The Subjectivity of Scientists 
and the Bayesian Approach 

WILEY SERIES IN PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
TEXTS, REFERENCES, AND POCKETBOOKS SECTION 
Established by WALTER A. SHEWHART and SAMUEL S. WILKS 
Editors: Peter Bloomfield, Noel A. C. Cressie, Nicholas I. Fisher, 
Iain M. Johnstone, J. B. Kadane, Louise M. Ryan, David W. Scott, 
Bernard W. Silverman, Adrian F. M. Smith, JozefL. Teugels; 
Vic Barnett, Emeritus, Ralph A. Bradley, Emeritus, 
J. Stuart Hunter, Emeritus, David G. Kendall, Emeritus 
A complete list of the titles in this series appears at the end of this volume. 

The Subjectivity of Scientists 
and the Bayesian Approach 
S. JAMES PRESS 
University of California, Riverside 
JUDITH M. TANUR 
State University of New York, Stony Brook 
Illustrated by Rachel D. Tanur 
A Wiley-Interscience Publication 
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC. 
New York · Chichester · Weinheim · Brisbane · Singapore · Toronto 

This book is printed on acid-free paper. Θ 
Copyright © 2001 by John Wiley and Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Published simultaneously in Canada. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or 
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through 
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for 
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 
Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, 
E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM. 
For ordering and customer service, call 1-800-CALL-WILEY. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication 
Data: 
Press, S. James 
The subjectivity of scientists and the Bayesian approach / by S. James Press 
and Judith M.Tanur. 
p. 
cm.—(Wiley series in probability & statistics. Texts, references, and pocketbooks 
section) 
Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 
ISBN 0-471-39685-0 (cloth : alk. paper) 
1. Research—Methodology. 
2. Bayesian statistical decision theory. 
3. Subjectivity. 
I. Tanur, Judith M. 
II. Title. 
III. Wiley series in probability and statistics. Texts, 
references, and pocketbooks section. 
Q180.55.M4 .P73 2001 
507.2—dc21 
00-043921 
Printed in the United States of America. 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

To our spouses and children 

The Reverend Thomas Bayes 

Contents 
Preface 
ix 
1. Introduction 
1 
2. Selecting the Scientists 
17 
3. Some Well-Known Stories of Extreme Subjectivity 
23 
3.1 
Introduction, 23 
4. Stories of Famous Scientists 
49 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
Johannes Kepler, 23 
Gregor Mendel, 26 
Robert Millikan, 34 
Cyril Burt, 37 
Margaret Mead, 43 
Stories of Famous Scientists 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
4.10 
4.11 
Introduction, 49 
Aristotle, 51 
Galileo Galilei, 60 
William Harvey, 71 
Sir Isaac Newton, 81 
Antoine Lavoisier, 95 
Alexander von Humboldt, 110 
Michael Faraday, 121 
Charles Darwin, 128 
Louis Pasteur, 143 
Sigmund Freud, 156 
Vll 

VH1 
CONTENTS 
4.12 Marie Curie, 166 
4.13 Albert Einstein, 177 
4.14 Some Conjectures About the Scientists, 189 
5. Subjectivity in Science in Modern Times: The Bayesian Approach 
199 
Appendix: References by Field of Application for Bayesian 
Statistical Science 
225 
Bibliography 
231 
Subject Index 
249 
Name Index 
267 

Preface 
We expect that both professional scientists and the general public will benefit 
from reading this book, not only to become better informed, but also for pure 
enjoyment. Our point of view in this book is that knowledge is accumulated 
by continually updating our understanding of a phenomenon through the 
merging of current findings with previous information. We believe that this is 
how scientists have worked informally in the past, and how scientists might 
work more formally in the future. 
Nonscientists will benefit from reading the book by gaining an increased 
understanding of how scientists have really worked—an understanding that is 
different from what they've traditionally been taught. Nonscientists reading 
this book will surely improve their understanding of the many ways that per-
sonal beliefs and biases find their way into supposedly objective scientific 
results and conclusions. After having read the book, laypeople will be likely 
to review reported results of scientific studies with a more critical, question-
ing, and skeptical eye, an important stance in today's increasingly complex 
society. [See Nelkin (1995) for additional discussion of how the personal biases 
of scientists affect the way they sometimes communicate their results to the 
public] 
This book will also be interesting and useful reading for science specialists. 
They will be reminded of how important it is to treat the data from their exper-
iments with great care and respect, and they will see how their educated sci-
entific beliefs can be introduced into their research in ways that they can use 
profitably without compromising their results. We believe that most specialists 
are not likely to have seen the common threads of tenacity of belief in the face 
of contradictory data that have run through the work of so many of the most 
famous scientists in history, even such giants as Sir Isaac Newton, Galileo 
Galilei, and Albert Einstein. These icons of science have had such keen aware-
ness and understanding of the basic principles underlying their disciplines that 
their intuition and scientific judgment generally helped to lead them to correct 
conclusions. 
ix 

X 
PREFACE 
Statisticians will find that the book integrates the world of inference into 
the general framework of science in a way that demonstrates the interdisci-
plinary nature of their field. They will also be reminded of the broadly perva-
sive role played by subjectivity. 
All readers are likely to benefit from the final chapter. It is somewhat more 
technical than the earlier chapters because it addresses the subject of Bayesian 
statistical analysis of scientific data. The subject is treated at an introductory, 
elementary level that is designed to provide an appreciation of how special-
ists and nonspecialists alike might benefit from adopting such a viewpoint. We 
believe that this chapter, especially in the context of the rest of the book, 
makes the volume a useful supplementary text for an undergraduate or grad-
uate course in Bayesian analysis. 
This book has had a gestation period of over 12 years. During that time we 
have learned to work together and help each other's understanding of the 
issues we were tackling. But we have been helped by others as well. Discus-
sions with colleagues, friends, and family members and the suggestions they 
made helped us to give more careful thought to the fundamental issues dis-
cussed in this book. We are grateful to Gordon Kaufman, John Kimmel, Frank 
Lad, Teddy Seidenfeld, Arnold Zellner, and several anonymous referees for 
helpful suggestions for improving the manuscript. We are especially grateful 
to Rachel Tanur for producing the drawings of the scientists. We are also grate-
ful for the financial support and encouragement given to us by the Depart-
ment of Statistics, University of California, Riverside, and the Department of 
Sociology, State University of New York, Stony Brook. 
Oceanside, California 
S. JAMES PRESS 
Montauk, New York 
JUDITH M. TANUR 
August 7, 2000 
REFERENCE 
Nelkin, Dorothy (1995). Selling Science: How the Press Covers Science and Technology, 
rev. ed., New York: W.H. Freeman. 

C H A P T E R 1 
Introduction 
This is a book about science, about scientists, and about the methods that sci-
entists use. We will show that the most famous scientists in history have all used 
their hunches, beliefs, intuition, and deep understanding of the processes they 
studied, to one extent or another, to arrive at their conclusions. The reader will 
see that the oft-expressed notion that science is "objective" is only partially true; 
in fact, science is really a combination of both subjective and objective views. 
In this book we tell the stories of 12 of the most famous scientists through-
out history, from Aristotle, the philosopher who lived during the era of the 
ancient Greeks, to Albert Einstein, who lived during the twentieth century. In 
each case, we discuss how the scientist's preconceived beliefs informally influ-
enced his or her scientific conclusions. 
In Chapter 2 we explain that we did not choose these particular 12 scien-
tists to study; they were selected for us. In Chapter 3 we tell the stories of five 
other very celebrated cases of famous scientists who may have stepped over 
the lines of acceptable scientific practice. Such overstepping arose either 
because their convictions about the correctness of their ideas led them to see 
or accept as accurate only what their theory predicted, or from their zeal to 
convince the world of the scientific merits of their work. 
A major portion of the book is devoted to the stories of our 12 most famous 
scientists in history (Chapter 4). We examine the lives of these people, their 
scientific contributions, and the ways in which they used their beliefs together 
with the results of their scientific experiments to carry out their research. In a 
final section of Chapter 4 we conjecture about what these scientists might have 
done had modern methods been available to them for combining their pre-
conceptions about the processes they were studying with their experimental 
data. 
Finally, in Chapter 5, we examine how subjectivity is being used in science 
in modern times. That discussion focuses on Bayesian statistical science. But 
first, in this introductory chapter, we provide some definitions and background 
for what is to come. 
1 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

2 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY 
Because we will be using the words subjectivity and objectivity frequently in 
this book, we must first explain how we are using these terms. We intend to 
use them in several ways. But we will always be thinking about observational 
data, about the distinction between beliefs held by a scientist about a phe-
nomenon prior to collecting the data, and beliefs held by the scientist after the 
data have been collected and analyzed. 
In common usage, certain entities are seen to have only a subjective reality, 
in that those entities are constructs based on views and beliefs that were 
formed out the human mind. On the other hand, the term objective reality is 
used for entities that exist outside the minds of individuals, in that they exist 
in the world regardless of whether a person perceives them. For example, the 
opinions people hold about a political or social issue are personal beliefs that 
have only a subjective reality, whereas our starting point with respect to exter-
nal reality is that the moon, the sun, and the planets would all exist regardless 
of whether or not human beings perceived them. But objective entities need 
not be corporeal. For example, all the scientific laws that govern the behavior 
of the physical world would exist regardless of their codification by human 
beings or humans' belief in them. 
The crux of our usage makes these terms specific to the scientific endeavor. 
When anything is observed or measured by human beings, human perception 
and sensory mechanisms are involved, and the resulting observations that are 
collected then depend on subjectively based distortions of objective reality. 
Further, after entities in the objective world are observed (perceived) by a 
human being, either through the senses and/or assisted by measuring instru-
ments, the resulting measurements (called data) are interpreted by a human 
being in a subjective way that reflects the person's own experience, under-
standing, and preconceived notions and beliefs about the entities, the object, 
phenomenon, or construct being measured. The interpretation of such data is 
also affected by the person's state of mind and state of senses at the time of 
the interpretation. We use the term subjective, or subjectivity, to refer to pre-
existing views or beliefs about entities that influence both the gathering of data 
and their interpretation. 
Broadening our interpretation of the term, we will also use subjectivity to 
mean a person's intuition, belief, and understanding about some proposition 
or hypothesis prior to that person collecting observational data that bear on 
the proposition, or prior to that person obtaining information about the 
hypothesis. Because the views about the hypothesis that we are talking about 
are those that a particular person held prior to that person having collected 
data, or they are his or her views prior to being told about the values of data 
that have been collected, and because these views may well differ across indi-
viduals, we call those views or beliefs subjective. 
To define objectivity in an experimental context, we appeal to a (grossly 
oversimplified) description of the old-fashioned textbook image of how 

SUBJECTIVITY AND OBJECTIVITY 
3 
science proceeds and how scientists behave. In this image, science and scien-
tists are objective in the following sense. A hypothesis is developed (the passive 
voice here is used to signify that little attention is paid to the origin of the 
hypothesis) and the scientist designs a study to test this hypothesis. After data 
gathering, whether by designed experiment or by carefully carried out obser-
vation in a nonexperimental setting, the scientist dispassionately evaluates 
the results and their implications for the hypothesis. If the results support the 
hypothesis, the scientist writes up the study for publication; if they do not, 
the scientist, again dispassionately, abandons the hypothesis as being wrong, 
and either revises the hypothesis in light of the new findings and repeats the 
cycle, or goes on to other concerns. 
The subjectivity that we intend to demonstrate that scientists use routinely 
is both less and more than the opposite of this kind of mythical objectivity. We 
surely do not suggest that scientists ignore the objective reality that is "out 
there," nor that they ignore the guidance offered by the results of their inves-
tigations. And surely historians of science have long since made it clear that 
scientists are considerably more human than our oversimplified portrait of dis-
passionate automaton would indicate. Scientists care about their work, care 
about their results, and even care about the recognition that will come to them 
with successful discoveries. These factors often drive the way in which they 
carry out their research and the way they report it to the world. Despite 
these factors, some observers of scientific methodology still describe it as 
"objective." 
Strongly held personal beliefs and hypotheses about scientific phenomena, 
the stuff of what we refer to as subjectivity, are sometimes so strongly held 
that a scientist will, under their influence, announce confirmatory results from 
experiments not yet carried out. Such a practice is clearly fraudulent, as is 
introducing major alterations of data from actual experiments to make them 
conform to a subjectively held theory. But we need to understand that the 
dividing line between normal practice and fraud is sometimes a fine one. For 
example, normal statistical analysis of scientific data often requires the analyst 
to decide to drop some data points because they lie so far away from what is 
expected that they seem to be aberrations or mistakes rather than meaning-
ful data that should be considered along with the bulk of the other observa-
tions (such data points are sometimes called outliers), or because they are 
poorly measured. 
But what we mean by the subjectivity of scientists is deeper than these 
understandably human traits. Some scientists seem to be particularly opin-
ionated and stubborn, not unlike some nonscientists. These scientists develop 
hypotheses based on strongly held, preconceived notions of how the world 
operates, and they sometimes (usually, unconsciously) design studies to prove 
these notions rather than merely to test them. In cases in which the results of 
their investigation are contrary to what the hypothesis would predict, a scien-
tist is sometimes more likely to doubt that the data are accurate than to con-
clude that the theory is incorrect. Such a scientist will redesign the study and 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
persist in trying to find data that prove the hypothesis, sometimes for years, 
sometimes for a lifetime. 
1.2 SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE PROBABILITY 
There is another important and related sense in which we use the terms sub-
jective and objective in this book; it relates to their meanings in relation to sub-
jective and objective probability. This use of the terms is discussed in great 
detail in Chapter 5. For the time being, we merely state that subjective prob-
ability refers to an individual scientist's degree of belief about the chance of 
some event occurring. Objective probability refers to the mathematical or 
numerical probability or chance of some event occurring. 
1.3 RATE-OF-DEFECTIVES EXAMPLE 
The definition of objectivity employed by some philosophers requires that the 
statement be testable by anybody. Subsumed in this position is the notion that 
everyone must have the same interpretation of observational data. But we 
believe that such uniformity of interpretation is rarely the case. We believe 
that different people come to observational data with differing preexisting 
views that induce them to construe the interpretation of the data somewhat 
differently, depending on their preconceived biases. It will be illuminating to 
begin our discussion of subjectivity in scientific methodology with an example 
that illustrates how different scientific observers, usually unwittingly, bring 
their own beliefs and biases—their subjectivity—to bear on the interpretation 
of scientific data. We see in the example below how different observers of the 
same data can proceed very differently and thus come away with very differ-
ent interpretations of them. We call this illustration the rate-of-defectives 
example, and we refer to it later. 
Before we present the example, however, we quote Ian Hacking (1965, p. 
217), who noted that u[o]ne of the most intriguing aspects of the subjectivist 
theory, and of Jeffreys' theory of probability, is use of a fact about Bayes' 
theorem to explain the possibility of learning about a set-up from a sequence 
of trials on it. The fact seems to explain the possibility of different persons 
coming to agree on the properties of the set-up, even though each individual 
starts with different prior betting rates and different initial data." Here 
Hacking refers to the comforting fact that although different observers of the 
same data may have differing interpretations of them, eventually, with a suf-
ficiently large number of trials, the differing prior views of different observers 
about the same data will generally disappear as the data begin to dominate all 
personal views about the underlying process. 
Let us suppose that you collect 100 observations from an experiment. We 
can refer to these observations as data points. You then send these data to five 

RATE-OF-DEFECTIVES EXAMPLE 
5 
scientists located in five different parts of the world. All five scientists receive 
the same data set, that is, the same 100 data points. (Note that for purposes of 
this example, the subjectivity involved in originally deciding what data to 
collect and in making the original observations themselves is eliminated by 
sending the same "objective" data to all five scientists.) Should we expect all 
five of the scientists to draw the same conclusions from these data? 
Our answer to this question is a very definite "no." But how can it be that 
different observers will probably behave very differently when confronted 
with precisely the same data? Part of the thesis of this book is that the 
methodology of science requires that inferences from data be a mixture of 
both subjective judgment (theorizing) and objective observation (empirical 
verification). Thus, even though the scientists all receive the same observa-
tional data, they come to those data with differing beliefs about what to expect 
and about how to proceed. Consequently, some scientists will tend to weight 
certain data points more heavily than others and consider differing aspects 
of the data as more consequential. Different scientists are also likely to weight 
experimental errors of measurement differently from one another. Moreover, 
scientists may decide to carry out formal checks and statistical tests about 
whether the phenomenon of interest in the experiment was actually demon-
strated (to ask how strongly the claimed experimental result was supported 
by the data). Such tests are likely to have different results for different 
scientists, because different scientists will bring different assumptions to the 
choice of statistical test. More broadly, scientists often differ on the mathe-
matical and statistical models they choose to analyze a particular data set, and 
different models usually generate different conclusions. Different assumptions 
about these models will very often yield different implications for the same 
data. 
These ideas that scientists can differ about the facts are perhaps surprising 
to some of us. Let us return to our 100 observations and five scientists to give 
a very simple and elementary example, with the assurance that analogous 
arguments will hold generally for more realistic and more complicated 
situations. 
Hypothetically, suppose there is a special type of machines that produces a 
certain component that we can calla "groove joint "a component required for 
the hard drives of desktop computers. It is common knowledge in the com-
puter industry that because groove joints are very difficult to fabricate, such 
machines generally produce these components with about a 50% defective 
rate. That is, about half the groove joints produced by a given machine will 
have to be discarded because they are defective. The machines that produce 
groove joints are very expensive. 
The hypothetical South Bay Electronics Company suspects that its newly 
purchased machine may be producing groove joints at a defective rate differ-
ent from the industry norm, so it decides to test the rate at which the new 
machine produces defectives. It first fabricates 100 groove joints on the new 
machine (each groove joint is fabricated independently of every other groove 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
joint) and examines each one to classify it as "good" or "defective." South Bay 
records the sequence of 100 groove joints produced by the new machine as: 
G, G, D,..., with "G" representing "good" and "D" representing "defective." 
The company finds that there were 90 defective groove joints in this batch, but 
the quality control staff still doesn't know the long-run rate of defectives for 
their machine. They decide to send the results representing the 100 tested 
groove joints to five different scientists to ask them for their own estimates of 
the long-run rate of defectives for this machine. We shall call this long-run rate 
of defectives p, bearing in mind that p can be any number between zero and 
one. 
The sequence of G's and D's are the data you send to the five scientists 
(three women and two men) in five different locations around the world to 
see how they interpret the results. You tell them that you plan to publish their 
estimates of the long-run rate of defectives and their reasoning behind their 
estimates in a professional scientific journal. Thus their reputations are likely 
to be enhanced or to suffer in proportion to their degrees of error in estimat-
ing p. As we shall see, it will turn out that they will all have different views 
about the long-run rate of defectives after having been given the results of the 
experiment. 
Scientist 1 is largely a theorist by reputation. She thinks that p = 0.5 no 
matter what. Her line of reasoning is that it just happened that 90% of the 
first 100 groove joints were defective, that there was a "run" of "defectives." 
Such an outcome doesn't mean that if the experiment were to be repeated for 
another 100 trials (produce yet another 100 groove joints) the next 100 trials 
wouldn't produce, say, 95 defectives, or any other proportion of defectives. Sci-
entist 1 has a very strong preconceived belief based upon theory that groove 
joints are about equally likely to be good or defective (p = 0.5) in the face of 
real data that militate against that belief. For her, unless told otherwise, all 
machines produce defective groove joints for roughly half of their output, even 
if many runs of many defectives or many good groove joints just happen to 
occur. 
Scientist 2 has the reputation for being an experimentalist. He thinks that 
p = 0.9, because that is the proportion of defectives found in the batch. (This 
estimate of p is what statisticians call the sample estimate (and under certain 
conditions, they also call it the maximum likelihood estimate). Scientist 2's defi-
nition of the best estimate available from the data is the fraction of defectives 
actually obtained. While scientist 1 believed strongly in theory, scientist 2 is 
ready to abandon theory about the production of defective groove joints in 
favor of strong belief in data, regardless of theory. 
When he actually carries out experiments in his research, which is only 
occasionally, scientist 3 is an extremely thorough and carefid experimentalist. 
He carefully examines the actual sequence of outcomes and decides to ignore 
a run of 50 straight defectives that occurred, feeling that such a run must be 
a mistake in reporting since it is so unlikely. This reduces the number of avail-
able data points (the sample size) from 100 down to 50, and out of those 50, 
40 were defective. So his conclusion is that p = 40/50 = 0.8. Scientist 3 has taken 

RATE-OF-DEFECTIVES EXAMPLE 
7 
the practical posture that many scientists take of weighting the observations 
so that some observations that are believed to be errors are discarded or 
down-weighted in favor of those thought to be better measurements or more 
valid in some experimental sense. 
Scientist 4 is a decision theorist, driven by a need to estimate unknown quan-
tities on the basis of using them to make good decisions. Such a scientist would 
be interested in minimizing the costs of making mistakes, and might perhaps 
decide that overestimating p is as bad as underestimating it, so the costs should 
be the same for making these two types of errors. Moreover, he wants to select 
his estimator of p to enhance his reputation, and you have told him that a 
correct estimate will do just that. So he decides to select his estimator such 
that the cost of being wrong will be as small as possible, regardless of the true 
value of p. (In the theory of decision making, under such circumstances 
he would often adopt what is called a quadratic loss function.) If scientist 4 
were to adopt the subjective belief that all values of p are equally likely and 
then used a result from probability theory (called Bay es' theorem', see dis-
cussion of this theorem in Chapter 5), his resulting estimate of p would be 
p = 91/102 = 0.892. 
Scientist 5 may be said to be other-directed. She badly wants the recognition 
from her peers that you said would depend on the accuracy of her estimate. 
She learns from you the names of the other four scientists. She then writes to 
them to find out the estimates they came up with (and for their own reasons, 
they send her their results). Having obtained the results of the other scientists, 
scientist 5 decides that the best thing to do would be to use their average value. 
(Robert Millikan, winner of a Nobel Prize in Physics, did similar averaging of 
earlier reported results—from entirely separate experiments in that case—in 
his oil-drop experiment to measure the charge on an electron; see Section 3.4.) 
So for scientist 5, the estimate of p = (0.5 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.892)/4 = 0.773. Or 
perhaps, learning that scientist 1 made an estimate of p that was not data 
dependent, scientist 5 might eliminate scientist l's estimate from her average, 
making the subjective judgment that it was not a valid estimate. Then scien-
tist 5 would have an estimate of p = (0.9 + 0.8 + 0.892)/3 = 0.864. Scientist 5's 
strategy is used by many scientists all the time, so that the values they propose 
will not be too discrepant with the orthodox views of their peers. 
So the five scientists came up with five different estimates of/? starting with 
the same observed data. All the estimates are valid. Each scientist came to 
grips with the data with a different perspective, using somewhat different 
procedures, and with a different belief about p. 
The values of p found by the five scientists thus are as follows: 
Scientist 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
Estimated 
Value of p 
0.500 
0.900 
0.800 
0.892 
0.773 or 0.864 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
But what is the "true" value of ρΊ 
In empirical science we never know with certainty what is true and what is 
not. We have only educated beliefs and the results of observations and experi-
ments. But note that with the exception of scientist 1, who refuses to be influ-
enced by the data, all the scientists agree that p must be somewhere between 
0.773 and 0.900, agreeing that the machine is turning out defective groove 
joints at a long-run rate of greater than 0.5. 
Suppose that the machine had produced 1000 groove joints instead of the 
100 groove joints we just considered, but with analogous results of 90% defec-
tives. Would this have made any difference to the scientists? Well perhaps it 
might have, for example, to scientist 1, because people differ as to the point at 
which they will decide to switch positions from assuming that the machine pro-
duces defectives at typical rates despite the experimental outcome results, to 
a position in which they are willing to assume that the machine has a higher 
long-run defective rate. One scientist may switch after 9 defectives out of a 
batch of 10 groove joints, another after 90 out of 100, whereas another may 
not switch until there are perhaps 900 defectives out of a batch of 1000 groove 
joints, or might insist on an even more extensive experiment with even 
stronger evidence. In any case the scientists may still differ in their views about 
the long-run rate of defectives for the machine for a very wide variety of 
reasons, only a few of which are mentioned above. 
1.4 DIVERSITY IN THE SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY PROCESS 
The rate-of-defectives example we just discussed was very elementary, but it 
was science nevertheless. Similar interpretive and methodological issues arise 
in all branches of the sciences. To examine the issues more broadly, we step 
back to the origins of science itself, and to the structure, development, and 
applications of various scientific methodologies. 
Wolpert (1992, p. 35) suggests that "unlike technology or religion, science 
originated only once in history, in Greece." He asserts that "Thales of Miletos 
who lived in about 600 B.C., was the first we know of who tried to explain the 
world not in terms of myths but in more concrete terms, terms that might be 
subject to verification." (Miletos is a city on the Aegean coast of what is now 
Turkey; at that time the city was considered part of Greece.) This was the 
beginning of what has come to be known as science. (In fact, it is claimed that 
Thales predicted the total solar eclipse of 585 B.C., and was responsible for 
proving five theorems of plane geometry, including the fact that an angle 
inscribed in a semicircle must be a right angle.) 
There is no unique definition for the term scientific method, a term discussed 
at length by Francis Bacon, Immanuel Kant, and others. But we can try to char-
acterize the scientific methodology process. We will see that scientists have 
varied greatly in their methodological approaches to research, so that there 
has not really been a single, acceptable approach regarded as the "correct" 

DIVERSITY IN THE SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY PROCESS 
9 
path to scientific achievement. In the following, we use the scientists studied 
in Chapters 3 and 4 to illustrate these ideas. 
Alexander von Humboldt (Section 4.7), a founding father of the field of 
physical geography, mostly observed and carefully recorded his observations. 
In some instances, he also hypothesized possible explanations about the 
mechanisms underlying his observations and showed how the observations fit 
these hypotheses. He was the quintessential observer. But as physical geogra-
phy was not viewed in earlier years as a field that required experimentation, 
he rarely conducted experiments. So the vast bulk of his beliefs about the 
possible causes of the phenomena he observed were totally subjective, and not 
based on experimental verification. 
Albert Einstein (Section 4.13), who propounded the theory of relativity, 
mostly hypothesized about his observations, relying heavily on his profound 
understanding of physics and on the implications of mathematical models he 
developed for describing physical phenomena to make verifiable predictions 
about the universe. But he personally almost never carried out experiments 
that might have demonstrated the validity of his mathematical inferences and 
subjective speculations about the world. Other scientists, sometimes many 
decades later, did ultimately check and verify many of Einstein's predictions 
empirically. 
Charles Darwin (Section 4.9), the biologist who propounded the theory of 
evolution, spent years in the process of observing and recording data meticu-
lously, but then he devoted the next 23 years of his life to theorizing and 
hypothesizing, trying to generalize from his observations. Predictive mecha-
nisms for the process of biological inheritance were developed by others, such 
as Gregor Mendel (discussed in Section 3.3). 
Sigmund Freud (Section 4.11) treated many people with emotional and 
mental problems and recorded his subjective observations case by case. He 
then spent many years trying to generalize his subjective beliefs about his 
patients to synthesize a theoretical framework from his case studies. 
Sir Isaac Newton (Section 4.5), perhaps the greatest of all scientists of all 
time, observed, hypothesized, developed the mathematics he needed to create 
mathematical models for use in quantitative prediction about the phenomena 
he wanted to study, built scientific equipment to improve the quality of his 
observations, carried out experiments designed to test his hypotheses, and then 
made and checked his predictions about the world. But as will be seen in 
Section 4.5, his strong beliefs about his theories may have led him to misrep-
resent some of his experimental results relating to the speed of sound. 
Marie Curie (Section 4.12) was another quintessential experimenter. 
She carried out experiments, laboriously and painstakingly, extending over 
many years, experiments designed to isolate the new element, radium. Her 
subjective beliefs that radium was indeed an element and could be isolated 
from pitchblende gave her the patience to continue searching until she gath-
ered a sufficient quantity of the precious element to establish its atomic 
properties. 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
Some scientists did not attempt to establish quantitative relationships. 
Rather, they carried out demonstrations to show that certain types of effects 
existed. For example, William Harvey (Section 4.4) provided a demonstration 
of the circulation of blood. 
So sometimes a scientist merely makes observations; in other cases, the 
scientist observes and then hypothesizes but does not follow up with experi-
ments; in other cases, the scientist observes, hypothesizes, experiments, or 
demonstrates, and then perhaps rehypothesizes, and reexperiments, often 
cycling through the investigative process many times. There is a complete spec-
trum of methodological behaviors followed by scientists. Most scientists labor 
in the vineyards to extend other people's theories and end up falling some-
where in between the extremes of the methodological investigatory spectrum. 
There is no set rule about what procedure every scientist follows. Francis 
Bacon (1561-1626), a philosopher, attempted to establish some rules about 
proper scientific methodology. His approach was experimental, relying on 
inductive logic. He was not convinced that mathematics should play an impor-
tant role in the scientific process, so his method was qualitative. Bacon's 
approach to scientific methodology was not really adopted until the nineteenth 
century and was quite limited relative to the broader spectrum of procedures 
actually adopted by scientists over the centuries. 
1.5 CREATIVITY IN SCIENCE 
It is most usual that scientific advance starts with an idea or a question in a 
scientist's head about some phenomenon. [Occasionally, a scientific advance 
comes about serendipitously, in that the scientist notices something unantici-
pated but realizes that it is important and thus discovers some unexpected 
effect; see, for example, Roberts (1989). We confine our attention to more 
usual, nonserendipitous discoveries.] But how does such an idea or question 
arise? A scientist observes the surrounding world, as do we all, but when the 
scientist has observed some phenomenon, perhaps many times, a trained 
curiosity prompts the asking of such questions as: I wonder what caused that 
to happen? I wonder what would happen differently if the conditions were 
changed somewhat? Is the response directly proportional to the stimulus? I 
wonder what the role of randomness was in that phenomenon? 
This process, stimulated by scientific curiosity, of raising questions about the 
mechanism that generates some real-world effect, sets the scientist to theo-
rizing and formulating hypotheses about the phenomenon. The process 
demands that the scientist be creatively subjective, and think nonlinearly, much 
as the artist, composer, or creative writer behaves. The scientist must be able 
to leap to tentative conclusions about what to expect under certain circum-
stances, without having yet observed the phenomenon under those circum-
stances and without passing through the appropriate logical steps (linear 
thinking) required to arrive at deductive conclusions.This subjectively creative 

THOUGHT (IMAGINARY) EXPERIMENTS VERSUS PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS 
11 
process is fundamental to how science is carried out. The scientist begins 
searching through a lifetime of personal experience, knowledge, and under-
standing of related phenomena. A review of the published literature on related 
topics reveals what is already known about this subject. If the full answers are 
not known, the exploratory path is open and the scientist begins to pursue the 
topic with vigor. Thus, the scientist proceeds with the idea, with speculation 
about it, and the scientific research process begins. Within this creative process, 
the scientist is most often driven by his or her own biases, intending to find 
preconceived results (results within a certain range) in the experiment. 
However, as Kuhn (1962, p. 35) pointed out: "[T]he range of anticipated, and 
thus of assimilable, results is always small compared with the range that imagi-
nation can conceive. And the project whose outcome does not fall in the nar-
rower range is usually just a research failure, one which reflects not on nature 
but on the scientist." 
1.6 THOUGHT (IMAGINARY) EXPERIMENTS VERSUS 
PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS 
Scientific research usually involves both theory and experiment. That is, a sci-
entist, after theorizing about the mechanism that is involved in a phenom-
enon, typically carries out experiments that will bear on the mechanisms 
postulated to be involved. Good experiments are designed to demonstrate 
whether the hypotheses about observed phenomena were correct. Usually, not 
all of a scientist's ideas are verified by an experiment or series of experiments, 
and modifications of the original beliefs must be made and new experiments 
mounted to test the modified beliefs. 
The scientist who merely hypothesizes and does not experiment is being 
strictly speculative; in such a case, subjective beliefs and the logic (perhaps 
mathematical projections or predictions) that ties them together are all that 
are available to justify scientific conclusions. These hypothesized beliefs may 
be arrived at by "thought experiments" in which the scientist reasons about 
the phenomenon, and based on a special understanding of how it works, tries 
to conclude what is likely to happen under various conditions or scenarios. 
Without empirical verification of the logically derived hypothetical conclu-
sions, the scientist is likely to be wrong, at least in part. In some unusual and 
remarkable cases, the scientist hypothesizes correctly about the likely outcome 
of experiments that could be carried out but haven't been yet. That is, such a 
scientist correctly predicts what will happen under various conditions. One of 
the characteristics of the outstanding scientist is that these subjective judg-
ments about the phenomenon under study turn out to be correct, even though 
the conclusions reached do not appear to have been arrived at through logical, 
step-by-step reasoning, experimental verification, or any combination thereof. 
There are many instances of this interesting, characteristic trait of the 12 out-
standing scientists on whom we focus in Chapter 4. There, we summarize the 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
lives, the scientific achievements, and the methodological approaches to 
science adopted by these very famous scientists. 
Some scientists make the decision to carry out a physical experiment (as 
distinguished from a thought experiment) that will bear on the phenomenon 
of interest. Sometimes they design the experiment to capture a qualitative 
effect, such as whether a certain phenomenon will occur under predicted cir-
cumstances. For example, will a current flow if we do such and such? In other 
situations, the scientist designs the experiment to capture a quantitative effect, 
such as how much of something will occur under particular circumstances. For 
example, how much current will flow if we do such and such? 
A scientist who decides to carry out a physical experiment must decide: 
1. Which experiment will be carried out (can the phenomenon be observed 
directly, or will indirect reasoning be necessary)? 
2. Which equipment will be used to carry out the experiment? The 
equipment decision determines how large the observational errors are 
likely to be, and often, whether the phenomenon can be observed at all. 
3. Which hypotheses will be tested by this experiment? The scientist must 
decide which conditions must be controlled or kept constant during the 
experiment and which can be varied to generate the phenomenon. The 
hypothesis about the predicted phenomenon must be clearly stated in 
advance of the experiment, and the conditions under which the phe-
nomenon will occur must be prespecified and designed into the experi-
ment. If the experiment is quantitative, the scientist must determine 
which outcome variables must be monitored when the input variables 
are varied. 
4. How will the hypotheses be examined? That is, how "close" to the pre-
dicted phenomenon must the experimental outcome be before the sci-
entist will claim to have produced the anticipated effect? How should 
the scientist measure closeness? 
5. What extraneous variables should be controlled or measured? 
6. If the scientist is to repeat the experiment on several occasions, how will 
strange or unusual outcome observations be treated? How many times 
should the experiment be replicated? How will the results of various 
replications be combined? How sensitive must the experiment be to 
observe the phenomenon of interest? What if the phenomenon were to 
be observed only sometimes and not at others? 
7. What should be done if the experimental outcomes contradict the initial 
hypotheses? 
8. How will the results be reported? 
9. Which results will be reported to the scientific community so that the 
work can be reviewed by peers and replicated by others to verify its 
correctness? 

BLINDING AGAINST EXPERIMENTER BIAS 
13 
All of these choices the scientist must make are partly subjective and partly 
objective. While attempting to avoid obvious biases, a scientist wants to use 
the fundamental understanding of the underlying phenomenon to help arrive 
at scientific conclusions that will be meaningful. To ignore such preexisting 
understanding of the phenomenon under study is to fail to take advantage of 
the best information available to build new knowledge. It would amount to 
reinventing the wheel every time we wanted to make an improvement in our 
understanding of transportation methods. We see in Chapter 5 how Bayesian 
methods of analysis seek to take advantage of this pre-existing understanding 
by incorporating various aspects of it into the analysis of an experiment. 
1.7 ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS 
The results of physical experiments that scientists carry out are observations, 
either qualitative or quantitative. If qualitative, they may be descriptive, in that 
they explain in qualitative terms what happened; or they may be categorical, 
in that they summarize whether the predicted phenomenon occurred. When 
quantitative, they are numbers obtained by observing the phenomenon under 
study under various conditions. Any of these forms of outcome of an experi-
ment characterizes the results of the experiment. These are the basic raw data. 
After obtaining such data, the scientist must try to make sense out of them. If 
the data are quantitative, they must be summarized and understood visually. 
In any case, inferences and predictions must be made from them. Quantita-
tively observed data points generally contain errors of measurement. Such 
errors of measurement are largely random, and thus follow the laws of 
probability, part of the domain of statistical science. Also in the domain of 
statistical science is the modeling of the laws that are thought to govern the 
phenomenon. 
The scientists discussed in Chapter 4 did not use the methods of analysis 
of Bayesian statistical science (or for that matter, with the exception of 
Einstein, any formal statistical methods). Although it is true that Bayes' theo-
rem had been put forth in the middle of the eighteenth century, many of the 
methods of analysis that today we call Bayesian statistical inference had not 
yet been developed; and none of it was available during the lifetimes of many 
of our scientists. Such methodology, however, is now available for scientific 
analysis, and makes possible more precise inference from the results of cate-
gorical and quantitative experiments. Such methodology is discussed at length 
in, Chapter 5. 
1.8 BLINDING AGAINST EXPERIMENTER BIAS 
The subjectivity of scientists has long been well-known to scientists them-
selves, and consequently, they have established procedures to guard against 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
those effects of subjectivity that may bias experiments and mislead experi-
menters. In biology/medicine/pharmacology, for example, modern clinical sta-
tistical trials have typically required that allocation of treatments to subjects 
be decided on a randomized basis with some subjects receiving an inert 
placebo, so that causation can be established. But the safeguard against experi-
menter bias is via a process called double-blinding. In a double-blind experi-
ment, neither the people who diagnose the results of the clinical trials nor the 
subjects themselves know which subjects actually received the drug being 
tested for efficacy and which received the placebo. If the experimenter does 
not know whether the subject he or she is diagnosing has received the treat-
ment or the placebo, his or her diagnostic judgment cannot be influenced by 
that knowledge. Similarly, a patient cannot attribute changes in his or her con-
dition to a treatment if he or she is not sure whether indeed he or she is getting 
the treatment or getting a placebo. 
In the social sciences, the existence of "experimenter effects" [for example, 
Rosenthal and Jacobson (1968)] in which the person conducting an experi-
ment is likely to find the results he or she expected, has given rise to a set of 
procedures by which the person actually running the experiment is kept blind 
to the hypothesis being tested. 
In our discussion of Gregor Mendel in Section 3.3 we see that one of the 
reasons suggested for his data being "too good to be true" is that when one 
expects a certain ratio of results and can see that ratio developing as the data 
are counted, one may be unconsciously led to stop counting when the ratios 
are as expected. Present-day genetics researchers routinely blind themselves 
to the results of such counts as they are developing. 
In his oil drop experiment to study the charge on the electron, Robert 
Millikan used a preferential treatment of his data. While he seemed to be 
choosing to eliminate only observations with large experimental error, in fact 
he eliminated observations that were contrary to his preconceived ideas, thus 
permitting his personal biases to determine his inferences about the true value 
of the charge on the electron. (See Section 3.4 for a discussion of how he 
weighted his data to conclude what he preferred.) 
Recent efforts by "particle physicists" have resulted in a blinding approach 
to guarding against experimental bias in their field, an approach that has been 
called offsets. "Research teams in particle physics have been programming 
their computers to add unknown numbers called 'offsets,' to their data to 
make the outcome of their analyses blind ... It is only after they experiment 
is over that the researchers discover what the value of the offset is" (Glanz, 
2000, p. Dl). 
Dr. Eric Prebys, a particle physicist at Princeton University and a member 
of a large research team called Belle, said scientists "always want a particular 
outcome whatever they say. Removing all landmarks is the only sure way to 
insulate them from their own hopes and expectations" (quoted in Glanz, 2000, 
p. D4). The basic idea is to blind the researchers from seeing the final experi-

BLINDING AGAINST EXPERIMENTER BIAS 
15 
mental results until after they have made their inferences about what phe-
nomena actually generated those experimental results. The focus of the experi-
ment in which Dr. Prebys has been involved is the small difference between 
the physics of matter and the physics of antimatter. Where are the asymme-
tries? Currently physicists have strong preconceived predilections to be able 
to confirm certain asymmetries in the physics of matter and antimatter, partly 
because such a finding would constitute scientific "news." Evidence so far has 
demonstrated some asymmetries; more are being sought to strengthen the 
theory. The current problem they have is trying to carry out experiments that 
relate to this issue without letting their personal biases about what to expect 
about symmetry/asymmetry creep in. As one part of the analysis Dr. Prebys is 
involved in, "they tried to determine whether a particular decay signature was 
due to a particle or its associated antiparticle" (Prebys, 2000). A decay signa-
ture is a term used by particle physicists to mean that the pattern of data that 
they have about a particular subnuclear particle uniquely identifies the type 
of particle that generated those data. 
The blinding of the analysts was accomplished by using a computer sub-
routine that randomly returned a "1" for a particle or a " - 1 " for an antiparti-
cle, effectively hiding the asymmetry that the scientists were looking for. The 
research team only examined the real experimental results as a final step after 
agreeing to accept the inferences about what had caused the results obtained, 
whatever those results might be. When they made their inference about what 
had caused the results that they had found, their inference implied that there 
was no asymmetry! When they reexamined the experimental results that had 
been hidden, they saw that that had they used only results with small meas-
urement error, and ignored those with the larger measurement error (since 
such a preferential treatment of the data strongly supported their biases), they 
would have concluded that they had indeed found asymmetry in the physics 
of matter and antimatter. Because of the blinding effect of the offsets they 
were forced to conclude there was no asymmetry. It is certainly possible that 
future experimenters will conclude that there is in fact asymmetry, but that it 
was difficult to detect in Dr. Prebys' experiment. 
It is not yet known how widespread this "offsets" or "blind" approach 
will become. Its function is to remove the possibly misleading aspects of a 
scientist's subjectivity, aspects that can bias him/her into misinterpretation of 
experimental results. It cannot (and should not) eliminate all the subjectivity 
of physical scientists. The physical scientist still must decide which experiment 
to carry out, he or she must still design the experiment, and must still decide 
which models and analyses will be used. Breakthroughs in science are likely 
to occur only with generous applications of informed understanding of the 
phenomena being studied, and with continued use of hunches and intuition. 
Physics is likely to benefit from the uses of offsets because such methodology 
added to the armamentarium of physics will result in an improved mixture of 
subjectivity and objectivity, the essence of all good science. 

16 
INTRODUCTION 
REFERENCES 
Glanz, James (2000). "New Tactic in Physics: Hiding the Answer," Science Times, in The 
New York Times, August 8,2000, pp. Dl, and D4. 
Hacking, Ian (1965). Logic of Scientific Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Prebys, Eric (2000). Personal communication, August 23,2000 and August 27, 2000. 
Roberts, Royston M. (1989). Serendipity: Accidental Discoveries in Science. New York: 
Wiley. 
Rosenthal, Robert, and Lenore Jacobson (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom: Teacher 
Expectation and Pupils' Intellectual Development. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston. 
Wolpert, Lewis (1992). The Unnatural Nature of Science. Boston: Harvard University 
Press. 

CHAPTER 2 
Selecting the Scientists 
How have we decided which scientists to study? In Chapter 4 we study some 
of the most famous scientists in all history, and we examine the nature of the 
subjectivity and objectivity that they exercised in their approaches to their 
research. But we did not select which scientists we should study; we left that 
task to someone else. 
The reader might guess that we carefully hand-picked scientists whom we 
knew to be considerably less than objective in their approaches to scientific 
research, just to make our point. But we did not exercise such subjectivity in 
Chapter 4, although we did in Chapter 3. In that introductory treatment of cel-
ebrated cases of extreme subjectivity we did not plan to be objective in our 
choices of scientists to study. For Chapter 3 we selected for study several sci-
entists who have been subjects of notoriety, not only because their scientific 
achievements have made them so renowned, but also because of their now 
well-known uses of subjectivity in their work. The five scientists examined in 
Chapter 3—Johannes Kepler, Gregor Mendel, Robert Millikan, Cyril Burt, 
and Margaret Mead—are discussed but briefly, merely enough to review some 
of the major subjective aspects of some of their research. 
But for the largest chapter of this book, that is Chapter 4, we attempted to 
approach this important selection question much more objectively ourselves. 
In that chapter we examine the cases of 12 world-famous scientists in consid-
erable detail: some from ancient times, some from the Renaissance and the 
period of the scientific revolution, and some from the modern era. But we did 
not select these 12 scientists. To be as objective as we could in our selection of 
the scientists we would use to demonstrate our contention, we decided to work 
from a template not selected by us. We accomplished this by focusing on 
someone else's book in which the lives of some eminent scientists were already 
discussed, and then by our doing a case study of every one of those scientists 
preselected for us by the author of that book. The book we chose is The Great 
Scientists, by Jack Meadows (1987). Meadows describes the lives, times, and 
scientific achievements of the following 12 scientists: 
17 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

18 
SELECTING THE SCIENTISTS 
1. Aristotle 
2. Galileo Galilei 
3. William Harvey 
4. Isaac Newton 
5. Antoine Lavoisier 
6. Alexander von Humboldt 
7. Michael Faraday 
8. Charles Darwin 
9. Louis Pasteur 
10. Sigmund Freud 
11. Marie Curie 
12. Albert Einstein 
These are therefore the cases we examine in Chapter 4. There, in each case, 
we provide a review of the life of the scientist, a review of his or her scientific 
contributions, and an examination of the ways this scientist used subjectivity 
in his or her research. 
Why did we select the Meadows book, in particular, to dictate our cases? 
Should we be concerned about whether these scientists are universally agreed 
upon as the most famous, most important, or even most appropriate scientists 
to study? In both Chapters 3 and 4 we try, as much as possible, to look at what 
the scientists actually did, rather than what they say they did or what others 
say they did. In that spirit, we must note that we chose the Meadows book as 
the basis for our list of scientists partly because it seemed to satisfy certain 
intuitive criteria of comprehensiveness of coverage and importance of the 
scientists included, but otherwise, we chose it somewhat arbitrarily. As we dis-
cussed our project of demonstrating the ways in which scientists used personal 
beliefs, intuition, and previous knowledge, and pondered how to make that 
demonstration convincing to others as well as to ourselves, we realized that 
we would need to show that we had subjected our own ideas to the kind of 
objective test that would be acceptable only if we relied on an outside agent 
to choose the cases on which our argument would rest. The Meadows book 
was at hand, and we decided to accept the challenge of demonstrating the 
subjectivity in the work of the 12 scientists that Meadows had designated as 
"great." 
In retrospect, despite the somewhat arbitrary method by which we chose 
it, we believe that our choice of the Meadows book was a good one. These are 
our reasons for that judgment: 
1. It purported to treat some of the most famous scientists in history. 
2. It treated as many as a dozen scientists, while some other books of similar 
genre treated perhaps only half as many, or fewer. 
3. It was not a dictionary or encyclopedia of scientists, which would be too 
unwieldy to handle. 

SELECTING THE SCIENTISTS 
19 
4. It was a recent book. 
5. It treated scientists of many nationalities and time periods. 
6. It included scientists from many scientific fields, including biology, 
chemistry, geography, mathematics, medicine, psychology, and physics. 
7. It treated all scientists equally, in that it devoted precisely 20 pages, 
including pictures, to each scientist. 
The scientists selected by Meadows surely include some of the most famous; 
but it is difficult to rank scientists. What criteria should be used: Some measure 
of how well known they are? Importance of their accomplishments? (How 
does one measure importance?) How often other scientists cite their work? 
How many of their ideas were eventually converted into applications used by 
society at large? Or which of countless other criteria should be used? People 
who do such rankings differ among themselves on how scientists should be 
ranked. For this reason we have examined a recent book of Simmons (1996) 
of rankings of the top 100 scientists (in his admittedly subjective view) and 
have included his rankings of the Meadow's scientists in the accompanying 
table, "Coverage of Scientists in Selected Reference Books." We have also 
examined several other books (see the References at the end of the chapter) 
that purport to include the most famous scientists. We have recorded in 
the table the extent to which these books have selected the Meadows 
scientists to examine in terms of the numbers of pages each book has devoted 
to each of the Meadows scientists. Although the list of comparison books is 
surely not exhaustive, it does reflect the results of a fairly extensive library 
search. 
The table shows, for example, that while Charles Darwin was ranked fourth 
among the top 100 scientists by Simmons and had the obligatory 20 pages 
devoted to him by Meadows, the Wilson book devoted 28 pages to him, whereas 
the Bolton and Posin books did not discuss him at all. Scanning across the table 
shows that in this sampling of books devoted to biographical accounts of these 
great scientists, the authors varied greatly in their decisions as to how to weight 
the amount of coverage they would devote to each case. Examining the table 
further shows us that many of the Meadows scientists are included among the 
top scientists in the Simmons rankings: Some are near the top, some are quite a 
bit farther down: and two are not even included among the top 100. (Simmons 
notes that Aristotle is of the greatest importance in the history of science but 
excludes him because his contributions are not due to direct influence; he 
excludes Alexander von Humboldt without any comment.) But in Chapter 4 we 
treat every one of the Meadows scientists as one of our cases, to be as objective 
and even-handed as possible. The variation in number of pages devoted to each 
scientist by the various authors, as reflected in the table, illustrates, at least in 
part, the differing views the authors have about rankings of these scientists. 
However, we can also note from the table that across 12 books purporting to 
treat the world's most famous scientists, there is substantial agreement as to 
who the most famous scientists were. 

^ 
Coverage of Scientists in Selected Reference Books 
Scientist 
Newton 
Einstein 
Darwin 
Pasteur 
Freud 
Galileo 
Lavoisier 
Faraday 
Curie 
Harvey 
Aristotle 
von Humbolt 
Kepler 
Mendel 
Mead 
Millikan 
Burt 
Rank 
in 
Simmons 
(1996) 
1 
2 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
11 
26 
38 
— 
— 
9 
60 
— 
— 
— 
Asimov 
(1989) 
19 
17 
8 
11 
6 
20 
9 
10 
5 
2 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Chambers 
(1989) 
2.5 
2.5 
1.5 
2 
0 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.5 
0.5 
0.5 
1 
0.5 
1 
0 
0.5 
0 
Crowther 
(1995) 
Simmons 
(1996) 
Number of Pages 
Bolton 
(1960) 
Hamilton 
(1991) 
Scientists Discussed in Meadows (1987) 
47 
46 
43 
0 
0 
39 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
6 
5 
5 
6 
5 
4 
5 
4 
4 
0 
0 
14 
15 
0 
0 
0 
23 
0 
7 
13 
0 
0 
0 
6 
8 
6 
6 
0 
0 
6 
8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
in ... 
Wilson 
(1937) 
19 
24 
28 
31 
0 
32 
12 
26 
0 
10 
14 
0 
Scientists Not Discussed in Meadows (1987) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
3 
— 
— 
— 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0 
0 
28 
12 
0 
0 
0 
Lenard 
(1933) 
28 
0 
5 
0 
0 
15 
0 
16 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Posin 
(1961) 
20 
12 
0 
0 
0 
12 
0 
20 
10 
0 
0 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Science 
Digest 
(1954) 
4 
3 
4 
6 
5 
6 
3 
6 
4 
5 
0 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0 
0 
Dolin 
(1960) 
4 
3 
10 
10 
0 
8 
9 
7 
9 
6 
0 
0 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Gibson 
(1970) 
27 
0 
13 
0 
0 
31 
0 
17 
0 
0 
5 
0 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 

REFERENCES 
21 
It will be seen that in every case, subjectivity played an important role in 
the research of the scientists we studied. Since this is how these most famous 
people approached science, it is not unreasonable to expect that most scien-
tists probably have approached their own research in analogous fashion. 
REFERENCES 
Asimov, Isaac (1989). Asimovs 
Chronology of Science and Discovery. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Bolton, Sarah Knowles (1960). Famous Men of Science, revised by Barbara Lovett 
Cline. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell. 
Chambers Concise Dictionary of Scientists (1989). Cambridge: W & R Chambers and 
the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 
Crowther, J. G. (1936). Men of Science. New York: W.W. Norton. 
(1995). Six Great Scientists: Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Darwin, Marie Curie, 
Einstein. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Dolin, Arnold (1960). Great Men of Science. New York: Hart. 
Gibson, Charles (1970). Heroes of the Scientific World. Freeport, NY: Books for 
Libraries Press. 
Hamilton, John (1991). They Made Our World: Five Centuries of Great Scientists and 
Inventors. London: Broadside Books. 
Lenard, Philipp Eduard Anton (1933). Great Men of Science: A History of Scientific 
Progress. New York: Macmillan. 
Meadows, Jack (1987). The Great Scientists. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Posin, Dan Q. (1961). Dr. Posin's Giants: Men of Science. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. 
Science Digest (1954). Science Milestones: The Story of the Epic Scientific Achievements 
and the Men Who Made Them Possible. Chicago: Windsor Press. 
Simmons, John (1996). The Scientific 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Scientists, 
Past and Present. Secaucus, NJ: Carol Publishing Group, Citadel Press. 
Wilson, Grove (1937). Great Men of Science. Garden City, NY: Garden City Publish-
ing Company. 

CHAPTER 3 
Some Weil-Known Stories of 
Extreme Subjectivity 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter we examine the work of five scientists who have become very 
celebrated cases of the excessive use of subjective methods in science. They 
are all very famous, highly respected scientists, and deservedly so. They are 
icons of science. These famous scientists all took advantage of their intuition, 
hunches, beliefs, and informed understanding of the processes they were study-
ing and combined them informally with experimental data to arrive at scien-
tific conclusions. But they are grouped here and studied because it is important 
to understand that even famous scientists may sometimes have overstepped 
the bounds of what is considered acceptable scientific practice in their zeal to 
rush to scientific conclusions and to have their work accepted by their peers. 
Although we advocate the combining of informed judgment with experimen-
tal data and show in Chapter 5 how to do this formally using Bayes' theorem, 
we do not condone the fabrication of data, the unjustified manipulation of data 
to select only those data that support a preconceived hypothesis, or any other 
fraudulent excessive use of subjectivity. 
3.2 JOHANNES KEPLER (1571-1630) 
Johannes Kepler was a German astronomer-mathematician who discovered 
from both empirical data and informed theorizing that the orbits in which the 
earth and the other planets travel around the sun are elliptical. He put forth 
the three fundamental laws of planetary motion in use today and is considered 
the father of modern astronomy.The Keplerian laws were later used by Sir Isaac 
Newton to develop his own laws of gravitational force of attraction of heavenly 
bodies (published in Newton's book, The Principia, 1687). Kepler's laws are: 
23 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

24 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
1. All the planets in our solar system move around the sun in elliptical 
orbits, having the sun as one of the foci (1609). 
2. A radius vector joining any planet to the sun sweeps out equal areas in 
equal periods of time (1609). 
3. The squares of the periods of revolution of the planets are directly 
proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun (1618). 
We discuss below briefly how the discovery of these laws came about, and how 
Kepler made generous use of his own personal beliefs in his methodological 
development and in his communication of the laws to the scientific community 
and the rest of the world. 
The story of Johannes Kepler really begins with Ptolemy of Alexandria, 
Egypt, a scientist who, in about A.D. 140, postulated the geocentric view 
that the earth is at the center of the solar system and that all the planets and 
the sun revolve around it. This view of the world was the one that prevailed 
in the Western world for about the next 1300 years of civilization, until 
Nicholas Copernicus (1473-1543). Copernicus was a Renaissance astronomer 
from East Prussia, now Poland. He described the solar system in heliocentric 
terms, with the sun, fixed in place, at the center, and Earth and all the other 
planets (six were known at the time) revolving around it in circles. Copernicus, 
by rejecting Ptolemy's geocentric theory and adopting the heliocentric view, 
got it basically right, although he believed the planetary orbits to be circles 
rather than ellipses, as they actually are, and believed that the sun is fixed in 
space. 
Kepler's other major precursor, Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), was a Danish 
astronomer born about the time that Copernicus died. Brahe devoted his life, 
first from Denmark and then from Prague, to observing accurately with his 
naked eye, and recording the positions and motions of the heavenly bodies. 
His observations produced a comprehensive study of the solar system and 
the recording of accurate positions of more than 777 "fixed stars," a scientific 
treasure trove of accurate observational data on the stars and planets. Brahe 
rose to become the imperial mathematician of the Holy Roman Empire. 
At college, Kepler studied astronomy under Michael Mastlin, a professor 
who was unusual in that he was one of the few who was convinced by the work 
of Copernicus that the solar system was heliocentric. Kepler was convinced 
in turn. Kepler sent Brahe a copy of his first major work in astronomy 
(Cosmographic Mystery, written in Latin), work that built on Copernican 
theory. Brahe was so impressed by both the astronomy and the mathematics 
that although he could not agree with the Copernican theory, he invited the 
24-year-old Kepler, in 1600, to join his laboratory just outside Prague. 
Brahe asked Kepler to work out the orbit of Mars. When Brahe died a year 
later, Kepler became keeper of Brahe's repository of observational data; he 
was also appointed Brahe's successor as imperial mathematician for the Holy 
Roman Empire. As such, he not only provided the emperor with some 800 
astrological horoscopes, but also acquired a team of astronomers to assist him. 

JOHANNES KEPLER (1642-1727) 
25 
Kepler continued to work on the orbit of Mars. He tried unsuccessfully to fit 
Brahe's data on Mars to a circle, to show that Mars moved in a circle around 
the sun, but he failed. He finally realized the truth, that it must move in an 
ellipse (he also tried an oval and other geometric shapes). He then general-
ized the concept to all the planets. With the help of Tycho Brahe's database, 
Kepler became determined to quantify the motions of all the planets, and 
in 1609 he published a 70-chapter tome, Astronomía Nova, a volume that 
summarized not only his work on the orbit of Mars but also two of his famous 
three laws of planetary motion. 
Almost 400 years later, William H. Donahue undertook the task of 
translating Kepler's 1609 Astronomía Nova into the English New Astronomy 
(Donahue, 1992). When, in the course of this work, he redid many of Kepler's 
calculations, he was startled to find some fundamental inconsistencies 
with Kepler's reporting of the same calculations (Donahue, 1988). Writing of 
Donahue's pathbreaking work in the New York Times, William Broad (1990) 
summarized Donahue's findings as saying that although Kepler claimed to 
have confirmed the elliptical orbits by independent observations and calcula-
tions of the position of Mars, in fact Kepler derived the data from the theory 
instead of the other way around. 
In his 1988 article, Donahue had noted that Kepler is reputed to have 
plotted the orbit of Mars by triangulation and then seen that the plot formed 
an ellipse: that is, the positions in the sky of Earth, the Sun, and Mars form a 
triangle, at any given point in time. At a later time, they form a new triangle. 
To understand the paths of motion involved, Kepler needed to measure accu-
rately the vertices of such triangles and the time elapsed between one trian-
gular position and another. But a close study of Kepler's New Astronomy 
(1609) shows that the plotted points do not fall exactly on such an ellipse. (Of 
course, measurements rarely fall exactly on a theoretical curve because they 
usually have random error sources incorporated into them.) Curtis Wilson 
(1968), however, carries the error argument further. The lack of precision 
inherent in the method of triangulation would have forced Kepler to use the 
plotted points only as a guide to his theorizing. Donahue tells us that Kepler 
presents a large table that supposedly shows the results of such observations, 
but the numbers in the table do not agree with the computations from which 
Kepler claims they were made. 
After detailed computational arguments, Donahue concludes that the 
results reported by Kepler in the table were not at all based on Brahe's obser-
vational data; rather, they were fabricated on the basis of Kepler's determi-
nation that the Mars orbit was elliptical. Donahue reasons that Kepler must 
have gone back to revise his earlier calculations that were made prior to his 
understanding that the orbit of Mars was actually elliptical. Thus anyone who 
cared to check Kepler's tables would find numbers that are consistent with the 
elliptical orbit postulated for Mars and would be inclined to believe that the 
numbers represented observational data. In fact, they were computed from 
the hypothesis of an elliptical orbit and then modified for measurement error. 

26 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
Such data, if they were truly observations, would be prima facie evidence of 
the theory's correctness. 
So Donahue concludes (1988, p. 236) with the following understanding of 
Kepler's thinking when he realized that the theory was not obviously deriv-
able from the observations and chose to present calculations that did not 
match the original data: "Not only would the numbers be confused, but Kepler 
saw clearly that no satisfactory theory could come from such a procedure. So 
rather than obliterate the traces of his earlier struggles, or present them in 
their messy detail, he chose a short cut." What appears to have occurred here 
is that a great scientist developed enormous understanding of the underlying 
processes that he was studying. That understanding was what he needed to 
develop the three planetary laws for which he became so famous. But later, 
he seems to have crossed the line of acceptable scientific practice. He became 
so convinced of what drove these physical processes that he subjectively pro-
jected his personal, nonobservationally-based beliefs onto the reporting scene 
to convince others in the scientific community of the validity of his theories. 
Fortunately, he was brilliant enough to get it right. This is a common thread 
that has run through the methodology of many of the world's successful 
scientists. 
REFERENCES 
Broad, William J. (1990). "After 400 Years, a Challenge to Kepler: He Fabricated His 
Data, Scholar Says," Science Times in the New York Times, January 23, pp. B5, B7. 
Donahue, W. H. (1988). "Kepler's Fabricated Figures: Covering Up the Mess in The 
New Astronomy,'" Journal for the History of Astronomy, 19:216-237. 
(Trans.) (1992). The New Astronomy by Johannes Kepler. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). Vol. V, p. 766. 
Wilson, Curtis (1968). "Kepler's Derivation of the Elliptical Path," Isis, 59:75-90. 
3.3 GREGOR MENDEL (1824-1884) 
Gregor Mendel was the founder of modern genetics. He was born in Moravia, 
now in the Czech Republic. He attended courses in philosophy at Olmutz Uni-
versity for two years and then joined the Augustinian monastery at Brün as a 
means of attaining further education. He was ordained in 1848. He was sent 
by his order to the University of Vienna for two years to study natural science, 
physics, and mathematics, and to prepare for an examination to become a 
regular high school teacher. 
During his time in Vienna he was exposed to botanists studying issues of 
plant evolution and was a demonstrator in the Physical Institute. Here, Olby 

GREGOR MENDEL (1824-1884) 
27 
(1966, p. 113) points out: "He would have had ample opportunity for becom-
ing familiar with the physicist's approach to experimentation which, unlike 
that of the naturalist, is not to make observations in a Baconian manner and 
then seek for an underlying pattern but to analyse a problem first, arrive at a 
solution on paper, and only then to carry out an experiment to confirm or 
refute the solution. With this approach in mind, the scientist attempts to design 
an experiment that will bear meaningfully on the hypothesized pattern. Of 
course, the problem is suggested in the first place by observational data...." 
At Vienna, too, Mendel would have been exposed to the facts then known 
about hybrids—that there is uniformity in the F, generation and reversion 
in the F2 generation. (The Fj generation are the offspring of a hybridization 
where two plants that are genetically pure have been cross-fertilized; the F2 
generation are the offspring by self-pollination in the F, generation.) 
In 1854, Mendel returned to substitute teaching at the secondary level, 
and in 1855 he again failed the examination for regular teacher and so remained 
a substitute teacher of physics and natural history for 14 years. It was during 
this period that Mendel carried out his experiments in plant hybridization. 
The work on peas, on which Mendel's fame rests, started in 1856 and culminated 
with a paper that was read before the Brunn Society for Natural History in 1865 
and published in their proceedings in 1866. The ideas that Mendel presented 
in that paper have become the basic principles of genetics: Heredity particles 
(now called genes) are passed from parent to offspring, where they remain 
intact, neither influencing each other nor changing. These genes determine the 
characteristics of the offspring of the next and of further generations according 
to a set of simple statistical rules. These ideas provided a mechanism through 
which the evolution of species by natural selection theorized by Darwin could 
proceed (see the discussion of Darwin in Section 4.9). 
To understand Mendel's ideas, let us take as an example human eye color. 
(For the sake of clarity, we shall use modern terminology and even concepts 
that were unknown to Mendel.) Every human being has 46 chromosomes (23 
pairs) in every cell (except the germ cells, that is, the eggs and sperm, which 
have only 23 chromosomes each, one from each pair). On each chromosome 
there are many particles called genes. The genes on each pair of chromosomes 
are themselves paired, so that in the case of eye color, a brown-eyed male must 
have a gene for brown eyes on one chromosome, and on the other chromo-
some he must have either another gene for brown eyes, or a gene for a dif-
ferent color, say blue. Because brown is dominant, the combination of one 
blue-eyed gene and one brown-eyed gene results in a person with brown eyes. 
For purposes of this explanation, let us assume that the man's other eye-color 
gene is the recessive gene for blue eyes. This means that when his germ cells 
are formed, each with one of the pair of chromosomes that carry the gene for 
eye color, half will have the gene for brown eyes and half will have the gene 
for blue eyes. 
Let us examine the possible results of a mating of this brown-eyed man with 
a brown-eyed woman; for the sake of this explanation, we shall assume that 

28 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
she also carries both the gene for blue eyes and that for brown eyes (and hence 
half of her germ cells carry the gene for blue eye color and half for brown eye 
color). We find that there are four possible genetic outcomes for eye color in 
the child: genes for blue eye color from both parents, genes for brown eye 
color from both parents, a gene for blue eyes from the mother and a gene for 
brown eyes from the father, and a gene for brown eyes from the mother and 
a gene for blue eyes from the father. But the last two possibilities result in the 
same brown eye color as occurs with two brown genes, because brown is 
dominant. So the four genetic possibilities (genotypes) reduce to two eye-color 
appearances (phenotypes). 
Mendel's great insight was to predict the likelihood that each genotype 
would occur. In the case of our eye-color example, he would say that the 
blue-blue combination and the brown-brown combination are equally likely, 
but the blue-brown combination occurs twice as often because we might get 
a blue-from-mother-brown-from-father, or a brown-from-mother-blue-from-
father. An equivalent interpretation is that there is a 25% chance that the child 
would have blue-blue genes for eye color (called a double recessive), a 25% 
chance that the child would have brown-brown genes for eye color (called a 
double dominant), and a 50% chance that the child would have the brown-
blue gene combination (called a hybrid). These percentages are really pro-
babilities. They mean that if the mating couple were to have eight children, it 
would be possible for all eight to be blue-eyed, but it is extremely unlikely for 
that to happen, just as a well-balanced coin flipped randomly eight times could 
result in eight heads, but "don't bet on it" (the chance of eight heads in eight 
flips is 1 in 256). The couple would be most likely to have two children with 
blue-blue genes, two with brown-brown genes, and four with blue-brown 
genes—but even that outcome is only an on-the-average phenomenon. 
If we now translate these ideas about eye color to Mendel's experiments, 
the same principles apply. Mendel worked with hybrid peas, that is, peas that 
he had bred from pure strains. He thus knew the hybrids to have one gene for 
the dominant variant of the characteristic and the other gene for the recessive 
variant of the characteristic. (Mendel worked with seven characteristics in all, 
having to do with such things as where the flowers of the pea plant were 
located on the plant, the shape of the seed, the color of the seed, and so on.) 
Then, when he self-fertilized such a hybrid pea plant, the offspring should have 
occurred in the same genetic ratios as in the case of blue and brown eye-color 
genes: that is, 25%, 50%, and 25%. 
Let us use as a specific example the sixth of the seven characteristics of peas 
that Mendel used—the position of the flowers on the stem. He found a variety 
of peas that consistently distributed its flowers along the main stem (termed 
axial) and another that consistently bunched the flowers at the top of the stem 
(terminal). When these two varieties were used in a hybridization experiment, 
each member of the next generation (the Ft generation) would have in each 
cell one gene that comes from the parent with axial flowers and one from the 
parent with terminal flowers. Half the reproductive cells of each offspring 

GREGOR MENDEL (1824-1884) 
29 
would carry the gene for axial flowers and half for terminal flowers. As axial 
flowers are dominant, all offspring in the Fj generation have axial flowers. 
Mendel then self-fertilized members of the Fj generation. (Self-fertilization 
assured that Mendel knew that the source of both germ cells going to form 
the next generation was the same, and thus that method of fertilization was 
used throughout his experiments on plant hybridization.) In the next genera-
tion, the F2 generation, he found that three-fourths of the offspring had axial 
flowers and one-fourth had terminal flowers. He reasoned that those with ter-
minal flowers had received the recessive gene from both reproductive cells, 
but needed to breed another generation of hybrids via self-fertilization to dis-
tinguish between those plants with axial flowers that carried two dominant 
genes and those that carried one dominant (for axial flowers) and one reces-
sive (for terminal flowers). Those plants in the F2 generation that produced 
only offspring with axial flowers would be considered to carry two dominant 
genes; those in the F2 generation that produced both axially flowered and 
terminally flowered offspring in the F3 generation would necessarily be carry-
ing one dominant and one recessive gene. Mendel writes that he chose 100 
members of the axially flowered plants in the F2 generation and from each 
planted 10 seeds to make this determination. He then reports that in the F3 
generation, the offspring of 33 plants had only axial flowers, and thus the 
parents were classified as carrying two dominant genes and that the offspring 
of 67 plants had some plants with axial flowers and some with terminal flowers, 
so the plants of the F2 generation were classified as hybrids. 
The experimental activities largely ceased when Mendel was elected abbot 
of his monastery in 1868 and his time was taken up with administrative duties 
and later by a controversy with the government about taxes on monastery 
property. Mendel continued, however, to act as a man of science and to make 
meteorological and horticultural observations until his death on January 6, 
1884. Mendel's work was practically unknown for 35 years, despite wide cir-
culation of the journal in which it appeared and despite his correspondence 
with Carl von Nägeli, then the foremost expert on hybridization. Its chief prin-
ciples were then discovered independently and approximately simultaneously 
by three botanists (Correns, 1900; de Vries, 1900; Von Tschermak, 1900). By 
that time, according to Mangelsdorf (see Mendel Centennial Symposium, 
1967) "in large part because of the profound observations of the German zool-
ogist Weismann, father of the germ plasm theory, the scientific world was ready 
and the principles of inheritance had an immediate impact, almost explosive 
in its nature, upon biological thinking and research." 
There has been a controversy about Mendel's use of subjectivity in his work 
since R. A. Fisher, a prominent geneticist and often considered the founder of 
the modern field of statistical science, pointed out (Fisher, 1936) that Mendel's 
data seemed "too good to be true." Mendel's reports of the results of his 
matings of hybrid pea plants, embodied in the ratio of double recessive, double 
dominant, and hybrid offspring, approximated extremely closely the theoret-
ical percentages of 25%, 25%, and 50%. But we just don't expect such good 

30 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
agreement in so few matings, just as we don't expect the well-balanced coin 
to fall heads exactly 5 times every time we flip it 10 times. Indeed, Fisher found, 
using a form of statistical test called chi-square, that Mendel's results were so 
close to what would be expected that such agreement could happen by chance 
less than once in 10,000 times (1936, p. 131). 
But Fisher also pointed out an even more serious flaw in Mendel's work. 
This had to do with how Mendel would decide whether an F2 generation pea 
plant was a hybrid or a dominant-dominant plant. As we have seen, part of 
his task in the experiments was to classify the plants in the F2 generation that 
showed the dominant phenotype as dominant-dominant or dominant-reces-
sive. If the characteristic Mendel was working with concerned the plant's seeds 
(e.g., whether they were "round" or "wrinkled"), he merely had to examine 
the seeds—a dominant-dominant plant would bear only seeds showing the 
dominant characteristic, while a hybrid would bear some seeds showing the 
dominant phenotype and some showing the recessive. But if the characteris-
tic had to do with the conformation of the plant itself (e.g., the placement of 
the flowers on the stem), the dominant-dominant and hybrid plants looked 
the same and Mendel couldn't be sure which was which. It was necessary to 
breed another generation, the F3 generation, through self-fertilization of the 
plants to be classified and to examine whether the double recessive charac-
teristic appeared in any of the offspring. If it did not, the parent plant 
was characterized as having the dominant-dominant gene combination. But 
misclassifications could easily occur by such methods in the case where only 
a few offspring were examined and by chance all the examined offspring of a 
hybrid happened to be double dominant. Fisher did the calculations and found 
that when Mendel used 10 plants in the F3 generation for each parent to be 
classified, about 5.6% of the hybrids would be misclassified as dominant-
dominants. Therefore, the ratio of plants classified as carrying two dominant 
genes to those carrying one dominant and one recessive among those in the 
F2 generation which displayed the dominant axial flowers should have been 
expected to be not 1:2 but 1.1126:1.8874. Mendel's data, however, fit the 1:2 
ratio very well, and fail to fit the adjusted ratio by a margin that would be 
expected to occur less than once in 2000 trials. 
Another prominent geneticist, Sewell Wright (1966), repeated Fisher's 
analysis a generation later and achieved essentially the same results as Fisher 
had. Various explanations have been advanced for Mendel's "too-good" data. 
All hinge on the idea that Mendel had formulated his theory before col-
lecting his data. Whereas this is common practice for scientists in all fields of 
study today and is indeed considered part of the "scientific method," it was 
unusual for naturalists in the mid-nineteenth century. They worked habitually 
in the style advocated by Francis Bacon, amassing great quantities of data 
and then spending years searching for patterns therein. Mendel undoubtedly 
absorbed the methods of experimental design from his work with physicists 
at the University of Vienna. The argument goes that Mendel either designed 
his experiments as demonstrations of the theory and discarded ill-fitting data 

GREGOR MENDEL (1824-1884) 
31 
as erroneous, or (whether consciously or unconsciously) biased the data 
collection efforts. That is, Mendel's subjective belief about the predictions 
of his theory about inheritance in successive generations may have been 
so strong that he doctored the data to fit the theory, either consciously or 
unconsciously. 
Fisher (1936) himself is a spokesman for the view that Mendel's "experi-
ments" were more demonstration than exploration. Indeed, Fisher pointed out 
that the conditions of knowledge by the middle of the nineteenth century were 
such that someone had only to assume that the material of inheritance was 
particulate rather than infinitely divisible and contributed by both parents 
to deduce the laws of inheritance. Fisher marshals evidence that the theory 
guided the design of the experiments by pointing out that Mendel was able 
to find seven pairs of varieties of peas, each differing in a single factor, perhaps 
choosing the factors to be studied as he chose the varieties; varieties that dif-
fered on more than a single factor would have introduced complications that 
would have made the demonstration of the theory more difficult. Fisher goes 
on to write (1936, p. 133): "Next, it appears that Mendel regarded the numeri-
cal frequency ratios, in which the laws of inheritance expressed themselves, 
simply as a ready method of demonstrating the truth of his factorial system, 
and that he was never much concerned to demonstrate either their exactitude 
or their consistency." 
How the data came to agree too closely with expectations is also a subject 
of speculation. Fisher suggests that an assistant, knowing all too well what 
to expect, reported the data erroneously to Mendel. Others (e.g., Sturtevant, 
1965) suggest that families which seemed aberrant might have been discarded 
as caused by experimental error, or that unconscious bias might have led 
Mendel or an assistant to classify doubtful individuals in a way that fit 
the expectations of the theory. Dunn (1965) gives a detailed explanation of 
another way in which such bias could occur. When tallying the phenotypes 
of offspring, especially into a large number of categories that are expected to 
be approximately equal, the investigator can watch the counts grow. Such 
an investigator may unconsciously be biased to stop the counting at a point 
when a large number of observations have been accumulated and the counts 
in the categories are indeed approximately equal. In the modern laboratory 
the dangers of such unconscious biases are recognized and protected against 
by setting up mechanisms to keep the investigator ignorant of the counts as 
they develop (A discussion of such safeguards against experimental bias in 
several scientific fields appears in Section 1.8.). But Mendel was a pioneer and 
had no such safeguards in place. But Dunn concludes (1965, p. 194): "There is 
no evidence of conscious fraud and he was careful to report wide deviations 
in some parts of some experiments which he would not have done if bent on 
fraud." 
This absolution of Mendel from accusations of fraud is universal. Indeed, 
some authors, citing the care that Mendel exhibits in all his writings, suggest 
that there is no phenomenon of "too good" data that needs explanation. Glass 

32 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
(1963, cited in Monaghan and Coreos, 1985b, p. 50) states this position strongly: 
"[It] was the existence of a tantalizing and hitherto insoluble problem that led 
him to undertake the particular kind of experiment he designed, and not the 
existence in his mind of any conceptual construct to which he was committed 
and for which he might have desired support." 
Thus, as in the cases of other famous scientists who may have doctored or 
fabricated data (Cyril Burt, Johannes Kepler, Sir Isaac Newton), there are both 
supporters and detractors of Mendel. Several authors suggest that more than 
10 plants per parent might have been grown in the F3 generation, making the 
necessary correction to the expected ratio that Fisher pointed out less drastic. 
Others, for example, Weiling (1971) argue that other experimenters have 
found ratios that agree with theory at least as well as Mendel's do, and thus 
there may be something in the botanical process that invalidates the statisti-
cal procedures used by Fisher. Weiling suggests that because there is depen-
dency between the fertilized cells of a single plant, the estimate of variance of 
the proportion of dominants would be smaller than that assumed by Fisher 
using a binomial distribution. If that variance, used in the denominator of the 
chi-square statistic, were replaced with something smaller, the computed value 
of the statistic would be larger and it might no longer point to congruence with 
expectations too good to be true. Citing Mendel's paper for some evidence of 
experiments that were repeated because they did not give the expected results, 
Van der Waerden (1968) suggests that Mendel used a system of sequential 
experimentation that would render Fisher's test invalid because that test is 
designed for an experiment that is fully planned in advance. Monaghan and 
Coreos (1985a) concur with an image of Mendel going back and forth between 
theory and data. 
We shall not be able here to settle the question of whether Mendel's data 
have been doctored—indeed, the question may never be answered fully. But 
as will be noted from the discussion above, there are those who believe that 
the data are fabricated at least in part and those who believe that they are 
accurate reports of experiments as carried out. Both groups see Mendel's pro-
cedure as an interplay between theory and experimentation. They differ, pri-
marily, on whether the theory was fully formed before the experiments began 
or was formulated piecemeal as results became available and was used to plan 
further rounds of experimentation. We must deplore any scientific fraud, even 
when carried out by a great scientist in the service of a correct theory; hence 
any fabrication of data by Mendel is indefensible. The interplay between 
theory and experiment, however, can be considered a form of subjectivity, 
employed to great profit by Gregor Mendel. Indeed, in his foreword 
to the centennial publication of Mendel's paper, Mangelsdorf (see Mendel 
Centennial Symposium, 1967) writes that "Mendel's work is a splendid 
example of what Henry Wallace has called 'small gardens and big ideas.' It is 
also one of the best examples of the preeminence of the human mind as a sci-
entific instrument." Thus, Mendel certainly had the insight to develop a theory 
of heredity based on genes and chromosomes that has widespread currency 

REFERENCES 
33 
today. Whether, like most scientists, he used his informed beliefs, intuition, and 
understanding of natural processes to aid him in arriving at meaningful 
scientific conclusions, or whether he sometimes fudged his data to make it 
conform with his preconceived theories, remains unclear. 
REFERENCES 
Beadle, G. (1967). "Mendelism," pp. 335-350 in A. Brink (Ed.), Heritage from Mendel. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Correns, Carl G. (1900). "Mendel's Regel über das Verhalten der Nachkommenschaft 
der Rassenbastarde," Botanischen Gesesellschaft Berichte, 18:158-168. 
Darbishire, A. D. (1911). Breeding and the Mendelian Discovery. London: Cassell and 
Company. 
De Beer, G. (1964). "Mendel, Darwin, and Fisher," Notes and Records of the Royal 
Society, London, 19(2): 192-226. 
de Vries, Hugo (1900). "Sur la Loi de Disjunction des Hybrides," Comptes Rendus de 
VAcadémie des Sciences, Paris, 130:845-847. 
Dunn, L. C. (1965). "Mendel: His Work and His Place in History," Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society, 109:189-198. 
Fisher, R. A. (1936). "Has Mendel's Work Been Rediscovered?" Annals of Science, 
1:115-137. 
Glass, B. (1963). "The Establishment of Modern Genetical Theory as an Example of 
the Interaction of Different Models, Techniques, and Inferences," pp. 521-541 in 
A. C. Crombie (Ed.), Scientific Change. New York: Basic Books; London: Heine-
mann. 
Mendel Centennial Symposium (1965: Fort Collins (Colo.) (1967). Heritage from 
Mendel: Proceedings of the Mendel Centennial Symposium 
Sponsored by the 
Genetics Society of America. Madison, WI: Wisconsin University Press. 
Mendel, Gregor (1965 [1866]). Experiments in Plant Hybridisation. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Monaghan, F., and A. Coreos (1985a). "Chi-Square and Mendel's Experiments: Where's 
the Bias?" Journal of Heredity, 76:307-309. 
(1985b). "Mendel, the Empiricist," Journal of Heredity, 76:49-54. 
Olby, Robert C. (1966). Origins of Mendelism. New York: Schocken Books. 
Orel, V. (1968). "Will the Story on Too Good' Results of Mendel's Data Continue?" 
Bioscience, 18:776-778. 
Sturtevant, A. H. (1965). A History of Genetics. Tokyo: Weatherhill. 
Van Der Waerden, B. L. (1968). "Mendel's Experiments," Centaurus, 12:275-288. 
Von Tschermak, E. (1900). "Über künstliche Kreuaung bei Pisum sativum," Botanis-
chen Gesellschaft Berichte, 18:232-239. 
Weiling, F. (1971). "Mendel's Too Good Data," in Special Issue on Pisum Experiments, 
Folia Mendelania, 6:71-77. 
Wright, S. (1966). "Mendel's Ratios," in C Stern and E. R. Sherwood (Eds.), The Origin 
of Genetics: A Mendel Source Book. San Francisco: WH. Freeman. 

34 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
3.4 ROBERT A. MILLIKAN (1868-1953) 
Robert A. Millikan was an American physicist. He successfully measured the 
electric charge on a single electron, winning a Nobel prize in 1923 for this 
famous oil-drop experiment. He also won many other prizes and honors and 
a lasting place in the annals of science for his pioneering efforts. In 1909, 
Millikan began experimenting with both water and oil droplets, trying to meas-
ure the size of the charge on a single electron, under the assumption that the 
electron is a discrete particle; his early results were reported in Millikan 
(1909-1910). These experiments continued until about 1913, yielding results 
from increasingly refined procedures. 
Millikan's basic experiment was to direct some oil droplets through a small 
hole in the top of a box with transparent sides, but with a metal top and bottom 
(these constituted condenser plates). He put a potential difference (voltage) 
across the top and bottom of the box and thereby created an electric field inside 
the box. A specific droplet of oil could be observed by a microscope and its 
weight calculated by the speed at which the droplet fell under gravity and 
against air resistance. Millikan was able to adjust the strength of the upward 
pull of the electric field on the oil droplet until the drop was just suspended 
motionless in the air, with the upward force on the charged oil droplet just 
equaling the downward pull of gravity. Millikan knew that the potential 
difference across the top and bottom of the box was just equal to the force of 
the electric field times the distance between the top and bottom plates of the 
box. Thus, knowing the distance and the voltage, he could readily calculate the 
force on the droplet, and, in turn, the charge on the electron (or electrons) in 
the droplet. As it turns out from his laboratory notebooks, he seems to have 
repeated the experiment 39 times but published only 29 of the sets of observa-
tions, discarding the rest (this is discussed further below). Millikan found that 
although his measurements showed some variability, the charge seemed not 
to vary continuously, but was an integral multiple of what he called e, the pos-
tulated charge on an electron. He concluded that the total charge on a droplet 
was an integer multiple of the number of discrete electrons in the droplet. 
At about the same time, Felix Ehrenhaft of the University of Vienna in 
Austria was carrying out similar experiments. Ehrenhaft claimed that the vari-
ability in Millikan's published measurements supported Ehrenhaft's theory 
that there must be subelectrons, each carrying a charge that is a fraction of 
that carried by an electron. Millikan and Ehrenhaft were at odds scientifically, 
and the issue of subelectrons became a major issue of debate; it ended soon 
afterward among scientists of that era when people lost interest. The argument 
about subelectrons has been revisited in recent years, however, as it relates to 
the quark, the elementary subnuclear particle that was found recently. Related 
particles are postulated that have one-third and two-thirds of the charge of 
the electron. The subelectron debate may not be over after all. 
In 1913, Millikan published new experimental results (Millikan, 1913) that 
he claimed were more accurate, and which purported to confirm his earlier 

ROBERT A. MILLIKAN (1868-1953) 
35 
conclusions. In italics, he stated: "This is not a selected group of drops but 
represents all of the drops experimented upon during 60 consecutive days." 
That should have ended the debate and should have shown that through 
objective, scientific measurement the situation was completely clarified; but 
Millikan's perhaps excessively generous use of scientific subjectivity in the 
reporting of his results was discovered later, by Gerald Holton (1978), who 
scrutinized Millikan's laboratory notebooks. Holton went back to the original 
notebooks and submitted papers on which Millikan based his 1913 paper and 
found some major problems with Millikan's reporting of his data. Holton 
reported (1978, p. 52): "With idiosyncratic frankness and detail, Millikan shows 
in the section, 'The Results', that the measurements with the new technique 
were still difficult to make, that he relied heavily on personal judgment, and 
that it was really still his first major paper." 
In short, Holton was reporting that Millikan had been excessively subjec-
tive in his methodology, that he had crossed over the line of what is accept-
able scientific practice. Holton (1978) explained that Millikan had given each 
of his original sets of observations in the 1910 paper a personal quality-of-
measurement rating. Millikan had used three stars to grade the quality of his 
measurements "best" (there were 2 such), two stars for "very good" (there 
were 7 such), one star for "good" (there were 10 such), and finally, "fair" 
received no stars (there were 13 with no stars). In his paper, Millikan recorded, 
in the (perhaps naive) interest of full disclosure, that he had discarded seven 
observations entirely. Then, in the mode of a modern data analyst who does 
not want to ignore any of the information available in an experiment, Millikan 
assigned weights to the various qualities of his observations. He then formed 
a weighted average of the assessments of e that he found in each set of 
observations of equal quality. His final estimate of e was the weighted average, 
e = 4.85 x 10~10esu (electrostatic units). But the ordinary unweighted average 
(mean) would have been 4.70 x 10~10esu. 
Our interpretation of the weights he used is that each of them represents 
Millikan's prior probability (his personal degrees of belief; see Chapter 5) for 
each of the groups of observations that they were yielding the true values. 
Millikan also mentions in his paper (Millikan, 1909-1910, p. 220) a very 
subjective, excessively strong personal belief that transcends his objectivity in 
measurement—that he would discard some observations if they had not 
agreed with the results of his other observations:"/ would have discarded them 
had they not agreed with the results of the other observations, and consequently 
I felt obliged to discard them as it was." Moreover, in his laboratory notebook 
for March 12,1912, there are annotations that Millikan associated with some 
of his observations, terms such as "publish this," "beauty," and "error high, will 
not use." So Millikan had very strong beliefs about what he was expecting to 
find and ignored the data that disagreed with his prior beliefs. 
It seems that although Millikan claimed to be reporting all of his measure-
ments in his published paper, he had actually selected his data subjectively. 
His 1913 article presented 58 data points (made on consecutive days) selected 

36 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
from a total of 140. What happened to the remaining missing data points? This 
question was not fully answered. Millikan's assessed mean value of e in his 
1913 paper was e - 4.774 ± 0.009 x 10"10esu (the currently accepted value for 
e is 4.77 x 10'1()esu). 
When a scientist tries to learn from the earlier research of others by com-
bining the results of their experiments in some reasonable, quantitative way, 
the procedure is called meta-analysis in modern terminology. It seems that Mil-
likan performed an early version of meta-analysis before reporting his results 
in his Philosophical Magazine paper (1910). In the section of the paper giving 
"the most probable value of the elementary electrical charge" (see Holton, 
1978, p. 51), Millikan presents his own new mean value, e = 4.65 x 10"1()esu. He 
also assigns equal weight to all the recent determinations of e by methods that 
seem least open to question: 
1. The value obtained by Planck from radiation theory (4.69 x 10~1()esu), 
which Rutherford had mentioned with favor at Winnipeg 
2. The value of Rutherford and Geiger (4.65 x 10"10) 
3. E. Regener's value, obtained by a method similar to Rutherford's 
(4.79 x 10"10) 
4. Begemen's recent and as yet unpublished value of 4.67 x 10",(), obtained 
in Millikan's laboratory 
The final mean for e, Millikan declares, is thus 4.69 x 10"10esu. So Millikan 
suggested to the scientific community that it should accept as the true value 
of e a simple average of those of the values reported previously that in 
Millikan's view were tolerably acceptable, including, of course, the value he 
had found himself. Millikan's meta-analytic approach was of course fun-
damentally subjective in his choices of which (whose) values to include in the 
averaging. 
Millikan's personal belief was that the electron was not divisible, so it 
carried an integral discrete charge. This belief was so strong that he blatantly 
admitted that he would have ignored data points that disagreed with his 
preconceived thesis by just not publishing them. As it has turned out, 
Millikan's final experimental value, confirmed by later experiments with 
x-ray diffraction by crystals, was about the value that is officially accepted 
today. Despite, or perhaps because of, his subjectivity, he seems to have gotten 
it right. 
REFERENCES 
Broad, William, and Nicholas Wade (1982). Betrayers of the Truth. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Micropedia (1975). Vol. VI, p. 898. 

CYRIL BURT (1883-1971) 
37 
Holton, Gerald (1978). "Subelectrons, Presuppositions, and the Millikan-Ehrenhaft 
Dispute," pp. 25-83 in Gerald Holton, The Scientific Imagination: Case Studies. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Millikan, Robert A. (1909-1910). "A New Modification of the Cloud Method of 
Measuring the Elementary Electrical Charge, and the Most Probable Value of 
That Charge", Physical Review, 29:560-561 (abstract, 1909); the full paper was 
published in 1910 in Philosophical Magazine, pp. 209-228. 
(1913). "On the Elementary Electrical Charge and the Avogadro Constant," 
Physical Review, 2:109-143. 
3.5 CYRIL BURT (1883-1971) 
On February 22,1997, Ian Wilmut of the Roslin Institute, an animal research 
laboratory near Edinburgh, Scotland, made a startling announcement to an 
astonished world. By means of gene manipulation involving three distinct 
sheep (see Section 3.5.1 for a description), he and his collaborators had suc-
cessfully created the first animal cloned from an adult mammal, a lamb named 
Dolly. [See Wilmut et al. (1997) for technical details, and Specter and Kolata 
(1997) for a good newspaper account.] The implications of this important 
research are enormous and multifaceted, including both the dream and the 
nightmare of the possible eventual cloning of human beings. There are very 
serious ethical, religious, political, and social considerations that must even-
tually be addressed in relation to this research, but let us set them aside for 
the moment. One clear implication of this line of research is the possibility of 
being able to study, for scientific research purposes, the various factors that 
relate to the nature-nature debate, by comparing characteristics of clones 
reared in the same environment with characteristics of those reared apart. 
This nature-nurture debate was the subject of much of the research of the 
eminent British educational psychologist Sir Cyril Burt (1883-1971). Burt rea-
soned that the only sure way to distinguish inherited from acquired traits 
would be to study identical twins, pairs of people who originate from the same 
fertilized egg and thus originally would necessarily have identical genetic com-
position, and to study how their intelligence varies with environmental factors. 
Perhaps the cloning of human beings will never take place (although now such 
an eventuality appears to be closer to a possibility than at any time in the past). 
Nevertheless, the possibility arises of extending Burt's twin research to the 
study of characteristics in clones of animals, because they would have almost 
identical genetic makeup. (But would the genetic differences in clones cause 
even more trouble?; see Section 3.5.2). 
Possibilities of such clone research might well be especially enticing because 
Burt's identical-twin research has posthumously been clouded in controversy 
over whether he fabricated his data in an overzealous attempt to provide "sci-
entific evidence" that supported his strong personal subjective beliefs about 
heredity and intelligence. Because of the possibility of being able to study 

38 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
larger samples of animals with known genetic composition, humankind might 
finally be able to address questions about heritability in a less controversial 
way. [A recent discussion of such controversies may be found in Herrnstein 
and Murray (1994), a source that itself has invoked much controversy because 
some have interpreted its conclusions to be redolent of racism. Another new 
work on the subject was published by Wright in 1997; see also Devlin et al. 
(1997) and Gould (1981).] But now we focus on Cyril Burt and the subjectiv-
ity in his scientific research. 
Cyril Burt was born in London, England, in 1883. He was educated at 
Oxford University, graduating in 1907. In his postgraduate years he came to 
be influenced by the newly developed school of biometric methods (statistical 
methods applied to problems in biology and especially in inheritance) of Sir 
Francis Galton, and of Karl Pearson at University College, London, and the 
work on understanding intelligence of Charles Spearman. Galton strongly 
believed in the effects of heredity on intelligence and called for study of how 
research on twins (2% of the population) could affect understanding of such 
hereditary effects (Galton, 1875). Galton had suggested that two-egg, frater-
nal (dizygotic) twins (75% of all twins) could be used to understand the vari-
ation of hereditary characteristics to be expected within a family, whereas 
single-egg, identical (monozygotic) twins (25% of all twins) could be used to 
demonstrate the effects of environment. Burt began research on intelligence; 
his first published paper (Burt, 1909) supported the hereditary determination 
of ability (Joynson, 1989, p. 21). Because his research in quantitative educa-
tional psychology involving juvenile delinquency, intelligence testing, and 
factor analysis (a statistical tool for analyzing multidimensional data, such as 
answers to questions on intelligence tests administered to many subjects) was 
considered to be pathbreaking, eventually his fame extended far beyond 
England. By the time he was knighted in 1946, he was a world-renowned sci-
entific figure. As Hearnshaw wrote (1979, p. 227), "Burt's reputation survived 
his lifetime. Not long before his death (1971) the American Psychological 
Association bestowed on him the Edward Lee Thorndike award, a high honor 
which had never previously been accorded to a foreigner 
In the obituary 
in The (London) Times Educational Supplement (15 Oct., 1971), Burt had been 
described as 'Britain's most eminent educational psychologist', and in the 
Cattell Feschrift (Dreger, 1972), which came out a little later, he was called 
'dean of the world's psychologists'. Nobody then anticipated the criticisms and 
onslaughts to which his work was shortly to be subjected." 
Burt was no stranger to controversy. His work came under attack on several 
occasions during his lifetime, but he had always fought back and defended 
himself. But after his death, his work came under serious questioning yet again. 
The problem started with an article by Arthur Jensen (1969) about the Head-
start Program in the United States. The Headstart Program was designed to 
help children who had been raised under culturally deprived conditions over-
come educational handicaps by giving them a headstart through extra school-
ing. Jensen argued, using Burt's twin data, that the Headstart Program was 

CYRIL BURT (1883-1971) 
39 
doomed to failure from the beginning, because children's educational handi-
caps were properly attributable to heredity, not environment. Thus putting 
resources into Headstart was a waste of money, time, and energy. 
Three years after Burt's death, the matter was taken up by Leon Kamin 
(1974). Kamin argued the other side of the issue—that it was not heredity but 
environment that was the culprit for educationally handicapped children. His 
reasoning was based on the notion that Burt's twin data on identical twins 
reared apart that Jensen had relied on for the support of his argument were 
highly questionable. Kamin's book was an attack on the entire school of psy-
chologists who had argued throughout the twentieth century that it was hered-
ity that was the cause of educational handicap. He was arguing that "the 
hereditarians had allowed their supposedly scientific conclusions to be biased 
by their political convictions" (Joynson, 1989, p. 29). Kamin, pointing out that 
the hereditarians' belief system included endorsement of ideas of eugenics, 
which encouraged selective breeding of humans to improve the stock, asserted 
that their subjective beliefs and judgments were not only intertwined with 
their experimental data, but perhaps the data had been altered to support the 
conclusions they sought. 
Kamin's 1974 criticisms against Burt's twin research claimed: 
1. That there was little in Burt's writing to explain precisely how the data 
were collected, which populations were tested, how test scores were 
adjusted, how parental IQs were obtained, the extent and duration of 
the separations of the twin pairs, or the precise ages of the twin pairs 
when their IQs were tested. 
2. That there were conflicting and inconsistent statements about economic 
background, social class, and intelligence of the twin pairs, as well as 
statements about the numbers of children in institutions. 
3. That there were careless errors in Burt's tables. 
4. That whereas the numbers of twin pairs being studied in Burt's various 
reports, both monozygotic and dizygotic, changed from one report to 
another, many of the correlations remained the same, to three decimal 
places. For example, for monozygotic twins reared apart, Burt reported 
in 1955 that the group tests of intelligence yielded a correlation of 0.771 
for 21 pairs, and also in 1966 for 53 pairs; for monozygotic twins reared 
together the correlation was 0.994 for 83 pairs in 1955, and the same for 
95 pairs in 1966. These are exceedingly unlikely coincidences. There were 
20 such coincidences in his table of 60 correlations, a result very difficult 
to accept as the legitimate report of findings. 
The Kamin attacks were highly damaging to Burt's scientific reputation. But 
when Oliver Gillie claimed on the first page of the London Times (Gillie, 1976) 
that Burt, the father of British educational psychology, had "faked" his data, 
Burt was being publicly accused of outright fraud, and much of his earlier work 

40 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
then also came under suspicion of fraud. Some of Burt's earlier data, analysis, 
and conclusions on twins reared separately and together appeared in a now 
infamous paper (Burt, 1961) that argued for a heredity basis for IQ and social 
class. It was this paper in which Kamin had found unexplainable technical 
problems. That same Burt paper was very carefully reexamined in a 10-page 
article in Science by psychologist D. D. Dorfman (1978). Dorfman concluded 
that (p. 1186) "[t]he eminent Briton is shown, beyond reasonable doubt, to 
have fabricated data on IQ and social class." 
The battle was joined. Burt had his apologists and his attackers, including 
many careful evaluators of his statistical methods. Some argued that while 
Dorfman had shown that Burt may have been sloppy or careless in various 
ways, there was no evidence that Burt had intentionally fabricated his data 
and that his results were fraudulent (Stigler, 1979). Others argued that 
Dorfman had no evidence for his claims against Burt, although there were 
indeed inconsistencies in the analyses. These inconsistencies could have been 
attributed to recording or computational errors, but might also have been 
attributable to Burt's trying to create the entries of tables from specified 
margins, as Dorfman had claimed (Rubin, 1978). In a joint letter to Science, 
the statisticians Rubin and Stigler (1979, p. 1205) agreed that "Burt's descrip-
tion of his work is very vague in many respects, and precisely because of this 
sloppiness it is impossible to determine, with the type of statistical investiga-
tion attempted by Dorfman, whether or not Burt fabricated data." 
The case for and against Burt was reopened more recently by Joynson 
(1989) and Fletcher (1991). Jensen (1995, p. 2) suggests that on the basis of 
Joynson's and Fletcher's work, the case against Burt is "not proven." But after 
reconsidering all the evidence, reexaminations, arguments, and counterargu-
ments, Mackintosh (1995, p. 145) concludes that "[i]t is difficult to resist 
the suspicion that Burt has something to hide, and that in some cases at least 
this ambiguity was deliberately designed to conceal serious inadequacy in the 
data—or worse." 
It seems clear to us in the case of Sir Cyril Burt that once again, strong 
subjective beliefs on the part of a famous and successful scientist appear to 
have dominated his methodological approach to research. It appears that he 
reached the point where he may have stepped over the bounds of acceptable 
scientific practice to justify his own very strong personal beliefs that intelli-
gence is largely attributable to heredity. He may or may not have gotten it 
right; only improved future studies will be able to decide the nature-nurture 
question. 
3.5.1 Note 1—Cloning Dolly 
Donor cells were taken from the udder of a pregnant Finn Dorcet ewe and 
treated to stop them from dividing. Meanwhile, an unfertilized egg cell was 
taken from a second sheep, a Blackface ewe, and its entire nucleus, along with 
its nuclear DNA, was sucked out. The denucleated egg cell was then placed 

CYRIL BURT (1883-1971) 
41 
next to a donor cell. An electrical charge placed on them caused them to fuse. 
A second electrical charge started the fused cell to grow by subdividing. Six 
days later the growing fused cell was implanted into the uterus of a third sheep, 
a Blackface ewe, where it grew to maturity. After gestation, a baby Finn Dorcet 
lamb named Dolly was born. An incredible aspect of the feat was that the 
already differentiated cell (one that had already gone through the process of 
deciding whether it would be muscle, hair, skin, legs, lungs, or whatever) from 
the udder of a mature sheep did not merely reproduce an udder, but rather, 
reproduced an entirely new, complete animal. Snakes that lose their tails can 
grow new ones; similarly, certain other animals can regenerate other organs. 
But in this case, cells from a mature mammal's udder produced an entire 
animal. 
3.5.2 Note 2—Differences between Clones 
In fact, the genetic makeup of clones would not be precisely the same, because 
of at least the following factors: 
1. Eggs contain material other than the nucleus. "Eggs also contain struc-
tural and metabolic equipment, including a complement of extranuclear 
DNA specific to that individual; the second ewe did not contribute her 
nucleus, but she did contribute the rest of the contents of her egg" 
(Hubbard, 1997). 
2. The genes don't really determine the structure of the brain. "The best 
the genes can do is indicate the rough layout of the wiring, the general 
shape of the brain" (Johnson, 1997, p. 1). After that, both the intrau-
terine environment and experience gained after birth work to shape the 
brain by making and breaking connections between neurons. "From the 
very beginning, what's in the genes is different from what's in the brain. 
And the gulf continues to widen as the brain matures" (Johnson, 1997, 
p.l). 
3. Even for ova that have split into two identical cells to form monozygotic 
(identical twin) fetuses, and therefore are gestated in the same uterus, 
the environment in which they develop is slightly different from the start. 
Although identical twins are closer to one another than clones would be, 
because they share both intranuclear DNA, as well as the DNA included 
within the ovum that is outside the nucleus, they need not be identical in all 
of their body structure, let alone internal organs and brains. For example, iden-
tical twins need not have identical fingerprints, although the fingerprints of 
identical twins are likely to be closer to one another than randomly selected 
fingerprints would be. This is because some body cells undergo spontaneous 
mutations (at a very low rate), and because environmental influences affect 
such things as the timing of sequences of cell development, causing small dif-

42 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
ferences in structural development, even in identical twins (Clegg, 1997).These 
mutational differences and environmental influences can produce different 
fingerprints in identical twins. 
REFERENCES 
Burt, C. L. (1909). "Experimental Tests of General Intelligence," British Journal of 
Psychology, 3:94-177. 
(1961). "Intelligence and Social Mobility," British Journal of Statistical 
Psychology, 14:3-24. 
Clegg, Michael (1997). Professor of Genetics, Department of Botany and Plant 
Sciences, University of California, Riverside, personal communication, March. 
Devlin, Bernie, Daniel P. Resnick, Stephen E. Fienberg, and Kathryn Roeder (Eds.) 
(1997). intelligence, Genes and Success: Scientists Respond to The Bell Curve. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
Dorfman, D. D. (1978). "The Cyril Burt Question: New Findings," Science, 
201:1177-1186. 
(1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:246-254. 
Dreger, R. M. (Ed.) (1972). Multivariate Personality Research, Chap. XI. Baton Rouge, 
LA: Claitor's Publishing Division. 
Fletcher, R. (1991). Science, Ideology, and the Media: The Cyril Burt Scandal. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Galton, F. (1875). "The History of Twins As a Criterion of the Relative Powers of 
Nature and Nurture," Fräsers Magazine, 12:566-576. 
Gillie, Oliver (1976). "Crucial Data Was Faked by Eminent Psychologist," Sunday 
Times [London], October 24, p. 1. 
Gould, Stephen Jay (1981). The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Hearnshaw, L. S. (1979). Cyril Burt: Psychologist. London: Hodder & Stoughton. 
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and 
Class Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press. 
Hubbard, Ruth (1997). "Irreplaceable Ewe," Editorial, The Nation, February 24. 
Jensen, A. R. (1969). "How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?" 
Harvard Educational Review, 39:1-123. 
(1995). "IQ and Science:The Mysterious Burt Affair," in N. J. Mackintosh (Ed.), 
Cyril Burt: Fraud or Framed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Johnson, George (1997). "Don't Worry. A Brain Still Can't Be Cloned," Week in 
Review, New York Times, March 2, p. 1. 
Joynson, Robert B. (1989). The Burt Affair. New York: Routledge. 
Kamin, L. J. (1974). The Science and Politics of IQ. New York: Wiley. 
Mackintosh, N. J. (Ed.) (1995). Cyril Burt: Fraud or Framed? Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Rubin, Donald B. (1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:245-
246. 

MARGARET MEAD (1902-1978) 
43 
Rubin, Donald B., and Stephen M. Stigler (1979). "Dorfman's Data Analysis," Letters 
to the Editor, Science, 205:1204-1206. 
Specter, Michael, with Gina Kolata (1997). "After Decades and Many Missteps, 
Cloning Success," New York Times, March 3, p. 1. 
Stigler, Stephen M. (1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:242-245. 
Wilmut, I., A. E. Schnieke, J. McWhir, A. J. Kind, and K. H. S. Campbell (1997). "Viable 
Offspring Derived from Fetal and Adult Mammalian Cells," Letter, Nature, 
385:810. 
Wright, Lawrence (1997). Twins and What They Tell Us About Who We Are. New York: 
Wiley. 
3.6 MARGARET MEAD (1902-1978) 
Margaret Mead was a world-famous American anthropologist, best known for 
her studies of the nonliterate peoples of Oceania, especially with regard to 
various aspects of psychology and culture and the cultural conditioning of 
sexual behavior. She was also a popular celebrity, and in that world she was 
most notable for her forays into such far-ranging topics as women's rights, 
childrearing, sexual morality, nuclear proliferation, race relations, drug abuse, 
population control, environmental pollution, and world hunger. 
During a 1925 field trip in Samoa relating to her doctoral thesis, she gath-
ered material for the first of her 23 books, Coming of Age in Samoa (Mead, 
1928; new ed. 1968), an example of her reliance on observation and a strong 
personal belief system, rather than on hard data. As we will see below, Coming 
of Age clearly reflected her strong belief in cultural determinism, a position 
that caused some later anthropologist critics to question both the accuracy of 
her observations and the soundness of her conclusions. 
Coming of Age had long attained the status of an anthropological classic by 
the time of Mead's death in 1978. In this work, Mead claims to show that ado-
lescence in Samoa is a stress-free stage of the life cycle, in stark contrast to the 
stürm und drang experienced by adolescents in the United States and in other 
Western cultures. Based on some five months of fieldwork, the book claims to 
show that the lack of stress Samoans feel in the transition from childhood to 
adulthood is traceable to two main factors. The first of these is the freedom 
that Samoan adolescents feel to indulge in sexual experimentation without 
feelings of guilt. The second factor is an upbringing that does not emphasize 
competitiveness and that involves residence in large extended families, so that 
intense emotional involvement between children and their parents is attenu-
ated. All this was seen to give rise to an easygoing way of life, without intense 
emotions and involving a smooth transition from childhood to adulthood 
without a traumatic adolescence. 
In 1983, Derek Freeman published Margaret Mead and Samoa: The Making 
and Unmaking of an Anthropological Myth. Freeman stressed that Mead was 
young and impressionable (she was 23) and poorly trained in ethnography (she 

44 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
had received very little explicit training in fieldwork, and none at all in the 
Samoan language until her arrival in the field). He pointed out that she was 
rushed in carrying out two major research projects in a very limited time and 
on a very limited budget. Freeman claimed that Mead reported seeing in 
Samoa what she had expected to see rather than what the society was actu-
ally like. That is, she had let her own beliefs dominate her methodological 
approach to a scientific investigation to such an extent that she, in part, either 
did not note or did not emphasize any data that did not support her precon-
ceived hypotheses. Normally, social scientists develop understanding of the 
processes at work in the phenomena they are studying and combine that 
understanding with experimental data to help them to draw appropriate con-
clusions about a social process. In Mead's case, according to Freeman, she 
became excessively subjective in her scientific methodology and overstepped 
the bounds of scientific propriety. 
During the 1920s the nature-nurture debate had been joined in the United 
States; at issue was whether human behavior was innate, biologically deter-
mined, and hence unchangeable by societal norms, cultures, and policies, or 
whether it was plastic, malleable, and hence influenced and influenceable by 
societies. (For more discussion of these issues, see, for example, the discussion 
of Cyril Burt in Section 3.5.) Because behavior is biologically determined, 
argued the eugenicists, societies could be improved by forced sterilization of 
"inferior" individuals and by restricting immigration of "inferior" ethnic and 
racial groups. These policies would make less sense if it could be shown that 
behavior is strongly influenced by culture. 
Mead's mentor, Franz Boas, was one of the social scientific proponents of 
the nurture school; he charged Mead explicitly to find a culture that would 
support his position. (He originally suggested that Mead look for such a 
culture among American Indian tribes; she insisted upon going to Samoa.) If 
adolescence, which was thought to be "naturally" stressful in Western culture, 
could be shown to be free of stress under other cultural arrangements, this 
example would open the door to the consideration of whether other behav-
iors, heretofore seen as "natural," might not also be culturally determined. 
(Indeed, Mead's later work considered gender roles in a similar fashion. Start-
ing out with the conception in Western culture of the feminine as passive, light-
hearted, and nurturing and the masculine as aggressive, serious, and often 
warlike, Mead claimed to have found cultures in which all possible com-
binations of those gender stereotypes exist. In one, the Western roles were 
reversed, with men acting "feminine" and women "masculine"; in another, 
both sexes acted "feminine"; and in yet a third, both acted "masculine." She 
was following the logic encouraged by Boas and embodied in Coming of Age 
in Samoa of showing a counterexample of a social arrangement thought to be 
"natural," and hence undermining its claim to inevitability because of its 
naturalness.) 
Freeman's book charged that Mead's limited time, limited resources, and 
limited familiarity with the Samoan language made it impossible for her to do 

MARGARET MEAD (1902-1978) 
45 
the careful fieldwork that would make a judgment of the level of stress 
involved in adolescence scientifically valid. He himself spent about six years 
in Samoa between 1940 and 1980 (thus a generation later, and at a different 
part of the island than that at which Mead had spent her time), becoming 
fluent in the language, being adopted into a Samoan family, and being awarded 
the title of chief. Rensberger (1983, p. 33) summarizes Freeman's findings: 
"Where Mead saw an adolescence of ease and tranquillity, Freeman saw 
teenagers every bit as rebellious and troubled as those of the industrialized 
world. Where Mead saw a sexual freedom that banished everything from 
impotence and frigidity to rape ... Freeman saw a puritanical attitude toward 
sex 
" Mead had insisted that rape was absent in Samoan culture. But not 
only does Freeman find rape in the Samoan culture he visited up to a half-
century after Mead, he also finds frequent reports of rapes in the local papers 
dating from the time that Mead was in the field. 
Further, on careful reading of Mead's own work, Freeman finds her noting 
exceptions, four adolescent girls whose behavior could be characterized as 
delinquent. Because the behavior of these girls was not consonant with the 
broad generalizations Mead was attempting to make about the tranquility of 
Samoan adolescence, she relegated their data to a separate chapter. Note here 
the down-weighting of data that do not fit neatly with the investigator's 
theory—similar to what we saw occurring with Kepler in Section 3.2 and Mil-
likan in Section 3.4. Freeman also claims that as a joke, two of Mead's chief 
informants simply told her tall tales that they judged she wanted to hear. 
Indeed, Freeman secured an affidavit from one of these informants, Fáapuáa 
Fáamu, asserting that she had played a joke on the young anthropologist, not 
realizing that Mead would take it literally. 
Freeman's book gave rise to a major controversy among anthropologists, 
with sessions at meetings and many publications, even leading to a com-
pendium (Caton, 1990). An attempt to close the controversy was made by 
Orans (1996). As well as reading Coming of Age in Samoa carefully, Orans 
claims to have made a detailed examination of Mead's field notes and letters, 
and worked at reconciling the various sources. He first argues that Freeman 
stressed Mead's broad generalizations, ignoring her more guarded ones (such 
as the treatment of deviants in Coming of Age in Samoa). Orans sees the field 
notes as supporting a more restrictive view of adolescent girls' sexual milieu 
than does Mead's book. He also argues that Mead could not have been duped 
by Fáapuáa Fáamu's joking, as she was familiar with the Samoan custom of 
making such jokes. Further, she had already written field notes about the 
restrictions on ceremonial virgins (of which Fáapuáa Fáamu was one) before 
the "joking" took place. But the crux of Orans' argument is that Mead did not 
do any real science. Orans feels that she bases conclusions about behavior on 
the report of a single informant, and that there is no clear indication as to how 
she reached many of her conclusions about such attitudes as the lack of fear 
of divine retribution for premarital sex. For example, Orans (1996, p. 123) 
quotes Mead as saying "[there is] no frigidity, no impotence, except as the tern-

46 
SOME WELL-KNOWN STORIES OF EXTREME SUBJECTIVITY 
porary result of severe illness, and the capacity for intercourse only once in a 
night is counted as senility." She argues that it is large families that produce 
less troubled adolescence, but she never compares behavior or attitudes 
between Samoan girls from larger families and those from smaller ones, 
although the data on family size were available to her from a census she herself 
carried out. And although she presents the pastor and his wife as influences 
against freedom of sexuality among the Samoan girls, she makes no com-
parison between those boarding with the pastor and those living with their 
own families. If she were really interested in contrasting Samoan adolescence 
with that in the United States, Orans argues, Mead would also have had to 
study American adolescents systematically or build on the work of someone 
who had already carried out such a study. 
It is worth describing at length Orans' argument about the unscientific char-
acter of Mead's methods. Mead was aware of the standards of scientific rigor 
appropriate for the social sciences. Indeed, after about two months in the field, 
she wrote to her mentor, Boas (quoted by Orans, 1996, p. 125): "I ought to be 
able to marshall an array of facts from which another would be able to draw 
independent conclusions." But she despairs of doing so, because although she 
can tally cases, she knows she hasn't drawn a real probability sample: she has 
merely used her own judgment. Thus, a reader of her book is required to trust 
her judgment about what the data say, whether rendered "statistically" by 
presenting counts, or by the qualitative richness she greatly prefers. 
Orans argues that Mead's sample need not have depended on her judg-
ment; she could have drawn a random sample of female adolescents from the 
villages she studied. Orans summarizes tellingly (1996, p. 127): 
What Mead is claiming is that she is quite confident of her conclusions even though 
she has not done any formal sampling, and therefore the only reason to do 
such sampling would be to convince others. In addition, she claims a kind of insight 
based upon context and judgment that can never be justified by a presentation 
of observations. Her colleagues, then, must either except [sic] her judgment or not. 
Of course, even if one concedes that an observer may know more than she can 
demonstrate, one might still contend that a concession might more readily be made 
if one were presented with the observations that are available. Mead is asking to be 
excused from collecting and presenting a fair sample and supporting her conclu-
sions with case histories. What she wants is permission to present data simply as 
"illustrative material" for the representativeness of which one will simply have to 
take her word. 
Orans also quotes Boas' answer to Mead (1996, p. 128), in which he tells 
her not to attempt a statistical treatment, but writes: "A complete elimination 
of the subjective use of the investigator is of course quite impossible in a 
matter of this kind but undoubtedly you will try to overcome this so far as that 
is at all possible." It is not clear that Mead was successful in any attempt to 
overcome her apparently excessive subjectivity that resulted in inappropriate 
methodology. Rensberger (1983) points out that it is hardly unusual for cul-

REFERENCES 
47 
tural anthropologists to interpret the same culture differently because their 
preconceptions act as filters on their perceptions (in our terminology, their 
subjectivity influences both their data collection and interpretations). 
That Mead used her judgment generously seems hardly in doubt. But she 
appears to have permitted her judgment not only to assist her in understand-
ing the social processes she was observing, but to dominate her scientific 
methodology to such an extent that she appears to have manipulated her data 
so as to support her own hypotheses. Whether her excessive subjectivity per-
mitted her to arrive at correct scientific conclusions is not clear. Derek 
Freeman insists that it led her to egregious error; Orans argues that her work 
was so totally unscientific as to be "not even wrong." 
REFERENCES 
Caton, Hiram (Ed.) (1990). The Samoa Reader: Anthropologists Take Stock. Lanham, 
MD: University Press of America. 
Freeman, Derek (1983). Margaret Mead and Samoa: The Making and Unmaking of an 
Anthropological Myth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Mead, Margaret (1973 [1928]). Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: Morrow. 
Orans, Martin (1996). Not Even Wrong: Margaret Mead, Derek Freeman, and the 
Samoans. Novato, CA: Chandler & Sharp. 
Rensberger, Boyce (1983). "Margaret Mead: The Nature-Nurture Debate I," 
Science83: 28-37. 

C H A P T E R 4 
Stories of Famous Scientists 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter we tell the stories of the 12 scientists who were selected for 
exploration in Jack Meadows' The Famous Scientists (see Chapter 2 for an 
explanation of how these scientists were selected) and therefore selected for 
more detailed examination in this book. The treatment is more extensive here 
than in Meadows; we discuss not only the lives of these people and their 
scientific contributions, we also discuss how they used their subjective views 
of the phenomena they studied to enhance the conclusions they drew. As in 
Chapter 3, the scientists we study in this chapter are all very famous and 
deservedly, highly respected. They include Nobel prize winners and others 
whose scientific contributions have been seminal in creating the structure of 
many fields of science. We have examined their lives and scientific contribu-
tions to study the informal ways they used their intuition, beliefs, and informed 
judgment to further their research. 
We will see that in all cases, the informal use of judgment combined with 
very carefully obtained experimental data led these scientists to broadly based 
conclusions that shaped their fields for many years into the future. In a few 
instances, in a small portion of their scientific investigations, even these 
most-famous scientists may have stepped across the lines of acceptable 
methodological behavior in their confidence in their scientific judgment and 
in their quest for recognition by their peers and by the world at large. But the 
fabricating and fudging of data, the misrepresentation of scientific results, 
and the committing of other fraudulent practices is never acceptable, even by 
world-renowned scientists. 
In Section 4.14 we provide some conjectures as to how and whether things 
might have been different had Bayesian statistical science been available to 
these famous scientists. We will see in Chapter 5 that by using Bayesian 
methods, the scientist is made very cognizant of where his or her judgments 
49 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

50 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
and preconceived hypotheses enter the analysis. In this way the scientist can 
minimize the chances of biasing the experimental results while still being able 
to capitalize on informed knowledge and understanding of the underlying 
process. 

ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.) 
51 
4.2 ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.) 
Aristotle was a philosopher, logician, naturalist, and scientist. His philoso-
phical constructs formed the basis of Western thinking for the next 2000 years. 
4.2.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Aristotle was born in 384 B.C. in a region of what is now northern Greece, 
called Macedonia, then a city-state. He was the most prominent spokesman 
for the Realist school of philosophy in the history of Western philosophy 
(holding that matter is the only reality). Perhaps more than any other thinker, 
Aristotle has characterized the orientation and content of all that is termed 
Western civilization. His methodological approach to science was largely to 
observe, and then to generalize through enormous subjective speculation, 
without experiment. His subjective generalizations about science often turned 
out to be wrong (his conjectures sometimes lasted for 2000 years before being 
corrected), but he was also often correct. (By contrast, his philosophical asser-
tions and proofs, especially those relating to the theory of logic, were not at 
all wrong, and have lasted to this day.) 
Insight into why Aristotle developed as he did comes from understanding a 
bit about his background. Aristotle's father was a doctor who became court 

52 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
physician to the king of Macedonia, Amyntas III. In Aristotle's adult years, the 
throne of Amyntas III was held by Amyntas's son, Philip II; Philip's son was 
Alexander the Great. Aristotle was the son of a doctor, and as such, he was heir 
to a scientific tradition about 200 years old. Through case histories contained in 
the Epidemial (Epidemics) of Hippocrates (about 440 B.C.), the father of 
medical science, Aristotle was introduced to Greek medicine and biology at an 
early age by his father, and this fact was greatly influential in determining 
many of his later interests. Medicine was traditional in certain families, being 
handed down from father to son by apprenticeship rather than by book learn-
ing. Thus, in all likelihood, Aristotle learned the fundamentals of that practical 
skill he was afterward to display in his biological researches. 
While Aristotle was still a youth, his father died. The young man was then 
sent to Athens, where, at age 17, he became a pupil of the philosopher Plato, 
at his Academy, which may be called the first university. At the Academy, 
Aristotle was engaged in dialogue for 20 years, studying, writing, and even-
tually taking part in the teaching of philosophy, mathematics, ethics, politics, 
and aesthetics. Plato is said to have called him "the mind of the school." These 
years dominated Aristotle's intellectual development, under the formative 
influences of the philosophers Socrates and Plato; Plato had been a student of 
Socrates. Socrates and Plato, together with Aristotle himself, were destined to 
form a compact intellectual dynasty. 
On Plato's death in 347 B.C., Aristotle left Athens. He went back north, this 
time to the coast of Asia Minor and the island of Lesbos. He again picked up 
his interest in natural science, and made notes especially on the structure and 
habits of the marine creatures he observed along the shore. At this time, Philip 
II was the king of Macedonia. Philip was a man of exceptional ability and 
driving will, who had for some years been at work transforming his realm from 
a poor, backward country of untapped natural resources and a population of 
rude huntsmen and mountaineers into a rich and powerful kingdom with an 
invincible army. The army had been organized to fight in solid blocks of heavily 
armed infantry, known as the Macedonian phalanx. Philip was seeking a dis-
tinguished Greek to take charge of the education of his only son, the fair-
haired, high-spirited boy Alexander, then 13 years old. In 343 B.C. he offered 
the post to Aristotle, then 42, who accepted it. 
In 340 B.C., Alexander, at 15, was made regent over the Macedonia 
Empire because his father, Philip II, was away in battle, in Greece. Because of 
Alexander's new responsibilities, he passed from Aristotle's surveillance. 
In 338 B.C., the armies of Athens and Thebes, which had been roused by 
Demosthenes (the great Athenian orator) to a futile defiance of Philip, were 
overwhelmed in the battle of Chaeronea. The rest of Greece succumbed 
gradually. Two years later, however, Philip was murdered, on the eve of launch-
ing his long-planned campaign against Persia, and Alexander, his son, reigned 
in his stead. Alexander soon showed that he had inherited a genius and ambi-
tion even grander than his father's. He promptly reduced all Greece to 
complete submission, then invaded and conquered, one after the other, all the 
empires of the Eastern Mediterranean—Assyrian, Egyptian, and Persian. 

ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.) 
53 
Not long after Alexander's assumption of power, Aristotle returned to 
Athens, then under Macedonian control. There he rented some buildings and 
opened a school known as the Lyceum. At the Lyceum, he collected one of 
the earliest reported libraries of manuscript books and scientific specimens 
of many sorts as material for research and lectures. Apparently, there was a 
botanical garden and a small menagerie of birds and other animals, perhaps 
because one or more of Aristotle's students accompanied Alexander on his 
expedition eastward and sent back accounts of the strange beasts and other 
things seen along the way. The chief difference in general character between 
Aristotle's new school and Plato's Academy was that the scientific interests of 
the Platonists centered on mathematics, whereas the main contributions of 
Aristotle's Lyceum lay, not surprisingly, in biology and history. 
In 323 B.C., at the age of 32, Alexander died of a fever, and his generals 
divided his empire among them. Alexander's empire spelled the downfall of 
the small independent city-state that to Aristotle was the only possible form 
of civilized political community. Aristotle's Athenian activities and influence 
were brought to a hault by the early death of Alexander. The patriotic anti-
Macedonian feeling that had festered just below the surface in Athens as 
long as the conqueror lived became overt after his death in an outbreak of 
hatred and bitterness against anyone with Macedonian ties or relationships. 
Aristotle, as Alexander's old tutor, who had come back to Athens in the wake 
of the Macedonian victory, was viewed with suspicion. A technical charge of 
impiety was lodged against him. Socrates had been treated the same way some 
80 years earlier. But before the case against Aristotle could be brought to trial, 
he had fled to the north, refusing to let Athens "sin twice against philosophy." 
There, in Chalcis, a year later, he died, leaving a will in which he provided that 
several of his slaves should be freed. For over 800 years his pupils and their 
successors carried on the Lyceum. It was finally closed by order of a Christian 
emperor in Constantinople. 
4.2.B Aristotle's Scientific Contributions 
We first discuss Aristotle's broad-ranging general contributions to civilization, 
and then focus on his involvement with what today we call science. To provide 
an inkling of Aristotle's enormous contributions to Western culture, we only 
need to define what is meant by Aristotelianism. Following the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica (1996), we see his influence in our language, with terms attribut-
able to him ranging from subject and predicate in grammar and logic through 
terms applicable to science, such as form, matter, energy, potential, quantity, 
and quality. His philosophical methodology included the use of deductive rea-
soning proceeding from self-evident principles or discovered general truths. 
Aristotelian epistemology "includes a concentration on knowledge either 
accessible by natural means or accountable for by reason; an inductive, ana-
lytical empiricism, or stress on experience, in the study of nature—including 
the study of men, their behaviour and organizations—leading from the 
perception of contingent individual occurrences to the discovery of per-

54 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
manent, universal patterns; and the primacy of the universal, that which is 
expressed by common or general terms." Aristotle put forward the belief in 
four material elements and their basic qualities and the four causes: formal, 
material, efficient, and final. 
Thus, we see that Aristotle has made profound and substantial contribu-
tions to civilization in his work in ethics, logic, philosophy, language, and meta-
physics. Much of this work not only survives to the present day—it is current, 
practically in its original form. But what of his researches into science? There, 
the story is quite a bit different (see, e.g., Barnes, 1982, 1995; Grant, 1877; 
Solmsen, 1960; Veatch, 1974). 
Given his early training in medicine, it is not surprising that among other 
things, Aristotle would become a naturalist and marine biologist and focus his 
observations on plants and animals. His biological writings constitute over 
25% of the surviving corpus. In taxonomy, Aristotle was a careful and meticu-
lous observer who classified animal species into various hierarchies of cate-
gories. He classified over 500 species of animals and dissected about 50 of 
them. For example, he observed that while the dolphin gave birth to live young 
and nursed them with its own milk after birth, fish did neither of these; so he 
classified dolphin with mammals instead of with fish. This classification was to 
be sustained 2000 years later. 
In science, Aristotle seems to have conducted considerable questioning and 
observation, engaged in much conjecturing, made some enormous leaps of 
faith to generality probably far beyond justification by his observations, and 
often did substantial reasoning to erroneous conclusions, because he lacked 
appropriate observational data. With a few exceptions, the vast corpus of his 
scientific conclusions is today believed to be false. Part of the reason for what 
we see today as his failures in the experimental sciences stems from the 
unavailability of proper scientific instruments. He had no barometer, micro-
scope, spectroscope, telescope, thermometer, or any of the countless other 
instruments we take for granted today. He could merely observe with naked 
eye and speculate. 
Some of his ideas do survive, however. Although suggestions that the earth 
is not flat dated from Pythagoras (520 B.C.), Aristotle (and other Greeks earlier 
than Aristotle) cited the reasons that are still appealed to today. They recorded 
noticing that ships' masts and mountaintops disappeared last, and appeared 
first, on the horizon; they noticed that new stars appeared in the sky as people 
traveled farther south; and they noticed Earth's circular shadow move across 
the Moon during its eclipses. For these reasons, Aristotle and others before 
him correctly concluded that Earth must be spherical. 
Aristotle also estimated the circumference of the earth to be 400,000 stades 
(an ancient Greek measure), or, equated to modern measures, 38,000 miles 
(Grant, 1877, pp. 138,139). Today we believe that a better estimate is about 
25,000 miles. But the error is not too bad for a 2300-year-old measurement. 
But Aristotle also argued that Earth is stationary in space. (It is, of course, in 
motion.) Moreover, he concluded that heavy objects move toward Earth with 

ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.) 
55 
speeds proportional to their weights. (Galileo and Newton showed that all 
bodies move toward Earth at the same speed, in a vacuum; but this was about 
2000 years later, so Aristotle's claim was the "scientific" result used for about 
2000 years.) 
In a biological context, Wyatt concluded (1924, p. 27): 
[Aristotle] alluded to the heart as the source as well as the reservoir of the blood. 
He distinguished between arteries and veins and said that they were complemen-
tary, each existing for the sake of the other. {De Respiratione, cap. ix) 
Further on he speaks of the heart as the seat and origin of the natural heat; and res-
piration, in his opinion, was instituted solely to cool this glowing organ and to mod-
erate its heat and keep it within bounds. "The hotter the animal," he says, "the more 
vigorously must it breathe, in order the more effectually to subdue the heat; whence 
the larger development of the lungs in quadruped and birds than in amphibious 
animals." (Ibid., cap. xix) 
The movement or pulsation of the heart was due to the sudden expansion of the 
material supplied to it from the food digested in the stomach. When this came in 
contact with the innate heat of the heart, it expanded and caused that organ to dilate 
and give a beat. The supply of this material being continuous, the pulse accordingly 
was never still. (Ibid., cap. xx) 
The arteries pulsated at the same time as the heart did, and the blood flowed alter-
nately from the vessels to the heart and from the heart to the vessels with a 
to-and-fro motion like the ebb and flow of the tides. The valves at the junction of 
the blood vessels with the chambers of the heart regulated these movements and 
alternately opened and shut; one movement of the heart opening one series of 
valves, the next movement closing these and opening others. 
In 1627, William Harvey was to show Aristotle's understanding to be totally 
wrong, and that, in fact, the blood circulates (see the story of Harvey in Section 
4.4). Aristotle's further misunderstanding of the anatomy of the heart is shown 
in his contention that the nerves derive therefrom. That misunderstanding has 
its basis in the long-standing belief that the heart is the seat of emotions, but 
such a misunderstanding is surprising in one who had carried out so many 
dissections. Grant (1887, p. 148) pointed out that in Aristotle's On the Parts of 
Animals, Aristotle "made a distinction, still valid in physiology, between tissues 
and organs." But Grant balances this view of Aristotle's getting it right by 
saying (p. 152) that "[i]t is hardly necessary to say that every opinion above 
mentioned is mistaken, and almost every statement of fact erroneous." 
Aristotle's History of Animals remains an important work. According to 
Barnes (1982, p. 9), the title really means "Zoological Researches." He says: 
The Researches discusses in detail the parts of animals, both external and internal; 
the different stuffs—blood, bone, hair and the rest—of which animal bodies are con-
structed; the various modes of reproduction found among animals; their diet, 
habitat, and behavior 
It is easy to become starry-eyed over the Researches, 

56 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
which are on any account, a work of genius and a monument of indefatigable indus-
try. Not surprisingly, sober scholars have felt it incumbent upon them to point out 
the defects in the work. 
First of all, it is said that Aristotle often makes errors of a crude and unscientific 
kind. Aristotle asserts more than once that during copulation the female fly inserts 
a tube or filament upwards into the male—and he says that "this is plain to anyone 
who tries to separate copulating flies." It is not. The assertion is wholly false. 
Secondly, Aristotle is accused of failing to use "the experimental method." ... 
There is no evidence that Aristotle ever attempted to establish correct experimen-
tal conditions or to make controlled observations; there is no evidence that he tried 
to repeat his observations, to check them, or to verify them. 
Finally, Aristotle is criticized for ignoring the importance of measurement. Real 
science is essentially quantitative, but Aristotle's descriptions are mostly qualitative. 
He was no mathematician. He had no notion of applying mathematics to zoology. 
He did not weigh and measure his specimens. 
Barnes mitigates these criticisms of Aristotle's work by pointing to 
Aristotle's lack of instruments, the fact that all researchers make errors of 
measurement, and that zoology is essentially a qualitative science. But the fact 
is that although Aristotle did show the way for science to develop, many of his 
own zoological beliefs and conclusions were wrong. Aristotle had no concept 
of chemistry. He decided subjectively that the world was composed of four 
elements: earth, water, air, and fire. Thales of Miletus 300 years earlier had 
claimed that there was only one such element, water. Today we are aware of 
over 100 elements, and water is not among them. 
4.2.C 
Major Works 
Aristotle's lectures at the Lyceum were eventually collected into almost a 150-
volume set of encyclopedias encompassing the knowledge of his time, much 
of it Aristotle's own beliefs and observations. Only some 47 of these have sur-
vived through time, having been found in a pit, accidentally, in 80 B.C. by some 
soldiers who brought them to Rome, where they were copied. 
Aristotle (1984). The Complete Works of Aristotle. Edited by J. Barnes. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
4.2.D 
Subjectivity in the Work of Aristotle 
Aristotle's recorded scientific observations and experiences in biology were 
truly remarkable, in that they ushered in the entire approach to observational 
data that we use today and take for granted as if that were always the way of 
science; it was not, until Aristotle. But Aristotle's inferences about nature, and 
his conclusions about the physical world, were not always based on objective 
observation; they were often tendentious and speculative. 

ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.) 
57 
Aristotle's teacher, Plato, was a rationalist, believing that he could arrive at 
all knowledge about the universe by reasoning, and therefore, he was more 
than willing to rely on the deductive use of mathematics for his conclusions. 
He reasoned through dialogues (discussion and refutation) rather than mono-
logues. Aristotle sometimes argued by reasoning and refutation, but by con-
trast, often tended to shun mathematics. He preferred instead to use the senses 
to observe, and to form opinions, based on empirical data and speculation 
(hypothesizing) about the meanings of the data, and then to express his views 
in peripatetic monologues, so-called because he walked around the Lyceum 
while explicating. 
We can trace the influence of Aristotle's preconceptions on his observa-
tional work, not only from the questions he asked, but also from the answers 
he gave, as he represents the results of his research. His search for final causes 
(teleology) is an often-cited example, although it is not so much his general 
assumption of function and finality in biological organisms as some of his 
rather crude particular suggestions that are open to criticism. Moreover, he is 
clear that not everything in the animal serves a purpose and that it is not only 
the final cause that needs to be considered. But many slipshod or plainly 
mistaken observations (or what purport to be such) relate to cases where we 
can detect certain underlying value judgments at work. 
The assumption of the superiority of right over left is one example. His 
repeated references to the differences between humans and other animals, and 
between males and females, are two other areas where errors and hasty non-
objective generalizations are especially frequent. Humans are not only marked 
out from the other animals by being erect—by having their parts, as Aristotle 
puts it, in their natural positions—and by possessing the largest brain for their 
size, hands, and a tongue adapted for speech. Aristotle also claims, more doubt-
fully, that human blood is the finest and purest, that human flesh is softest, and 
that the male human emits more seed, and the female more menses, in pro-
portion to their size. While Aristotle's general distinction between male and 
female animals relates to a capacity or incapacity to fabricate the blood, he 
subjectively records largely or totally imaginary differences in the sutures of 
the skull, in the number of teeth, in the size of the brain, and in the tempera-
ture of men and women. 
His view that, in general, males are better equipped with offensive and 
defensive weapons than females is one factor that leads him to the conclusion 
that the worker bees are male (today we know that they are female). To be 
sure, he sometimes notes exceptions to his general rules. For example, he 
remarks that although males are usually bigger and stronger than females in 
the nonoviparous animals, the reverse is true in most oviparous quadrupeds, 
fish, and insects. Although he goes along with the common belief that male 
embryos usually move first on the right-hand side of the womb, females on the 
left, he remarks that this is not an exact statement because there are many 
exceptions. There are certainly many inaccuracies in his reported observations 
besides those that occur when an a priori assumption is at work. 
We can document the influence of Aristotle's overarching theories on what 

58 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
he reports that he has seen. But there are other occasions when the theories 
themselves appear to depend on, and may in some cases even be derived 
from, one or more observations (however accurate or inaccurate) which 
accordingly take on a particular significance for his argument. Undoubtedly, 
the most striking example of this is his often-repeated statement that the heart 
is the first part of the embryo to develop. He says that the primacy of the heart 
is clear not only according to argument, but also according to perception. In 
reporting his investigation of the growth of hen's eggs (a completely uncon-
trolled experiment) he notes that (Historia Animalium, vi, 561a6ff., 11-12) 
after about three days, the heart first appears as a blood spot that "palpitates 
and moves, as though endowed with life." The circumstantial detail of this and 
other accounts show that they are based on firsthand inspection, although the 
conclusion Aristotle arrived at is not entirely correct. As Ogle (1897) put it, 
"the heart is not actually the first structure that appears in the embryo, but it 
is the first part to enter actively into its functions." Lloyd (1987, p. 58) traced 
the results of Aristotle's observation: "This provides the crucial empirical 
support for his doctrine that it is the heart—rather than say the brain—that is 
the principle of life, the seat not just of the nutritive soul, but also of the faculty 
of locomotion and of the common sensorium." 
Aristotle apparently frequently drew his conclusions from the opinions 
of others. He would ask other people, fishermen, hunters, and other passersby 
what they believed about something and would use those proxy views as 
his observational data, rather than his own, firsthand observations. Not 
surprisingly, conclusions drawn from these proxy observations were often 
wrong. 
In both his physical and biological treatises, Aristotle often created general 
theories largely by projection from very small samples of data, if any. Even-
tually, with the aid of scientific measuring instruments developed almost 2000 
years later, the fields of astronomy, physics, and anatomy as they were devel-
oped by Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, and Harvey proved Aristotle mistaken 
on so many points that his credibility as a naturalist began to come under ques-
tion as well. In his research into the physical world he goes wrong more often 
than not and draws conclusions that are mostly subjectively based. But in his 
studies of biology, where he was better prepared for the scholarly approach, 
he works to somewhat better success. In his work on logic, his scientific con-
tributions are as fresh today as ever. But the inescapable conclusion is that 
Aristotle the scientist depended, to an enormous extent, upon subjective judg-
ment, intuition, observations of others, and creativity, mixed with some careful 
personal observations and some often hazardous leaps of faith. 
REFERENCES 
Aristotle, Edited (1943). Introduction by Louise Ropes Loomis. New York: Gramercy 
Books. 

REFERENCES 
59 
Asimov, Isaac (1989). Asimovs 
Chronology of Science and Discovery. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Barnes, Johnathan (1982). Aristotle. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
(Ed.) (1995). The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). Vol. 1, pp. 1162-1171. 
(1996). "Aristotle and Aristotelianism: Assessment and Nature of Aristotelian-
ism," compact disk version. 
Grant, Sir Alexander (1877). Aristotle. Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons. 
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1987). "Empirical Research in Aristotle's Biology," pp. 59ff. in Allan 
Gotthelf and James Lennox (Eds.), Philosophical Issues in Aristotle s Biology. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ogle, W. (Trans.) (1897). Aristotle on Youth and Old Age, Life and Death and Respira-
tion. London: Longmans. 
Russell, B. (1959). The Wisdom of the West. New York: Doubleday. 
Solmsen, Friedrich (1960). Aristones System of the Physical World: A Comparison with 
His Predecessors. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Veatch, Henry B. (1974). Aristotle: A Contemporary Appreciation. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press. 
Wyatt, R. B. Hervey (1924). William Harvey. London: Beonard Parsons; Boston: Small, 
Maynard. 

60 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
4.3 GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) 
Galileo Galilei was an Italian mathematician, astronomer, and physicist who 
advocated that experiments be included in scientific methodology; he qualita-
tively enunciated the physical laws of motion; and he exploited the use of the 
recently discovered telescope by discovering the moons of Jupiter and the 
rings of Saturn. 
4.3.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Galileo was born at Pisa on February 15,1564, the son of Vincenzo Galilei, a 
musician, and Guiulia Ammanati. His first name was given according to the 
local custom of doubling the family name for the firstborn. The family returned 
to Vincenzo's native Florence in 1574, and in the following year Galileo began 
his formal education at the monastery of Vallombrosa nearby. After about four 
years, the young man decided to become a monk, but his father intervened 
and spirited him away from the monastery. In 1581 he entered the University 
of Pisa to study medicine. He showed scant interest in the required courses 
but a great deal of interest in the peripheral course of mathematics. He began 
to study mathematics and science with Ostilio Ricci, a teacher in the Tuscan 
court. Observing the regularity of a pendulum swinging in church, Galileo 

GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) 
61 
devised a device to measure the human pulse, thus making a temporary good 
impression on his professors of medicine, who had been despairing at his lack 
of attendance at lectures and his argumentative ways when he did attend. But 
in 1585, the professors' dislike of Galileo persuaded them to deny him a schol-
arship and thus he had to withdraw from the university because of lack of 
funds before he had received a degree. Returning to Florence, he helped to 
support the family by tutoring private students in mathematics and even by 
returning to the monastery at Vallombrosa to teach the novices about math-
ematical perspective. 
In 1586, at the age of 22, Galileo produced his first published scientific work, 
an essay describing the hydrostatic balance, the invention of which made his 
name known throughout Italy. He was eager to obtain a chair of mathematics 
at a university. In 1587 he applied for such a post in Bologna but was not 
selected; in 1589, however, he won a three-year appointment to the post of 
mathematics lecturer at the University of Pisa. He was very poorly paid, both 
because he was an academic beginner and because mathematics was consid-
ered an inferior discipline that did not command high salaries or prestige. 
Galileo developed a contempt for other members of the faculty who were 
Aristotelians (see Aristotle, Section 4.2) and who took the received wisdom 
of the master as unquestionable truth. His research into the theory of 
motion—in which he surely carried out both actual experiments and thought 
experiments, and may have experimented by dropping balls off the tower of 
Pisa—disproved the Aristotelian contention that bodies of different weights 
fall at different speeds. His contract was not renewed. 
He then mounted a campaign for appointment to the chair of mathe-
matics at Padua, a campaign that involved traveling to the seat of the Serene 
Republic of Venice to meet with a board of examiners and to lobby for support 
of the appointment in the Venetian Senate. His appointment went into effect 
in the fall of 1592; he was to remain at Padua for 18 years and perform the 
bulk of his most outstanding work there. At Padua he continued his research 
on motion and proved theoretically (about 1604) that falling bodies obey what 
came to be known as the law of uniformly accelerated motion (in such motion 
a body speeds up or slows down uniformly with time). He also gave the law 
of parabolic fall; for example, a ball thrown in a vacuum follows a parabolic 
path. 
In 1594 and 1595 Galileo lectured on Ptolemy (who, in about 140 A.D., had 
advanced the geocentric theory that the Sun and planets revolve around 
Earth; see Kepler, Section 3.2), thus establishing himself as an astronomer. But 
Galileo had became convinced early in life of the truth of the heliocentric 
Copernican theory (i.e., that the planets revolve about the Sun)—he expressed 
support only privately, however. In 1597 he gave an exposition of the theory 
to an old friend Jacopo Mazzoni, and in the same year he responded to a book 
sent to him by Johannes Kepler that he had been a Copernican for many years. 
He felt, however, that public support would inspire ridicule. During these years 
Galileo had increasing family responsibilities. His father had died, leaving to 

62 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
his eldest son such tasks as assisting in the support of a younger brother hoping 
to make a career as a musician and paying the dowries for his sisters. In addi-
tion, Galileo began a liaison with Marina Gamba which was not to result in 
marriage but which lasted 10 years and produced three children. 
In 1604 a new star appeared in the sky; Galileo gave a series of three public 
lectures about it in Padua, his first public appearance as an astronomer. Any 
new star, let alone one that moved, constituted a challenge to the established 
order of things, which held that the heavens were perfect and unchanging. 
Galileo accepted the evidence of his senses and spoke of the movement of the 
star—and in a published discourse on the phenomenon even hinted that Earth 
might also be moving. 
While in Venice in the spring of 1609, Galileo learned of the recent inven-
tion of the telescope, and after returning to Padua he built one of threefold 
magnifying power, quickly improving it to a power of 32. This began a period 
of frantic activity. He produced numerous telescopes for his own use and to 
offer to influential people as gifts. Within the next two years he made and 
announced a series of astronomical discoveries. He found that the surface of 
the Moon was irregular rather than smooth, as had been supposed, and likened 
it to the surface of Earth, with seas and mountains. He observed that the Milky 
Way was composed of a collection of stars. He discovered four of the satel-
lites of Jupiter and named them the Medican Stars, hoping to gain favor with 
his former pupil and future employer, Cosimo di Medici II, Grand Duke of 
Tuscany, and his illustrious family. He observed sunspots, the phases of Venus, 
and the rings of Saturn. His first astronomical observations were published in 
1610 in Sidereus Nuncius (The Starry Messenger). 
These important discoveries resulted in an appointment by the Grand Duke 
of Tuscany as "first philosopher and mathematician" at the court in Florence, 
a post that was free of teaching responsibilities and which Galileo accepted in 
1610. In 1611, fearing that his enemies were plotting against him, Galileo trav-
eled to Rome to win papal support for his work. He demonstrated his tele-
scope to the most eminent personages at the pontifical court, including the 
pope himself. While he was in Rome, he was also elected to membership in 
the Academy of the Lynx, reputed to be the first scientific academy, founded 
and headed by Prince Frederico Cesi.The Lincean Academy in the future was 
to provide him with information on how his work was being received, support 
for his cause, and a publication outlet for his best-known work. 
Returning to Florence, Galileo prepared and delivered a debate (and there-
after a treatise) on floating bodies, perhaps his first foray into experimental 
physics and the basis for his future work on mechanics. He learned in late March 
1612 that a stargazer using the pseudonym of "Apelles" had observed sunspots, 
claimed priority for their discovery, and attributed them to the movement of 
stars across the face of the Sun; Galileo had been observing sunspots for 18 
months. To assert his priority, he wrote three letters on the sunspots and had 
them printed at Rome in 1613. In these letters he took a more definite position 
on the Copernican theory, using the movement of the spots across the Sun as 

GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) 
63 
evidence for that theory. Because he wrote these letters in Italian rather than 
the usual Latin of academic discourse, they became well known and broadly 
influential. Angered because they had vested interests in the Ptolemiac theory, 
the professors at the university denounced him to the Inquisition, citing 
the contradictions between Copernican theory and Scripture. What ensued is 
succinctly described in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975, p. 852): 
Gravely alarmed, Galileo ... wrote letters meant for the Grand Duke and for the 
Roman authorities ... in which he pointed out the danger, reminding the church of 
its standing practice of interpreting Scripture allegorically whenever it came into 
conflict with scientific truth, quoting patristic authorities and warning that it would 
be "a terrible detriment for the souls if people found themselves convinced by proof 
of something that it was made then a sin to believe." He even went to Rome in 
person to beg the authorities to leave the way open for a change. A number of eccle-
siastical experts were on his side. Unfortunately, Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, the 
chief theologian of the church, was unable to appreciate the importance of the new 
theories and clung to the time-honoured belief that mathematical hypotheses have 
nothing to do with physical reality. He only saw the danger of a scandal, which might 
undermine Catholicity in its fight with Protestantism. He accordingly decided that 
the best thing would be to check the whole issue by having Copernicanism declared 
"false and erroneous" and the book of Copernicus suspended by the congregation 
of the Index. The decree came out on March 5,1616. On the previous February 26, 
however, as an act of personal consideration, Cardinal Bellarmine had granted an 
audience to Galileo and informed him of the forthcoming decree, warning him that 
he must henceforth neither "hold nor defend" the doctrine, although it could still 
be discussed as a mere "mathematical supposition." 
It should be understood that Galileo's stance, if substantiated, would pose 
a real problem for the church; it might require a whole new Biblical science 
that would have to be put into place essentially overnight. Far more efficient 
to prohibit publication of such troublesome work. 
Galileo returned home to Bellosguardo near Florence, close to where his 
daughters had now entered the convent of the Poor Clares, and continued his 
studies. He computed tables of the motions and eclipses of the moons of 
Jupiter. In 1618-1619 three comets appeared and caused a great stir. Galileo 
was too ill to make careful firsthand observations but was dismayed to read 
the publication of a Jesuit, Horatio Grassi, that declared the comets to be off-
spring of Mercury and located between the Moon and the Sun, thus tending 
to discredit the Copernican system. A disciple of Galileo's, Mario Guiducci, 
wrote a reasoned rebuttal, but Galileo, still smarting about his priority on the 
sunspot issue, added sharp jabs at "Apelles" and at the entire Jesuit order. 
Grassi replied in kind, and in 1623 Galileo's reply, "The Assayer," appeared. 
It was a brilliant polemic on physical reality and an exposition of the new sci-
entific method. In it he distinguished between the primary (i.e., measurable) 
properties of matter and the others (e.g., odor) and wrote his famous pro-
nouncement that the "Book of Nature is ... written in mathematical charac-

64 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
ters." Also in 1623, Maffeo Barberini, who had been a longtime friend of 
Galileo, became Pope Urban VIII, and Galileo dedicated the book to him. 
Pope Urban received the dedication enthusiastically. 
But when Galileo went to Rome in 1624 to ask the new pope for permis-
sion to write about the Copernican theory, the permission was given only con-
ditionally. He could write about both systems, Ptolemaic and Copernican, 
treating the latter hypothetically and coming to the appropriate conclusion— 
that humans cannot presume to know how the world is really made because 
God could have brought about the same effects in ways that we cannot 
imagine. Humans must not restrict God's omnipotence. Galileo used this per-
mission to write his great book Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World 
Systems—Ptolemaic and Copernican. In it, two savants and a third character, 
Simplicio, discuss cosmology; the weight of argument supports the Coperni-
can position. Nevertheless, with a preface and conclusion written by the papal 
censor, the book received a full imprimatur. 
Before long the pope learned the true position of the book as a compelling 
and unabashed plea for the Copernican system—indeed, the censor's conclu-
sion at the end seemed not to fit the argument at all. Others whispered to the 
pope that the character of Simplicio was modeled on him; the pope was furious 
and ordered a prosecution. But because Galileo had received an imprimatur, 
there seemed no ground for prosecution. At this point a document was found 
in Galileo's Inquisition file that said that during his audience with Bellarmine 
on February 26, 1616, Galileo had been specifically enjoined from "teaching 
or discussing Copernicanism in any way." (Modern historians believe the 
weight of evidence suggests that this document had been manufactured after 
the fact to meet the need for a basis for prosecution.) Thus the imprimatur 
had been received under false pretenses and Galileo could be prosecuted for 
disobedience and "vehement suspicion of heresy." 
After delays caused by his illnesses, Galileo went to Rome in February 1633 
to stand trial. In deference to his age and celebrated works, he was not jailed 
but stayed first in the palace of the Tuscan ambassador and later in the Vatican 
itself. Under interrogation he denied any memory of the 1616 injunction. 
Nevertheless, Galileo was found guilty of having "held and taught" the Coper-
nican doctrine and was ordered to recant and then remain imprisoned. After 
spending some months as the guest/prisoner of the Archbishop of Sienna, he 
was held under house arrest at his home at Arcetri, near Florence, from 
December 1633 until his death in 1642. 
Even under house arrest and despite the failing of his never-robust health, 
Galileo continued to produce masterpieces. In 1634 he completed Discourses 
on Two New Sciences, in which he recapitulated the results of his early ex-
periments and his mature meditations on the principles of mechanics. His last 
telescopic discovery—that of the Moon's diurnal and monthly librations (wob-
bling from side to side)—was made in 1637, only a few months before he 
became blind. Even after his blindness was complete, he worked out verbally 
a sketch of how a pendulum could be used to regulate a clock. He died of a 

GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) 
65 
slow fever at Arcetri on January 8, 1642. In 1992 the Church finally exoner-
ated Galileo. 
4.3.B Galileo's Scientific Contributions 
In an objective sense, Galileo's achievements can be listed according to his 
writings and the principles he enunciated. Thus, he is credited with develop-
ing "the empirical, or experimental, scientific method." His method combined 
experiment with calculation, using experiments to check theoretical deduc-
tions. There is some controversy about Galileo's use of the experimental 
method (see, e.g., Shapere, 1974); this issue is discussed below. In any case, his 
discoveries described below resulted from using some combination of received 
wisdom; reasoning using mathematics; and the telescope, the pendulum, and 
the inclined plane: 
1. He informally stated (in nonmathematical form) what came to be known 
(in their mathematical forms) as Newton's first two laws of motion: First, 
the principle of inertia—a body continues in a state of rest or uniform 
rectilinear motion forever unless acted upon by an external force; and 
second, that a body speeds up or slows down uniformly with time. 
Note that Galileo concluded that the rate of fall is independent of the 
constitution of the falling body; all bodies fall at the same rate, at least 
in a vacuum. 
2. The fact that the path of a projectile in a vacuum is a parabola. 
3. Numerous astronomical discoveries (including some of the moons of 
Jupiter, the rings of Saturn, the irregularity of the surface of the Moon, 
and the existence and behavior of sunspots) which together supported 
the Sun-centered Copernican system of the universe against the 
Ptolemaic Earth-centered system. 
He also introduced the application of mathematics to the study and solu-
tion of scientific problems, stating that "the Book of Nature is written in 
mathematical characters." As a consequence of these contributions, Galileo 
often is referred to as the founder of modern mechanics and experimental 
physics. He was the first to grasp the idea of "force" as a mechanical agent. 
The concept of force was later elaborated mathematically by Newton, who 
defined it in his second law of motion (see Newton, Section 4.5). Although 
Galileo did not formulate the laws of motion per se, his writings on dynamics 
clearly show that he understood and used the laws; in this sense he paved the 
way for Newton in the seventeenth century. 
Galileo's linking of mathematics and physics made it possible for him to 
link celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and it broke down for him the tradi-
tional division of the world above the Moon and that below it. Galileo also 
made some valid predictions of modern discoveries. He predicted that a small 
annual parallax would eventually be found for some of the fixed stars that 

66 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
is, a given star would be seen to move somewhat over the course of a year. 
He also predicted that extra-Saturnian planets would at some future time 
be ascertained to exist and that light travels with a measurable, although 
extremely great velocity. 
4.3.C Major Works 
The first complete edition of Galileo's works was that of Eugenio Alberi, 16 
vols. (1842-1856). It is now superseded by the final Edizione nazionale delle 
opere di Galileo Galilei, 20 vols., edited by Antonio Pavaro (1890-1909, 
reprinted 1929-1939). Florence: Barbera. It contains every obtainable docu-
ment and scrap of correspondence. The first English translation of Galileo's 
writings was by Thomas Salusbury, Mathematical Collections and Translations, 
5 vols. (1661-1962). London. Other English translations include: 
Galilei, Galileo (1590). De Motu (unpublished manuscript). Translated by I. E. Drabkin 
as "On Motion," pp. 13-114 in Galileo on Motion and on Mechanics (1960). 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
(1610). Sidereus Nuncius. Translated by Edward Stafford Carlos as The Sidereal 
Messenger of Galileo Galilei and a Part of the Preface to Keplers Dioptrics (1880). 
London. 
(1612). Discourse on Bodies in Water, with introduction and notes by Stillman 
Drake (1960). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
(1613). Letters on Sunspots, abridged text translated by Stillman Drake, 
pp. 87-144 in Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo (1957). Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday. 
(1623). The Assayer, translated by Stilllman Drake, pp. 151-336 in The Con-
troversy on the Comets of 1618 (1960). Philadelphia: University of Pennslyvania 
Press. 
(1632). Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems—Ptolemaic and 
Copernican, translated by Stillman Drake, 2nd ed. (1967). Berkeley, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press; in the Salusbury translation, Giorgio de Santillana (Ed.), 
Dialogue on the Great World Systems (1953). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
(1634). On Mechanics, translated by Thomas Salusbury as "Galileus, His 
Mechanics" pp. 271-302 of Vol. 2 of Mathematical Collections and Translations 
(1662). London. Translated by Stillman Drake, pp. 147-182 of Galileo on Motion 
and on Mechanics (1960). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
(1638). Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, translated by Henry Crewe 
and Antonio de Salvio (1914, reprinted 1954). New York: Macmillan; 2nd ed., New 
York: Dover. Also translated by Stillman Drake as Two New Sciences (1974). 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 2nd ed. (1989). Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press. 
4.3.D Subjectivity in the Work of Galileo 
Galileo is popularly credited with being the first to develop and use the 
scientific method, and he is given as the exemplar of that method. (Aristotle 

GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) 
67 
proposed that we should first take observations. Francis Bacon borrowed 
from Aristotle, suggesting that this was really the only way science could 
advance. Galileo took the approach further by suggesting that we can carry 
out experiments to validate the theory that follows observations and that we 
use mathematics to predict experimental results.) Shapere (1974) credits the 
nineteenth-century philosopher-scientist Ernst Mach as a primary proponent 
of this view, quoting him (p. 4) as writing that Galileo "did not supply us with 
a theory of the falling of bodies, but investigated and established, wholly 
without preformed opinions, the actual facts of falling" and that Galileo pro-
ceeded by "gradually adapting ... his thoughts to the facts." 
Shapere also guides us through some of the voluminous literature that has 
been generated by historians and philosophers of science, exploring Galileo's 
role in the scientific revolution and attempting to understand his methodol-
ogy. In particular, what is at issue is the role of theory (especially mathemat-
ics) and of experiment in Galileo's science. Shapere (1974, p. 129) quotes 
Alexander Koyre (1968) as taking the extreme opposite view from that held 
by Mach: "It is thought, pure unadulterated thought, and not experience or 
sense-perception, as until then [i.e., in the Aristotelian tradition], that gives the 
basis for the 'new science' of Galileo Galilei.... [According to Galileo] good 
physics is made a priori. Theory precedes fact." 
Part of this confusion, perhaps, can be explained by the fact, cited by Miller 
(1996), that like Einstein many centuries later, Galileo performed "thought 
experiments" in addition to the actual physical experiments he carried out. An 
example is the work on the speed of falling bodies. The issue is that because 
of air resistance, in the real world very light bodies do indeed fall more slowly 
than do heavy ones; it is only in a vacuum that all bodies fall at the same speed. 
But there were no facilities to create laboratory vacuums in Galileo's time, so 
he had to imagine what would happen in a vacuum. Miller (1996, p. 8) describes 
one of Galileo's thought experiments on this subject: Consider a heavy 
rock that falls with 8 units of speed and a lighter one that falls with 4 units of 
speed. Now consider tying the two rocks together. How fast will they fall? 
Aristotelian principles dictate that the speed be somewhere between 4 and 8 
units, as the lighter rock will impede the speed of the heavier. But Galileo asks 
how the rocks can know they are tied together, and whether it isn't possible 
that the combination will fall at a rate greater than 8 units. 
Galileo's own writings are equivocal in resolving the question of whether 
he used experiments, and if so, whether they were exploratory or confirma-
tory. This ambiguity is in part because so many of his works were cast in the 
form of dialogues as an expository technique designed to appeal to a mass 
public and to make it possible for him with relative impunity to make state-
ments that might be interpreted as challenging to church doctrine. Hence his 
writings can be mined for quotations supporting both sides of the controversy. 
For example, Shapere (1974, p. 126) presents two quotes from Dialogue Con-
cerning the Two Chief World Systems. The first (from p. 223 of the 1962 Drake 
translation) says: "[I]n order not to proceed arbitrarily or at random, but with 
a rigorous method, let us first seek to make sure by experiments repeated 

68 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
many times how much time is taken by a ball of iron, say, to fall to earth from 
a height of one hundred yards." The second (from p. 328 of the Drake trans-
lation) has become famous: 
Nor can I ever sufficiently admire the outstanding acumen of those who have taken 
hold of this [Pythagorean, i.e., Copernican] opinion and accepted it as true; they 
have through sheer force of intellect done such violence to their own senses as to 
prefer what reason told them over that which sensible experience plainly showed 
them to the contrary. For the arguments against the whirling of the earth which we 
have already examined are very plausible, as we have seen; and the fact that the 
Ptolemaics and Aristotelians and all their disciples took them to be conclusive is 
indeed a strong argument of their effectiveness. But the experiences which overtly 
contradict the annual movement are indeed so much greater in their apparent force 
that, I repeat, there is no limit to my astonishment when I reflect that Aristarchus 
and Copernicus were able to make reason so conquer sense that, in defiance of the 
latter, the former became mistress of their belief. 
Here is surely an argument that suggests that if the data contradict a theory, 
the data, not the theory, should be questioned. 
Shapere (1974) also discusses the distinction between the experimental 
method used in an inductive mode to generate hypotheses and the method 
used in a deductive mode to test hypotheses otherwise generated or even to 
illustrate propositions already believed to be true. That author carries out a 
careful examination of the development of Galileo's conclusions that the dis-
tance traveled by a naturally falling body is proportional to the square of the 
time of fall. Galileo's first statement on this issue was in On Motion, completed 
around 1590, where he states that "a falling body will accelerate until the 
impetus that sent it aloft has diminished to zero; thereafter it will fall with con-
stant speed." (Of course, we know today that objects do not fall at constant 
speed.) But Galileo changed his mind. Shapere (1974, p. 80) quotes Drake's 
translation of Galileo's Fragment dated 1604 as stating: "I suppose (and 
perhaps I shall be able to demonstrate this) that the naturally falling body goes 
continually increasing its velocity according as the distance increases from the 
point from which it parted." 
His reasoning in that work, however, was based on deriving the fact that 
the distance fallen is proportional to the square of the elapsed time from the 
false proposition that velocity is proportional to distance traveled. This is evi-
dence, suggests Shapere, that "Galileo was convinced of the truth of the time-
squared relationship on grounds independent of the [velocity proportional to 
distance] relationship and the deduction of the former from the latter. Indeed, 
his search for a proof clearly came after his conviction of the truth of the con-
clusion, of which he was more firmly convinced than he was of the premise 
from which he attempted to derive it." Shapere goes on to consider explana-
tions for Galileo's belief in the time-squared relationship as received wisdom, 
as a generalization of his experimental work with pendulums and inclined 
planes, or as arising from a process of pure reasoning. 

REFERENCES 
69 
In addition, as we have already seen in the case of a vacuum, there are ques-
tions of whether it was possible, in terms of laboratory equipment and tech-
niques, for Galileo to have carried out the experiments he describes and that are 
sometimes credited to him. Many historians and philosophers of science have 
weighed in with opinions on this controversy, which is essentially about the roles 
of rationalism (with its roots in Plato's thought) and empiricism in the work of 
Galileo. In particular, Albert Einstein, in a preface to Drake's translation of 
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (written in 1952, pub-
lished in 1967) argues for both the presence of subjectivity in Galileo's work and 
for its usefulness: "There is no empirical method without speculative concepts 
and systems... no speculative thinking whose concepts do not reveal... 
the empirical material from which they stem.... Moreover, the experimental 
methods at Galileo's disposal were so imperfect that only the boldest specula-
tion could possibly bridge the gaps between the empirical data." 
Einstein concludes that Galileo was aiming more at comprehension than at 
factual knowledge, and that comprehension depends on an already accepted 
logical system. That an already accepted logical system could affect Galileo's 
acceptance of others' ideas is illustrated by his neglect of Kepler's laws of plan-
etary motion, which were discovered during his lifetime. But even while his 
own work was regarded by the Church as disrupting the perfect order of the 
cosmos, Galileo adhered strongly to his belief in such cosmic order—in par-
ticular, that all motion was circular. Hence he could not accept Kepler's for-
mulation of elliptical orbits; and this preconception prevented him from giving 
a full formulation of the inertial law, which he himself discovered, although it 
is usually attributed to the French mathematician Rene Descartes. Again, 
Galileo believed that the inertial path of a body around Earth must be circu-
lar. Lacking the idea of Newtonian gravitation, he hoped this would allow him 
to explain the path of the planets as circular inertial orbits around the sun. 
Further, the idea of a universal force of gravitation seems to have almost been 
within Galileo's grasp, but he refused to entertain it because he considered it 
an "occult" quality. 
Thus we see that Galileo combined the rational and empiricist approaches 
to his research, that he was truly a man of his own time as well as the instiga-
tor of the scientific revolution, and that subjectivity colored many parts of his 
work, both his successes and his failures. 
REFERENCES 
Biagioli, Mario (1993). Galileo: Courtier. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Drake, Stillman (1990). Galileo: Pioneer Scientist. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Einstein, Albert (1967). "Foreword" to Galileo Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two 
Chief World Systems—Ptolemaic and Copernican, 2nd ed., translated by Stillman 
Drake. Berkeley: University of California Press. The foreword is dated July 1952 
and is an authorized translation from the German by Sonja Bargmann. 

70 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). 
Fermi, Laura, and Gilberto Bernardini (1961). Galileo and the Scientific Revolution. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Koyre, Alexander A. (1968). Metaphysics and Measurement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Mach, Ernst (1960). The Science of Mechanics. LaSalle, IL: Open Court. 
Miller, Arthur I. (1996). Insights of Genius. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Redondi, Pietro (1987). Galileo: Heretic, translated by Raymond Rosenthal. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Reston, James, Jr. (1994). Galileo: A Life. New York: HarperCollins. 
Shapere, Dudley (1974). Galileo:A Philosophical Study. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
71 
4.4 WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
William Harvey was the father of the fields of embryology and physiology and 
discovered the circulation of the blood. 
4.4.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
William Harvey was born on April 1,1578, in Kent, England. At 16 he entered 
Cambridge University. It is likely that he began his medical studies there, for 
the courses offered included practical anatomy. In any event, Harvey received 
his B.A. degree in 1597 and then went to the medical school at the University 
of Padua to learn the technical side of medicine. There he studied under 
Girolamo Fabrizi (1537-1619), also known as Hieronymus Fabricius of 
Aquadendente, who had demonstrated the valves of the veins and showed that 
they were always placed so that their open ends faced the heart. Fabricius 
did not make much of this discovery; it would remain for Harvey to show 
the importance of the valves for the circulation of blood. 
On April 25,1602, Harvey received his degree as a doctor of medicine and 

72 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
returned to England. He settled in London, but had to be licensed by the 
College of Physicians to practice in the city. Passing a series of three exami-
nations, but being allowed to practice following his successful completion of 
the first in 1603, he was finally admitted to the College toward the end of 1604. 
In the same year he married Elizabeth Browne, the daughter of a prominent 
physician to the royal family, Lancelot Browne. The marriage was childless but 
lasted over 40 years. In 1607 he became a Fellow of the College of Physicians, 
and in 1609 was appointed as a physician to the Hospital of St. Bartholomew. 
The duties of this post, which included attending at the hospital at least twice 
a week to examine patients and prescribe for them, formed part of Harvey's 
workload. In addition, there was his private practice, his work for the College 
of Physicians—where he was three times censor, charged with inspection of 
apothecary shops to monitor the quality of the drugs offered for sale—and his 
experimental activities. 
It was in 1616 that Harvey presented his first public anatomical demon-
stration at the College of Physicians, having been chosen Lumleian Lecturer, 
a post he held for 40 years. The Lumleian Lecturer was required to give a 
course of lectures (twice a week for an hour each) on anatomy, surgery, and 
medicine. The curriculum required a six-year cycle for completion, and the 
Lumleian Lecturer was also required to carry out a complete anatomical 
demonstration once a year (on a corpse of an executed criminal). 
In 1627, Harvey made an attempt to explain contraction of muscles in On 
Local Movement of Animals and in 1628 he published his magnum opus, 
Exericitatio Anatómica de Motu Coráis et Sanguinis in Animalibus (An 
Anatomical Treatise on the Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals). 
Here he recounted nine years of thinking and experimentation that convinced 
him of the circulation of the blood. He spent the bulk of his remaining pro-
fessional life studying the embryology and gestation characteristics of a wide 
variety of animal species in an effort to be able to make inferences about how 
characteristics of humans are passed on from one generation to the next. He 
referred to this process as the "generation of animals." 
In 1631, Harvey was appointed physician-in-ordinary to King Charles I. 
The two men became friends, and the king made the deer in his deer park 
available to Harvey for his scientific experiments. When, in 1633, King Charles 
traveled to Scotland for his coronation as King of Scots, Harvey went along 
on the trip and used the opportunity to observe the breeding of gannets and 
other wild birds, thus securing more material for studies of embryology. 
By the mid-1630s, Harvey's eminence was sufficiently great that he was 
called upon to perform such public services as examining women accused 
of witchcraft, and performing an autopsy on a man reputed to have lived to 
age 152. In 1639, he became senior physician to the king. During the English 
Civil War, Harvey was, of course, a royalist. He accompanied the king in his 
move to Oxford and became affiliated with the university there, receiving an 
appointment from the king as warden of Merton College when the incumbent 
was removed for his rebel sympathies. At Oxford, Harvey continued his studies 

WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
73 
of animal embryology, observing the progress of embryos in a series of chicken 
eggs. When the rebels besieged Oxford in 1646, Harvey returned to London. 
There he published On the Circulation of Blood, responding to critics of De 
Motu Cordis. In this work he went further than the original publication in 
rejecting the anatomical and physiological model dating from the time of 
Galen (who died in A.D. 200) as to how the body is nourished by the blood. 
He asserted that the blood gets distributed around the body not in spurts that 
ebb and peak; rather, the blood flows in a smooth, continuous circulation 
around the body, and the flow is driven by the pumping and squeezing of the 
heart. 
On his return from Oxford, Harvey found that his lodgings had been broken 
into and notes and manuscripts, especially those relating to the reproductive 
life cycle of insects, had been destroyed—a loss of many years of observational 
work. He was obliged to move to his house in Surrey, because as a Royalist 
he was not allowed to live in London. It was in Surrey that George Ent insisted 
on submitting Harvey's manuscript Exercitationes de Generatione Animalium 
for publication, over Harvey's own protests that it was incomplete because of 
the loss of the insect data. The treatise was published in 1651. 
In his later years, Harvey lived with his brother, Eliab, reading rather than 
investigating new problems and declining on the grounds of age to serve as 
president of the College of Physicians, although he had been elected to that 
office in 1654. He died at Eliab's house on June 3,1657. 
4.4.B Harvey's Scientific Contributions 
Harvey published two major works, Exericitatio Anatómica de Motu Cordis 
et Sanguinis in Animalibus {De Motu Cordis) in 1628 and Exercitationes de 
Generatione Animalium {De Generatione Animalium) in 1651. The former 
is the basis of his lasting fame; the latter has been all but forgotten. 
We first briefly discuss De Generatione Animalium. This work was based on 
life-long exercises in dissection and observation, especially of the developing 
eggs of chickens and of deer, supplied to him in abundance by his patron, King 
Charles. However careful his observation, Harvey was perforce handicapped 
by the lack of the existence of a microscope with sufficient resolution to show 
fine structure, by the rudimentary state of the science of physiology, and by 
the fact that the development of biochemistry was not to occur until the fol-
lowing century. In this work, Harvey returned to an Aristotelian view of the 
process of formation of new organisms, insisting on the principle of epigéne-
sis, the formation of a fetus or animal by the addition of one part after another. 
Indeed, he was the first to apply this term, still current today, to the process. 
This insistence was contrary to the prevailing view of the time, preformation, 
which held that all parts of the animal were present, if invisible, from the 
start. Preformation was consistent with the ideas of spontaneous generation, 
also current at the time (but see Pasteur, Section 4.10). Besides the advocacy 
of epigénesis, some of the accomplishments of De Generatione Animalium 

74 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
include the following (adapted from Pagel, 1967, pp. 329-330): that all animals 
derive from primordia with the shape and properties of ova. These include 
true eggs for oviparous animals and the conceptus of mamáis (i.e., the ferti-
lized egg). This discovery casts doubt on spontaneous generation; although 
Harvey did not completely reject the possibility, he narrowed the possible 
range of application: "Harvey recognized the independent position of the 
female 'geniture,' the primordial ovum, refuting the Aristotelian view of its 
passive, merely material, and 'excremental'... nature. This applied to all 
animals, although Harvey failed to recognize the significance of the ovary in 
mammals. He was fully aware of it in birds, however, and consciously gener-
alized his observations in the latter as applying to the whole animal kingdom" 
(Pagel, 1967, p. 329). Note that this generalization is a clear example of 
Harvey's use of subjectivity. 
In De Generatione Animalium, Harvey also explored the reproductive 
system, observing peristalsis in the uterus and tubes and the independence of 
fetal and maternal circulations. He identified amniotic fluid as a source of 
nutrition, rather than sweat or urine. Starting with a large batch of simultane-
ously fertilized hen's eggs, Harvey opened one each day and thus constructed 
a complete description of the development of the chick embryo. Harvey erred, 
however, in two principal conclusions: that nothing passed from the ovaries to 
the uterus in mammals, and that the uterus did not receive sperm from the 
male. Again, we must remember the lack of a microscope and understand with 
Pagel (1967, p. 328) that the particular mammal to which Harvey had unlim-
ited access, the deer that the king supplied, seems the species least suitable for 
Harvey's research. The problem with deer is that in this species, the initial 
stages of pregnancy are much different from what occurs in most other 
mammals. Deer usually carry but one fetus, and in its early stages such a single 
fetus would be invisible to the unaided eye. Later, when it first becomes visible, 
it appears only as an elongated filament some 20 millimeters long and a few 
millimeters wide. Harvey observed this filament but compared it to a spider 
thread and did not understand that it served the same function as the sacs that 
he was used to seeing in other mammals. 
Turning to De Motu Cordis, we note that to understand Harvey's contri-
bution in describing the circulation of the blood, it is necessary to understand 
the state of knowledge at the time that he did his work. Singer (1956) gives a 
detailed history of the ideas of the generation and movement of the blood 
starting with Galen. Even earlier, Aristotle had declared the heart the most 
important organ in the body, not only the center of the vascular system but 
also the source of heat and the seat of intelligence (see Aristotle, Section 4.2). 
It was common knowledge that the blood was in motion, but the motion was 
believed to be merely an ebb and flow. 
Galen had described the heart as consisting of only two chambers, the ven-
tricles (rather than the four we now know it to have), and maintained that the 
septum between those chambers was penetrable via invisible passages. Blood 
was believed to be created in the liver and there charged with natural spirits. 

WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
75 
Thence the veins were thought to carry the natural spirits (and nourishment 
absorbed from the intestines) throughout the body. The veins were also 
thought to absorb impurities. What Galen called the "arterial vein" (our pul-
monary artery) was believed to discharge impurities to the lungs, whence they 
were exhaled. He also believed that the pulmonary vein (which he called the 
"venal artery") brought air to the heart and thus accounted for the differing 
colors of venous and arterial blood—the conception was of two different kinds 
of blood flowing through two different systems of vessels. Arterial blood was 
thought to be charged with "vital spirits," accounting for movement and dis-
tributed throughout the body. The blood that reached the brain was thought 
to be there charged with "animal spirits," which were distributed by the 
nervous system through nerves thought to be hollow. 
For centuries the mostly subjectively derived system of Galen had been 
accepted as true, with anatomy lessons and dissections being used to demon-
strate the correctness of his formulations, despite the universal inability to find 
the pores that were thought to connect the left and right sides of the heart. 
With the Renaissance, progress began to be made toward a more accurate 
view. Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1518) was among the first to question Galen's 
views. Leonardo adopted the empirical approach by dissecting bodies of 
human beings and animals and found that the bronchi end blindly in the lungs, 
and he was unable to drive air from the bronchi into the heart. Hence Galen's 
notion that the pulmonary vein (then called the venal artery) conveyed air 
from the lungs to the heart was untenable. Leonardo also identified the four 
chambers of the heart, arguing that all four were of importance; Galen had 
considered that the only function of the auricles was to prevent overfilling of 
the ventricles. Leonardo was also able to verify that the valves at the roots of 
the great arteries functioned to prevent blood from flowing back into the 
heart. 
In the first edition of The Fabric of the Human Body (1543), Andreas 
Vesalius (1514-1564) hinted that Galen might be wrong in maintaining that 
blood moves from one side of the heart to the other through invisible pores. 
In the second edition of his work (1555), he made his doubts explicit. Michael 
Servetus (1511-1553), a theologian, believing that understanding the spirit 
of man was one route to the comprehension of the spirit of God, discussed 
physiology in his theological publications. Commenting on Galen, who wrote 
that throughout the body the arteries and veins mutually give each other blood 
through openings called anastomoses, Servetus insisted that the vital spirit 
passes from the arteries to the veins through the anastomoses. Thus, by seeing 
as unidirectional Galen's bidirectional flow, Servetus almost hit on the mecha-
nism of circulation. Servetus says that the many communications between 
the pulmonary artery and pulmonary vein within the lung confirm this evi-
dence of what is now called the pulmonary or lesser circulation. Nevertheless, 
Servetus never took the great step of seeing the pulmonary circulation as 
connected with the systemic circulation as Harvey was to do; his work was 
considered heretical, and as a consequence, Servetus was burned at the stake 

76 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
in Geneva in October 1553. This was the milieu that Harvey entered when he 
embarked on his study of the movement of blood. 
Harvey's own teacher, Fabricius of Aquapendente, found the valves on the 
veins, demonstrating them to the students in his anatomy classes much earlier, 
but finally publishing his findings in 1600. He did not attach much significance 
to the valves, failing to inquire deeply about their function but being satisfied 
that they were merely a means to counteract the effects of gravity and prevent 
the blood from pooling in the extremities. But Harvey, schooled in the 
Aristotelian doctrine of final cause (i.e., that everything in nature has a 
purpose), did wonder about the function of those valves, noting that those in 
the upper part of the body prevented not downward flow of blood, as would 
be expected to counteract the effect of gravity but upward flow. Understand-
ing the function of the valves was one of the clues to the system of circulation. 
As we shall see, Harvey's work in De Motu Coráis, while based on very 
careful observation, was also hampered by the lack of a proper microscope. 
His reasoning went approximately as follows: He knew, from the earlier 
work of Matteo Realdo Colombo (1516-1559), that the active phase of the 
heart's movement is its contraction, when it become hard and elongated (as a 
muscle does when it contracts) and is able to expel blood into the aorta. 
Harvey confirmed this fact and many others by observations on snakes and 
other cold-blooded creatures whose hearts continue to beat for some time 
after death and to beat slowly enough to lend themselves to careful and 
detailed examination. At the same time that the heart contracts, the arteries 
expand, generating a pulse; that this is a causal chain was confirmed by noting 
that a cut artery bleeds in spurts coincident with the contraction of the 
ventricle. That causal chain was extended backward to the auricles; Harvey 
showed that blood flows from the auricles to the ventricles by cutting a heart 
open and seeing that at each beat of the auricles there is a spurt of blood into 
the ventricles. 
As Leonardo had shown, blood entering either the aorta or the pulmonary 
artery is prevented from returning to the heart, and this turns out to be a key 
idea for Harvey. He calculated that the ventricle can hold about 2 ounces of 
blood. If the pulse beats 72 times per minute, that means that from the ven-
tricles into the aorta or pulmonary artery must flow about 2 x 72 x 60 ounces 
(or 540 pounds) of blood in an hour. Harvey wondered where this enormous 
quantity of blood could come from—the body itself is not large enough to 
supply it; it cannot come from food and drink, because they cannot be con-
sumed in such quantities; and it cannot lodge in the tissues, for they would 
burst. Hence, Harvey reasoned, the supply of blood in the ventricles must 
come from the veins, which also contain blood. Thus the idea of a circular 
motion seemed to make sense, but now Harvey was faced with answering how 
the blood gets from the venous system to the left side of the heart and from 
the arteries to the veins. It was easy to see that blood can enter the right auricle 
through the vena cava and travel thence to the right ventricle. But the only 
exit from the right ventricle (if one rules out a route through the septum of 

WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
77 
the heart, as Harvey did) is through what in Harvey's time was called the arte-
rial vein and what we call the pulmonary artery. Singer (1956, p. 55) quotes 
Harvey on this point: "The heart then is continually receiving and expelling 
blood by and from its ventricle, and for this end is equipped with four sets of 
valves—two for the expulsion of blood and two for its admission.... As then 
the blood is continually flowing into the right side of the heart and flowing out 
of the left side of the heart, it is obvious that it must somehow pass from the 
vena cava into the aorta 
It thus clearly appears that the blood must pen-
etrate through the porosities of the lung from the right to the left ventricle 
[to get] from the vena cava to the aorta." 
Further, Singer (1956, p. 56) quotes Harvey's conclusion: "I now began to 
think whether there might not be A MOVEMENT, AS IT WERE, IN A 
CIRCLE, and this I afterwards found to be true. I saw that the blood, forced 
by the action of the left ventricle into the arteries, was distributed to the body 
at large, and its several parts. In the same manner it is sent through the lungs, 
impelled by the right ventricle into the arterial vein [pulmonary artery]." 
Harvey then detailed some experiments that clinch the point. In modern terms, 
using a tourniquet to close off an artery causes blood to back up between the 
heart and the closure of the artery; closing off a vein, however, causes blood 
to back up distal to the point of closure. 
Arguing that you cannot pass a probe from the trunk of a vein to one of 
the branches, although it is easy to push it in the opposite direction, Harvey 
then showed that the function of the valves in the veins is to keep the venous 
blood flowing to the center of the body from the extremities, without any 
reverse flow. Finally, Harvey summed up (quoted by Singer, 1956, pp. 62-63): 
Now I may give my view of the circulation of the blood and propose it for general 
adoption. All things, both argument and ocular demonstration, confirm that the 
blood passes through lungs and heart by the force of the ventricles, and is driven 
thence and sent forth to all parts of the body. There it makes its way into the veins 
and pores of the flesh. It flows by the veins everywhere from the circumference to 
the centre, from the lesser to the greater veins, and by them is discharged into the 
vena cava and finally into the right auricle of the heart. [The blood is sent] in such 
a quantity, in one direction, by the arteries, in the other direction by the veins as 
cannot possibly be supplied by the ingested food.... It is therefore necessary to 
conclude that the blood in the animals is impelled in a circle, and is in a state of 
ceaseless movement; this is the act or function of the heart, which it performs by 
means of its pulse; and that it is the sole and only end of the movement and pulse 
of the heart. 
4.4.C 
Major Works 
Harvey, William (1627). De Motu Locali Animalium. 
(1628). Exercitatio Anatómica de Motu Cordts et Sanguinis in Animalibus. 
Frankfurt. 
(1649). Execitatio de Circulatione Sanguinis. Cambridge. 

78 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
(1651). Exercitationes de Generatione Animalium. London. 
(1766). Opera Omnia, 2 vols. London. 
Whitteridge, Gweneth (Ed. and Trans.) (1964). The Anatomical Lectures of William 
Harvey: Prelectiones Anatomie Universalis; De Musculis. Edinburgh: E. & S. 
Livingstone. 
Willis, Robert (Trans.) (1847). The Works of William Harvey, M.D. London: Sydenham 
Society. 
4.4.D Subjectivity in the Work of Harvey 
Although, as we shall see, Harvey used subjectivity in his work, he was not 
above decrying it in others. For example, in the preface to De Generatione 
Animalium he writes harshly that his old teacher, Fabricius, "relieth upon 
probability rather then experience, and layeth aside the verdict of sense 
which is grounded upon dissections; he flies to petty reasonings borrowed from 
mechanicks, which is very unbeseeming so famous an Anatomist" (quoted by 
Keynes, 1966, p. 347). Pagel (1976, p. 3) argues forcefully that Harvey's dis-
covery was not a deduction from a mass of evidence but the result of an idea 
or a "hunch" that led him to accumulate evidence. He tells us: "[OJne can find 
in translations of Harvey a tendency to help the reader to discover in Harvey's 
text a sequence of events which would today be regarded as legitimate in the 
process of scientific invention and discovery. On such a view, discovery should 
normally be the result of a sum total of observations and suitably designed 
experiments, and such a process should be discernible in Harvey's own 
account of his discovery as the immediate conclusion from observations and 
experiments." 
But Harvey's own account does not speak of concluding from observations 
or experiments. We have described what he calls his "meditation" on the quan-
tity of blood issuing from the heart. This meditation or careful introspection 
led him to the idea of circulation because he reasoned that such a vast quan-
tity of blood could not be manufactured or stored in the body. Harvey actu-
ally mentions this meditation twice in the eighth chapter of De Motu, both 
times in the passage in which he announces the discovery of the blood's cir-
culation. He states: "I started to think by myself, whether it (i.e. the blood) 
could have a motion as it were in a circle. This I afterwards found to be true" 
(quoted in Pagel, 1976, p. 4). 
As an Aristotelian, believing that nature does nothing without a purpose, 
Harvey was, of course, led to this introspection by his deep knowledge of the 
anatomy of the heart, veins, and arteries. Harvey also told Robert Boyle that 
additional considerations of nature's purposiveness led him to postulate the 
circulation of the blood; keeping arterial blood from flowing back to the heart 
was the purpose of the valves. Pagel (1976, p. 4) quotes Sir Henry Dale as 
saying that Harvey's greatest achievement was "not that he made a discovery 
of such profound and permanent significance, but that he created and dis-
played for all time the method by which such discovery may be attained and 

WILLIAM HARVEY (1578-1657) 
79 
made secure." Note that the method that Pagel quotes Sir Henry Dale as prais-
ing is one that is based in subjectivity, although confirmed by observation and 
experiment. 
Another example of the subjectivity in Harvey's work lies in the fact that 
he had shown that the blood passes from the arteries to the veins, but had not 
been able to physically see the passage. Although the microscope had already 
been developed as a by-product of the ideas embedded in the invention of the 
telescope (indeed, Galileo demonstrated its use as early as 1610), microscopes 
of Harvey's time did not offer sufficiently clear images to be useful in the sort 
of biological work that he was doing. Hence he did not use a microscope, and 
if he had done so, the power and clarity of the available instruments would 
not have been sufficient for him to be able to see the network of capillaries 
that we now know connect the arteries with the veins. Wyatt (1924, p. 151) 
quotes Harvey's 1649 first Anatomical Disquisition to John Riolanus to show 
that he tried to find the connections: "I have never succeeded in tracing any 
connection between the arteries and the veins by a direct anastomosis of their 
orifices; neither in the liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, or any other viscus is such 
a thing to be seen...." 
Harvey goes on to describe in detail his thorough but fruitless search for 
connections. Having been unable to find the connections but knowing that 
blood must flow from arteries to veins, Harvey asserted that the blood must 
indeed pass from the arteries to the veins. But he had to rest content with 
supposing that the arteries shed their blood into minute spaces in the tissues, 
whence it was picked up by the veins. In his 1661 Anatomical Observations on 
the Lungs, Marcello Malpighi demonstrated the capillary connection. 
Yet another example of Harvey's subjectivity in his methodological 
approach to his research was described above in a quote from Pagel (1967) 
given in Section 4.4.B. There we saw that Harvey had actually seen the ova in 
birds, but failing to recognize the significance of the ovaries in mammals, failed 
to actually identify a human ovum. Nevertheless, so sure was he of the theo-
retical concept that was guiding him that he generalized his findings from birds 
to the entire animal kingdom. 
Still another aspect of subjectivity in the work of Harvey is his adherence 
to Aristotelian ideas, even as he proved them false. Aristotle had said that the 
heart was the "sovereign" of the body (see Aristotle, Section 4.2). Having just 
shown in De Motu Coráis that the heart and blood vessels form a single 
system, and shown in De Generatione Animalium that the blood is formed 
before the heart, Harvey nevertheless ends De Motu Coráis (as quoted by 
Singer, 1956, p. 65) thus: 
Are we to agree less with Aristotle in regard to the soveriegnty of the heart? Or, 
on the other hand, are we to inquire whether it receives sense and motion from 
the brain, and blood from the liver? and whether it be the origin of the veins and 
of the blood? They who affirm these latter propositions against Aristotle, overlook, 
or do not rightly understand . . . that the heart is the first part which exists, and that 

80 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
it contains within itself blood, life, sensation, motion, before either the brain or the 
liver were in being, or had appeared distinctly, or, at all events, before they could 
perform any function. The heart, ready furnished with its proper organs of motion, 
like a kind of internal creature, is of a date anterior to the body: first formed nature 
willed that it should afterwards fashion, nourish, preserve, complete the entire 
animal, as its work and dwelling-place: the heart, like the prince in a kingdom, in 
whose hands lie the chief and highest authority, rules over all; it is the original and 
foundation from which all power is derived, on which all power depends in the 
animal body. 
But it could well have been Aristotle's idea of the primacy of the heart that 
influenced Harvey to look for an explanation that did not, as Galen's did, 
require two blood centers, the liver as well as the heart. Aristotle's ideas of 
unity might well also have encouraged Harvey to think of the unity of the 
venous and arterial blood rather than of the two systems envisaged by Galen. 
Further, Artistotle's ideas of the perfection of circular motion could very well 
have been the wellspring from which Harvey's ideas of circulation flowed. 
REFERENCES 
Franklin, Kenneth J. (1961). William Harvey: Englishman. London: Macgibbon & Kee. 
Keynes, Geoffrey (1966). The Life of William Harvey. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Pagel, Walter (1967). William Harvey's Biological Ideas: Selected Aspects and Histori-
cal Background. New York: Hafner. 
(1976). New Light on William Harvey. New York: S. Karger. 
Singer, Charles (1956). The Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood. London: Wm. 
Dawson & Sons. 
Whitteridge, Gweneth (1967). "William Harvey," pp. 673-675, Vol. 11, Collier's 
Encyclopedia. New York: Crowell Collier and Macmillan. 
(1971). William Harvey and the Circulation of the Blood. London: Macdonald; 
New York: American Elsevier. 
Wyatt, R. B. Hervey (1924). William Harvey. London: Beonard Parsons; Boston: Small, 
Maynard. 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
81 
4.5 SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
Sir Isaac Newton was a mathematician and physicist, who, because of his sci-
entific achievements, is perceived to be, along with Albert Einstein, among the 
very greatest of all scientists of all time. He created the mathematical theory 
of the calculus, mathematically codified the universal laws of motion and 
gravitation, and proposed a physical structure for the propagation of light. 
4.5.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Isaac Newton was born prematurely, on Christmas Day, 1642, in England, three 
months after the death of his father. A tiny and weak baby, Newton was not 
expected to survive his first day of life, much less 84 years. Within two years 
his mother remarried and moved to a neighboring village, leaving young Isaac 
with his grandmother. Thus, Isaac was effectively separated from his mother 
for nine years until the death of her second husband. They were then reunited 
for only two years, after which he was sent away to grammar school. The psy-
chotic tendencies that Isaac Newton later sometimes displayed, his anxiety 

82 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
about his work, and the violence of his defense of it have been ascribed to the 
insecurity engendered by this separation from his mother and his hatred of 
his stepfather. At school he apparently gained a firm command of Latin, but 
probably received very little instruction in arithmetic. 
Newton was 19 years old when he arrived in Cambridge in 1661, and he 
was to remain there for 35 years. By this time the scientific revolution was well 
developed; Copernicus and Kepler had already elaborated the heliocentric 
system of the universe; and Galileo had proposed the foundations of a new 
mechanics built on the principle of inertia. But the universities of Europe, 
including Cambridge, continued to focus on the ideas and teachings of Aris-
totle, which rested on a geocentric view of the universe, and which dealt with 
nature in qualitative rather than quantitative terms (see Aristotle, Section 4.2). 
Therefore, like other college students, Newton began his higher education by 
immersing himself in Aristotle's work. But even though the new philosophy 
of the scientific method was not formally in the curriculum, it was becoming 
common knowledge. 
Newton began his studies in mathematics, an area where he felt deficient, 
because of his minimal earlier preparation. He started with Descartes and 
went on to classical geometry and the literature of modern analysis, with its 
application of algebraic techniques to problems of geometry. He mastered the 
literature in a very short time and then began to move into new territory. He 
discovered the binomial theorem, and he began informally developing the 
calculus. Newton made none of this work public, merely keeping his own 
notebooks. He received the bachelor's degree in April 1665. 
Some time during his undergraduate career, Newton discovered the works 
of the French natural philosopher Rene Descartes (1596-1650) and the other 
mechanical philosophers. In contrast to Aristotle, these mechanical philiso-
phers viewed physical reality as composed entirely of particles of matter in 
motion and held that all the phenomena of nature result from their mechani-
cal interaction. (Newton was eventually to propose that light is composed of 
particles of matter.) A new set of notes, which he entitled (in Latin) Certain 
Philosophical Questions, begun sometime in 1664, filled the unused pages of 
a notebook intended for traditional scholastic exercises. Under the title he 
entered (in Latin) the slogan, "Plato is my friend, Aristotle is my friend, but 
my best friend is truth." This was clearly the beginning of Newton's scientific 
career. 
In 1665 the Great Plague of London (70,000 deaths in a population estimated 
at 460,000) closed the university, and for most of the following two years Newton 
was forced to stay at his home, contemplating at leisure what he had learned. 
During the plague years Newton laid the foundations of the calculus, developed 
most of the ideas that would be elaborated in his Opticks, and derived the 
inverse-square relation that the force acting on a planet, attracting it to the Sun, 
decreases with the square of the planet's distance from the Sun. 
Newton was elected to a fellowship in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1667, 
after the university reopened. Two years later, at age 26, he was made the 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
83 
Lucasian professor of mathematics (a position he was to occupy for the next 
32 years). The professorship exempted Newton from tutoring but required an 
annual course of lectures. During the three years 1670-1672, his lectures devel-
oped the essay Of Colours into a form that was later revised to become Book 
One of his Opticks. His interest in colors led him to the belief that chromatic 
aberration could never be eliminated from lenses. This problem occurs when 
undesired colors appear in a lens because the lens acts partially as a prism, as 
the light is refracted, that is, bent, as it passes through the lens. To study the 
phenomenon of color, Newton turned to reflecting telescopes, where chro-
matic aberration would not be a factor because reflection does not involve 
refraction, and he constructed the first reflecting telescope ever built. Newton's 
telescope had high power, but because he took advantage of mirroring to 
increase focal length, it needed to be just 6 inches long. In 1671 the Royal 
Society of London heard about Newton's telescope and asked to see it. Up 
until that time his name was probably unknown to the Royal Society (orga-
nized just 11 years earlier). He was elected to this distinguished society the 
following year (1672). 
There is no evidence that the theory of colors, fully described by Newton 
in his inaugural lectures at Cambridge, made any impression, just as there is 
no evidence that aspects of his mathematics and the content of the Principia, 
1687 (his most important written work, described later), also pronounced from 
the podium, made any impression. Rather, the theory of colors, like his later 
work, was transmitted to the world through the Royal Society of London. 
Pleased by the Royal Society's enthusiastic reception of the telescope and by 
his election as a member, Newton volunteered a paper on light and colors early 
in 1672. On the whole, the paper was also well received, although a few ques-
tions and some dissent were heard. Among the most important dissenters to 
Newton's paper was Robert Hooke, one of the leaders of the Royal Society, 
who considered himself the master in optics; he wrote a condescending cri-
tique of the unknown Newton. The critique would have annoyed a normal 
man; in Newton it provoked rage and a desire to humiliate Hooke publicly. 
Less than a year after submitting the paper, he was so unsettled by the give 
and take of honest discussion that he began to cut his professional ties, and he 
withdrew into virtual isolation. 
In 1675, Newton sent the Royal Society a new paper entitled, "An Hypoth-
esis Explaining the Properties of Light"; it was, in fact, a general system of 
nature. This paper provoked a new controversy. Hooke apparently claimed 
that Newton had stolen its content from him, and Newton boiled over again. 
The issue was quickly controlled, however, by an exchange of formal, exces-
sively polite letters that failed to conceal the complete lack of warmth between 
the men. 
Newton was also engaged in another exchange on his theory of colors with 
a circle of English Jesuits in Liege, perhaps the most revealing exchange of all. 
Although their objections were shallow, their contention that his experiments 
were mistaken lashed him into a fury. The correspondence continued until 

84 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
1678, when a final shriek of rage from Newton, apparently accompanied by a 
complete nervous breakdown, was followed by silence. The death of his 
mother the following year completed his isolation. For six years he withdrew 
from intellectual commerce except when others initiated a correspondence, 
which he always broke off as quickly as possible. Starting in the latter part of 
the 1670s, Newton's alchemical and theological investigations flourished in 
private, while his public career as a scientist declined. 
In 1687, at age 44, Newton published the Principia, his magnum opus. The 
Principia was written in Latin and for that reason, was readable by only a small 
segment of society. The difficulty of the material limited its comprehensibility 
to an even smaller number. It was composed of the Introduction (including 
the famous three laws of motion), and three books (Books I and II include 
discussions of various hypothetical forces and motions, and Book III applies 
the theory to planetary and terrestrial motions). When the Royal Society 
received the completed manuscript of Book I in 1686, Hooke claimed that the 
work was plagiarized, a charge that was difficult to justify. On the other hand, 
Newton's response to it revealed much about him. Hooke could easily have 
been mollified by an acknowledgment; he was at that time a sick man who had 
already passed his prime, and such an acknowledgment would have made 
Newton appear even bigger. Instead, Newton went through his manuscript and 
eliminated nearly every reference to Hooke. Such was his fury that he refused 
either to publish his Opticks or to accept the presidency of the Royal Society, 
until Hooke was dead. 
The Principia immediately raised Newton to international prominence. In 
their continuing loyalty to the mechanical ideal, continental scientists rejected 
Newton's idea of action at a distance for a generation, but even in their rejec-
tion they could not withhold their admiration for the technical expertise 
revealed by the work. Young British scientists spontaneously recognized him 
as their model. Newton, whose only close contacts with women were his unful-
filled relationship with his mother, who had seemed to abandon him, and his 
later guardianship of a niece, found satisfaction in the role of patron to a circle 
of young scientists attracted to him. His four-year friendship with Nicolas Fatio 
de Duillier (1664-1753), a Swiss-born mathematician resident in London who 
shared Newton's interests, was probably the most important emotional rela-
tionship of Newton's adult life. 
Almost immediately following the publication of the Principia, Newton, a 
fervent if unorthodox Protestant, helped to lead the resistance of Cambridge 
to King James IPs attempt to Catholicize it. As a consequence, he was elected 
to represent the university in the convention that arranged the revolutionary 
settlement. In this capacity, he made the acquaintance of a broader group, 
including the philosopher John Locke. Newton tasted the excitement of 
London life in the aftermath of the Principia. The great bulk of his creative 
work had been completed. He was never again satisfied with the academic 
cloister, and his desire to change was whetted by Fatio de Duillier's sugges-
tion that he find a position in London. Seek a place he did, and finally, in 1696, 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
85 
at 53, Newton was appointed "warden of the mint," an administrative position 
within the government that caused him to move to London. 
In the meantime, Newton's relations with Fatio de Duillier had undergone 
a crisis. Fatio de Duillier was taken seriously ill; then family and financial prob-
lems threatened to call him home to Switzerland. Newton's distress knew no 
limits. In 1693 he suggested that Fatio de Duillier move to Cambridge, where 
Newton would support him, but nothing came of the proposal. Through early 
1693 Newton's letters to his friend steadily intensified, and then, without expla-
nation, both their close relationship and their correspondence broke off. Four 
months later, without prior notice, Samuel Pepys and John Locke, both per-
sonal friends of Newton, received wild, accusatory letters. Pepys was informed 
that Newton would see him no more; Locke was charged with trying to entan-
gle him with women. Both men were alarmed for Newton's sanity; and in fact, 
Newton had suffered at least his second nervous breakdown. The crisis passed, 
and Newton recovered his stability. Only briefly did he ever return to sustained 
scientific work, however, and the move to London was the effective conclu-
sion of his creative activity. 
In London, Newton assumed the role of patriarch of English science. In 
1703, at age 60, he was elected president of the Royal Society, and he was 
annually reelected for 25 years. In 1705, Queen Anne knighted him, the first 
occasion on which a scientist was so honored. Newton ruled the Royal Society 
magisterially. John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, had occasion to feel that 
he ruled it tyrannically. In his years at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, 
Flamsteed, who was a difficult man in his own right, had collected an unrivaled 
body of data. Newton had received needed information from him for the Prin-
cipia, and in the 1690s, as he worked on the lunar theory, he again required 
Flamsteed's data. Annoyed when he could not get all the information he 
wanted as quickly as he wanted it, Newton assumed a domineering and con-
descending attitude toward Flamsteed. As president of the Royal Society, he 
used his influence with the government to be named as chairman of a body of 
"visitors" responsible for the Royal Observatory; then he tried to force the 
immediate publication of Flamsteed's catalog of stars. Newton broke agree-
ments that he had made with Flamsteed so that Flamsteed's observations, the 
fruit of a lifetime of work, were, in effect, seized despite his protests and pre-
pared for the press by his mortal enemy, Edmond Halley. Flamsteed finally 
won his point and by court order had the printed catalog returned to him 
before it was generally distributed. He burned the printed sheets, and his assis-
tants brought out an authorized version after his death. In this respect, and 
at considerable cost to himself, Flamsteed was one of the few men to best 
Newton. Newton sought his revenge by systematically eliminating references 
to Flamsteed's help in later editions of the Principia. 
In Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the German philosopher and mathematician, 
Newton met his intellectual match. It is now well established that Newton 
developed the calculus before Leibniz seriously pursued mathematics. It 
is agreed almost universally that Leibniz later arrived at the calculus 

86 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
independently. There has never been any question that Newton did not publish 
his method of fluxions (his designation for what Leibniz would call the calcu-
lus)', thus, it was Leibniz's paper in 1684 that first made the calculus a matter 
of public knowledge. In the Principia Newton hinted at his method, but he did 
not really publish it until he appended two papers to the Opticks in 1704. By 
then the priority controversy was already smoldering. If, indeed, it mattered, 
it would finally be impossible to assess responsibility for the ensuing fracas. 
What began as mild innuendoes escalated rapidly into blunt charges of pla-
giarism on both sides. Egged on by followers anxious to win a reputation under 
his auspices, Newton allowed himself to be drawn into the center of the fray; 
and once his temper was aroused by accusations of dishonesty, his anger was 
beyond restraint. Leibniz's conduct of the controversy was not pleasant, yet it 
paled beside that of Newton. Although he never appeared in public, Newton 
wrote most of the pieces that appeared in his defense, publishing them under 
the names of the young men in his entourage. As president of the Royal 
Society, he appointed an "impartial" committee to investigate the issue, 
secretly wrote the report officially published by the society, and reviewed it 
anonymously in the Philosophical Transactions. Even Leibniz's death could 
not allay Newton's wrath, and he continued to pursue the enemy beyond the 
grave. The battle with Leibniz, the irrepressible need to efface the charge of 
dishonesty, dominated the final 25 years of Newton's life. It obtruded itself 
continually upon his consciousness. Almost any paper on any subject from 
those years is apt to be interrupted by a furious paragraph against the German 
philosopher, as he honed the instruments of his fury ever more keenly. In the 
end, only Newton's death ended his wrath. During his last years, his niece, 
Catherine Barton Conduitt, and her husband lived with him. Newton died on 
March 20,1727, at age 84, in London. 
4.5.B Newton's Scientific Contributions 
Isaac Newton's major scientific contributions were made principally in math-
ematics, physics, and astronomy. But he also contributed in such fields as chem-
istry, alchemy, and theology. In mathematics, physics, and astronomy his 
contributions were fundamental, codifying, inventive, and enormous in impor-
tance and quantity. His research during the three years 1664-1666, ages 21-23, 
including the period when Cambridge University was closed because of the 
plague, laid the foundation for all of his subsequent work in science and math-
ematics. We begin with his more general scientific views and his contributions 
to chemistry. 
The works of the seventeenth-century chemist Robert Boyle provided the 
foundation for Newton's considerable output in chemistry. Significantly, he 
had read Henry Moore, the Cambridge Platonist, and was thereby introduced 
to another intellectual world, the magical Hermetic tradition, which sought to 
explain natural phenomena in terms of alchemical and magical concepts. 
(Hermes Trismegistus, the Greek title of the Egyptian moon god, Thoth, was 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
87 
also the god of literature, including all the writings that relate to the sciences. 
Thoth is also credited with the invention of alchemy and magic.) The two tra-
ditions of natural philosophy (i.e., of science), the mechanical and the Her-
metic, antithetical though they appear, continued to influence Newton's 
thought and in their tension supplied the fundamental themes of his scientific 
career. He was to carry out research in both traditions. 
Under the influence of the Hermetic tradition, Newton's conception 
of nature underwent a decisive change in the late 1670s. Until that time, he 
had been a mechanical philosopher in the standard seventeenth-century style, 
explaining natural phenomena by the motions of particles of matter. Thus, 
he held that the physical reality of light is a stream of tiny corpuscles diverted 
from its course by the presence of denser or rarer media. His subjective belief 
was that the apparent attraction of tiny bits of paper to a piece of glass that 
has been rubbed with cloth is the result of an ethereal flow that streams 
out of the glass and carries the bits of paper back with it. This mechanical 
philosophy denied the possibility of action at a distance—as with static elec-
tricity, it explained away apparent attractions by means of invisible ethereal 
mechanisms. Newton's "Hypothesis of Light" of 1675, with its universal 
ether, was a standard mechanical system of nature. Some phenomena, such 
as the capacity of chemicals to react only with certain others, puzzled him, 
however, and he spoke of a "secret principle" by which substances are "socia-
ble" or "unsociable" with others. (There was a similar idea of elective affinity 
of elements in the work of Lavoisier 100 years later, and of sociability of 
interacting substances in Pasteur's chemistry, 200 years later; see the material 
on Lavoisier in Section 4.6 and Pasteur in Section 4.10.) About 1679, Newton 
abandoned the ether and its invisible mechanisms and began to ascribe the 
puzzling phenomena—chemical affinities, the generation of heat in chemical 
reactions, surface tension in fluids, capillary action, the cohesion of bodies, 
and the like—to attractions and repulsions between particles of matter. More 
than 35 years later, in the second English edition of the Opticks, Newton 
accepted an ether again, although it was an ether that embodied the concept 
of action at a distance by positing a repulsion between its particles. (Ultimately, 
the existence of an ether was disproved 200 years later by the Michelson-
Morley experiment of 1887; see the discussion in the section on Einstein, 
Section 4.13.) 
The attractions and repulsions of Newton's speculative, and largely sub-
jective, science were direct transpositions of the occult sympathies and 
antipathies of Hermetic philosophy, as mechanical philosophers never ceased 
to protest. Newton, however, regarded them as a modification of the mechani-
cal philosophy that rendered it subject to exact mathematical treatment. As 
he conceived of them, attractions were quantitatively defined, and they offered 
a bridge to unite the two basic themes of seventeenth-century science: the 
mechanical tradition, which had dealt primarily with verbal mechanical 
imagery, and the Pythagorean tradition, which insisted on the math-
ematical nature of reality. (There are those today who question whether the 

88 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
mathematical modeling of the real world is perhaps too constraining, and that 
what we really need is to consider approaches that mix the worlds of nature 
and mathematics; see, e.g., Casti, 1996.) Newton's reconciliation through the 
concept of "force" (action at a distance), which we now take for granted, may 
have been his ultimate contribution to science. 
Turning to mathematics, we note that Newton is generally considered, along 
with Archimedes (287-212 B.C.), and Gauss (1777-1855), to have been among 
the three most important mathematicians of all time. In mathematics, 
Newton's major contribution was surely the invention of the calculus, but he 
made other contributions as well. A manuscript dated May 20, 1665 showed 
that Newton had already developed the calculus to the point where he could 
compute the tangent and the curvature at any point of a continuous curve. 
Although Newton published his method only when he appended two papers 
to Opticks in 1704, twenty years earlier, in 1684, Leibniz had already published 
his own, independent development of the calculus. Thus it was through 
Leibniz, and not Newton, that the world first became familiar with this new 
and exciting mathematical methodology. To set down the laws of motion (dis-
cussed below), Newton had to define momentum (mass times velocity) and to 
be concerned with rate of change of momentum. To this end he had to define 
velocity, and he defined it as rate of change of position. But what is a rate, and 
how should it be measured? His need to quantify these terms led him to 
develop the differential calculus. Analogously, his need to quantify the total 
distance passed over in a given time by a moving particle whose velocity is 
varying continuously led him to develop the integral calculus. 
His contributions to algebra included the discovery of a method for finding 
the rational factors, if any, of a polynomial in one unknown with integral coef-
ficients, and a rule for finding the imaginary roots of such a polynomial; these 
methods remain in use today. He also did work in infinite series and in number 
theory. In analytic geometry he introduced polar coordinates, he developed 
the method of finite differences, and he also worked out a system of classifi-
cation of curves and developed methods of computation and approximation 
(e.g., the Newton-Raphson method). 
Newton's research in physics focused on optics, both geometric and physi-
cal, and the mechanics of bodies in motion (dynamics). His work in optics 
began very early in his career (1664), when he began experimenting with non-
spherical lenses. By 1666, he had concluded that white light is an aggregate of 
homogeneous colors. He had carried out experiments that involved observing 
white light pass through a tiny hole in a shutter and then through a glass tri-
angular prism, thus spreading out into a spectrum of colors. Other experiments 
involved passing light through two prisms. He also studied interference pat-
terns resulting from light passing through a convex piece of glass separated by 
air from a flat piece of glass. The patterns he observed were a series of con-
centric light- and dark-colored bands. The light bands are formed by the crests 
of light waves combining to brighten the light, but when the troughs and the 
crests combine, the light is annihilated, producing darkness. The resulting 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
89 
pattern has since been referred to as Newton's rings. In this work, Newton 
predicated his understanding on a wave theory of light. It was only later that 
he switched to a corpuscular theory of light. 
By 1671, Newton had carried out many experiments with lenses and had so 
completely convinced himself that chromatic aberration could not be elimi-
nated from ground lenses that he had built the first reflecting telescope, so he 
could avoid the problem (as discussed in Section 4.5.A). He had presented lec-
tures at Cambridge on optics and the behavior of light (published in 1728 as 
Optical Lectures) and published his first paper on optics in 1672 as "New 
Theory About Light and Colors" in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society. 
Newton next began hypothesizing openly in both written talks and in manu-
scripts about the physical nature of light. Although at first Newton had 
accepted the prevailing theory of his time that light was a wave motion, the 
more he experimented with light, the more he became convinced that he 
had been in error. His later belief was that light is composed of a flow of tiny 
particles (called the corpuscular theory of light). His corpuscular theory 
stemmed from his study of dynamics of particles and his work on the Prin-
cipia. He came to believe that the behavior of light could be understood by 
studying how his laws of motion would predict the behavior of the particles 
comprising the light. In 1704, he published the book Opticks (in English), 
which, among many other things, included his discourses on the interference 
patterns that we now call Newton's rings, mentioned above. (Interference, as 
a phenomenon of light behavior, was not actually explained until 100 years 
later, by Thomas Young.) 
A contrary view of the physical nature of light was strongly held by one of 
Newton's contemporaries, Christiaan Huygens, who believed that light is 
propagated as a wave motion; this disagreement caused a fundamental intel-
lectual and emotional conflict between Huygens and Newton. Much later, Max 
Planck (1858-1947) took an intermediate path by proclaiming that light is 
neither purely particles nor purely waves. It is rather an entity that exhibits 
both properties under different circumstances: It refracts, reflects, and diffracts, 
as a wave, but it excites the particles in an atom as a particle and acts as 
particles in the photoelectric effect. The debate rages on today. 
Newton's work in mechanics and dynamics was carried out nearly 80 years 
after Kepler had described the elliptical orbits of the planets in 1609. Scien-
tists had been trying to work out what it was that kept the planets in their 
orbits and made the orbits ellipses. It was clear that the Sun had to attract the 
planets somehow, but what was the attraction, and how did it work? A number 
of scientists got pretty close to what turned out to be the truth, notably Robert 
Hooke (1635-1703). When Hooke boasted to Edmond Halley, a famous 
astronomer and geophysicist who also happened to be secretary to the Royal 
Society, and who was a great friend of Newton, that he (Hooke) had the 
answer, Halley went to Newton, in 1684, to check the matter with him. Newton 
said that he had worked out the answer in 1666 but had never published it. 

90 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Halley, in great excitement, urged publication as soon as possible. Newton 
could do this now with much greater confidence than he could have done it 
20 years earlier. For one thing, he now had the calculus, which made easy some 
calculations that would have been difficult before. For another, he had accu-
rate figures on Earth's size, calculated by John Picard (1620-1682). 
Newton took 18 months to write up his work, eventually publishing it in 
1687, as Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Princi-
ples of Natural Philosophy; what we call science today was called natural phi-
losophy in Newton's day), often known simply as the Principia. It was written 
in Latin and did not appear in English until 1729. It is generally considered 
the greatest science book ever written. Despite the greatness of the book, 
Newton had trouble publishing it. Hooke was unalterably opposed, and the 
Royal Society hesitated to become involved in the controversy. Fortunately, 
Halley had inherited a fortune in 1684, when unknown assailants murdered 
his father. He saw to the proofreading of the book and had it published at his 
own expense. 
In the introduction to the book, Newton codified Galileo's findings con-
cerning falling bodies (based on Galileo's thought and physical experiments, 
begun in 1589, and his own experiments) into three laws of motion: 
1· The first law of motion enunciated the principle of inertia: A body at rest 
remains at rest, and a body in motion remains in motion at a constant 
velocity (i.e., constant speed in a constant direction) as long as outside 
forces are not involved', 
2. The second law of motion defines the concept of force. It then asserts 
that force is equal to the product of mass and acceleration. This was the 
first clear distinction between the mass of a body (representing its resis-
tance to acceleration) and its weight (representing the extent to which 
it is acted on by a gravitational force). 
3. The third law of motion states that for every action there is an equal and 
opposite reaction. 
These laws of motion are equivalent to the axioms and postulates with 
which Euclid began his treatment of geometry. From the axioms and postu-
lates, an enormous number of theorems can be derived, each one building on 
theorems that went before. In the same way, from the laws of motion, a very 
large number of mechanical effects can be deduced. 
In Book III of the Principia, Newton applied the laws of motion to astro-
nomical matters, and thereby, initiated the field of celestial mechanics. He 
showed, for example, that Kepler's third law relating the periods of the planets 
(the times they require to rotate around the Sun) to their orbital radii (the 
distances to their centers of rotation in the elliptical paths they travel) could 
be deduced from the laws laid out in the introduction to the Principia. He 
was also able to show that the orbital force acting on the Moon followed an 
inverse-square law. Building on such results, Newton was able to show that the 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
91 
force of attraction of the Moon to Earth was exactly the same as the accelera-
tion of falling bodies near the surface of Earth. So the force by which the Moon 
is retained in its orbit is exactly the same force as we normally call gravity. 
Newton generalized this result into his law of universal gravitation, which 
asserts that all bodies in the universe attract one another with a force 
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the 
squared distance between them. Newton then went on to calculate the motions 
of the tides, of comets, and of the Moon. 
4.5.C Major Works 
Newton, Isaac (1687). Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Londini: Jussu 
Societaus Regiae ac Typis Josephi Streater. 
(1729). Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Translated into English 
by Andrew Motte, London: Printed for B. Motte. 
(1704). Opticks. London: Warnock Library. 
(1707). Arithmetica 
Universalis. Cantabrigiae: Typis Academicus, Londini: 
Impensis Benj. Tooke Bibliopolae juxta Medii Templi Portam in Vico Vulgo 
vocato, Fleet Street. 
(1720). Universal Arithmetick. Translated into English from the Latin by Mr. 
Raphson. London: Printed for J. Senex . . . , W. Taylor . . . , T. Warner . . . , and 
J. Osborn. 
4.5.D Subjectivity in the Work of Newton 
Isaac Newton was a strong believer in the experimental method, a procedure 
for pursuing scientific research by means of carrying out experiments; this 
methodological approach to science was proposed by Galileo (see Section 
4.3), an experimentalist who lived a generation earlier. Newton was to become 
a supreme experimentalist. His experiments led to hypotheses, and they in turn 
led to more experiments. But something special happened on the way from 
Galileo to Newton; Newton developed the special mathematical tools to create 
mathematical models for the general principles that he believed governed the 
phenomena he observed. He was able, through application of the calculus and 
other mathematical tools, to quantify the laws of motion precisely. So he could 
make predictions and then observe whether his predictions were correct. 
Galileo did not have such specialized tools available, so he was less able to 
quantitatively verify his beliefs about the laws governing the physical behav-
ior of astronomical and earthly objects. 
Newton became so enamored of his mathematical armamentarium that he 
began to believe that through this vehicle he could unlock all the doors that 
concealed the mysteries of the universe and that his mathematical physics was 
the approach that could solve all problems of the physical world. The more he 
labored in his research, the more certain he became that his conclusions 
reflected universal truths. His strongly held prior beliefs (prior to taking any 

92 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
data) about what he would find after experimenting on some physical phe-
nomenon became so strong that when there was disagreement between belief 
and observation, he began to ignore the data and accept the belief. His sub-
jective beliefs began to dominate his attempts to be objective to such an extent 
that he actually began to alter his data, to force it to conform to his precon-
ceived notions about what he felt his data should have shown. These facts 
about Newton's subjective approach to his research were revealed only in 
recent years. Some accounts of his subjectivity follow. 
Richard Westfall (1973) suggested that Newton fabricated some of his data 
to suit the needs of his theory. Westfall carefully examined the three editions 
of the Principia and compared them. His overall conclusion was that Newton 
had manipulated his data. He noted that while the third edition (1726), the 
one on which the English translation in use today is based, repeated the 
second, the second edition (1713) introduced major changes from the original 
edition (1687) with respect to the three specific major problems of physics 
that Westfall had decided to investigate: (1) the acceleration of gravity, or 
the inverse-square law of universal gravitation; (2) the speed of sound; and (3) 
the precession of the equinoxes. The major changes increased the apparent 
precision by altering the same data numerically. 
In his examination of Newton's reported research on the speed of sound, 
Westfall makes several allegations of fraud. First, he shows that Newton 
claims to have calculated the speed of sound and found it to be a value that 
was identical with the value that Derman had claimed for it, despite the fact 
that Derman's figure was merely the average of many distinct measurements. 
Westfall argues that Newton's claimed value for the speed of sound as exactly 
equal to the average value found by Derman was too unlikely a finding to be 
credible. 
Second, Westfall shows Newton claiming that a unit volume of air contained 
10% water vapor, and that the water vapor in the air does not vibrate the 
sound waves that pass through it; that is, sound is not propagated through 
water vapor. But Newton had not offered any empirical basis for such a claim. 
Third, Westfall shows that Newton was claiming that because in his view 
sound was not propagated through the water vapor in the air, its calculated 
speed through air (that didn't contain water vapor) should be increased by 
10%, the claimed percentage of water vapor in the air (because the speed of 
sound is slowed down by the water vapor). The 10% figure was only a con-
jecture and was wrong—the correct percentage varies with temperature and 
pressure of the air. 
Westfall continued his attack on Newton in connection with the precession 
of the equinoxes. The precession of the equinoxes in the plane of Earth's orbit 
is caused by the cyclic precession of Earth's axis of rotation, that is, the wob-
bling of Earth's axis caused by the forces of attraction of the Sun and the Moon 
on Earth's axis. Westfall asserted that because Newton found a lemma to be 
wrong and had to correct it, he then had to make "an adjustment of more than 
50 percent in the remaining numbers. Without even pretending that he had 

SIR ISAAC NEWTON (1642-1727) 
93 
new data, Newton brazenly manipulated the old figures on precession so that 
he not only covered the apparent discrepancy but carried the demonstration 
to a higher plane of accuracy." 
Roger Cotes was the editor of the second edition of the Principia. Westfall 
points to evidence that he conspired with Newton in the misrepresentations 
therein as Gale Christianson (1984) explains in another exegesis of Newton's 
excessive subjectivity: 
As a means of repeatedly underscoring this point, Newton resorted to clever 
manipulation of his sacred experimental data, feigning a level of mathematical pre-
cision that was unattainable by the scientific standards of his time. 
In point of fact, Newton took relatively little risk by doctoring his figures, as he was 
well aware. Unlike the individual who intentionally fakes his experimental data to 
confirm a promising hypothesis, he knew full well that the fundamental insights 
gathered from a lifetime of meticulous experimentation were sound. He had simply, 
if dishonestly, elevated these demonstrations to a higher plane of accuracy that the 
figures warranted. When viewed in this light, such pretense obviously had one over-
riding purpose: to serve as a grand polemic against the mechanists in general and 
against Leibniz in particular. Writing Newton on February 11,1712, concerning the 
problem of calculating the rate of the moon's descent, Cotes captured the spirit of 
the enterprise: "In the Scholium to the IVth Proposition I think the length of the 
Pendulum should not be put 3 feet & 8 2/5 lines [a line is 1/12 of an inch]; for the 
descent will then be 15 feet 1 inch 11/3 line. I have considered how to make that 
Scholium appear to the best advantage as to the numbers and I propose to alter it 
thus." This was but one of several instances in which the young mathematician 
proved himself almost as adroit as his master at doctoring the figures. Two months 
later Newton praised him for further manipulating the lunar theory. 
It seems clear that Newton was so certain of the truth of his mathematical 
and physical results that he was prepared to modify his data to silence his 
opponents. He appears to have fudged his data to demonstrate how accurately 
his theory had been confirmed by evidence, when in fact, his theory had not 
yet been confirmed, except to his own satisfaction. 
Simon Schaffer (1989) has commented on Newton's subjectivity in his 
numerous experiments. He points out that Newton has been accused of 
various crimes of improper experimental procedure in connection with his 
extensive experiments in geometric optics. He has been accused of not taking 
a sufficiently large sample size to prove his claims, and he has been accused 
of reporting experiments that cannot be replicated by others, a minimal 
requirement for acceptable scientific procedure. Then Schaff er (1989, p. 68) 
quotes Newton's own words in his first published account of the optical trials: 
"that 'the historical narration of these experiments would make a discourse 
too tedious and confused, and therefore lay down the Doctrine first and then, 
for its examination, give you an instance or two of the Experiments, as a 
specimen of the rest.'" Thus Schaffer is also pointing out that Newton was 
criticized for advocating stating one's principle first, and then illustrating it 

94 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
with a couple of examples, as the appropriate way to do science. In fact, in 
some respects, Newton's subjectivity overwhelmed his experimental proce-
dure. Moreover, his need to convince his peers of the validity of the research 
results he subjectively believed in very strongly drove him to report numeri-
cal results that strongly and unquestioningly corroborated his predictions. 
REFERENCES 
Asimov, Isaac (1989). Asimovs 
Chronology of Science and Discovery. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Bell, E. T. (1937). Men of Mathematics. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Casti, John (1996). "Confronting Science's Logical Limits," Scientific 
American, 
October, pp. 102-105. 
Christianson, Gale E. (1984). In the Presence of the Creator: Isaac Newton and His 
Times. New York: Free Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). Vol. 13. 
Encyclopedia Americana (1958). Vol. 20. 
Fauvel, John, Raymond Flood, Michael Shortlans, and Robin Wilson (Eds.) (1988). Let 
Newton Be! A New Perspective on His Life and Works. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Gillispie, Charles Coulston (Ed.) (1974). Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 10. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Schaffer, Simon (1989). "Glass Works: Newton's Prisms and the Uses of Experiment," 
in David Gooding, Trevor Pinch, and Simon Schaffer (Eds.), The Uses of 
Experiment: Studies in the Natural Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Westfall, Richard (1973). "Newton and the Fudge Factor," Science, 179:751-758. 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
95 
4.6 ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
Antoine Lavoisier has been called the father of modern chemistry. He dis-
proved the phlogiston theory of combustion, correctly identified the role of 
oxygen in combustion and other forms of oxidation, and provided a system-
atic classification of chemical substances and a corresponding nomenclature. 
4.6.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier was born in Paris on August 23, 1743. After the 
death of his mother in 1748, Lavoisier (together with a younger sister who died 
as a teenager) was cared for by his father, a lawyer, and a maiden aunt, his 
mother's sister. From age 11 he was educated at the College Mazarin, receiv-
ing training in mathematics and the sciences as well as in language, literature, 
and philosophy. At age 18 he transferred to the Faculty of Law and received 
his baccalaureate in law in 1763 and his licentiate in 1764. But his main inter-
ests, even while studying the law, were in the sciences, and he soon abandoned 
the law in order to devote himself to science. He was particularly interested 

96 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
in geology and set out to learn the chemistry he would need to identify and 
classify rocks. He studied chemistry with Guillaume Fran£ois Rouelle, who is 
credited with introducing two generations of Frenchmen to the subject. 
For several years Lavoisier traveled with a family friend, Jean-Etienne 
Guettard, collecting rocks and minerals and preparing a geologic atlas of 
northern France. During these expeditions Lavoisier displayed the strong 
interest in quantification that was to mark all his work as a scientist and did 
preliminary work on a theory of stratification that was finally to be presented 
to the Royal Academy of Sciences in 1788. Lavoisier's first chemical research 
grew out of this interest in geology. He began to investigate the properties of 
the mineral gypsum (a hydrated sulfate of calcium). He measured the solu-
bility of different samples of gypsum and of what was called calcinated gypsum 
(plaster of paris) and presented these papers to the Royal Academy in 1765 
and 1766. He was eager for election to the Academy, not for financial reasons, 
because his own circumstances were comfortable (indeed, even before he 
reached the age of majority, his father made over to him a sizable inheritance). 
The election was important, nevertheless, so that he would have a prestigious 
institutional base from which to carry out his scientific studies. To contribute 
to the goal of election, Lavoisier entered an Academy-sponsored competition 
to design street lighting for Paris. He carried out an extensive theoretical and 
practical study, an early example of Lavoisier's penchant for combining theo-
retical and practical work, particularly in an effort to carry out projects for 
public service. Although he did not win the offered prize (which was split 
among several contestants who had concentrated on the practical aspects of 
the problem), his work was much admired and the Academy awarded him a 
gold medal for it. Nevertheless, he was not elected to the Academy to fill the 
vacancy that occurred in 1766. 
By 1768, however, Lavoisier had read two more papers before the Royal 
Academy, these concerning the composition of water and also growing out of 
his interest in geology. In the election to fill another vacancy that had occurred 
in the Academy, he received a slim majority of the votes; King Louis XVI, who 
had the privilege of making the final choice between two candidates recom-
mended by the Academy, failed to choose Lavoisier. Nevertheless, the 
Academy bent its rules slightly and admitted Lavoisier as an extra member. 
From that time forward, Lavoisier, in addition to his own research, was active 
in the investigations of the Academy until its dissolution after the French 
Revolution. He served on committees (and often served as their secretary) to 
investigate such issues as hypnotism, hydrogen balloons, and the conditions of 
prisons and hospitals in Paris. 
In 1768, Lavoisier made another decision that was to prove momentous. He 
used part of his inheritance to buy a part of a share in the Ferme General. The 
Ferme was an organization of businessmen who entered into a contract with 
the government to collect taxes on tobacco, salt, and produce entering Paris, 
and to collect customs duties. Although all evidence seems to point to 
Lavoisier's honest business dealings, it would seem that the contracting out 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
97 
tax collection, with the contractors paying a fixed sum to the government and 
being permitted to pocket any extra revenue collected, was fated to create 
resentment among those from whom taxes were being collected. In pre-
Revolutionary France, taxes were collected only from the middle and working 
classes, the nobility being exempt. Thus, eventually the Fermiers Genérales 
would not be in good repute with the revolutionaries. 
Despite his travels on behalf of the Ferme Genérale, Lavoisier continued 
his research program, often reporting on his results to scientific bodies in the 
cities he visited. Another circumstance that was to put Lavoisier in peril during 
the Reign of Terror was the purchase by his father, in 1775, of an honorific 
office that carried a title of hereditary nobility. Lavoisier inherited that title 
and also purchased a country estate. Despite the fact that he used the estate 
to carry out agricultural experiments and reported the results to the Royal 
Agricultural Society of Paris (of which he was an elected member) and to the 
government's Committee on Agriculture, his possession of it made him part 
of the landed aristocracy, a status that was to be considered inimical to the 
Revolution. 
Lavoisier's concern with the composition of waters from various parts of 
France led to his interest in a plan to bring water to Paris in an open canal 
and the means of testing such water for potability. The standard test was to 
evaporate the water to dryness and then weigh the residue. But at that time 
it was believed that there were just the four basic elements described by 
Aristotle: earth, air, fire, and water. Many scientists believed that distilling 
water could transmute it to earth. If such transmutation indeed took place, the 
evaporation method would be unreliable. Lavoisier devised an experiment in 
which he kept water that he had carefully distilled at the boiling point for 101 
days. Having weighed the flask beforehand, Lavoisier found that it had lost 
weight after the passage of three months' time. When he evaporated the 
remaining water to dryness and weighed the residue together with the solid 
particles that he found appearing in the water during the prolonged heating, 
these accounted roughly for the weight lost by the flask. It was easy for 
Lavoisier to conclude that the appearance of solid material was not the result 
of transmutation but of the dissolving of the glass of the flask. This work, ini-
tialed by the secretary of the Academy as being completed in 1769 and pre-
sented in late 1770, was an early step in Lavoisier's path to investigating the 
elements and how they combine with one another. 
In 1771, at the age of 28, Lavoisier married the 14-year-old Marie Anne 
Pierrette Paulze, daughter of a fellow Fermier Genérale, Jacques Paulze. By all 
accounts the marriage was a very happy one, although childless. Madame 
Lavoisier learned English so that she could translate the scientific literature 
in that language for her husband's use. She also studied drawing so that she 
could illustrate his scientific work. 
In 1775, at age 32, Lavoisier was appointed a commissioner of the Royal 
Gunpowder Administration. His duties were essentially those of a scientific 
director, and a residence at the Paris Arsenal was part of the appointment. 

98 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Here for the next two decades, in a laboratory that he himself carefully (and 
expensively) equipped, Lavoisier was to carry out his major innovative scien-
tific work. From here he conducted the experiments that convinced him of the 
falsity of the phlogiston theory of combustion; from here he formulated his 
new vision of chemistry. To persuade other chemists, Lavoisier worked with 
Claude Berthollet, Antoine de Fourcroy, and Guyton de Morveau to publish 
a volume proposing a new system of chemical nomenclature that was consis-
tent with the new theory. In 1789, at the start of the French Revolution, for 
the same purpose of persuasion, Lavoisier published his classic text, Traite éle-
mentaire de chimie. 
Lavoisier, a political liberal, took an active part in the events leading up to 
the French Revolution. He served as an alternative deputy for the nobility of 
Blois to the Estates General and there drafted a proposal to redress griev-
ances. Among other services, he was a member of the Bureau of Arts and 
Crafts, for which he prepared a report on public instruction that proposed a 
system of universal free education and outlined a curriculum. As the Revolu-
tion moved to the left, Lavoisier continued in his scientific pursuits as much 
as was possible. Indeed, in 1791 he served on a committee of the Academy to 
develop a uniform system of weights and measures for the nation. But the 
institutions in which Lavoisier had served were being abolished by the Revo-
lution. In 1791, the Ferme Genérale was abolished. In the same year he was 
removed from his post in the Gunpowder Administration. In 1793 he had to 
move from his residence at the arsenal; and in the same year, the beginning 
of the Reign of Terror, all the royal learned societies, including the Academy 
of Sciences, were abolished. 
On November 28, 1793, Lavoisier was arrested. We can discern several 
reasons that predisposed him to be a victim of the Terror. First, he had been 
a member of the Ferme Genérale, and it had been his proposal, years 
earlier, that a wall be built around Paris to prevent smuggling of produce into 
the city. The theory was that such a wall would protect honest traders, and his 
proposal had been accepted and carried out. Not only was the expense of 
building a needlessly elaborate wall outrageously high and hence strongly 
resented, but it was widely believed to function to restrict air circulation, 
confining bad air to the city and preventing good air from entering. There 
had also been a dangerous incident in 1789 in which the revolutionary mob 
had seized some low-grade industrial powder that was being shipped abroad 
and, in the name of liberating it for the Revolution, brought it for storage at 
the arsenal where Lavoisier was powder commissioner. He realized that the 
low-grade powder was occupying storage space needed for musket powder, 
and hence sought and received a permit to ship the industrial powder else-
where, to be replaced by musket powder. Through a mix-up in the paperwork, 
the citizens of Paris believed that the powder they had liberated for the 
Revolution was being disposed of traitorously by Lavoisier. Although the 
situation was eventually clarified, some hint of suspicion clung to Lavoisier. 
Lavoisier had also, in the early 1780s, made an enemy of Jean Paul Marat, 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
99 
a would-be chemist and a revolutionary zealot, by stating publicly that a paper 
Marat had written entitled "Recherches physiques de la feu" was devoid of 
merit and would never be approved by the Academy for publication. 
(Lavoisier had been irate that the work, on the basis of no solid empirical 
evidence, presented a theory of combustion that challenged his own; he was 
further outraged when a notice in a Paris journal stated falsely that the paper 
had been approved by the Academy.) Marat was a powerful enemy. As early 
as January 1791 his newspaper Uami du peuple had launched a first attack on 
Lavoisier. 
The specific charge against Lavoisier and 31 of his colleagues (including 
his father-in-law) arrested at the same time was that they had defrauded the 
nation of 400,000,000 livres. Although that amount was later reduced, all the 
accused were kept imprisoned, their property confiscated, and their homes 
sold by the state, and it was determined that they be tried by the revolution-
ary tribunal as enemies of the state. The deputy in charge of the investigation, 
Andre Dupin, was approached by friends of Lavoisier and convinced to sepa-
rate Lavoisier's case from that of the other Farmers and to eliminate from the 
final report all accusations that might condemn him. Dupin made the con-
dition, however, that Madame Lavoisier make the request to him in person. 
Madame Lavoisier did indeed visit Dupin, but instead of pleading for her 
husband's life and thus mollifying the petty official, she haughtily asserted 
his innocence and that of the other Farmers. She argued that he would be 
disgraced if his case were separated from those of the other Farmers and 
demanded that he be set free. Thus Lavoisier's fate was sealed. Dupin pre-
sented his report calling for a trial before the revolutionary tribunal on May 
5,1794. The trial began at 10 in the morning of May 8 after the accused had 
been permitted 15-minute meetings with their court-appointed defenders. The 
accused were found guilty of "a plot against the people tending to favor the 
enemies of France by excising, extorting, exacting from the people by adding 
water to tobacco... by retarding the warfare of the nation against despots 
who rise against the Republic." Lavoisier and his fellow Farmers were 
condemned to death within 48 hours, but they were guillotined that same 
afternoon. 
4.6.B 
Lavoisier's Scientific Contributions 
To understand Lavoisier's contributions, it is necessary to review the state of 
chemical knowledge and theory at the middle of the eighteenth century. The 
following account is adapted from McKenzie (1960). 
The theory of four elements of the Greeks (earth, air, fire, and water), 
remained the overarching conceptualization of fundamental chemical sub-
stances. The specific explanation for combustion was embodied in the phlo-
giston theory. All flammable substances were thought to contain this 
mysterious substance, which is given off on burning. The amount of phlogis-
ton in a substance was thought to be measured by the amount of physical 

100 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
residue left after combustion. The less physical residue left, the higher the pro-
portion of phlogiston the substance contained. 
Because charcoal was used in refining metal ore and disappears as the ore 
forms, it was thought that metals were combinations of ore and charcoal. 
Therefore, metals must contain the phlogiston absorbed from the charcoal. 
But some metals when heated to molten produce a surface scum, called a calx, 
in a process called calcination. The calx was thought to be the metal after the 
loss of phlogiston. That the calx weighed more than the metal was puzzling— 
if the metal incorporated both phlogiston and calx, how could it weigh less 
than the calx itself? This puzzle was solved (probably to nobody's satisfaction, 
certainly not to Lavoisier's) by attributing negative weight to phlogiston. 
Another explanation, advanced by Robert Boyle, was that in the burning 
process, fire particles enter the calx. 
It was also known that combustion (and calcination) could only take place 
in air—never in a vacuum—and persists only briefly in limited air. Phlogiston 
theory explained this phenomenon by postulating that the phlogiston given up 
by combustion was absorbed by the air and that air has limited capacity to 
absorb phlogiston. Air was the only gas thought to exist. Joseph Black, in 1756, 
in a major breakthrough, identified another gas, which he termed fixed air and 
which we know as carbon dioxide. 
Although there seems to be no evidence that Lavoisier was interested in 
combustion, the calcination of metals, or the composition of air prior to 1772, 
on February 20,1773 he recorded in his laboratory notebook his intention of 
embarking upon a large series of experiments on the elastic fluids (gases) that 
bodies emit during chemical reactions and on the air absorbed during com-
bustion. He visualized that his results would be important enough to bring 
about a revolution in physics and chemistry. Guerlac (1973, p. 73) character-
izes this revolution: 
This revolution has often been summed up as Lavoisier's overthrow of the phlo-
giston theory (his new chemistry was later called the antiphlogistic chemistry), but 
this is only part of the story. His eventual recognition that the atmosphere is com-
posed of different gases that take part in chemical reactions was followed by his 
demonstration that a particular kind of air, oxygen gas, is the agent active in com-
bustion and calcination. Once the role of oxygen was understood—it had been pre-
pared before Lavoisier first by Scheele in Sweden and then independently by 
Priestley in England—the composition of many substances, notably the oxyacids, 
could be precisely determined by Lavoisier and his disciples. But the discovery of 
the role of oxygen was not sufficient of itself to justify abandoning the phlogiston 
theory of combustion. To explain this process, Lavoisier had to account for the pro-
duction of heat and light when substances burn. It is here that Lavoisier's theory of 
the gaseous state, and what for a time was his theory of the elements, came to play 
a central part. 
During 1772, a year which Guerlac (1961) calls crucial for Lavoisier and for 
chemistry, Lavoisier had carried out some important experiments. On Novem-

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
101 
ber 2,1772 he deposited a note with the Secretary of the Academy stating that 
he had been able to show that when phosphorus and sulfur are burned, they 
gain in weight because of the air that is fixed during the burning. Further, he 
stated that the increase in weight could occur in all bodies that gain weight by 
combustion and calcination. He had confirmed that latter speculation in the 
case of lead by reducing lead oxide in a closed vessel and observed that air 
was given off when the calx changed into the metal. In the succeeding year 
Lavoisier undertook to repeat others' experiments and to extend his own. By 
the Easter meeting of the Academy, Lavoisier presented what has become a 
most famous paper, entitled "On a new theory of the calcination of metals." 
Here he pointed out that when exposed to air, iron rusts and copper is reduced 
to verdigris (hydrous copper oxide). As these metals pass from the metallic 
state to the powder, their weight increases. His experiments led him to con-
clude that (as quoted by Donovan, 1993, p. 750 ) "there is an absorption of air 
during calcination and a disengagement of air during reduction" and there-
fore, "(1) a metallic powder is formed by the combination of a metal with a 
certain quantity of fixed air, and (2) metallic reduction consists essentially of 
the disengagement of the air with which the metal has in some manner been 
saturated." Because the abundant fixed air in the atmosphere causes the gain 
of weight in calcination, Lavoisier saw no need to consider whether phlogis-
ton is also involved. These findings were written up in Lavoisier's first book, 
Opuscules physiques et chimiques. 
Later, in 1774, Lavoisier read a paper to the Academy on the calcination of 
metals in sealed vessels. Boyle's experiment that had caused him to conclude 
that particles of fire had entered the tin was arranged in such a way that he 
heated the tin in a sealed container, cooled it, unsealed it, and then weighed 
it. Lavoisier, on the other hand, weighed the vessel after heating but before 
unsealing and discovered that the weight remained the same, lending evidence 
to his contention that the gain in weight of the tin on calcination was due to 
the absorption of something from the air within the sealed vessel. Further, 
when he unsealed the vessel, he heard a whistling noise as air rushed in and 
determined that the weight of the additional air was equal to the weight added 
to the tin. Although he was promptly informed that similar experiments had 
been carried out earlier by a Father Beccaria and that Jean Rey had postu-
lated in 1630 that the weight gain in calcination was due to the absorption of 
air, Lavoisier persevered. It was not the experimental findings as such for 
which we remember him, but their weaving into a coherent theory. 
It had become clear to Lavoisier that calcination in a closed system does 
not continue until all the air is absorbed, but ceases when some fraction is 
exhausted. But the reason for this phenomenon eluded him until he learned 
of findings of Joseph Priestley, who had heated red calx of mercury (mercuric 
oxide) and found that the calx reverted to mercury and a gas was driven off. 
Priestley found that this gas supported combustion better than did normal air. 
He rejected the idea that it could be a gas with properties similar to those that 
he had recently discovered in nitric oxide. His reasoning was that calx or 

102 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
mercury does not contain what was called "nitre" and thus could not produce 
nitric oxide. Priestley further discovered that the new gas was eminently res-
pirable, using both mice and himself to test its "goodness." Although Priestley 
called the new gas dephlogisticated air because its support of combustion and 
respiration suggested that it was able to absorb great amounts of phlogiston, 
Lavoisier was later to christen it with the name we know today, oxygen. (The 
name connotes "begetter of acids," as Lavoisier, in his effort to classify and 
systematically name all chemical substances, mistakenly believed that all acids 
contained oxygen.) Priestley visited Paris in late 1774 and told many there, 
including Lavoisier, about his new gas. 
Lavoisier repeated Priestley's experiments and in April 1775 read to the 
Academy a paper entitled "On the Nature of the Principle that combines 
with the Metals on Calcination and increases their Weight." In this paper he 
described two experiments with calx of mercury. When he heated it together 
with charcoal, a gas was given off that did not support either combustion or 
respiration and that precipitated lime water (calcium hydroxide). These tests 
showed that it was fixed air (carbon dioxide). If heated alone, however, calx 
of mercury gave off a different gas, one that did support both combustion and 
respiration but did not precipitate lime water. From all this Lavoisier con-
cluded that what combines with metals is particularly pure air; the notion that 
air is a mixture rather than an element had yet to be discovered. 
It was in 1777-1778 that the next part of the puzzle fell into place, as a result 
of a crucial experiment. Four ounces of mercury were heated until calx ceased 
to form in an open container that was set over a bath of mercury, the whole 
covered by a glass container called a bell jar. The volume of air in the bell jar 
dropped from 50 to 42 cubic inches and those 42 cubic inches of gas could not 
support combustion or respiration. When the deposited calx was heated to a 
yet higher temperature, it gave off 8 cubic inches of air, which exhibited all 
the properties of dephlogisticated air. When the 8 cubic inches of dephlogis-
ticated air were mixed with the 42 cubic inches of air remaining from the first 
procedure, 50 cubic inches of normal air were recovered. There was no need, 
or room, for phlogiston in this explanation. 
Further support for Lavoisier's theory that combustion involves combina-
tion with oxygen arose from his interpretation of experiments carried out by 
Henry Cavendish and by Priestley. Cavendish had isolated a gas which he 
called inflammable air becausd it burned in air, and which he regarded as 
almost pure phlogiston. In 1781, Priestley used an electric spark to explode a 
mixture of inflammable air and dephlogisticated air and found that a dew was 
produced. In the same year, Cavendish undertook a series of experiments with 
inflammable air but did not publish his results until three years later. Explod-
ing common air and inflammable air, he again produced dew, the dew this time 
accounting for all the inflammable air and one-fifth of the common air. His 
analysis of the dew suggested strongly that it was pure water. From these 
experiments Cavendish concluded that inflammable air was more likely to be 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
103 
a mixture of water and phlogiston than pure phlogiston, as it needs a flame to 
react with dephlogisticated air. 
When Cavendish's assistant visited Paris in 1783, he informed Lavoisier of 
these unpublished experiments. According to the theory that Lavoisier was 
developing at the time, the product of the burning of inflammable air in the 
air should have been an acid. Impressed, he repeated Cavendish's experiments 
in a very rough form and reported the results to the Academy with barely a 
mention of Cavendish. (The results reported included detailed calculations 
that showed that the sum of the weights of the two gases was equal to the 
weight of the water produced—calculations that were too exact to have been 
derived from his own experiment and must have arisen from the work of 
Cavendish.) Lavoisier never replied to the charge of plagiarism arising from 
this incident. 
The genius of Lavoisier lay in his interpretation of these results. He imme-
diately saw that inflammable air (which he was to label hydrogen, meaning 
"water former") and oxygen were elements that combined into a new sub-
stance, a chemical compound, water. He also reversed the experimental 
program of Cavendish and performed an analysis of water by dropping it 
through the red-hot iron barrel of a gun. The oxygen combined with the iron 
to form an iron oxide and the hydrogen was released. 
To Lavoisier's mind the revolution in chemistry that he had promised in 
his 1772 memorandum (the demonstration that on burning, all substances 
gain weight) had been achieved; his remaining task was to see to its acceptance. 
For this purpose he gathered the group of collaborators: Berthollet, de 
Fourcroy, and de Morveau. He felt that the names of substances should reflect 
their chemical composition or their actions and should use Latin and Greek 
roots. As we have already seen, inflammable air, because it was involved in the 
synthesis of water, was named hydrogen and dephlogisticated air was named 
oxygen because Lavoisier thought it formed acids. Calces of metals were called 
oxides, the main ingredient of charcoal was called carbon, fixed air was called 
carbonic acid, and its salts were called carbonates. Vitriolic acid, formed by the 
combination of sulfur and oxygen, was called sulfuric acid and its salts, sulfates; 
Vitriol of Venus was called copper sulfate. To further the acceptance of both his 
theory and his system of nomenclature, Lavoisier undertook to write a text, 
which was published in 1789 and entitled Traite Elementaire de Chimie. In the 
text, Lavoisier defined an element as a substance that cannot be decomposed 
into anything simpler (or at least had not yet been successfully so decomposed). 
He gave a list of elements; they were 33 in number and included 23 that we 
accept as elements today. The list also includes light and caloric, which Lavoisier 
regarded as the principle of heat. He explained that matter may exist in any 
of the three states solid, liquid, or gas. But he theorized that the state of a 
substance depended on the amount of the imponderable caloric associated 
with the substance. Although the work of Cavendish and Priestley as well as that 
of Lavoisier himself had tacitly assumed a law of conservation of mass, in that 

104 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
all these scientists felt constrained to show that the mass of the products of a 
chemical reaction was the same as the mass of the starting substances, that law 
had never been explicitly enunciated. The text did so. 
Holmes (1985) entitles his book-length biography Lavoisier and the Chemi-
stry of Life and concentrates on Lavoisier's contributions to physiological 
chemistry. He states (p. xv): "He devised the basic method for the elementary 
analysis of plant and animal matter around which the field of organic chemi-
stry afterward coalesced. His famous study of the alcoholic fermentation of 
sugar was the starting point for investigations of that process which have occu-
pied physiologists and chemists ever since. His theory that respiration is a slow 
combustion of carbon and hydrogen has been central to the whole of modern 
biology." 
4.6.C Major Works 
A bibliography of Lavoisier's works was produced by Denis I. Duveen and 
Herbert S. Klickstein (1954), A Bibliography of the Works ofAntoine Laurent 
Lavoisier, 1743-1794, London; W. Dawson & Sons, and E. Weil. Oeuvres de 
Lavoisier, 6 vols., Paris, 1862-1893, contains his published articles, some unpub-
lished material, and two of his major books. 
Lavoisier, A. L. (1774). Opuscules Physiques et Chimiques. Paris. (An English transla-
tion by Thomas Henry entitled Essays Physical and Chemical was published in 
London in 1776.) 
(1787). Methode de Nomeclature Chimique, Proposee par MM. de Morveau, 
Lavoisier, Bertholet [sie] & de Fourcroy. On y a joint un nouveau systéme de car-
acteres chimiques, adaptes a cette nomenclature, par MM. Hassenfratz & Adet. 
Paris. (An English translation by James St. John was published in London in 1788.) 
(1789). Traite Élementaire de Chimie. Paris. (An English translation by Robert 
Kerr entitled Elements of Chemistry, in a New Systematic Order, Containing All 
the Modern Discoveries was published in Edinburgh in 1790.) 
(1805). Mémoires de Chimie, 2 vols. Printed posthumously for Madame 
Lavoisier from incomplete proofs partially corrected by Lavoisier, not commer-
cially published. 
4.6.D Subjectivity in the Work of Lavoisier 
Because a large proportion of Lavoisier's contribution to science consists of a 
theoretical synthesis of experimental results, many of them originally obtained 
by other researchers, there is a sense in which we can consider his whole body 
of work as the product of informal subjectivity. (Such informal subjectivity 
may be compared with the formal subjectivity considered in Chapter 5.) 
In another broad sense of subjectivity, Donovan (1993, p. 79) tells how 
Lavoisier's mind was prepared to accept different conceptualizations of ele-
ments. He refers to Lavoisier's teacher, Guillaume Frangois Rouelle, and says: 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
105 
Like Remelle, Lavoisier treated the identification and characterization of the chemi-
cal elements as a matter of investigative tactics rather than philosophical ontology. 
He posited the existence of simple substances because he had to have some "things" 
to reason with, not because he believed he could gain absolutely secure knowledge 
about the ultimate units of matter. Earth, air, fire, and water provided reasonable 
starting points for physicists and chemists, yet Lavoisier was prepared to consider 
the possibility that water, for instance, can be turned into earth or air. The kind of 
knowledge science builds on is experimental and quantitative. The simplest sub-
stances that can be known are those that resist all further attempts at analysis. In 
principle, therefore, Lavoisier was prepared from the outset to accept the plurality 
of airs and the analysis of water into oxygen and hydrogen. He had learned 
from Rouelle to treat theories of elements heuristica.lly. When formulating his own 
theories, he was fully aware that the "things" he called simple substances were 
historically and instrumentally contingent. 
Thus Donovan shows us the flexibility of Lavoisier's subjectivity—if his 
current instruments do not let him decompose a substance, he will consider 
it an element pro tern, with the classification being subject to possible future 
amendment when instruments are improved. 
In a more specific sense, Lavoisier early on claimed to have rejected the use 
of subjectivity in his research, despite what we shall see is a generous subjec-
tive leavening in his objective procedures. In his earliest paper given to the 
Academy of Sciences (on the analysis of gypsum) he insisted that in report-
ing experiments a scientist must give only demonstrated facts and must avoid 
speculations. Thus, he claimed that although he thought he could guess the 
cause of the phenomenon that overheated gypsum would not recombine with 
water, he was unable to prove his case and so he refused to speculate. As 
early as 1764 he drafted an outline for a course in chemistry. There he cited 
Benjamin Franklin's experiment in which he captured lightning and stored it 
in a Ley den jar as changing the identification of lightning and electricity from 
an analogy to a demonstration. Indeed, he said there, and his career bears out, 
that what he valued in an experiment was not its ability to reveal surprising 
facts but its provision of demonstrative evidence. Thus, Lavoisier insisted on 
the importance of experiment and derides reliance on hypotheses. As we shall 
see, Lavoisier did not always practice what he preached. 
Lavoisier was a man of his time, and the received wisdom of his time was 
that combustion caused a substance to lose phlogiston. Although Lavoisier's 
program of research was to overthrow the phlogiston theory (and indeed 
became known as the antiphlogiston theory), he used explanations derived 
from phlogiston theory, at least early in his career, to interpret his experimental 
results. For example, in 1772 he found experimentally that phosphorus absorbs 
air in burning and increases in weight. His published explanation of these results 
was that the phosphorus was decomposed and lost phlogiston. Note that this 
explanation would have to postulate a negative weight for the mysterious and 
elusive phlogiston. In his masterly summation of his work on chemistry, the 
Traite élementaire de chimie, while clearly proving the lack of necessity of the 

106 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
imponderable phlogiston to explain combustion, he invoked the equally 
imponderable caloric to explain the differing states of matter. Ironically, it was 
Benjamin Thompson, Count Rumford, who both married Lavoisier's widow 
and, by showing that heat is a form of energy, proved that Lavoisier's caloric 
was as unnecessary a construct as phlogiston had been. 
In 1773, writing in his laboratory notebook (and quoted by Guerlac, 1961, 
p. 228), Lavoisier maintained: "I have felt bound to look upon all that has been 
done before me as merely suggestive; I have proposed to repeat it all with new 
safeguards, in order to link our knowledge of the air that goes into combus-
tion or that is liberated from substances, with other acquired knowledge to 
form a theory." 
There is some question whether Lavoisier did, in fact, repeat the experi-
ments of others (we have seen above that there were accusations that 
Lavoisier plagiarized the work of both Priestley and Cavendish), let alone 
whether they were repeated "with new safeguards." But experimental findings 
that supported his emerging new paradigm must have seemed appealingly 
accurate to Lavoisier. Indeed, Davis (1966) tells us that some of the readers 
(including Priestley) of Lavoisier's first book, Opscules physiques et chimiques, 
found that his theoretical conclusions often rested on little or flimsy experi-
mental support; and what experimental support was present was often derived 
from the work of others. 
Davis gives as an example Lavoisier's statement (in modern terms) that 
although all of ordinary air cannot be converted to carbon dioxide via com-
bustion or be used to produce the calcination (or oxidation of metals), some 
other gas is mixed with air that can support these processes. When that other 
gas is exhausted, the oxidation ceases. To return to quoting Davis (1966, p. 
136): "His only laboratory evidence for this was a single experiment in which 
the enclosed atmospheric air was diminished by a mere 5 percent when calci-
nation of the enclosed metal (it was lead) ceased 
We now know that the 
diminution, in a properly conducted experiment, should have approximated 
20 percent, the percentage of the atmosphere composed of oxygen. Priestley, 
in an experiment published before Lavoisier conducted his, had come much 
nearer the mark, noting a diminution in air volume of between one-fifth and 
one-fourth." Called to account for this discrepency, Lavoisier was later to claim 
that the amount of "fixable elastic fluid" might well vary over time and space. 
In another statement in Opuscules, Lavoisier's informal subjectivity again 
outran his experimental results. Lavoisier stated that calcination in an enclosed 
vessel could take place only to the extent that there was air in the vessel. 
Further, if the vessel were exhausted of air, if calcination took place at all it 
would be very different from that which occurs in the presence of air 
and would not result in an increase of weight in the calx. But the experiments 
that supported these statements were carried out only after the book was 
published. 
Similar anticipation of experimental findings occurred in the November 12, 
1774 memoir about experiments with sealed vessels, which involved weighing 

ANTOINE LAVOISIER (1743-1794) 
107 
the vessel before and after combustion. Although Lavoisier claimed to have 
completed many successful experiments with tin and lead, in fact many of the 
sealed retorts he was using exploded so that he could draw no conclusions 
from such trials. Indeed, Davis (1966, p. 143) tells us that "[h]e had actually 
completed two conclusive experiments with tin and, as he later confessed, 
'hardly one for lead.'" 
Although he frequently wrote that careful experimentation was crucial to 
good science and even more frequently characterized his measurement as 
"careful" and his data as "accurate," on occasion Lavoisier was also apt to play 
fast and loose with his experimental data in the service of his theory. For 
example, Lavoisier claimed in the November 12, 1774 memoir that he very 
carefully weighted the sealed retorts both before and after heating, finding the 
increase in weight after opening the retort always to be exactly equal to the 
amount of weight gained by the metal. But such precise equality of weights 
would not actually be found. A film of water vapor is always present on cool 
glass in atmospheric air. Hence Lavoisier should have noticed a slight decrease 
in weight after heating. He did notice a slight gain in weight in one retort that 
he left standing overnight (and which thus cooled) but attributed no signifi-
cance to that gain, not being aware of the water vapor film. 
Thus we see Lavoisier ignoring the details of his data—a slight weight loss 
immediately after heating and a subsequent slight weight gain—that were 
inconsistent with his contention that the weight of the closed system remained 
the same. He may well have subjectively decided that the weight is indeed con-
stant and that the variations from constant weight were mere experimental 
artifacts. His personal beliefs were thereby injected into his experimental 
results. Again, the remarkable thing about these informal uses of subjectivity 
in scientific method is that these great scientists had such keen understanding 
of the processes underlying their researches that they generally got their con-
jectures right! 
Another example of such data bending in the service of a theory cited by 
Davis (1966, p. 147) is worth quoting. To show that mercurius calcinatus per se 
(the red powder obtained by heating mercury by itself, without the presence 
of charcoal) was a true metal calx, Lavoisier, in the Easter memoir, reported 
heating it in a sealed retort, and in 2.5 hours reducing it to mercury and "air": 
"... 1 ounce contained 576 grains, and when the 'operation' was 'completed,' 
he found that the 576 grains of calx originally placed in the retort had been 
'reduced' to 522 grains of liquid mercury, a net loss of 54 grains of solid matter. 
Simultaneously there had been 'set free' and collected above the water in the 
bell jar 78 cubic inches of air. If it were assumed that the 54 grains of solid 
calx had been transformed into 78 cubic inches of air, 'then each cubic inch 
[of air] must weigh a little less than two-thirds of a grain, which does not differ 
much from the weight of ordinary air.'" 
But Conant (1956) pointed out that Lavoisier had earlier said that a cubic 
inch of atmospheric air weighed 36/78 of a grain. He was now calculating that 
a cubic inch of atmospheric air weighed 54/78 grain. Thus the agreement 

108 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Lavoisier claimed was due considerably more to the influence of his theory 
that expected the results to be the same than to the actual laboratory results. 
His expectation was that this new air was a particularly pure sample of atmos-
pheric air. 
In yet another instance of the same sort, Guerlac (1973) describes an experi-
ment carried out on fermentation (for additional discussion oí fermentation, 
see Pasteur; Section 4.10). Lavoisier assumed that the amounts of carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen in the original sugar he used would be equal to the 
amounts of these elements contained in the products of the reaction, i.e., 
alcohol, carbon dioxide, and acetic acid. Although his data were unreliable, his 
end result somehow was correct. Guerlac (1973, p. 83) quotes Arthur Harden 
as noting in his Alcoholic Fermentation: "The research must be regarded as 
one of those remarkable instances in which the genius of the investigator tri-
umphs over experimental deficiencies." And because the data reveal grave 
errors, "it was only by a fortunate compensation of these that a result near the 
truth was attained." 
Kenneth Davis, whose 1966 work has supplied us with much of the material 
attesting to Lavoisier's use of subjectivity, eventually exonerates him of real 
wrongdoing. Lavoisier had a kind of intellectual pride that kept him from fully 
acknowledging intellectual debts but also kept him from fully ignoring them. 
It also kept him stubbornly trying to find the laboratory results he expected. 
Davis writes (1966, p. 158): "He could not resist temptations to fake experi-
mental evidence just a little bit now and then, in his eagerness to publish con-
clusions he knew must be true since they were logically implied by other firmly 
established truths; nor could he resist the felt need, rooted in his pride, to 
correct such falsifications. He redid his experiments until they were success-
ful, and when they at last justified the conclusions he had prematurely pub-
lished or when they required some modification of these, he revised and 
corrected his memoirs." 
REFERENCES 
Conant, James Bryant (1956). The Overthrow of the Phlogiston Theory, Vol. 2 of 
Harvard Case Studies in Experimental Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press. 
Davis, Kenneth S. (1966). The Cautionary Scientists: Priestley, Lavoisier, and the Found-
ing of Modern Chemistry. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 
Donovan, Arthur (1993). Antoine Lavoisier. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. 
Guerlac, Henry (1961). Lavoisier—The Crucial Year: The Background and Origin of 
His First Experiments on Combustion in 1772. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
(1973). "Lavoisier," in Charles Coulston Gillispie (Ed.), Dictionary of Scientific 
Biography. New York: Chan les Scribner's Sons. 
Holmes, Frederic Lawrence (1985). Lavoisier and the Chemistry of Life: An Exploration 
of Scientific Creativity. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 

REFERENCES 
109 
(1987). "Scientific Writing and Scientific Discovery," Isis, 78:220-235. 
(1988 ). "Lavoisier's Conceptual Passage," Osiris, 4:82-92. 
(1990). "Laboratory Notebooks: Can the Daily Record Illuminate the Broader 
Picture?" Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 134:349-366. 
McKenzie, A. E. E. (1960). The Major Achievements of Science: The Development of 
Science from Ancient Times to the Present, New York: Simon & Schuster. 
McKie, Douglas (1952). Antoine Lavoisier: Scientist, Economist, Social Reformer. 
London: Constable and Co.; New York: Henry Schuman. 
Susac, Andrew (1970). The Clock, the Balance, and the Guillotine: The Life 
ofAntoine 
Lavoisier. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 

110 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
4.7 ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
Alexander von Humboldt was a naturalist—a climatologist, geographer, 
geologist, and geomagnetist—as well as a botanist, ecologist, and explorer. 
4.7. A Brief Biographical Sketch 
To sketch Alexander von Humboldt's career is to chronicle almost 60 years of 
scientific activity. A son of nobility, von Humboldt was born in Berlin in 1769. 
With his brother, Wilhelm who became a famous philologist, he was educated 
by private tutors before going on to the university. Besides the classics and 
modern languages, his early training included botany. After a brief time at the 
University of Frankfurt an der Oder, both von Humboldt brothers moved to 
the University of Göttingen. Although at this point self-trained in geology and 
mineralogy, Alexander undertook what he called a two-month-long "scientific 
tour" throughout Germany, studying botany and geology, which resulted in his 
first scientific paper, "Mineralogical Observations on Some Basalts of the 
Rhine." 
This early Rhine expedition was to be only the first of many such scientific 
journeys. In Göttingen, Alexander met George Adam Forster, who had accom-

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
111 
panied his father on Captain Cook's second voyage around the world and 
written eloquently and excitingly about the voyage; surely, Forster whetted 
von Humboldt's appetite for scientific travel. In fact, the two young men 
embarked on a several-month-long trip on the lower Rhine and to France and 
England. 
At his mother's insistence, von Humboldt next enrolled in the Hamburg 
School of Commerce, but from there wrote to A. G. Werner asking admittance 
to the Freiberg Mining Academy, which was then an important scientific 
institution under Werner's directorship. Although noting that he had only six 
months to devote to studies there before having to enter employment, von 
Humboldt was indeed admitted. (Indeed, the prospective student asked for 
and received assurances that following his course of study at Freiberg he 
would be employed as an inspector by the Department for the Regulation 
of the Mining and Smelting Works.) At Freiberg, von Humboldt followed a 
curriculum dealing with both the practical and scientific aspects of mining 
while continuing his botanical investigations with a concentration on subter-
ranean plants, reading in physics, and embarking on a self-directed study of 
chemistry. 
Following his time at Freiberg, in 1792, von Humboldt did receive an 
appointment as assessor in the Administrative Department of Mines and 
Smelting Works, in which position he made tours of inspection. After only 
six months he was promoted to Superintendent of Mines in the Franconian 
Principalities. His official duties again involved travel, and these travels were 
occasions for making observations and collecting data. He was readying for 
publication a manuscript on underground plants and investigating salt springs. 
While he was superintendent he established a free school for the miners to 
educate them about dangers in the mines and on how to recognize strains of 
ores; he long hoped, however, to leave public service so that he could travel 
more extensively. When his mother died in 1796, he was at last free to do so. 
He resigned his position and began to plan his travels in earnest. 
He spent some time in Vienna and in Paris, preparing himself for his travels 
by studying botany and learning skills of geodetic, meteorological, and geo-
magnetic measurement. During the 1790s, von Humboldt became acquainted 
with Goethe and Schiller. Both a plan to sail around the world and a projected 
expedition to Egypt were frustrated by the political upheavals of the 
Napoleonic Wars. Finally, he received permission to travel to the Spanish 
colonies in the New World, and set sail in 1799. He was accompanied on what 
turned out to be a five-year journey by Aimé Bonpland, a French botanist 
whom von Humboldt had met in Paris. 
During the sea journey to the New World, von Humboldt and Bonpland 
spent their time making astronomical and meteorological observations, mea-
suring the temperature and chemical composition of the ocean, and examin-
ing marine life that was brought on board. Landing first in the Canary Islands, 
the two explorers climbed the volcanic peak of Teide and examined and 
collected botanical and geological specimens. From there the party sailed to 

112 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Cumaná, Venezuela, where von Humboldt and Bonpland gathered more 
botanical specimens, made more meteorological and astronomical observa-
tions, and tested their instruments. They made a trip to an inland mountain 
mission at Caripe, exploring caves, finding a new species of bird, and collect-
ing and cataloging botanical specimens. After experiencing their first earth-
quake and meteor shower, the travelers set off for Caracas, where they rented 
a house, and while waiting out the rainy season, ascended Silla, the highest of 
the peaks surrounding Caracas. Finally, they headed for the interior, the torrid 
plains of the llanos (where von Humboldt recorded a ground temperature of 
50°C at their noon arrival). Visiting a cattle-trading station, the travelers 
experimented with electric eels; and finally, arrived at the Rio Apure, a major 
tributary of the Orinoco. Traveling in a canoe with Indian paddlers and a pilot, 
they proceeded down the Rio Apure and up the Orinoco, portaging past the 
great cataracts where no men of science had yet penetrated. The jungle was 
filled with wildlife, including abundant and fierce jaguars and incessantly 
annoying insects. Bonpland collected plants, von Humboldt made constant 
measurements, and they collected a small menagerie of animal specimens. 
The purpose of the journey was primarily to establish the existence of the 
Casiquiare Canal, a natural waterway that joins the Rio Negro with 
the Orinoco, thus connecting two huge river systems (the Orinoco and the 
Amazon). This accomplished, they headed downstream on the Orinoco, 
stopping on their way down the coast to investigate the composition and 
effects of curare. 
At last they arrived at Angoustura in the river straits and traveled overland 
back to Cumaná; Botting (1973, pp. 36-37) summarizes their journey thus: 
"... the first scientific exploration of 1500 miles of almost unknown territory 
between the headwater areas of the Amazon and Orinoco basins. They had 
measured the latitude and longitude of more than 50 places, including the 
Casiquiare canal, taken a series of important magnetic readings, and made a 
huge collection of plants, 12,000 specimens in all, many of them rare or new 
to science." 
The next stage of their South American journey took the travelers to Cuba 
and thence to Cartagena and overland to Bogotá and Quito. Staying in Quito 
for six months, von Humboldt and Bonpland investigated the surrounding vol-
canoes, in the process learning about and recording the symptoms of altitude 
sickness. They climbed Chimborazo, making seismographic measurements and 
mapping the geography of plants, and at 20,702 feet set an altitude record that 
remained unbroken for 30 years. Thence they traveled to Lima and sailed to 
Guayaquil, making measurements of the cold current that has since been 
named after von Humboldt. From Guayaquil the party sailed to Acapulco and 
spent almost a year traveling around Mexico. This period was filled less with 
field research and more with academic research on the geography, economics, 
and politics of the country and eventually resulted in the first modern volume 
of regional geography, von Humboldt's Political Essay on the Kingdom of New 
Spain. 

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
113 
The next port of call was Havana, and thence to the United States to visit 
Philadelphia, the scientific capital of the nation and Washington, where von 
Humboldt visited with President Thomas Jefferson before sailing back to 
France. With the exception of trips such as to Berlin and to Italy to observe 
the eruption of Vesuvius, von Humboldt chose to live in Paris for the next 
quarter century. Here he arranged the enormous collections he had brought 
back from the New World, wrote up his results in what became 30 volumes 
on the South American trip, lectured, did experimental work with Louis Gay-
Lussac on the composition of the atmosphere, and planned a future expedi-
tion to Asia. He enjoyed a very active social life, meeting all the eminent 
scientists of the day, and being much in demand by the rich and famous. During 
these years he tried unsuccessfully to mount a journey to Asia, to examine the 
Himalayas, but was refused entry permits by the British. He expended all his 
personal funds on the publication of his books; to support him the Prussian 
king, Frederick William III, appointed him court chamberlain, a post that was 
a sinecure but paid a stipend. Von Humboldt traveled to England and through-
out Italy as an advisor to the king. In 1827, at the insistence of Frederick 
William, von Humboldt returned from Paris to Berlin to take up the post of 
court chamberlain in earnest, a post he filled as a sort of cultural advisor, at 
the beck and call of the king. 
In 1829 von Humboldt was finally able, at the invitation of Czar Nicholas, 
to make at least part of the long-planned journey of exploration to Asia. He 
and two companions (Christian Ehrenberg and Gustav Rose) in nine months 
traveled 10,000 miles by carriage across Russia and to the Altai Mountains at 
the border of China. Thence they explored the Urals and the great steppe of 
Ishim and returned to the Caspian Sea. Unlike the earlier expedition to South 
America, this journey was carried out in comparative comfort and with many 
official receptions, but throughout, von Humboldt made geographical, geo-
logical, and meteorological observations. These were published primarily as 
Asie Céntrale, recherches sur les chames des montagnes et la climatologie 
compaerée (Central Asia: Research on Mountain Chains and Comparative 
Climatology, 1843). 
The last 30 years of von Humboldt's life were spent primarily in Berlin 
(with yearly visits to Paris to renew acquaintance with prominent scientists), 
writing up the results of his investigations and working on his magnum opus, 
Kosmos. During this time he was also instrumental in convincing the British 
government to set up a series of observatories in Canada, South Africa, 
Australia, and New Zealand and to send an expedition to Antarctica to 
measure the earth's magnetic field. The data gathered at these observatories, 
together with data already being gathered from a chain of observatories orga-
nized by Carl Friedrich Gauss in Germany, England, and Sweden, were for the 
purpose of determining whether the magnetic storms von Humboldt had 
observed were of terrestrial or extraterrestrial origin. It was from these data 
that Sir Edward Sabine later concluded that the appearance of magnetic 
storms in Earth's atmosphere was correlated with the changing activity of 

114 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
sunspots. Von Humboldt died in Berlin on May 6, 1859, still at work on the 
fifth volume of Kosmos. 
4.7.B Von Humboldt's Scientific Contributions 
Following de Terra (1955, p. 374) we give a list of von Humboldt's major 
contributions (with the fields of application in alphabetical order): 
1. Anthropology. Von Humboldt made ethnologic observations on Ameri-
can aborigines and traced, through such artifacts as calendars and myths, 
their origins to northeast Asia. Von Humboldt's geographic orientation 
suggested that environmental factors influenced native customs, as they 
influenced botanical and zoological features. 
2. Astronomy. Von Humboldt made careful observations on the meteor 
showers of 1799 and helped to establish the periodicity of such showers. 
The first volume of Kosmos was largely devoted to a description of the 
planets and cosmic nebulae. 
3· Botany. Von Humboldt collected and described enormous numbers of 
plant specimens, many of them new species. His theory of botanical 
zones, both across Earth's latitudes and across the elevations of moun-
tains, constituted the beginning of plant geography. 
4. Geography. Von Humboldt was the founder of modern geography and 
the originator of the use (and naming) of isotherms. 
5. Geology. Von Humboldt recognized the relationship between volcanism 
and earth structures and noted the similarities between geologic forma-
tions across the continents he explored. His climb of Chimborazo estab-
lished an altitude record that stood for many years. 
6. Geophysics. Von Humboldt discovered the law of declining magnetic 
intensity between the earth's poles. 
7. Physiology. Von Humboldt was the first to observe the effects of high 
altitude on the human body; research growing from these careful obser-
vations contributed to the development of manned flight. 
8. Zoology. Von Humboldt's travels in South America led to the descrip-
tion of such animals new to science as the electric eel, the alligator, and 
the monkey. He pioneered the practical use of guano. 
Von Humboldt also made important contributions to meteorology and 
oceanography—in fact, the Humboldt Current is named after him. 
Meadows (1987, p. 109) describes von Humboldt's contributions: 
The scientific revolution of the 17th century was much concerned with attempts to 
interpret the world about us in terms of mechanical models. During the 18th century 
this approach proved increasingly useful in "natural philosophy"—such sciences as 
physics and chemistry, but it was of much less value for studying "natural history" 

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
115 
environmental or biological problems. The scientific revolution that culminated in 
Newton therefore gave greater aid to natural philosophy than to natural history. 
Humboldt's importance is that he helped focus attention on the significance of sci-
entific explanation in natural history. He linked the world view of Newton in the 
17th century with that of Darwin in the 19th century. 
There is no question that von Humboldt was regarded as eminent in his 
own time. He is often referred to in his time as second in fame only to 
Napoleon. Von Hagen (1945, p. 168) quotes the American writer Bayard Taylor 
(1825-1878) writing in 1857 to say: "I came to Berlin not to visit its museums 
and galleries, its operas, its theatres, nor to mingle in the gay life—but for the 
sake of seeing and speaking with the world's greatest living man—Alexander 
von Humboldt 
" On the same page, von Hagen refers to Charles Darwin 
as von Humboldt's spiritual protege and quotes Darwin as calling von 
Humboldt "the greatest scientific traveler who ever lived." Thus von 
Humboldt derives his eminence from his scientific travels, collections, and 
descriptions. An enormous scientific curiosity and the impetus to classify and 
understand drove von Humboldt. 
4.7.C Major Works 
Survey Measurements 
von Humboldt, Alexander 
(1808). Conspectus 
Longitudinum 
et 
Latitudinum 
Geographicaraum. Paris: F. Schoell. 
(1808-1810). 
Recueil 
d'Observations 
Astronomiques, 
dy Operations 
Trigonométriques et de Mesures Barométriques. Rédigées et Calculées par Jabbo 
Oltmanns, 2 vols. Paris: F. Schoell and Tubingen: J. G. Cotta. 
(1809). Nivellement Barométrique. Paris: F. Schoell. 
Botany 
C. S. Kunth (1822-1826). Synopsis Plantarum, 4 vols. Paris: Apud F. G. Levrault. 
von Humboldt, Alexander (1805-1817). Plantes Équinoxiales, 2 large folio vols., 144 
plates. Paris: F. Schoell and Tubingen: J. G. Cotta. 
(1806-1823). Monographie des Melastomacées, arranged by A. Bonpland; 2 large 
folio vols., 120 color plates. Paris: Gide. 
(1816-1825). Nova Genera et Species Plantarum, described by Carl Sigismund 
Kunth; 7 large folio vols., 700 plates, mostly in color. Paris: Sumtibus Librariae 
graeco-latino-germanicae. 
(1819-1824). Mimoses etAutres Plantes Légumineuses, described by C. S. Knuth; 
2 large folio vols., 60 color plates. Paris: Librairie greque-latine-allemande. 
(1829-1834). Revision des Graminées, 2 large folio vols., 220 color plates. Paris: 
Gide fils. 
Plant Geography 
von Humboldt, Alexander (1805). Essai sur la Geographie des Plantes. Paris: F. Schoell. 

116 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Zoology and Comparative Anatomy 
von Humboldt, Alexander (1805-1833). Recueil d'Observations 
de Zoologie et 
dAnatomie 
Comparée, 2 vols., 57 plates. Paris. Vol. 1 published Paris 1805 
Levrault, Schoell; Vol. 2 published 1833 Paris: C. J. Smith, Gide. 
Travel and Geography 
von Humboldt, Alexander (1808-1812). Atlas Géographique et Physique du Royaume 
de la Nouvelle-Espagne, large folio, 20 maps. Paris: F. Schoell and Tubingen: 
J. G. Cotta. 
(1813). Altlas Pittoresque—Vues des Cordilléres et Monuments des Peuples 
Indigenes de VAmérique, 2 large folio vols., 69 color and monochrome plates. Paris: 
F. Schoell. 
(1811). Essai Politique sur le Royaume de la Nouvelle-Espagne, 2 vols. Paris: 
F. Schoell. 
(1814-1825). Relation Historique du Voyage aux Regions Équinoxiales du 
Nouveau Continent [in which is included the political essay on the island of Cuba], 
3 vols. Paris: Schoell. This was published in England as Personal Narrative of 
Travels to Equinoctial Regions of America, translated by Thomasina Ross, 3 vols., 
London, 1852. 
(1814-1834). Atlas Géographique et Physique des Regions Équinoxiales du 
Nouveau Continent, large folio, 40 plates. Paris: F. Schoell: Gide. 
(1814-1834). Examen Critique de VHistoire de la Geographie du Nouveau 
Continent. Paris: Gide. 
Other Major Works 
von Humboldt, Alexander (1843). Asie Céntrale, Recherches sur les Chames des 
Montagnes et la Climatologie Comparée, 3 vols. Paris: Gide. 
(1845-1862). Kosmos, 5 vols. Stuttgart: Cotta. Translated by E. C Otté (1852) as 
Cosmos: A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe. New York: Harer. 
4.7.D Subjectivity in the Work of von Humboldt 
As we have seen, Alexander von Humboldt's methodological approach to 
science was largely to observe carefully, to record his observations, and often, 
to develop a taxonomy about the entities in the phenomenon he was observ-
ing. Such a methodological approach was, of course, entirely appropriate for 
a naturalist. As a consequence, however, he does not appear to have often pro-
ceeded beyond such initial stages to the later stages of the scientific method 
proposed by Galileo: hypothesizing, experimentation, theory formulation, 
more experimentation, revision of theory, prediction, and so on. For this 
reason, many of his conclusions about the world resulted largely from con-
jecture, subjective speculation, and an Aristotelian view of the purposefulness, 
and harmony and unity in the universe. We will see this, for example, in von 
Humboldt's position on Neptunism, discussed below. 
At the time von Humboldt was trained, and trained himself, in geology and 
mineralogy, the dominant theory of the formation of rocks was termed Nep-

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
117 
tunist, so named because it traced that origin to the actions of waters in oceans 
and rivers, with rocks being precipitated out. (This was in opposition to the 
Plutonist school, which traced the origin of Earth's rocks to the actions of vol-
canoes and other movements of the earth.) The Neptunist school was also 
referred to as the Wernerian school after Abraham Gottlob Werner, a very 
prominent geologist of his day and director of the Freiberg Mining Academy, 
where von Humboldt studied. Not only was the Neptunist theory widely 
accepted in scientific circles, it was also congruent with religious beliefs. 
Plutonism was reviled because it preached continuing violent changes in 
Earth's crust, unlike Neptunism, which saw a single creation and then only 
gradual wearing away with water—the Neptunist view was much more 
consistent with religious beliefs. 
Von Humboldt's first paper, "Mineralogical Observations on Some Basalts 
of the Rhine," written some years before he attended the Freiberg Mining 
Academy under Werner, was premised on the Neptunist theory of the origin 
of the earth's rocks. Indeed, von Humboldt wrote a letter dated July 25,1790 
to Werner at Freiberg (quoted in Bruhns, 1873, p. 94) that said in part: 
In my journey to England, whence I have just returned, I traversed for a second 
time the mountains of the Rhine. I found nothing to necessitate the supposition of 
previous volcanic agency, but on the contrary abundant evidence to prove the 
aqueous formation of basalt. Your theory that a stratum of basalt had once covered 
the whole earth never seemed to me more reasonable or more obvious than at Linz 
and Unkel, where I noticed horizontal layers of basalt upon the highest summits. 
I shall be severely censured for this confession by many of our geologists, and 
my pamphlet (if it not be altogether overlooked) will be subjected to no tender 
criticism. But such considerations shall never prevent me from saying what I feel 
to be true, and I trust that I shall always maintain this resolution. I have resided 
for a considerable time in a region that has been called volcanic, and I have indus-
triously traversed on foot the mountains of Hanover, Hesse, and the Rhine, as well 
as those in the neighborhood of Zweibruken; but I cannot accept the hypothesis 
so charmingly set forth by De Luc in his geological work "Lettres physiques et 
morales." 
This is an instance of a strong belief and intuitive informed understanding held 
prior to observing data—that basalts are formed by sedimentary action rather 
than by volcanoes or other upheavals of the earth—influencing von Humboldt 
to see that which he expected to see. 
Werner's Neptunists ideas were later discredited in the face of the geologic 
theory proposed by James Hutton as early as 1785, which maintained that 
basalt and granite were volcanic and magmatic, as is recognized by modern 
geologists. That theory was later expanded and popularized by Sir Charles 
Lyell. Von Humboldt himself abandoned his strong prior belief in the face 
of overwhelming evidence. He became convinced of the correctness of the 
Plutonist stance during his time exploring the volcanoes around Quito, when 
he saw the difference between eruptive and sedimentary rocks and examined 

118 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
the change that can take place in the structure of minerals in the neighbor-
hood of a volcanic explosion. That his original prior belief affected his obser-
vations was clear to von Humboldt himself. Lowenberg in Bruhns (1872, vol. 
1, p. 306) points out that von Humboldt's first publication of his observations 
during the ascent of volcanoes were published under such separate rubrics as 
botany and geography, and only later did he compose separate topographies 
of the ascents. The reason for waiting to present this kind of integrated treat-
ment was "that he thought it necessary to wait until he could show 4the rela-
tive worthlessness' of his labours, by distinguishing between those geological 
observations, which had been made on principles since proved obsolete, and 
those of a character which could not be affected by time." 
Von Humboldt's change of views was consequential for him. For example, 
a friendship between von Humboldt and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe began 
in the 1790s and continued until Goethe's death in 1832. Von Humboldt 
absorbed a good deal of Goethe's world view and admired his scientific 
research as well as his literary achievements. But with this friendship he was 
flirting with a very critical force. The Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975, Vol. 8, 
p. 229) tells us of Goethe that: "Few have been as aware of the mental 
processes involved in the study of natural phenomena; few have been more 
alive to the hazards that beset the scientist, at every level, from sheer obser-
vation to the construction of a theory; and few have been more conscious of 
the unwitting theorizing involved in even the simplest act of perception." 
Goethe admired von Humboldt's observations, but he roundly criticized 
his friend when von Humboldt abandoned his adherence to the Neptunist 
theory of the formation of rocks. In fact, two verses in Goethe's Faust speak 
to the point, and were widely seen at the time as scientific criticism of von 
Humboldt. In the first of these verses, Faust praises the Neptunist view, while 
in the second verse, Mephistopheles himself ridicules the Plutonists. Goethe 
acknowledged, in our terms, the hold a strong, if mistaken, prior belief had 
upon him: "I have spent several years of my life in studying the mutual 
connection of the stratified formations. The views I formed coincided with 
Werner's doctrine, and I continued to hold them even after I had good reason 
to believe that they left many problems unresolved" (quoted in Bruhns, 1873, 
vol. 1, p. 168). 
Also of concern to von Humboldt were the sensibilities and reputation of 
his mentor, A. G. Werner. At the 1850 commemoration of the centenary of 
Werner's birth, von Humboldt credited the director of the Freiberg Mining 
Academy with a strong influence on his thinking and career and commented 
that he (von Humboldt) had endeavored to "elevate his works, in modern 
times so often misunderstood, to their right position" (Bruhns, 1973, vol. 1, 
p. 115). 
More broadly, early in his scientific career, von Humboldt resolved to 
uncover a harmony in nature that he believed to be omnipresent, with all 
natural objects being interrelated. He articulated that view and his aim to 
confirm it as he set sail for South America in 1799: "In a few hours we sail 

ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (1769-1859) 
119 
round Cape Finisterre. I shall collect plants and fossils and make astronomic 
observations. But that's not the main purpose of my expedition. I shall try to 
find out how the forces of nature interact upon one another and how the geo-
graphic environment influences plant and animal life. In other words, I must 
find out about the unity of nature" (quoted in Botting, 1973, p. 64). In 1844, in 
the preface to Kosmos, von Humboldt reiterates: 
Although the outward relations of life, and an irresistible impulse toward knowl-
edge of various kinds, have led me to occupy myself for many years—and appar-
ently exclusively—with separate branches of science, as, for instance, with 
descriptive botany, geognosy [a branch of geology], chemistry, astronomical deter-
minations of position, and terrestrial magnetism, in order that I might the better 
prepare myself for the extensive travels in which I was desirous of engaging, the 
actual object of my studies has nevertheless been of a higher character. The princi-
pal impulse by which I was directed was the earnest endeavor to comprehend the 
phenomena of physical objects in their general connection, and to represent nature 
as one great whole, moved and animated by internal forces. 
A quote from Van Dusen (1971) offers insight into the early training of 
Alexander von Humboldt and the impact of that training on his later achieve-
ments and his effort to demonstrate the unity of nature. On page 18 we read: 
"[I]n each of young Humboldt's major interests one can discern a definitely 
similar pattern. It is one of unity that transcends diversity; this unity reconciles 
various forms so that they appear to us aesthetically harmonious and coher-
ent 
In order to realize the fundamental unity that encompasses the uni-
verse, one must be able to study one's environment and reflect upon it 
philosophically." 
Nelken (1980, p. 87) shows us how this vision of unity extended to von 
Humbold's view of human beings and their culture: 
[H]e was the first to make on-the-spot sketches of the monuments of the indig-
enous American people and to point out the significance of their vanished culture 
and civilization. Although Humboldt was brought up on Winckelmann's theory of 
the artistic and intellectual superiority of ancient Greece and Rome, he did not dis-
regard the relics of the Incas and the Aztecs, which were so different from the classic 
canons of beauty. These "savage" images, with their "primitive" proportions, formed 
an integral part of their natural environment, thus confirming Humboldt's theory 
of the unity of nature, peoples, and their creations. He considered these monuments 
an important source, along with those of Egypt, Greece and the Orient, for com-
parative studies of the cultural development of mankind. 
Bruhns tells us that this world view was part of the basis of the friendship 
between von Humboldt and Goethe. We may speculate on the effect of von 
Humboldt's conviction of the unity and harmoniousness of nature. Such a 
deeply held and broadly conceived view must surely have influenced not only 
von Humboldt's collection, selection, and organization of his own data, but 

120 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
also his choice of which data of others to include (in such works as 
Kosmos) 
and how to treat them. Harmony he expected, and harmony he found. 
REFERENCES 
Botting, Douglas (1973). Humboldt and the Cosmos. New York: Harper & Row. 
Bruhns, Karl (Ed.) (1873). Life of Alexander von Humboldt Compiled in Commemo-
ration of the Centenary of His Birth by J. Lowenberg, Robert Avé-Lallemant, and 
Alfred Dove, 2 vols., translated by Jane and Caroline Lassell. London: Longmans, 
Green. 
de Terra, Helmut (1955). Humboldt: The Life and Times of Alexander von Humboldt, 
1769-1859. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). Vol. 8. 
Klencke, H. (1852). Alexander von Humboldt: A Biographical Monument, translated 
by Juliette Bauer. London: Ingram, Cooke. 
Meadows, Jack (1987). The Great Scientists. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Nelken, Haiina (1980). Alexander von Humboldt: His Portraits and Their Artists: A 
Documentary Iconography. Berlin: D. Reimer. 
Stearn, William T. (Ed.) (1968). Humboldt, Bonpland, Kunth and Tropical American 
Botany: A Miscellany on the "Nova Genera et Species Plantarum." Stuttgart, 
Germany: Verlag von J. Carmer. 
Van Dusen, Robert (1971). The Literary Ambitions and Achievements of Alexander von 
Humboldt. Berne, Switzerland: Herbert Lang; Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter 
Lang. 
von Hagen, Victor Wolfgang (1945). South America Called Them: Explorations of the 
Great Naturalists: La Condamine, Humboldt, Darwin, Spruce. New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf. 

MICHAEL FARADAY (1791-1867) 
121 
4.8 MICHAEL FARADAY (1791-1867) 
Michael Faraday was a natural philosopher, physicist, and chemist who is 
known principally for showing that an electric current could be induced to flow 
in a coil of wire by moving a magnet through the coil. He invented the elec-
tric motor and the dynamo, was one of the originators of field theory, and was 
among the founders of electrochemistry. 
4.8.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Michael Faraday was born in Surrey, England, to a father who was a member 
of the Sandemanian church, and a mother who although not a member (i.e., she 
had not made a confession of faith), belonged to the congregation. His father 
was a blacksmith and the family lived in the humblest of circumstances. Indeed, 
at the age of 9, Michael had to make do weekly with a single loaf of bread from 
his parents. He attended a common day school and had what he called a "most 
ordinary" education, consisting of only a single year of formal schooling. 
His father having died, and facing the need to help support his widowed 
mother and younger sister, beginning in 1804, Faraday was an errand boy and 

122 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
then an apprentice to George Riebau, who trained him as a bookbinder. In 
the bindery, young Faraday educated himself by reading the scientific books 
that were being bound, as well as books from Riebau's personal library. In par-
ticular, in his writings, Faraday mentions Marcet's Conversations in Chemistry 
and the electrical treatises in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. During this time, 
Faraday also conducted simple experiments in chemistry, constructed pieces 
of electrical apparatus in his attic room in the home of Riebau, and also 
attended public lectures on natural philosophy. Perhaps most important, in 
1812 Faraday heard four lectures on chemistry, electricity, and electrolysis by 
Sir Humphry Davy at the Royal Institution and wrote up and bound copious 
notes about what was taught. 
After Faraday became a journeyman bookbinder, he sent those notes to 
Davy, expressing his wish to "enter into the service of science" (Jones, 1870, 
vol. 1, p. 47) and asking for Davy's help in making that entrance. Within 
months, Davy had Faraday appointed his assistant at the Royal Institution; he 
joined the Royal Institution at the age of 22 in 1813 and was to remain there 
for his entire scientific career. Indeed, his living quarters were thenceforth in 
the Institution's building. Six months later, Faraday accompanied Davy on a 
year-and-a-half-long trip to the continent as his assistant and secretary. 
Working under Davy, Faraday accomplished the liquefaction of several 
gases and discovered two new chlorides of carbon. In the momentous year of 
1821, he first made a magnetic needle revolve around an electric current (later 
he was to induce an electric current by inserting and removing a magnet in a 
coil of wire) and married Sarah Barnard. Although the marriage was childless, 
it seems to have been extremely happy. 
In 1824, Faraday was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, in 1825 he was 
appointed director of the Royal Academy, and in 1833 he became Fullerian 
professor of chemistry there. He used his position to give many very vivid 
public lectures on science; his special lectures for children were especially well 
received, and the institution of those lecture continues today. The 1820s and 
1830s were a period of extreme productivity, so much so, in fact, that Faraday 
suffered from exhaustion, and on doctor's orders in 1840 and 1841 he cut back 
on his scientific endeavors. He returned to his research thereafter and con-
tinued for another quarter century to make momentous discoveries. He 
resigned as superintendent of the Royal Institution in 1866 and died the 
following year, just before his seventy-sixth birthday. 
Perhaps the most salient nonscientific fact about Faraday is his adherence 
to Sandemanianism, a sect with which his grandfather, father, and wife were 
also involved. He made a confession of faith in 1821 and was elected an elder 
in 1840. The sect followed extremely demanding religious practices. Its adher-
ents pledged to live purely and according to the Bible, to avoid the amassing 
of worldly goods, and to refrain from games of chance, for lotteries were 
regarded as sacred means of division of resources, as often mentioned in scrip-
ture. Sandemanians believed that the laws of God that governed everyday life 
were all available in the Bible, so that Bible reading and commentary were 

MICHAEL FARADAY (1791-1867) 
123 
necessary to the adherents in order to find the necessary guidance. There was 
no clergy to intervene or make exegesis. 
The religion stressed the intelligibility, beauty, and symmetry of the uni-
verse, and hence has been seen (e.g., by Williams, 1965) as a root of Faraday's 
science. Indeed, Faraday himself wrote: "[E]ven in earthly matters I believe 
that the invisible things of HIM from the creation of the world are clearly seen, 
being understood by the things that are made, even His eternal power and 
Godhead ..." (cited by Cantor, 1985, p. 71). The notions of simplicity in God's 
creation, God's avoidance of unnecessary complexity, and man's ability to read 
the book of God were paralleled, for Faraday, by an ability to read the book 
of nature, also written by God (Cantor, 1985). It was man's moral duty to learn 
about the world, and although God would shun unnecessary complexity, He 
would not necessarily make the learning easy for man. 
4.8.B 
Faraday's Scientific Contributions 
Originally working in chemistry, Faraday moved through an interest in elec-
trochemistry and the development of the basic laws of electrolysis to the study 
of electricity and magnetism. All this was in addition to public lectures and 
other obligations, including industrial consulting, entailed by his connection 
with the Royal Institution. As an analytic chemist, Faraday discovered two new 
compounds of carbon (tetrachloroethene and hexachloroethane). He studied 
the liquefaction of gases (achieving the liquefaction of chlorine, ammonia, 
carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen 
sulfide, among others), thus demonstrating the continuity of matter, showing 
that the three states are convertible. He discovered what he called bicarburet 
of hydrogen, which was later named benzene, and isobutene, and he estab-
lished the chemical formula for naphthalene. All these new molecules find 
modern uses in the aniline dye, chemical, explosive, and pharmaceutical 
industries. In 1827 Faraday published a major monograph entitled Chemical 
Manipulation. 
Faraday's most important accomplishment was the discovery of electro-
magnetic induction, but the path leading to that discovery was long. He 
learned of the discovery in 1820 by Hans Oersted that a wire carrying an elec-
tric current deflects a magnetized compass needle and the further discovery 
by Andre Ampere that wires carrying electric currents exert forces on each 
other. Thereafter, Faraday carried out a major survey of the state of current 
knowledge about the relations between electricity and magnetism. He then 
carried Oersted's work further to show that a wire carrying an electric current 
could be made to rotate around a stationary magnet and a magnet could be 
made to rotate around a stationary wire. This first demonstration of electro-
magnetic rotation, converting electrical energy into mechanical energy, formed 
the basis for the electric motor. 
But Faraday believed that further conversion of energy was also possible, 
that magnetism could produce electricity. He began a series of experiments 

124 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
that culminated in 1831 with the demonstration of electrical inductance and 
the enunciation of his laws of electromagnetic induction, that an electric 
current is set up in a closed circuit by a changing magnetic field. From this 
demonstration grew the development of both the transformer and the 
dynamo. To explain the phenomenon of inductance, Faraday proposed the 
concept of a field of force surrounding a magnet or a wire carrying an electric 
current. The physical visualization of such a field is exemplified by lines of 
force which iron filings trace out on a sheet of paper placed over a bar magnet. 
These ideas were unpopular at the time, but were later mathematized by James 
Clerk Maxwell and became the basis of modern field theory. 
Faraday's investigations of electrolysis led to his discovery of the famous 
laws named for him. Thomas (1991, p. 48) quotes Faraday's own words in 
stating these laws: 
The first Law ... states "Chemical action or decomposing power is exactly propor-
tional to the quantity of electricity which passes." The second Law ... asserts "Elec-
trochemical equivalents coincide and are the same with ordinary chemical 
equivalents." In other words, the electrochemical equivalent of an element is pro-
portional to its ordinary chemical equivalent. Today we call the amount of electric-
ity necessary to liberate one equivalent (i.e. 1.008 grams of hydrogen and 35.457 of 
chlorine) from a solution of hydrogen chloride, or, in short, lg equivalent of any 
element from conduction solutions or conducting molten salts of its compounds, one 
"faraday".... 
Thus Faraday showed that chemical and electrical forces are intimately and 
quantitatively related. Other work by Faraday about the same time showed 
that there was no difference between the various forms of electricity then 
known—induced, voltaic, electrostatic, animal (as shown by the electric eel), 
and thermoelectricity. 
Still in the 1830s, Faraday investigated the effects of different insulators on 
the propagation of electric currents. He discovered that each insulator had 
what he called a specific inductive capacity, a phenomenon now referred to as 
the insulator's dielectric constant. He believed that a substance's inductive 
capacity was connected to the structure of its molecules, a deduction later 
shown to be correct but which Faraday himself was unable to prove. In 1845, 
Faraday showed yet another example of the unity of forces, this time the rela-
tion between magnetism and light. Using special heavy optical glass that he 
had prepared decades earlier, he found that the plane of polarized light was 
rotated by magnetism, a phenomenon that is now called the Faraday effect. In 
1849, Faraday tried to link the forces of electricity and gravity, but failed in 
the attempt. 
4.8.C 
Major Works 
Faraday, Michael (1820-1862). Faraday's Diary. Being the various philosophical notes 
of experimental investigation made by Michael Faraday, DCL, FRS, during the years 

MICHAEL FARADAY (1791-1867) 
125 
1820-1862 and bequeathed by him to the Royal Institution of Great Britain. Now, 
by order of the Managers, printed and published for the first time, under the edito-
rial supervision of Thomas Martin, 7 vols. and index. London: G. Bell and Sons, 
1932-1936. 
— (1821-1857). Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics. Reprinted 
from the Philosophical Transactions of 1821-1857, Journal of the Royal Institution', 
Philosophical Magazine, and other publications. London: R.Taylor and W. Francis, 
1859. 
— (1831-1852). Experimental Researches in Electricity. Reprinted from the Philo-
sophical Transactions of 1831-1852 with other electrical papers from the Quarterly 
Journal of Science, Philosophical Magazine, Proceedings of the Royal Institution, 
3 vols. London: R. Taylor and W. Francis, 1839-1855. 
4.8.D Subjectivity in the Work of Faraday 
Faraday's religion of Sandemanianism seems to have been a major source of 
the informal subjectivity in his scientific work.The integrated view of the world 
as God's creation explicit in that religion seems to have led Faraday to seek 
for integration in his science as well, and in particular to believe in the sim-
plicity of the integration of forces. Thus, having seen evidence of the magnetic 
field surrounding a wire conducting electricity, Faraday believed for a decade 
that magnetism could produce electricity. He maintained this belief in the face 
of numerous unsuccessful experiments, and finally was able to demonstrate 
the phenomenon only when his other research led him to notice the transient 
electric currents that occur when magnetism is turned on or off. 
Faraday went further in his speculations about the identity of forces and 
the simplicity of creation. As noted above, he formulated the equivalence of 
chemical and electrical forces and proved the identity of all forms of electric-
ity. As early as 1816, he wrote: "[T]hree apparently distinct kinds of attraction; 
the attraction of gravitation, electrical attraction and magnetic attraction ... 
appear ... to be sufficient to account for all the phenomena of spontaneous 
approach and adherence with which we are acquainted.... The Science of 
Chemistry is founded upon the cohesion of matter and the affinities of bodies 
and every case either of cohesion or of affinity is also a case of attraction.... 
That the attraction of aggregation and chemical affinity are actually the same 
as the attraction of gravitation and electrical attraction I will not positively 
affirm but I believe they are" (Faraday, 1816a, pp. 30-31). 
Years later, in 1845, he wrote: "I have long held an opinion, almost amount-
ing to conviction, in common I believe with many other lovers of natural 
knowledge, that the various forms under which the forces of matter are made 
manifest have one common origin; or, in other words, are so directly related 
and mutually dependent that they are convertible, as it were, one into another, 
and possess equivalents of power in their action. In modern times the proofs 
of their convertibility have been accumulated to a very considerable extent, 
and a commencement made of the determination of their equivalent forces'' 

126 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
(quoted by Thomas, 1991, p. 67). And by the time he had carried out a series 
of experiments on the grand synthesis of electricity and gravity, all leading to 
negative results, he could still say in 1849 that they "do not shake my strong 
feeling [here is his informal introduction of personal views and biases into his 
methodology] of the existence of a relation between gravity and electricity" 
(Jones, 1870, p. 253). 
There is a clear statement of prior beliefs (beliefs held prior to taking any 
data that might support those beliefs) in these quotes. We know that Faraday 
persevered in experimentation in the face of results disconfirming his strong 
prior beliefs, with eventual success in the case of magnetism generating elec-
tricity, but without it in the case of the relation between gravity and electric-
ity. Nevertheless, Faraday himself believed the myth that science is strictly 
objective, arguing against excessive theorizing in science that when observa-
tions are not taken at face value but are interpreted through theory, they are 
necessarily prone to distortion (Gooding, 1985). In The Inertia of Mind (1818), 
Faraday warned of the dangers of becoming prematurely attached to one's 
own theories and looking only for confirmatory evidence. But he also sees the 
value in such attachment, and for the same reason, that it encourages the 
search for confirmation. 
Faraday's belief in the unity of forces went even further. He speculated that 
electromagnetic waves analogous to those in the ocean exist, but he made the 
speculation in a sealed letter to the Royal Society which by his orders was not 
opened until 1937. On this issue, Faraday counted on future generations to 
collect the data to support his prior belief. [Albert Einstein (see Section 4.13) 
and other scientists did very much the same thing.] 
REFERENCES 
Agassi, Joseph (1971). Faraday as Natural Philosopher. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Berman, Morris (1978). Social Change and Scientific Organization: The Royal 
Institution, 1799-1844. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Cantor, Geoffrey N. (1985). "Reading the Book of Nature: The Relation Between 
Faraday's Religion and His Science," pp. 69-81 in David Gooding and Frank 
A. J. L. James (Eds.), Faraday Rediscovered. Bassingstoke, Hants, UK: Macmillan. 
(Published in the United States and Canada by Stockton Press, New York.) 
Faraday, Michael (1816a). Chemistry Lectures. London: Institute of Engineers. 
(1816b). "Observations on the Inertia of the Mind," in Commonplace 
Book, 
1816-1846. London: Institute of Engineers. 
(1839-1855). Experimental Researches in Electricity. Reprinted from the Philo-
sophical Transactions of 1831-1852 with other electrical papers from the Quarterly 
Journal of Science, Philosophical Magazine, Proceedings of the Royal institution, 
3 vols. London. 
(1854). "Observations on Mental Education," pp. 39-88 in Lectures on Educa-

REFERENCES 
127 
tion Delivered at the Royal Institution of Great Britain. London: J. W. Parker and 
Son. Reprinted in Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics (1859). 
London: R. Taylor and W. Francis. Page numbers refer to reprinted edition. 
Gooding, David (1985). "'In Nature's School': Faraday as an Experimentalist," pp. 
105-135 in David Gooding and Frank A. J. L. James (Eds.), Faraday Rediscovered. 
Bassingstoke, Hants, UK: Macmillan. (Published in the United States and Canada 
by Stockton Press, New York.) 
Gooding, David, and James, Frank A. L. J. (1985). Faraday Rediscovered: Essays on 
the Life and Work of Michael Faraday, 1791-1867. Bassingstoke, Hants, UK: 
Macmillan. (Published in the United States and Canada by Stockton Press, New 
York.) 
Jones, Bence (1870). The Life and Letters of Faraday, 2 vols. London: Longmans, Green. 
MacDonald, D. K. C. (1964). Faraday, Maxwell, and Kelvin. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday. 
Miller, Mabel (1968). Michael Faraday and the Dynamo. Philadelphia: Chilton. 
Thomas, John Meurig (1991). Michael Faraday and the Royal Institution (The Genius 
of Man and Place). Bristol, UK: Adam Hilger. 
Tricker, R. A. R. (1966). The Contributions of Faraday and Maxwell to Electrical 
Science. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Williams, L. Pearce (1965). Michael Faraday: A Biography. London: Chapman & Hall. 
(1966). The Origins of Field Theory. New York: Random House. 

128 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
4.9 CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
Charles Darwin was an English naturalist who demonstrated that the various 
species of life, both plants and animals, have been evolving steadily over time 
rather than having been created all at one time. This biological principle is 
called the theory of evolution. Darwin proposed that the mechanism by which 
this evolution takes place is that of natural selection. 
4.9.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Darwin attended Edinburgh University with the intention of studying medi-
cine; but he was a poor student. What he did enjoy was collecting marine 
animals in tidal pools, accompanying fishermen trawling for oysters, and learn-
ing to skin and stuff birds. Since he had so little interest in medicine, he left 
Edinburgh at 18 and was sent to Cambridge to prepare for Holy Orders in the 
Church of England. Although he paid little attention to his official studies, 
he became acquainted with some distinguished scientists, in particular, John 
Stevens Henslow, reverend and professor of botany, who influenced Darwin 
profoundly by stimulating his interest in natural history. 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
129 
In 1831, when Darwin was just 22, the Admiralty asked for a naturalist to 
accompany Capt. Robert Fitzroy of the Royal Navy on a voyage in the ship 
HMS Beagle to survey the coasts of Patagonia, Tierra del Fuego, Chile, and 
Peru, to visit some Pacific islands, and to establish a chain of chronometrical 
stations around the world. Henslow recommended Darwin. Darwin happily 
agreed to go and set sail from England on the Beagle on December 27,1831. 
He was to be away for five years gathering data that would change forever 
the world's thinking about the origin of species. He took with him a copy of 
the first volume of Lyell's new book, Principles of Geology. He was about 
to begin emulating his hero, the great German naturalist Alexander von 
Humboldt (von Humboldt, 1769-1859, is treated in detail in Section 4.7), who 
traveled the world recording data on geology, plants, physical geography, 
oceanography, and many other features of the earth. Von Humboldt recorded 
his scientific observations in the five volumes of his tome Kosmos and drew 
theoretical generalizations from that systematization. He did not use these 
observations, as Darwin was to do, to derive a grand theory of the origin of 
species. 
The Cape Verde Islands provided Darwin with his first observation of a 
volcano; in Brazil he saw his first tropical forest; in Argentina he found his 
first fossils: sloths, mastodons, and horses. In Chile, Darwin experienced an 
earthquake and observed both its effects in raising the level of the land and 
its connection with volcanic eruption (see Darwin and Seward, 1903, p. 95). 
Repeatedly when ashore he went on long, arduous, and dangerous expeditions 
on horseback, collecting specimens. Wherever he saw a mountain he climbed 
it, and on one journey from Chile to Argentina over high passes of the Andes, 
he was bitten massively by insects. After visiting the Galápagos Islands, 
the Beagle sailed to Tahiti, New Zealand, Australia, Cocos Keeling Atoll, 
Mauritius, South Africa, St. Helena, Ascension Island, Brazil again (to check 
chronometers), and then home. Darwin returned to England, on October 2, 
1836, at 27 years of age. 
The young man had, during all the hardships and dangers of the voyage of 
the Beagle and his numerous hazardous journeys ashore, enjoyed robust 
health and great physical stamina. But within a few months of his return began 
to show increasingly frequent symptoms of illness that reduced him to a state 
of semi-invalidism. These symptoms were great lassitude, painful intestinal 
discomfort, frequent vomiting, and sleeplessness. His doctors were unable to 
find any organic cause for his condition, in which he settled down to a daily 
routine of four hours' work, walks in the garden, and rests on a sofa smoking 
a cigarette while being read to. Frequently, he was unable to work at all. 
His illness was never satisfactorily diagnosed. One major hypothesis was 
that it was psychological, relating to some sort of rebellion against his father. 
Another explanation proposed was his bites from insects: the massive attack 
that Darwin suffered in 1835 came from the bites of Triatoma infestans, the 
most important carrier of the trypanosome of Chagas' disease. This try-
panosome, not discovered until 1909, is found in the blood even many years 

130 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
after infection; it causes lassitude and heart block and prevents normal func-
tioning of the intestines. The case histories of patients with Chagas' disease 
and Darwin's symptoms fit like a glove: He suffered a heart attack in 1873 and 
died of another in 1882 at 73. It is against this background of suffering that 
Darwin's scientific work was achieved and that his family life was lived. Ten 
children were born, of whom two died in infancy. 
4.9.B Darwin's Scientific Contributions 
Much of Darwin's work in evolutionary biology and geology stemmed directly 
from the observations and collections that he made during the voyage of 
the Beagle. Charles Darwin wrote 15 books, plus four monographs on the 
taxonomy of barnacles. Most of these works were of minor importance rela-
tive to his two most important: Origin of Species (1859) and Descent of Man 
(1871). In the eyes of posterity, the other 13 books were so overshadowed by 
Darwin's momentous work on evolution that they have been neglected, but 
they were fundamental to his later work. 
Starting from the fact that coral polyps are found only in clear salt water 
less than 20 fathoms deep, at temperatures not less than 68°F, and that coral 
atolls and barrier reefs are all at about sea level, Darwin argued that such atolls 
and reefs could only have resulted from subsidence of the sea floor, the corals 
growing upward as their bases dropped. Darwin's view has since been con-
firmed by deep borings of coral reefs revealing at depths of nearly 5000 feet 
dead corals that once lived within 120 feet of the surface. So Darwin was not 
only a keen observer of his surroundings, he also took the next (scientific) step 
of hypothesizing about how to integrate those observations into a unifying 
theory. 
Another kind of reef, which Darwin called the fringing reef occurs above 
sea level and results from elevation of the sea floor. Plotting on the map the 
distribution of atolls and barrier reefs on the one hand and of fringing reefs 
on the other, Darwin saw that great areas of the ocean bottom had undergone 
subsidence, and others elevation, and that all active volcanoes are in the latter. 
This agreed with the association that he had observed in South America 
between volcanic action and elevation of the ground. That such changes of 
level could be substantial he knew from his explorations in the Andes. There, 
at an altitude of 7000 feet, he had discovered a fossil forest overlain by thou-
sands of feet of sedimentary deposits laid down by the sea, thus proving the 
occurrence of earlier earth movements of the order of 10,000 feet vertical 
height. 
In petrology his comparison of volcanic lavas with plutonic rocks (rocks 
that have originated deep within the earth) showed that they were closely 
related (see also our discussion of the scientific work of Alexander von 
Humbolt in Section 4.7). The minerals in crystalline granites and in glasslike 
lavas were similar. He studied the direction of the veins of rocks containing 
the minerals and the angle in a vertical plane of the mineral rock strata. He 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
131 
showed that planes of cleavage were constant over very wide areas, parallel 
to the direction of great axes along which elevation of land had taken place 
over hundreds of miles. Furthermore, these planes of cleavage had no relation 
to the planes of stratification of sedimentary deposits, and had been super-
imposed on strata by pressure and recrystallization. This was the origin of the 
deformation theory of metamorphic rocks. His work in geology was to play a 
major role in Darwin's approach to science. 
But Darwin's contribution to biological science was of a different nature. 
When he started on the voyage, like everyone else, he did not question the 
immutability of species. During the journey, however, his own observations 
raised several questions that set him thinking. Why do so many similar animals 
exist so far apart geographically? Why does the South American rhea, for 
example, resemble so closely the African ostrich? On the other hand, why are 
adjacent areas populated by similar, though not identical species? Why, for 
instance, were the birds and tortoises of each Galápagos island different, 
although the physical conditions of the islands seemed identical? 
After his return to England, Darwin saw, in 1837, that these questions and 
many more, in comparative anatomy, embryology, classification, geographical 
distribution, and paleontology, could be explained satisfactorily if species were 
not immutable but had evolved into other species, many with a common ances-
tor. The evolutionary view of how humans descended by mutating over the 
generations, appears to answer all these questions, which otherwise remain 
inexplicable and without a common determining principle. 
Darwin realized that it would be useless, in the state of opinion of his day 
(opinion very much dominated by church dogma), to try to convince anybody 
of the truth of evolution unless he could also explain how it was brought about. 
In searching for this cause, he knew that the key to human success in produc-
ing change in cultivated plants and domestic animals was careful selection of 
parents from which to breed the desired qualities, and he felt sure that selec-
tion must somehow also be operative in nature's creation of species. He knew 
that all individuals in a species were not identical but showed variation, and 
he realized that some individuals, well adapted to the places they occupied in 
the economy of nature (in the mid-twentieth century called ecological niches), 
would flourish, while others, less adapted, would perish. This was the principle 
of natural selection that he had grasped as early as 1837, but he still needed 
to understand how nature enforced it. 
In 1838, Darwin read Malthus's Essay on the Principle of Population. In 
this work Malthus tried to show that because the rate of increase of human 
population was in a geometrical ratio while that of increase in human food 
supply was only in arithmetical ratio, the result must be misery and death for 
the poor, unless population growth was checked. Malthus's argument was 
unsound because it has never been determined to what extent human food 
supply could be artificially increased if it were given sufficient priority and 
finance. But Darwin saw at once that this fallacious argument could be applied 
correctly to plants and animals, which are unable to increase their food supply 

132 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
artificially. He saw, too, that in these organisms, mortality must be very high, 
thereby automatically enforcing the mechanism of selection of parents of suc-
cessive generations. The note, in telegraphic style, which Darwin entered that 
day in his Notebook on Transmutation of Species stated: "On an average every 
species must have same number killed year with year by hawks, by cold, & 
c.—even one species of hawk decreasing in number must affect instanta-
neously all the rest. The final cause of all this wedging must be to sort out 
proper structure 
One may say there is a force like a hundred thousand 
wedges trying to force every kind of adapted structure into the gaps in the 
economy of nature, or rather forming gaps by thrusting out weaker ones." In 
these words, Darwin showed that he had solved the problem of the origin and 
improvement of adaptation as a result of selection pressure, and that 
modification during descent (i.e., evolution) does not take place in a vacuum 
but is strongly related to the ecological niches occupied by the species. Darwin 
is therefore included among the founding fathers of the science of ecology. 
Having discovered the greatest general principle in biology, Darwin kept it 
to himself. In 1842 he penciled a "Sketch" of his results, which he expanded in 
an "Essay" in 1844, but he showed it only to his botanist friend Joseph Dalton 
Hooker. From 1846 to 1854 he devoted his attention and energies to a study 
of the different species of living and fossil barnacles, for the purpose of clas-
sifying them. This tedious work provided him with firsthand experience of the 
amount of variation found in species and of the problems of classification, 
essential for the study of how species originate. In 1856, Darwin started to put 
on paper his discoveries about evolution and natural selection. As he worked 
he added to his evidence by studies on the problems of divergence (i.e., the 
greater variability of species belonging to wide-ranging genera containing 
many species) and on geographical distribution, including the function of sea 
and wind in disseminating the population of oceanic islands. He also worked 
out his ideas in discussions with his friends Lyell, Hooker, and Thomas Henry 
Huxley. 
Darwin's writing work went steadily until, on June 18, 1858, out of the 
blue, he received from Alfred Rüssel Wallace, a naturalist then in the Malay 
Archipelago, a succinct but complete statement of his own conclusions on 
evolution and natural selection. Darwin's shock at the danger of being 
forestalled in work on which he had been engaged for 20 years was great. But 
Lyell and Hooker, insisting that a joint paper by Darwin and Wallace should 
be read before the Linnean Society of London on July 1, 1858, saved the 
situation. Darwin then started what he called an abstract of the full work 
on which he was engaged. By 1859, the scientific atmosphere surrounding the 
origin of human beings and their history was saturated with the possibility 
of evolution. It was only a matter of time before someone published a sys-
tematic theory. 
Darwin's abstract was the Origin of Species, which was published on 
November 24,1859, 23 years after he had collected the data for his theories 
during the voyages of HMS Beagle-, the book sold out immediately. By January 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
133 
1872 the work had run through six editions. With the publication of the Origin 
of Species, Darwin brought down on himself enemies of two kinds. The first 
were old-fashioned scientists, some like Adam Sedgwick refusing to admit 
Darwin's method of using hypotheses as acceptable in science. Another was 
Richard Owen, who had until then enjoyed the reputation of being the leading 
English biologist and who was jealous, realizing that his former friend Darwin 
might eclipse him altogether and must, at any cost, be discredited. The other 
class of enemies were the upholders of orthodox religious beliefs, to whom 
Darwin administered two shocks. If evolution were true, the account of the 
Creation in the Book of Genesis was false or at least not literally true. Also, 
if evolution worked automatically by natural selection, there was no room for 
divine guidance and design in the production of living plants and animals, 
including humans, on earth. 
The battle was joined at the Oxford meeting of the British Association for 
the Advancement of Science on June 30, 1860. Owen had carefully coached 
Samuel Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, who attacked Thomas Henry Huxley. 
Huxley came to be referred to as Darwin's "bulldog," because he acted as 
Darwin's principal defender in public debates about the controversial new 
theory. Wilberforce spoke in a patronizing and contemptuous manner to 
Huxley about Darwin's views (by referring to Huxley's simian origins). 
Huxley's counterattack was so brilliant that the Church of England never 
again formally attempted to cross swords with science. But there are many in 
society at large who have, to this day, refused to accept Darwin's theory of 
human evolutionary descent, preferring instead a literal interpretation of 
biblical sources. 
4.9.C Major Works 
The complete works of Charles Darwin may be found in the Cambridge 
University Library. A good source for publication of his works is John 
Murray, London. 
Darwin, Charles (1832-1836). Journal of Researches into the Geology and Natural 
History of the Various Countries Visited by H.M.S. Beagle', popular title, The Voyage 
of the Beagle (1839). London: John Murray. 
(1842). The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs (2nd ed., 1874). London: 
Smith, Elder. 
(1859). On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preser-
vation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. London: John Murray. 
(1862). The Various Contrivances by Which Orchids Are Fertilised by Insects. 
London: W. Pickering, 1988; Series title: Darwin, Charles (1809-1882), Works of 
Charles Darwin, 1986. 
(1865). The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants. London: John Murray. 
(1868). The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication, 2 vols. New 
York: D. Judd. 

134 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
(1871). The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 2 vols. London: 
John Murray. 
(1872). The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. London: John 
Murray. 
(1875). The Insectivorous Plants. London: John Murray. 
(1876). The Effects of Cross and Self and Cross Fertilisation in the Vegetable 
Kingdom. London: John Murray. 
(1877). The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species. London: 
John Murray. 
(1880). The Power of Movement in Plants. London: John Murray. 
(1881). The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through the Action of Worms. 
London: John Murray. 
4.9.D Subjectivity in the Work of Darwin 
In Darwin's day science was supposed to make progress only by inductive 
methods. Although Darwin felt that he followed Baconian principles, and 
without any theory collected facts on a wholesale scale, he himself invalidated 
this when he wrote to Lyell (June 1,1860): "Without the making of theories, 
I am convinced there would be no observations." In 1861 he wrote to a 
Cambridge political economist, Henry Fawcett: "About thirty years ago there 
was much talk that geologists ought only to observe and not theorise 
How 
odd it is that anyone should not see that all observation must be for or 
against some view, if it is to be of any service!" 
Again in 1863, Darwin wrote to an Edinburgh botanist, John Scott: "Let 
theory guide your observations, but till your reputation is well established, be 
sparing in publishing theory. It makes persons doubt your observations" (More 
Letters ..., vol. 2, p. 323). Thus, Darwin recognized that there is no such thing 
as pure induction from observations, for if the observer did not already have 
an idea of what to look for, a subjective personal belief, derived from deduc-
tion, nothing at all could be observed. We also find here a partial explanation 
for why Darwin waited 23 years to publish his findings on evolution through 
natural selection. 
Darwin's methodology was to spin a hypothesis about anything that struck 
his attention (i.e., anything that he was predisposed by ideas to see), and then 
to deduce from it consequences that should follow and could be refuted or 
verified. This "hypothetic-deductive" method, as Sir Peter Medawar has called 
it, is illustrated in Darwin's letter to F. W. Hutton (Apr. 20, 1861): "I am 
actually weary of telling people that I do not pretend to adduce direct 
evidence of one species changing into another, but I believe that this view is 
in the main correct, because so many phenomena can thus be grouped and 
explained." 
All of Darwin's mental energy was focused on his subject, and that was why 
poetry, pictures, and music ceased in his mature life to afford him the pleasure 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
135 
that they had given him in his earlier days. His technique for collecting facts, 
in addition to those that he observed for himself, was illustrative of tenacity 
and his capacity for holding strong personal beliefs. Darwin held some rather 
naive views. To Thomas Huxley he wrote (Jan. 9,1860): "The history of error 
is quite unimportant." But the study of errors of measurement, and the study 
of errors that represent imperfections in a mathematical or statistical model, 
have become the focus of entire fields of study since Darwin's time. 
Darwin's first transmutation notebook compiled aboard the Beagle was 
begun about July 1837. At that time Darwin was thinking about changes in 
organisms. He wrote that changes in the physical environment provoke and 
require changes in the organisms that inhabit that environment. At the time, 
people still believed in spontaneous generation of organic life from inorganic 
materials. (Although other scientists had earlier cast doubt on this theory, it 
was only later that Louis Pasteur showed that such a mechanism could not 
hold true; see the essay on Louis Pasteur in Section 4.10 for more details.) So 
it was that Darwin developed the theory of monadism, that simple living par-
ticles, or "monads" are constantly springing into life. They have their origin in 
inanimate matter and are produced by natural forces. Such was his subjective 
interpretation of the data as he saw the matter at that time. It was only later 
that he discarded this subjective interpretation of the same data. 
Charles Darwin's research, beliefs, theories, and general scientific laws were 
summarized in his many published books, articles, and letters. But much of his 
writing was based on the notebooks he created during his five-year voyage on 
the Beagle. Those notebooks he casually entitled, B, C, D, E, M, N, Journal, and 
some "Old and Useless Notes." The M and N notebooks (written 1838-1839) 
were published for the first time only in 1974, in a book by Howard Gruber 
and Paul Barrett. The M and N notebooks focused on man, mind, and 
materialism as they related to Darwin's thinking about evolution. They bear 
on Darwin as a psychologist, because they treat such topics as memory; psy-
chopathology; heredity, environment, and free will; beauty and imagination; 
music and poetry; instinct versus intellect; God's will, man's will, and chance; 
mind and body; emotion in humans and animals; dreams and thought; day-
dreams, dreams, and belief; happiness; passion; and many other topics normally 
confined to the realms of psychology, philosophy, and theology. Gruber, a 
psychologist, and Barrett, a biologist, were a very natural team to study these 
previously unexamined notebooks. 
To understand the development of the theory of evolution in Darwin's 
mind, we need to understand that in his time, beliefs about evolutionary 
biology were shaped, in part, by philosophy developed by the Greeks. For 
example, according to Plato's notion of ideal forms, or essentialism, the physi-
cal world was a mirage from which little reliable information could be gained. 
The only things that really existed were changeless ideas or forms; the objects 
that existed in the physical world were distorted changeable shadows of these 
permanent unalterable essences. So change and variation were mere illusions, 

136 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
and genuine reality consisted of fixed types, permanently distinguished from 
one another. If this notion were applied to nature, it would rule out the pos-
sibility of biological change. 
Evolution had been advocated earlier. J. B. A. P. de Monet Lamarck 
(1744-1829) developed the theory that new organs arise from new needs, that 
new organs continue to develop in proportion to the extent to which they are 
used, and that these acquisitions are handed down from one generation to the 
next. Conversely, disuse of existing organs leads to their gradual disappear-
ance, and these shrinking organs would also be inherited. Lamarck suggested 
that living matter had a natural ambition to be bigger and more complex. But 
his neglecting to provide evidence for evolution, his attempt to explain its 
cause by appealing to the "inner feeling" of a tendency to perfection (an 
example of the use of strong subjectivity and a strong belief in science regard-
less of the availability of supporting data), and his equally fanciful belief in 
the satisfaction of the needs of the organisms led other scientists to reject his 
evolutionary theory. 
Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802), Charles Darwin's grandfather, was a distin-
guished doctor and evolutionary biologist who believed in the "descent of 
man through modification." He had his own ideas about evolution, similar to 
those of Lamarck. Drawing conclusions from simple observations, Erasmus 
Darwin believed that species changed because they needed to adapt to their 
environment. 
The French naturalist Comte G. L. L. de Buffon (1707-1788) published his 
Theory of the Earth in 1749. In this work he took an alternative path to the 
one in the Bible (Creationism, and belief in the assertion of Archbishop James 
Ussher in 1650 that the universe was created on October 22, 4004 B.C.E., 
making it about 6000 years old). Buffon declared that in his opinion the earth 
was very old, that clerical people had seriously underestimated its age, and 
that living things had probably undergone substantial change. Moreover, to 
make his point, he identified much of the evidence later presented by Charles 
Darwin. He attempted to order chronologically the appearance on earth of 
different species. In essence, he was supporting the doctrine of descent with 
modification. 
In 1844, the Scottish publisher, Robert Chambers (anonymously), published 
the book The Vestiges of the Natural History of the Creation. The book sug-
gested that the succession of fossil types was evidence of an unceasing 
transformation of what God had created at the beginning of time. The book 
was considered blasphemous. However, Charles Darwin felt that the book 
expressed many of his own views, and therefore he postponed until 1859 pub-
lication of his own theories in what later was to become Origin of Species. By 
that time the scientific world was very ready to accept what he said. 
All of this earlier evolutionary biology was well known to Charles Darwin 
as it was to other scientists. Moreover, Darwin's observational data collected 
during his voyages on the Beagle were carefully presented to the scientific 
world. Thus because all of these observational data were then available to the 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
137 
biological science community, as an augmentation of natural history data col-
lected earlier, other scientists could use the same data set as Darwin to develop 
their own theses regarding the descent of man. One needs, then, to ask why it 
was Darwin and not one of his contemporaries who published the definitive 
work on the origin of species. 
During the 23 years between his return from South America until the pub-
lication of Origin of Species, Darwin introspected about the meaning of his 
observational data, about how all the loose ends might fit together most log-
ically, and about how earlier theory might be brought to bear on the patterns 
of evolution of living things and a dynamically changing earth. This intro-
spection process involved a subjective synthesis of observational data with 
strong personal beliefs about the nature of the patterns from which the obser-
vational data had come. His interpretation of the data, as distinguished from 
the interpretations of them by other scientists, depended on his own back-
ground, his own subjective evaluation, his creativity, and his own formulation 
of scientific hypotheses that could be tested. Because his beliefs differed from 
those of the earlier biologists, he saw different patterns in the data than they 
did. Thus, in light of both his strongly and carefully considered beliefs, and his 
observational data, his (posterior) inferences about evolution and the descent 
of man were different from theirs. 
To develop his ideas about the descent of man, Darwin had to free himself 
from earlier theories supporting a constancy in nature stemming from a 
Creationist, Bible-based, static earth, as well as a constancy of all living species. 
Then he had to construct alternative hypotheses regarding the mechanisms by 
which humans have developed into our present form, and these mechanisms 
were not always strongly supported by large quantities of observational data. 
Yet Darwin's powerful insights, intuition, lengthy observations of nature, and 
ability to recognize patterns where others could not, generated within him very 
strong personal and subjective beliefs about human evolution. It was these 
strong subjective beliefs that propelled him forward to promulgate his theses, 
despite strong opposition in the lay community, opposition that exists to the 
present time. Fortunately, he did not have to battle much with the scientific 
community as well; by the time he published Origin of Species, the scientific 
community was generally quite willing to accept these ideas, and it largely felt 
that the ideas were long overdue in coming. It was Darwin's subjective views 
of the changing, evolutionary process in nature that dominated his theories 
about human descent. 
But there were a few important objections from scientists, and these objec-
tions led Darwin to a totally subjectively based, remarkable recanting of his 
earlier notions about the heritability of acquired traits (his theory of Pan-
genesis, described below). There were four specific objections that gave him 
the most trouble. First, the zoologist H. St. George Mivart argued that although 
natural selection might account for the success of well-established adaptations, 
it could not possibly explain the initial stages of their development. The 
biological usefulness of the eye is self-evident, but how did such an organ get 

138 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
started in the first place? We now recognize that Darwin's explanation is true; 
that at its first appearance, a fortuitous novelty may confer subtle and invis-
ible advantages. Nevertheless, the utility of imperceptible novelties continued 
to be a problem and was one of the reasons why natural selection became dis-
credited in Darwin's own lifetime. (Although the theory of evolution con-
tinued to be accepted, the mechanism of natural selection was rejected in favor 
of Lamarckian principles.) 
Second, Darwin was well aware of the fact that there were huge gaps in the 
fossil record, so that direct evidence of smooth transitions from form to form 
was not available. He explained these by assuming subjectively that the inter-
mediate stages had been destroyed. To him, it was as if some geological vandal 
had torn out pages and chapters in the book of life. But he maintained strong 
beliefs with no evidence (prior beliefs) that subsequent research would restore 
these lost episodes and that the continuity of the record would eventually be 
restored. This has not happened. Modern paleontologists now recognize that 
Darwin did not explain the often-abrupt succession of fossil types. There is 
now overwhelming evidence pointing to the conclusion that certain forms 
remained stable for long periods of time, only to be succeeded suddenly by 
new forms altogether. Latter-day Creationists have seized on this finding, in 
the effort to reinstate the doctrine of serial creations. Serious biologists dismiss 
this as a frivolous suggestion. But they are ready to concede that the process 
of evolution is more episodic than Darwin supposed. Confronted by the fact 
of so many unbridgeable gaps in the fossil record, paleontologists are trying 
to accommodate themselves to the idea that the modification that accompa-
nies descent is not necessarily gradual. Although the process of imperceptible 
change has an all-important part to play in the origin of species, it is often 
superseded by abrupt transformations that result in the emergence of com-
prehensively new designs. 
The exact mechanism of these rapid changes is now a subject of heated 
controversy. One biologist has described these novelties as "hopeful monsters" 
and has argued that an unsolicited transformation in the genetic instructions 
might occasionally result in the emergence of a design fortuitously adapted 
to the new circumstances, thrown up at a time of rapid geological change. 
Although this suggestion kills two birds with one stone, since it deals both with 
the apparent absence of intermediate types and with the apparent uselessness 
of incipient novelties, it presupposes disruptively large changes in the heredi-
tary instructions. Modern geneticists argue that such abrupt upheavals would 
prove lethally disabling to the process of embryological development. What-
ever the explanation is, it must eventually account for the fact that evolution 
has not always been a smooth process and that the history of life on Earth has 
often been sharply punctuated. 
The third objection to Darwin's theory was that an evolutionary theory 
based on the slow accumulation of small invisible novelties presupposes huge 
lengths of time. As we have already seen, the geologists of the eighteenth and 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
139 
nineteenth centuries had gradually recognized the great age of Earth. But 
Darwin's theory demanded an almost inconceivable span of biological time. 
This assumption was seriously endangered when the physicist Lord Kelvin 
(incorrectly) calculated from the temperature of Earth's interior that Darwin 
had grossly overestimated the age of the globe. Darwin's subjective belief, 
which was borne out in time, was that Kelvin's calculation would turn out to 
be wrong. If he had lived longer, he would have been gratified to discover that 
Earth was even older than he himself supposed. 
Darwin's ignorance about the mechanism of inheritance left him exposed 
to a fourth and potentially even more damaging objection. In 1867, a Scottish 
engineer, Fleeming Jenkin, pointed out that a favorable variation would soon 
disperse itself as the "fortunate" individual interbred with "normal" members 
of a population. Jenkin's objection (later proved false) was based on the 
assumption that the genetic factors were infinitely divisible, which implied that 
a new variation would automatically distribute itself in steadily diminishing 
amounts. Ironically, this objection could have been answered, if the scientific 
world had taken note of a discovery published by the Czech monk Gregor 
Mendel (see Section 3.3 for further discussion of Mendel) less than a year after 
Jenkin's assertion. Working in the obscurity of a provincial monastery, Mendel 
proved that the genetic factors behaved as if they were indivisible particles 
and that they did not blend or dilute themselves in the course of interbreed-
ing. Unfortuntely, Mendel's paper was neglected, and by the time it was redis-
covered in 1900, the theory of small unsolicited novelties had undergone a 
total eclipse. 
Confronted by the twin specters of Kelvin's calculation of the age of Earth 
and Jenkin's prediction of the dispersion of fortunate variations, Darwin 
began to lose confidence in the effectiveness of natural selection. He now 
felt it necessary to introduce some auxiliary process that would hasten evo-
lutionary change in a purposive direction. In summarizing the sixth and 
final edition of Origin of Species (1872), he conceded that evolution was 
"... aided in an important manner by the use and disuse of parts; and in an 
unimportant manner, that is in relation to adaptive structures, whether past 
or present, by the direct action of external conditions.... It appears that I for-
merly underrated the frequency and value of these latter forms of variation, 
as leading to permanent modifications of structure independently of natural 
selection." By introducing this codicil, Darwin reverted to his original belief 
in the Lamarckian heredity effect of effort and experience. In 1868 he pub-
lished a two-volume book containing an elaborate theory (pangenesis) that 
purported to explain the inheritance of acquired characteristics (The Variation 
of Animals and Plants Under Domestication). In his theory of pangenesis, 
Darwin formulated a set of ideas that were very similar to ideas put forward 
by the ancient Greek philosopher Democritus. According to this theory, 
the cells destined to play a reproductive role gradually accumulate a set of 
representative particles, or "gemmules," derived from all the organs and tissues 

140 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
of the adult body. It was as if the body were divided into a series of parlia-
mentary constituencies, each of which sent a team of representatives com-
missioned to reproduce the limbs, organs, or tissues for which they stood. These 
gemmules were dispatched into the bloodstream; and having reassembled in 
the reproductive cells, their presence guaranteed a faithful reduplication of the 
parent physique. 
For Darwin, this theory proved an admirable explanation for the inherit-
ance of acquired characteristics. If, through its own efforts, a creature suc-
ceeded in enlarging the muscles of its limbs, the number of gemmules arising 
from these overgrown parts would increase, and they would therefore be over-
represented in the constituent assembly gathered in the reproductive cells. The 
offspring would therefore automatically inherit the fruits of its parents' exer-
tion. Conversely, if a limb or organ dwindled through disuse, the gemmules 
would be underrepresented and the offspring would inherit the parental 
deficit. This revision gave heart to those who already found the evolutionary 
role of unsolicited variation suspect; and the fact that Darwin himself had 
made such a concession was one of the factors that led to the development of 
a Lamarckian backlash. From 1870 the revision gathered momentum, and in 
the years shortly before Darwin's death there was a veritable landslide in favor 
of Lamarck. 
In Europe and in the United States, evolution was widely accepted as a doc-
trine, but natural selection was rejected in favor of the inherited effects of use 
and disuse, and the hereditary effects stimulated directly by the environment. 
By the end of the century, only two important scientists were prepared to 
regard unsolicited variation as the raw material of evolutionary change. Both 
of them remained unswervingly loyal to the principle of natural selection: 
Alfred Russell Wallace and the German naturalist August Weismann. After 
sifting all the experimental evidence, Weismann was unable to find a single 
case in which the experience and effort of one generation had influenced the 
structure and function of the next. Experimental scars and mutilations were 
never inherited; nor were skills. The brawny muscles acquired by a blacksmith 
during a lifetime of toil were not handed on to his idle son. Regardless of the 
changes undergone during the lifetime of any one individual, the next gen-
eration invariably reverted to type. According to Weismann, the doctrine of 
inherited characteristics was factually wrong and biologically impossible. The 
scientific community eventually abandoned pangenesis. 
These various contradictions were mostly reconciled, in time. Lamarckian 
explanations were ruled out when it was shown that acquired characters, 
whether impressed by the environment or resulting from use or individual 
effort, were never inherited. The advance of genetics showed that large muta-
tions were rarer and of far less biological importance than those of small extent 
and that, apparently, continuous evolutionary change could be, and often was, 
brought about by the accumulation of numerous small discontinuous muta-
tions under the guidance of natural selection. 
Finally, R. A. Fisher in 1930 made it clear that heredity was particulate, 

CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) 
141 
dependent on distinct self-reproducing units or genes, each of which could 
mutate into new self-reproducing forms. Further, the fact that most mutants 
are recessive at once got rid of the major difficulties that beset Darwin, who 
accepted the current view of blending heredity—the view that characters and 
the entities that determined them were commingled into a single blend when 
crossed. Commingling would imply that any new character would be progres-
sively diluted by crossing in each generation (as Jenkins had predicted), and 
would make its establishment in the stock difficult. But a particulate genetic 
mechanism in which most mutants are recessive makes it possible for new 
mutants to be stored indefinitely in the constitution, and for new combinations 
of new and old genes to be formed, ready to be utilized by selection when con-
ditions are favorable. Natural selection was seen, not as involving the sharp 
alternatives of life or death, but as the result of the differential survival of vari-
ants; and it was established that even slight advantages, of one-half of 1% or 
less, could have important evolutionary effects. 
Darwin spent many years traveling around the world gathering observa-
tional evidence for his theories, and then 23 years introspecting about evolu-
tion and the descent of man, and the mechanism for natural selection that 
drives it, before he elected to write about it (1836-1859). But as alluded to 
earlier, after Origin of Species went through five successful editions, the pres-
sures of the scientific and general lay communities forced him to rethink his 
scientific beliefs in favor of an explanation that was not only totally subjec-
tive, but was also not based on any experimental data at all. This new expla-
nation was in fact false, or so we now believe. 
Darwin's subjective views were strongly influenced by observational data, 
both his own and that of earlier workers. Were any of these eighteenth- and 
nineteenth-century biologists mentioned above developing their scientific con-
clusions in an objective way? We don't think so. All of them, including Charles 
Darwin, started their scientific studies with differing subjective prior beliefs 
about the descent of man, that is, beliefs that were different in various respects 
from one another's. Their beliefs were shaped by their own backgrounds, 
experiences, understandings of earlier scientific thought on the subject, and 
differing degrees of resistance they were able to muster to counter the pres-
sures of lay societal beliefs, political pressures, familial pressures, tacit promises 
of collegial ostracism if they were found wrong, church edicts, and problems 
of contradicting what was widely believed to be "common knowledge." Then, 
starting their scientific studies with these differing subjective prior beliefs, they 
each examined the available scientific observational data that was thought to 
bear on the subject. They then developed differing conclusions about what 
all the data meant; that is, their posterior inferences, not surprisingly, were 
sometimes quite disparate from one another. It is Charles Darwin's subjec-
tively based (posterior) inferences, which depended on an informal mixture of 
belief, theory, and observational information, that have ultimately dominated 
scientific thought about natural selection and the origin of the species up to 
the present time. 

142 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
REFERENCES 
Darwin, Francis (Ed.) (1887). Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, 3 vols. London: John 
Murray. 
Darwin, Francis, and A. C. Seward (Eds.) (1903). More Letters: Letters of Charles 
Darwin, 2 vols. London: John Murray. 
De Beer, Sir Gavin (Ed.) (1974). Darwin and Huxley: Autobiographies. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). Vol. 5, pp. 492-496. 
Fisher, R. A. (1958 [1930]). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; New York: Dover. 
Gruber, Howard E., and Paul H. Barrett (1974). Darwin on Man. Toronto: Clarke, 
Irwin. 
Huxley, Sir Julian (1958). "Introduction," Mentor edition of The Origin of Species by 
Charles Darwin. New York: Mentor Books. 
Miller, Johnathan, and Borin van Loon (1982). Darwin for Beginners. New York: 
Pantheon Books. 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
143 
4.10 LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
Louis Pasteur was a French scientist whose world-famous research spanned 
the fields of crystallography, structural chemistry, bacteriology, microbiology, 
and the etiology of infectious diseases. The well-known process of pasteuriza-
tion of milk and other dairy products is a purification procedure now required 
in most urban areas of the world. 
4.10.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Louis Pasteur was born December 27,1822, in eastern France. His childhood 
was uneventful. At 18, he graduated with a baccalaureate degree in letters, 
and two years later received a second such degree, in science. After failing 
the entrance examination for the much-sought-after Ecole Poly technique, an 
engineering-oriented school, the following year he was admitted to VEcole 
Normale Supérieure, the famous teachers' college in Paris. He received his 
doctor of sciences degree at 25, in 1847, in both physics and chemistry. A year 
later, he presented an important paper on crystallography before the Paris 
Academy of Sciences. 
In 1848, Pasteur was appointed professor of physics at the Dijon Lycee (a 
secondary-level school). Months later he took a job at the University of Stras-
bourg as professor of chemistry. There, at 26, he married Marie Laurent, the 
daughter of the rector of the university. They had five children, only two of 

144 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
whom survived childhood. In 1854, when he was 32, Pasteur was appointed 
dean of the new science faculty at the University of Lille. Pasteur is reputed 
to have begun his studies on fermentation at Lille in order to respond to a 
question raised by an industrialist on the production of alcohol from grain 
and beet sugar. From studying the fermentation of alcohol he went on to the 
problem of fermentation in milk, showing yeast to be an organism capable of 
reproducing itself, even in artificial media, without free oxygen, a concept that 
became known as the Pasteur effect. 
In 1857, Pasteur was appointed director of scientific studies at VEcole 
Normale Supérieure. Despite his additional administrative responsibilities, he 
continued his work on fermentation and concluded that fermentation was the 
result of the activity of minute organisms (yeast). Pasteur also showed that 
milk could be soured by purposely introducing a number of organisms 
from buttermilk or beer, but the milk would not sour if such organisms were 
excluded. These demonstrations ended a debate about the mechanism behind 
fermentation that had raged for many years. Pasteur was elected to the 
Academy of Sciences in 1862. 
As a logical sequel to his work on fermentation (the conversion of sugar 
into alcohol and carbon dioxide in the presence of yeast bacteria), Pasteur 
began research on spontaneous generation (the concept that bacterial life 
arose spontaneously). This research continued into the mid-1860s. The ques-
tion of life in the form of complex species arising from nothing was counter 
to Darwinian theory but consistent with theological doctrine, so there was a 
heated controversy over the matter among scientists of that period. (Charles 
Darwin published his Origin of Species, in English, in 1859; the French trans-
lation appeared in 1862; for details, see Darwin in Section 4.9). Pasteur rec-
ognized that both milk and alcohol fermentations took place more rapidly 
when there was exposure to air. So his research questioned whether invisible 
organisms were always present in the atmosphere or whether they were gen-
erated spontaneously. Pasteur showed experimentally that food decomposes 
when there are microbes present in the air that cause its putrefaction. More-
over, food does not putrefy in such a way as to generate new organisms within 
itself spontaneously. 
In July 1867, when Pasteur was almost 45 years old, an important incident 
involving a student affected his life profoundly. The student had written a letter 
supporting a speech by a French senator that had deplored an attempt 
to remove allegedly subversive books from a provincial library. The letter also 
approved of a recent attempt to assassinate Emperor Louis Napoleon. Pasteur 
recommended that the student be expelled and threatened to resign his uni-
versity post unless the expulsion order were carried out. When the student was 
expelled, the entire student body went out into the streets of Paris to protest, 
closing down the school. By the beginning of the fall term in October, Pasteur, 
by then a very eminent scientist, had been dismissed from the university and 
the school had reopened. 
In his teaching capacity, Pasteur was a government employee. Now that he 
had been dismissed from his university post, the government needed to find 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
145 
this renowned scientist a new job. In 1868, Pasteur was given both a profes-
sorship in chemistry at the Sorbonne and the directorship of a newly con-
structed, and generously endowed (by the Emperor Louis Napoleon) research 
laboratory in physiological chemistry. In 1871, Pasteur resigned from his teach-
ing position at the Sorbonne so that he could devote himself more fully 
to research at the laboratory. In 1873, Pasteur was elected a member of the 
Academy of Medicine. In 1874 the French parliament provided him with a 
large stipend that was intended to provide him with financial security while 
he pursued his research. 
In 1881, Pasteur succeeded in vaccinating a herd of sheep against the 
disease known as anthrax. He was also able to protect fowl from chicken 
cholera, for he had observed that once animals stricken with certain diseases 
had recovered, they were later immune to a fresh attack. 
On April 27, 1882, at 60 years of age, Pasteur was elected a member of 
the Académie Frangaise. He then began experiments designed to prevent the 
disease rabies. On July 6, 1885, he saved the life of a 9-year-old boy, Joseph 
Meister, who had been bitten by a rabid dog. The experiment was an 
outstanding success, opening the road to protection from a terrible disease. 
In 1888 the Pasteur Institute was inaugurated in Paris for the purpose of 
undertaking fundamental research, prevention, and treatment of rabies. 
Pasteur, although in failing health, headed the institute until his death on 
September 28,1895. 
4.10.B Pasteur's Scientific Contributions 
Louis Pasteur's scientific education and background prepared him to carry out 
research that traversed the borders of several of the physical and life sciences, 
including biology, chemistry, and physics. He began his career by studying 
some optical problems in crystallography. Then each new area of research 
he entered built logically and very efficiently on results from his previous 
research. In crystallography, Pasteur devoted the first 10 years of his scientific 
career (1847-1857) to studying the ability of organic substances to rotate the 
plane of polarized light shining on them and to studying the relationship of 
this property to crystal structure and molecular configuration. He examined 
two tartaric acids. The first, simply called tartaric acid, is found as a component 
of the tartar in wine fermentation vats. The second, known as paratartaric acid 
or racemic acid (which means "acid from grape") has the same chemical prop-
erties and structure as tartaric acid. But Pasteur discovered that the one acid 
(tartaric) turned the plane of a ray of polarized light to the right, while the 
other (racemic) had no corresponding optical effect. Pasteur set out to solve 
this mystery. He knew that inorganic substances such as quartz crystals have 
the ability to rotate a plane of polarized light passing through them (some to 
the right and some to the left). But at that time it was believed that the optical 
activity of organic substances was attributable to molecules in solution and 
had nothing to do with their crystalline structure. Nevertheless, Pasteur exper-
imented with inorganic substances whose salt crystals turned the polarization 

146 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
plane to the left and with others that turned it to the right. Pasteur combined 
substances with the two types of crystals and found that the combination was 
optically inactive. By analogy, Pasteur abandoned the idea that optical activ-
ity of organic compounds was due to their molecular structure and concluded 
that it must be a consequence of crystalline structure, just as in inorganic 
materials. In particular, racemic acid must be composed of two isomeric acids 
whose crystals are mirror images of one another, which, when mixed in equal 
amounts, divert the ray, with equal power, in opposite directions. One of the 
two crystal forms of racemic acid proved to be identical with the tartaric 
acid of fermentation. This led to Pasteur's research into fermentation and his 
founding of the field of stereochemistry. 
Pasteur also linked his research in crystallography to biology and life. He 
noted that the substances that seemed to exhibit crystalline asymmetry in solu-
tion (with mirror images of the crystals rotating the planes of polarized light 
in opposite directions) were organic, and those that were optically inactive in 
solution were inorganic and had symmetric crystalline structures. He argued 
that optically active substances were naturally occurring organic compounds 
(organic compounds are those that contain carbon), and they are necessary 
for life; organic compounds that are not active optically, and inorganic 
substances, are not necessary for life, so he considered them to be secondary 
products. It was from this vantage point that Pasteur attacked, and helped to 
destroy, the theory of spontaneous generation. 
Fermentation was not yet understood in 1857. By 1865, Pasteur had shown 
that the various changes involved in the fermentation process were the result 
of the presence and growth of a microorganism which he called the ferment. 
He was thus the founder of the science of bacteriology (as well as that of 
stereochemistry). He proceeded to demonstrate that the varieties of fer-
mentation observed were attributable to separate organisms in each case 
and that when these atmospheric germs were absolutely excluded, no change 
took place. 
Pasteur also showed that one component of racemic acid (that identical 
with the tartaric acid from fermentation) could be utilized for nutrition by 
microorganisms, whereas the other, which is now termed its optical antipode, 
was not assimilable by living organisms. On the basis of these experiments, 
Pasteur elaborated his theory of molecular asymmetry. He showed that the 
biological properties of chemical substances depend not only on the nature 
of the atoms constituting their molecules (which were the same in the case of 
the two acids with which he had been experimenting), but also on the manner 
in which these atoms are arranged in space (which were different with his 
acids). In the course of his analysis he once again encountered—although in 
liquid form—new "right" and "left" compounds. 
After laying the theoretical groundwork, Pasteur proceeded to apply his 
findings to the study of vinegar and wine, two commodities of great impor-
tance in the economy of France. He developed a sterilization process that came 
to be called pasteurization, the destruction of harmful germs by heat, which 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
147 
made it possible to produce, preserve, and transport these products without 
their undergoing deterioration. These discoveries proved to be of great value 
to the brewing and winemaking industries, where scientific certainty could now 
be substituted for the guesswork used earlier. Once the pasteurization process 
was introduced in France to prevent the deterioration of wines, beers, and 
milk, these industries became more profitable, and fewer consumers suffered 
ill effects from using spoiled products. 
In 1865, Pasteur began the study of silkworm diseases; he researched the 
area for the next five years. At that time, silkworm diseases had tremendously 
reduced the value of raw silk in France. The entire industry was threatened. 
He carried out his research on silkworm diseases in the plantations of south-
ern France. Eventually, he was able to determine the causes of the silkworm 
diseases and to eliminate them as a serious threat to the industry. His work 
was followed by a rapid increase in the annual value of silk and the reestab-
lishment of prosperity in the trade. 
From 1870 to about 1876, Pasteur devoted himself to the problems of 
beer going bad. Similar to wine and vinegar, beer was likely to undergo 
spontaneous changes, to acidify, and spoil, especially during the warm seasons. 
Pasteur demonstrated that these changes in the beer were always attributable 
to microscopic organisms. Following an investigation conducted both in France 
and among the brewers in London, he devised, as he had done for vinegar and 
for wine, a procedure for manufacturing beer that would prevent its deterio-
ration with time. British exporters, whose ships at the time had to sail entirely 
around the African continent, were thus able to send British beer as far as 
India without fear of its deteriorating. 
Smallpox was a disease that ravaged Europe and the Orient for many cen-
turies starting from about the sixth century A.D. The disease affected its peak 
number of victims by about the seventeenth century. Those victims who lived 
(about 25% of those infected) were left with pockmarked faces and blindness 
in many cases. It was known that repeated attacks of smallpox were very rare. 
Once one recovered from it, one was quite unlikely to get it again. People 
began to understand that if they were purposely given (by injection) a small 
amount of the disease, as from a pustule, only a very mild case of smallpox 
would result, and the disease could then run its course with a minimum of risk. 
This approach to prophylaxis was called inoculation. 
Edward Jenner had studied cowpox, a relatively harmless disease in the 
smallpox family which usually affects cows and people who work directly with 
them. He found, in 1796, that when a person stricken with cowpox was injected 
with virulent smallpox virus, the person would then not contract small-
pox. Jenner had discovered an immunization for smallpox. This vaccination 
with cowpox virus immunized the person against the terrible scourge of the 
smallpox virus. 
Pasteur's work in preventive medicine may be his best known achievement. 
This work started in about 1877 and consumed about the next two decades, 
until the end of his life in 1895. He developed a germ theory of disease. Pasteur 

148 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
generalized the work of Edward Jenner by applying similar principles of inocu-
lation to fermentation and infectious diseases. Pasteur knew that each variety 
of fermentation was originated by a specific ferment; so in the case of various 
maladies, the infection depended on the presence of a specific microbe. He 
reasoned that an artificial growth of this microbe might be obtained and that 
by growing a certain succession of such cultures (by harvesting several microbe 
generations in the laboratory environment), the virus would be weakened in 
virulence. Then, if an animal were injected with such weakened strains of the 
virus, a slight attack of a given malady would appear, but the animal would 
then be rendered immune to the disease. Pasteur's application of this notion 
to cholera (bacilli) in chickens and to anthrax (bacilli) in cattle and sheep was 
very successful. 
Pasteur finally extended the concept of immunization to inoculation for 
rabies virus (in 1885), with enormous success. After experimenting with inoc-
ulations of saliva from infected animals, he came to the conclusion that the 
virus was also present in the nerve centers. He demonstrated that, when a 
portion of the medulla oblongata of a rabid dog was injected into the body of 
a healthy animal, symptoms of rabies were produced. By further work on the 
dried tissues of infected animals and the effect of time and temperature on 
these tissues, he was able to obtain a weakened form of the virus that could 
be used for inoculation. Having detected the rabies virus by its effects on 
the nervous system and attenuated its virulence, he applied his procedure to 
human beings. 
Louis Pasteur brought about a veritable revolution in disease understand-
ing and treatment. By abandoning his laboratory and tackling the agent of 
the disease in its origin in the natural environment, he was able through his 
investigations to supply the complete solution to the question before him, 
not only identifying the agent responsible for a disease but also indicating the 
remedy. A skillful experimenter, endowed with a great curiosity and a remark-
able gift of observation, Pasteur devoted himself with immense enthusiasm to 
science and its applications to medicine, agriculture, and industry. 
4.10.C Major Works 
Pasteur, Vallery-Radot (Ed. and Louis Pasteur's grandson) (1922-1939). Oeuvres de 
Pasteur, 7 volumes containing all books and papers published by Louis Pasteur 
during his lifetime, plus other works not published during his lifetime, and related 
documents by others), Paris: Masson et Cíe. 
(1964). Pasteur: Donation du Professeur. Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale. (The 
donation of Pasteur's previously private laboratory notebooks to the National 
Library.) 
(1985). Nouvelle Acquisitions Latines et Franqaises du Departement des Μαηιι-
scrits Pendant les Annes 1977-1982: Inventaire Sommaire, Paris, 17923-18112. 
Louis Pasteur, Papiers. 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
149 
4.10.D Subjectivity in the Work of Pasteur 
A half century ago, Dubos (1950) pointed out Pasteur's dependence on 
strongly held preexperiment beliefs, intuition, and deep understanding of the 
processes he worked with to advance his science: "In many instances, discov-
ery appears to have evolved from the fact that Pasteur had been made alert 
to the recognition of a phenomenon, because he was convinced a priori of its 
existence" (p. 373). Or, again, "[h]e often mentioned his use of preconceived 
ideas, from which he derived the stimulus for many experiments" (p. 369). 
And yet again: "His greatest discoveries were the fruits of intuitive visions 
and they were published in the form of short preliminary notes long before 
experimental evidence was available to substantiate them" (p. 360). 
More recently, careful study of Louis Pasteur's private notebooks has 
revealed that very broadly based informal subjectivity and personal beliefs 
pervaded much of his research methodology and his approach to scientific 
investigation. These revelations have caused a considerable stir in some sci-
entific communities. We find, however, that they show that Pasteur was, like 
most other scientists, a research worker whose personal beliefs, based on 
an educated understanding of underlying scientific processes, assisted him in 
conjecturing what was probably true about the world. Often, but certainly not 
always, his conjecturing, intuition, and frequent use of educated strong per-
sonal belief turned out to be supported by his experimental results. We explore 
below some of the subjectivity issues associated with Pasteur's approach to 
scientific research. 
It is important to make distinctions among the many ways other-than-
objective methods are used by scientists. It will be seen in the discussion that 
follows that like other scientists, Louis Pasteur certainly used subjective re-
search methods based on strongly held prior beliefs. But also, and very dif-
ferently from some other scientists, some observers have asserted that Pasteur 
was much more than just subjective. They argue that he lied and misrepre-
sented his "scientific" results—that he claimed to have carried out experiments 
that proved his beliefs when, in fact, no such experiments had been carried 
out. In short, Pasteur is being accused of scientific fraud. Fraud carries belief 
and subjectivity to extremes that are unacceptable in science, and a sharp line 
must be drawn between, on the one hand, the use of subjectivity to assist 
the scientist in conjecturing what might correspond to scientific truth, even 
approximately, and, on the other hand, fraud. It is mandatory for maintaining 
a proper perspective about science that such distinctions be borne in mind 
when evaluating claims made against Pasteur or any other scientist. Although 
some historians of science argue that such fraud was actually committed by 
Pasteur, others disagree. 
Pasteur instructed his family that after his death his laboratory notebooks 
were not to be shown to anyone—ever. Despite this request, however, in 1964, 
his grandson, Pasteur Vallery-Radot, donated most of the collection to the 

150 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Paris Bibliotheque Nationale. By 1985, the Bibliotheque Nationale had 
prepared a printed catalogue of the notebooks and other works. Now that 
historians of science have examined this material, they have discovered large 
discrepancies between what Pasteur recorded in his notebooks, and what he 
did and said in public. Comparing the two, some have concluded that like other 
scientists, Pasteur was driven by very strong, preconceived beliefs in his own 
ability to discover and understand some of the truths in nature. Moreover, 
sometimes these strong beliefs were in disagreement with observed data, and 
sometimes, it seems, Pasteur failed even to report such discrepant data. His 
approach to scientific research was anything but the narrow, mythical path 
of objectivity that scientists are generally believed to take. His approach is 
described in detail in Geison (1995) and in some of Geison's earlier writing 
on Louis Pasteur (see, e.g., Geison, 1974). 
Geison shows many discrepancies between what Pasteur wrote in the 
notebook and what he said in public or wrote for public consumption. He 
specifically denies any attempt to tarnish Pasteur's reputation, but believes 
that the telling of the story will shed light on the actual practice of science, 
showing that pure objectivity in science is really a myth. Instead, science, like 
any other form of culture, depends on rhetoric and the actions of human 
beings. Geison's 1995 book on Pasteur was reviewed by Lewis Wolpert (1995). 
Wolpert said: "Pasteur was deceptive because... he wanted both priority 
and recognition ... to find support for his work and for personal gratification. 
... What this life of Pasteur shows is how complex, hard and imaginative 
scientific discovery is, and that it requires a variety of skills rarely found in one 
person." 
Another review of Geison's 1995 book described the comparison of the 
notebooks with the published work and then had this to say about Pasteur's 
research methodology (Altman, 1995): "[T]his is not the only example of sci-
entists and historians as well as investigative journalists beginning to shatter 
myths about crucial discoveries and those who made them. The disclosures are 
revealing that science is not as objective, neat and scrupulously honest as it is 
portrayed" [emphasis added]. 
Chapter 6 of Geison's book discusses the discrepancy between Pasteur's 
public and his laboratory-notebook accounts of the production of his vaccine 
against anthrax (which involved the "secret of Pouilly-le-Fort"). This discus-
sion is primarily an account of the relationship between Pasteur and his rival 
Jean-Joseph Toussaint for claiming priority for discovering a vaccine against 
anthrax. The incident relates to Pasteur's claims to the scientific community 
and to the public about scientific results that were based on his generous use 
of his exceedingly powerful personal views about the underlying structure of 
the phenomenon he was studying, in this case, immunization against anthrax, 
prior to his obtaining the data required to justify his conclusions. 
In the incident of Pouilly-le-Fort, Pasteur agreed to hold a public trial of a 
new vaccine he had discovered against anthrax, a major killer of animals and 
people. (The same anthrax microorganism is being discussed publicly these 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
151 
days as possibly being designed by some countries for use as a weapon for 
mass destruction of human beings in biological warfare.) The trials took place 
at Pouilly-le-Fort, a suburb of Paris, in May-June 1881. Twenty-five sheep were 
vaccinated with the Pasteur vaccine, and then these 25, along with another 25 
unvaccinated sheep, were injected with virulent anthrax bacilli. With a very 
few exceptions that were explained away, the vaccinated sheep did very well 
compared with the unvaccinated sheep, most of which died. The public trials 
were a great success for Pasteur. Although Pasteur was never very clear about 
the actual nature of the vaccine he used in the trial, finally, on June 13,1881, 
he announced to the French Académie des Sciences that his vaccine in the 
Pouilly-le-Fort trials was prepared by a method in which exposure to atmos-
pheric oxygen played a crucial role. But in 1937, some 40 years after Pasteur's 
death, his nephew Adrien Loir published some essays (Loir, 1937-1938) in 
which he asserts that "the vaccine actually used at Pouilly-le-Fort had been 
prepared not by atmospheric attenuation, but rather by the 'antiseptic' action 
of potassium bichromate." 
Geison and his colleague Antonio Cadeddu confirmed the truth of this 
version of reality by carefully examining Pasteur's laboratory notebooks. They 
concluded that Pasteur had "deliberately deceived the public and the scien-
tific community about the nature of the vaccine actually used at Pouilly-le-
Fort" (Geison, 1995, p. 151). This was the secret of Pouilly-le-Fort. According 
to Loir (see Geison, 1995, p. 149): "Pasteur, at that time, pursued the attenua-
tion of viruses by atmospheric oxygen. It was a theory that he had conceived. 
Oxygen destroyed the virulence of all microbes. The immense role of oxygen 
was an idea he had long held. He pursued its demonstration." Pasteur vowed 
that he would not permit anyone to publish the results of his experiments with 
potassium bichromate until attenuation by oxygen had been found. 
Pasteur had held very strong beliefs about the role played by oxygen in 
destroying harmful disease-causing bacteria. He had concluded earlier that 
oxygen was the agent that attenuated the virulence of the chicken cholera 
microbe. So he believed that this same mechanism was probably applicable 
to the anthrax problem as well. But he had no proof. Nevertheless, he reported 
to the Academy of Sciences that it was an oxygen-attenuated vaccine that 
he had used rather than the antiseptic vaccine that he had actually used. He 
had let his beliefs about which vaccine was appropriate to immunize against 
anthrax, rather than his actual data, drive his representation to the world. 
Pasteur's claims of discovery were in some sense similar to Einstein's many 
claims (Section 4.13) about the truth of his theories long before there were 
data that confirmed them. In Pasteur's case, however, the scientist misrepre-
sented the mechanism for the conclusions reached. Moreover, Pasteur did not 
derive his conclusions by inferences from mathematical formulations, as did 
Einstein. In both cases, however, these scientists arrived at their conclusions 
from a profound understanding of the underlying science involved rather than 
from confirming experiments. 
In 1885, Pasteur saved the lives of the boys Joseph Meister and Jean-

152 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Baptiste Jupille, who had been bitten by a rabid dog. Pasteur claimed to have 
perfected a vaccine against rabies and these cases demonstrated that his 
vaccine worked. He repeatedly claimed to have previously produced immu-
nity in 50 animals. Yet, on July 6, when he gave the first injection to Meister, 
Pasteur's notebooks make clear that he had just begun a series of vaguely com-
parable experiments on 40 dogs. However, he had been trying out various vac-
cines, and he speculated that his vaccine would work—and fortunately for the 
boys, it did. On the day that he delivered his famous paper to the French 
Academy of Sciences, October 26,1885, Pasteur was still injecting Jupille—not 
even waiting for the full outcome before claiming success. 
We should note that there is some justification for human experimentation 
of this sort, even in the absence of the animal evidence that Pasteur claimed. 
The boys were savagely bitten and the chance that they would come down 
with rabies was very high. If they did contract rabies, death was very likely. 
Pasteur had a possible cure, and although he had no actual evidence that 
it would work, he did have his subjective belief that it would. Hence, using 
it rather than not treating the boys at all may indeed have been ethically 
justifiable. 
According to Geison, Pasteur's work on spontaneous generation was also 
subjected to some manipulation, for somewhat different reasons. Pasteur was 
a political conservative who used his science in the service of France, the 
Catholic Church, and the Second Empire. Pasteur saw to it in these experi-
ments that nature did not speak for itself but was shown to be on the side of 
the Second Empire, the Catholic Church, and France. Pasteur was careful to 
exclude from his public announcements any experiments that did not confirm 
his personal biases. Pasteur labeled results experimental errors if they con-
flicted with his a priori belief that spontaneous generation must be wrong. Such 
an idea had to be wrong because it conflicted with his values. 
We pointed out in Chapter 1 that the same data may be interpreted differ-
ently by different observers. Pasteur understood that data need to be inter-
preted. Because he was a political animal he interpreted his data in ways that 
would support the Catholic Church and the French nation. Because he inter-
preted his data selectively, he misled the public and other scientists as well as 
the Academy of Sciences. Pasteur had come up with undesirable results in his 
experiments, so he manipulated the data. He threw out the data that were dis-
turbing. He arranged for his experiments to confirm his judgments. 
The following is an adaptation of portions of Geison (1995): We can explain 
such failures in Pasteur's experiments in the light of the knowledge of today— 
that some of the organisms Pasteur had in the samples in his experiment were 
able to survive unless the temperature were extremely high. But in a so-called 
objective scientific approach, when the data conflict with the scientist's beliefs 
and theory, the scientist should report the anomalous data, and might change 
the theory until it conforms to the observed data. Pasteur seems to have some-
times done it the other way around. He apparently ignored the data that con-
flicted with the strong beliefs he held prior to his taking the data. Pasteur 

LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895) 
153 
defined as "unsuccessful" any experiments that gave results contrary to his 
beliefs. Moreover, during the 1860s, the most politically sensitive phase in the 
spontaneous generation debate, Pasteur's public image was that of fearless 
crusader against the dangerous doctrine of spontaneous generation. Yet one 
learns from the notebooks that during those years, Pasteur considered the arti-
ficial creation of life a theoretical possibility. He had actually pursued the 
problem experimentally in the early 1850s. For 30 years, Pasteur said nothing 
in public about these remarkable experiments and very little about precon-
ceived ideas. The public would have been amazed to learn that Pasteur had 
managed to wage a vocal public campaign against spontaneous generation 
even as he speculated about the creations of life in his own special version of 
this dangerous doctrine (pp. 137-138). 
Some conclusions regarding Geison's book, bear repeating. Commenting 
on the discrepancies between the notebooks and Pasteur's public pronounce-
ments, Higgins (1995) points out that such discrepancies are familiar to 
working scientists or students of "science studies." For them: "[I]t will be 
obvious that such discrepancies are part... of the process by which 'raw data' 
are transformed into published 'results.' In the interests of brevity, clarity, 
logical coherence and rhetorical power, the published record always projects 
a more or less distorted image of what the scientist 'really' did." 
Dubos (1950) knew of Pasteur's preconceptions and some missteps that 
resulted in other areas as well: 
As will be remembered [Pasteur] had isolated from the saliva of the first rabid child 
that he studied a virulent encapsulated microorganism—now known as the pneu-
mococcus. Before recognizing that this organism did not bear any relation to rabies, 
he constructed the theory that the period of incubation of the disease was the time 
required for the dissolution or destruction in the tissues of the capsule surrounding 
the microorganism. Had this working hypothesis fitted the facts of rabies, it would 
have been, indeed, an exciting theory; but because it did not, scientific etiquette rules 
it bad taste to mention it in print. 
And yet, the elucidation of the mental processes involved in scientific discovery 
requires a knowledge of the hypotheses that miscarry, as well as of those which bear 
fruit (p. 376). 
We have presented some of the evidence regarding the subjectivity and 
possible fraud of Louis Pasteur in light of the research of biographers such as 
Dubos (1950) and Geison (1995). Dubos sometimes chose to overlook appar-
ent inconsistencies in Pasteur's methodological approach to science; Geison 
used Pasteur's own laboratory notebooks to illuminate seemingly inexplica-
ble misrepresentations and discrepancies between his data and his theories. 
But Pasteur also had his strong defenders among scientists. Perutz (1995) 
wrote a long critique of Geison's 1995 book, claiming that Geison had misin-
terpreted Pasteur's notebooks. But Higgins (December 26,1995) convincingly 
countered Perutz, claiming that Perutz was merely trying to uphold Pasteur's 
sacred place as a hero and an icon in the history of biology. 

154 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
We have examined the scientific methodology of Louis Pasteur on the basis 
of the evaluations of his principal biographers, and on the basis of his private 
laboratory notebooks. We find that Louis Pasteur was a giant among scientists, 
a pathbreaker in his research, and like other scientists before him, very infor-
mally subjective in his methodological approach. 
REFERENCES 
Altman, Lawrence K. (1995). "Revisionist History Sees Pasteur as Liar Who Stole 
Rival's Ideas," New York Times, May 16, pp. Cl, C3. 
Collins, Harry, and Trevor Pinch (1993). The Golem: What Everyone Should Know 
About Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Dagognet, Francois (1967). Méthodes et Doctrines dans VOeuvre de Pasteur. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires. 
DeKruif, Paul (1953). Microbe Hunters. New York: Harbrace Paperback Library. 
Dubos, Rene (1950, 1960, 1976). Louis Pasteur: Free Lance of Science. New York: 
Scribners, Da Capo Press. 
Duclaux, Emile (1895). "Le Laboratoire de Monsieur Pasteur ä TEcole Normale," 
Revue Scientifique, 4th series, 15:449-454. Reprinted in Le Centenaire de TEcole 
Normale, 1795-1895. Paris: Ecole Normale. 
(1896). Pasteur: Histoire d'un Esprit. Sceaux, France: Charaire. English transla-
tion by E. F. Smith and F. Hedges as Pasteur: The History of a Mind (1920). 
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. 
Farley, John, and Gerald Geison (1982). "Science, Politics and Spontaneous Genera-
tion in Nineteenth-Century France: The Pasteur-Pouchet Debate," pp. 1-38 in 
H. M. Collins (Ed.), Sociology of Scientific Knowledge: A Source Book. Bath, 
UK: Bath University Press. [Originally, Bulletin of the History of Medicine (1974), 
48:161-198.] 
Geison, Gerald A. (1974). "Louis Pasteur," pp. 350-416 in Charles C. Gillispie (Ed.), 
The Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 10. New York: Scribners. 
(1995). The Private Science of Louis Pasteur. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press. 
Higgins, A. 
C. 
(1995). Science 
Fraud 
Bulletin 
Board 
(Internet 
address: 
scifraud©albnyvml), June 12,13, December 26. 
Loir, Adrien (1937-1938). "A lOmbre de Pasteur" (In the Shadow of Pasteur) Mou-
vement Sanitaire, 14:91-92. 
Medawar, Peter B. (1964). "Is the Scientific Paper Fraudulent," Saturday Review, 
August 1, pp. Α2-Λ3. 
Metchnikoff, Elie (1933). Trois Fondateurs de la Médecine Moderne: Pasteur, Lister, 
Koch. Paris: Libraire Felix Alean. 
Nicolle, Jacques (1953). Un Maltre de VEnquete Scientifique, Louis Pasteur. Paris: La 
Colombe. Translated as Louis Pasteur: A Master of Scientific Enquiry. London: 
Hutchinson, 1961. 
(1966). Louis Pasteur: The Story of His Major Discoveries. New York: Fawcett. 

REFERENCES 
155 
Perutz, M. F. (1995). "The Pioneer Defended," a review of Gerald L. Geison, The 
Private Science of Louis Pasteur (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) New 
York Review of Books, December 21, pp. 54ff. 
Roux, Ernie (1896). "LOeuvre Medícale de Pasteur," in Agenda du Chimiste, Paris. 
Reprinted in Institut Pasteur, "Pasteur 1822-1922." Translated by E. F. Smith as 
"The Medical Work of Pasteur," Scientific Monthly, 21:325-389 (1925). 
Vallery-Radot, Rene (1883). Pasteur: Histoire dyun Savant par un Ignorant. Paris: J. 
Hetzel. 
(1900). La Vie de Pasteur, 2 vols. Paris: Flammarion. Translated as The Life of 
Pasteur by R. L. Devonshire, 2 vols. London: Constable, 1911. 
Wolpert, Lewis (1995). "Experiments in Deceit: A Review of Gerald L. Geison, The 
Private Science of Louis Pasteur," Book Review, New York Times, May 7, p. 35. 

156 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
4.11 SIGMUND FREUD (1856-1939) 
Sigmund Freud was a psychologist who was the founding father of the field 
we now call psychoanalysis. 
4.11.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Sigmund Freud was born in Freiberg, now part of the Czech Republic, in 1856. 
At that time, Freiberg was in a region called Moravia, ruled by Austria. 
Although he was Jewish by birth, he considered himself an atheist. Czech 
nationalism against Austrian rule was on the rise, and the German-speaking 
Jewish minority offered an easy target for hostile feelings. When Freud was 3 
years old, the family moved to Vienna, Austria, to the poor and overcrowded 
Jewish ghetto of the city. Anti-Semitic incidents were to affect his professional 
research and belief systems. He lived in Vienna for the next 79 years, almost 
to the end of his life. 
In the educational system of Vienna, to become a medical doctor, one went 
directly to medical school after secondary school, without an intermediate 
undergraduate degree. So at the age of 17, Freud entered medical college at 
the University of Vienna. He was a distinguished medical student and worked 
in the physiology laboratory of Ernst Brücke. But Freud shunned quantitative 
(mathematical or physical science) approaches to medical matters in favor of 
the more qualitative histological and clinical approaches. He obtained his 
medical diploma at 25. 

SIGMUND FREUD (1856-1939) 
157 
At 26, Freud abandoned basic science and decided to become practical, so 
that he could earn a living. Accordingly, to qualify to practice on people, he 
spent three years doing a residency at Vienna General Hospital. There, among 
the many other medical specialties he explored, he studied psychiatry under 
Theodor Meynert, an anatomist of the brain. He joined Meynert's psychiatric 
clinic as assistant physician in 1882. 
At age 29, Freud went to Paris for 4y months, where he studied under the 
most famous neurologist of his time, Jean Martin Charcot. This was surely a 
major turning point in his career, for there that he saw Charcot studying 
hysteria, a condition of the mind. It must have struck young Freud that the 
study of the psychological aspects of neurology, as Charcot was doing, was far 
more interesting than the study of the physical aspects of neurology with which 
he had heretofore been engaged. This was a basic shift in his interests, from 
the brain to the mind, a shift that was to be permanent. He started private 
practice as a neurologist at age 30 and married the following year. 
The remainder of Freud's life involved his treating patients for mental 
problems and combining his case studies of those patients with his under-
standing of biology to try to understand the human psyche by inferring 
general theories about the causes and possible resolutions of such psychologi-
cal problems in general. His work resulted in the development of the general 
field of psychoanalysis. In 1939, the Nazis formally annexed Austria. Freud 
escaped by fleeing to London. He died there from cancer later that year, at 
the age of 83. 
4.11.B Freud's Scientific Contributions 
Freud's contributions to science may be classified into four general categories 
of topics; his work was carried out during partially overlapping time periods 
(see Alexander and Selesnick, 1966, p. 241): studies in hypnotism and hysteria 
(1886-1895), contributions to the anatomy of the nervous system and to 
neurology (1893-1897), study of the unconscious and the development of 
the psychoanalytic method of treating patients with problems of the mind 
(1895-1920), and studies of personality and the structure of society 
(1920-1939). His work in hypnotism and hysteria resulted in his publication, 
with Josef Breuer, of Studies in Hysteria (in German) in 1895. Freud's research 
in neurology concentrated on the basic science of the body more than did his 
studies of the mind, which were based on case studies. 
Freud's most productive period, in the sense of his contributions to the 
development of psychoanalysis, was between 1895 and 1900. In 1895 he devel-
oped the method of free association, in which he asked patients to abandon 
conscious control over their ideas and to say whatever came into their minds. 
Freud reasoned that there are opposite forces at play in the mind: those 
seeking to repress unpleasant events long since forgotten by the conscious 
mind, and those seeking to express feelings and emotions—forces of repres-
sion and expression. These opposing forces generated conflicts in the mind that 
resulted in mental and physical disorders. By asking his patients to freely asso-

158 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
ciate, Freud hoped that important thoughts that were previously repressed in 
the unconscious mind of the patient would come to the surface and be 
expressed, perhaps inadvertently, by the conscious mind. Once the conscious 
mind was able to "work through" and therefore to understand these repressed 
thoughts, the patient's disorders would disappear. Freud referred to this pro-
cedure (in 1896) as psychoanalysis. Later, others have also applied the term 
to the process of ridding a patient of his or her neuroses by discussion with 
the patient, regardless of whether or not the therapist believes in a repression-
based genesis of the problem (non-Freudian psychoanalysis). 
Freud noticed that while undergoing free association, many patients began 
to talk spontaneously about their dreams, often revealing the hidden content 
of their dreams. He then began to understand that the dreams were attempts 
by the patient to relieve emotional tensions and frustrations caused by inner 
conflicts. It was in 1900 that Freud published what is generally accepted to be 
his greatest work, The Interpretation of Dreams. Over time, Freud became 
increasing adroit at interpreting his patients' dreams. Moreover, the more he 
studied the dreams, the more he became convinced that sexual impulses 
played a significant role in neuroses. In fact, he finally became convinced that 
sexual conflict is the most influential driving force in most, if not all, psy-
chopathology. His conclusions were published in 1905 in Three Essays on the 
Theory of Sexuality. 
It was not until 1920 that Freud finally decided to summarize some of the 
results of his case studies in terms of a theory of personality, by publishing 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle. He then also began to speculate about societal 
ills in terms of group psychology, as exemplified by Civilization and Its Dis-
contents. These speculations continued until his final work, Moses and 
Monotheism, published in 1939. 
As the field of treating mental illness has developed, other researchers and 
clinicians have introduced alternative explanations of the source of neuroses. 
They have proposed alternative methods of treatment (such as behavior 
therapy, psychopharmaceutical therapy, cognitive therapy, and a variety of psy-
chodynamical procedures), and they have suggested experiments that might 
test Freudian and related theories of the etiology and treatment of mental 
illnesses. 
4.11.C Major Works 
Freud, Sigmund (1899). Die Traumdeutung (The Interpretation of Dreams). Leipzig: 
F. Deuticke. 
(1904). Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens (Psychopathology of Everyday 
Life). Authorized English edition (1914) by A. A. Brill. London: T. Fisher Univan. 
(1905). Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (Three Essays on the Theory of 
Sexuality). Leipzig: F. Deuticke. 
(1910). Über Psychoanalyse 
(The Origin and Development of Psycho-
Analysis). Vienna: F. Deuticke. 

SIGMUND FREUD (1856-1939) 
159 
(1913). Totem und Tabu (Totem and Taboo). English verison, Totem and 
Taboo and Other Works (1955) London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of 
Psychoanalysis. 
(1914). Zur Geschuchte der Psychoanalytischen Bewegung (On the History of 
the Psychoanalytic Movement). English version (1917), London: The Nervous and 
Mental Disease Publishing Co. 
(1917). Vorlesungen zur Einfuhrung in die Psychoanalyse (A General Intro-
duction to Psychoanalysis). English version (1920), New York: Boni and Liveright. 
(1920). Jenseits des Lustprinzips 
(Beyond the Pleasure Principle). English 
version (1922), London: The Psycho-analytical Press. 
(1923). Das Ich und das Es (The Ego and the Id). English version 
(1927), London: L. and Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press and the Institute of 
Psychoanalysis. 
(1925). Selbstdarstellung (An Autobiographical Study). Translation to English 
(1935), London: L. and Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press and the Institute of 
Psychoanalysis. 
(1926). Hemmung, Symptom und Angst (Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety). 
Vienna: Intionationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag. 
(1926). Die Frage der Laienanalyse (The Question of Lay-Analysis). English 
translation (1950) New York: Norton. 
(1927). Die Zukunft einer Illusion (The Future of an Illusion). English transla-
tion (1928) London: L. and Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press and the Institute 
of Psychoanalysis. 
(1930). Das Unbehagen in der Kultur (Civilization and Its Discontents). English 
translation (1930) London: L. and Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press and the 
Institute of Psychoanalysis. 
(1933). Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einfuhrung in die Psychoanalyse (New 
Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis). Translated by W. J. H. Sprott (1933), 
New York: WW. Norton. 
(1939). Der Mann Moses und die Monotheistische 
Religion (Moses and 
Monotheism). English translation (1985) Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
(1974) The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund 
Freud, 24 vols., James Strachey et al. (Eds.). London: Hogarth Press and the Insti-
tute of Psychoanalysis. 
Freud, Sigmund, and J. Breuer (1895). Studien über Hysterie (Studies in Hysteria). 
English translation (1950) Boston: Beacon Press. 
4.11.D Subjectivity in the Work of Freud 
Since Freud's death there have been many who have questioned whether his 
research methodology was really honest and objective, and even whether it 
was really science. The assaults on his work have steadily increased. Recently, 
a variety of documents relating to Freud and his work have been released, 
some by his estate. These documents have raised many questions, not only 
about his use of personal beliefs in his scientific research. They go further, to 

160 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
ask also whether the entire field of psychoanalysis he started, and the related 
field of clinical psychology, should be considered bone fide scientific fields, or 
just passing pseudoscientific fads (see, e.g., Dawes, 1994). An informative 
account of the more recent attacks on Freud's work was given by Gray (1993). 
Not only has the Freudian theory become the dominant view of mental illness 
and its treatment, but his influence has permeated our culture. We need little 
familiarity with the actual works of Freud to understand the meaning of such 
terms as Freudian slip or Oedipus complex. But the advent and increased 
success of psychoactive drugs suggest that the etiology of mental illness may 
be more physiological and less psychological than Freud believed. 
Freud and his entire theory of psychoanalysis have come under frontal 
assault. Adapting from Gray (1993), we can see that some of the accusations 
were leveled against Freud even quite early. The 10-year collaboration 
between Freud and Carl Jung ended in 1914, to the detriment of psycho-
analysis, when a difficult schism developed in the field that permanently 
divided its adherents. From that time on there were Freudians and Jungians. 
John Kerr argues in A Most Dangerous Method (quoted in Gray, 1993, p. 49) 
"... that the growing philosophical disputes between Freud and Jung were 
exacerbated by a cat-and-mouse game of sexual suspicion and blackmail." 
Freud contended that an ex-patient of Jung's named Sabina Spielrein had 
also been Jung's mistress. On the other side, Jung became convinced that Freud 
had become involved with his sister-in-law, Minna Bernays. Both men could 
readily have destroyed each other's reputations. But each of them retreated 
from these hazardous positions, preferring instead to benefit personally from 
their collaborative efforts, with the result that their professional positions 
partitioned different portions of the theory. Gray has asked (1993, p. 49): "Was 
this any way to found an objective science?" 
Freud's supporters have argued that his personal life bears little relation 
to his contributions to the field, despite the fact that Freud himself stated that 
his development of the analytic method began with his pioneering analysis of 
himself. Regardless of this assertion, Arnold Richards, editor of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association newsletter, dismissed any attention paid to Freud's 
private conduct: "It has no scientific practical consequence. It's not relevant 
to Freud's theory or practice" (quoted in Gray, 1993, p. 49). Freud's published 
case histories largely recorded inconclusive results. For this reason, some 
of his defenders have argued that he may not have been very good at imple-
menting his own beliefs, but that failing in no way invalidates his theories. 
Freud's supporters have also had to defend against the onslaught em-
bodied in Grunbaum (1993). The 1993 book continues Grunbaum's assault 
(Grunbaum, 1983) on the fundamental structure of psychoanalysis and brings 
into question whether psychoanalysis should even be considered a science. He 
accomplishes this by examining a number of key psychoanalytic premises: the 
theory of repression (which Freud called "the cornerstone on which the whole 
structure of psychoanalysis rests"), the investigative capabilities offered by 

SIGMUND FREUD (1856-1939) 
161 
free association, and the diagnostic significance of dreams. Although 
Grunbaum admits that the idea of repressed memories, for instance, may be 
correct, he questions whether Freud or any of his successors has ever 
established a cause-and-effect link between a repressed memory and a later 
neurosis or a retrieved memory and a subsequent cure. 
In Freud's favor, Gray (1993, p. 51) cites the work of Jonathan Winson, pro-
fessor emeritus of neurosciences at Rockefeller University, who has done 
extensive research on the physiology of sleep and dreams. Winson claims 
that Freud's intuition of the existence of the unconscious was correct, even if 
not based on scientific evidence. Winson also credits Freud for sensing that 
dreams are the "royal road" to the unconscious. In the final analysis, Freud 
may have gotten so many important concepts right that it is, and will be, 
difficult simply to brush him aside. We reach this conclusion despite his care-
less treatment of colleagues and patients alike, and despite his many sins of 
omission and commission. He still managed to create an intellectual construct 
that appears to contain more important and basic ideas than does any 
other psychological system currently extant. But despite his arguments to the 
contrary, the field of psychoanalysis he established so subjectively has not yet 
proved itself to be a science. 
But Freud's more-than-generous use of subjectivity in his approach to his 
work did not escape notice even by his contemporaries. For example, Joseph 
Jastrow wrote (1932, p. 93): 
The initial source of dissension was the far reaching sovereignty assigned by Freud 
to sex in the psychic life, and particularly to the detailed deductions derived from 
its imperial sway. The protests against the sexualization of the psyche were many 
and emphatic, and made not by squeamish Puritans, but by responsible scientists 
and by Freud's own followers. In Jung's '"analysis," sex is as strident as in Freud's; 
but in his survey the urge to live and live the life abundant cannot be confined to 
the will to live sexually, nor is it derived from it. Libido includes other urges, bio-
logically parallel and equally primary. Libido is life-energy expressed through the 
psyche. So radical a reshaping of a major doctrine was proclaimed a heresy. Sex was 
the shibboleth; those who pronounced it differently were of another tribe. They were 
met by the excommunication of estrangement. 
Jastrow was here noting how strongly Freud held to his personal belief that 
sexual urge and libido was the end-all, the driving force behind all repression 
and inner conflict. Freud held fast to this belief, despite major objections and 
major objectors. It was a very strong prior belief, in our technical sense, and 
one that was not to be modified objectively in the light of observational data, 
if such could be found. 
But what generated such strong prior beliefs by Freud? What were the influ-
ences on him that engendered such strongly held personal notions of the drives 
that must be responsible for molding and shaping human behavior? Torrey 
(1992, p. 13) states: 

162 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
[DJuring the 1890s Sigmund Freud was a man with a mystical sense of personal 
destiny, who believed in telepathy and numerology, and who was using cocaine at 
least intermittently. Specifically, Freud acknowledged "making frequent use of 
cocaine" during the period when he analyzed his own dream of Irma's injection in 
1895; this dream, labeled by Ernest Jones as "an historic moment," has been called 
the prototypic "dream specimen" of psychoanalysis. The dream of Irma's injection 
also inaugurated Freud's own self-analysis, during which he developed his theory of 
childhood sexual development and the Oedipal complex. 
The fact that Freudian theory evolved simultaneously with a sense of destiny, an 
interest in the occult, and the use of cocaine does not in itself negate the validity of 
the theory. It does, however, cast a shadow over its scientific foundation. It also 
makes more comprehensible Freud's own recollections of the development of his 
theory, published in 1914 as a pamphlet titled The History of the Psychoanalytic 
Movement: "Since, however, my conviction of the general accuracy of my observa-
tions and conclusions grew and grew, and as my confidence in my own judgment 
was by no means slight, any more than my moral courage, there could be no doubt 
about the outcome of the situation." 
Torrey (1992, pp. 215-216) also wrote: "In later years, when a psychologist 
wrote Freud to tell him that he had found scientific support for Freud's theory, 
Freud responded testily that his theory needed no validation." This statement 
of Freud clearly demonstrates his very strong personal belief in his own theory, 
regardless of data, a characteristic shared by Newton, Einstein, Pasteur, and 
many of the other scientists being studied in this book. This informal subjec-
tivity in his methodological approach to research is parallel to the informal 
subjectivity employed by the other famous scientists we are examining in 
this chapter, and contrasts with the Bayesian approach of using formal 
subjectivity mixed with experimental data advocated in Chapter 5. 
Torrey (1992) continued with a statement of Freud in the same vein: "It 
should also be recalled that Freud was actively conducting experiments 
on occult phenomena throughout these years, and it may have been within 
such a context that Freud spoke when he once proclaimed: 4We possess the 
truth, I am sure of it.'" Kline (1972) added: "Freudian theory, so far as it is 
dependent on data at all, rests on data which by the criteria of scientific 
methodology are totally inadequate. These data are, for the most part, the free 
associations of patients undergoing therapy and their dream reports, and both 
of these sources are unquantifiable and riddled with subjective interpretation." 
In a review of Freud's work as "science" (Eysenck and Wilson, 1973), the 
authors concluded: "In this volume the authors found not one study which one 
could point to with confidence and say, 'Here is definitive support of this or 
that Freudian notion; a support which is not susceptible to alternative inter-
pretation, which has been replicated, which is based on a proper experimen-
tal design, which has been submitted to proper statistical treatment, and which 
can confidently be generalized, being based on an appropriate sample of the 
population.' After three quarters of a century, this is a serious indictment of 
psychoanalysis." 

SIGMUND FREUD (1856-1939) 
163 
Another important influence on Freud's development of psychoanalysis 
and the building of his very strong prior beliefs was his ethnic background 
(see, e.g., Bakan, 1958; Grollman, 1965). Grollman wrote: 
Before the Freudian era, a movement was led by a man who represented the com-
plete opposite of cold pedantry. The new approach followed the uprisings in 
the Ukraine when more than 100,000 Jews lost their lives in less than a decade. 
[Note from the authors: Israel ben Eliezer, generally known by the name of Israel 
Baal Shem Tov (1700-1760), about 1735, started a movement called Chassidism 
(Hebrew, meaning "piousness") that spiritually revived Slavic Jewry and deeply 
penetrated all Jewry in Eastern Europe.] In his movement of Chassidism, a man 
could literally escape his unbearable miseries by immersing himself in a mystical 
hithlahabuth (the esoteric kindling of the soul with God). To the masses who hun-
gered for a direct, simple, stimulating religion which they could follow without any 
philosophical sophistications, the doctrine of salvation through prayer and humility 
rather than study was appealing. The unsupressed emotions and optimistic Chas-
sidic spirit served as a buffer against the depressing environment of dissolution 
and terror. 
It is important to note that many of the pioneers in psychoanalysis were born of 
parents upon whom Chassidism had made an impact. Freud acknowledged his 
father Jakob came from Chaissidic stock, even as Josef Breuer's father was a Chais-
sidic rabbi. Professor David Bakan postulated that Freud gave birth to psycho-
analysis because his mind was already pregnant with Chassidic mysticism. He 
mentioned Freud's awareness of the 16th century Jewish mystical physician, 
Solomon Almoli, whose book, The Solution of Dreams, gives a description of sexual 
symbolism, wish fulfillment and word play as elements found in dreams. Many coun-
terparts of Freudian theory were found in the Zohar (literally "brightness," the mys-
tical writings issued in part by Moses de Leon in the 14th century) such as the 
portrayal of primordial man where the divine act of creation was given an erotic 
character and where sex relations were treated as avenues of salvation.... 
E. Steindletz also mentioned the prior belief of Chassidism in an unconscious sex 
drive and pleasure principle. 
Bakan states in the preface to his 1958 book: "Freud's repeated affirmation 
of his Jewish identity had greater significance for the development of psycho-
analysis than is usually recognized. He was a participant in the struggles and 
the issues of Jewish mysticism; and where it was appropriate, he drew from 
the Jewish mystical armamentarium for equipment in these struggles." 
Shweder (1995) pointed out how different disciplines have different objec-
tions to various parts of Freud's subjectively derived system in a commentary 
on a decision of the Library of Congress to cancel a planned exhibition of 
Freud's work. He concludes by saying (p. 19): "And the philosophers of science 
come in two kinds: those who think Freud's tenets are untestable and hence 
unworthy of scientific consideration, and those who think his tenets are 
testable and have been shown to be false." 
In summary, in the case of Sigmund Freud, it is not necessary to search 
deeply for specific instances in which subjectivity played a role in his research 

164 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
methodology; his subjectivity is very visible throughout his work. Subjectivity 
was an integral part of Freud's methodology and clearly dominated his 
conclusions throughout his development of psychoanalysis. Freud's contribu-
tions to science are under attack at the present time, as were the works of 
Darwin and Galileo during their lives and after their deaths. It will therefore 
only be in the light of historical perspective that we will be able to assess 
whether Freud's use of personal beliefs, biases, and intuition were helpful to 
his contribution of new and important results in science, or misleading toward 
error. 
REFERENCES 
Abraham, Hilda G, and Ernst L. Freud (Eds.) (1965). A Psycho-Analytic 
Dialogue: 
The Letters of Sigmund Freud and Karl Abraham, 1907-1926. London: Hogarth 
Press. 
Alexander, F., and Sheldon Selesnick (1966). The History of Psychiatry. London: 
Hogarth Press. 
Andreas-Salome, Lou (1965). The Freud Journal of Lou Andreas-Salome 
(English 
translation of In der Schule bei Freud: Tage-buch eines Jahres, 1912-1913). London: 
Hogarth Press. 
Bakan, David (1958a). "Moses in the Thought of Freud," Commentary, October, 
pp. 322-331. 
(1958b). Sigmund Freud and the Jewish Mystical Tradition. Princeton, NJ: 
D. Van Nostrand. 
Bonaparte, Marie, Anna Freud, and Ernst Kris (Eds.) (1887-1902). Sigmund Freud, the 
Origins of Psychoanalysis: Letters to Wilhelm Fliess, Drafts and Notes, English 
translation by Eric Mosbacher and James Strachey. New York: Basic Books. 
Bottome, Phyllis, and Alfred Adler (1946). Apostle of Freedom, 2nd ed. London: Faber 
& Faber. 
Brome, Vincent (1967). Freud and His Early Circle. New York: Morrow. 
Costigan, Giovanni (1968). Sigmund Freud: A Short Biography. New York: Collier 
Books. 
Dawes, Robyn (1994). House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built on Myth. 
New York: Free Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Macropedia (1975). Vol. 7, p. 742. 
Eysenck, Hans, and Glenn D. Wilson (1973). The Experimental Study of Freudian 
Theories. London: Methuen. 
Fliess, Wilhelm (1906). In Eigener Sache: Gegen Otto Weininge und Hermann Swoboda. 
Berlin: E. Goldschmidt. 
Freud, Ernst L. (Ed.) (1960). Letters of Sigmund Freud, 1873-1939, translated by Tania 
and James Stern. New York: Basic Books. 
Fromm, Erich (1959). Sigmund Freuds Mission: An Analysis of His Personality and 
Influence. New York: Harper. 
Gray, Paul (1993). "The Assault on Freud," Time, November 29, pp. 47-51. 

REFERENCES 
165 
Grollman, Earl A. (1965). Judaism in Sigmund Freud's World. New York: Bloch 
Publishing Co. 
Grunbaum, Adolf (1983). In R. S. Cohen and L. Laudan (Eds.), Physics, Philosophy, 
and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum. Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands: D. Reidel (distributed in the United States by Kluwer Boston). 
(1993). Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalyis: A Study in the 
Philosophy of Psychoanalysis. Madison, CT: International Universities Press. 
Jaffe, Aniela (Ed.) (1963). Carl Jung: Memories, Dreams, Reflections, translated from 
the German. New York: Vintage Books. 
Jastrow, Joseph (1932). Freud: His Dream and Sex Theories. New York: Pocket Books. 
Jones, Ernest (1953-1957). The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud, 3 vols. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Kline, Paul (1972). Fact and Fancy in Freudian Theory. London: Methuen. 
Peters, Heinz E. (1962). My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salome. 
New York: W.W. Norton. 
Puner, Helen W. (1947). Freud: His Life and His Mind, A Biography. New York: Howell, 
Soskin. 
Reik, Theodor (1940). From Thirty Years with Freud. London: Hogarth Press. 
Robert, Marthe (1964). La Revolution Psychoanalytique: La Vie et ΓOeuvre de Sigmund 
Freud,2 vols.;English translation, The Psychoanalytic Revolution:Sigmund 
Freuds 
Life and Achievement (1966). New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. 
Sachs, Hanns (1944). Freud: Master and Friend. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Shweder, Richard A. (1995). "It's Time to Reinvent Freud," Op Ed., New York Times, 
December 15, p. A19. 
Stekel, Wilhelm (1950). Autobiography: The Life Story of a Pioneer Psychoanalyst. New 
York: Liveright. 
Torre y, E. Fuller (1992). Freudian Fraud: The Malignant Effect of Freud's Theory on 
American Thought and Culture. New York: HarperCollins. 
Trilling, Lionel, and Steven Marcus (1961). The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud, 
edited and abridged. New York: Penguin Books. 
Wittels, Fritz (1924). Sigmund Freud, English translation. Leipzig: E.P.Tal. 
Wortis, Joseph (1954). Fragments of an Analysis with Freud. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 

166 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
4.12 MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
Marie Curie won Nobel prizes in both physics and chemistry for her discov-
eries of the elements polonium and radium. 
4.12.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Marie Curie was born Marya Sklodovska in Warsaw, Russian-occupied Poland, 
on November 7,1867, the youngest of five children. Because both her parents 
were teachers, Marya was constantly exposed to teaching and learning. She 
was extremely precocious, learning to read fluently by age 4 and early showing 
evidence of an extraordinary memory. Marya graduated from secondary 
school with a gold medal in 1883 and at her father's insistence took a year of 
vacation to decide on a future course for her life. On her return to Warsaw 
she began giving private lessons to supplement her family's income. Both 
Marya and her older sister Bronya were eager for further study, but women 
were denied access to the University of Warsaw. The sisters became partici-
pants in the "Floating University." This arrangement consisted of lessons on 
such topics as anatomy, natural history, and sociology, given in secret in private 
homes through the benevolence of teachers willing to risk imprisonment for 

MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
167 
the sake of imparting knowledge to young people eager and brave enough to 
run similar risks for the sake of learning. To help her older sister study medi-
cine in Paris and to earn money for her own study there, Marya worked as a 
governess for three years. During that time, late into the night she read texts 
of literature, sociology, and science and worked mathematical problems sent 
to her by her father, thus acquiring the habit of independent work that would 
serve her so well in the future. Thereafter, as her father had secured a pension, 
she returned to Warsaw to live with him. Here, to earn her fare to Paris, she 
gave private lessons, and for the first time had access to a laboratory in which 
she tried out some of the experiments described in the chemistry and physics 
texts she had been reading. In the fall of 1891, at age 24, Marya finally left for 
Paris to begin her advanced studies. 
To start, Marya lived with her sister and brother-in-law, by then both physi-
cians, and registered for courses in physics at the Sorbonne in the Faculty of 
Science as Marie Sklodovska—the French form of her first name would be 
used thenceforth by everyone but her family. She found immediately that her 
command of French was not as perfect as she had thought, and her self-taught 
knowledge of physics left her well behind her classmates, who were holders of 
the French baccalaureate. She studied hard to remedy these deficiencies, and 
delighted in the opportunity to study science at last. Later, to secure more 
privacy to study, Marie decided to move into student lodgings in an attic in 
the Latin Quarter. She was able to afford only scant furnishing, a small amount 
of coal to ward off the winter's chill, and very modest amounts of food, but 
her time was her own to devote to her studies. She ate so little that she became 
ill of starvation; when her brother-in-law and sister found out, they took her 
again into their home to get some food into her. But as soon as she had 
regained her strength, Marie returned to her attic and her extremely modest 
diet. In 1893 she passed first in her class on the examination for a master's 
degree in physics (Licence es Physiques) and in 1894 second on that for 
mathematics (Licence es Mathématiques). 
At the beginning of 1894, Marie had received a commission to study the 
magnetic properties of various steels from the Society for the Encouragement 
of National Industry. She had no workspace in which to accomplish the task. 
She confided her problem to M. Kovalski of the University of Fribourg, who 
was visiting in Paris. Professor Kovalski suggested that the scientist Pierre 
Curie might have some advice and arranged a meeting between him and 
Marie. By this time, Pierre had already investigated the phenomenon of piezo-
electricity and invented, with his brother Jacques, a device that uses the effect 
in quartz crystal. This device later would be useful to Marie in her research on 
radioactivity. He served as chief of the laboratory at the School of Physics and 
Chemistry of the City of Paris, a post neither prestigious nor very remunera-
tive. The two took a liking to one another immediately, spending the evening 
discussing matters scientific. They saw each other during the remainder of the 
school year and remained in correspondence during the summer when Marie 
returned to Poland. By this time Pierre had suggested marriage, but Marie was 

168 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
reluctant to think about leaving Poland permanently. It took another year 
of persuasion, but on July 26,1895 the couple was married. They spent their 
honeymoon bicycling through the countryside, a pastime that was to be their 
recreation through the years. 
Marie settled in to doing the research on the magnetism of steels in the lab-
oratory and in learning how to keep house. She passed first in the examina-
tion for a fellowship in secondary education. On September 12,1897, Marie 
gave birth to her first child, Irene, and during this period also published her 
first scientific monograph, on the magnetization of tempered steel. She then 
began to think about her doctoral thesis and settled on an investigation of 
"uranic rays," which had been discovered by Antoine Henri Becquerel in 1895. 
Within a year Marie (together with Pierre) had made several startling discov-
eries. They found that the intensity of the radiation released by uranium was 
proportional to the quantity of the element present and hence was an atomic 
property. They also found that thorium too had this property, which Marie 
called radioactivity. Thus there were two new radioactive elements, named by 
the Curies polonium and radium. During the next four years, as Pierre worked 
to determine the properties of radium, Marie devoted herself to accumulating 
a sufficient quantity of radium to establish its atomic weight. The radium was 
extracted by crystallization from enormous quantities, literally tons, of pitch-
blende. The Curies obtained the pitchblende as industrial waste, after the 
uranium had been extracted. After years of heavy work under very poor 
conditions—a leaky and barely heated shed served as laboratory—Marie 
extracted 1 decigram of radium in 1902. During this time, to earn enough 
money to make ends meet, both Curies carried heavy teaching loads (Pierre 
at the Physics, Chemistry, and Natural Science Annex of the Sorbonne and 
Marie at the Higher Normal School for Girls at Sevres, near Versailles). It 
would have been far easier for them if Pierre had been able to gain the pro-
fessorship in physical chemistry at the Sorbonne for which he had applied in 
1898. But he was rejected, primarily because he had not gone through either 
the normal schools or the polytechnic, and hence did not have the support 
such institutions offered their graduates. Pierre had been offered a chair in 
physics in Geneva in 1900, together with a laboratory, a comfortable salary, 
and a post for Marie, but the couple felt that the move to Geneva would inter-
rupt their work on radioactivity unduly and so declined the offer. Pierre was 
proposed for membership in the Académie des Sciences in 1902, but his can-
didacy failed. Both members of the couple were in poor health from overwork 
and lack of proper nutrition; Marie suffered a miscarriage in 1903. But also in 
1903, Marie received her doctorate for the work with radium and shared the 
Nobel Prize in Physics for the study of uranium and other radioactive sub-
stances with Pierre and Antoine Henri Becquerel. 
Other honors also started coming to the Curies; Pierre was invited to lecture 
at the Royal Institution in London, and the couple was awarded its Davy 
Medal; Marie received the Osiris Prize. The couple meanwhile decided not to 
take out a patent for the process for extracting radium and therefore never 
profited from that development. Hence the prize money from the Nobel Foun-

MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
169 
dation was most welcome; it permitted Pierre to give up his teaching burden 
and also permitted the hiring of a laboratory assistant. At the end of 1904, the 
Curies' second daughter, Eve, was born. Finally, in 1904 a chair in physics at 
the Sorbonne was created for Pierre; the appointment included a laboratory, 
of which Marie was officially appointed chief. In 1905, Pierre was finally 
elected to the Académie des Sciences. 
The couple continued to dedicate themselves to their laboratory, living 
quietly and modestly and working long hours. On April 19, 1906, Pierre 
was run over by a horse-drawn wagon in Paris and died instantly. Marie was 
hard hit by the loss and took a good deal of time to recover; indeed, she was 
to be characterized by her daughter Eve as thereafter not only a widow but 
at the same time a pitiful and incurably lonely woman. Nevertheless, within a 
month she was back in the laboratory, mindful of what Pierre had said to her 
some years earlier when she wondered how one of them could go on if the 
other should die: "Whatever happens, even if one has to go on like a body 
without a soul, one must work just the same..." (cited by E. Curie, 1939, 
p. 254). She was given the chair in physics at the Sorbonne that had been 
created for Pierre, thus becoming the first woman to hold such a position in 
French higher education. This was a lectureship; in 1908 she was given the title 
of professor. 
An Institute of Radium was established; Marie became director of the half 
of the institute that dealt with the pure research on the physics and chemistry of 
radioactivity; the other half concentrated on research on the application 
of radioactivity to biological problems and the treatment of disease. Marie 
continued her research with thoroughness, precise elucidation of details, and 
exact measurement. She supervised many students and demanded and received 
careful and excellent work from them. In 1910 she published an encyclopedic 
treatment of her work and that of others, entitled Radioactivity, with Andre 
Debierne isolated metallic radium by electrolysis, and provided a gram of pure 
radium chloride which in 1911 established the International Radium Standard. 
Although 1911 brought failure of election to the Académie des Sciences, it 
also brought a second Nobel prize, this one in chemistry awarded to her alone, 
for her work in isolating radium. It also brought a scandal, in which what seems 
to have been an illicit affair between Marie and Paul Langevin, a colleague of 
hers and a former student of Pierre's, was discovered by Langevin's wife and 
widely written about in the tabloid press of the day. A duel was held, a trial 
was scheduled, and the Swedish Nobel committee suggested that Marie refrain 
from coming to Stockholm to receive the prize until after the trial. She refused 
to postpone her trip to Sweden, arguing that there was no connection between 
her scientific work and the facts of her private life. But the stain of scandal 
clung to her and to her daughters, her health suffered, and she was never again 
completely well. 
During World War I Marie organized a corps of vehicles each equipped with 
a portable x-ray apparatus to visit field hospitals and x-ray the wounded. She 
drove one such vehicle herself, and she and her daughter Irene were active in 
training technicians to take and read the x-rays. By 1920 her eyesight started 

170 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
deteriorating badly because of cataracts, and her general health declined due 
to anemia, which resulted from her long years of working with radioactive 
substances without knowledge of their damaging effects and thus without 
protection. She traveled twice to the United States, where she was greeted with 
acclimation and presented by President Harding with a gram of radium to be 
used in her research and bought with funds raised by popular subscription. 
She also visited Warsaw, where a great Radium Institute had been opened. 
She was elected a vice-president of the League of Nations' International 
Committee on Intellectual Co-operation and worked with the Committee on 
problems of international scientific bibliographies, agreements on scientific 
symbols, and the preparation of tables of scientific constants. 
It seems that Marie's attachment to radioactivity helped obscure for her the 
dangers it posed to human health. Of course, these dangers were hard to see: 
first, because the length of time before the onset of symptoms varied but was 
usually rather long, and second, because there is a good deal of individual 
variation in susceptibility to the hazards of radiation. Although many in her 
laboratories suffered ill effects and several died, her own long-term exposure, 
which eventually probably caused her death, was very slow to have its worst 
effects. Nevertheless, on July 4,1934, she died of pernicious anemia. She was 
buried beside Pierre in the family grave at Sceaux. 
4.12.B Curie's Scientific Contributions 
Marie Curie's major scientific contributions were the discovery of polonium 
and radium and the investigation of radioactivity. Let us look at these achieve-
ments in more detail. 
X-rays had been discovered in 1895 by Wilhelm Röntgen in Germany and 
had become an important subject for laboratory research and a novelty in 
popular culture. Discharging an electrical current through the gas remaining 
in a near-vacuum tube would produce a ray that would penetrate many opaque 
substances and could expose a photographic plate. Thus, x-rays could be used 
to view the bones of human beings through their flesh and to locate fractures. 
Shortly thereafter, Antoine Henri Becquerel at the Paris Polytechnic started 
exploring whether fluorescent bodies under the action of light emitted rays 
similar to x-rays. In particular, Becquerel was working with salts of uranium 
and found that such salts emitted rays of unknown nature without exposure 
to light and that they rendered the surrounding air conductive of electricity. 
He had observed what Marie Curie was later to dub radioactivity, and pub-
lished several papers on the phenomenon. But having begun by studying phos-
phorescence, Becquerel considered the emission produced by radium not as 
something entirely new but only as the first example of a metal exhibiting an 
invisible phosphorescence. 
Becquerel could arouse very little interest among other scientists in his so-
called "uranic ray," although William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, had, in 1897, pre-
sented a paper before the Royal Society of Edinburgh which confirmed that 

MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
171 
uranic rays did electrify the air. Lord Kelvin had earlier been interested in the 
electrometer developed by Pierre and Jacques Curie, had praised it extra-
vagantly, and had made it a point to call on Pierre in his laboratory on a visit 
to Paris in 1893. Lord Kelvin used the instrument developed by the Curie 
brothers to make the measurements reported in 1897. It was perhaps the con-
nection between Lord Kelvin and the Curies that helped spark the couple's 
fascination with uranic rays. In any case, Marie chose the subject as the topic 
of her doctoral dissertation. 
The first step was to measure the amount of what we now call radiation 
given off by various substances to see if the property found for uranium was 
peculiar to that element. The Curies invented and built an ionization chamber 
in which an electric charge was applied to a plate coated with the substance 
being tested. Whether and how fast that charge was transmitted to another 
plate separated from the first by 3 centimeters was an indication of the amount 
of radiation being produced by the substance being tested. The experimental 
setup used both the electrometer and the very sensitive piezoelectric quartz 
balance that had earlier been developed by the brothers Curie. Testing 
uranium, Marie found that the amount of radiation did not depend on either 
the physical or the chemical state of the element, only on the amount present. 
This established that radioactivity, as she dubbed this property, was an atomic 
property. She also tested various other elements and on February 17, 1898, 
tested the compound pitchblende, which contains uranium but which pro-
duced a much stronger current than that produced by uranium alone. A week 
later she found that thorium was also more active than uranium, although less 
so than pitchblende. Within a month the Curies (Pierre had dropped his work 
on crystals to cooperate with Marie in this new endeavor) had developed the 
hypothesis that pitchblende contained a new element that was more radio-
active than uranium. It was difficult to confirm that hypothesis using pitch-
blende, as that mineral contains many elements and is thus difficult to simulate 
in the laboratory. But when the Curies discovered that another, much simpler 
mineral, chalcite, was also radioactive, they were able to simulate it in the la-
boratory by combining uranium and copper phosphate. The laboratory-pro-
duced mineral showed no greater radioactivity than would be expected from 
the uranium it contained. This finding demonstrated that the naturally occur-
ring chalcite must contain a powerfully radioactive substance other than 
uranium. On April 12,1898, Marie established her priority for these discover-
ies by arranging that a note be read at the Académie des Sciences noting that 
pitchblende and chalcite exhibited more radioactivity than uranium and that 
such radioactivity implied the presence of an unknown element. This paper, 
at least implicitly, represented two other major breakthroughs: the use of 
radioactive properties to identify new substances and the notion that radio-
activity is an atomic property. 
The Curies next attempted to isolate the substance in pitchblende that was 
so radioactive. With the help of the chemist Gustave Bémont they developed 
a heating treatment that concentrated the active substance. They soon found 

172 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
that two very active substances seemed to result from the breakdown of pitch-
blende, one accompanying bismuth and one accompanying barium. They 
worked with the former and felt, although they could not separate it from the 
bismuth in order to identify it clearly through spectroscopy, that they had suf-
ficient evidence, in particular its radioactivity (400 times that of uranium), that 
they were dealing with a new element. They named their discovery polonium 
after Marie's native country and wrote a report that was read by Becquerel to 
the Académie des Sciences on July 18, 1898, announcing their discovery. (It 
was in the title of this paper, "On a new radio-active substance contained in 
pitchblende," that the term radioactivity was introduced.) 
There is a gap of several months in the laboratory notebooks at this point— 
the Curies were on summer vacation. When they returned they worked with 
the substance that accompanied barium in the breakdown of uranium; 
repeated heat concentrations led to a substance that had 900 times the radio-
activity of uranium; now spectroscopy yielded a pattern that was attributable 
to no known element. The Curies tried briefly to isolate the active substance, 
which they had named radium, in order to determine its atomic weight and its 
actual radioactivity, but failed for the time being. At the end of December 
1898, they nevertheless announced their new discovery in a paper coauthored 
with Gustave Bémont and read before the Académie des Sciences, "On a new 
strongly radio-active substance contained in pitchblende." 
Now it was necessary to isolate the pure elements and measure their atomic 
weights, thus giving them places in the periodic table and firmly proving that 
they were indeed new elements. It proved easier to isolate radium from the 
barium chloride with which it was associated than to isolate polonium, so 
Marie started with radium. Guessing that radium constituted only 1 part in 
perhaps 100 of pitchblende, the Curies realized that they would need enor-
mous quantities of the mineral. It turned out, eventually, that radium consti-
tuted only 1 part in a million of pitchblende, and that the extraction of radium 
from a ton of pitchblende required 50 tons of water and 5 to 6 tons of other 
chemicals to yield 5 to 6 grains of radium. The Curies were able to obtain large 
quantities of pitchblende as industrial waste after the commercial extraction 
of uranium, and a large shed, which, although far from comfortable, permit-
ted Marie to undertake the gigantic task of extraction. She developed methods 
of crystallization that required long, hard, and heavy labor over four years, 
but she finally succeeded, and these were the methods that were later used 
commercially as well. 
Another strand in the research was seeking an understanding of the nature 
of the phenomenon of radioactivity. One can start tracing this development 
with the work of J. J. Thompson at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge 
University, who used Röntgen's vacuum tube to study the streams of light that 
run from the negative to positive anodes and which he called cathode rays. He 
concluded that cathode rays were made up of negatively charged particles, 
much smaller than atoms (which came to be called electrons), and he consid-
ered these particles the basic building blocks of all matter. This understand-

MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
173 
ing presupposed an "atomist" view of the nature of matter, one that accepted 
the notion of discrete, although invisible molecules and atoms rather than a 
more accepted view that postulated a continuous ether holding everything 
together. But Thompson was going even a step further and postulating that 
the atom, far from being the immutable and indivisible ultimate building block 
of nature as Mendeleev had argued, was itself made up of smaller particles. 
Ernest Rutherford, then at McGill University but earlier a student of Thomp-
son's, studied the emissions from radioactive substances and in 1899 he found 
that they were made up of at least two kinds of rays: alpha rays, which carried 
a large positive charge but were deflected by flimsy barriers, and beta rays, 
which were negatively charged but penetrated thick barriers. Within the year 
the Curies (with Becquerel) published a series of papers which showed that 
beta rays (a component of radioactivity) were identical to electrons; it was 
later shown that the alpha rays are identical to helium nuclei. 
Next, Rutherford showed in a paper published in January 1900, that 
an "emanation" given off by thorium was different from the parent element 
and could induce long-lasting radioactivity in any substance on which it fell. 
But the Curies had published a paper entitled "On the radioactivity induced 
by Becquerel rays" on November 6, 1899 showing the occurrence of the 
phenomenon. They attributed the induced radioactivity to a transfer of energy, 
a kind of phosphorescence. Rutherford's next paper, published in February 
1900, noted the Curies' results but dismissed phosphorescence as an expla-
nation. So the question and its implications became, as Quinn (1995, p. 167) 
explains: "Was the temporary radioactivity, which both Rutherford and the 
Curies had observed in objects placed in proximity to radioactive substances, 
caused by a transfer of energy of some kind from the substances themselves, 
or was it caused by a breakdown product, an offspring which differed in 
makeup and in behavior from its parent? If another radioactive substance 
could be found to produce an 'emanation' different from itself, as thorium 
did, then perhaps such emanations were a general phenomenon of radio-
activity." And perhaps elements were transmutable as they transferred their 
radioactivity. 
Indeed, results seemed to show that there were other transformations. An 
English chemist, Sir William Crookes, treated uranyl nitrate chemically and 
arrived at a substance that was chemically different from uranium and highly 
radioactive. He called it uranium X. In 1900, Andre Debierne found a new 
element, named it actinium, and suggested that it might be the same as the 
thorium emanation. In addition, Debierne found that the barium that had pre-
cipitated from a solution of actinium and barium had become radioactive. The 
Curies themselves noted that everything in their lab became radioactive and 
attributed this phenomenon to the continual formation of radioactive gas. 
Rutherford and a colleague then published a paper claiming that thorium ema-
nation, now called thorium X, was a different substance from thorium—and 
when it was produced the parent thorium temporarily lost its radioactivity. The 
Curies rejected this transformation theory, arguing that lost radioactivity was 

174 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
always regained over time. They still believed that either the radioactivity 
released was already in the element in the form of potential energy or that 
radioactive elements draw the energy they release from outside themselves. 
But Rutherford and his colleagues, by 1903, had concluded that transforma-
tion, subatomic chemical change, was the explanation of radioactivity, thus 
setting the stage for the development of nuclear physics. 
4.12.C Major Works 
Most of Marie Curie's major works have appeared in various translations. No 
systematic attempt has been made to list those. 
Curie, Marie (1904). Radio-active Substances, 2nd ed. London: Chemical News Office 
(doctoral dissertation.) (A translation, published by the Philosophical Library, 
New York, was published in 1961.) 
(1921). La Radiologie et la Guerre. Paris: Librarie Felix Alean. 
(1925). L'Isotopie et les Elements Isotopes. Paris: Edite par la Societe Journal de 
Physique. 
(1932). Les Rayons a, ß, y des Corps Radio-actifs en Relation avec la Structure 
Nucleaire. Paris: Hermann. 
(1935). Traite de Radioactivité. Paris: Hermann. (Originally published in 1910 in 
Paris by Gauthier-Villars, includes her doctoral thesis, her Sorbonne class lectures, 
and everything known about radioactivity to that date.) 
(1954). Oeuvres, Recueillies par Irene Joliot Curie. Warsaw: Pánstwowe Wydawn. 
Naukowe. 
4.12.D Subjectivity in the Work of Curie 
Perhaps the most obvious example of subjectivity in the work of Marie Curie 
was her insistence, in the face of doubt, that radium was indeed a previously 
unknown element. Eve Curie in her intimate biography of her mother quotes 
her (1937, p. 157) talking to her sister: "You know, Bronya, the radiation I 
couldn't explain comes from a new chemical element. The element is there 
and I've got to find it. We are sure! The physicists we have spoken to believe 
we have made an error in experiment and advise us to be careful. But I am 
convinced that I am not mistaken." Marie Curie was to carry out the back-
breaking work of isolating a sufficient quantity of radium to prove that the 
substance was an element and that she was not mistaken. 
A 1902 paper entitled "Sur les corps radio-actif' offered the Curies' own 
reservations about the role of subjectivity in science, particularly the care 
that must be taken with hypothesis formulation. Quinn (1995, p. 169) gives a 
quotation in English: 
In studying unknown phenomena we can make quite general hypotheses and 
advance step by step in concordance with experience. This sure, methodical progress 

MARIE SKLODOVSKA CURIE (1867-1934) 
175 
is necessarily slow. In contrast, we can make bold hypotheses in which the mecha-
nism of phenomena is specified. This procedure has the advantage of suggesting 
certain experiments and above all of facilitating the thought process, making it less 
abstract by the use of an image. On the other hand, we cannot hope to imagine a 
priori a complex theory which agrees with experience. Precise hypotheses almost 
certainly contain a portion of error along with a portion of truth. 
Surely this stance made it difficult for the Curies to accept Rutherford's 
transformation theory until the evidence was overwhelming; and surely 
this "slow and steady" philosophy characterized Marie Curie's approach to 
science. 
An example of how Marie's research goals influenced her findings is given 
by her interpretation of an increase in radiation found in her laboratory. In 
1898 Marie and Gerhard Carl Schmidt independently discovered that thorium 
is radioactive. In the course of measuring the ionizing power of thorium prior 
to making the announcement of the discovery, Marie noticed that there was a 
slight buildup of activity over time. Thinking it experimental error, she 
repeated her observations but found the same result. Because her goal at the 
time was to survey many substances in order to discover which were radio-
active, and because she had no preconceived idea about the buildup of radio-
activity, she ignored the slightly anomalous findings about the amount of 
radioactivity associated with thorium. Thus she missed discovering the "ema-
nations" later seized upon by Rutherford and used by him as the basis for 
understanding the nature of radioactivity and for elaborating a theory of 
matter. 
Of great importance was the preconceived belief in the atomist nature of 
matter that both Curies held, important not only to their search for the 
mechanism of radioactivity but also to their ability to identify polonium and 
radium as elements. Had they subscribed to the notion of an ether, as was not 
uncommon among scientists of the time, they would not have been able to use 
the fact that the amount of radiation given off by a substance was proportional 
to the amount of the radioactive substance present to aid in the discovery of 
the source of the radioactivity. On the other hand, their belief in the scientific 
principles they held, in particular the first law of thermodynamics, that energy 
can be converted from one form to another but in a closed system cannot be 
created or destroyed, kept them from recognizing that energy is released in 
radioactive decay. Their preconceptions, together with the fact that they were 
working with elements with very long half-lives, thus kept them from making 
the leap to understanding how radioactivity was linked to the atomic makeup 
of the substances they were studying. Because their preconceived beliefs kept 
them from accepting the notion of transmutation of elements, they offered two 
hypotheses, both of which turned out to be false, to explain the origin of the 
energy given off by radioactive substances. Either the law of conservation of 
energy was suspended for these special substances, allowing them to create 
energy de novo, or the energy came from outside. Indeed, Marie speculated 

176 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
that all space may be full of rays that can only be absorbed by elements with 
high atomic weights. 
An interesting aspect of the Curie's subjectivity was why it was difficult for 
them, especially Marie, to understand radiation as the release of subatomic 
particles. They had from the beginning considered radioactivity an atomic 
property, and Marie toyed with the idea of some kind of transformation. Quinn 
summarizes an argument she made in an article in the Revue Scientifique in 
July 1900: 
Radioactive substances . . . may be "substances in which there is a violent interior 
movement of substances in the course of breaking up. If this is the case, radium 
should constantly lose weight. But the smallness of the particle is such that, although 
the electric charge sent out into the atmosphere is easy to detect, the correspond-
ing mass is absolutely insignificant... it would take millions of years for radium to 
lose . . . milligrams of its weight." Thus it is impossible to measure the loss. "The 
materialist theory of radioactivity is very seductive," she continues. "It explains the 
phenomena of radioactivity well." 
But the Curies were right in maintaining that it would be impossible to 
measure the loss of weight—at least it was impossible for them. Further, they 
had spent many years of their professional lives establishing that radium and 
polonium were indeed elements. If they then had to accept that these new ele-
ments could change over time (presumably into other elements), such accep-
tance might well threaten their conclusions about the elementary nature of 
these substances. Thus, as Quinn puts it, theorizing that elements transform 
into one another (1995, p. 172) "... would not only contradict the inviolabil-
ity of the atom, it would also threaten the inviolability of their new elements." 
Thus, Marie Curie's subjectivity was embodied in the enormous persistence 
and tenacity of her scientific beliefs, both those that were correct and those 
that proved mistaken. Or as Einstein put it in a letter to her in December 1923, 
she was a person "full of goodness and obstinacy at the same time 
" 
REFERENCES 
Crowther, J. G. (1995). Six Great Scientists: Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Darwin, Marie 
Curie, Einstein. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Curie, Eve (1939). Madame Curie: A Biography by Eve Curie, translated by Vincent 
Sheean. New York: Doubleday, Doran. 
Giroud, Frangoise (1986). Marie Curie: A Life, translated by Lydia Davis from Une 
Femme Honorable, copyright Librarie Artheme Fayard, 1981. New York: Holmes 
& Meier. 
Pflaum, Rosalynd (1989). Grand Obsession. New York: Doubleday. 
Quinn, Susan (1995). Marie Curie. New York: Simon & Schuster. 

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
177 
4.13 ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
Albert Einstein was a world-renowned physicist whose numerous far-reach-
ing scientific contributions have affected many aspects of the modern world. 
He was considered by many in his own time to be the greatest scientific genius 
the world has ever known. For many people, he is most closely associated with 
the theory of relativity, although he was responsible for many other important 
results as well. 
4.13.A Brief Biographical Sketch 
Einstein was born in Germany on March 14, 1879. He was thought to have 
little scholastic ability, and in addition, was believed to be dyslectic. He had 
no interest in physical activity or sports. His father and uncle had set up an 
electrical and electrical engineering plant in Munich, a Catholic city. Albert 
was the only Jewish boy in the local school. But Albert's family, not being reli-
gious, was not a part of the local Jewish community. As a consequence, Albert 

178 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
was not to come to grips with his ethnic identity until many years later. By age 
15 the family business failed and the family moved south to Milan, Italy, but 
without Albert; he remained behind to try to complete his schooling. But six 
months later, Albert, who resented the regimented format of Teutonic 
schooling and who had poor grades in geography, history, and languages, quit 
his secondary school studies in Munich without having received any diploma 
and joined the family in the more relaxed environment of Milan. 
In 1896, while thinking about continuing on with his education to college, 
Einstein's distaste for Germany compelled him to renounce his German citi-
zenship, despite the fact that he then became stateless. It was difficult to con-
tinue on to college without a formal high school diploma from Munich. So 
Albert decided to apply to the renowned Federal Polytechnic School in 
Zurich, Switzerland, which did not require a diploma but where he would have 
to pass an entrance exam. He took the exam but failed. However, by doing 
preparatory studies in Switzerland for a year he finally passed the entrance 
examination. At the Polytechnic he focused on studies in mathematics and 
physics rather than on electrical engineering, as his family would have pre-
ferred, and graduated in 1900 at age 21. In 1901, he became a Swiss citizen. 
While in Zurich, Albert enjoyed the company of a number of women. One 
such during his college years was Mileva Marie, a mathematics student of 
Hungarian origin who was four years his senior. They became sweethearts and 
married in 1903. Einstein's joy in women and his need to have them in his life 
were to be a characteristic throughout his life. 
After graduation in 1900, Albert was unable to find employment. He finally 
found a two-month job as a mathematics teacher. Through friends, however, 
he was referred to the Swiss patent office in Bern, Switzerland, in June 1902 
for a job as an examiner. He remained at the patent office until 1909. During 
the period 1902-1905, since Einstein was married, had the security of a guar-
anteed income because of his government job at the patent office, and had 
finalized his citizenship, his life was stable. He then had time to work, in 
his spare time, at his principal interest and passion, physics. Not yet in the 
academic world, and not yet required to do research for his job, Einstein was 
carrying out his research from purely personal curiosity. 
By 1904, Einstein had already published five papers, mainly on the theory 
of heat. But the excitement was yet to come. The year 1905 was to be a banner 
year for 26-year-old Albert Einstein; he published four separate scientific 
papers, each of which was to open up a distinct subfield of physics. One of the 
four dealt with the quantification of the theory of Brownian motion of small 
particles suspended in fluids. In that paper, Einstein showed how to calculate 
the masses and sizes of atoms, and it was for that paper that he received his 
doctorate from the University of Zurich in 1905. For these four 1905 papers, 
and another published in 1906, Einstein would eventually be acclaimed 
throughout the world for the genius which revolutionized the field of physics 
and changed the world's view of space and time forever. 
In the winter of 1908, at the age of 29, while still employed at the patent 

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
179 
office, he began his academic career by lecturing to audiences of two to four 
students at the University of Bern. A year later, he left the patent office for a 
full-time associate professorship at the University of Zurich. By 1911 he had 
left Zurich to teach at the German University in Prague, Bohemia (now the 
Czech Republic). But life in Prague, aside from his work, was difficult. He was 
a man with a Germanic background in a Slavic country and did not speak 
Czech. He found himself confined to the German community of Prague, while 
his Slavic wife became involved in the Serbian struggle for independence. 
Einstein himself had no interest in such a cause and the couple began to drift 
apart. In August 1912, Albert returned to the University of Zurich as a full 
professor; in this move back to Switzerland he was accompanied, for the last 
time, by his wife and children. 
In the spring of 1914, Einstein accepted a position with the Prussian 
Academy of Sciences in Berlin. He decided to return to Germany despite his 
many negative feelings about the country and despite increasing talk of the 
possible outbreak of war, because of the opportunities there would be in 
Berlin to interact with some of the best scientists in Europe and because of 
the high salary promised him. There he could carry out his research unen-
cumbered by administrative and teaching duties, and occasionally, he could 
give lectures at the very prestigious University of Berlin. 
By this time, the Einsteins had two sons, Hans Albert and Eduard. When 
Albert moved to Berlin, his wife and sons remained behind to vacation in 
Switzerland. But in August 1914, the outbreak of World War I prevented his 
family members from joining Albert in Berlin. This forced separation finally 
precipitated a more formal marital separation; Albert and Mileva remained 
separated until the war ended in 1918, at which point they officially divorced. 
Albert then married his widowed cousin Elsa in the summer of 1919. 
Einstein was an outspoken critic of German militarism, and openly adopted 
a pacifist position, one he would hold through the remainder of his life. During 
World War I he continued his research into the general theory of relativity 
and enjoyed a decade of research accomplishment that was comparable in 
importance to his banner year of 1905. Einstein had suggested that his 
new general theory of relativity might be tested empirically by observing the 
precession (wobbling) of the orbit of the planet Mercury during an eclipse. 
The eclipse required to test Einstein's general relativity theory was to occur 
in 1919. Scientists traveled to New Guinea to make measurements, and 
Einstein's predictions about the orbit of Mercury were verified precisely 
(within experimental error). This confirmation finally brought international 
fame to Einstein. Up until then, his work was known mostly only to other 
scientists. But from that time on, the name of Einstein became a household 
word in general society, synonymous with genius. A very smart person was 
called "an Einstein." 
Ironically, as Einstein's reputation grew outside Germany, he came under 
increasing attack within Germany because he was Jewish. Anti-Semitism was 
spreading throughout Germany as the society searched for reasons why it had 

180 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
lost World War I. Postwar Germany, looking for a scapegoat, blamed the Jews. 
Einstein was attacked by both German scientists, who claimed that his rela-
tivity work was all wrong, and by German society in general. Up until then 
Einstein had hardly known that he was Jewish; now he had to defend himself 
against blind bigotry. In 1919, Einstein attended a conference in Berlin on 
Zionism, a meeting called to discuss the problems and future of the Jewish 
people in the Diaspora. The conference had a powerful effect upon Einstein; 
he became an ardent Zionist and would be involved in Zionist affairs for the 
rest of his life. In 1921, at Chaim Weizmann's request, Einstein toured the 
United States to raise money for the Palestine Foundation Fund. 
In 1921, Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics for his research 
on the photoelectric effect and for general contributions to theoretical physics. 
His photoelectric effect work was published in one of his 1905 papers. His 
work on relativity, controversial at the time, was not specifically mentioned. 
Einstein remained in Berlin at the Prussian Academy of Sciences for 19 years, 
until 1933. During this period he worked on trying to relate electromagnetism 
to gravitation and thus find a unified field theory relating all the forces of 
nature. (Faraday had attacked the same problem with the same negative result; 
see Section 4.8.) 
In 1933, Adolph Hitler became chancellor of Germany. Realizing immedi-
ately the implications for his survival, Einstein left Germany as soon as pos-
sible. He was taken by private yacht from Belgium (where he had been 
lecturing) to England, and then he traveled to the United States, where he 
had accepted a job at the newly established Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton, New Jersey. Einstein's wife Elsa died in 1936. He was left a very 
lonely man, alone in yet another new country. 
Einstein was to become involved in World War II in his newly adopted 
country. He watched the rise of Adolph Hitler in Germany from afar and fol-
lowed the systematic persecution of the Jewish people in the nation where he 
had spent most of his life. He considered the members of the Jewish community 
in Germany to be fools for trying to be loyal to Germany and not appreciating 
what fate the Nazi regime had in mind for them. In a famous letter dated August 
2,1939, one month before the beginning of World War II, Einstein advised Pres-
ident Roosevelt that "... the element uranium may be turned into a new and 
important source of energy in the immediate future. Certain aspects of the sit-
uation which has arisen seem to call for watchfulness, and if necessary, quick 
action on the part of the administration 
" Einstein suggested that an atomic 
bomb might be carried into a port by a boat and exploded, destroying the port 
and much of the surrounding territory. Roosevelt consequently appointed 
administrators and scientists who carried out the development of the atomic 
bomb that ended the World War II in 1945. Einstein was to have misgivings 
about the atomic monster that he had suggested be released. He felt partly to 
blame for the horror inflicted upon the Japanese people by the dropping of 
atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
181 
In 1948, the United Nations recreated the Jewish State of Israel after a gap 
of 3000 years. Einstein was offered the presidency of the new nation in 1952. 
He turned it down, claiming incompetence for the task. Einstein remained at 
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton during the final 22 years of his 
life, and died in 1955 at the age of 76. He was never successful in finding a 
unified field theory that was acceptable to the scientific world. On April 6, 
1922, in an address to the French Philosophical Society at the Sorbonne, in 
Paris, Einstein said: "If my theory of relativity is proven successful, Germany 
will claim me as a German, and France will declare that I am a citizen of the 
world. Should my theory prove untrue, France will say that I am a German, 
and Germany will declare that I am a Jew." 
4.13.B Einstein's Scientific Contributions 
In 1905, Einstein published four fundamental research papers: 
1. A theoretical explanation for Brownian motion based on thermo-
dynamics and statistical mechanics 
2. A new representation of light in terms of particles called quanta, or 
photons, that gave rise to the photoelectric effect (light could then be 
viewed as particles instead of waves) 
3. The special theory of relativity 
4. An equivalence of mass and energy 
Together with the general theory of relativity, these papers were his major sci-
entific contributions; each was revolutionary and changed the way we view the 
universe. 
Brownian Motion (1905) 
In 1828, Robert Brown, a Scottish naturalist, had discovered that when pollen 
dust (particles of the order of 0.001 millimeter) is suspended in water, the 
specks of dust exhibit a continuous, zigzag, and seemingly random motion. 
Brown found that the same random motion, now known as Brownian motion, 
resulted when small particles of either organic or inorganic matter were sus-
pended in any liquid. But Brown provided no explanation for this phenome-
non. In 1905, Einstein provided an explanation and quantified the effect. What 
fascinated Einstein was that the motion seemed contrary to all experience, in 
that it never diminished although no external forces seemed to be acting on 
the particles. His explanation of the motion was that it was due to the kinetic 
energy of the invisible molecules with which the particles were constantly col-
liding. He then went on to predict the mass and number of molecules involved 
and thereby quantified the nature of the Brownian motion. His predictive law 
was probabilistic and given by the "normal" or bell-shaped curve. It stated that 

182 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
the probability distribution for the distance that a particle suspended in a fluid 
would move in any given direction in a given time interval is given by the 
normal probability law in which the variance is proportional to the length of 
the time interval. 
Einstein asserted statistically that the mean kinetic energy of agitation of 
the particles was expected to be exactly the same as the energy of agitation in 
a fluid molecule (i.e., a liquid or a gas). By showing their impact on suspended 
particles, Einstein had demonstrated the existence of the invisible molecules; 
the existence of molecules is a fact we take for granted today. He had pro-
vided a basis for prediction, based on subjective hypothesizing and theory 
alone; his predictive law was not developed on the basis of experimentation. 
That approach to science was the one that Einstein was to use in all his 
research. It was an approach based on mathematical formulation of laws of 
nature, formulations whose implications could be studied. 
Photoelectric Effect (1905) 
In 1900, Max Planck had asserted that energy is radiated not in a continuous 
flow but in discrete bursts or quanta (photons). The amount of energy radi-
ated is proportional to the frequency of the associated wave of electro-
magnetic radiation. For example, violet light, which has twice the frequency 
of red light, would emit twice the number of photons per unit time. So there 
seemed to be a conflict between beliefs about the very nature of light. 
Did light consist of waves or particles? Or was there a duality in the nature 
of light? 
Working with Planck's explanation of how light is constituted, Einstein pos-
tulated a physical law to explain what happens when light is shined on matter. 
He explained that light can be wavelike but behave like flows of discrete par-
ticles. He reasoned that when electromagnetic radiation impinges on matter, 
each photon in the radiation penetrates the matter and collides with an atom. 
Each atom has electrons, and when the incoming photon hits the atom, the 
atom ejects an electron, which is given great speed by the interaction. When 
many photons interact with the matter, many electrons are released and a 
current of electricity flows. Einstein showed that the maximum kinetic energy 
of the ejected electron is proportional to the frequency of the radiation being 
used to stimulate the action, diminished by the work done by the electron in 
escaping from the surface of the matter. The number of ejected electrons 
(although not their speed) varies with the intensity of the incident light. The 
kinetic energy of the ejected electrons is proportional to the voltage produced 
by shining the light on the matter (usually, a metal). So the size of the electric 
current to be expected can be calculated from Einstein's mathematical for-
mulation. For his explanation of this phenomenon, which came to be called 
the photoelectric effect, Einstein won a Nobel prize in 1921. The applications 
of this work are found, for example, in the development of television, the light 
meter, the laser, the videotelephone, the computer screen, talking motion pic-
tures, and videos. 

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
183 
Special Theory of Relativity 
(1905) 
In 1887, Albert Michelson and Edward Morley carried out a famous experiment 
that was designed to study the effect on the speed of light of Earth's passage 
through a postulated ether that surrounds it. It had been thought since the time 
of the Greeks that there had to be a medium (the ether) through which 
electromagnetic radiation (including light) had to travel, just as sound requires 
molecules of air to vibrate before it can be heard. It was reasoned that if a man 
walks forward along the deck of a ship at the rate of 1.5 meters per second, and 
the ship moves through the water in the same direction at the rate of 7.5 meters 
per second, the man's speed with respect to the water is 9 meters per second. If 
he walks aft, his speed relative to the water is 6 meters per second. If he could 
walk at the same speed at which the ship is moving through the water, but in the 
opposite direction, and if the water were not in motion, an observer on land 
would perceive that the man was not moving at all. 
The same phenomenon of addition and subtraction of speeds is observable 
with the sound of a bell ringing at a railroad crossing when heard by someone 
on an approaching or departing train. If the train is traveling at 25 meters per 
second and if the sound is traveling at 400 meters per second, the speed of the 
sound relative to the train is 425 meters per second when the train is approach-
ing the crossing, but 375 meters per second when the train is leaving the cross-
ing. When this same reasoning was applied to the speed of light, serious 
problems arose after the Michelson-Morley experiment was carried out. We 
quote from Barnett (1948, p. 47): 
Specifically, a light ray projected in the direction of the earth's movement should 
be slightly retarded by the ether flow, just as a swimmer is retarded by a current 
when going upstream. The difference would be slight, for the velocity of light... is 
186,284 miles a second, while the velocity of the earth in its orbit around the sun is 
only 20 miles a second. Hence, a light ray sent against the ether stream should travel 
at the rate of 186,264 miles a second, while one sent with the ether stream should 
be clocked at 186,304 miles a second. Michelson and Morley constructed an instru-
ment of such great delicacy that it could detect a variation of even a fraction of a 
mile per second in the enormous velocity of light (the instrument was called an 
interferometer) 
And the result was simply this: there was no difference what-
soever in the velocity of the light beams regardless of their direction. 
That is, the experiment did not find any ether. It was concluded that there 
is no such medium. The implications for physics were enormous. Light propa-
gation from, or to, Earth would be unaffected by an ether, since such a 
medium did not exist. According to Barnett (1948, p. 49): "The one indis-
putable fact established by the Michelson-Morley experiment was that the 
velocity of light is unaffected by the motion of the earth. Einstein seized on 
this as a revelation of universal law. If the velocity of light is constant regard-
less of the earth's motion, he reasoned, it must be constant regardless of the 
motion of any sun, moon, star, meteor, or other system moving anywhere in 
the universe. From this he drew a broader generalization, and asserted that 

184 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
the laws of nature are the same for all uniformly moving systems. This simple 
statement is the essence of Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity." 
If there is acceleration, the general theory of relativity would be invoked, 
but for constant (uniform) speed, special relativity theory would be sufficient 
for an explanation. The implications of the special theory were very difficult 
for the nonspecialist to grasp. For example, since speed is the ratio of distance 
divided by time, if speed (of light) is to remain constant as light travels over 
different distances, this ratio must remain constant, and the only way that 
can happen is if the concepts of distance and of time are both modified. 
To accomplish this constancy of the speed of light, Einstein demonstrated 
mathematically precisely how the classical notions of distance and time had 
to be modified. He showed, for example, that an object in uniform motion 
relative to an observer would have to have its length modified relative to its 
length when at rest. In fact, it would lengthen by a factor that depends on the 
square of the ratio of its speed to the speed of light. He showed using the 
Lorentz transformation equations (which had been developed for a different 
purpose) that similar relationships would have to hold for time itself and for 
the mass of the object. The Lorentz transformation equations (Barnett, 1948, 
p. 58) "preserve the velocity of light as a universal constant but modify all 
measurements of time and distance according to the velocity of each system 
of reference." 
Events in any two frames of reference could be connected in terms of these 
specialized Lorentz transformation equations, instead of in terms of the New-
tonian transformation equations that had served well for so long. The result 
for the object in motion, say a rod, was that its length would shrink or con-
tract; elapsed time would be reduced (clocks would run more slowly); and mass 
would grow (the mass of the rod in uniform motion would increase from its 
rest mass value). The effects would be noticeable only for objects traveling at 
speeds that were significant fractions of the speed of light, and for those, the 
effects could be substantial. Otherwise, results obtainable from Newtonian 
mechanics would be satisfactory as an approximation. 
Equivalence of Mass and Energy (1905) 
Einstein's fourth 1905 paper was, in a sense, an extension of the special theory 
of relativity. The paper provided a formal way of relating the energy of a radi-
ating object to its mass. As the object radiates by emitting light rays, it loses 
mass, but how much? This question resulted in arguably the most famous equa-
tion of all time: E - mc2—the energy of the radiating object is proportional to 
its mass, and the proportionality constant is the squared speed of light (c2). 
This equation was used, for example, to predict the amount of energy that 
would be released in the atomic bomb explosions of 1945. 
General Theory of Relativity 
The general theory of relativity, developed during the decade following the 
1905 development of the special theory of relativity, produced many other 
mathematical predictions. For example, light passing from one part of a grav-

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
185 
itational field to another would be shifted in wavelength. This effect has been 
referred to as the Einstein red shift. Just as he had concluded for the special 
theory of relativity, Einstein asserted for the general theory that the laws of 
nature are the same for all systems, regardless of their state of motion. The 
playing out of this premise involved Einstein in modifying the laws of gravi-
tation. He proposed the principle of equivalence of gravitation and inertia.That 
is, there is no way to distinguish the motion produced by inertial forces (accel-
eration, centrifugal force, recoil, etc.) from motion produced by gravitation. 
For Newton, gravitation was a force; for Einstein, it was afield, as Faraday and 
Maxwell viewed the field of electricity around a magnet. Einstein concluded 
that like any material object, light travels in a curved path when traveling 
through the gravitational field of a massive body. 
Using the general theory of relativity, Einstein predicted that light from 
stars surrounding the Sun should be bent inward, toward the Sun, in passing 
through the Sun's gravitational field. So the images of those stars should be 
shifted outward from their usual positions in the sky. For the closest stars to 
the Sun, he predicted that the deviation should be about 1.75 seconds of 
arc. When the eclipse of May 29, 1919 was observed in equatorial latitudes, 
Einstein's predictions turned out to be confirmed exactly, within limits of 
measurement accuracy. This result astonished both the scientific world and 
society in general and brought Einstein universal acclaim. 
4.13.C Major Works 
Scientific Papers 
Most of Einstein's scientific work is contained in the papers listed in Ernst 
Weil, Ed. Albert Einstein: A Bibliography of His Scientific Papers, 1901-1930. 
London: 1937. 
Albert, Einstein (1905). "Über Einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes 
Betreffenden 
Heuristischen Gesichtspunkt," Annalen 
der Physik, 
Ser. 4, 
17:132-148. 
(1905). "Über die von der Molekularkinetischen Theorie der Warme Geforderte 
Bewegung von in Ruhenden Flüssigkeiten Suspendierten Teilchen," Annalen der 
Physik, Ser. 4,17:549-560. 
(1905). "Zur Elektrodynamik Bewegter Korper," Annalen der Physik, Ser. 4, 
17:891-921. 
(1905). "Ist die Trägheit eines Korpers von Seinem Energieinhalt Abhangig?" 
Annalen der Physik, Ser. 4,18:639-641. 
(1906). "Zur Theorie der Brownschen Bewegung," Annalen der Physik; trans-
lated separately as Investigations on the Theory of the Brownian 
Movement. 
London: Methuen and Co. 1926. 
(1907). "Plancksche Theorie der Strahlung und die Theorie der Spezifischen 
Warme," Annalen der Physik, Ser. 4,22:180-190, and p. 800 (Berichtigung). 
(1911). "Über den Einfluss der Schwerkraft auf die Ausbreitung des Lichtes," 
Annalen der Physik, Ser. 4,25:898-908. 

186 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
(1913). "Entwurf einer Verallgemeinerten Relativitätstheorie und einer 
Theorie der Gravitation," Zeitschrift fur Mathematik und Physik, 62:225-261. 
(1916). "Die Grundlage der Allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie" (The Foundation 
of the General Theory of Relativity), Annalen der Physik, Ser. 4,49:769-822. 
(1917). "Quantentheorie der Strahlung," Physikalische Zeitschrift, 18:121-128. 
(1924). "Quantentheorie des Einatomigen Idealen Gases," Sitzungsberichte der 
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (1924 and 1925), 261-267. 
(1950). The Meaning of Relativity, Including the Generalized Theory of Gravi-
tation, 3rd ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Lorentz, H. A., Albert Einstein, H. Weyl, and A. Minkowski (1923). The Principle of 
Relativity: A Collection of Original Memoirs on the Special and General Theory of 
Relativity. London: Methuen and Co. 
Albert Einstein (1987) Stachel, John, et al. (Eds.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein (Contains all his papers, notes, and 
letter, with companion translation volumes.) 
Other Works 
Einstein, Albert (1930). About Zionism: Speeches and Letters, English translation by 
Sir Leon Simon. New York: The Macmillan Co. 
(1950). Out of My Later Years, paperback ed. New York: Wisdom Library of the 
Philosophical Library. 
Einstein, Albert, and Sigmund Freud (1932). Builders of the Universe. 1933, "Warum 
Krieg?" (Why War?), English translation (1978) by Fritz and Anna Moellenhoff 
Chicago: Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis. 
Einstein, Albert (1949). The World as I See It. English translation by Alan Harris. New 
York: Philosophical Library. 
Einstein, Albert, and Leopold Infeld (1938). The Evolution of Physics, from Early 
Concepts to Relativity and Quanta. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
4.13.D Subjectivity in the Work of Einstein 
Albert Einstein was a theoretician, not an experimentalist. His research did 
not follow the classical scientific tradition, established from the time of 
Galileo, of hypothesizing and then designing experiments to test the hypoth-
esis. Instead, Einstein's methodological approach was to make some assump-
tions, develop mathematical representations of the assumptions, and then to 
study, mathematically and physically, the implications of the structural models 
built from the assumptions. Einstein would then carry out what he called 
gedanken experimente, thought experiments that would test his ideas theoreti-
cally, experiments possible in theory but ruled out by experimental difficul-
ties. For example, he might create an "experiment" in which an observer is in 
an elevator traveling at near the speed of light, and then he would speculate 
about what the observer might see happen to a ball thrown up in the air in 
the elevator. In one of Einstein's later writings he tells the story that at age 
16, he wondered what would happen if one could follow a beam of light at the 

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) 
187 
speed of light. He concluded that the observer would be in a "spatially oscil-
latory electromagnetic field at rest." In the twin paradox, Einstein carried out 
a gedanken experiment in which one identical twin stayed home but the other 
traveled through the universe at great speed. Einstein concluded that they 
must age differently. The one traveling through the universe at great speed 
ages slowly, returning home only to find that his twin has been dead for 
perhaps hundreds of years. 
But where did Einstein's assumptions and hypotheses come from? 
Ronald W. Clark has commented (1984, p. 54): "Thus it was physics to which 
he turned, working 'most of the time in the physical laboratory, fascinated 
by the direct contact with experience' [Schilpp, p. 15]. This contact with 
experience was in strange contrast with the period when he would answer 
a question about his laboratory by pointing to his head, and a question 
about his tools by pointing to his fountain pen. Yet despite this he never 
ceased to emphasize that the bulk of his work sprang directly and naturally 
from observed facts; the coordinating theory explaining them might arise 
from an inspired gleam of intuition, but the need for it arose only after 
observation." 
Einstein pointed out that his formulation of the special theory of relativity 
"was not speculative in origin; it owes its invention entirely to the desire to 
make physical theory fit observed facts as well as possible" (Lecture, Kings 
College, London, 1921, quoted in The Nation, London, June 18,1921). When 
Einstein was studying and trying to quantify Brownian motion, he provided a 
virtual proof for the existence of molecules, particles invisible to the human 
eye whose existence was postulated by theory rather than produced by experi-
mental evidence. Einstein thus believed that theories into which facts were 
later seen to fit were more likely to stand the test of time than theories con-
structed entirely from experimental evidence. 
According to Clark (1984, p. 118), "Einstein was always ready to agree that 
inventiveness, imagination, the intuitive approach—the very stuff of which 
artists rather than scientists are usually thought to be made—played a serious 
part in his work." Einstein, himself said (recalled by a friend on the one hun-
dredth anniversary of Einstein's birth, celebrated February 18, 1979, quoted 
in Ryan, 1987): "When I examine myself and my methods of thought I come 
to the conclusion that the gift of fantasy has meant more to me than my talent 
for absorbing positive knowledge." 
Einstein had very strong subjective convictions about the assumptions he 
made that were to form the?basis of his theoretical constructs. For example, in 
a letter of March 17,1942 to one of Albert Michelson's biographers, he said: 
"It is no doubt that Michelson's experiment was of considerable influence 
upon my work insofar as it strengthened my conviction concerning the valid-
ity of the principle of The Special Theory of Relativity. On the other side, I 
was pretty much convinced of the validity of the principle before I did know 
this experiment and its result. In any case, Michelson's experiment removed 
practically any doubt about the validity of the principle in optics and showed 

188 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
that a profound change of the basic concepts of physics was inevitable." Ein-
stein claimed that he had learned about the Michelson-Morley experiment 
only after 1905; otherwise, he claimed, he would have included reference to 
it in his 1905 paper. Einstein told R. S. Shankland of Case Institute, on 
February 4,1950: "I am not sure when I first heard of the Michelson-Morley 
experiment... I just took it for granted that it was true." 
David Ben-Gurion once asked Einstein whether the theory of relativity 
was the result of his thought processes only. Einstein confirmed that it was, 
but added {Jewish Observer, Feb. 22, 1955): "I naturally had before me the 
experimental works of those preceding me. These served as material 
for my thoughts and studies." R. W. Clark (1984, p. 222) pointed out: "Only 
Einstein the philosopher could have convinced Einstein the scientist that 
if the evidence did not agree with the theory then the evidence must be 
faulty." 
In his 1911 paper on gravitation, Einstein tried to answer the question of 
whether the propagation of light is influenced by gravitation. Was light bent 
by gravity as it passed near the sun? From 1911 onward he pointed out with 
increasing persistence that here was one way of proving or disproving experi-
mentally a theory which had been built up logically, but which had as its foun-
dation, little more than an intuitive hunch (Clark, 1984, p. 183). In a note to 
Carl Seelig (Seelig, 1956, p. 188) Einstein wrote: "I concentrated on specula-
tive theories, whereas Rutherford managed to reach profound conclusions on 
the basis of almost primitive reflection combined with relatively simple experi-
mental methods." 
Max Born, on reading Einstein's 1916 paper "The Foundation of the 
General Theory of Relativity," wrote (Born, 1916, p. 253) that it was "the great-
est feat of human thinking about nature, the most amazing combination of 
philosophical penetration, physical intuition, and mathematical skill. But its 
connections with experience were slender. It appealed to me like a great work 
of art, to be enjoyed and admired from a distance." 
Einstein generally carried out his research with a strong inner belief 
that bordered on certainty that he was right. He somehow had very strong 
preconceived notions about what concepts in physics had been formulated 
improperly and how they should be reformulated. On any given topic, 
he was able first to search the extant knowledge base and then carefully 
scrutinize it for any inconsistencies and unreasonable implications. When 
he encountered such an unreasonable inconsistency, he took on the task 
of trying to reformulate the physical relationships in ways that would 
eliminate the problems with previous theory. He held strong personal beliefs 
about what should be expected in the physical world and then set about 
structuring mathematical laws and descriptive systems that would lead to 
his anticipated conclusions. He was extremely subjective in his approach to 
scientific research, perhaps more subjective than any other scientist had 
ever been. 

SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
189 
REFERENCES 
Barnett, Lincoln (1948). The Universe and Dr. Einstein. New York: New American 
Library of World Literature, Mentor Books. 
Born, Max (1916). Physica Acta. Hebrew University, Israel: The Einstein Archives, 
p. 253. 
Calaprice, Alice (1996). The Quotable Einstein. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Clark, Ronald W. (1984). Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: Avon Books. 
Einstein, Albert (1993). Einstein on Humanism. Secaucus, NJ: Carol Publishing Group, 
Citadel Press. 
Frank, Philipp (1947, 1953). Einstein: His Life and Times (English translation). New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Hoffman, Banesh (with the collaboration of Helen Dukas) (1972). Albert Einstein: 
Creator and Rebel. New York: Viking. 
Holton, Gerald (1996). Einstein, History and Other Passions. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley. 
Michelmore, Peter (1962). Einstein: Profile of the Man. New York: Dodd. 
Regis, Edward (1987). Who Got Einstein's Office. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Ryan, Dennis P. (Ed.) (1987). Einstein and the Humanities. New York: Greenwood 
Press. 
Schilpp, Paul A. (Ed.) (1949). Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 2nd ed. Evanston, 
IL: Library of Living Philosophers. 
Seelig, Carl (1956). Albert Einstein: A Documentary Biography. London: Staples Press. 
Vallentin, Antonina (1954). Einstein: A Biography (English translation). Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday; Paris: Plon et les Librairies Associés. 
4.14 SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
We have now completed our task of recounting a story for the life and scien-
tific methodology of each of the 12 scientists listed in Meadows (1987) The 
Great Scientists. We believe that our own strong prior belief that we would find 
generous use of subjectivity in the scientific work of each of the 12 is con-
firmed. It might be of interest to conjecture a bit about what the famous sci-
entists might have done had Bayesian analysis been available to them. 
Suppose that advanced mathematics, subjective probability, and Bayesian sta-
tistical methods of analyzing scientific data had already been developed and 
were readily available at the time some of the scientists we have studied lived 
and worked. How might that research methodology have been employed to 
strengthen the positions that those scientists held, thus perhaps settling more 
definitively some of the questions still raised, even today, perhaps hundreds of 
years later? In many cases we are still questioning their research methodolo-
gies, their judgments, their conclusions, and their decision making that was 

190 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
based on the conclusions they reached. In the following summaries of the sub-
jectivity of each of these scientists, we shall speculate in some cases as to how 
they might have used Bayesian analysis. In particular, we shall speculate on 
how they might have used such analysis to compare competing models of the 
phenomena under investigation. (We show in Chapter 5 how to use Bayesian 
analysis to compare scientific models.) 
Aristotle was a dedicated and careful observer of the natural world. Never-
theless, his belief in final causes and other overarching theories sometime led 
him to overgeneralize or otherwise distort his observations. For example, he 
wrote that human beings are superior to other animals in purity of blood and 
softness of flesh. Because he believed that males are better equipped than 
females with offensive and defensive weapons, he concluded that worker bees 
are male (when, in fact, they are female). He overgeneralized his observation 
that extremely light objects fall more slowly than do heavy ones to conclude 
that the speed of falling is generally related to the weight of an object. (We 
now understand that the difference in speed between extremely light and 
heavy objects occurs only because the effect of air resistance is more obvious 
for very light objects.) He described detailed observations that purport to 
show, mistakenly, that the heart is the first part of the embryo to develop. These 
mistaken observations lent support to his doctrine that the heart is the prin-
ciple of life, the seat of the soul, of locomotion, and of what we now call higher 
mental functions. Since Aristotle was more inclined to speculate about scien-
tific facts than to collect data to support his conclusions, we shall not conjec-
ture in his case about how he might have utilized probability. 
Galileo seems to have been convinced a priori of the law of motion that 
the distance fallen by a dropped object is proportional to the square of the 
time elapsed from dropping well before he conducted experiments to demon-
strate the law. Indeed, he seems to have derived the law from a set of false 
premises. Further, there is some doubt as to whether the instrumentation of 
his day would have permitted Galileo to carry out the experiments he claims 
to have done, or at least to have achieved results of sufficient accuracy to prove 
his thesis, had he not already been convinced of its truth. Despite his position 
that seemed to challenge the Church's insistence on a geocentric universe, 
Galileo's own belief in cosmic order prevented him from accepting Kepler's 
substitution of elliptical planetary orbits for the more cosmically perfect cir-
cular ones. This rejection barred Galileo from full formulation of the inertial 
law, eventually formulated by Newton. 
Galileo was forced to entertain two opposing theories of how Earth travels 
through the universe: Does Earth travel around the Sun, or does the Sun travel 
around Earth? Copernicus and Kepler had already concluded that the helio-
centric theory was to be preferred to Ptolomy's geocentric theory. Galileo's 
professional career was dominated by his life-threatening confrontation with 
the Catholic Church over which of these two theories should be accepted as 
truth. Putting political and religious considerations aside, Galileo might have 
calculated the (posterior) odds favoring each theory from a Bayesian view-

SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
191 
point by comparing the (subjective) probabilities of each of the two theories 
to see how they compared (the methodology required for accomplishing this 
is explicated in Chapter 5). The powerful political position of the Church at 
that time, and its strong and long-held fixed belief in geocentrism, suggest that 
even if such a calculation had yielded results that showed the probability of 
the heliocentric theory overwhelming the probability of the geocentric theory, 
it still would have been difficult to convince the Church authorities. 
William Harvey used what he called a "meditation" on the amount of blood 
issuing from the heart over a period of time to deduce that such a large quan-
tity could not be manufactured or stored in the body; hence he was led to the 
notion of circulation. Having convinced himself of the reality of circulation 
and thus the necessity for blood to flow from arteries to veins, he was willing 
to believe (correctly) in the existence of a connecting network of capillaries 
without ever having physically observed such a network. In his work on the 
reproductive mechanisms of animals, Harvey was unable to identify a human 
ovum but was sufficiently confident of the generality of his findings in lower 
animals that he subjectively (and correctly) generalized them to the entire 
animal kingdom. 
Harvey confronted Galen's earlier theory about the heart, aorta, and all the 
arteries—that the blood pulsates through the body in an ebb-and-flow pattern, 
and certainly doesn't travel in a closed, one-directional path—by examining 
the implications of such a theory. He actually made calculations about what 
such a pulsation theory would imply about the buildup of blood in various 
places in the body, and he collected data that would bear on both the pulsa-
tion and circulation hypotheses. Had Bayesian methods of analysis been avail-
able, he might have formed the posterior odds ratio for the probability of the 
pulsation model for blood compared with the probability of the circulation 
model he was considering. A ratio much less than 1 would have argued very 
strongly for the circulation model, and might have been very convincing to 
Harvey's colleagues. Harvey might also have applied such a probabilistic 
approach to comparing his belief in the old Aristotelian theory of epigénesis 
(the formation of a fetus by the addition of one part after another) with the 
more commonly held thinking of his time, the theory of preformation (all parts 
of the animal fetus were present, if invisible, from the start). His data, obtained 
from numerous dissections, strongly supported his belief. 
Subjectivity seems to have entered the work of Sir Isaac Newton at a later 
point in the scientific process. Between the first and second editions of the 
Principia, Newton has been found to have made several changes to make the 
data he reported seem to fit more closely the theories he was advocating. He 
reported a calculated value of the speed of sound that agreed too exactly with 
a value reported by another investigator, despite the fact that the earlier value 
was the average of many distinct measurements. Newton claimed that water 
vapor constitutes 10% of air (in fact, it does not, but varies with temperature, 
pressure, and geographic location). He further claimed, without empirical 
support, that sound is not propagated through water vapor. To compensate, 

192 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
Newton arbitrarily increased the calculated speed of sound by 10%. Numbers 
purported to be data on the precession of the equinoxes were altered to better 
fit some corrected mathematics. Because Newton was sure of the truth of his 
theories, he saw his task as that of convincing his peers, and hence sometimes 
altered his experimental results to make them seem to support the theory 
more strongly. But excluding his work in alchemy and other metaphysical 
researches, he got his physical laws right (although they were somewhat mod-
ified later by Einstein). 
A major issue of model comparison concerned Newton during most of 
his career, the issue of the physical nature of light. Should light be thought of 
as corpuscular (made up of tiny particles) or as a wave motion? Newton was 
mostly persuaded during his early years that light should be thought of as a 
wave motion (and he studied the interference patterns now called Newton's 
rings, which invoked wave-motion thinking). Later in his career he switched 
positions and then thought about light as made up of particles whose behav-
ior could be predicted by his theory of the laws of motion of material bodies. 
In this matter he was to be pitted against Christian Huygens, another famous 
scientist of the time, who strongly believed in the wave theory of light. The 
issue remains an arguable matter today. In what is called the dual nature of 
light (a theory partially attributable to Max Planck), light sometimes seems to 
act one way and sometimes the other. Would a Bayesian model comparison 
have helped? We believe it might have, and might still, but such a probabil-
ity comparison does not yet seem to have been carried out. 
For Antoine Lavoisier, there is a sense in which his entire corpus of work, 
consisting as it did primarily of a theoretical synthesis of the experimental 
work of others, constitutes an exercise in subjectivity. He spent a good part of 
his career refuting the phlogiston theory (the mistaken theory that all flam-
mable substances contain something called phlogiston that is given off when 
they burn). Indeed, he was the originator of the antiphlogiston theory of com-
bustion. Yet he was not above invoking explanations drawn from phlogiston 
when these seemed convenient, and he advocated the imponderable "caloric" 
to help explain the varying states of matter. Not only may Lavoisier have pla-
giarized the experiments of others, claiming to have repeated those experi-
ments but perhaps not actually having done so, but experiments that he 
reported having done were sometimes carried out after the publication in 
which they were cited. Further, the accuracy of experimental results was some-
times exaggerated, and the number of replications achieved similarly inflated. 
Like Newton, Lavoisier was subjectively convinced of the accuracy of the sci-
entific system he was proposing, the systematization of chemistry, and some-
times gave in to the temptation to embellish the empirical support for that 
system. But the system and most of its details, especially the understanding 
of combustion and other forms of oxidation, were sufficiently correct to earn 
Lavoisier the sobriquet "father of modern chemistry." The argument between 
the antiphlogistians and the advocates of the phlogiston theory of combustion 
might have been resolved more readily had the posterior probability calcula-

SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
193 
tions been presented to researchers caught up in Lavoisier's chemical revolu-
tion. Again, the issue was selection of the correct model to use to come closer 
to truth. 
Early in his scientific career, Alexander von Humboldt set out to demon-
strate the harmoniousness of nature; accordingly, his voluminous writings 
repeatedly make the point that nature is one great whole, in which plants, 
animals, and geological and meteorological phenomena, as well as human 
beings and their culture, fit coherently. Von Humboldt's subjectivity influenced 
him, early in his career, to interpret geological observations as evidence sup-
porting the Neptunist theory of the origin of rocks in sedimentation. Later, 
more extensive observations and a change in his theoretical orientation led to 
a reversal of the interpretation of the same observations as evidence in favor 
of the volcanic origin of the rocks (the Plutonist theory). Bayesian statistical 
methods of analysis, had they been available at the time, could readily have 
compared the Neptunist and Plutonist theories. 
Michael Faraday, like von Humboldt, sought unity in nature. Under the 
influence of his religion of Sandemanianism, Faraday believed in the simplic-
ity and integration of nature. This led him to attempt to establish the unity of 
the forces of magnetism, electricity, and gravitation. He achieved the conver-
sion of electrical to mechanical energy and established the equivalence of all 
types of electricity. His conviction led to his persistence through many years 
of attempts before he was successful in showing the conversion of magnetism 
to electricity. He continued to believe in the relationship between electricity 
and gravity, although he was unable to establish that relationship. Faraday 
even left a letter to be opened 60 years after his death that carried the idea of 
unity of forces further with speculation on the existence of electromagnetic 
waves analogous to those of the ocean. 
Charles Darwin believed theory must guide observations despite his pro-
fessed belief in Baconian induction. His synthesis of his observations led him 
to a theory of evolution powered by a mechanism of natural selection yield-
ing gradual changes in organisms. This subjective belief led him to explain gaps 
in the fossil record, where intermediate forms should have been represented, 
as being merly temporary gaps in data gathering, to be filled as paleontolo-
gists explored further. It also led him to disbelieve then-current calculations 
of the age of Earth, since the accumulation of gradual changes would require 
more time than those calculations provided. Scientific opposition to Darwin's 
proposed mechanism of natural selection was coupled with the mistaken belief 
(which Darwin shared) that the material of heredity was "infinitely divisible." 
If that were the case, the substance in the human body that passed heredity 
characteristics such as eye color on to the next generation could pass on any 
degree of "blueness," for example, as opposed to just "blue" or "not blue." An 
implication of this mistaken belief was that a change (mutation) in an organ-
ism would be diluted through interbreeding. That implication caused Darwin 
to change his mind about natural selection. His later writings gave but scant 
importance to natural selection and stressed instead a purely subjective notion 

194 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
of pangenesis, which implied the inheritance of acquired characteristics. 
Neither Darwin nor any of his contemporaries or successors could find any 
empirical evidence for the inheritance of acquired characteristics, called the 
Lamarckian view. The lack of empirical support for Lamarckian mechanisms 
was coupled with the rediscovery of the work of Gregor Mendel, which 
showed that the material of heredity is paniculate, that is, not infinitely divis-
ible but discrete, and thus that mutations can be stored in the genes without 
being diluted. These findings eventually caused the scientific community to 
revive the idea of natural selection as the mechanism for evolution, despite 
the fact that Darwin had abandoned the idea. 
These two models of inheritance, pangenesis, implying the inheritance of 
acquired characteristics (the Lamarckian view), and natural selection, were 
opposed to one another. There were considerable data available that bore on 
the two models. They could easily have been compared probabilistically, as 
part of the scientific analysis. Such an analysis, and related analyses about the 
model of evolution versus the model of Biblical genesis, have not yet been 
carried out, although the arguments surrounding such competing models still 
rage. As in the case of Galileo and the heliocentric and geocentric theories, 
the arguments regarding natural selection and evolution go far beyond science 
and mathematics by pitting religious belief against the opinions of the scien-
tific community. Although it is likely that probability would have helped some-
what both in Galileo's time and in Darwin's, the issue of convincing the public 
is one that pits science against religion. 
Louis Pasteur has been shown within recent years to have let his strong 
prior beliefs influence his clinical treatments and his reports of data he falsely 
claimed to have acquired through experimentation. On the basis of theory and 
its demonstrated effectiveness in the case of the microbe for chicken cholera, 
Pasteur believed that atmospheric oxygen would be effective in attenuating 
the virulence of other microbes. He was extremely enthusiastic about this 
theory of the usefulness of atmospheric oxygen. Hence in reporting a highly 
successful public test of the effectiveness of a vaccine against anthrax, Pasteur 
claimed that he had prepared the vaccine using atmospheric oxygen, when in 
fact it had been produced using potassium bichromate. Similarly, when he 
believed he had hit upon a process that would produce immunity to rabies, 
Pasteur felt himself justified in using that vaccine on two young boys who had 
been bitten by a rabid dog. He claimed that he had already successfully immu-
nized 50 dogs with this same vaccine; his recently revealed laboratory note-
books make it clear that he had barely begun trials of this vaccine and had as 
yet no results at all. In his work to disprove the doctrine of the spontaneous 
generation of life, Pasteur is seen to have suppressed the results of experi-
ments that had what he considered "errors," that is, data that might lend 
support to the theory he was trying to disprove. We now know that Pasteur's 
experimental procedure generated insufficient heat to kill all the microorgan-
isms originally present in his experimental material, so that the "erroneous" 
results do not, in fact, support the idea of spontaneous generation. But Pasteur 
himself did not have this explanation available. Regardless, Pasteur's steri-

SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
195 
lization process was eventually justified, and resulted in the pasteurization 
process that has currency today. 
One of the several model comparisons that Pasteur was involved with 
was the one that examined the theory of spontaneous generation, and he con-
fronted it with the theory that life can only derive from other life. He intro-
duced the notion of sterilization (now called pasteurization) to prove his point. 
Would probabilistic analysis have helped his cause? Probably, but despite all 
his brilliance and flashes of scientific insight, Pasteur's approach to data was 
to suppress them if they didn't agree with his preconceptions of what they 
ought to be. Bayesian analyses by others of data analogous to Pasteur's would 
surely have helped Pasteur make his case more convincing. 
Partly because Sigmund Freud used subjectivity so pervasively in his work, 
some observers believe that his work is not science at all. He used data based 
on patients' free associations and recounting of dreams to interpret their sub-
conscious thoughts, and thus derive what he considered universal laws indi-
cating that the sexual urge and the libido are the driving forces behind all 
repression and inner conflict. Observers of Freud's work have stressed that his 
ideas evolved in a mind suffused with a sense of personal destiny and that 
maintained a lively interest in the occult. His attention to mysticism perhaps 
stemmed from his father's Chassidic mysticism and from his own heavy use of 
cocaine. Because they argue that Freud never scientifically tested his claims 
for the causal links he proposed between sexual repression and neurosis, and 
between the processes of psychoanalysis and cure, some critics feel Freud's 
work is pure subjectivity (rather than the required combination of subjec-
tivity and objectivity found in all good science). Freud's data are questionable 
in a scientific sense since he did not carry out controlled experiments and his 
observations were totally subjective assessments of what was happening to his 
patients. But that has been the nature of most of the field of psychoanalysis, 
although there are positive signs that the stance may be undergoing change in 
the appropriate direction. 
Marie Curie was long sustained in her investigation of radium by her belief 
that the new substance was an element. But her belief that elements could not 
be transmuted to other elements (even through radioactive decay) kept her 
from being able to explain the origin of radioactivity, although she (together 
with her husband, Pierre) originated the insight that radiation was an atomic 
property. The fact that the elements with which she was working (not only 
radium, but polonium as well) had long half-lives made it extremely difficult 
for Curie to measure the loss of weight and energy due to radioactive decay. 
Thus, despite her toying in a 1900 publication with the idea of transmutation, 
Marie Curie's strong subjective prior belief in the established principles of 
physics, coupled with her strong belief in what her data told her, kept the next 
insight from her. A Bayesian model comparison of alternative theories pro-
porting to explain radioactivity would probably have directed her towards 
such insights. 
Albert Einstein was a theoretical physicist in the sense that he derived his 
beliefs about the physical world not only from a profound understanding of 

196 
STORIES OF FAMOUS SCIENTISTS 
the way the physics of the world works, but also from the mathematical models 
that he developed of relationships that physical phenomena should obey. His 
equations governing the special and general theories of relativity, for example, 
were used to make corrections to Isaac Newton's laws of motion and to gen-
erate predictions about what might be observed in appropriate hypothetical 
circumstances, as when traveling at speeds near the speed of light. But he never 
tested any of his theories experimentally; he merely stated them subjectively 
and mathematically, fully expecting them to characterize correctly what would 
be observed in the real world. He also believed that if data were collected to 
test his theories, and if the data contradicted theory, he would be inclined to 
reject the data as erroneous, because they contradicted the theory that he 
simply knew a priori to be true. 
Einstein was fully capable of carrying out any mathematical analysis of his 
choosing. So to examine competing theories of physics using probability and 
posterior odds ratios would have been well within his grasp. He even used 
probability to develop the (predictive) law of Brownian motion, one of his 
famous papers of 1905. But he had difficulties with collecting his own data. He 
was not an experimentalist. So it was not his approach to decide about any 
physical laws on the basis of being convinced by a preponderance of scienti-
fic data, expressed probabilistically or otherwise. Einstein just intuitively and 
mathematically decided how things ought to be and then enunciated what 
the general principles had to be. Probability considerations are very unlikely 
to have been much of a cogent force on his own beliefs, although they might 
have strengthened the scientific beliefs of others in his theories (such as in the 
theory of general relativity) at earlier stages in his career. 
We can discern several themes in this recital of the earlier uses of informal 
subjectivity in science and the use of formal probability to examine compet-
ing scientific hypotheses. First, we see generalizations from data (induction), 
precisely as Bacon had prescribed (and contrary to Popper's views involving 
falsification). But sometimes, these generalizations go well beyond the data at 
hand and can lead either to correct inferential leaps or mistaken overgener-
alizations. We have seen Harvey correctly assume that the origin of all life is 
in the ovum, even though he was unable to understand the significance of the 
ovaries in mammals. But we have also seen Aristotle overgeneralize from 
watching extremely light and heavy objects fall. He concluded that heavy 
objects tend to fall toward the earth and light ones tend to rise, and thus that 
the speed of fall is related to an object's weight. 
Second, we have seen instances in which a scientist, overwhelmed by a 
theory, is apt to see what the theory prescribes (or is unlikely to see what the 
theory denies). Thus Margaret Mead, expecting to see a stress-free adoles-
cence in Samoa to justify a nurture view of the nature-nurture controversy, 
reported seeing just that. Marie Curie, guided by a belief in the conservation 
of energy, failed to identify the mechanism that gives rise to radioactivity. 
Albert Einstein insisted that any data that might seem to contradict his theory 
would prime facie be mistaken. Note how this statement echoes Galileo's 

SOME CONJECTURES ABOUT THE SCIENTISTS 
197 
expression of awe at learning that the adherents of the Coperinican (helio-
centric) system were able to ignore the evidence of their own senses (that the 
Sun appears to rotate around Earth) to conclude that Earth revolves around 
the Sun. 
Third, we have seen instances in which a scientist becomes sufficiently 
convinced of the correctness of the line of investigation being followed that 
a singleminded stubbornness develops. We have seen Marie Curie insisting 
that her newly discovered substance, radium, is an element, and we see 
Michael Faraday laboring for a decade to demonstrate the induction of elec-
tricity from magnetism. 
Finally, we have seen instances of subjectivity that fall on the border of 
outright fraud—and instances that fall squarely within the domain of the 
fraudulent. Johannes Kepler, Gregor Mendel, Robert Millikan, and Cyril 
Burt reported data that were too good to be true but that in each case fit 
the theory that the scientist was trying to prove or to demonstrate (see Chapter 
3). The data doctoring in three of these cases was in the service of a theory 
now believed to be true; in Burt's case the jury is still out. Sir Isaac Newton 
altered data between editions of his masterpiece, The Principia, in order that 
his theoretical contentions appear in the best possible light. Both Antoine 
Lavoisier and Louis Pasteur claimed to have carried out experiments that 
were either incomplete or even not yet begun at the time they published 
the supposed results. We do not condone their bending, or even breaking, the 
accepted rules of honesty applicable no less in the practice of science than 
more broadly in normal human interaction. Nevertheless, we must note that 
Newton, Lavoisier, and Pasteur were most often correct in their scientific 
conclusions and that they enormously advanced the cause of science with their 
thinking. 
Throughout this volume we have mentioned that even eminent scientists 
may have overstepped the bounds of acceptable scientific methodology at 
times. But we have had no intention of trying to tarnish the eminence of the 
scientists whose works we have described and whose subjectivity we have 
documented. Indeed, the modern world is indebted to these scientists for many 
benefits, ranging from the comforts and safety of everyday life to sophisticated 
understanding of the physical and mental universes. But a consideration of 
such infractions of the rules, along with creative subjectivity and prediction on 
the basis of understanding of underlying theory, demonstrates in bold relief 
the processes of subjectivity that we believe to occur in much less obvious form 
in the day-to-day practice of science. 
Subjectivity occurs, and indeed should occur, in the work of scientists; 
it is not just a factor that plays a minor role that we need to ignore as a flaw 
that sometimes creeps into otherwise "objective" scientific analysis. Total 
objectivity in science is a myth. Good science inevitably involves a mixture of 
subjective and objective parts. In Chapter 5 we'll see how the subjective and 
objective parts can be integrated in a natural way. 

CHAPTER 5 
Subjectivity in Science in Modern 
Times: The Bayesian Approach 
The Reverend Thomas Bayes 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
We saw in Chapters 3 and 4 that down through the ages, the world's 
most famous scientists have brought their own personal beliefs, insights, 
and intuition (i.e., their subjectivity) into their scientific research methodology 
199 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

200 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
in a variety of ways, often unacknowledged and informal. Their informal 
subjectivity involved educated or informed ideas, intuition, strong beliefs, 
scientific understanding of underlying principles, and so on, and such pre-
existing ideas were generally based on earlier observations made by them-
selves or by others. The scientific conclusions reached by scientists generally 
result from a mixture of, on the one hand, belief and understanding held prior 
to carrying out some experiment and collecting data, together with, on the 
other hand, largely objective analysis of experimental data. (Instances of 
purely theoretical work with no data to back up the theory are special cases 
of such a mixture, and occur only rarely, as in the case of scientists such 
as Albert Einstein.) 
We pointed out above that the subjective approach in the past has been 
"informal." We mean that for the scientists we discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, 
as well as for many others, it is generally difficult to state which portions 
of their postexperimental conclusions and beliefs about some phenomenon 
are attributable to subjectivity and which to largely objective observation. 
In modern times (especially since the second half of the twentieth century), 
many scientists have continued to bring subjective knowledge about the 
phenomena they are researching to bear on their analyses in informal 
ways. But others have begun to take advantage of the benefits of a more 
formal approach, one that uses the methods of Bayesian statistical analysis. 
In the discussion below, we will see how formal subjectivity is used and how 
it is incorporated in Bayesian statistical analysis of scientific data. In this 
context, the term subjectivity refers to beliefs, information, or knowledge 
held by the scientist prior to taking new data. In this chapter we explain 
some of the ways in which subjectivity is being used in modern times, by 
both scientists and laypeople. This subjectivity is used in decision making 
in everyday life and at all levels of policymaking in business, industry, 
and government. It is even used sometimes in cases when no new data are 
collected at all. 
Some articles that solve real problems using the Bayesian approach in many 
diverse disciplines are cited in the Appendix. A recent article discusses the 
importance of, and the rate of the shift to, the Bayesian paradigm that the sci-
entific establishment is currently undergoing (Malakoff, 1999). Malakoff 
pointed out, for example, that the number of scientific Bayesian papers that 
have been published each year has steadily increased since 1991, and reached 
about 1400 in 1999, a trend that he speculated might be called "a Bayesian 
publishing boom." He also elaborated on the diversity of fields of application 
where Bayesian statistical methods have been applied: "from astrophysics to 
genomics and in real world applications such as testing new drugs and setting 
catch limits for fish. The long-dead minister is also weighing in on law suits 
and public policy decisions and is even making an appearance in consumer 
products" (p. 1460). 

ORIGINS OF PROBABILITY AND STATISTICAL INFERENCE IN SCIENCE 
201 
5.2 ORIGINS OF PROBABILITY AND STATISTICAL 
INFERENCE IN SCIENCE 
Use of probabilistic and statistical methods in science evolved from the 
earliest days of mercantile trade, when people began to calculate the appro-
priate cost of insuring themselves to cover the economic risks they were con-
sidering taking in business ventures. (How does the chance of encountering 
some undesirable event relate to the cost that would be so incurred?) 
So started the field of insurance. Later, in the seventeenth century, gamblers 
approached mathematicians with questions about the chances of some random 
event occurring. The events they were interested in were those they were 
considering betting on, such as the chance that double sixes would come up 
in throwing a pair of fair (well-balanced) dice cast in a gambling game. The 
mathematicians then worked out the probability laws required to answer such 
questions. Mathematical probabilities are calculated by enumerating the 
number of possible ways an event such as double sixes can happen (it can 
happen in only one possible way) and expressing that as a fraction of the total 
number of possible outcomes of the dice. A normal pair of dice can fall in 36 
possible ways, hence the probability of double sixes for a pair of well-balanced 
dice is 1/36. But such purely enumerative calculations are useful only if all out-
comes are equally likely and only if the number of possible outcomes is finite, 
so that we can carry out the enumeration process. But what if all possible 
outcomes are not equally likely? With specially designed dice certain 
outcomes are more likely than others. For a loaded die, one side is more likely 
to fall uppermost than are others. For another example, because it is so diffi-
cult to produce a high quality computer chip, in the manufacturing process, a 
defective computer chip is currently a much more likely outcome than an 
acceptable, nondefective, chip. 
Suppose that one or both of a pair of dice is loaded (weighted so that one 
number is more likely to appear than others). Then simple counting rules 
cannot be used to define probabilities. Suppose, for example, that we know 
that one die is loaded so that "six" is more likely to come up than are the other 
sides. Thus, if both dice are tossed, we know that double sixes is more prob-
able as an outcome than the 1 time in 36 that we calculated for a pair of well-
balanced dice. But how much more probable? One way that we can find out 
is by tossing the dice repeatedly, counting the number of times we get double 
sixes, and expressing that count as a proportion of the number of tosses. This 
is called the long-range relative frequency definition of probability. It is clear 
that when the dice are not loaded, the probability of double sixes we get by 
the method of counting sides will be duplicated by a long-range relative fre-
quency, also equal to 1/36 (assuming that the dice are cast a very large number 
of times). The long-range relative frequency definition of probability relates 
the important construct of mathematical probability to something that can be 
observed empirically, and thereby marries it to empirical science. 

202 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
For all its advantages, the long-range relative frequency definition of 
probability made the term (and the laws for manipulating probabilities) 
applicable only to situations that could, conceptually at least, be repeated 
many times. But there are many other sorts of situations, ones that are unique 
in that they cannot, even conceptually, be repeated many times, to which we 
often want to apply the notion of probability. For example, we may be inter-
ested in the probability that this scientific theory predicts future observations 
well (we discuss this important matter more extensively below), the probabil-
ity that it will rain during the next hour, or the probability that our candidate 
will win in the upcoming election. These events will occur only once. It became 
clear that the definition of probability needed to be expanded to one that that 
would cover all such situations and would include the earlier definitions as 
special cases. 
Eventually, probability came to be thought of as an individual's personal 
degree of belief about some proposition or about any quantity unknown to 
the person making the probability statement. The individual's personal degree 
of belief about an event, or personal probability, is often called a subjective 
probability. The term subjective used here implies that this construct is based 
on a belief specific to an individual. The other definitions of probability given 
above are special cases of subjective probability. The belief could be that the 
mathematical probability (an enumerative proportion) is what is called for in 
a given instance. Or it might be that the long-range relative frequency (the 
proportion of times some event occurs within many trials) is what is called for 
in the belief system of the person making the probability statement. Or it could 
be that neither definition is appropriate, and the subjective probability state-
ment instead implies a belief of the individual based on his or her scientific 
knowledge and deep understanding of some underlying biological, physical, 
or social phenomenon. 
For example, consider the proposition "Andrew Jackson was the eighth 
president of the United States." This proposition is either true or false. You 
can look it up in a reference book if you're not certain about it. But you per-
sonally may not know whether the proposition is true or false, so for you it is 
uncertain; but you have a degree of belief about its correctness. You may feel 
there's a 50:50 chance (50% probability) that it's correct, or you may feel, for 
example, that it's almost certainly true, because of other information you have 
in your head about other presidents, about events of that period of history, or 
whatever. You might actually have any degree of belief (probability) whatever 
about this proposition. The point is that it is your personal probability for the 
truth of this proposition, and you might even be willing to bet on it. For ex-
ample, you may feel there's a 90% chance that the proposition is true (equiva-
lent^, that there's just a small degree of uncertainty in your mind about the 
truthfulness of this statement). It might also mean that you would be happy 
to make a wager with me by which I give you a dollar if it turns out that the 
proposition is true, and you give me $9 if it turns out that the proposition is 
false. Equivalently, if you believe that there's a 90% chance that the proposi-

BAYESIAN STATISTICAL INFERENCE: PRIOR AND POSTERIOR BELIEF 
203 
tion is true, you believe that the chance that the proposition is true is the same 
as the chance of randomly drawing a white ball out of an urn that contains 90 
white balls and 10 black balls, all randomly mixed up. (By the way, Andrew 
Jackson was actually the seventh president of the United States, serving 
1829-1837.) 
We could make an analogous argument about any quantity unknown to 
you, such as the height of the next person you might see accidentally in the 
street or whether a particular scientific theory is true. Your personal belief 
about the height of the person in the street would most certainly not be that 
the height is greater than 10 feet, or as small as 5 inches; you know in advance 
that people are not that tall or small. So you could say that your subjective or 
personal probability that the height of the person is less than 5 inches or 
greater than 10 feet is zero. But your subjective probability might be that 
there's a 50% chance that the person's height is within an inch or so of 5 feet 
8 inches, that there's a 25% chance that the person's height is less than 5 feet 
4 inches, and a 15% chance that the person's height will exceed 6 feet. These 
subjective probabilities are based on your own previous observations, experi-
ences, and understandings about human growth and development. Indeed, if 
you thought that the next person you will see is, in some sense, randomly 
chosen from the population, you might use all the published information 
about the distribution of heights in the population to form your personal 
probability. 
You might have a belief, before conducting any experiments, that the prob-
ability that a particular theory is true is 50%. You might then collect obser-
vational data that add more evidence that the theory is true, to the extent that 
you are willing to say that your probability that the theory is true has increased 
to 75%. In fact, a scientist is never certain (100% probability) that a theory is 
true; he or she only knows that this theory predicts future observations well 
and that no contradictions to the theory have yet been observed. 
By comparison with probability, statistical inference really began only in the 
latter portion of the nineteenth century and began to flourish as a discipline 
starting only in the 1930s. [For a discussion of the development of statistical 
inference see, for example, Stigler (1986).] Statistical inference involves scien-
tists collecting observations about some phenomenon, and from those obser-
vations, trying to infer or induce some general underlying principles. Those 
principles are then used to predict outcomes of future experiments that 
involve that phenomenon (see Section 5.6). 
5.3 BAYESIAN STATISTICAL INFERENCE: PRIOR AND 
POSTERIOR BELIEF 
In 1763 an important scientific paper was published in England, authored by 
a Reformist Presbyterian minister by the name of Thomas Bayes (see Bayes, 
1763). An implication of this work was a method for making statistical infer-

204 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
enees that builds on earlier understanding of a phenomenon, and that formally 
combines that earlier understanding with currently measured data in a way 
that updates the scientific belief (subjective probability) of the experimenter. 
The earlier understanding and experience is called the prior belief (subjective 
knowledge in the form of belief or understanding held prior to observing the 
current set of data). The new belief that results from updating the prior belief 
by combining it with the experimental data is called the posterior belief (the 
belief held after having taken the current data and having examined those data 
in light of how well they conform with preconceived notions). This inferential 
updating process is eponymously called Bayesian inference. The inferential 
process suggested by Bayes shows us that to find your subjective probability 
for some event, proposition, or unknown quantity, you need to multiply your 
prior beliefs about the event by an appropriate summary of the observational 
data. Thus, Bayes pointed out to us that all formal scientific inference inher-
ently involves two parts, a part that depends on the subjective information and 
understanding that you have prior to carrying out an experiment (prior knowl-
edge), and a part that depends on scientific observation and experiment (a 
summary of the observational data). 
A large international school of scientists preceded, supported, expanded, 
and developed Bayesian thinking about science. These included such famous 
scientists as James Bernoulli in 1713 (even before the paper by Bayes was pub-
lished), Pierre Simon de Laplace in 1774, and many twentieth century scien-
tists such as Bruno de Finetti, Harold Jeffreys, L. J. Savage, Dennis V. Lindley, 
and Arnold Zellner. Bayesian methodology was the method of statistical infer-
ence generally used from the time of Bayes until the early part of the twenti-
eth century, when Sir Ronald A. Fisher and others introduced the frequentist 
approach to statistical inference. To many, it has become increasingly clear that 
the frequentist approach is fraught with technical problems and inconsisten-
cies (see, e.g., Berger and Berry, 1988; Howson and Urbach, 1989; Matthews, 
1998a,b). As a consequence, today, scientists schooled in the Bayesian 
approach to scientific inference have been departing from the frequentist 
approach and returning to the Bayesian approach. Many scientists now believe 
that a paradigm shift in the sense of Kuhn (1962) has been taking place in the 
way that scientific inference is, and will be, carried out. Many scientists now 
recognize the advantages of bringing prior beliefs into the inference process 
in a formal way from the start. The alternative is attempting to achieve total 
objectivity, or pretending to have done so, even though prior information is 
often brought to bear on the problem anyway, in surreptitious or even uncon-
scious ways. Subjectivity may enter the scientific process surreptitiously in the 
form of seemingly arbitrarily imposed constraints, in the introduction of initial 
and boundary conditions, in the arbitrary levels of what should be called a sta-
tistically significant result, in the deemphasizing of certain data points which 
represent suspicious observations (this is what was done in the case of Robert 
Millikan, as discussed in Section 3.4), and so on. 
The Bayesian result is that the degree of a person's belief about some 

BAYESIAN STATISTICAL INFERENCE! PRIOR AND POSTERIOR BELIEF 
205 
unknown entity, once something about it has been observed, is determined as 
the product of two types of information. One type of information character-
izes the data that are observed; this is usually thought of as the "objective" 
portion of posterior belief, since it involves the collection of data, and data are 
generally referred to as "objectively determined." (We recognize that we do 
not really mean that data are necessarily objective unless we assume that there 
were no subjective influences surrounding the data collected. See the discus-
sion in Chapter 1 about the perceptual influences on data collection as well as 
the subjective influences on data interpretation exemplified by the rate-of-
defectives example.) This so-called "objective" information is summarized in 
what is sometimes called the likelihood function. It summarizes the observa-
tional data from an experiment in a probability form. 
The other type of information used in Bayesian analysis is the person's 
degree of belief about the unknown entity held prior to observing data 
obtained from the current experiment. (The prior belief might be based on 
theory, or implications of some mathematical formulation of the theory, or it 
might be based on a combination of theory and empirical data obtained in 
earlier experiments.) Thus, this prior belief may be based, at least in part, on 
things that were observed or learned about this unknown quantity or theory 
prior to this most recent measurement. The product of the probability of the 
data (based on a given model for the theory) and the prior (subjective) prob-
ability of the theory determines the posterior (subjective) probability. 
Bayesian analysis of scientific data formally combines these two types of 
information. 
We saw in the rate-of-defectives example in Chapter 1 that several scien-
tists examining the same set of data from an experiment came up with differ-
ent interpretations. This phenomenon is not unusual in science (or in everyday 
interaction; see the film Rashomon). When several scientists interpret the same 
set of data, they rarely have exactly the same interpretations. Almost invari-
ably, their own prior beliefs about the underlying phenomenon enter their 
thinking, as do their individual understandings of how meaningful each data 
point is. Their conclusions regarding the extent to which the data support the 
hypothesis will generally reflect a mixture of their prior degree of belief about 
the hypothesis they are studying and the data observed. 
Whether formal Bayesian inference is actually used in dealing with the data 
in an experiment, or whether other, non-Bayesian methods are used, prior 
belief is generally used in one way or another by all good scientists in a natural, 
sometimes quite informal, way. Science cannot, and should not, be totally 
objective, but should and does involve a mixture of both subjective and objec-
tive procedures, with the one type of procedure feeding back on the other. As 
the data show the need for modification of the hypothesis, ideally, a new 
hypothesis is entertained, a new experiment is designed, and new data are 
taken. What had been the posterior belief in the earlier experiment becomes 
the prior belief in the new experiment, because the result of the last experi-
ment is now the best understanding the scientist has of what result to expect 

206 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
in a new experiment. To study the future, scientists must learn from the past; 
and it is important—indeed inevitable—that the learning process be partly 
subjective in that the scientist must continually revise his or her information 
about a phenomenon in the light of new information. 
The best information scientists (and the lay public) have about a particular 
phenomenon is the collection of beliefs and results of experiments carried out 
by one or more particular scientists who have been investigating that phe-
nomenon. Then other scientists repeat those experiments for verification; they 
may find that their results approximate those of the original scientists who 
carried out the seminal investigations. Then the posterior probabilities of this 
collection of scientists about this phenomenon become those of the general 
public. 
5.4 MATHEMATICAL FORMALISM OF THE 
BAYESIAN APPROACH 
(The less mathematically inclined reader may wish to skip this section.) 
Although it is not necessary to read this section for general understanding of 
the formal subjective approach, for those who are comfortable with math-
ematical formulations, we offer a brief mathematical explanation of the very 
simple Bayesian formula that underlies all of Bayesian statistical science, the 
modern approach to subjectivity in science. We assume that there is some 
underlying experiment of interest and that the experiment has more than one 
possible outcome; that is, the outcome of the experiment is uncertain and 
unknown until the experiment is actually performed, and there are several 
possible outcomes. (The number of possible outcomes might be two, or three, 
or four, or more, or even an uncountably infinite number, such as any number 
in an interval.) 
Suppose we call two of the possible outcomes that can occur in an experi-
ment, event A and event B. For simplicity of illustration, we assume that as 
the outcome of the experiment, event A may or may not occur, event B may 
or may not occur, both may occur, or neither may occur. We use the traditional 
symbols and formalism that "P{event}" denotes the degree of belief, proba-
bility, or chance, that a particular event will occur when a random mechanism 
generates an event. The probability is calculated in advance of the experiment 
being performed. Once the experiment has been carried out, there is no longer 
any uncertainty about the outcome; the outcome is known. 
Bayesian statistical analysis depends fundamentally on a relationship deriv-
able from the axioms of probability theory that enables us to convert the 
chance that an event A will happen, conditional on our having information 
about event B into the chance that event B will occur once we know that event 
A has already occurred. Then, using this symbolism, Bayes' formula asserts 
that 

MATHEMATICAL FORMALISM OF THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
207 
Prevent B will occur) given (event A has occurred)} 
= P{B given A} = 
P{A given B} x P{B] 
6 
P{A given B} x P{B} + P{A given not B] x P{not B} 
In this formula, P[A given B) is generally referred to as the model·, it depends 
on the observational data, as we will see. P{B) is generally referred to as the 
prior probability (since this probability depends only on information known 
prior to observing the data). P[B given A] is referred to as the updated or pos-
terior probability of B since it is conditioned on having information about 
event A. (The prior probability of B was not so conditioned.) 
5.4.1 Example 1: A Bayesian Inference Problem in Medical Diagnosis 
Suppose that you go to the doctor for a regular medical checkup. In the course 
of your examination, the doctor suggests a laboratory test for a serious illness, 
such as a particular form of cancer. For the purpose of illustrating the formal 
subjective (Bayesian) approach to scientific inference, we will keep the 
example very simple by assuming (unrealistically) that the doctor has avail-
able only the one test. We also assume that she has not discovered any reason 
to believe, a priori, that you have the disease—you have no history of the 
disease, it's not in the medical background you've told her about, and she 
doesn't see any particular signs of the disease otherwise. She just believes 
everyone should be tested for this disease as a matter of routine. 
Suppose that the medical test is a very sensitive one in that the chance that 
the lab test is positive when in fact you don't have the disease (false positive) 
is 3%, and the chance that the lab test is negative when in fact you do have 
the disease (false negative) is 1 %. (The false negative kind of error is, of course, 
of greater concern to you.) These error rates for the test reflect what happens 
on the average. In other words, for example, the test doesn't necessarily yield 
three false positive results for every 100 times the test is administered on ran-
domly selected patients. Sometimes, it won't give any false results in thousands 
of tests, and other times it may give 10 or more false results in 100 tests. But 
on average, the false positive rate is 3%; similar possibilities hold for the false 
negative rate. 
Suppose also that the incidence of the disease in the population at large is 
1 in a million (you adopt this value as the prior probability that you have the 
disease, P{B\ in the notation above). You take the lab test, and to your sur-
prise and horror, the lab result comes back positive! What should you now 
believe about the chances that you actually have this dreaded disease? (That 
is, what is the posterior probability that you have the disease? This is P{B given 
A] in the notation above.) In light of the laboratory evidence, our fictitious 
physician whose tools we have limited to just this one lab test (and who might 
be unfamiliar with probability) might just say that there's a 97% chance that 

208 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
you actually do have the disease, since the physician has been advised that 
when the lab test is positive, it is fallible only 3% of the time. In fact, a more 
precise and less threatening interpretation of the lab result is that if you don't 
have the disease, the test will, on the average 3% of the time, indicate incor-
rectly that you do have the disease. A computation (provided below) using the 
Bayesian paradigm would say that the chances that you actually have this form 
of cancer are only 0.003%, less than a mere one hundredth of 1 percent! Our 
fictitious physician, who is unsuspecting of her misinterpretation of the error 
probabilities of the test, has given you very bad, and incorrectly dishearten-
ing, advice. Of course, we also handicapped her by making only one labora-
tory test available to her for diagnosis. 
The Bayesian paradigm asserts above that in the situation created for this 
medical diagnosis example, the probability that you actually have the cancer 
in question, taking into account that the lab test was positive, is given by 
P{(you have cancer) given (your positive lab test)} 
= P{(cancer) given (+test)} 
P{(+test) given (cancer)}P{cancer} 
P{(+test) given (cancer)}P{cancer} + P{(+test) given (no cancer)}P{no cancer} 
In this situation, we can specify the sensitivity of the test by 
P{(+test) given (no cancer)} = probability of a false positive = 0.03; 
P{(-test) given (cancer)} = probability of a false negative = 0.01, 
so 
P{(+test) given (cancer)} = 1 - P{(-test) given (cancer)} = 1 - 0.01 = 0.99. 
Substituting these numbers into the Bayesian formula gives 
(0.99)P{(cancer)} 
P{(cancer) given (+test)} = (0.99)P{(cancer)} + (0.03)P{(no cancer)}' 
But we have supposed that the incidence of the disease in the population at 
large is 1 in a million. So you take 
P(cancer) = 10"6 = 0.000001. 
P(no cancer) = 1-10~6 = 0.999999. 
Substituting these numbers gives approximately 
P{(cancer) given (positive lab test)} = 0.003%. 

MATHEMATICAL FORMALISM OF THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
209 
In view of this very small posterior probability, if you really believe sub-
jectively that your chance of getting this cancer is equivalent to that of a 
randomly selected person in the population, it is quite unlikely that you have 
cancer despite the positive outcome of the test. 
But suppose that when the doctor had asked you about your medical 
history, you didn't know that there had been a strong incidence of cancer in 
your family. On further investigation, suppose that you found that three out 
of four of your grandparents had died early of the same type of cancer that 
you are being tested for and that your father had been misdiagnosed when he 
died. In fact, your father actually died from this form of cancer. Now you have 
to question the figure of 1 in a million that applies to the population at large. 
It probably doesn't apply to you. The chances of getting this type of cancer 
may be much higher for you than for others, because of something related to 
your genes. So the incidence of cancer for your subpopulation is not 1 in a 
million, but perhaps it is 1 in 1000. Now, as it turns out, your chance of having 
this type of cancer given your positive test result increases to about 3.2%. The 
chance is still much smaller than the 97% the fictitious doctor had mistakenly 
conjectured, but it is larger than what it might be calculated to be without 
taking into account the subjective factor that relates to you. 
We can readily carry out analogous computations using the Bayesian para-
digm considering a collection of different incidences of the disease, perhaps 
appropriate for different subpopulations to which you might believe that you 
belong. We find that the probability that a hypothetical person with a positive 
test result actually has the disease doesn't reach even 50% until the incidence 
of the disease in the appropriate population is 1 in 34 (see the table "Prob-
abilities for a Disease"). 
Probabilities for a Disease" 
Incidence of Disease (Prior Probability) 
Posterior Probability (%) 
1 in a million 
0.003 
1 in 100,000 
0.033 
1 in 10,000 
0.33 
1 in 1000 
3.2 
1 in 100 
25 
1 in 34 
50 
1 in 10 
78.6 
"3% probability of false positives and 1% probability of false negatives 
5.4.2 Value of a Second Opinion 
Now suppose that because you feel that cancer is such a serious disease, you 
decide to seek a second opinion about your problem. You look for another 
physician, perhaps an oncologist, who will suggest either that a new, independ-

210 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
ent lab test be obtained, or that a new pathologist evaluate the results of the 
same lab test. The purpose of either procedure is to see whether a new test or 
a new reading of the same lab results will change your opinion about your 
chance of having the disease. (Because such lab tests can be quite invasive, 
and even dangerous, multiple readings of the same lab results are often taken 
rather than additional invasive procedures being performed.) In either case, 
the result will be either positive again (confirmatory), or perhaps this time it 
will be negative. 
Suppose the second lab test is positive again. How should that affect your 
belief about your having this cancer? Bayes' formula can be used again. Before 
the second test results are known, you best information about your chances 
of having the disease is the posterior probability that you developed on the 
basis of the first test results. That probability was originally 0.003%, based on 
using the 1 in a million incidence of the disease in the general population. But 
then when you determined that this particular type of cancer ran in your 
family, you modified your belief to 3.2%. Now this posterior probability 
becomes your new prior probability. So you can reapply Bayes' formula using 
a prior probability of 3.2% (assuming that the false positive and false nega-
tive probabilities remain the same). The resulting calculation shows that the 
new posterior probability that you have the cancer in the light of the second 
test results has risen to 52.2% (or 16 times the earlier probability). Very sen-
sibly, you start treatment as soon as possible, and perhaps simultaneously, you 
seek even a third opinion. 
It is important to bear in mind that although this example is illustrative of 
one type of use of the Bayesian approach, we assumed unrealistically that the 
original doctor is limited to one test. In fact, physicians generally depend for 
their diagnoses upon several tests and symptoms displayed by their patients. 
It is only after certain symptoms persist over time, and several tests of various 
kinds point to the same diagnosis, that meaningful conclusions can be drawn. 
The Bayesian approach can be used to great advantage in this context, as we 
have seen, but sometimes the problem is more complicated and the additional 
complications must be taken into account in the Bayesian analysis. 
5.4.3 Example 2: Bayesian Inference in Physics 
(To understand this example the reader should have some familiarity with the 
binomial distribution.) 
Suppose that a scientist is interested in evaluating his posterior probability 
that there is a particular physical effect operating in his experiments. Denote 
the effect by E. Suppose ne feels a priori that there is a 50:50 chance that the 
effect is present. To evaluate the effect, the scientist knows that he must first 
do some preexperiment trials. These may terminate either in his observing 
some minimum voltage (called a success because it tends to indicate that the 
effect is happening) or not (called a failure because it tends to indicate that 
the effect is not happening). He carries out the trials independently of one 
another, and the chance of a success on a single trial remains the same from 

MATHEMATICAL FORMALISM OF THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
211 
one trial to the next. He carries out the trials three times and finds two 
successes. These are the observational data. The scientist calculates that if the 
effect E is actually present, the chance of a success on a single trial is 0.6, but 
if E is not present, the chance of a success is just 0.2. 
Bayes' formula gives the posterior probability of E given the 2 successes in 
3 trials as 
P{E given 2 successes} 
_ 
P{(2 successes) given (E)}P{E} 
P{(2 successes) given (E)}P{E} + P{(2 successes) given (E)}P{E}' 
Here E denotes the event "not £," meaning the event that the effect E is not 
present. Wejiote that because of the 50:50 chance assumed in this example 
P{E] = P{E) = 0.5. Also (using the binomial distribution^, we find that 
P{{2 successes) given E] = 0.432, and P[(2 successes) given E] = 0.096. Sub-
stituting into Bayes' formula gives 
P{E given 2 successes} 
P{{2 successes) given (E)} x (0.5) 
P{(2 successes) given (E)} x (0.5) + P{(2 successes) given (E)} x (0.5) 
P{(2 successes) given E} 
P{{2 successes) given E} + P{{2 successes) given E} 
0.432 + 0.096 
' 
' 
Summarizing, 
P{E given 2 successes} = 0.818 = 81.8%. 
So the scientist's posterior probability that there is an effect E has increased 
from 50%, a priori, to 81.8%. 
Applications of Bayesian analysis to problems in physics abound, for 
example, in the work of Harold Jeffreys (see Jeffreys, 1961) and Edward Jaynes 
(see Jaynes/Rosenkrantz, 1983). The approach was also advocated by Richard 
Feynman [see the book by Mathews and Walker (1964) in which the authors 
explain in the Preface that the book was an outgrowth of lectures by Richard 
Feynman at Cornell University; see pp. 361-370, where Feynman suggests that 
to compare contending theories one should use Bayesian methods. See also, 
the example in Section 5.6.2 below]. 
The previous two examples were applications of Bayes' formula for cases 
in which the data followed discrete probability distributions. (Sections 5.4.1 
and 5.4.2 involved some basic discrete probabilities associated with a problem 
in medical diagnosis, and Section 5.4.3 involved the binomial distribution with 
some physical science experiments.) But Bayes' formula can readily be applied 

212 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
to much more sophisticated, realistic problems in science. We summarize such 
a problem in the following example. 
5.4.4 
Example 3: Bayesian Inference in Biological Science 
[This example is a very brief summary of an article by Gary A. Churchill that 
appeared in Gatsonis, Hodges, Kass, and Singpurwalla (1995, pp. 90-138, with 
discussion; see the Appendix).] 
The information about heredity in an organism is found in its genes. The 
genetic material is called a DNA molecule. The DNA molecule is composed 
of subunits called bases (nucleotides), of four types: adenine (A), cytosine (C), 
guanine (G), and thymine (T). Information about heredity is encoded in a 
DNA sequence according to the specific ordering of the bases. There are two 
strands of DNA (the double helical structure first proposed by Watson and 
Crick in 1953) in each gene, and they are joined together in a complementary 
way so that that an A on one DNA strand is always paired with a T on 
the opposite strand, and D is always paired with C. The complete genetic 
information is therefore contained in the sequence of just one strand. 
The totality of DNA in an organism is called its genome. There has been 
extensive activity in the biological community in recent years to map the DNA 
sequence of many organisms, especially to map the human genome contain-
ing about 3 billion base pairs. There are automatic sequencing devices for 
accomplishing this feat, but the sequencing must still be carried out very 
slowly. The large number of base pairs has exacerbated the problem. The 
sequencing is most frequently carried out by a process called the enzymatic 
method. 
At this point the scientific Bayesian analysis problem becomes quite 
complicated and beyond the scope of this volume. Suffice it to say that 
prior information is used to describe the frequencies and types of errors that 
arise in evaluating the sequences in separate portions of the DNA sequence 
(DNA fragments). The prior distribution often used in such an analysis is 
not discrete, but continuous, and such analysis, although too advanced to be 
discussed here, is treated in books on Bayesian statistical science (see Appen-
dix A). The posterior distribution is also continuous, and to evaluate its char-
acteristics, sophisticated, computer-intensive, statistical methods of sampling 
from the posterior distribution must be used (called Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo sampling). 
One of the most important challenges to data analysis in modern statisti-
cal genetics and molecular biology is the problem of how to analyze gene 
expression data in which the number of variables or dimensions, "p", greatly 
exceeds the number of replicates, "n" (that is, we have p much greater than 
n). Such data frequently are generated by a piece of equipment called a 
microarrayer. The data analysis problem is opposite to the usual problem in 
statistical data analysis in which typically p is much less than n. In the microar-
rayer context, we might have p = 10,000, for example, while n = 10. In such 

USING PROBABILITY TO COMPARE SCIENTIFIC THEORIES 
213 
contexts, to reduce the problem to one where ordinary statistical methods can 
be applied, it is necessary either to increase the number of replicates (sample 
size) or to reduce the number of dimensions, or both. The Bayesian approach 
may offer the best solution to such problems since in Bayesian analysis, as is 
easy to show, bringing prior information to bear on a model is equivalent to 
adding more replicates, or increasing the effective sample size. 
5.5 USING PROBABILITY TO COMPARE SCIENTIFIC THEORIES 
It is important for scientists to be able to demonstrate that their theories and 
experimental results improve in some way on the knowledge that was avail-
able prior to their work. Often, there are competing theories that are believed 
to explain the same phenomenon. How can scientists decide which of several 
proffered theories is best? Various proposals have been made for resolving 
this important issue. We suggest here that the ideal way to compare compet-
ing theories is by means of probability. 
Our studies of the lives of scientists in Chapters 3 and 4 show that the beliefs 
of knowledgeable scientists about various phenomena, beliefs that are usually 
based, in part, on empirical data, are really the best thinking that we have 
available in our attempts to understand biological, physical, and social phe-
nomena. For us, probabilities express our personal beliefs about an event or 
proposition. But when empirical data are available that bear on the event or 
proposition, these empirical data are built into the probability belief of the 
scientist doing the analysis, either informally by educated judgment, or 
formally via Bayesian methods as part of a "prior belief (prior to taking 
observations). 
For example, to say that you have a subjective probability (degree of belief) 
of 70% for the chance that some physical theory or proposition is true is 
equivalent to saying that your (subjective) probability for that event or propo-
sition is the same as the chance that you will draw a white ball randomly from 
an urn that contains 70 white balls and 30 nonwhite balls, all well mixed up in 
the urn. If, instead, you do not believe that the balls were really well mixed up 
in the urn, but rather that the white ones were added only after the others 
were already put into the urn with little further mixing, so that the white ones 
were on top and most readily drawn, your belief that a white ball will be drawn 
would be greater than 70%. In that case, your subjective probability might be, 
perhaps, 85% (reflecting not an enumeration of the fraction of white balls in 
the urn, but rather, an understanding of the fact that white balls were much 
more likely to be drawn than their number in the urn would suggest). Thus, 
as Savage (1954) pointed out (and as we have mentioned earlier in this 
chapter), "mathematical" or "objective" probability is a special case of 
subjective probability. 
Good (1950, 1965, 1983) proposed that to compare scientific theories, sci-
entists should examine the weight of the evidence favoring each of them, and 

214 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
he has shown that this concept is well defined in terms of a conditioning on 
prior information. In the same spirit, Jeffreys (1961) developed an axiomati-
cally based theory of subjective probability and applied it directly to problems 
in modern physics. In the Jeffreys approach, one can readily compare theories 
by examining their posterior probabilities to see which one has the greatest 
posterior (subjective) probability. The posterior probability of the theory being 
correct is the probability obtained after combining the experimental data with 
the belief held prior to collecting the experimental data, via Bayes' formula 
(used, for example, in the medical diagnosis example above). 
We saw through the studies of scientists in Chapters 3 and 4 how varied sci-
entific methodology has been over the centuries and how strong personal 
belief in scientific theories has been the general rule. We proceed in the spirit 
of Howson and Urbach (1989, p. 11), who state: 
It was the ambition of Popper, Lakatos, Fisher, Neyman and Pearson, and others of 
their schools to develop this idea of a standard of scientific merit which is both objec-
tive and compelling, and yet non-probabilistic. And it is fair to say that their theo-
ries, especially those connected with significance testing and estimation, which 
comprise the bulk of so-called classical methods of statistical inference, have 
achieved pre-eminence in the field. The procedures they recommended for the 
design of experiments and the analysis of data have become the standards of cor-
rectness with many scientists 
We [Howson and Urbach] shall show that these 
classical methods are really quite unsuccessful, despite their influence among 
philosophers and scientists, and that their pre-eminence is undeserved. Indeed we 
[Howson and Urbach] shall argue that the idea of total objectivity is unattainable 
and that classical methods which pose as guardians of that ideal, in fact violate it at 
every turn; virtually none of those methods can be applied without a generous 
helping of personal judgment and arbitrary assumption. 
In this very pithy statement, Howson and Urbach point out that some 
philosophers, scientists, and statisticians of the first half of the twentieth 
century (see, e.g., Popper, 1959a,b, 1963; Lakatos, 1968,1970,1974,1978; Fisher, 
1922,1935,1947,1956,1970; Neyman and Pearson, 1928,1933) developed an 
approach to statistical analysis of scientific data that was not based on prob-
ability. That approach, which attempted to be "objective" in its interpretation 
of data, is the classical or frequency approach. The frequency approach was 
readily adopted by the scientific community at large despite its many failings, 
and inconsistencies, and was (and is currently) used to estimate uncertain 
scientific quantities and to test hypotheses about scientific theories. This is a 
fundamentally Popperian approach {oí falsification, or setting up a strawman 
hypothesis believed to be false and then showing that it is indeed false) to 
comparing scientific theories. It was adopted by Neyman and Pearson in sta-
tistical science and is what is often referred to as hypothesis testing and its 
concomitant, significance testing. These are terms used to refer to the classical 
method, that purports to determine whether some unknown, underlying, sei-

PREDICTIVE PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS 
215 
entitle quantity that was estimated is likely to have been generated at random 
from the noise or measurement error in an experiment, or is really a scientifi-
cally meaningful quantity. But these approaches are notorious for involving 
technical inconsistencies and inadequacies that arise in carrying out scientific 
inference (see, e.g., Basu, 1988; Press, 1989, Sec. 2.3.2, p. 32). 
We do not view the issue of the injection of a scientist's educated belief into 
the scientific inference process as a problem. On the contrary, we accept it as 
an inescapable part of the process of science, and we point out how to take 
advantage of the personal beliefs and understanding that scientists have of 
phenomena of interest in the world to update their understanding of the 
limited amount of data they may have gathered about some matter. The 
Bayesian approach to analysis of scientific data provides scientists with a very 
natural and logical separation between the views held before taking data and 
the so-called "objective" views (views held after taking observational data). It 
sees both views as contributions to knowledge and provides a way of com-
bining them. 
A useful way to compare scientific theories using the Bayesian paradigm is 
to compare their "predictive distributions" for new observations. This com-
parison involves going from subjective understanding of a phenomenon in 
nature to the development of a theory or model that will predict new obser-
vations. We have seen that partial subjectivity in their scientific methodology 
is characteristic of scientists. We believe that the main task of science is to 
predict. Expressing the results of a scientific investigation in a predictive prob-
ability distribution combines these principles. 
5.6 PREDICTIVE PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS 
Frequently, scientists test a theory by using a mathematical formulation of the 
theory (called the model) and then predicting the value of future observations 
from the model. Of course, it is rare that the observed values of the future 
observations are exactly the same as the values predicted by the mathemati-
cal model of the theory. Failure of exact prediction arises for at least two 
reasons. First, nature is generally much more complex than any simple math-
ematical formulation is able to capture. Second, all future observations must 
be measured, and measurements always have error associated with them 
(called measurement error) attributable to inaccuracies of various kinds in 
every device used for measurement. The discrepancy between predicted and 
observed data values is frequently referred to as prediction error. With a 
"good" mathematical formulation of a theory, most nuances of the theory will 
be included within the mathematical model. In a good experiment, measure-
ment error is very small. So under good conditions, prediction error can be 
held to a very small value. 
The quality of any scientific theory is measured by how well the theory 

216 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
predicts future observations. If the theory predicts poorly, it doesn't matter 
how well it performs in terms of fitting all previous data; it is not an accept-
able theory. Sometimes the theory predicts well but performs poorly in fitting 
previous data well. Such performance is preferable to poor prediction, 
although ideally, the theory would perform well at both prediction and fitting 
previous data. 
Once the current experiment has been performed, the scientist must evalu-
ate the prediction error. Is the prediction error too large for the theory to be 
acceptable? How large is too large? These questions involve statistical infer-
ence. Mere calculation of the frequently used root-mean-squared error of the 
prediction (which merely looks at how far a particular prediction is from truth) 
is often inadequate for meaningful evaluation of the quality of the prediction. 
Alternatively, we provide below a brief summary of how to evaluate the pre-
dictive distribution of the experimental data. For illustrative purposes, and to 
keep the discussion of prediction at a simple mathematical level, we consider 
only a very simple case. This case involves prediction of a discrete random 
quantity whose probability distribution is that of the number of "successes" in 
independent trials of an experiment. We refer the interested reader through 
citations of other literature to more detailed and advanced mathematical 
treatments of prediction in the case of continuous quantities. 
Suppose that the scientist is planning to carry out an experiment associated 
with a particular physical phenomenon. In connection with this experiment, 
the scientist wants to predict the value expected to be observed in the experi-
ment. Call this as-yet-unobserved value, Y. Suppose further that there are just 
two competing theories for generating Y; call them theory A and theory B. (In 
a more general case, there might be more than two theories to compare.) 
Finally, suppose that last year the scientist (or some other scientist) carried out 
a similar experiment and observed the outcome of that similar experiment to 
be X. Now, based on all the information the scientist has about this phenom-
enon, the aim is to predict Y. Moreover, the scientist wants more than just the 
prediction of a single value; the aim is to find the probabilities that the future 
observation is likely to fall into particular ranges. We next resort to a mathe-
matical explanation and an example for those readers who prefer that type of 
approach. 
5.6.1 Probability Formulation of Predictive Distribution 
(The less mathematically inclined reader may wish to skip this section.) 
Using a simple law of probability, it can be shown that the predictive prob-
ability of the future observation 7, given the earlier observed result X, is a 
weighted average of the predicted values of Y assuming that theory A holds, 
and the predicted values of Y given that theory B holds. We have assumed for 
simplicity of explication that only theory A or theory B can hold. (This is the 
simplest case; more interesting cases occur when more than two theories have 
been proposed.) 

PREDICTIVE PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS 
217 
Calculating a weighted average is like calculating the value or cost of a 
market basket of food (in this simple example, there are only two food items 
in the market basket). Using a vertical line (|) to stand for given in the nota-
tion used above, the weighted average for the predictive probability distribu-
tion is given by 
P{Y\X} 
= P{y|theory A} x P{theory A\X} + P{y|theory B} x P{theory B\X}. 
Note that the weights here (P{theory A\X] and P[theory B\X\) are the poste-
rior probabilities (updated degrees of belief of the experimenter) obtained 
from Bayes' formula (following the previous experiment) of theories A and 
B, given that the result of that experiment was the data X. 
5.6.2 Example: Comparing Theories Using Binomial Distribution 
Suppose it has already been found that the posterior probability of theory A 
given the earlier observation X is given by P{(theory A) given X] = 0.2, and 
the posterior probability of theory B given the earlier observation X is 
P{(theory B) given X) = 0.8. These are the weights that will be used in the 
weighted average. Then 
P{Y given X} = P{Y given (theory A)} x (0.2) + P{Y given (theory B)} x (0.8). 
Now suppose that a particular experiment can result in only one of two 
ways: Either a specific effect is found (we call this outcome a success) or the 
specific effect is not found (we call this outcome a failure). The experiment 
might be repeated independently many times. Let Y denote the number of 
successes in (for simplicity) 2 independent trials of the experiment, and assume 
that the probability p of success in both trials is the same: namely,/? = 0.1 if 
theory A is true and p = 0.5 if theory B is true. Then it is well known in sta-
tistical science that (because this hypothetical situation is characterized by a 
binomial distribution) 
P{Y given (theory A)} = P{Y given (p = 0.1)} = y 
2
2^y)!(0.1)V(0.9)2-y, 
and 
P{Y given (theory B)} = P{Y given (p = 0.5)} = 
*[ yy(0.S)2. 
Note that Y\ means (Y) x (Y- 1) x · · · x (2) x (1). Combining terms gives 

218 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
P{Y given X} = 7 ^ ^ ( 0 · 1 ) Κ ( 0 · 9 ) 2 ^ ( 0 · 2 ) + Τ ^ ^ ( 0 . 5 ) 2 ( 0 . 8 ) . 
This last expression, the predictive probability for the unknown Y (conditional 
on X), depends only on Y (once X is observed). Since there are assumed to 
be just two trials, Y, the number of successes observed can be 0,1, or 2 (0 suc-
cesses, 1 success, or 2 successes). 
We can evaluate the predictive probabilities for these three cases by sub-
stituting Y = 0, Y = 1, and Y = 2 in the last formula. They are given by 
P{(Y = 0) given X} = 0.362; 
P{(Y = 1) given X} = 0.436; 
P{(Y = 2) given X} = 0.202. 
Note that these predictive probabilities sum to 1, as indeed they must if they 
are to represent a (discrete) probability distribution. 
It is now clear that although the experiment has not yet been carried out, 
if it were to be carried out, the most likely value of Y is Y = 1 (i.e., the most 
likely number of successes is 1) since its predictive probability (0.436) is 
greater than the predictive probabilities for the other possible values (0.362 
or 0.202). Moreover, 
P{(Y < 1) given X} = P{(Y = 0) given X} + P{(Y = 1) given X) 
= 0.798-80%. 
Also, 
P{(Y > 1) given X} = P{(Y = 1) given X} + P{(Y = 2) given X} 
= 0.638-64%. 
So there is an 80% chance that there will be zero successes or one success, 
while there is only a 64% chance that there will be one or two successes. But 
most likely, there will be just one success. 
5.7 
SUMMARY 
A guide to some books on the theory and practice of Bayesian methodology 
is given at the end of this chapter. A list of some published applications of 
Bayesian methodology in a wide variety of scientific and professional fields is 
given in the Appendix. 
In summary, as we have seen in this book, scientists have always used 
various subjective approaches in their research work. We believe that seien-

REFERENCES 
219 
tists will continue to incorporate subjective procedures into their analyses, but 
they will increasingly adopt the Bayesian formalism, using it for experimental 
design, for estimation, for hypothesis testing, for model checking, for averag-
ing over many possible models, and for prediction of future events. The sub-
jectivity of scientists has not only been an inherent factor in many discoveries, 
it is ingrained, and here to stay, and science is the better for it because its use 
permits scientists to achieve better, more accurate, and more predictable 
results. 
5.8 ANNOTATED GUIDE TO SOME LITERATURE ON METHODS 
FOR BAYESIAN ANALYSIS 
1. For a few introductory treatments of the theory and methods of Bayesian 
inference see, for example, Antleman (1997), Berry (1996), Blackwell 
(1969), Howson and Urbach (1989), Lee (1997), Schmitt (1969), and 
Winkler (1972). 
2. A few more advanced treatments may be found in Berger (1985), 
Bernardo and Smith (1994), Carlin and Louis (1998), Dey et al. (1998), 
Florens et al. (1990), Geisser (1993), Gelman et al. (1995), Hartigan 
(1983), Kadane et al. (1999), Lad (1996), Leonard and Hsu (1999), 
Lindley (1965,1972), O'Hagen (1994), Press (1989), Raiffa and Schlaifer 
(1961), Viertl (1987), and Zellner (1971). Many others are listed in the 
list of references. 
3. For a history of Bayesian inference in science up to the beginning of the 
twentieth century, see Dale (1991). 
4. Treatments of Bayesian computation methods, including Gibbs Sam-
pling/Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedures, may be found in Albert 
(1996), Gamerman (1997), Gilks et al. (1996), Mockus et al. (1997), and 
Tanner (1996). 
5. Bayesian time-series analysis is treated in Broemeling (1985), Müller and 
Vidakovic (1999, using wavelets), and West and Harrison (1997). 
6. Neural networks are treated from a Bayesian point of view by Neal 
(1996). 
7. Bayesian methods applied to sample survey problems are treated in 
Meeden and Ghosh (1997). 
REFERENCES 
Albert, James H. (1996). Bayesian Computation Using Minitab. Belmont, CA: 
Wads worth. 
Antleman, Gordon (1997). Elementary Bayesian Statistics. Albert Madansky and 
Robert E. McCulloch (Eds.). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 

220 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
Basu, D. (1988). Statistical Information and Likelihood: A Collection of Critical Essays, 
Vol. 45 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Bayes, Thomas (1763). "An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of 
Chances," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 53:370-418. 
Berger, James O. (1985). Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, 2nd ed. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
Berger, James O., and Donald A. Berry (1988). "Statistical Analysis and the Illusion of 
Objectivity," American Scientist, 76:159-165, March-April. 
Bernardo, José M, and Adrian F. M. Smith (1994). Bayesian Theory. New York: Wiley. 
Bernoulli, James (1713). Ars Conjectandi (The Art of Conjecturing), Book 4. Basileae: 
Impensis Thurnisiorum. 
Berry, Donald A. (1996). Statistics: A Bayesian Perspective. Belmont CA: Wadsworth. 
Blackwell, David (1969). Basic Statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Box, George E. P., and George C. Tiao (1973). Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analy-
sis. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Broemeling, Lyle D. (1985). Bayesian Analysis of Linear Models. New York: Marcel 
Dekker. 
Buck, Caitlin E., William G. Cavanagh, and Clifford D. Litton (1996). Bayesian 
Approach to Interpreting Archaeological Data. New York: Wiley. 
Carlin, Bradley, and Thomas A. Louis (1998). Bayes and Empirical Bayes Methods for 
Data Analysis. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
Dale, Andrew I. (1991). A History of Inverse Probability from Thomas Bayes to Karl 
Pearson. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
De Finetti, Bruno (1973). Theory of Probability, Vols. 1 and 2, translated from the 
Italian by Antonio Machi and Adrian Smith. New York: Wiley. 
DeGroot, Morris H. (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
(1975). Probability and Statistics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Dey, Dipak, Peter Müller, and Sinha Debajyoti (Eds.) (1998). Practical Nonparametric 
and Semiparametric Bayesian Statistics, Vol. 133 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
Fisher, R. A. (1922). "On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical Statistics," 
Philosophical Transactions the Royal Society of London, A222:309-368. 
(1935). "Statistical Tests," Nature, 136:474. 
(1936). "Has Mendel's Work Been Rediscovered?" Annals 
of Science, 
1:115-137. 
(1970). Statistical Methods for Research Workers, 14th ed. Edinburgh: Oliver & 
Boyd (first published in 1925). 
(1947). The Design of Experiments, 4th ed. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd (first pub-
lished in 1926). 
(1956). Statistical Methods and Statistical Inference. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd. 
Florens, Jean-Pierre, Michel Mouchart, and Jean-Marie Roin (1990). Elements of 
Bayesian Statistics. New York: Marcel Dekker. 
Gamerman, Dani (1997). Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation for 
Bayesian Inference. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 

REFERENCES 
221 
Gatsonis, C, J. S. Hodges, R. E. Kass, and N. D. Singpurwalla (Eds.) (1993). Case Studies 
in Bayesian Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
(1995). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. II. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Gatsonis, C, J. S. Hodges, R. E. Kass, R. McCulloch, P. Rossi, and N. D. Singpurwalla 
(Eds.) (1997). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. III. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Gatsonis, G, B. Carlin, A. Gelman, M. West, R. E. Kass, A. Carriquiry, and I. Verdinelli 
(Eds.) (1999). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. IV. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Geisser, Seymour (1993). Predictive Inference: An Introduction. New York: Chapman 
& Hall. 
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern, and Donald B. Rubin (1995). Bayesian 
Data Analysis. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Gilks,W. R., S. Richardson, and D. J. Spiegelhalter (Eds.) (1996). Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo in Practice. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Gillispie, Charles Coulston (1960). The Edge of Objectivity: An Essay in the History of 
Scientific Ideas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Good, I. J. (1950). Probability and the Weighting of Evidence. London: Charles Griffin. 
(1965). The Estimation of Probabilities: An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods, 
Research Monograph 30. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
(1974). Information, Weight of Evidence, the Singularity Between Probability 
Measures and Signal Detection. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
(1983). Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and Its Applications. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Hadamard, Jacques (1945). An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the Mathemat-
ical Field. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Hartigan, J. A. (1983). Bayes Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Howson, Colin, and Peter Urbach (1989). Scientific Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach. 
La Salle, IL: Open Court. 
Jaynes, E. T. (1983). In R. D. Rosenkrantz (Ed.), Papers on Probability, Statistics, and 
Statistical Physics of E. T. Jaynes. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel. 
Jeffreys, Harold (1939,1948,1961). Theory of Probability, 1st 2nd, and 3rd eds. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Kadane, Joseph B., Mark J. Schervish, and Teddy Seidenfeld (1999). Rethinking the 
Foundations of Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Keynes, John Maynard (1921). A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., enlarged. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lad, Frank (1996). Operational Subjective Statistical Methods: A Mathematical, Philo-
sophical, and Historical Introduction. New York: Wiley-Interscience. 
Lakatos, I. (1968). "Criticism and Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes," 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 69:149-186. 
(1970). "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes," 
in I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (Eds.), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

222 
SUBJECTIVITY IN SCIENCE IN MODERN TIMES! THE BAYESIAN APPROACH 
(1974). "Popper on Demarcation and Induction," Chapter 5 in P. A. Schilpp 
(Ed.), The Philosophy of Karl Popper, Vol. 2. LaSalle, IL: Open Court. 
(1978). In J. Worrall, and G. Currie (Eds.), Philosophical Papers, 2 vols. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Laplace, P. S. (1774). "Mémoire Sur la Probabilité des Causes par les Evénements," 
Memories de VAcademic Royale Sciences Presents Par Divers Savans, 6:621-656. 
Lee, Peter M. (1997). Bayesian Statistics: An Introduction, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley. 
Leonard, Thomas, and John S. J. Hsu (1999). Bayesian Methods: An Analysis for 
Statisticians and Interdisciplinary Researchers. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Lindley, Dennis V. (1965). Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 2 vols. (Part 1: Prob-
ability; Part 2: Inference). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
(1972). Bayesian Statistics: A Review. Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and 
Applied Mathematics. 
Malakoff, David (1999). "Bayes Offers a 'New' Way to Make Sense of Numbers," 
Science, 286:1460-1464. 
Mathews, Jon, and R. L. Walker (1965). Mathematical Methods of Physics. New York: 
W. A. Benjamin, Inc. 
Matthews, Robert A. J. (1998a). Fact Versus Factions: The Use and Abuse of Subjectiv-
ity in Scientific Research, ESEF Working Paper 2/98, European Science and Envi-
ronment Forum, Cambridge, September. 
(1998b). "Flukes and Flaws," Prospect, Issue 35, pp. 20-24. 
Meeden, G., and Malay Ghosh (1997). Bayesian Methods for Finite Population Sam-
pling. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Mockus, Jonas, William Eddy, Audris Mockus, Linas Mockus, and G. V. Reklaitis 
(1997). Bayesian Heuristic Approach 
to Discrete and Global 
Optimization: 
Algorithms, Visualization, Software, and Applications. Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Mosteller, Frederick, and David L. Wallace (1984). Applied Bayesian and Classical 
Inference, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Muller, Peter, and Brani Vidakovic (Eds.) (1999). Bayesian Inference in Wavelet-Based 
Models, Vol. 141 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Neal, Radford M. (1996). Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, Vol. 118 of Lecture 
Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Neyman, Jerzy, and Lucian M. Le Cam (Eds.) (1965). Bernoulli (1713), Bayes (1763), 
Laplace (1813), Anniversary Volume. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Neyman, J., and E. S. Pearson (1928). "On the Use and the Interpretation of Certain 
Test Criteria for Purposes of Statistical Inference," Biometrika, 20:175-240, Part I; 
263-294, Part II. 
(1933). "On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses," 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 231A:289-337. 
O'Hagen, Anthony (1994). "Bayesian Inference," in Kendalls Advanced Theory of Sta-
tistics, Vol. 2B. London: Edward Arnold/Hodder Headline. 
Polanyi, Michael (1958, 1962). Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philoso-
phy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (corrected edition, 1962). 

REFERENCES 
223 
Popper, Sir Karl (1956, 1982). Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, from the 
Postscript to The Logic of Scientific Discovery, W W. Bartley III (Ed.).Totowa,NJ: 
Rowman & Littlefield. 
(1959a). "The Propensity Interpretation of Probability," British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 10:25-42. 
(1959b). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Hutchinson; New York: 
Harper & Row. 
(1963). Conjectures and Refutations. New York: Routledge & Kegan. 
Press, S. James (1989). Bayesian Statistics: Principles, Models and Applications. New 
York: Wiley. 
Raiffa, Howard, and Robert Schlaifer (1961). Applied Statistical Decision Theory. 
Boston: Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration. 
Ramsey, Frank Plimpton (1926). "Truth and Probability," in R. B. Braithwaite (Ed.), 
The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays. New York: Human-
ities Press, 1950. Reprinted in Henry E. Kyburg and Howard F. Smokier (Eds.), 
Studies in Subjective Probability, 1980. Huntington, NY: Robert E. Krieger, 
pp. 23-52. 
Roberts, Royston M. (1989). Serendipity: Accidental Discoveries in Science. New York: 
Wiley. 
Savage, L. J. (1954). The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley. 
(1981). The Writings of Leonard Jimmie Savage—A Memorial Selection. 
Washington, DC: American Statistical Association and Institute of Mathematical 
Statistics. 
Schlaifer, Robert (1961). Introduction to Statistics for Business Decisions. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Schmitt, Samuel A. (1969). Measuring Uncertainty: An Elementary Introduction to 
Bayesian Statistics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Stigler, S. M. (1986). The History of Statistics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Tanner, Martin A. (1996). Tools for Statistical Inference: Methods for the Exploration 
of Posterior Distributions and Likelihood Functions, 3rd ed. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Viertl, R. (Ed.) (1987). Probability and Bayesian Statistics. New York: Plenum Press. 
Watson, James D., and Francis H. C. Crick (1953). "A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic 
Acid." Nature, 171:737. 
West, Mike, and Jeff Harrison (1997). Bayesian Forecasting and Dynamic Models, 2nd 
ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Winkler, Robert L. (1972). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference and Decision. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Wolpert, Lewis (1992). The Unnatural Nature of Science. Boston: Harvard University 
Press. 
Zellner, Arnold (1971). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New 
York: Wiley. 
(1997). Bayesian Analysis in Econometrics and Statistics: The Zellner View and 
Papers. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 

A P P E N D I X 
References by Field of Application 
for Bayesian Statistical Science 
A considerable amount of Bayesian statistical inference procedures that for-
mally admit meaningful prior information in the scientific process of data 
analysis have had to await the advent of modern computer methods of analy-
sis. This did not really happen in any major way until about the last couple of 
decades of the twentieth century. Moreover, at approximately the same time, 
numerical methods for implementing Bayesian solutions to complex applied 
problems were greatly augmented by the introduction of Markov Chain 
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Gelfand and Smith, 1990; Geman and 
Geman, 1984). Since the arrival of these developments, Bayesian methods 
have been very usefully applied to problems in many fields, and the general 
approach has generated much new research. 
A.1 BAYESIAN METHODOLOGY 
Some books and articles summarizing Bayesian methodology in various fields 
are given below. 
1. Anthropology and archaeology: Buck et al. (1996). 
2. Econometrics: Zellner (1971). 
3. Economics: Dorf man (1997). 
4. Evaluation research: Pollard (1986). 
5· Mutual fund management: Hulbert (1999). 
6. Physics and engineering: There is a series of books on maximum entropy 
and Bayesian methods published by Kluwer; a few are given in the 
References at the end of this appendix, listed under "Kluwer." See also 
225 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

226 
REFERENCES BY FIELD OF APPLICATION 
Stone et al. (1999) for target tracking, O'Ruanaidh and Fitzgerald (1996) 
for signal processing, and Jaynes (1983) for physics. 
7. Reliability: Sander and Badoux (1991). 
A.2 
APPLICATIONS 
For the convenience of readers in various fields, we have organized and pre-
sented immediately below, by discipline, citations of some technical papers that 
use the Bayesian approach to find solutions to real problems. Sometimes a 
paper really belongs to several of our discipline categories but is only listed in 
one. These citations have been drawn from the following four volumes, enti-
tled Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, published by Springer-Verlag (New 
York). The first volume (which we shall refer to as volume I, although it actu-
ally has no volume number) published in 1993, and Volume II, published in 
1995, were edited by Gatsonis, Hodges, Kass, and Singpurwalla; Volume III, 
published in 1997, was edited by Gatsonis, Hodges, Kass, McCulloch, Rossi, 
and Singpurwalla; Volume IV, published in 1999, was edited by Gatsonis, 
Carlin, Gelman, West, Kass, Carriquiry, and Verdinelli. 
Biochemistry 
Etzioni, Ruth, and Bradley P. Carlin, "Bayesian Analysis of the Ames 
Salmonella/Microsome Assay," Vol. I, p. 311. 
Business Economics 
Nandram, B., and J. Sedransk, "Bayesian Inference for the Mean of a Stratified 
Population When There Are Order Restrictions," Vol. II, p. 309. 
Ecology 
Lad, Frank, and Mark W. Brabyn, "Synchronicity of Whale Strandings with Phases of 
the Moon," Vol. I, p. 362. 
Raftery, Adrian E., and Judith E. Zeh, "Estimation of Bowhead Whale, Balaena 
mysticetus, Population Size," Vol. I, p. 163. 
Wolfson, L. J., J. B. Kadane, and M. J. Small, "A Subjective Bayesian Approach to 
Environmental Sampling," Vol. Ill, p. 457. 
Wolpert, Robert L., Laura J. Steinberg, and Kenneth H. Reckhow, "Bayesian Decision 
Support Using Environmental Transport-and-Fate Models," Vol. I, p. 241. 
Engineering 
Andrews, Richard W, James O. Berger, and Murray H. Smith, "Bayesian Estimation of 
Fuel Economy Potential Due to Technology Improvements," Vol. I, p. 1. 
Jewell, William S., and Shrane-Koung Chou, "Predicting Coproduct Yields in Microchip 
Fabrication," Vol. I, p. 351. 
O'Hagan, Anthony, and Frank S. Wells, "Use of Prior Information to Estimate Costs 
in a Sewerage Operation," Vol. I, p. 118. 

APPLICATIONS 
227 
Short, Thomas H., "Restoration and Segmentation of Rail Surface Images," Vol. I, 
p. 403. 
Finance 
Stevens, Ross L., "Variable Selection Tests of Asset Pricing Models," Vol. Ill, p. 271. 
Forestry 
Ickstadt, Katja, and Robert L. Wolpert, "Multiresolution Assessment of Forest 
Inhomogeneity," Vol. Ill, p. 371. 
Genetics 
Churchill, Gary A., "Accurate Restoration of DNA Sequences," Vol. II, p. 90. 
Lee, Jae Kyun, "Assessment of Deleterious Gene Models Using Predictive p-values," 
Vol. Ill, p. 387. 
Geology/Geophysics 
Craig, Peter S., Michael Goldstein, Allan H. Seheult, and James A. Smith, "Pressure 
Matching for Hydrocarbon Reservoirs: A Case Study in the Use of Bayes Linear 
Strategies for Large Computer Experiments," Vol. Ill, p. 37. 
Royle, J. A., L. M. Berliner, C. K. Wikle, and R. Milliff, "A Hierarchical Spatial Model 
for Constructing Wind Fields from Scatterometer Data in the Labrador Sea," Vol. 
IV, p. 367. 
Sanso, B., and P. Müller, "Redesigning a Network of Rainfall Stations," Vol. IV, p. 383. 
Humanities 
Greene, Stuart, and Larry Wasserman, "The Composition of a Composition: Just the 
Facts," Vol. I, p. 337. 
Marketing 
Clark, L. A., W S. Cleveland, L. Denby, and C. Liu, "Modeling Customer Survey Data," 
Vol. IV, p. 3. 
Hodges, James S., Kirthi Kalyanam, and Daniel, S. Putler, "Estimating the Cells of 
a Contingency Table with Limited Information, for Use in Geodemographic 
Marketing," Vol. Ill, p. 347. 
Montgomery, Alan L., "Hierarchical Bayes Models for Micro-Marketing Strategies," 
Vol. Ill, p. 95. 
Nandram,Balgobin,"Bayesian Inference for the Best Ordinal Multinomial Population 
in a Taste Test," Vol. Ill, p. 399. 
Nobile, Agostino, Chandra R. Bhat, and Eric I. Pas, "A Random Effects Multinomial 
Probit Model of Car Ownership Choice," Vol. Ill, p. 419. 
Rossi, Peter E., Robert E. McCulloch, and Greg M. Allenby, "Hierarchical Modelling 
of Consumer Heterogeneity: An Application to Target Marketing," Vol. II, p. 323. 
Medicine 
Carlin, B. P., H. Xia, O. Devine, P. Tolbert, and J. Mulholland, "Spatio-Temporal Hier-
archical Models for Analyzing Atlanta Pediatric Asthma ER Visit Rates," Vol. IV, 
p. 303. 

228 
REFERENCES BY FIELD OF APPLICATION 
Clyde, Merlise, Peter Müller, and Giovanni Parmigiani, "Optimal Design for Heart 
Defibrillators," Vol. II, p. 278. 
Craig, Bruce A., and Michael A. Newton, "Modeling the History of Diabetic 
Retinopathy," Vol. Ill, p. 305. 
Crawford, Sybil L., William G. Johnson, and Nan M. Laird, "Bayes Analysis of Model-
Based Methods for Non-ignorable Nonresponse in the Harvard Medical Practice 
Survey," Vol. I, p. 78. 
Crawford, Sybil L., Sharon L. Tennstedt, and John B. McKinlay, "Longitudinal Care 
Patterns for Disabled Elders: A Bayesian Analysis of Missing Data," Vol. II, p. 293. 
Flournoy, Nancy, "A Clinical Experiment in Bone Marrow Transplantation: Estimating 
a Percentage Point of a Quantal Response Curve," Vol. I, p. 324. 
Normand, Sharon-Lise T., Mark E. Glickman, and Thomas J. Ryan, "Modeling Mor-
tality Rates for Elderly Heart Attack Patients: Profiling Hospitals in the Cooper-
ative Cardiovascular Project," Vol. Ill, p. 155. 
Parmigiani, Giovanni, and Mark S. Kamlet, "A Cost-Utility Analysis of Alternative 
Strategies in Screening for Breast Cancer," Vol. I, p. 390. 
Meteorology 
Smith, R. L., and P. J. Robinson, "A Bayesian Approach to the Modeling of 
Spatial-Temporal Precipitation Data," Vol. Ill, p. 237. 
Neurophysiology 
Genovese, C. R., and J. A. Sweeney: "Functional Connectivity in the Cortical Circuits 
Subserving Eye Movements," Vol. IV, p. 59. 
West, Mike, and Guoliang Cao, "Assessing Mechanisms of Neural Synaptic Activity," 
Vol. I, p. 416. 
Oncology/Genetics 
Adak, S., and A. Sarkar, "Longitudinal Modeling of the Side Effects of Radiation 
Therapy," Vol. IV, p. 269. 
Iversen, E. S. Jr., G. Parmagiani, and D. A. Berry, "Validating Bayesian Prediction 
Models: A Case Study in Genetic Susceptibility to Breast Cancer," Vol. IV, p. 321. 
Palmer, J. L., and P. Müller: "Population Models for Hematologic Models," Vol. IV, p. 
355. 
Parmigiani, G., D. A. Berry, E. S. Iversen, Jr., P. Müller, J. M. Schildkraut, and E. P. Winer, 
"Modeling Risk of Breast Cancer and Decisions About Genetic Testing," Vol. IV, 
p. 133. 
Slate, E. H., and L. C. Clark: "Using PSA to Detect Prostate Cancer Onset: An Appli-
cation of Bayesian Retrospective and Prospective Changepoint Identification," 
Vol. IV, p. 395. 
Slate, Elizabeth H., and Kathleen A. Crohin, "Changepoint Modeling of Longitudinal 
PSA as a Biomarker for Prostate Cancer," Vol. Ill, p. 435. 
Pharmacology/Pharmacokinetics 
Paddock, S., M. West, S. S. Young, and M. Clyde, "Mixture Models in the Exploration 
of Structure-Activity Relationships in Drug Design," Vol. IV, p. 339. 

REFERENCES 
229 
Wakefield, J., Aarons, L., and A. Racine-Poon: "The Bayesian Approach to Population 
Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Modeling," Vol. IV, p. 205. 
Physiology 
Brown, Emery N., and Adam Sapirstein, "A Bayesian Model for Organ Blood Flow 
Measurement with Colored Microspheres," Vol. II, p. 1. 
Political Science 
Bernardo, José M., "Probing Public Opinion: The State of Valencia," Vol. Ill, p. 3. 
Psychiatry 
Erkanli, Alaattin, Refik Soyer, and Dalene Stangl, "Hierarchical Bayesian Analysis for 
Prevalence Estimation," Vol. Ill, p. 325. 
Public Health 
Aguilar, O., and M. West: "Analysis of Hospital Quality Monitors Using Hierarchical 
Time Series Models," Vol. IV, p. 287. 
Belin, Thomas R., Robert M. Elashoff, Kwan-Moon Leung, Rosane Nisenbaum, 
Roshan Bastani, Kiumarss Nassen, and Annette Maxwell, "Combining Informa-
tion from Multiple Sources in the Analysis of a Non-equivalent Control Group 
Design "Vol. II, p. 241. 
Blattenberger, Gail, and Richard Fowles, "Road Closure: Combining Data and Expert 
Opinion," Vol. II, p. 261. 
Carlin, Bradley P., Kathryn M. Chaloner, Thomas A. Louis, and Frank S. Rhame, 
"Elicitation, Monitoring, and Analysis for an AIDS Clinical Trial," Vol. II, 
p. 48. 
Malee, Donald, Joseph Sedransk, and Linda Tompkins, "Bayesian Predictive Inference 
for Small Areas for Binary Variables in the National Health Interview Survey," 
Vol. I, p. 377. 
Radiology 
Johnson, Valen, James Bowsher, Ronald Jaszczak, and Timothy Turkington, 
"Analysis and Reconstruction of Medical Images Using Prior Information," Vol. 
II, p. 149. 
REFERENCES 
Buck, Caitlin E., William G. Cavanagh, and Clifford D. Litton (1996). Bayesian 
Approach to Interpreting Archaeological Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Dorfman, Jeffrey H. (1997). Bayesian Economics Through Numerical Methods: A Guide 
to Econometrics and Decision-Making with Prior Information. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Gelfand, A. E., and A. F. M. Smith (1990). "Sampling Based Approaches to Calcu-
lating Marginal Densities," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 
85:398-409. 

230 
REFERENCES BY FIELD OF APPLICATION 
Geman, S., and D. Geman (1986). "Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distributions and the 
Bayesian Restoration of Images," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 6:721-741. 
Hulbert, Mark (1999). "Are Fund Managers Irrelevant? An 18th Century Theory 
Suggests Not," Business Section, New York Times, October 10. p. 26. 
Jaynes, E. T. (1983). In R. D. Rosenkrantz (Ed.), Papers on Probability, Statistics, and 
Statistical Physics of E. T Jaynes. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1982). Maximum-Entropy 
and Bayesian Spectral 
Analysis and Estimation Problems, C. Ray Smith, and Gary J. Erickson (Eds.). 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1991). Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Pro-
ceedings of the I lth International Workshop on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian 
Methods, Seattle, WA. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1992). Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop 
on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Paris, A. Mohammad-Djafari and 
G. Demoment (Eds.). 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1994). Proceedings of the 14th International Workshop 
on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Cambridge, John Skilling and 
Sibusiso Sibisi (Eds.). 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1995). Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop 
on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Santa Fe, NM, Kenneth M. Hanson 
and Richard N. Silver (Eds.). 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1997). Proceedings of the 17th International Workshop 
on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Boise, ID, Gary J. Erickson, Joshua 
T. Rychert, and C. Ray Smith (Eds.) 
Kluwer Academic Publishers (1999). Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Pro-
ceedings of the 18th International Workshop on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian 
Methods. 
Lad, Frank (1996). Operational Subjective Statistical Methods: A Mathematical, 
Philosophical, and Historical Introduction. New York: Wiley-Interscience. 
O'Ruanaidh, Joseph J. K., and William J. Fitzgerald (1996). Numerical Bayesian 
Methods Applied to Signal Processing. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Pollard, William E. (1986). Bayesian Statistics for Evaluation Research: An Introduction. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. 
Sander, P., and R. Badoux (Eds.) (1991). Bayesian Methods in Reliability. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Smith, C. Ray (Ed.) (1985). Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Inverse Prob-
lems,Vo\. 14 of Fundamental Theories of Physics. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. 
Reidel. 
Stone, Lawrence D., Carl A. Barlow, and Thomas L. Corwin (1999). Bayesian Multiple 
Target Tracking. Norwood, MA: Artech House. 
Zellner, Arnold (1971). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Bibliography 
Abraham, Hilda C, and Ernst L. Freud (Eds.) (1965). A Psycho-Analytic Dialogue: The 
Letters of Sigmund Freud and Karl Abraham, 1907-1926. London: Hogarth Press. 
Agassi, Joseph (1971). Faraday as Natural Philosopher. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Albert, James H. (1996). Bayesian Computation 
Using Minitab. Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 
Alexander, F., and Sheldon Selesnick (1966). The History of Psychiatry. London: 
Hogarth Press. 
Altman, Lawrence K. (1995). "Revisionist History Sees Pasteur as Liar Who Stole 
Rival's Ideas," New York Times, May 16, pp. Cl, C3. 
Andreas-Salome, Lou (1965). The Freud Journal of Lou Andreas-Salome (Englis
h 
translation of In der Schule bei Freud: Tage-buch eines Jahres, 1912-1913). London
: 
Hogarth Press. 
Antleman, Gordon (1997). Elementary Bayesian Statistics. Albert Madansky and 
Robert E. McCulloch (Eds.). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 
Aristotle (1943). Introduction by Louise Ropes Loomis. New York: Gramerc
y 
Books. 
Asimov, Isaac (1989). Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery. New York
: 
Harper & Row. 
Bakan, David (1958a). "Moses in the Thought of Freud," Commentary, October
, pp. 
322-331. 
(1958b). Sigmund Freud and the Jewish Mystical Tradition. Princeton, NJ: D
. Van 
Nostrand. 
Barnes, Johnathan (1982). Aristotle. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
(Ed.) (1995). The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle. Cambridge: Cambridg
e 
University Press. 
Barnett, Lincoln (1948). The Universe and Dr. Einstein. New York: New America
n 
Library of World Literature, Mentor Books. 
Basu, D. (1988). Statistical Information and Likelihood: A Collection of Critical Essays, 
Vol. 45 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
231 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

232 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Bauer, Henry H. (1992). Scientific Literacy and the Myth of the Scientific Method, 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
Bayes, Thomas (1763). "An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of 
Chances," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 53:370-418. 
Beadle, G. (1967). "Mendelism," pp. 335-350 in A. Brink (Ed.), Heritage from Mendel. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Bell, E. T. (1937). Men of Mathematics. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Bell, Robert Ivan (1992). Impure Science: Fraud, Compromise, and Political Influence 
in Scientific Research, New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Ben-Yehuda, Nachum (1985). Deviance and Moral Boundaries. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
(1986). "Deviance in Science: Towards the Criminology of Science," British 
Journal of Criminology, 26:1-27. 
Berger, James O. (1985). Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Berger, James O., and Donald A. Berry (1988). "Statistical Analysis and the Illusion of 
Objectivity," American Scientist, 76:159-165, March-April. 
Berman, Morris (1978). Social Change and Scientific Organization: The Royal Institu-
tion, 1799-1844. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Bernardo, José M., and Adrian F. M. Smith (1994). Bayesian Theory, New York: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Bernoulli, James (1713). Ars Conjectandi (The Art of Conjecturing), Book 4. Basileae: 
Impensis Thurnisiorum. 
Berry, Donald A. (1996). Statistics: A Bayesian Perspective. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 
Biagioli, Mario (1993). Galileo: Courtier. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Blackwell, David (1969). Basic Statistics. New York: Mc Graw Hill Book Co. 
Bolton, Sarah Knowles (1960). Famous Men of Science, revised by Barbara Lovett 
Cline. New York: Thomas Y Crowell. 
Bonaparte, Marie, Anna Freud, and Ernst Kris (Eds.) (1887-1902). Sigmund Freud, the 
Origins of Psychoanalysis: Letters to Wilhelm Fliess, Drafts and Notes, English 
translation by Eric Mosbacher and James Strachey. New York: Basic Books. 
Born, Max (1916). Physica Acta. Hebrew University, Israel: The Einstein Archives, 
p. 253. 
Botting, Douglas (1973). Humboldt and the Cosmos. New York: Harper & Row. 
Bottome, Phyllis, and Alfred Adler (1946). Apostle of Freedom, 2nd ed. London: Faber 
& Faber. 
Bourdieu, Pierre (1991). "The Peculiar History of Scientific Reason," Sociological 
Forum, 6:3-26. 
Bower, Bruce (1998). "Objective Visions: Historians Track the Rise and Times of 
Scientific Objectivity," Science News, 154:360-362, Dec. 5. 
Box, George E. P., and George C. Tiao (1973). Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analy-
sis. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Broad, William J. (1990). "After 400 Years, a Challenge to Kepler: He Fabricated His 
Data, Scholar Says," Science Times, New York Times, January 23, pp. B5, B7. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
233 
Broad, William, and Nicholas Wade (1982). Betrayers of the Truth, New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 
Broemeling, Lyle D. (1985). Bayesian Analysis of Linear Models. New York: Marcel 
Dekker. 
Brome, Vincent (1967). Freud and His Early Circle, New York: Morrow. 
Brooke, John Hedley (1991). Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Bruhns, Karl (Ed.) (1873). Life of Alexander von Humboldt Compiled in Commemo-
ration of the Centenary of His Birth by J. Lowenberg, Robert Avé-Lallemant, and 
Alfred Dove, 2 vols., translated by Jane and Caroline Lassell. London: Longmans, 
Green. 
Buck, Caitlin E., William G. Cavanagh, and Clifford D. Litton (1996). Bayesian 
Approach to Interpreting Archaeological Data, New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Burt, C. L. (1909). "Experimental Tests of General Intelligence," British Journal of 
Psychology, 3:94-177. 
(1961). "Intelligence and Social Mobility," British Journal of Statistical Psychol-
ogy, 14:3-24. 
Calaprice, Alice (1996). The Quotable Einstein. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Cantor, Geoffrey N. (1985). "Reading the Book of Nature: The Relation Between 
Faraday's Religion and His Science," pp. 69-81 in David Gooding and Frank 
A. J. L. James (Eds.), Faraday Rediscovered: Essays on the Life and Work of 
Michael Faraday, 1791-1867. Bassingstoke, Hants, UK: Macmillan. (Published in 
the United States and Canada by Stockton Press, New York.) 
Carlin, Bradley, and Thomas A. Louis (1998). Bayes and Empirical Bayes Methods for 
Data Analysis. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 
Casti, John (1996). "Confronting Science's Logical Limits," Scientific 
American, 
October, pp. 102-105. 
Caton, Hiram (Ed.) (1990). The Samoa Reader: Anthropologists Take Stock. Lanham, 
MD: University Press of America. 
Chalmers, Alan (1990). Science and Its Fabrication. Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
Chambers Concise Dictionary of Scientists (1989). Cambridge: W & R Chambers and 
the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 
Christianson, Gale E. (1984). In the Presence of the Creator: Isaac Newton and His 
Times. New York: Free Press. 
Clark, Ronald W. (1971). Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: Avon Books. 
Clegg, Michael (1997). Professor of Genetics, Department of Botany and Plant Sci-
ences, University of California, Riverside, personal communication, March. 
Cline, Barbara Lovett (1960). See Bolton (1960). 
Collins, Harry, and Trevor Pinch (1993). The Golem: What Everyone Should Know 
About Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Conant, James Bryant (1956). The Overthrow of the Phlogiston Theory, Vol. 2 of 
Harvard Case Studies in Experimental Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press. 

234 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Correns, Carl G (1900). Mendel's Regel über das Verhalten der Nachkommenschaft 
der 
Rassenbastarde" Botanischen Gesellschaft Berichte, 18:158-168. 
Costigan, Giovanni (1968). Sigmund Freud: A Short Biography. New York: Collier 
Books. 
Crowther, J. G (1936). Men of Science. New York: W.W. Norton. 
(1995). Six Great Scientists: Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Darwin, Marie Curie, 
Einstein. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Curie, Eve (1939). Madame Curie: A Biography by Eve Curie, translated by Vincent 
Sheean. New York: Doubleday, Doran. 
Dagognet, Francois (1967). Méthodes et Doctrines dans VOeuvre de Pasteur. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires. 
Dale, Andrew I. (1991). A History of Inverse Probability from Thomas Bay es to Karl 
Pearson. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Darbishire, A. D. (1911). Breeding and the Mendelian Discovery. London: Cassell and 
Company. 
Darwin, Francis (Ed.) (1887). Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, 3 vol. New York: 
Appleton. 
(1903). More Letters of Charles Darwin, 2 vols. London: John Murray, Vol. 1. 
Darwin, Francis, and A. C. Seward (Eds.) (1903). More Letters: Letters of Charles 
Darwin, 2 vols. London: John Murray. 
Daston, Lorraine J., and Peter Galison (1992). "The Image of Objectivity," Represen-
tations, 40:81-128. 
Davis, Kenneth S. (1966). The Cautionary Scientists: Priestley, Lavoisier, and the Found-
ing of Modern Chemistry. New York: GP. Putnam's Sons. 
Dawes, Robyn (1994). House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built on Myth. 
New York: Free Press. 
De Beer, G (1964). "Mendel, Darwin, and Fisher," Notes and Records of the Royal 
Society, London, 19(2): 192-226. 
De Beer, Sir Gavin (Ed.) (1974). Darwin and Huxley: Autobiographies. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
De Finetti, Bruno (1973). Theory of Probability, Vols. 1 and 2, translated from the 
Italian by Antonio Machi and Adrian Smith. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
DeGroot, Morris H. (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
(1975). Probability and Statistics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
DeKruif, Paul (1953). Microbe Hunters. New York: Harbrace Paperback Library. 
de Terra, Helmut (1955). Humboldt: The Life and Times of Alexander von Humboldt, 
1769-1859. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Devlin, Bernie, Daniel P. Resnick, Stephen E. Fienberg, and Kathryn Roeder (Eds.) 
(1997). Intelligence, Genes and Success: Scientists Respond to The Bell Curve. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
De Vries, Hugo (1900). "Sur la Loi de Disjunction des Hybrides," Comptes Rendus de 
TAcademie des Sciences, Paris, 130:845-847. 
Dey, Dipak, Peter Müller, and Sinha Debajyoti (Eds.) (1998). Practical Nonparametric 
and Semiparametric Bayesian Statistics, Vol. 133 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
235 
Dolin, Arnold (1960). Great Men of Science. New York: Hart. 
Donahue, W. H. (1988). "Kepler's Fabricated Figures: Covering Up the Mess in The 
New Astronomy," Journal for the History of Astronomy, 19:216-237. 
(Trans.) (1992). The New Astronomy by Johannes Kepler. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Donovan, Arthur (1993). Antoine Lavoisier. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. 
Dorfman, D. D. (1978). "The Cyril Burt Question: New Findings," Science, 
201:1177-1186. 
(1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:246-254. 
Dorfman, Jeffrey H. (1997). Bayesian Economics Through Numerical Methods: A Guide 
to Econometrics and Decision-Making with Prior Information. New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Drake, Stillman (1990). Galileo: Pioneer Scientist. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Dreger, R. M. (Ed.) (1972). Multivariate Personality Research. Baton Rouge, LA: 
Claitor's Publishing Division. 
Dubos, Rene (1950, 1960, 1976). Louis Pasteur: Free Lance of Science. New York: 
Scribner's, Da Capo Press. 
Duclaux, Emile (1895). "Le Laboratoire de Monsieur Pasteur a TEcole Normale," 
Revue Scientifique, 4th ser., 15:449-454; reprinted in Le Centenaire de VEcole 
Normale, 1795-1895. Paris: Ecole Normale. 
Duclaux, Emile (1896). Pasteur: Histoire d'un Esprit. Sceaux, France: Charaire. English 
translation by E. F. Smith and F. Hedges as Pasteur: The History of a Mind (1920). 
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. 
Dunn, L. C. (1965). "Mendel: His Work and His Place in History," Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society, 109:189-198. 
Edwards, A. W. F. (1986). "Are Mendel's Results Really Too Close?" Biological Review, 
61:295-312. 
Einstein, Albert (1967). "Foreword" to Galileo Galilei Dialogue Concerning the Two 
Chief World Systems—Ptolemaic and Copernican, 2nd ed., translated by Stillman 
Drake. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. The foreword is dated July 
1952 and is an authorized translation from the German by Sonja Bargmann. 
(1993). Einstein on Humanism. Secaucus, NJ: Carol Publishing Group, Citadel 
Press. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1975). 
(1996). "Aristotle and Aristotelianism: Assessment and Nature of Aristotelian-
ism," compact disk version. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica Micropedia (1975). 
Encyclopedia Americana (1958). Vol. 20. 
Eysenck, Hans, and Glenn D. Wilson (1973). The Experimental Study of Freudian 
Theories. London: Methuen. 
Faraday, Michael (1816a). Chemistry Lectures. London: Institute of Engineers. 
(1816b). "Observations on the Inertia of the Mind," in Commonplace Book, 
1816-1846. London: Institute of Engineers. 
(1839-1855). Experimental Researches in Electricity. Reprinted from the Philo-
sophical Transactions of 1831-1852 with other electrical papers from the Quarterly 

236 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Journal of Science, Philosophical Magazine, Proceedings of the Royal Institution, 
3 vols. London. 
(1854). "Observations on Mental Education," pp. 39-88 in Lectures on Educa-
tion Delivered at the Royal Institution of Great Britain. London: J. W. Parker and 
Son. Reprinted in Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics (1859). 
London: R. Taylor and W. Francis. 
Farley, John, and Gerald Geison (1982). "Science, Politics and Spontaneous Genera-
tion in Nineteenth-Century France: The Pasteur-Pouchet Debate," pp. 1-38 in 
H. M. Collins (Ed.), Sociology of Scientific Knowledge: A Source Book. Bath: 
Bath University Press. [Originally, Bulletin of the History of Medicine (1974), 
48:161-198.] 
Fauvel, John, Raymond Flood, Michael Shortlans, and Robin Wilson (Eds.) (1988). Let 
Newton Be! A New Perspective on His Life and Works. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Fermi, Laura, and Gilberto Bernardini (1961). Galileo and the Scientific Revolution. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Fisher, R. A. (1922). "On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical Statistics," 
Philosophical Transactions the Royal Society of London, A222:309-368. 
(1926). The Design of Experiments (4th ed., 1947). Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd. 
(1935). "Statistical Tests," Nature, 136:474. 
(1936). "Has Mendel's Work Been Rediscovered?" Annals 
of Science, 
1:115-137. 
(1956). Statistical Methods and Statistical Inference, Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd. 
(1958 [1930]). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; New York: Dover. 
(1970). Statistical Methods for Research Workers, 14th ed. Edinburgh: Oliver & 
Boyd (first published in 1925). 
Fletcher, R. (1991). Science, Ideology, and the Media: The Cyril Burt Scandal. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
Fliess, Wilhelm (1906). In Eigener Sache: Gegen Otto Weininge und Hermann Swoboda. 
Berlin: E. Goldschmidt. 
Florens, Jean-Pierre, Michel Mouchart, and Jean-Marie Roin (1990). Elements of 
Bayesian Statistics. New York: Marcel Dekker. 
Frank, Philipp (1947,1953). Einstein: His Life and Times, English translation. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf. 
Franklin, Kenneth J. (1961). William Harvey: Englishman. London: Macgibbon & Kee. 
Freeman, Derek (1983). Margaret Mead and Samoa: The Making and Unmaking of an 
Anthropological Myth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Freud, Ernst L. (Ed.) (1960). Letters of Sigmund Freud, 1873-1939, translated by Tania 
and James Stern. New York: Basic Books. 
Freud, Sigmund (1974). In James Strachey et al. (Eds.), The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, 24 vols. London: Hogart Press 
and Institute of Psychoanalysis. 
Fromm, Erich (1959). Sigmund Freud's Mission: An Analysis of His Personality and 
Influence. New York: Harper. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
237 
Galton, F. (1875). "The History of Twins as a Criterion of the Relative Powers of Nature 
and Nurture," Fraser's Magazine, 12:566-576. 
Gamerman, Dani (1997). Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation for 
Bayesian Inference. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Gardner, M. (1977). "Great Fakes of Science," Esquire, Oct. pp. 88-92. 
Gatsonis, C, J. S. Hodges, R. E. Kass, and N. D. Singpurwalla (Eds.) (1993). Case Studies 
in Bayesian Statistics, New York: Springer-Verlag. 
(1995). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. II. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Gatsonis, C, J. S. Hodges, R. E. Kass, R. McCulloch, P. Rossi, and N. D. Singpurwalla 
(Eds.) (1997). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. III. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Gatsonis, C, B. Carlin, A. Gelman, M. West, R. E. Kass, A. Carriquiry, and I. Verdinelli 
(Eds.) (1999). Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics, Vol. IV. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Geison, Gerald A. (1974). "Louis Pasteur," pp. 350-416 in Charles C. Gillispie (Ed.), 
The Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 10. New York: Scribners. 
(1995). The Private Science of Louis Pasteur. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press. 
Geisser, Seymour (1993). Predictive Inference: An Introduction. New York: Chapman 
& Hall. 
Gelfand, A. E., and A. F. M. Smith (1990). "Sampling Based Approaches to Calculat-
ing Marginal Densities," Journal of the American 
Statistical Association, 
85:398-409. 
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern, and Donald B. Rubin (1995). Bayesian 
Data Analysis. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Geman, S., and D. Geman (1986). "Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distributions and the 
Bayesian Restoration of Images," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 6:721-741. 
Gholson, Barry, William R. Shadish, Jr., Robert A. Neimeyer, and Arthur C. Houts 
(Eds.) (1989). Psychology of Science: Contributions to Metascience. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gibson, Charles (1970). Heroes of the Scientific World. Freeport, NY: Books for 
Libraries Press. 
Gilks, W R., S. Richardson, and D. J. Spiegelhalter (Eds.) (1996). Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo in Practice. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Gillie, Oliver (1976). "Crucial Data Was Faked by Eminent Psychologist," Sunday Times 
[London], October 24,1976, p. 1. 
Gillispie, Charles Coulston (1990 [I960]). The Edge of Objectivity: An Essay in the 
History of Scientific Ideas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
(Ed.) (1974). Dictionary of Scientific Biography. New York: Charles Scribner's 
Sons. 
Giroud, Fran9oise (1986). Marie Curie: A Life, translated by Lydia Davis from ¡Jne 
Femme Honorable, copyright Librarie Arthéme Fayard, 1981. New York: Holmes 
& Meier. 
Glanz, James (2000). "New Tactic in Physics: Hiding the Answer," Science Times, in The 
New York Times, August. 8,2000, pp. Dl, and D4. 

238 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Glass, B. (1963). "The Establishment of Modern Genetical Theory as an Example of 
the Interaction of Different Models, Techniques, and Inferences," pp. 521-541 
in A. C. Crombie (Ed.), Scientific Change. New York: Basic Books; London: 
Heinemann. 
Golinski, Jan (1990). "The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory: Sociological 
Approaches to the History of Science," Isis, 81:492-505. 
Good, I. J. (1950). Probability and the Weighting of Evidence. London: Charles Griffin. 
(1965). The Estimation of Probabilities: An Essay on Modern Bayesian Methods, 
Research Monograph 30. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
(1974). Information, Weight of Evidence, the Singularity Between Probability 
Measures and Signal Detection. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
(1983). Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and Its Applications. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Gooding, David (1985). "Tn Nature's School': Faraday as an Experimentalist," pp. 
105-135 in David Gooding and Frank A. J. L. James (Eds.), Faraday Rediscovered: 
Essays on the Life and Work of Michael Faraday, 1791-1867. Bassingstoke, Hants, 
UK: Macmillan. (Published in the United States and Canada by Stockton Press, 
New York.) 
Gooding, David, and Frank A. L. J. James (Eds.) (1985). Faraday Rediscovered: Essays 
on the Life and Work of Michael Faraday, 1791-1867. Bassingstoke, Hants, UK: 
Macmillan. (Published in the United States and Canada by Stockton Press, New 
York, NY.) 
Gould, Stephen Jay (1978). "The Finagle Factor," Human Nature, July, pp. 294-299. 
(1981). The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Grant, Sir Alexander (1877). Aristotle. Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons. 
Gray, P. (1983). "Fakes That Have Skewed History," Newsweek, May 16, p. 25. 
Gray, Paul (1993). "The Assault on Freud," Time, November 29, pp. 47-51. 
Grollman, Earl A. (1965). Judaism in Sigmund Freuds World. New York: Bloch 
Publishing Co. 
Gruber, Howard E., and Paul H. Barrett (1974). Darwin on Man. Toronto: Clarke, 
Irwin. 
Grunbaum, Adolf (1983). In R. S. Cohen and L. Laudan (Eds.), Physics, Philosophy, 
and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum. Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands: D. Reidel (distributed in the United States by Kluwer Boston). 
(1993). Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis: A Study in 
the Philosophy 
of Psychoanalysis. 
Madison, CT: International Universities 
Press. 
Guerlac, Henry (1961). Lavoisier—The Crucial Year: The Background and Origin of 
His First Experiments on Combustion in 1772. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
(1973). "Lavoisier," in Charles Coulston Gillispie (Ed.), Dictionary of Scientific 
Biography. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Hacking, Ian (1965). Logic of Scientific Inference, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Hadamard, Jacques (1945). An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the Mathemat-
ical Field. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
239 
Hamilton, John (1991). They Made Our World: Five Centuries of Great Scientists and 
Inventors. London: Broadside Books. 
Hartigan, J. A. (1983). Boyes Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Hearnshaw, L. S. (1979). Cyril Burt: Psychologist, London: Hodder & Stoughton. 
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and 
Class Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press. 
Hetherington, N. S. (1983). "Just How Objective Is Science?" Nature, 306:727. 
Higgins, A. 
C. 
(1995). Science 
Fraud 
Bulletin 
Board 
(Internet 
address: 
scifraud@albnyvml), June 12,13, December 26. 
(1994). Bibliography on Scientific Fraud. Albany, NY: Exams Unlimited. 
Hoffman, Banesh (with the collaboration of Helen Dukas) (1972). Albert Einstein: 
Creator and Rebel. New York: Viking. 
Holmes, Frederic Lawrence (1985). Lavoisier and the Chemistry of Life: An Exploration 
of Scientific Creativity. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
(1987). "Scientific Writing and Scientific Discovery," Isis, 78:220-235. 
(1988). "Lavoisier's Conceptual Passage," Osiris, 4:82-92. 
(1990). "Laboratory Notebooks: Can the Daily Record Illuminate the Broader 
Picture?" Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 134:349-366. 
Holton, Gerald (1978). "Subelectrons, Presuppositions, and the Millikan-Ehrenhaft 
Dispute," pp. 25-83 in Gerald Holton, The Scientific Imagination: Case Studies. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
(1993). Science and Anti-science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
(1996). Einstein, History and Other Passions. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Howson, Colin, and Peter Urbach (1989). Scientific Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach. 
La Salle, IL: Open Court. 
Hubbard, Ruth (1997). "Irreplaceable Ewe," Editorial, The Nation, February 24. 
Hulbert, Mark (1999). "Are Fund Managers Irrelevant? An 18th Century Theory Sug-
gests Not," New York Times, October 10, Business Section, p. 26. 
Huxley, Sir Julian (1958). "Introduction," mentor edition of The Origin of Species by 
Charles Darwin. New York: Mentor Books. 
Jaffe, Aniela (Ed.) (1963). Carl Jung: Memories, Dreams, Reflections, translated from 
the German. New York: Vintage Books. 
Jastrow, Joseph (1932). Freud: His Dream and Sex Theories. New York: Pocket Books. 
Jaynes, E. T. (1983). In R. D. Rosenkrantz (Ed.), Papers on Probability, Statistics, and 
Statistical Physics of E. T. Jaynes. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel. 
Jeffreys, Harold (1939, 1948, 1961). Theory of Probability, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd editions. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Jensen, A. R. (1969). "How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?" 
Harvard Educational Review, 39:1-123. 
(1995). "IQ and Science: The Mysterious Burt Affair," in N. J. Mackintosh (Ed.), 
Cyril Burt: Fraud or Framed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Johnson, George (1997). "Don't Worry. A Brain Still Can't Be Cloned," Week in 
Review, New York Times, March 2, p. 1. 
Jones, Bence (1870). The Life and Letters of Faraday, 2 vols. London: Longmans, Green. 

240 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Jones, Ernest (1953-1957). The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud, 3 vols. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Joynson, Robert B. (1989). The Burt Affair. New York: Routledge. 
Kadane, Joseph B., Mark J. Schervish, and Teddy Seidenfeld (1999). Rethinking the 
Foundations of Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kamin, L. J. (1974). The Science and Politics oflQ. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Keller, Evelyn Fox (1985). Reflections on Gender and Science. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press. 
Kerr, John (1950). A Most Dangerous Method: The Story of Jung, Freud, and Sabina 
Spielrein. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, distributed by Random House. 
Keynes, Geoffrey (1966). The Life of William Harvey. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Keynes, John Maynard (1921). A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan. 
Klencke, H. (1852). Alexander von Humboldt: A Biographical Monument, translated 
by Juliette Bauer. London: Ingram, Cooke. 
Kline, Paul (1972). Fact and Fancy in Freudian Theory. London: Methuen. 
Koestler, Arthur (1973). The Case of the Midwife Toad. New York: Vintage Books. 
Kohn, Alexander (1997). False Prophets: Fraud and Error in Science and Medicine, rev. 
ed. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Koyre, Alexander A. (1968). Metaphysics and Measurement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. enlarged. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lad, Frank (1996). Operational Subjective Statistical Methods: A Mathematical, 
Philosophical, and Historical Introduction. New York: Wiley-Interscience. 
Lakatos, I. (1968). "Criticism and Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes," 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 69:149-186. 
(1970). "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes," 
in I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (Eds.), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
(1974). "Popper on Demarcation and Induction," Chapter 5 in P. A. Schilpp 
(Ed.), The Philosophy of Karl Popper, Vol. 2. LaSalle, IL: Open Court. 
(1978). In J. Worrall, and G. Currie (Eds.), Philosophical Papers, 2 vols. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Laplace, P. S. (1774). "Mémoire sur la probabilité des causes par les événements," 
Memoires de VAcademie Royale des Sciences Presents Par Divers Savans, 6:621-
656. 
Lee, Peter M. (1997). Bayesian Statistics: An Introduction, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley. 
Lenard, Philipp Eduard Anton (1933). Great Men of Science: A History of Scientific 
Progress. New York: Macmillan. 
Leonard, Thomas, and John S. J. Hsu (1999). Bayesian Methods: An Analysis for 
Statisticians and Interdisciplinary Researchers. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Lindley, Dennis V. (1965). Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 2 vols. (Part 1: 
Probability; Part 2: Inference). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
241 
(1972). Bayesian Statistics: A Review. Philadelpia: Society for Industrial and 
Applied Mathematics. 
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1987). "Empirical Research in Aristotle's Biology," pp. 59ff. in Allan 
Gotthelf and James Lennox (Eds.), Philosophical Issues in Aristotle's Biology. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Loir, Adrien (1937-1938). "A l'ombre de Pasteur" (In the Shadow of Pasteur), Mou-
vement Sanitaire, 14:91-92. 
Longino, Helen E., E. F. Keller, Anne Fausto-Sterling, and Sandra Harding (1988). 
"Science, Objectivity, and Feminist Values: Review Essay," Feminist Studies, 
14:561-574. 
MacDonald, D. K. C. (1964). Faraday, Maxwell, and Kelvin. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday. 
Mach, Ernst (1960). The Science of Mechanics. La Salle, IL: Open Court. 
Mackintosh, N. J. (Ed.) (1995). Cyril Burt: Fraud or Framed? Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 
Mahoney, Michael J. (1979). "Psychology of the Scientist: An Evaluative Review," 
Social Studies of Science, 9:349-375. 
Malakoff, David (1999). "Bayes Offers a 'New' Way to Make Sense of Numbers," 
Science, 286:1460-1464. 
Mathews, Jon, and R. L. Walker (1965). Mathematical Methods of Physics. New York: 
W. A. Benjamin, Inc. 
Matthews, Robert A. J. (1998a). Fact Versus Factions: The Use and Abuse of Subjectiv-
ity in Scientific Research, ESEF Working Paper 2/98, European Science and Envi-
ronment Forum, Cambridge, September. 
(1998b). "Flukes and Flaws," Prospect, Issue 35, pp. 20-24. 
McKenzie, A. E. E. (1960). The Major Achievements of Science: The Devel-
opment of Science from Ancient Times to the Present. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 
McKie, Douglas (1952). Antoine Lavoisier: Scientist, Economist, Social Reformer. 
London: Constable and Co.; New York: Henry Schuman. 
Mead, Margaret (1973 [1928]). Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: Morrow. 
Meadows, Jack (1987). The Great Scientists. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Medawar, Peter B. (1984). Pluto's Republic. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
(1964). "Is the Scientific Paper Fraudulent," Saturday Review, August 1, 1964, 
pp. 42-43. 
Meeden, G., and Malay Ghosh (1997). Bayesian Methods for Finite Population Sam-
pling. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Mendel Centennial Symposium (1965: Fort Collins (Colo.) (1967). Heritage from 
Mendel: Proceedings of the Mendel Centennial Symposium Sponsored by the 
Genetics Society of America. Madison, WI: Wisconsin University Press. 
Mendel, Gregor (1965 [1866]). Experiments in Plant Hybridization, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Metchnikoff, Elie (1933). Trois Fondateurs de la Médecine Moderne: Pasteur, Lister, 
Koch. Paris: Libraire Felix Alean. 
Michelmore, Peter (1962). Einstein: Profile of the Man. New York: Dodd. 

242 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Millar, David (1989). Chambers Concise Dictionary of Scientists. Cambridge: W & R 
Chambers and the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 
Miller, Arthur I. (1996). Insights of Genius. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Miller, Johnathan, and Borin van Loon (1982). Darwin for Beginners. New York: 
Pantheon Books. 
Miller, Mabel (1968). Michael Faraday and the Dynamo. Philadelphia: Chilton. 
Millikan, Robert A. (1909-1910). "A New Modification of the Cloud Method of Mea-
suring the Elementary Electrical Charge, and the Most Probable Value of that 
Charge," Physical Review, 29:560-561 (Abstract, 1909); the full paper was pub-
lished in 1910 in Philosophical Magazine, pp. 209-228. 
(1913). "On the Elementary Electrical Charge and the Avogadro Constant," 
Physical Review, 2:109-143. 
Mockus, Jonas, William Eddy, Audris Mockus, Linas Mockus, and G. V. Reklaitis (1997). 
Bayesian Heuristic Approach to Discrete and Global Optimization: Algorithms, 
Visualization, Software, and Applications. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Monaghan, F., and A. Coreos (1985a). Chi-Square and Mendel's Experiments: Where's 
the Bias? Journal of Heredity, 76:307-309. 
(1985b). "Mendel, the Empiricist," Journal of Heredity, 76:49-54. 
Mosteller, Frederick, and David L. Wallace (1984). Applied Bayesian and Classical 
Inference, 2nd ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Mulkay, Michael J., and Gilbert, G. Nigel (1982). "Accounting for Error: How Scien-
tists Construct Their Social World When They Account for Correct and Incorrect 
Belief," Sociology, 16:165-183. 
Müller, Peter, and Brani Vidakovic (Eds.) (1999). Bayesian Inference in Wavelet-Based 
Models, Vol. 141 of Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Neal, Radford M. (1996). Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, Vol. 118 of Lecture 
Notes in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Nelken, Haiina (1980). Alexander von Humboldt: His Portraits and Their Artists: A 
Documentary Iconography. Berlin: D. Reimer. 
Nelkin, Dorothy (1995). Selling Science: How the Press Covers Science and Technology, 
rev. ed. New York: W.H. Freeman. 
Neyman, Jerzy, and Lucían M. Le Cam (Eds.) (1965). Bernoulli (1713), Bayes (1763), 
Laplace (1813), Anniversary Volume. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Neyman, J., and E. S. Pearson (1928). "On the Use and the Interpretation of Certain 
Test Criteria for Purposes of Statistical Inference," Biometrika, 20:175-240, Part I; 
263-294, Part II. 
(1933). "On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses," 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 231A:289-337. 
Nicolle, Jacques (1953). Un Maitre de VEnquete Scientifique, Louis Pasteur. Paris: La 
Colombe. Translated as Louis Pasteur: A Master of Scientific Enquiry. London: 
Hutchinson, 1961. 
(1966). Louis Pasteur: The Story of His Major Discoveries. New York: Fawcett. 
Ogle, W (Trans.) (1897). Aristotle on Youth and Old Age, Life and Death and Respira-
tion. London: Longmans. 
O 'Hagen, Anthony (1994). "Bayesian Inference," in Kendalls Advanced Theory of Sta-
tistics, Vol. 2B. London: Edward Arnold/Hodder Headline. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
243 
Olby, Robert C. (1966). Origins of Mendelism, New York: Schocken Books. 
Orans, Martin (1996). Not Even Wrong: Margaret Mead, Derek Freeman, and the 
Samoans. Novato, CA: Chandler & Sharp. 
Orel, V. (1968). "Will the Story on Too Good' Results of Mendel's Data Continue?" 
Bioscience, 18:776-778. 
O'Ruanaidh, Joseph J. K., and William J. Fitzgerald (1996). Numerical Bayesian 
Methods Applied to Signal Processing. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Pagel, Walter (1967). William Harvey s Biological Ideas: Selected Aspects and Histori-
cal Background. New York: Hafner. 
(1976). New Light on William Harvey. New York: S. Karger. 
Perutz, M. F. (1995). "The Pioneer Defended," a review of Gerald L. Geison, The 
Private Science of Louis Pasteur (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), New 
York Review of Books, December 21, pp. 54ff. 
Peters, Heinz E. (1962). My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salome. 
New York: W.W. Norton. 
Pflaum, Rosalynd (1989). Grand Obsession. New York: Doubleday. 
Polanyi, Michael (1958, 1962). Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philoso-
phy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (corrected edition, 1962). 
Pollard, William E. (1986). Bayesian Statistics for Evaluation Research: An Introduction. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. 
Popper, K. R. (1956, 1982). Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, from the 
Postscript to The Logic of Scientific Discovery, W.W. Bartley III (Ed.).Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman & Littlefield. 
(1959a). "The Propensity Interpretation of Probability," British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 10:25-42. 
(1959b). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Hutchinson; New York: 
Harper & Row. 
(1963). Conjectures and Refutations. New York: Routledge and & Kegan. 
Posin, Dan Q. (1961). Dr. Posins Giants: Men of Science. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. 
Prebys, Eric (2000). Personal communication, August 23,2000 and August 27,2000. 
Press, S. James (1989). Bayesian Statistics: Principles, Models and Applications. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Puner, Helen W. (1947). Freud: His Life and His Mind, A Biography. New York: Howell, 
Soskin. 
Quinn, Susan (1995). Marie Curie. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Raiffa, Howard, and Robert Schlaifer (1961). Applied Statistical Decision Theory. 
Boston: Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration. 
Ramsey, Frank Plimpton (1926). "Truth and Probability," in R. B. Braithwaite (Ed.), 
The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays. New York: Humani-
ties Press, 1950. Reprinted in Henry E. Kyburg and Howard F. Smokier (Eds.), 
Studies in Subjective Probability, 1980. Huntington, NY: Robert E. Krieger, 
pp. 23-52. 
Redondi, Pietro (1987). Galileo: Heretic, translated by Raymond Rosenthal. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Regis, Edward (1987). Who Got Einstein's Office. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Reik, Theodor (1940). From Thirty Years with Freud. London: Hogarth Press. 

244 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Rensberger, Boyce (1983). "Margaret Mead: The Nature-Nurture Debate I," 
Science83: 28-37. 
Reston, James, Jr. (1994). Galileo: A Life. New York: HarperCollins. 
Robert, Marthe (1964). La Revolution Psychoanalytique: La Vie et VOeuvre de Sigmund 
Freud, 2 vols.; English translation, The Psychoanalytic Revolution: Sigmund Freud's 
Life and Achievement (1966). New York: Harcourt, Brace and World. 
Roberts, Royston M. (1989). Serendipity: Accidental Discoveries in Science. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Rosenthal, Robert, and Lenore Jacobson (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom: Teacher 
Expectation and Pupils' Intellectual Development. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston. 
Ross, Andrew (Ed.) (1996). Science Wars. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Rostand, J. (1960). Error and Deception in Science. New York: Basic Books. 
Roux, Ernie (1896). "L'Oeuvre Medícale de Pasteur," in Agenda du Chimiste. Paris. 
Reprinted in Institut Pasteur, "Pasteur 1822-1922." Translated by E. F. Smith as 
"The Medical Work of Pasteur," Scientific Monthly, 21:325-389 (1925). 
Rubin, Donald B. (1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:245-246. 
Rubin, Donald B., and Stephen M. Stigler (1979). "Dorfman's Data Analysis," Letters 
to the Editor, Science, 205:1204-1206. 
Russell, B. (1959). The Wisdom of the West. New York: Doubleday. 
Ryan, Dennis P. (Ed.) (1987). Einstein and the Humanities. New York: Greenwood 
Press. 
Sachs, Hanns (1944). Freud: Master and Friend. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Sander, P., and R. Badoux (Eds.) (1991). Bayesian Methods in Reliability. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Savage, L. J. (1954). The Foundations of Statistics. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
(1981). The Writings of Leonard Jimmie Savage—A Memorial Selection. 
Washington, DC: American Statistical Association and Institute of Mathematical 
Statistics. 
Schaffer, Simon (1989). "Glass Works: Newton's Prisms and the Uses of Experiment," 
in David Gooding, Trevor Pinch, and Simon Schaffer (Eds.), The Uses of 
Experiment: Studies in the Natural Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Scheffler, Israel (1967). Science and Subjectivity. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Schilpp, Paul A. (Ed.) (1949). Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 2nd ed. Evanston, 
IL: Library of Living Philosophers. 
Schlaifer, Robert (1961). Introduction to Statistics for Business Decisions. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Schmitt, Samuel A. (1969). Measuring Uncertainty: An Elementary Introduction to 
Bayesian Statistics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Science Digest (1954). Science Milestones: The Story of the Epic Scientific Achievements 
and the Men Who Made Them Possible. Chicago: Windsor Press. 
Seelig, Carl (1956). Albert Einstein: A Documentary Biography. London: Staples 
Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
245 
Seidenfeld, Teddy (1998). "P's in a Pod: Some Recipes for Cooking Mendel's Data." 
Pittsburgh, PA: Departments of Philosophy and Statistics, Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity. Mimeo. 
Shapere, Dudley (1974). Galileo:A Philosophical Study. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Shapin, Steven (1982). "History of Science and Its Sociological Reconstructions," 
History of Science, XX: 157-211. 
Shweder, Richard A. (1995). "It's Time to Reinvent Freud," Op Ed., New York Times, 
December 15, p. A19. 
Simmons, John (1996). The Scientific 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Scientists, 
Past and Present. Secaucus, NJ: Carol Publishing Group, Citadel Press. 
Singer, Charles (1956). The Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood. London: Wm. 
Dawson & Sons. 
Smith, C. Ray (Ed.) (1985). Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Inverse Prob-
lems, Vol. 14 of (Fundamental Theories of Physics). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
D. Reidel. 
Solmsen, Friedrich (1960). Aristotle s System of the Physical World: A Comparison With 
His Predecessors, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Specter, Michael, with Gina Kolata (1997). "After Decades and Many Missteps, Cloning 
Success," New York Times, March 3, p. 1. 
Stearn, William T. (Ed.) (1968). Humboldt, Bonpland, Kunth and Tropical American 
Botany: A Miscellany on the uNova Genera et Species Plantarum." Stuttgart, 
Germany: Verlag von J. Carmer. 
Stekel, Wilhelm (1950). Autobiography: The Life Story of a Pioneer Psychoanalyst. New 
York: Liveright. 
Stigler, Stephen M. (1979). "Burt's Tables," Letters to the Editor, Science, 204:242-
245. 
(1986). The History of Statistics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Stone, Lawrence D., Carl A. Barlow, and Thomas L. Corwin (1999). Bayesian Multiple 
Target Tracking. Norwood, MA: Artech House. 
Sturtevant, A. H. (1965). A History of Genetics. Tokyo: Weatherhill. 
Susac, Andrew (1970). The Clock, the Balance, and the Guillotine: The Life of Antoine 
Lavoisier. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Tanner, Martin A. (1996). Tools for Statistical Inference: Methods for the Exploration 
of Posterior Distributions and Likelihood Functions, 3rd ed. New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
Thomas, John Meurig (1991). Michael Faraday and the Royal Institution (The Genius 
of Man and Place). Bristol, UK: Adam Hilger. 
Torrey, E. Fuller (1992). Freudian Fraud: The Malignant Effect of Freud's Theory on 
American Thought and Culture. New York: HarperCollins. 
Tricker, R. A. R. (1966). The Contributions of Faraday and Maxwell to Electrical 
Science. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Trilling, Lionel, and Steven Marcus (1961). The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud, 
edited and abridged. New York: Penguin Books. 

246 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Vallentin, Antonina (1954). Einstein: A Biography, English translation. Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday; Paris: Plon et les Librairies Associés. 
Vallery-Radot, Rene (1883). Pasteur: Histoire d'un Savant par un Ignorant. Paris: J. 
Hetzel. 
(1900). La Vie de Pasteur, 2 vols. Paris: Flammarion. Translated as The Life of 
Pasteur by R. L. Devonshire, 2 vols. London: Constable, 1911. 
Van Der Waerden, B. L. (1968). "Mendel's Experiments," Centaurus, 12:275-288. 
Van Dusen, Robert (1971). The Literary Ambitions and Achievements of Alexander 
von Humboldt. Berne, Switzerland: Herbert Lang; Frankfurt am Main, Germany: 
Peter Lang. 
Veatch, Henry B. (1974). Aristotle: A Contemporary Appreciation. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press. 
Viertl, R. (Ed.) (1987). Probability and Bayesian Statistics. New York: Plenum Press. 
von Hagen, Victor Wolfgang (1945). South America Called Them: Explorations of the 
Great Naturalists: La Condamine, Humboldt, Darwin, Spruce. New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf. 
Von Tschermak, E. (1900). Über künstliche Kreuaung bei Pisum Sativum," Botanis-
chen Gesellschaft Berichte, 18:232-239. 
Watson, James D., and Francis H. C. Crick (1953). "A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic 
Acid." Nature, 171:737. 
Weber, Max (1946). "Science and the Disenchantment of the World," in H. H. Gerth, 
and C. Wright Mills (Eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Weiling, F. (1971). "Mendel's Too Good Data," in Special Issue on Pisum Experiments, 
Folia Mendelania, 6:71-77. 
West, Mike, and Jeff Harrison (1997). Bayesian Forecasting and Dynamic Models. New 
York: Springer-Verlag. 
Westfall, Richard (1973). "Newton and the Fudge Factor," Science, 179:751-758. 
Whitteridge, Gweneth (1967). "William Harvey," pp. 673-675, Vol. 11, Collier's Ency-
clopedia. New York: Crowell Collier Macmillan. 
(1971). William Harvey and the Circulation of the Blood. London: Macdonald; 
New York: American Elsevier. 
Williams, L. Pearce (1965). Michael Faraday: A Biography. London: Chapman & Hall. 
(1966). The Origins of Field Theory. New York: Random House. 
Wilmut, I., A. E. Schnieke, J. McWhir, A. J. Kind, and K. H. S. Campbell (1997). "Viable 
Offspring Derived from Fetal and Adult Mammalian Cells," Letter, Nature, 
385:810. 
Wilson, Curtis (1968). "Kepler's Derivation of the Elliptical Path," Isis, 59:75-90. 
Wilson, Grove (1937). Great Men of Science. Garden City, NY: Garden City Publish-
ing Company. 
Winkler, Robert L. (1972). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference and Decision. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Wittels, Fritz (1924). Sigmund Freud, English translation. Leipzig: E.P. Tal. 
Wolpert, Lewis (1992). The Unnatural Nature of Science. Boston: Harvard University 
Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
247 
(1995). "Experiments in Deceit: A Review of Gerald L. Geison, The Private 
Science of Louis Pasteur" Book Review, New York Times, May 7,1995, p. 35. 
Wortis, Joseph (1954). Fragments of an Analysis with Freud. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 
Wright, Lawrence (1997). Twins: And What They Tell Us About Who We Are. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Wright, S. (1966). "Mendel's Ratios," in C. Stern and E. R. Sherwood (Eds.), The Origin 
of Genetics: A Mendel Source Book. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman. 
Wyatt, R. B. Hervey (1924). William Harvey. London: Beonard Parsons; Boston: Small, 
Maynard. 
Zellner, Arnold (1971). An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 
(1997). Bayesian Analysis in Econometrics and Statistics: The Zellner View and 
Papers. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 
Zinder, N., and A. Meyer (1983). "Fraud in Science: A Scientist's View," Science, 83:94. 

Subject Index 
Académie des Sciences, 168,169,171,172 
Academy of the Lynx, 62 
Acapulco, 112 
Acceleration, 68,90,185 
of gravity, 92 
Acetic acid, 108 
Acid(s), 102,103 
Acquired characteristics, inheritance of, 139, 
194 
Actinium, 173 
Action at a distance, 84, 87,88 
Action/reaction, 90 
Adapting thoughts to facts, 67 
Adolescence, 43-47,196 
Advanced treatments, 219 
Affinities of bodies, 125 
Age of the earth, 193 
Air, 99,106,107,108 
resistance, 190 
Alchemy, 84,86,192 
Alcohol, 108 
Alcoholic fermentation, 108 
Algebra, 88 
Alligator, 114 
Alpha rays, 173 
Altai Mountains, 113 
Altitude 
effects of, 114 
record, 112 
sickness., 112 
Amazon, 112 
American aborigines, 114 
American Psychoanalytic Association, 
160 
American Psychological Association, 38 
An Anatomical Treatise on the Movement of 
the Heart and Blood in Animals, see 
Exercitatio Anatómica de Motu Cordis et 
Sanguinis in Animalibus 
"An Hypothesis Explaining the Properties of 
Light," 83 
Analytic geometry, 88 
Anastomoses, 75 
"Anatomical Disquisition," 79 
"Anatomical Observations on the Lungs," 
79 
Anatomy of the nervous system, 157 
Andrew Jackson example, 202-203 
Anemia, 170 
Angoustura, 112 
Aniline dye, 123 
Animal electricity, 124 
Animal spirits, 75 
Annotated Guide to Some Literature on 
Bayesian Analysis, 219 
Anthrax, 145,148,151,194 
Anthropology, 43-47,114, 225 
Antimatter, 15 
Antiparticle, 15 
Antiphlogiston theory, 95-109,192 
Anti-Semitism, 156,179 
Aorta, 76 
Application references, 225-230 
Applications of Bayesian analysis, 226-229 
Apprenticeship in medicine, 52 
Aqueous formation of basalt, 117 
Archaeology, 225 
Aristocracy, 97 
Aristotelian(s), 61, 68, 73,76,78, 79,82,191 
Aristotelian epistemology, 53 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

250 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Aristotelianism, 53 
Aristotle, 51-59,190 
biography, 51-53 
errors, 56 
major works, 56 
scientific contributions, 53-56 
subjectivity, 56-58 
Arrest of Lavoisier, 98 
Ars Conjectandi, 220 
Arsenal, 98 
Arterial blood, 75 
Arterial vein, see Pulmonary artery 
Arteries, 76,191 
functions of, 71-80 
pulsation of, 55 
Artifacts, 107 
Artists, 187 
Asie Céntrale, recherches sur les chames des 
montagnes et la climatologie compaée, 
113,116 
Assaults on Freud's work, 159 
Astronomer, 23,60,89 
Astronomer Royal, 85 
Astronomía Nova, 25 
Astronomical 
discoveries, 65 
observations, 111 
Astronomy, 62, 86,114,119 
Astrophysics, 200 
Asymmetry, 15 
Athens, 52 
Atom(s), 173 
masses and sizes of, 178 
Atomic 
bomb, 180,184 
property, 168,171,195 
structure, 175 
weight(s), 168,172 
Atomist 
nature of matter, 175 
view, 173 
Attraction(s), 87,125 
Auricles, 75,76 
Austrian rule, 156 
Automatic sequencing devices, 212 
Average, 7, 36, 92 
Axial flowers, 28 
Axioms, 90 
Aztecs, 119 
Baal Shem Tov, 163 
Baconian induction, 27,193 
Barium, 172,173 
chloride, 172 
Basalt, 117 
Bases, 212 
Bayes' formula/theorem, 4, 7,13,207,208, 
210,211,214,217 
Bayesian 
analysis, 189-197,199-223 
approach, 162 
formalism, 219 
inference, 205 
inference in physics example, 210-212 
methods, 225-226 
paradigm, 200-230 
publishing boom, 200 
statistical inference, 13,203-206 
Becquerel rays, 173 
Bees, 190 
Behavior therapy, 158 
Belgium, 180 
Bell jar, 102 
Belle, 14 
Benzene, 123 
Berlin, 113,179,180 
Bern, 178 
Beta rays, 173 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 158 
Biases, 13-15 
Biblical genesis, 194 
Binomial 
distribution, 32, 210-211 
theorem, 82 
Biochemistry, 226 
Biographical sketch of 
Aristotle, 51-53 
Curie, 166-170 
Darwin, 128-130 
Einstein, 177-181 
Faraday, 121-123 
Freud,156-165 
Galileo, 60-65 
Harvey, 71-73 
Lavoisier, 95-99 
Newton, 81-86 
Pasteur, 143-145 
von Humboldt, 110-114 
Biological determinism, 44 
Biological sciences example, 212-213 
Biology, 9,13,52,55,104 
Biometrie methods, 38 
Bismuth, 111 
Blinding, 13-15 
Blood,71-80,191 
circular motion of, 76 
circulation of, 10, 55, 71-80,191 
flow of, 55 

SUBJECT INDEX 
251 
quantity of, 76,78 
Bogotá, 112 
Bone fractures, 170 
Book of God, 123 
Book of Nature, 63,123 
Bookbinder, 122 
Botanical 
process, 32 
zones, 114 
Botanist, 110 
Botany, 26,110, 111, 114,115,119 
Boundary conditions, 204 
Brain, 41,157 
Bronchi, 75 
Brownian motion, 178,181-182,187,196 
probability law for, 182 
Burning, 99,103 
Burt, Cyril, 37-43 
Business, 200,226 
Calcinated gypsum, 96 
Calcination, 100,101,102,106 
Calcium hydroxide, 102 
Calculus, 81,82,85,88,90,91 
Caloric, 103,106,192 
Calx(ces), 100,101,102,106,107 
of mercury, 102 
of metals, 103 
Cambridge University, 71,82,172 
Canary Islands, 111 
Cancer example, 207-210 
Capillaries, 79,191 
Capillary action, 87 
Caracas, 112 
Carbon, 103,108 
dioxide, 100,106,108 
Carbonates, 103 
Carbonic acid, 103 
Caripe, 112 
Cartagena, 73 
Case histories, 160 
Case studies, 157 
Casiquiare Canal, 73,112 
Caspian Sea, 113 
Cataracts, 112,170 
Catch limits for fish, 200 
Cathode rays, 172 
Catholic Church, 190-191 
Catholicity, 63 
Causes, 54 
Cavendish Laboratory, 172 
Celestial 
mechanics, 90 
phenomena, 65 
Central Asia: Research on Mountain Chains 
and Comparative Climatology, 113 
Centrifugal force, 185 
Certain Philosophical Questions, 82 
Chalcis, 53 
Chalate, 171 
Chamberlain, 113 
Chambers Concise Dictionary of Scientists, 21 
Chambers of the heart, 74,75 
Chance, 201 
Charcoal, 107 
Charge of electron, 34-37 
Charles II, 73 
Chassidism, 163,195 
and psychoanalysis, 163 
Checkup, 207 
Chemical 
affinity(ies), 87,125 
compound, 103 
manipulation, 123 
reactions, 100 
revolution, 100,103,192 
Chemist(s), 104,121 
Chemistry, 86,87,95,95-109,119,123,192 
Chicken 
cholera, 194 
eggs, 73 
Childhood sexual development, 162 
Children's lectures, 122 
Chimborazo, 73,114 
China, 113 
Chi-square, 29,32 
Chlorides of carbon, 122 
Chromatic aberration, 83,89 
Chromosomes, 27 
Circular motion, 77,80 
Circulation of blood, 10, 55, 71-80 
Harvey's summary, 77 
model, 191 
Civilization, 119 
Civilization and Its Discontents, 158 
Classical methods of statistical inference, 214 
Classification, 54 
Climatologist, 110 
Clinical 
approach, 156 
psychology, 160 
trials, 14 
Cloning, 37,40-42 
Cocaine, 162 
Cognitive therapy, 158 
Cohesion 
of bodies, 87 
of matter, 125 

252 
SUBJECT INDEX 
College Mazarin, 95 
College of Physicians, 72 
Combining prior beliefs and observational 
data, 205 
Combustion, 95-109, 99,101,102,103,105, 
106,192 
Comets, 63, 91 
Coming of Age in Samoa, 43-47 
Comparative anatomy, 80 
Comparing scientific theories, 213-215 
using binomial distribution, 218-219 
via posterior probabilities, 214 
Compensating errors, 108 
Competing theories, 213,216-218 
Comprehension, 69 
Computational methods, 219 
Computer 
methods of analysis, 225 
screen,182 
Conceptus, 74 
Conditional probability, 206 
Confirmatory evidence, 126 
Confirming experiment, 27 
Congregation of the Index, 63 
Conjecture(s), 107,116 
about scientists, 189-197 
Conservation 
of energy, 175,196 
of mass, 103 
Constraints, 204 
Continuous 
posterior distribution, 212 
prior distribution, 212 
Contraction of heart, 76 
Conversations in Chemistry, 123 
Conversion 
of energy, 123 
of forces, 125 
Copernican theory, 24,61,62,63,64,65,68,197 
Copper, 101 
phosphate, 171 
sulphate, 103 
Corpuscles, 87 
Corpuscular theory of light, 89,192 
Correlations, 37-43 
same in Burt's data, 39 
Cosmic order, 69 
Cosmographic Mystery, 24 
Creativity in science, 10-11 
Crystallization, 168,172 
Cuba, 73 
Cultural determinism, 43 
Culture, 43,119 
Cumaná, 112 
Curare, 112 
Curie, Marie, 166-176,195 
biography, 166-170 
major works, 174 
scientific contributions, 170-174 
subjectivity, 174-176 
Curvature, 88 
Curve fitiing, 25 
Customs duties, 96 
Czar Nicholas, 113 
Czech nationalism, 156 
Darwin, Charles, 128-142,193-194 
biography, 128-130 
major works, 133-134 
scientific contributions, 130-133 
subjectivity, 134-141 
Data, 162 
altering, 39, 92 
analysis of, 214 
analysis of experimental, 200 
bending, 107 
borrowing, 103 
choice, 120 
discarding, 30,34,92 
doctoring, 25,32,197 
editing, 204 
fabrication, 32,40, 92 
faking, 39 
fudging, 194 
ignoring, 35,107 
inconsistent, 107 
interpretation, 2 
manipulation, 14,47, 92, 93,107,108, 192, 
197 
selection, 44 
suppression, 194 
weighting, 14, 35,45 
Davy Medal, 168 
De Generatione Animalium, see Exercitationes 
de Generatione Animalium 
De Motu Cordis, see Exericitatio Anatómica 
de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in 
Animalibus 
De Motu Locali Animalium, 77 
De Respiratione, 55 
Decay signature, 15 
Decision making, 200 
Decision-theorist, 7 
Decomposing power, 124 
Deduction, 57, 68, 90 
Deductive reasoning, 53 
Deer, 72, 74 
eggs, 73 

SUBJECT INDEX 
Degree of belief, 202,203,204, 213 
Demonstration(s), 31,75,93,105 
of theory, 30 
Department for the Regulation of the Mining 
and Smelting Works, 111 
Dependency, 32 
Dephlogisticated air, 102,102,103 
Design of experiments, 214 
Dew, 102 
Diagnoses, 210 
Diagnostic 
judgment, 14 
test, 207 
Dialogs, 57,67 
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World 
Systems—Ptolemaic and Copernican, 64, 
67 
Dice, 201 
Dielectric constant, 124 
Differential calculus, 88 
Discarding 
data, 34,92 
observations, 30 
Discourses on Two New Sciences, 64 
Discrete probability distributions, 211 
Discrete random quantity, 216 
Dissection, 73 
Distribution of heights, 203 
Dizygotic twins, 38 
DNA, 212-213 
fragments, 212 
molecule, 212 
sequence, 212 
Doctor, 207-210 
Doctored data, 32 
Dolly, 40-41 
Dolphins, 54 
Dominant, 27,28,29 
Doppler effect, 183 
Double helix, 212 
Double-blinding, 14 
Dream of Irma's injection, 162 
Dreams, 158,161,163,195 
reports, 162 
Drug, 14 
Drug testing, 200 
Dual nature of light, 192 
Dynamics, 88,89 
Dynamo, 122,124 
Dyslectic, 177 
E = mc2,184 
e,34 
Earthquake, 112 
253 
Earth's circumference, 54 
Easter memoir, 107 
Eclipse, 179,185 
Ecologist, 110 
Ecology, 226 
Econometrics, 225 
Economics, 112,225,226 
Educated belief, 215 
Egg, content of, 41 
Einstein, Albert, 177-189,195-196 
biography, 177-181 
major works, 185-186 
scientific contributions, 181-186 
subjectivity, 186-188 
Einstein red shift, 185 
Elastic fluids, 100 
Elective affinity, 87 
Electric 
current, 3,182 
eel(s),112,114 
motor, 122,123 
Electrical 
attraction, 125 
inductance, 124 
Electricity, 105,121-127,185,193 
and magnetism, 122 
electrostatic, 124 
induced,121,122,124,197 
Electrochemical equivalents, 124 
Electrochemistry, 122,123 
Electrolysis, 123,124,169 
Electromagnetic 
induction, 123 
radiation, 182 
rotation, 123 
waves, 126,193 
Electromagnetism, 180 
Electrometer, 171 
Electrons, 172,173,182 
Element(s), 97,103,105 
Elevator example, 186 
Elliptical orbits, 23, 25, 69 
Emanation(s), 173,175 
Embryo, 74 
Embryology, 71, 72 
Empirical 
approach, 75 
scientific method, 65 
verification, 5 
Empiricism, 69 
Empiricist, 69 
Energy, 182 
conservation of, 175 
of agitation, 182 

254 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Energy (Continued) 
radioctive release of, 174 
transfer, 173 
Engineering, 225,226 
England, 180 
English Civil War, 72 
Enumerative proportion, 202 
Environment, 39 
Environmental factors, 37,114 
Enzymatic method, 212 
Epidemial, 52 
Epigénesis, 73,191 
Equally likely outcomes, 201 
Equipment, 9,12 
Equivalence of mass and energy, 181,184 
Eroticism, 163 
Error rates, 207 
Errors of measurement, 5,12,13 
Eruptive rocks, 117 
Estates General, 98 
Estimation, 214,219 
Esu, electrostatic units, 35 
Ether, 87,173,175,183 
Ethnic identity, 178 
Ethnicity, 163 
Ethnography, 43-47 
Ethnologic observations, 114 
Etiology of mental illness, 158 
Eugenicists, 44 
Eugenics, 39 
Evaluation research, 225 
Evolution, 194 
Examples 
Andrew Jackson example, 202-203 
Bayesian inference in physics example, 
210-212 
biological sciences example, 212-213 
cancer example, 207-210 
elevator example, 186 
eye color example, 27-28 
height example, 203 
medical diagnosis example, 207-209 
physics example, 210-211 
position-of-flowers example, 28-29 
rate-of-defectives example, 4-8,205 
second opinion example, 209-210 
Execitatio de Circulatione Sanguinis, 72, 
77 
Exercitatio Anatómica de Motu Coráis et 
Sanguinis in Animalibus, 72, 73, 74, 76, 
77, 78, 79 
Exercitationes de Generatione Animalium, 49, 
50,59, 63, 72, 73,74, 77, 78,79 
Expectation, 108 
Experiment(s), 60,66,67,77,78,91,107,190, 
197,205 
analysis of, 13 
as demonstrations, 105 
confirmatory, 67 
design of, 12 
exploratory, 67 
Experimental 
design, 162,219 
error, 14,31,107 
findings, anticipation of, 106 
method, 91 
physics, 62 
scientific method, 64 
support, 106 
Experimentalist, 6, 91,186 
Experimentation, 107 
Experimenter, 9 
effects, 14 
Exploration, 110-120 
Explorer, 110 
Explosive industry, 123 
Expression, 157 
Extraction of radium, 172 
Eye-color example, 27-28 
Fj generation, 27,28 
F2 generation, 27,29 
F3 generation, 29,30,32 
Fabricated data, 32 
Factor analysis, 38 
Faculty of Law, 95 
Failure, 210,217 
Fake experimental evidence, 108 
Falling body(ies), 61,67,68,90 
False negative, 207-208 
False positive, 207-208 
Falsification, 196,214 
Fame, 21 
Family size, 46 
Famous scientists, 49-189 
Fantasy, 187 
Faraday effect, 124 
Faraday, Michael, 121-127,193 
biography, 121-123 
major works, 124-125 
scientific contributions, 123-124 
subjectivity, 125-126 
'Faraday', 124 
Father of Modern Chemistry, 192 
Faust, 118 
Federal Polytechnic School, 178 
Ferme Generale, 96,98 
Fermentation, 104,108 

SUBJECT INDEX 
Fertilized egg, 74 
Fetal circulation, 74 
Field hospitals, 169 
Field of force, 124 
Field theory, 121-127 
Fieldwork, 43-47 
Final cause(s), 54, 57, 76,78,190 
Finance, 227 
Fingerprints, 41 
Finite sample spaces, 201 
Fire particles, 100 
First law of thermodynamics, 175 
First World War, 169 
Fisher's critique of Mendel, 29-30 
Fixable elastic fluid, 106 
Fixed air, 100,101,103 
Fixing of air, 101 
Floating bodies, 62 
Floating University, 166 
Florence, 62 
Fluorescence, 170 
Fluxions, 86 
Force, 65,88,90 
Forestry, 227 
Formal subjectivity, 162,200 
Formalism of Bayesian approach, 206-213 
Fossil record, 193 
Four elements of the Greeks, 99 
Frames of reference, 184 
France, 181 
Frankfurt an der Oder, University of, 110 
Fraud,3,31.32.39,92,108,197 
Free association(s), 157,161,162,195 
Freiberg Mining Academy, 111, 117,118 
French Philosophical Society, 181 
French Revolution, 98 
Frequentist methods of statistical inference, 
204,214 
Freud, Sigmund, 156-165,195 
biography, 156-157 
major works, 158-159 
scientific contributions, 157-158 
subjectivity, 159-164 
Freudian slip, 160 
Freudians, 160 
Frigidity, 45 
Fullerian professor of chemistry, 122 
Future observations, 216 
Galilei, Galileo, 60-70,190-191 
biography, 60-65, 
major works, 66 
scientific contributions, 65-66 
subjectivity, 66-69 
255 
Gambling and probability, 201 
Gannets, 72 
Gas(es), 100,103 
Gaseous state, 100 
Gedanken experiment, 186 
Gender 
differences, 190 
roles, 44 
Gene(s), 27,28,193,212 
General theory of relativity, 179,184,184-185, 
196 
Generalization, 79,162 
Generated at random, 215 
Generation of animals, 72 
Genetic 
composition, 38 
material, 212 
ratio, 28 
Genetics, 14, 26, 227, 228 
Geneva, 168 
Geniture, 74 
Genome, 212 
Genomics, 200 
Genotypes, 28 
Geocentric theory, 24,61,82,190,191,194 
Geodetic measurement, 111 
Geognosy, 119 
Geographer, 110 
Geography, 110-120 
Geologic 
formations, 114 
observations, 193 
Geologist, 110,117 
Geology, 96,110,114,117,227 
Geomagnetic measurement, 111 
Geomagnetist, 110 
Geometric optics, 93 
Geometry, 82,90 
Geophysicist, 89 
Geophysics, 114, 227 
Germ plasm theory, 29 
German University, Prague, 179 
Germany, 177,179,181 
Gestation, 72 
Gibbs sampling, 219 
Good physics is made a priori, 67 
Government, 200 
Grand Duke of Tuscany, 62 
Gravitation, 69, 81,125, 180, 185,188,193 
Gravitational 
field, 185, 185 
force, 23 
Gravity, 91 
and electricity, 126 

256 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Great Plague, 82 
Greece, 49-59,119 
Groove joint, 5 
Guano, 114 
Guayaquill, 73 
Guillotine, 99 
Gun barrel, 103 
Gunpowder Administration, 98 
Gypsum, 96,105 
Half lives, 175,195 
Hamburg School of Commerce, 111 
Harmony, 116,119 
of nature, 193,120 
Harvey, William, 71-80,191 
biography, 71-73 
major works, 77-78 
scientific contributions, 73-77 
subjectivity, 78-80 
Havana, 113 
Headstart Program, 38 
Heart, 55,74,190 
functions of, 71-80 
primacy of, 58 
pulsation of, 55 
Heat, 100,103 
generated in chemical reactions, 87 
Height example, 203 
Heliocentric theory, 24, 82,190-191,194,197 
Helium nuclei, 173 
Heredity, 32,38,39 
particles, 27 
Heritability, 38 
Hermetic tradition, 87 
Hexachloroethane, 123 
Higher Normal School for Girls, 168 
Hiroshima, 180 
Histology, 156 
Historia Animalium, 58 
History of Animals, 55 
History of Bayesian inference, 219 
Hithlahabuth, 163 
Honesty, 197 
Horoscopes, 24 
Humanities, 227 
Humboldt current, 112,114 
Humboldt, Alexander von, see von Humboldt, 
Alexander 
Humility, 163 
Hunch, 78 
Hybrid peas, 28 
Hybridization, 27 
experiment, 28 
Hydrogen, 103,105,108 
Hydrostatic balance, 61 
Hydrous copper oxide, 101 
Hypnotism, 157 
Hypothesis(es), 3,68,91,105 
formulation, 10,174 
testing, 12, 214,219 
Hypothesis of Light, 87 
Hypothesizing, 57,182,186 
Hysteria, 157 
Identical twins, 37 
Identity of forces, 125 
Ignoring data, 35,107 
Imagination, 187 
Impotence, 45 
Imprimatur, 64 
Incas, 119 
Incidence of disease, 207,209 
Inclined planes, 68 
Inconsistencies in frequentist approach, 204 
Inconsistent data, 107 
Independence, 210 
Indigenous American people, 119 
Induced electricity, 121,122,124,197 
Inductance, 123 
Induction, 27, 30,68,196, 203 
Inductive logic, 10 
Industry, 200 
Inertia, 65, 82, 90 
Inertial law, 190 
Inference, 157 
Inferential leaps, 196 
Infinite series, 88 
Inflammable air, 102,103 
Influences, 161 
Informal subjectivity, 104,106,162,196,200 
Infractions of the rules, 197 
Inheritance, 9 
of acquired characteristics, 139,194 
Initial conditions, 204 
Inner belief, 188 
Inquisition, 63, 64 
Insights, 200 
Institute for Advanced Study, 180,181 
Institute of Radium, 169 
Instrumentation, 54,67,68, 73, 76,79, 91,93, 
105 
Insulators, 124 
Insurance, 201 
Integral calculus, 88 
Integrated world view, 125 
Integration of forces, 125 
Intelligence, 37^43 
Intelligibility of universe, 123 

SUBJECT INDEX 
257 
Interference patterns, 88,89 
Interferometer, 183 
International Committee on Intellectual Co-
operation, 170 
International observatories, 113 
International Radium Standard, 169 
Interplay between theory and 
experimentation, 32 
Interpretation(s) of data, 4,205 
Interpretations, convergence of, 4 
Intra-uterine environment, 41 
Introductory treatments, 219 
Introspection, 78 
Intuition, 187,200 
Intuitive approach, 187 
Inventiveness, 187 
Inverse square law, 82,92 
Inviolability of elements, 176 
Ionization chamber, 171 
Ionizing power, 175 
10,37-43 
Iron, 101 
filings, 124 
oxide, 103 
Ishim, 113 
Isobutene, 123 
Isotherms, 114 
Jaguars, 112 
Jesuits, 83 
Jewish, 156 
identity, 163 
Jewry, 163 
Jungians, 160 
Jupiter, moons of, 60,62,63,65 
Kepler, Johannes, 23-26 
Kinetic energy of molecules, 182 
King Louis XVI, 96 
Kings College, London, 187 
Kluwer, 225 
Kosmos, 113,115,116,119,120 
L'ami du peuple, 99 
Laboratory 
notebook(s), 34,106 
simulation, 171 
test, 207 
Lamarckian theory, 194 
Laser, 182 
Latin Quarter, 167 
Lavoisier and the Science of Life, 104 
Lavoisier, Antoine, 95-109,192-193 
biography, 95-99 
major works, 104 
scientific contributions, 99-104 
subjectivity, 104-108 
Law(s) of 
conservation of mass, 104 
declining magnetic intensity, 114 
electromagnetic induction, 124 
gravitation, 185 
motion, 55,60,65,81,84, 88,90,91,190, 
192,196 
parabolic fall, 61 
planetary motion, 23,24,69 
uniformly accelerated motion, 61 
universal gravitation, 91 
Lead,101,107 
oxide, 101 
League of Nations, 170 
Lenses, 88 
Lesbos, 52 
Ley den jar, 105 
Libido, 161,195 
Library of Congress, 163 
Licence es Mathématiques, 167 
Licence es Physiques, 167 
Light, 82,87,88,100,103,181,184,192 
bands, 88 
dual nature of, 89 
from stars, 185 
intensity of, 182 
propogation of, 81,183 
speed of, 183 
waves, 89 
Lightmeter, 182 
Lightning, 105 
Likelihood function, 205 
Lima, 73 
Lime water, 102 
Lincean Academy, 62 
Liquefaction of gases, 122,123 
Liquid, 103 
Literature review, 11 
Liver, 74 
Llanos, 112 
Loaded die, 201 
Logic, 51 
Logician, 51 
London,168 
Long-range relative frequency, 201,202 
Lorentz transformation equations, 184 
Lucasian professor, 83 
Lumleian Lecturer, 72 
Lunar theory, 85 
Lungs, 75, 76 
Lyceum, 53 

258 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Macedonia, 52 
Macedonian phalanx., 52 
Magic, 87 
Magmatic, 117 
Magnetic 
attraction, 125 
field, 125 
needle, 122 
storms, 113 
Magnetism, 121-127,193,197 
of steels, 167,168 
Major works of 
Aristotle, 56 
Curie, 174 
Darwin, 133-134 
Einstein, 185-186 
Faraday, 124-125 
Freud,158-159 
Galileo, 166 
Harvey, 77-78 
Lavoisier, 104 
Newton, 91 
Pasteur, 148 
von Humboldt, 115-116 
Male vs. female, 57 
Mamáis, 74 
Manned flight, 114 
Marine biologist, 54 
Marketing, 227 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, 212, 
219,225 
Mars, orbit of, 24,25 
Mass, 90,184 
and energy, equivalence of, 184 
loss of in radioactive decay, 176 
Material elements, 54 
Materialist theory of radioactivity, 176 
Maternal circulation, 74 
Mathematical 
formalism of Bayesian approach, 206-213 
formulation, 182 
laws, 188 
model(s),9,88,91,215 
physics, 91 
probability(ies),201,212 
representations, 186 
supposition., 63 
tools, 91 
Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy, 90 
Mathematician, 60, 81 
Mathematics of Predictive Distributions, 
216-218 
Mathematics, 9,57,60,65,66,67,81,86,88, 
189 
Matter, 82 
states of, 123 
Maximum entropy, 225 
Maximum likelihood estimate, 6 
McGill University, 173 
MCMC methods, 212,219,225 
Mead, Margaret, 43-47 
Measurement error, 3,15,107,215 
Mechanical 
models, 114 
philisopher(s), 82,87 
Mechanics, 62,64,89 
Mechanists, 93 
Medical 
diagnosis example, 207-209 
history, 209 
science, 52 
Medican Stars, 62 
Medicine, 14,52,227 
Meditation, 78,191 
Mendel, Gregor, 26-33 
Mental 
illness, 158 
problems, 157 
Mephistopheles, 118 
Mercantile trade, 201 
Mercuric oxide, 101 
Mercurius calcinatus per se, 107 
Mercury, 63,101,102,107 
Merton College, 72 
Meta-analysis, 7,36 
Metallic radium, 169 
Metals, 100 
Metaphysics, 192 
Meteor shower(s), 112,114 
Meteorological measurement, 111 
Meteorology, 114, 228 
Method(s) 
Bayesian, 225-226 
of finite differences, 88 
of fluxions, 86 
Methodology, 78 
Mexico, 112 
Michelson-Morley experiment, 87,183, 
187-188 
Microbe, 194 
Microorganisms, 194 
Microscope, 73,79 
Milan, 178 
Milky Way, 62 
Millikan, Robert A., 34-37 

SUBJECT INDEX 
Mind, 157 
"Mineralogical Observations on some Basalts 
of the Rhine," 110,117 
Mineralogy, 110,117 
Minimum voltage, 210 
Mining, 111 
Misclassifications, 30 
Mixture, 102 
Model(s), 13,186,190,207,215, 
assumptions, 5 
checking, 219 
comparison, 192,193,194,195,196 
fit, 29 
Modern subjectivity, 199-230 
Molecules, 173,181-182,187 
Momentum, 88 
Monkey, 114 
Monologues, 57 
Monozygotic twins, 38,41 
Moon, 91 
god,86 
librations of, 64 
surface of, 62 
Moses and Monotheism, 158 
Motion pictures, 182 
Munich, 177 
Muscles, contraction of, 72 
Mutation, 194 
Mutual fund management, 225 
Mysticism, 163,195 
Myth of objectivity, 197 
Nagasaki, 180 
Naphthalene, 123 
Napoleonic Wars, 111 
Natural 
history, 114 
philosophy, 87, 90,114,121 
selection, 132-133,139,193 
spirits, 74 
Naturalist, 51,54,110,116 
Nature vs. nurture, 37-47,196 
Nature, unity of, 119 
Nazis, 157,180 
Nebulae, 114 
Negative weight, 100 
Neptunist theory, 116,117, 118,193 
Nervous system, 75 
Neural networks, 219 
Neurologist, 157 
Neurology, 157 
Neurophysiology, 228 
Neurosciences, 161 
259 
Neurosis(es), 158,161,195 
New Astronomy, 25 
New Guinea, 179 
New Spain, 112 
New Theory About Light and Colors, 89 
New World, 111 
Newton, Isaac, 81-94,191-192 
biography, 81-86 
major works, 91 
scientific contributions, 86-91 
subjectivity, 91-94 
Newton/Raphson method, 88 
Newton's rings, 89,192 
Newtonian transformation equations, 184 
Nitric oxide, 101 
Nobel 
committee, 169 
Foundation, 169 
Prize, 7, 34,169,180,182 
Prize in physics, 168 
Nomenclature, 98,103 
Non-Freudian psychoanalysis, 158 
Nonlinear thinking, 10 
Normal distribution, 181 
Nuclear physics, 174,177-189 
Nucleotides, 212 
Null hypothesis, 214 
Number theory, 88 
Numerical methods, 225 
Numerology, 162 
Object in motion, 184 
Objective, 126,214 
probability, 212 
reality, 2 
Objectivity, 2,204,214 
Observation(s), 9,78 
affected by preconceptions, 118 
Observational data, 161,200,203,207, 
211 
as "objective," 205 
Occult, 87,162,195 
Ocean temperature, 111 
Oceanography, 114 
Oedipus complex, 160,162 
Of Colours, 83 
Offsets, 14 
Oil drop experiment, 7,14,34-37 
"On a new theory of the calcination of 
metals," 101 
On Local Movement of Animals, 72 
On Motion, 68 
On the Circulation of Blood, 73 

260 
SUBJECT INDEX 
'On the Nature of the Principle that 
combines with the Metals on Calcination 
and increases their Weight," 102 
On the Parts of Animals, 55 
Oncologist, 209 
Oncology, 228 
Opscules physiques et chimiques, 106 
Optical Lectures, 89 
Opticks, 82,83,84,86,87,88,89 
Optics, 81,88,187 
Opuscules physiques et chimiques, 101,106 
Orbit(s), 23,24,89 
Orbital radii, 90 
Organic chemistry, 104 
Origins of probability and statistics in science, 
201-203 
Orinoco, 112 
Osiris Prize, 168 
Other-directed, 7 
Outcome enumeration, 201 
Outliers, 3 
Ovary(ies), 74,79 
Overgeneralizations, 196 
Oviparous animals, 74 
Ovum(a),74,79,191,196 
Oxford University, 72 
Oxidation, 95,106 
Oxides, 103 
Oxyacids, 100 
Oxygen, 95,100,102,103,105,108,194 
in air, volume of, 106 
P,6,7 
Pacifism, 179 
Padua, University of, 61,71 
Palestine Foundation Fund, 180 
Pangenesis vs. natural selection, 139,194 
Parabolic motion, 65 
Paradigm, 106 
shift, 204 
Paris, 113,167 
Arsenal, 97 
Polytechnic, 170 
Particle(s) 
of matter, 87, 89 
physicists, 14 
theory of light, 182 
Particulate genetic material, 31 
Pasteur, Louis, 143-155,194-195 
biography, 143-145 
major works, 148 
scientific contributions, 145-148 
subjectivity, 149-154 
Pasteurization, 194 
Patent office, 178 
Pathologist, 210 
Peas, 27 
Pendulum(s), 60, 68, 93 
Perception, 2,118 
Perceptual influences on data collection, 205 
Periodic table, 172 
Peripatetic monologues, 57 
Pernicious anemia, 170 
Persistence, 176 
Personal 
belief(s), x, 35,107,159,162,200,215 
biases, 14,15 
degree of belief, 202 
experience, 11 
judgment, 34,214 
probability, 202,203 
definition of, 202 
Pharmaceutical industry, 123 
Pharmacokinetics, 228 
Pharmacology, 14,228 
Phenotypes,28,31 
Philadelphia, 113 
Phillip of Macedonia, 52 
Philosopher(s),51,188,214 
of science, 163 
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, 
90 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, 86, 89 
Philosophy, 51 
Phlogiston, 101,102,102,105 
theory, 95, 98, 99,100,105,192 
Phosphorescence, 170,173 
Phosphorus, 101,105 
Photoelectric effect, 89,180, 181,182 
Physical 
effect, 210 
experiments, 11 
geography, 9 
Physicist, 34, 60, 81,121,177 
Physics, 9, 86, 88,178,187, 214, 225 
example, 210-211 
Physiological 
chemistry, 104 
etiology of mental illness, 160 
Physiologists, 104 
Physiology, 71, 75,114,156,229 
of sleep and dreams, 161 
Piezoelectric quartz balance, 167, 171 
Piezoelectricity, 168 
Pisa, University of, 60 
Pitchblende, 9,168,171,172 
Placebo, 14 

SUBJECT INDEX 
261 
Plagiarism, 103,106,192 
Planetary orbits, 190 
Planets, 114 
periods of, 90 
Plant 
collecting, 112 
evolution, 26 
geography, 80,112,114 
hybridization, 27 
Plaster of Paris, 96 
Plato, 52, 57 
Plato's Academy, 52 
Plutonist theory, 117,118,193 
Polar coordinates, 88 
Polarized light, 124 
Policymaking, 200 
Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, 
112 
Political science, 229 
Politics, 112 
Pollen dust, 181 
Pollination, 27 
Polonium, 166,168,172,175,176,195 
Polynomial, 88 
Pope, 62 
Popperian approach, 214 
Porosities of the lung, 77 
Position-of-flowers example, 28-29 
Posterior 
belief(s), 2, 204, 205 
odds, 190 
probability(ies), 207,208,210,211,217 
Postulates, 90 
Potability, 97 
Potassium bichromate, 194 
Potential energy, 174 
Prague, 179 
Prayer, 163 
Precession 
of Mercury, 179 
of the equinoxes, 92,192 
Preconceived 
belief, 6 
hypotheses, 44 
notions, 188 
Preconceptions, 57,175 
Predicting, 215 
Prediction(s),9,91,219 
Prediction error, 215, 216 
Predictive probability distributions, 215-218 
Preformation, 73,191 
Primary properties, 63 
Primordia, 74 
Princeton, 180 
Principia, 83, 84, 90, 91, 92,191,197 
Principle of Equivalence of Gravitation and 
Inertia, 185 
Prior 
and posterior belief, 203-206 
belief(s), 2,26, 68,77, 79-80, 91, 93,117,118, 
126,161,162,189,194, 200, 204,205 
distribution, x 
probability, 207, 208, 210 
theory, 30 
Prisms, 88 
Probabilistic law, 181 
Probability(ies), 13,28,78,201-203 
as personal beliefs, 213 
comparisons of scientific theories, 213-215 
distribution, 218 
for a Disease (table), 209 
formulation of predictive distribution, 
216-218 
history of, 201-202 
laws, 201 
of future observations, 216 
theory, 206 
Propagated 
of light, 188 
of sound,92 
Protestantism, 63 
Proxy observations, 58 
Prussian Academy of Sciences, 179,180 
Pseudoscientific fads, 160 
Psychiatry, 157, 229 
Psychoactive drugs, 160 
Psychoanalysis, 9,156-165,195 
Psychodynamical procedures, 158 
Psychologist, 37,156 
Psychopharmaceutical therapy, 158 
Psychotic tendencies, 81 
Ptolemaic system, 63,65 
Ptolemaics, 68 
Public health, 229 
Public lectures, 122 
Pulmonary 
artery, 75, 77 
circulation, 75 
vein, 75 
Pulsation model, 191 
Pythagorean theory, 68, 87 
Quadratic loss function, 7 
Qualitative 
experiment, 12 
research, 56 
Quality control, 6 
Quanta of light, 181,182 

262 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Quantification, 96 
Quantitative experiment, 12 
Quark, 34 
Quito, 73,117 
Rabies, 145,148,151-152,194 
Radiation, 166-176,195 
hazards, 170 
increase in, 175 
Radioactive 
decay, 173,175,195 
emissions, 173 
gas, 173 
Radioactivity, 166-176,195 
and health, 170 
as an atomic property, 176 
buildup of, 175 
loss of, 173 
Radiology, 229 
Radium, 9,166,168,172,174,175,176,195, 
197 
as an element, 174 
chloride, 169 
Institute, 170 
Random 
error, 25 
events, 201 
mechanism, 206 
motion, 181 
Randomization, 14 
Randomly drawing, 203 
Rashomon, 205 
Rate-of-defectives example, 4-8,205 
Rational, 69 
Rationalism, 69 
Realist, 51 
Reason overriding evidence of the senses, 68 
Reasoning, 68 
Recant, 64 
Recessive, 27,28,29 
Recoil, 185 
Red calx of mercury, 101 
Reduction, 101 
References 
by field of application of Bayesian 
statistical science, 225-230 
to Bayesian methodolgy, 219-223 
to Bayesian methods, 225-226 
Reflecting telescope, 89 
Refraction, 83 
Regional geography, 112 
ReignofTerror,97,98 
Relativity 
general theory of, 181,185-186 
special theory of, 181,183-184 
theory of, 177-189 
Reliability, 226 
Religion, 46,125,163 
and science, 123 
vs. science, 62-63,75,83,190-191,194 
Replication, 93 
Repressed memories, 161 
Repression, 157,160,161,195 
Reproductive system, 74 
Repulsions, 87 
Research methodology, 189 
Respiration, 102,104 
Revolutionary Tribunal, 99 
Rhine expedition, 110 
Rio Apure, 112 
Rio Negro, 112 
Rockefeller University, 161 
Rome, 119 
Root-mean-squared-error, 216 
Royal Academy (Paris), 96 
Royal Academy of Sciences (Paris), 98 
Royal Academy, 96,122 
Royal Agricultural Society of Paris, 97 
Royal Gunpowder Administration, 97 
Royal Institution, 122,123,168 
Royal Observatory, 85 
Royal road to the unconscious, 161 
Royal Society, 83, 85, 90,122,126 
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 170 
Royal Society of London, 83 
Russia, 113 
Rusting, 101 
St. Bartholomew, Hospital of, 72 
Salts of uranium, 170 
Salvation, 163 
Samoa, 43^7,196 
Sample(s), 162 
estimate, 6 
size, 8 
surveys, 219 
Sampling, 46 
Sandemanianism, 121,122-123,125,193 
Saturn, rings of, 60,62, 65 
Scandal, 169 
School of Physics and Chemistry of the City 
of Paris, 168 
Science 
history of, 8 
vs. religion, 62-63, 75,190-191 
Science Digest, 21, 244 
Scientific 
method, 3, 63, 64, 65, 78, 82,116 

SUBJECT INDEX 
263 
methodology, 8 
revolution, 82,114 
traveler, 115 
Scientific contributions of 
Aristotle, 51-56 
Curie, 170-174 
Darwin, 130-133 
Einstein, 181-185 
Faraday, 123-124 
Freud,157-158 
Galileo, 65-66 
Harvey, 73-77 
Lavoisier, 99-104 
Newton, 86-91 
Pasteur, 145-148 
von Humbold, 114-115 
Scripture, 63 
Sealed vessels, 107 
Second opinion, example, 209-210 
Sedimentary 
action, 117 
rocks, 117 
Seeing what the theory prescribes, 196 
Seismographic measurements, 73 
Selecting data, 35 
Selecting the scientists, 17-22 
Selective perception, 44 
Self-
analysis, 160,162 
fertilization, 28,29 
pollination, 27 
Sense of destiny, 162 
Sensory mechanisms, 2 
Septum, 74,76 
Sequential experimentation, 32 
Serbian struggle for independence, 179 
Serendipity, 10 
Sevres, 168 
Sex 
importance of in psychic life, 161 
relations as salvation, 163 
Sexual 
behavior, 43 
conflict, 158 
experimentation, 43 
repression, 195 
suspicion, 160 
symbolism, 163 
urge, 161 
Sexualization of the psyche, 161 
Sheep cloning, 40-41 
Sidereus Nuncius, 62 
Signal processing, 226 
Significance testing, 214, 
Silla, 112 
Simplicio, 64 
Simplicity, 123 
of creation, 125 
Sleep, 161 
Small samples, 93 
Smallpox, 147 
Sociability, 87 
Sociable/unsociable substances, 87 
Social class, 40 
Socially constructed, 44 
Society for the Encouragement of National 
Industry, 167 
Socrates, 52,53 
Solid, 103 
Solubility, 96 
Sorbonne, 167,168,169,181 
Sound 
propogation of, 191 
speed of, 183 
South America, 112 
South Bay Electronics Company, 5 
Spatially oscillatory electromagnetic field, 187 
Special theory of relativity, 183-184,187,196 
Specific inductive capacity, 124 
Spectroscopy, 172 
Spectrum, 88 
Speculation(s), 57,69,105 
Speculative concepts, 69,187 
Speed 
of falling, 190 
of light, 184,196 
of sound, 9, 92,192 
relative, 183 
Spherical earth, 54 
Spontaneous generation, 73,74,152,194 
Standard of scientific merit, 214 
State of Israel, 181 
States of matter, 103,123 
Static electricity, 87 
Statistical 
analysis, 162,214 
inference, 5,203,216 
mechanics, 181 
science, 29,214 
significance, 204 
Statisticians, 214 
Statistics, history of, 203 
Sterilization, 194 
Stories of Famous Scientists, 49-189 
Strawman hypothesis, 214 
Street lighting, 96 
Stress, 43 
Stubbornness, 197 

264 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Studies in Hysteria, 157 
Sturm und drang, 43 
Subatomic 
chemical change, 174 
particles, 173,174 
Subconscious, 195 
Subelectrons, 34 
Subjective 
approaches, 218 
belief(s),31,39,92 
convictions, 187 
interpretation.", 162 
judgment, 5,7 
knowledge, 204 
probability(ies), 2,191,203,204,213 
definition of, 202 
reality, 2 
Subjective and objective probability, 4 
Subjectivity, 2, 3,15, 32, 34,46, 74, 93,174, V 
197 
and objectivity, 2-3 
dangers of, 175 
modern, 199-230 
Subjectivity in the work of 
Aristotle, 56-58 
Curie, 174-176 
Darwin, 134-141 
Einstein, 186-188 
Faraday, 125-126 
Freud,159-165 
Galileo, 66-69 
Harvey, 78-80 
Lavoisier, 104-108 
Newton, 91-94 
Pasteur, 149-154 
von Humboldt, 116-120 
Subnuclear particle, 15 
Subpopulation, 209 
Subterranean plants, 111 
Success, 210,216,217 
Sugar, 108 
Sulphates, 103 
Sulphur, 101,103 
Sulphuric acid, 103 
Sun, 185 
gravitational field of, 185 
Sunspots, 62, 65, 115 
Superintendent of Mines in the Franconian 
Principalities, 111 
Superiority 
of humans, 57 
of right over left, 57 
Surface tension, 87 
Survey measurements, 115 
Switzerland, 178 
Symmetry, 15 
of universe, 123 
Symptoms, 210 
Systemic circulation, 75 
Tangent, 88 
Target tracking, 226 
Tax collection, 96 
Taxonomy, 54,116 
Teide, 111 
Teleology, 57 
Telepathy, 162 
Telescope, 60,62 
reflecting, 83 
Television, 182 
Temporary radioactivity, 173 
Tenacity, 176 
Terminal flowers, 28 
Terrestrial 
magnetism, 119 
phenomena, 65 
Terror, 98 
Testability of hypotheses, 4 
Tetrachloroethene, 123 
Thales of Miletos, 8 
The Assay er, 63 
The Fabric of the Human Body, 75 
The Great Scientists, 21 
The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement, 
162 
The Inertia of Mind, 126 
The Interpretation of Dreams, 158 
The Principia, 23 
The Solution of Dreams, 163 
The Starry Messenger, 62 
Theology, 75, 84, 86 
Theorems, 90 
Theoretical 
conclusions, 106 
constructs, 187 
percentages, 29 
physicist, 195 
synthesis, 104,192 
Theoretician, 6, 186 
Theorizing, 5,10, 25, 66,106,108,118, 126, 
162,182,203 
Theory(ies), 187, 191 
influence of, 58 
of colors, 83 
of elements, 105 
of evolution, 6,193 
of matter, 175 
of motion, 61 

SUBJECT INDEX 
265 
of personality, 158 
of relativity, 9,181 
of subjective probability, 214 
precedes fact, 67 
vs. evidence, 188 
role of, 67 
Theory of Sexuality, 158 
Thermodynamics, 181 
Thermoelectricity, 124 
Thorium, 168,171,172,173,175 
emanation, 173 
Thorium X, 173 
Thorndike award, 38 
Thought, 67 
experiments, 11,61,67,186 
processes, 188 
Tides, 91 
Time series analysis, 219 
Time-squared relationship, 68 
Tin, 101,107 
Too good to be true, 29 
Topographies, 118 
Tourniquet, 77 
Traite Elementaire de Chimie, 98,103,105 
Transformation 
of elements, 173,176 
theory, 175 
Transformer, 124 
Transmutation of elements, 173,175,176, 
195 
Travel, 116 
Treatment of mental illnesses, 158 
Trial of Galileo, 64 
Triangulation, 25 
Trinity College, Cambridge, 82 
Twin 
paradox, 187 
research, 37-43 
Ukraine, 163 
Unconscious, 158,161 
bias, 31 
Unified field theory, 180,181 
Uniform acceleration, 65 
Unity, 80,116,119 
in nature, 119,120,193 
of forces, 124,126,180,193 
Universal 
constant, 184 
gravitation, 91,92 
University 
of Berlin, 179 
of Bern, 179 
of Fribourg, 167 
of Warsaw, 166 
of Zurich, 178 
Unknown outcome, 206 
Unquantifiable, 162 
Updating, x, 204,207,215 
Urals, 113 
Uranic rays, 168,170 
Uranium, 168,171,172,180 
Uranium X, 173 
Uranyl nitrate, 173 
Urn model, 203,213 
Vacuum, 67,100 
tube, 172 
Validation, 162 
Vallombrosa, 60 
Valves, 75, 76, 77, 78 
in blood vessels, 55 
of the veins, 71 
Veins, 75,191 
functions of, 71-80 
Velocity, 88 
of light, 183,184 
Vena cava, 76 
Venal artery, see Pulmonary vein 
Venice, 61 
Venous 
blood, 77 
system, 76 
Ventricle(s), 74, 75, 76 
Venus, phases of, 62 
Verdigris, 101 
Vesuvius, 113 
Videos, 182 
Vienna, 156 
General Hospital, 157 
Vital spirits, 75 
Vitriol of Venus, 103 
Vitriolic acid, 103 
Volcanism, 114 
Volcanoes, 117 
Voltage, 182,210 
Voltaic electricity, 124 
von Humboldt, Alexander, 110-120,193 
biography, 110-114 
major works, 115-116 
scientific contributions, 114-115 
subjectivity, 116-120 
Wager, 202 
Wall around Paris, 98 
Warden of the mint, 85 
Warsaw, 166,170 
Washington, DC, 113 

266 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Water, 96,102,103,105 
evaporation experiment, 97 
vapor, 95,107,191 
Wave 
motion, 89 
theory of light, 89,182,192 
Wavelength, 185 
Wavelets, 219 
Weight, 106,107,108 
of air, 107 
of evidence, 213 
loss of in radioactive decay, 176 
Weighted average, 35,217 
Weighting, 5,7 
data, 14,35,45 
Wernerian theory, 117 
White light, 88 
Widow, 169 
Wish fulfillment, 163 
Wobbling of the earth's axis, 92 
Word play, 163 
Worker bees, 57 
World War 
1,179 
II, 180 
Wounded soldiers, 169 
X-ray(s), 170 
apparatus, portable, 169 
diffraction by crystals, 36 
Zionism, 180,186 
Zohar, 163 
Zoological Researches, 55 
Zoology, 114,80 
Zurich, 178 

Name Index 
Aarons, L., 229 
Abraham, Hilda C, 164,231 
Adak, S., 228 
Adler, Alfred, 164,232 
Agassi, Joseph, 126,231 
Aguilar, O., 229 
Alberie, Eugenio, 66 
Albert, James H., 219,231 
Alexander the Great, 52 
Alexander, F., 157,164,231 
Allenby, Greg M, 227 
Almoli, Solomon, 163 
Altman, Lawrence K., 231 
Ammanati, Guiulia, 60 
Ampere, Andre, 123 
Amyntas III, 52 
Andreas-Salome, Lou, 164,231 
Andrews, Richard W., 226 
Antleman, Gordon, 219,231 
Apelles, 62,63 
Archimedes, 88 
Aristarchus, 68 
Aristotle, 51-59,65,74,79,97,116,190,196, 
231 
Asimov, Isaac, 21,59,97, 
Avé-Lallemant, Robert, 120,233 
Baal Shem Tov, 163 
Bacon, Francis, 8,10,30,67,196 
Badoux, R„ 226, 230,244 
Bakan, David, 163,164,231 
Barberini, Maffeo, see Pope Urban VIII 
Bargmann, Sonja, 69,235 
Barlow, Carl A., 230 
Barnard, Sarah, 122 
Barnes, Johnathan, 54,55,56,59,231 
Barnett, Lincoln, 183,184,189,231 
Barrett, Paul H., 238 
Bartley,W.W.IH,243 
Basu, D, 215,220,231 
Bauer, Henry H., 232 
Bayes, Thomas, 199,203,220,232 
Beadle, G., 33,232 
Beccaria, Father, 101 
Becquerel, Antoine Henri, 168,170,172,173 
Belin, Thomas R., 229 
Bell, E.T., 94, 232 
Bell, Robert Ivan, 232 
Bellarmine, Cardinal Robert, 63 
Bémont, Gustave, 171,172 
ben Eliezer, Israel, 163 
Ben Gurion, David, 188 
Ben-Yehuda, Nachum, 232 
Berger, James O., 204,219,220,226,232 
Berliner, L. M., 227 
Berman, Morris, 126,232 
Bernardini, Gilberto, 70,236 
Bernardo, Jose M, 219,220,229,232 
Bernays, Minna, 160 
Bernoulli, James, 204,220,232 
Berry, Donald A., 204,219,220,228,232 
Berthollet, Claude, 98,103 
Bhat, Chandra R., 227 
Biagioli, Mario, 69,232 
Black, Joseph, 100 
Blackwell, David, 220,232 
Blattenberger, Gail, 229 
Boas, Franz, 44,46 
Bolton, Sarah Knowles, 21,232 
Bonaparte, Marie, 164,232 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

268 
NAME INDEX 
Bonpland, Aimé, 111, 112 
Born, Max, 188,189,232 
Botting, Douglas, 112,119,120, 232 
Bottome, Phyllis, 164,232 
Bourdieu, Pierre, 232 
Bower, Bruce, 232 
Bowsher, James, 229 
Box, George E. P., 220,232 
Boyle, Robert, 78,86,100,101 
Brabyn, Mark W., 226 
Brahe,Tycho,24,25 
Braithwaite, R. B., 223,243 
Breuer, Josef, 157,163 
Broad, William J., 25,26,36,232,232,233 
Broemeling, Lyle D., 219, 220,233 
Brome, Vincent, 164, 233 
Brooke, John Hedley, 233 
Brown, Emery N., 229 
Brown, Robert, 181 
Browne, Elizabeth, 72 
Browne, Lancelot, 72 
Brücke, Ernst, 156 
Bruhns, Karl, 117,118,119,120,233 
Buck, Caitlin E., 220,225,229,233 
Burt, Cyril, 21, 24 32, 37-43, 44,197, 233 
Calaprice, Alice, 189,233 
Campbell, K. H. S., 43, 246 
Cantor, Geoffery N., 123,126, 233 
Cao, Guoliang, 228 
Carlin, Bradley P., 219, 220, 221,226,227,: 
233,237 
Carlin, John B., 221, 237 
Carlos, Edward Stafford, 66 
Carriquiry, A. 221, 226,237 
Casti, John, 88, 94, 233 
Caton, Hiram, 45,47, 233 
Cavanagh, William G., 220, 226, 229, 233 
Cavendish, Henry, 102,103,106 
Cesi, Prince Frederico, 62 
Chalmers, Alan, 233 
Chaloner, Kathryn M., 229 
Charcot, Jean Martin, 157 
Charles I., 72 
Christianson, Gale E., 93, 94, 233 
Churchill, Gary A., 212,227 
Clark, L. A., 227 
Clark, L. C, 228 
Clark, Ronald W, 187,188,189, 233 
Clegg, Michael, 42,233 
Cleveland, W. S., 227 
Cline, Barbara Lovett, 232, 233 
Clyde, Merlise, 228 
Cohen, R. S., 238 
Collins, Harry M., 233,236 
Colombo, Matteo Realdo, 76 
Conant, James Bryant, 107,108,233 
Conduitt, Catherine Barton, 86 
Cook, Captain James, 111 
Copernicus, Nicholas, 24,58,82,190 
Coreos, A., 32, 33, 242 
Correns, Carl G., 29,33, 234 
Corwin, Thomas L., 230 
Costigan, Giovanni, 164, 234 
Cotes, Roger, 93 
Count Rumford, 106 
Craig, Bruce A., 228 
Craig, Peter S, 227 
Crawford, Sybil L., 228 
Crick, Francis H. C, 212,223, 246 
Crohin, Kathleen A., 228 
Crookes, Sir William, 173 
Crowther,J.G,21,176,234 
Curie, Eve, 169,174,176, 234 
Curie, Irene, 168,169 
Curie, Jacques, 167,171, 
Curie, Marie, 9,166-176,195 
Curie, Pierre, 167-176,195 
da Vinci, Leonardo, 75,76 
Dagognet, Francois, 234 
Dale, Andrew I., 219, 220, 234 
Dale, Henry, 78, 79 
Darbishire, A. D, 33,234 
Darwin, Charles, 9, 21, 27,115,128-142,164, 
193-194 
Darwin, Francis, 234 
Daston, Lorraine J., 234 
Davis, Kenneth S., 106,107, 108, 234 
Davis, Lydia, 176,237 
Davy, Humphry, 122 
Dawes, Robyn, 160,164, 234 
De Beer, Gavin, 33, 234 
de Finetti, Bruno, 204,220,234 
de Fourcroy, Antione, 98,103 
de Morveau, Guyton, 98,103 
de Terra, Helmut, 114,120, 234 
de Vries, Hugo, 29,33,234 
Debajyoti, Sinha, 234 
Debierne» Andre, 169,173 
DeGroot, Morris H., 220,234 
DeKruif, Paul, 234 
Demoment, G, 230 
Demosthenes, 52 
Denby, L., 227 
Descartes, Rene, 69, 82 
Devine, O., 227 
Devlin, Bernie, 38, 42, 234 

NAME INDEX 
Dey, Dipak, 219,220,234 
Dolin, Arnold, 21, 235 
Donahue, William H., 25,26,235 
Donovan, Arthur, 101,104,105,108, 235 
Dorfman, D. D., 40,42,235 
Dorfman, Jeffrey H., 225, 229,235 
Dove, Alfred, 120,233 
Drabkin, I. E., 66 
Drake, Stillman, 66,69,235 
Dreger, R. M., 38,42,235 
Dubos, Rene, 153,154,235 
Duclaux, Emile, 235 
Dukas, Helen, 189,239 
Dunn, L.C, 31,33,235 
Dupin, Andre, 99 
Duveen, Denis L, 104 
Eddy, William, 222,242 
Edwards, A. W F., 235 
Ehrenberg, Christian, 113 
Ehrenhaft, Felix, 34 
Einstein, Albert, 9,34,67,69,81,87,126,162, 
176,177-189,192,195-196,200,235 
Einstein, Eduard, 179 
Einstein, Elsa, 179,180 
Einstein, Hans Albert, 179 
Einstein, Mileva, 178,179 
Elashoff, Robert M., 229 
Erickson, Gary J., 230,230 
Erkanli, Alaattin, 229 
Etzioni, Ruth, 226 
Euclid, 90 
Eysenck, Hans, 162,164, 235 
Fáamu, Fáapuáa, 45, 46 
Fabricius of Aqadendente, Hieronymus, 71, 
76,78 
Fabrizi, Girolamo, 71 
Faraday, Michael, 121-127,185,193,197,235, 
236 
Farley, John, 236 
Fatio de Duillier, Nicholas, 84 
Fausto-Sterling, Anne, 241 
Fauvel, John, 94,236 
Fermi, Laura, 70, 236 
Fienberg, Stephen E., 42, 234 
Fisher, R. A., 29, 31, 33, 204, 214, 220, 236 
Fitzgerald, William J., 226,230,242 
Flamsteed, John, 85 
Fletcher, R., 40,42,236 
Fliess, Wilhelm, 164,236 
Flood, Raymond, 94,236 
Florens, Jean-Pierre, 219,220,236 
Flournoy, Nancy, 228 
269 
Fowles, Richard, 229 
Frank, Philipp, 189,236 
Franklin, Benjamin, 105 
Franklin, Kenneth J., 80,236 
Frederick William III, 113 
Freeman, Derek, 43, 47, 236 
Freud, Anna, 164,232 
Freud, Ernst L., 164,231,236 
Freud, Jakob, 163 
Freud, Sigmund, 9,156-165,186,195, 236 
Fromm, Erich, 164, 236 
Galen, 19,73,74, 75,80 
Galilei, Galileo, 55,58,60-70, 79,82, 90,91, 
116,164,186,190,194,196 
Galilei, Vincenzo, 60 
Galison, Peter, 234 
Galton, Francis, 38,42,237 
Gamba, Marina, 62 
Gamerman, Dani, 219, 220,237 
Gardner, M., 237 
Gatsonis, C, 212, 221, 226, 237 
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 88,113 
Gay-Lussac, Louis, 113 
Geiger, Hans, 36 
Geison, Gerald A., 150-153,154, 236, 237, 
243 
Geisser, Seymour, 219, 221, 237 
Gelfand,A. E.,225,229 
Gelman, Andrew, 219,221, 226,237 
Geman, D., 225, 230, 237 
Geman, S., 225, 230, 237 
Genovese, C. R., 228 
Gerth, H. H., 246 
Gholson, Barry, 237 
Ghosh, Malay, 219,222,241 
Gibson, Charles, 21,237 
Gilks,WR.,219,221,237 
Gillie, Oliver, 39,42,237 
Gillispie, Charles Coulston, 94, 221, 237 
Giroud, Fran9oise, 176, 237 
Glanz, James, 14,16, 237 
Glass, B., 31, 33, 238 
Glickman, Mark E., 228 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 111, 118, 
119 
Goldstein, Michael, 227 
Golinski, Jan, 238 
Good, I. J., 213, 221, 238 
Gooding, David, 126,127, 233, 238, 244 
Gooding, Paul, 94 
Gotthelf, Allan, 59, 241 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 38,42,238 
Grant, Alexander, 54, 55, 59, 238 

270 
NAME INDEX 
Grassi, Horatio, 63 
Gray, Paul, 160,161,164,238 
Greene, Stuart, 227 
Grollman, Earl A., 163,165,238 
Gruber, Howard E., 238 
Grunbaum, Adolf, 160,165,238 
Guerlac, Henry, 100,106,108,108,238 
Guettard, Jean-Etienne, 96 
Guiducci, Mario, 63 
Hacking, Ian, 4,16,238 
Hadamard, Jacques, 221,238 
Halley, Edmond, 85,89 
Hamilton, John, 21,239 
Hanson, Kenneth M., 230 
Harden, Arthur, 108 
Harding, Sandra, 241 
Harding, Warren, 170 
Harrison, Jeff, 212,, 223, 246 
Hartigan,J.A.,219,221,239 
Harvey, Eliab, 73 
Harvey, William, 10,55,58,71-80,191,196 
Hearnshaw, L. S., 38,42,239 
Hedges, E, 235 
Henry, Thomas, 104 
Hermes Trismegistus, 86 
Herrnstein, Richard J., 38,42,239 
Hetherington, N. S., 239 
Higgins, A. C, 239 
Hippocrates, 52 
Hitler, Adolph, 180 
Hodges, James S., 212,221,226,227,237 
Hoffman, Banesh, 189,239 
Holmes, Frederic Lawrence, 104,108,239 
Holton, Gerald, 34,36,37,189,239 
Hooke, Robert, 83,84,89,90 
Houts, Arthur C, 237 
Howson, Colin, 204,214, 219,221,239 
Hsu, John S.J., 219, 222,240 
Hubbard,Ruth,41,42,239 
Hulbert, Mark, 225,230,239 
Humboldt, Alexander von, 9,110-120,193 
Hutton, James, 117 
Huxley, Julian, 239 
Huygens, Christiaan, 89,192 
Ickstadt, Katja, 227 
Infeld, Leopold, 186 
Israel ben Eliezer, 163 
Iversen, E. S. Jr., 228 
Jackson, Andrew, 202 
Jacobson, Lenore, 14,16,244 
Jaffe,Aniela,165,239 
James, Frank A. J. L., 126,127,233,238 
Jastrow, Joseph, 161,165,239 
Jaszczak, Ronald, 229 
Jaynes, E. T., 221,226, 230, 239 
Jefferson, Thomas, 113 
Jeffreys, Harold, 4,204,214,221,239 
Jensen, Arthur, R., 38,42,239 
Johnson, George, 41,42,239 
Johnson, Valen, 229 
Johnson, William G, 228 
Joliot Curie, Irene, 174 
Jones, Bence, 122,126,127,239 
Jones, Ernest, 162,165,240 
Joynson, Robert B., 38,39,40,42,240 
Jung, Carl, 160,161 
Kadane, Joseph B., 219, 221, 226, 240 
Kalyanam, Kirthi, 227 
Kamin, Leon, J., 39,42, 240 
Kamlet, Mark S., 228 
Kant, Immanuel, 8,16 
Kass,R.E.,212,221,226,237 
Kaufman, Gordon, x 
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 240,241 
Kelvin, William Thompson, Lord, 170 
Kepler, Johannes, 21,23-26,32,45,61,69,82, 
89,90,190,197 
Kerr, John, 160,240 
Kerr, Robert, 104 
Keynes, Geoffrey, 78,80,240 
Keynes, John Maynard, 221, 240 
Kimmel, John, x 
Kind, A. J., 43,246 
King James II, 84 
Klencke, H., 120,240 
Klickstein, Herbert S., 104 
Kline, Paul, 162,165,240 
Koestler, Arthur, 240 
Kohn, Alexander, 240 
Kolata, Gina, 37,43,245 
Kovalski, M., 167 
Koyre, Alexander A., 67, 70,240 
Kris, Ernst, 164,232 
Kuhn, Thomas S., 11,16,204,221 
Kyburg, Henry E., 223,243 
Lad, Frank, x, 219,221, 226, 230,240 
Laird, Nan M., 228 
Lakatos,I.,214,221,240 
Langevin, Paul, 169 
Laplace, Pierre Simon de, 204,240 
Lassell, Caroline, 120 
Lasseil, Jane, 120 
Laudan, L., 238 

NAME INDEX 
271 
Lavoisier, Antoine, 87,95-109,192-193,197 
Le Cam, Lucían M., 222,242 
Lee, Jae Kyun, 227 
Lee, Peter M., 219,222,240 
Leibnitz Gottfried Wilhelm, 85,88,93 
Lenard, Philipp Eduard Anton, 21,240 
Lennox, James, 59,241 
Leonard, Thomas, 219,222,240 
Leung, Kwan-Moon, 229 
Lindley, Dennis V, 204,219,222,240 
Litton, Clifford, 220,225,229,233 
Liu, C, 227 
Lloyd, G. E. R., 58,59,241 
Locke, John, 84 
Loir, Adrien, 241 
Longino, Helen E., 241 
Loomis, Louise Ropes, 58,231 
Lorentz, H. A., 186 
Louis, Thomas A., 219,220,229,233 
Lowenberg, Julius, 118,120,233 
Lyell, Charles, 117 
MacDonald, D. K. C, 127,241 
Mach, Ernst, 67,70,241 
Machi, Antonio, 234 
Mackintosh, N. J., 40,42,241 
Madansky, Albert, 219,231 
Mahoney, Michael J., 241 
Malakoff, David, 200,222,241 
Malee, Donald, 229 
Malpighi, Marcello, 79 
Mangelsdorf, 29,32 
Marat, Jean Paul, 98 
Marcus, Steven, 165,245 
Marie, Mileva, 178,179 
Mastlin, Michael, 24 
Matthews, Jon, 222,241 
Matthews, Robert A. J., 204,222,241 
Maxwell, James C, 124,185,241 
Mazzoni, Jacopo, 61 
McCuUoch, P., 226 
McCuUoch, Robert E., 219,221,227,231,237 
McKenzie, A. E. E., 99,109,241 
McKie, Douglas, 109,241 
McKinlay, John B., 228 
McWhir,J.,43,246 
Mead, Margaret, 21,43-47,196,241 
Meadows, Jack, 21,25,49,114,189,241 
Medawar, Peter B., 241 
Medici, Cosimo di II, 62 
Meeden,G.,219,222,241 
Mendel, Gregor, 9,14,21,26-33,194,197,241 
Mendeleev, Dmitri 173 
Metchnikoff, Elie, 241 
Meyer, A., 247 
Meynert, Theodor, 157 
Michelmore, Peter, 189,241 
Michelson, Albert, 183,187 
Millar, David, 242 
Miller, Arthur I., 67,70,242 
Miller, Johnathan, 242 
Miller, Mabel, 127,242 
Milliff,R.,227 
Millikan, Robert, 7,14,21,34-37,45,197,204, 
242 
Mills, C Wright, 246 
Minkowski, A., 186 
Mockus, Audris, 222,242 
Mockus, Jonas, 219,222,242 
Mockus, Linas, 222,242 
Mohammad-Djafari. A., 230 
Monaghan, E, 32,33,242 
Montgomery, Alan L., 227 
Moore, Henry, 86 
Morley, Edward, 183 
Mosbacher, Eric, 232 
Moses de Leon, 163 
Mosteller, Frederick, 222,242 
Motte, Andrew, 91 
Mouchart, Michel, 236 
Mulholland,J.,227 
Mulkay, Michael J., 242 
Müller, Peter, 219,220,222,227,228,234, 
242 
Murray, Charles, 38,42,239 
Musgrave, A., 240 
Nägeii, Can von, 29 
Nandram, Balgobin, 226,227 
Neal, Radford M., 219,222,242 
Neimeyer, Robert A., 237 
Nelken, Haiina, 119,120,242 
Nelkin, Dorothy, ix, x, 242 
Newton, Isaac, 9,23,32,55,58,65 81-94,115, 
162,185,190,191-192,196,197 
Newton, Michael A., 228 
Neyman, Jerzy, 214,222,242 
Nicolle, Jacques, 242 
Nigel, Gilbert G, 242 
Nisenbaum, Rosane, 229 
Nobile, Agostino, 227 
Normand, Sharon-Lise, 228 
Oersted, Hans, 123 
Ogle, W, 242 
O'Hagen, Anthony, 219,222,226,242 
Olby, Robert C, 243 
Orans, Martin, 45,47,243 

272 
NAME INDEX 
Orel, V., 33,243 
O'Ruanaidh, Joseph J. K., 226,230,242 
Paddock, S., 228 
Pagel, Walter, 74,78,79, 80,243 
Palmer, J. L., 228 
Parmagiani, Giovanni., 228 
Pas, Eric I., 227 
Pasteur, Louis, 73,87,108,143-155,162, 
194-195,197 
Paulze, Jacques, 97 
Paulze, Marie Anne Pierrette, 97 
Pavaro, Antonio, 66 
Pearson, Egon, 214, 222,242 
Pearson, Karl, 38 
Pepys, Samuel, 85 
Perutz, M. E, 243 
Peters, Heinz E., 165,243 
Pflaum, Rosalynd, 49, 243 
Philip of Macedonia, 52 
Picard, John, 90 
Pinch, Trevor, 94,233,244 
Planck, Max, 36, 89,182,192 
Plato, 52,69,82 
Polanyi, Michael, 222,243 
Pollard, William E., 225,230,243 
Pope Urban VIII, 64 
Popper, Karl, 196, 214,223,243 
Posin,DanQ.,21,243 
Prebys, Eric, 14,16,243 
Press, S. James, 215, 219, 223, 243 
Priestley, Joseph, 100,101,102,103,106 
Ptolemy of Alexandria, 24,61 
Ptolomy, Claudius, 190 
Puner, Helen W, 165,243 
Puner, Helen W, 243 
Pythagoras, 54 
Queen Anne, 85 
Quinn, Susan, 173,174,176,243 
Racine-Poon, A., 229 
Raftery, Adrian E., 226 
Raiffa, Howard, 219,223,243 
Ramsey, Frank Plimpton, 223,243 
Reckhow, Kenneth H., 226 
Redondi, Pietro, 70, 243 
Regener, E., 36 
Regis, Edward, 189,243 
Reik, Theodor, 165,243 
Reklaitis, G. V., 222,242 
Rensberger, Boyce, 45,46,47,244 
Resnick, Daniel P., 42,234 
Reston, James, Jr., 70,244 
Rey, Jean, 101 
Rhame, Frank S., 229 
Ricci, Ostilio, 60 
Richards, Arnold, 160 
Richardson, S., 219,221,237 
Riebau, George, 122 
Riolanus, John, 79 
Robert, Marthe, 165, 244 
Roberts, Royston M., 10,16,223,244 
Robinson, P. J., 228 
Roeder, Kathryn, 42,234 
Roin, Jean-Marie, 236 
Röntgen, Wilhelm, 170,172 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 180 
Rose, Gustav, 113 
Rosenkrantz, R. D., 221,230,239 
Rosenthal, Raymond, 70 
Rosenthal, Robert, 14,16,244 
Ross, Andrew, 244 
Rossi, P., 226,227,237 
Rostand, J., 244 
Rouelle, Guillaume Frangois, 96,104 
Roux, Ernie, 244 
Royle, J. A., 227 
Rubin, Donald B., 42, 43, 221, 237, 244 
Russell, B., 59,244 
Rutherford, Ernest, 36,173,174,175, 
188 
Ryan, Dennis P., 187,189,244 
Ryan, Thomas J., 228 
Rychert, Joshua T, 230 
Sabine, Edward, 113 
Sachs, Hanns, 165,244 
St. John, James, 104 
Salusbury, Thomas, 66 
Sander, P., 226, 230, 244 
Sanso, B., 227 
Sapirstein, Adam, 229 
Sarkar, A., 228 
Savage, L. J., 204,213, 223,244 
Schaffer, Simon, 93, 94,244 
Scheele, K. W, 100 
Scheffler, Israel, 244 
Schervish, Mark, 240 
Schildkraut, J. M., 228 
Schiller, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von, 
111 
Schilpp, Paul A., 187,189,240,244 
Schlaifer, Robert, 219, 223, 243, 244 
Schmidt, Gerhard Carl, 175 
Schmitt, Samuel A., 219,223, 244 
Schnieke, A. E., 43,246 
Sedransk, J., 226, 229 

NAME INDEX 
Seelig, Carl, 188,189,244 
Seheult, Allan H., 227 
Seidenfeld, Teddy, x, 240,245 
Selesnick, Sheldon, 157,164,231 
Servetus, Michael, 75 
Seward, A. C, 234 
Shadish, William R. Jr., 237 
Shankland, R. S., 188 
Shapere, Dudley, 65,67,68,70,245 
Shapin, Steven, 245 
Sheean, Vincent, 176 
Sherwood, E. R., 33,247 
Short, ThomasH., 227 
Shortlans, Michael, 94, 236 
Shweder, Richard A., 163, 65,245 
Sibisi, Sibusiso, 230 
Silver, Richard N., 230 
Simmons, John, 28,23,245 
Simplicio, 64 
Singer, Charles, 74,77,79, 80,245 
Singpurwalla, N. D., 212,221,226,237 
Skilling, John, 230 
Sklodovska, Bronya, 166,174 
Sklodovska, Marie, 167 
Sklodovska, Marya, 166 
Slate, Elizabeth H., 228 
Small, M. J., 226 
Smith, Adrian E M., 219,220,225,226,229, 
232,234 
Smith, C. Ray, 230,245 
Smith, E. E, 235, 244 
Smith, James A., 227 
Smith, Murray H., 226 
Smith, R. L., 228 
Smokier, Howard E, 223,243 
Socrates, 52,53 
Solmsen, Friedrich, 54,59,245 
Solomon Almoli, 163 
Soyer, Refik, 229 
Spearman, Charles, 38 
Specter, Michael, 37,43,245 
Spiegelhalter, D. X, 219,221,237 
Spielrein, Sabina, 160 
Stachel, John, 186 
Stangl, Dalene, 229 
Stearn, William, 120,245 
Steinberg, Laura J., 226 
Steindletz, E., 163 
Stekel, Wilhelm, 165,245 
Stern, C, 33,247 
Stern, Hal S., 221,237 
Stern, James, 236 
Stern, Tania, 236 
Stevens, Ross L., 227 
273 
Stigler, Stephen M., 40,43,203,223,244,245 
Stone, Lawrence D., 226, 230 
Strachey, James, 232,236 
Sturtevant, A. H., 31, 33,245 
Susac, Andrew, 109,245 
Sweeney, J. A., 228 
Tanner, Martin A., 219, 223, 245 
Tanur, Rachel, x 
Taylor, Bayard, 115 
Tennstedt, Sharon L., 228 
Thales of Miletus, 56 
Thomas, John Meurig, 124,126,127,245 
Thompson, Benjamin, Count Rumford, 106 
Thompson, J. J., 172 
Thompson, William, Lord Kelvin, 170 
Thoth, 86 
Tiao, Geroge C, 220,232 
Tolbert, P., 227 
Tompkins, Linda, 229 
Torrey, E. Fuller, 161-162,162,165,245 
Tricker, R. A. R., 127,245 
Trilling, Lionel, 165,245 
Turkington, Timothy, 229 
Urbach, Peter, 204,214,219,221,239 
Urban VIII, Pope, 63 
Vallentin, Antonina, 189,246 
Vallery-Radot, Rene, 246 
Van der Waerden, B. L., 32, 33, 246 
Van Dusen, Robert, 119,120, 246 
van Loon, Borin, 242 
Veatch, Henry B., 54,59,246 
Verdinelli,I.,221,226,237 
Vesalius, Andreas, 75 
Vidakovic, Brani, 222, 242 
Viertl,R.,219,223,246 
Von Hagen, Victor Wolfgang, 115, 120, 246 
von Humboldt, Alexander, 9,110-120,193 
von Humboldt, Wilhelm, 110 
Von Tschermak, E., 29, 33, 246 
Wade, Nicholas, 36,233 
Wakefield, J., 229 
Walker, R. L., 222,241 
Wallace, David L. 222,242 
Wallace, Henry, 32 
Wasserman, Larry, 227 
Watson, James D., 212,223,246 
Weber, Max, 246 
Weil, Ernst, 185 
Weiling, E, 32, 33,246 
Weismann, August, 29 

274 
NAME INDEX 
Weizmann, Chaim, 180 
Wells, Frank S., 226 
Werner, Abraham Gottlob, 111, 117,118 
West, Mike, 219,221,223,226,228,229,2 
246 
Westfall, Richard, 92,94,246 
Weyl, H., 186 
Whitteridge, Gweneth, 78,80,246 
Wikle, C. K., 227 
Williams, L. Pearce, 123,127,246 
Willis, Robert, 78 
Wilmut, Ian, 37,43,246 
Wilson, Curtis, 25,26,246 
Wilson, Glenn D., 162,164,235 
Wilson, Grove, 21,246 
Wilson, Robin, 94,236 
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim, 119 
Winer, E. P., 228 
Winkler, Robert L., 219,223,246 
Winson, Jonathan, 161 
Wittels, Fritz, 165,246 
Wolfson, L. J., 226 
Wolpert, Lewis, 8,16,223, 246,247 
Wolpert, Robert L., 226, 227 
Wortis, Joseph, 165,247 
Wright, Lawrence, 38,43,247 
Wright, Sewell, 30,33,247 
Wyatt, R. B. Hervey, 55,59,79,80,247 
Xia, H., 227 
Young, S. S., 228 
Young, Thomas, 89 
Zeh, Judith E., 226 
Zellner, Arnold, x, 204,219,223,225,230, 
247 
Zinder, N., 247 

WILEY SERIES IN PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
ESTABLISHED BY WALTER A. SHEWHART AND SAMUEL S. WlLKS 
Editors 
Peter Bloomfield, Noel A. C. Cressie, Nicholas I. Fisher, Iain M. Johnstone, 
J. B. Kadane, Louise M Ryan, David W. Scott, Bernard W. Silverman, 
Adrian F. M. Smith, JozefL. Teugels; Vic Barnett, Emeritus, 
Ralph A. Bradley, Emeritus, J. Stuart Hunter, Emeritus, 
David G. Kendall, Emeritus 
Probability and Statistics 
Section 
♦ANDERSON · The Statistical Analysis of Time Series 
ARNOLD, BALAKRISHNAN, and NAGARAJA · A First Course in Order Statistics 
ARNOLD, BALAKRISHNAN, and NAGARAJA · Records 
BACCELLI, COHEN, OLSDER, and QUADRAT · Synchronization and Linearity: 
An Algebra for Discrete Event Systems 
BARNETT · Comparative Statistical Inference, Third Edition 
BASILEVSKY · Statistical Factor Analysis and Related Methods: Theory and 
Applications 
BERNARDO and SMITH · Bayesian Statistical Concepts and Theory 
BILLINGSLEY · Convergence of Probability Measures, Second Edition 
BOROVKOV · Asymptotic Methods in Queuing Theory 
BOROVKOV · Ergodicity and Stability of Stochastic Processes 
BRANDT, FRANKEN, and LISEK · Stationary Stochastic Models 
CAINES · Linear Stochastic Systems 
CAIROLI and DALANG · Sequential Stochastic Optimization 
CONSTANTINE · Combinatorial Theory and Statistical Design 
COOK * Regression Graphics 
COVER and THOMAS · Elements of Information Theory 
CSÖRGÖ and HORVÁTH · Weighted Approximations in Probability Statistics 
CSÖRGÖ and HORVÁTH · Limit Theorems in Change Point Analysis 
*DANIEL · Fitting Equations to Data: Computer Analysis of Multifactor Data, 
Second Edition 
DETTE and STUDDEN · The Theory of Canonical Moments with Applications in 
Statistics, Probability, and Analysis 
DEY and MUKERJEE · Fractional Factorial Plans 
*DOOB · Stochastic Processes 
DRYDEN and MARDIA · Statistical Shape Analysis 
DUPUIS and ELLIS · A Weak Convergence Approach to the Theory of Large Deviations 
ETHIER and KURTZ ■ Markov Processes: Characterization and Convergence 
FELLER · An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volume I, 
Third Edition, Revised; Volume II, Second Edition 
FULLER * Introduction to Statistical Time Series, Second Edition 
FULLER · Measurement Error Models 
GHOSH, MUKHOPADHYAY, and SEN · Sequential Estimation 
GIFI · Nonlinear Multivariate Analysis 
GUTTORP · Statistical Inference for Branching Processes 
HALL · Introduction to the Theory of Coverage Processes 
HAMPEL · Robust Statistics: The Approach Based on Influence Functions 
H ANN AN and DEISTLER · The Statistical Theory of Linear Systems 
HUBER · Robust Statistics 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 
The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
S. James Press and Judith M. Tanur 
Copyright © 2001 John Wiley and Sons, Inc 

Probability and Statistics (Continued) 
HUSKOVA, BERAN, and DUPAC · Collected Works of Jaroslav Hajek— 
with Commentary 
IMAN and CONOVER · A Modern Approach to Statistics 
JUREK and MASON · Operator-Limit Distributions in Probability Theory 
KASS and VOS · Geometrical Foundations of Asymptotic Inference 
KAUFMAN and ROUSSEEUW ■ Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster 
Analysis 
KELLY · Probability, Statistics, and Optimization 
KENDALL, BARDEN, CARNE, and LE · Shape and Shape Theory 
LINDVALL · Lectures on the Coupling Method 
MANTÓN, WOODBURY, and TOLLEY · Statistical Applications Using Fuzzy Sets 
MORGENTHALER and TUKEY · Configural Polysampling: A Route to Practical 
Robustness 
MUIRHEAD · Aspects of Multivariate Statistical Theory 
OLIVER and SMITH · Influence Diagrams, Belief Nets and Decision Analysis 
*PARZEN · Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications 
PEÑA, TIAO, and TSAY · A Course in Time Series Analysis 
PRESS · Bayesian Statistics: Principles, Models, and Applications 
PUKELSHEIM · Optimal Experimental Design 
RAO · Asymptotic Theory of Statistical Inference 
RAO · Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Second Edition 
RAO and SHANBHAG · Choquet-Deny Type Functional Equations with Applications to 
Stochastic Models 
ROBERTSON, WRIGHT, and DYKSTRA · Order Restricted Statistical Inference 
ROGERS and WILLIAMS · Diffusions, Markov Processes, and Martingales, Volume I: 
Foundations, Second Edition; Volume II: Ito Calculus 
RUBINSTEIN and SHAPIRO · Discrete Event Systems: Sensitivity Analysis and 
Stochastic Optimization by the Score Function Method 
RUZSA and SZEKELY · Algebraic Probability Theory 
SCHEFFE * The Analysis of Variance 
SEBER · Linear Regression Analysis 
SEBER · Multivariate Observations 
SEBER and WILD · Nonlinear Regression 
SERFLING · Approximation Theorems of Mathematical Statistics 
SHORACK and WELLNER · Empirical Processes with Applications to Statistics 
SMALL and McLEISH · Hilbert Space Methods in Probability and Statistical Inference 
STAPLETON · Linear Statistical Models 
STAUDTE and SHEATHER · Robust Estimation and Testing 
STOYANOV · Counterexamples in Probability 
TANAKA · Time Series Analysis: Nonstationary and Noninvertible Distribution Theory 
THOMPSON and SEBER · Adaptive Sampling 
WELSH · Aspects of Statistical Inference 
WHITTAKER · Graphical Models in Applied Multivariate Statistics 
YANG · The Construction Theory of Denumerable Markov Processes 
Applied Probability and Statistics Section 
ABRAHAM and LEDOLTER · Statistical Methods for Forecasting 
AGRESTI · Analysis of Ordinal Categorical Data 
AGRESTI · Categorical Data Analysis 
♦Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Applied Probability and Statistics (Continued) 
ANDERSON, AUQUIER, HAUCK, OAKES, VANDAELE, and WEISBERG · 
Statistical Methods for Comparative Studies 
♦ARTHANARI and DODGE · Mathematical Programming in Statistics 
ASMUSSEN · Applied Probability and Queues 
* BAILEY · The Elements of Stochastic Processes with Applications to the Natural 
Sciences 
BARNETT and LEWIS · Outliers in Statistical Data, Third Edition 
BARTHOLOMEW, FORBES, and McLEAN · Statistical Techniques for Manpower 
Planning, Second Edition 
BASU and RIGDON · Statistical Methods for the Reliability of Repairable Systems 
BATES and WATTS · Nonlinear Regression Analysis and Its Applications 
BECHHOFER, SANTNER, and GOLDSMAN - Design and Analysis of Experiments for 
Statistical Selection, Screening, and Multiple Comparisons 
BELSLEY · Conditioning Diagnostics: Collinearity and Weak Data in Regression 
BELSLEY, KUH, and WELSCH · Regression Diagnostics: Identifying Influential 
Data and Sources of Collinearity 
BHAT · Elements of Applied Stochastic Processes, Second Edition 
BHATTACHARYA and WAYMIRE · Stochastic Processes with Applications 
BIRKES and DODGE · Alternative Methods of Regression 
BLISCHKE AND MURTHY · Reliability: Modeling, Prediction, and Optimization 
BLOOMFIELD · Fourier Analysis of Time Series: An Introduction, Second Edition 
BOLLEN · Structural Equations with Latent Variables 
BOULEAU · Numerical Methods for Stochastic Processes 
BOX · Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis 
BOX and DRAPER · Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces 
*BOX and DRAPER · Evolutionary Operation: A Statistical Method for Process 
Improvement 
BUCKLEW · Large Deviation Techniques in Decision, Simulation, and Estimation 
BUNKE and BUNKE · Nonlinear Regression, Functional Relations and Robust 
Methods: Statistical Methods of Model Building 
CHATTERJEE and HADI · Sensitivity Analysis in Linear Regression 
CHERNICK · Bootstrap Methods: A Practitioner's Guide 
CHILES and DELFINER · Geostatisties: Modeling Spatial Uncertainty 
CLARKE and DISNEY · Probability and Random Processes: A First Course with 
Applications, Second Edition 
♦COCHRAN and COX * Experimental Designs, Second Edition 
CONOVER * Practical Nonparametric Statistics, Second Edition 
CORNELL · Experiments with Mixtures, Designs, Models, and the Analysis of Mixture 
Data, Second Edition 
*COX · Planning of Experiments 
CRESSIE · Statistics for Spatial Data, Revised Edition 
DANIEL · Applications of Statistics to Industrial Experimentation 
DAVID · Order Statistics, Second Edition 
*DEGROOT, FIENBERG, and KADANE · Statistics and the Law 
DODGE · Alternative Methods of Regression 
DOWDY and WEARDEN · Statistics for Research, Second Edition 
GALLANT · Nonlinear Statistical Models 
GLASSERMAN and YAO · Monotone Structure in Discrete-Event Systems 
GNANADESIKAN · Methods for Statistical Data Analysis of Multivariate Observations, 
Second Edition 
GOLDSTEIN and LEWIS · Assessment: Problems, Development, and Statistical Issues 
GREENWOOD and NIKULIN · A Guide to Chi-Squared Testing 
*HAHN · Statistical Models in Engineering 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Applied Probability and Statistics (Continued) 
HAHN and MEEKER · Statistical Intervals: A Guide for Practitioners 
HAND · Construction and Assessment of Classification Rules 
HAND · Discrimination and Classification 
HEIBERGER · Computation for the Analysis of Designed Experiments 
HEDAYAT and SINHA · Design and Inference in Finite Population Sampling 
HINKELMAN and KEMPTHORNE: · Design and Analysis of Experiments, Volume 1: 
Introduction to Experimental Design 
HOAGLIN, MOSTELLER, and TUKEY · Exploratory Approach to Analysis 
of Variance 
HOAGLIN, MOSTELLER, and TUKEY · Exploring Data Tables, Trends and Shapes 
HOAGLIN, MOSTELLER, and TUKEY · Understanding Robust and Exploratory 
Data Analysis 
HOCHBERG and TAMHANE · Multiple Comparison Procedures 
HOCKING · Methods and Applications of Linear Models: Regression and the Analysis 
of Variables 
HOGG and KLUGMAN · Loss Distributions 
HOSMER and LEMESHOW · Applied Logistic Regression, Second Edition 
H0YLAND and RAUSAND · System Reliability Theory: Models and Statistical Methods 
HUBERTY · Applied Discriminant Analysis 
JACKSON * A User's Guide to Principle Components 
JOHN · Statistical Methods in Engineering and Quality Assurance 
JOHNSON · Multivariate Statistical Simulation 
JOHNSON and KOTZ · Distributions in Statistics 
JOHNSON, KOTZ, and BALAKRISHNAN · Continuous Univariate Distributions, 
Volume 1, Second Edition 
JOHNSON, KOTZ, and BALAKRISHNAN · Continuous Univariate Distributions, 
Volume 2, Second Edition 
JOHNSON, KOTZ, and BALAKRISHNAN · Discrete Multivariate Distributions 
JOHNSON, KOTZ, and KEMP · Univariate Discrete Distributions, Second Edition 
JURECKOVÁ and SEN · Robust Statistical Procedures: Aymptotics and Interrelations 
KADANE AND SCHUM · A Probabilistic Analysis of the Sacco and Vanzetti Evidence 
KELLY · Reversability and Stochastic Networks 
KHURI, MATHEW, and SINHA · Statistical Tests for Mixed Linear Models 
KLUGMAN, PANJER, and WILLMOT · Loss Models: From Data to Decisions 
KLUGMAN, PANJER, and WILLMOT · Solutions Manual to Accompany Loss Models: 
From Data to Decisions 
KOTZ, BALAKRISHNAN, and JOHNSON · Continuous Multivariate Distributions, 
Volume 1, Second Edition 
KOVALENKO, KUZNETZOV, and PEGG ■ Mathematical Theory of Reliability of 
Time-Dependent Systems with Practical Applications 
LAD · Operational Subjective Statistical Methods: A Mathematical, Philosophical, and 
Historical Introduction 
LEPAGE and BILLARD · Exploring the Limits of Bootstrap 
LINHART and ZUCCHINI · Model Selection 
LITTLE and RUBIN · Statistical Analysis with Missing Data 
LLOYD · The Statistical Analysis of Categorical Data 
MAGNUS and NEUDECKER · Matrix Differential Calculus with Applications in 
Statistics and Econometrics, Revised Edition 
MANN, SCHÄFER, and SINGPURWALLA · Methods for Statistical Analysis of 
Reliability and Life Data 
McLACHLAN · Discriminant Analysis and Statistical Pattern Recognition 
McLACHLAN and KRISHNAN · The EM Algorithm and Extensions 
McLACHLAN and PEEL · Finite Mixture Models 
MEEKER and ESCOBAR · Statistical Methods for Reliability Data 
♦Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Applied Probability and Statistics (Continued) 
MONTGOMERY and PECK · Introduction to Linear Regression Analysis, Second Edition 
MYERS and MONTGOMERY · Response Surface Methodology: Process and Product 
in Optimization Using Designed Experiments 
NELSON · Accelerated Testing, Statistical Models, Test Plans, and Data Analyses 
NELSON · Applied Life Data Analysis 
OCHI · Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes in Engineering and Physical 
Sciences 
OKABE, BOOTS, and SUGIHARA · Spatial Tesselations: Concepts and Applications 
of Voronoi Diagrams 
PANKRATZ · Forecasting with Dynamic Regression Models 
PANKRATZ · Forecasting with Univaríate Box-Jenkins Models: Concepts and Cases 
PORT · Theoretical Probability for Applications 
PUTERMAN · Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming 
RACHEV · Probability Metrics and the Stability of Stochastic Models 
RÉNYI · A Diary on Information Theory 
RIPLEY · Spatial Statistics 
RIPLEY · Stochastic Simulation 
ROUSSEEUW and LEROY · Robust Regression and Outlier Detection 
RUBIN · Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys 
RUBINSTEIN · Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method 
RUBINSTEIN and MELAMED · Modern Simulation and Modeling 
RYAN · Statistical Methods for Quality Improvement, Second Edition 
SCHIMEK · Smoothing and Regression: Approaches, Computation, and Application 
SCHUSS · Theory and Applications of Stochastic Differential Equations 
SCOTT · Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization 
♦SEARLE · Linear Models 
SEARLE · Linear Models for Unbalanced Data 
SEARLE, CASELLA, and McCULLOCH · Variance Components 
SENNOTT * Stochastic Dynamic Programming and the Control of Queueing Systems 
STOYAN, KENDALL, and MECKE · Stochastic Geometry and Its Applications, Second 
Edition 
STOYAN and STOYAN · Fractals, Random Shapes and Point Fields: Methods of 
Geometrical Statistics 
THOMPSON · Empirical Model Building 
THOMPSON · Sampling 
THOMPSON · Simulation: A Modeler's Approach 
TIJMS · Stochastic Modeling and Analysis: A Computational Approach 
TIJMS · Stochastic Models: An Algorithmic Approach 
TITTERINGTON, SMITH, and MAKOV · Statistical Analysis of Finite Mixture 
Distributions 
UPTON and FINGLETON · Spatial Data Analysis by Example, Volume 1: Point 
Pattern and Quantitative Data 
UPTON and FINGLETON · Spatial Data Analysis by Example, Volume II: 
Categorical and Directional Data 
VAN RIJCKEVORSEL and DE LEEUW · Component and Correspondence Analysis 
VIDAKOVIC · Statistical Modeling by Wavelets 
WEISBERG · Applied Linear Regression, Second Edition 
WESTFALL and YOUNG · Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and 
Methods for p-Value Adjustment 
WHITTLE · Systems in Stochastic Equilibrium 
*ZELLNER · An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics 
♦Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Biostatistics 
Section 
ARMITAGE and DAVID (editors) · Advances in Biometry 
BROWN and HOLLANDER · Statistics: A Biomedical Introduction 
CHOW and LIU · Design and Analysis of Clinical Trials: Concepts and Methodologies 
DUNN and CLARK · Applied Statistics: Analysis of Variance and Regression, Second 
Edition 
♦ELANDT-JOHNSON and JOHNSON · Survival Models and Data Analysis 
*FLEISS · The Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments 
FLEISS · Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, Second Edition 
FLEMING and HARRINGTON · Counting Processes and Survival Analysis 
KADANE · Bayesian Methods and Ethics in a Clinical Trial Design 
KALBFLEISCH and PRENTICE · The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data 
LACHIN · Biostatistical Methods: The Assessment of Relative Risks 
LANGE, RYAN, BILLARD, BRILLINGER, CONQUEST, and GREENHOUSE · 
Case Studies in Biometry 
LAWLESS * Statistical Models and Methods for Lifetime Data 
LEE · Statistical Methods for Survival Data Analysis, Second Edition 
MALLER and ZHOU · Survival Analysis with Long Term Survivors 
McNEIL · Epidemiological Research Methods 
McFADDEN · Management of Data in Clinical Trials 
*MILLER · Survival Analysis, Second Edition 
PIANTADOSI * Clinical Trials: A Methodologie Perspective 
WOODING · Planning Pharmaceutical Clinical Trials: Basic Statistical Principles 
WOOLSON · Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Biomedical Data 
Financial Engineering 
Section 
HUNT and KENNEDY · Financial Derivatives in Theory and Practice 
ROLSKI, SCHMIDLI, SCHMIDT, and TEUGELS · Stochastic Processes for Insurance 
and Finance 
Texts, References, and Pocketbooks 
Section 
AGRESTI · An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis 
ANDEL · Mathematics of Chance 
ANDERSON · An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Second Edition 
ANDERSON and LOYNES · The Teaching of Practical Statistics 
ARMITAGE and COLTON · Encyclopedia of Biostatistics: Volumes 1 to 6 with Index 
BARTOSZYNSKI and NIEWIADOMSKA-BUGAJ · Probability and Statistical Inference 
BEND AT and PIERSOL · Random Data: Analysis and Measurement Procedures, 
Third Edition 
BERRY, CHALONER, and GEWEKE · Bayesian Analysis in Statistics and 
Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Arnold Zellner 
BHATTACHARYA and JOHNSON · Statistical Concepts and Methods 
BILLINGSLEY · Probability and Measure, Second Edition 
BOX · R. A. Fisher, the Life of a Scientist 
BOX, HUNTER, and HUNTER · Statistics for Experimenters: An Introduction to 
Design, Data Analysis, and Model Building 
BOX and LUCEÑO · Statistical Control by Monitoring and Feedback Adjustment 
CHATTERJEE and PRICE · Regression Analysis by Example, Third Edition 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Texts, References, and Pocketbooks (Continued) 
COOK and WEISBERG · Applied Regression Including Computing and Graphics 
COOK and WEISBERG · An Introduction to Regression Graphics 
COX · A Handbook of Introductory Statistical Methods 
DANIEL · Biostatistics: A Foundation for Analysis in the Health Sciences, Sixth Edition 
DILLON and GOLDSTEIN · Multivariate Analysis: Methods and Applications 
*DODGE and ROMIG · Sampling Inspection Tables, Second Edition 
DRAPER and SMITH · Applied Regression Analysis, Third Edition 
DUDEWICZ and MISHRA · Modern Mathematical Statistics 
DUNN and CLARK · Basic Statistics: A Primer for the Biomedical Sciences, 
Third Edition 
EVANS, HASTINGS, and PEACOCK · Statistical Distributions, Third Edition 
FISHER and VAN BELLE · Biostatistics: A Methodology for the Health Sciences 
FREEMAN and SMITH · Aspects of Uncertainty: A Tribute to D. V. Lindley 
GROSS and HARRIS · Fundamentals of Queueing Theory, Third Edition 
HALD · A History of Probability and Statistics and their Applications Before 1750 
HALD · A History of Mathematical Statistics from 1750 to 1930 
HELLER · MACSYMA for Statisticians 
HOEL · Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, Fifth Edition 
HOLLANDER and WOLFE · Nonparametric Statistical Methods, Second Edition 
HOSMER and LEMESHOW · Applied Logistic Regression, Second Edition 
HOSMER and LEMESHOW · Applied Survival Analysis: Regression Modeling of 
Time to Event Data 
JOHNSON and BALAKRISHNAN · Advances in the Theory and Practice of Statistics: A 
Volume in Honor of Samuel Kotz 
JOHNSON and KOTZ (editors) · Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences: From the 
Seventeenth Century to the Present 
JUDGE, GRIFFITHS, HILL, LÜTKEPOHL, and LEE · The Theory and Practice of 
Econometrics, Second Edition 
KHURI · Advanced Calculus with Applications in Statistics 
KOTZ and JOHNSON (editors) · Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences: Volumes 1 to 9 
with Index 
KOTZ and JOHNSON (editors) · Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences: Supplement 
Volume 
KOTZ, READ, and BANKS (editors) ■ Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences: Update 
Volume 1 
KOTZ, READ, and BANKS (editors) · Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences: Update 
Volume 2 
LAMPERTI · Probability: A Survey of the Mathematical Theory, Second Edition 
LARSON · Introduction to Probability Theory and Statistical Inference, Third Edition 
LE · Applied Categorical Data Analysis 
LE · Applied Survival Analysis 
MALLOWS · Design, Data, and Analysis by Some Friends of Cuthbert Daniel 
MARDIA · The Art of Statistical Science: A Tribute to G. S. Watson 
MASON, GUNST, and HESS · Statistical Design and Analysis of Experiments with 
Applications to Engineering and Science 
McCULLOCH and SEARLE · Generalized, Linear, and Mixed Models 
MURRAY · X-STAT 2.0 Statistical Experimentation, Design Data Analysis, and 
Nonlinear Optimization 
PRESS and TANUR · The Subjectivity of Scientists and the Bayesian Approach 
PURI, VILAPLANA, and WERTZ · New Perspectives in Theoretical and Applied 
Statistics 
RENCHER · Linear Models in Statistics 
RENCHER · Methods of Multivariate Analysis 
RENCHER · Multivariate Statistical Inference with Applications 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Texts, References, and Pocketbooks (Continued) 
ROSS · Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists 
ROHATGI and SALEH · An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, Second Edition 
RYAN · Modern Regression Methods 
SCHOTT · Matrix Analysis for Statistics 
SEARLE · Matrix Algebra Useful for Statistics 
STYAN · The Collected Papers of T. W. Anderson: 1943-1985 
TIAO, BISGAARD, HILL, PEÑA, and STIGLER (editors) · Box on Quality and 
Discovery: with Design, Control, and Robustness 
TIERNEY · LISP-STAT: An Object-Oriented Environment for Statistical Computing 
and Dynamic Graphics 
WONNACOTT and WONNACOTT · Econometrics, Second Edition 
WU and HAMADA · Experiments: Planning, Analysis, and Parameter Design 
Optimization 
JWS/SAS Co-Publications 
Section 
KHATTREE and NAIK · Applied Multivariate Statistics with SAS Software, 
Second Edition 
KHATTREE and NAIK · Applied Descriptive Multivariate Statistics Using SAS Software 
WILEY SERIES IN PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
ESTABLISHED BY WALTER A. SHEWHART AND SAMUEL S. WlLKS 
Editors 
Robert M. Groves, Graham Kalton, J. N. K. Rao, Norbert Schwarz, 
Christopher 
Skinner 
Survey Methodology 
Section 
BIEMER, GROVES, LYBERG, MATHIOWETZ, and SUDMAN · Measurement 
Errors in Surveys 
COCHRAN · Sampling Techniques, Third Edition 
COUPER, BAKER, BETHLEHEM, CLARK, MARTIN, NICHOLLS, and O'REILLY 
(editors) · Computer Assisted Survey Information Collection 
COX, BINDER, CHINNAPPA, CHRISTIANSON, COLLEDGE, and KOTT (editors) · 
Business Survey Methods 
*DEMING · Sample Design in Business Research 
DILLMAN · Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method, Second Edition 
DILLMAN · Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design Method 
GROVES and COUPER · Nonresponse in Household Interview Surveys 
GROVES · Survey Errors and Survey Costs 
GROVES, BIEMER, LYBERG, MASSEY, NICHOLLS, and WAKSBERG · 
Telephone Survey Methodology 
"HANSEN, HURWITZ, and MADOW · Sample Survey Methods and Theory, 
Volume 1: Methods and Applications 
♦HANSEN, HURWITZ, and MADOW · Sample Survey Methods and Theory, 
Volume II: Theory 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 

Survey Methodology (Continued) 
KISH · Statistical Design for Research 
*KISH · Survey Sampling 
KORN and GRAUBARD · Analysis of Health Surveys 
LESSLER and KALSBEEK · Nonsampling Error in Surveys 
LEVY and LEMESHOW · Sampling of Populations: Methods and Applications, 
Third Edition 
LYBERG, BIEMER, COLLINS, de LEEUW, DIPPO, SCHWARZ, TREWIN (editors) · 
Survey Measurement and Process Quality 
SIRKEN, HERRMANN, SCHECHTER, SCHWARZ, TANUR, and TOURANGEAU 
(editors) · Cognition and Survey Research 
VALLIANT, DORFMAN, and ROYALL · Finite Population Sampling and Inference: A 
Prediction Approach 

