
THE STORY OF COLLAPSING STARS


THE STORY
OF COLLAPSING
STARS
Black Holes, Naked Singularities,
and the Cosmic Play of Quantum Gravity
Pankaj S. Joshi
3

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Pankaj S. Joshi 2015
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2015
Impression: 2
Reprinted with corrections 2015
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014948114
ISBN 978–0–19–968676–6
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY

To:
That Indomitable Spirit within,
That inspires Our Search without,
Of the Universe,
and of the Self within...


Preface
The basic aim of fundamental physics and cosmology is to understand
the nature and structure of the Universe and to decipher and com-
prehend the underlying laws that govern the Cosmos. This justiﬁes
current efforts to ﬁnd a theory that will unify the forces of nature
known today, namely the weak and strong nuclear forces, electromag-
netism, and gravity. Although we seem to have at present a good theory
that combines the ﬁrst three forces, to unite it with gravity to generate a
quantum gravity theory has been an unfulﬁlled dream and elusive goal
for a long time now.
How are we to achieve this? As efforts are made to obtain evidence of
quantum gravity, as has been done for the past several decades without
success, my own feeling is that it may be worth considering phenom-
ena in the Cosmos where these key forces come together to generate
possibly observable effects. What we need are detectable and observable
signatures of possible quantum gravity phenomena. These could give
us the real clues leading to such a uniﬁed theory.
From such a perspective, we undertake here a journey into one of the
most fascinating intellectual adventures of past decades, namely un-
derstanding the ﬁnal fate of massive collapsing stars in the Universe,
or in general the gravitational collapse of massive matter clouds on a
larger scale. This is of great interest in fundamental physics and cosmol-
ogy, for gravitation theory and modern astrophysical observations. This
phenomenon could be intimately connected to our search for a uniﬁed
understanding of basic forces of nature, namely gravity, which governs
the cosmological universe, and the microscopic forces, which include
the quantum phenomena.
Using Einstein’s theory of gravity this investigation takes us to the
world of black holes, spacetime singularities, and other intriguing pos-
sibilities. Today, this continues to be a crucially important, unresolved
area in astrophysics and cosmology forming the foundation of modern
black hole physics and its current applications. The issue is also relevant
to mysterious, very high energy astrophysical phenomena observed in
the Cosmos which defy any consistent theoretical understanding. They
include, for example, cosmic gamma ray bursts, active galactic nuclei,
quasars, and powerful jets from galaxies.

viii
Preface
According to the general theory of relativity, a massive star that col-
lapses catastrophically under its own gravity when it runs out of its
internal nuclear fuel must give rise to a spacetime singularity. Such sin-
gularities are the regions in the Universe where physical quantities take
extreme values and become arbitrarily large. The singularity might be
hidden within a black hole or visible to faraway observers. Thus, general
relativity predicts that a massive star’s ﬁnal fate of collapse is either as
a black hole or as a visible naked singularity. In the latter case, ultra-
high density and curvature regions formed during the gravitational
collapse are visible from far away, and there can be rather intriguing
observational consequences.
Within such a context, we discuss here recent results and develop-
ments on the gravitational collapse of massive stars and matter clouds.
We suggest that a deeper understanding of catastrophic gravitational
collapse, where energy scales grow extraordinarily high, can be a test-
ing ground for examining, developing, and reﬁning our efforts toward
a uniﬁed quantum gravity theory. We indicate the exciting possibility
that collapsing massive stars and the resulting spacetime singularities
may provide a laboratory where one can test the uniﬁcation possibilities
for basic forces of nature.
In this way, the phenomenon of collapsing massive stars becomes all
the more interesting and intriguing. Also, the possible connection to
the very high energy cosmic phenomena mentioned earlier is worth
exploring, and we consider possible observational and astrophysical
implications when naked singularities form in the Universe.
The story that develops has amazing curves and ups and downs. In
fact, black hole physics has undergone key changes in recent times.
What began with the remarkable discovery by Chandrasekhar in the
1930s on white dwarf mass limits continued with detailed insights on
neutron stars and pulsars, further moving onto dizzy domains of black
holes and singularities. While this is all supposed to be scientiﬁc inves-
tigation and hard core fundamental physics, the emotional debates and
controversies that have ﬂared up from time to time during past decades
have been no less spectacular.
While several interesting conclusions have emerged from these inves-
tigations in recent years, as we discuss here, the debate is far from over
and this continues to be an area of great scientiﬁc excitement. Perhaps
this proves again the vitality, importance, and key nature of the issues
and themes involved.

Preface
ix
It is my hope to show at the end of the discussion here that the
emerging story is no less exciting and thought-provoking than Einstein
gravity itself, from which it has developed. If the following narrative
creates a few moments of happy and insightful thought, the effort here
will have succeeded.
Pankaj S. Joshi
Mumbai, 2014

Acknowledgments
My thoughts on these cosmic themes evolved and developed over
many years and I owe much to many colleagues who offered animated
and extensive discussions on the issues covered here. While the opin-
ions did not always converge and kept evolving, there was never a lack
of interest and excitement due to the very basic nature of the inquiry
at hand. In particular, I thank Indresh Dwivedi, Rituparno Goswami,
Daniele Malafarina, Ken-ichi Nakao, and all my collaborators for exten-
sive discussions and debates. Their thought-provoking questions and
comments have been invaluable.
Conversations with Stephen Hawking, Roger Penrose, and Rob-
ert Geroch made me think deeply and intensely on these problems,
and those with Peter Biermann, Ramesh Narayan and Kip Thorne
motivated me to probe the possible observational consequences of grav-
itational collapse scenarios. With much fondness I also mention here
my few interactions with S. Chandrasekhar, who showed keen interest
in these problems, and offered his critical comments. His penetrat-
ing insight inspired me to tackle the complex problem of gravitational
collapse in Einstein’s theory of gravity.
I express my sincere gratitude to Jayant Narlikar, P. C. Vaidya, and A.
K. Raychaudhuri, who always took a keen interest in the progress of our
work over many years, and offered many useful comments. The very
kind support to our work from M. G. K. Menon and B. V. Sreekantan
has been invaluable, and I thank them warmly.
My detailed discussions with George Musser, Vithal Nadkarni, and
Bharat Kapadia on black holes and cosmology brought out the rich tap-
estry of interwoven ideas and different aspects of the problem, and I
extend many thanks to them. The discussions with Adlung Sonke at
OUP led to the idea of this book, and I am very grateful to him for
his careful attention throughout. Jessica White, Ania Wronski, Charles
Lauder, Ralph Footring, and Gandhimathi Ganesan have taken much
care to see this work comes out well, and I am very thankful to them.

Contents
1. Our Universe
1
Microcosm, Macrocosm, and Forces of Nature
2
The Role of Gravity
5
Dynamical Evolution in the Universe
8
Black Holes, Singularities, and Quantum Gravity
10
Our Trajectory
15
2. The Fabric of Spacetime
18
The Force of Gravity
19
Spacetime Continuum
21
Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
24
Physical Implications
30
Local and Global Aspects
35
Spacetime Foam
38
3. Black Holes
41
Life of a Star
42
Collapse of Massive Stars
45
A Black Hole is Born
47
Gravitational Collapse
49
The Debate on Horizon and Singularity
51
Black Hole Physics
52
4. Singularities
61
The Existence
62
Can We Avoid Singularities?
65
Causality Violations
67
Energy Conditions and Trapped Surfaces
69
Fundamental Challenges
71
5. Cosmic Censorship
74
What is a Naked Singularity?
75
Censoring the Cosmos
80
Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
86
The Genericity Aspects
95

xii
Contents
6. Naked Singularities
99
Collapsing a Massive Star
100
Gravitational Collapse Studies
102
Non-spherical Collapse
109
Numerical Simulations
113
Event-like and Object-like Singularities
117
Collapse Scenarios
119
Why a Naked Singularity Forms
123
Observational Aspects and Quantum Gravity
126
7. Cosmic Conundrums
128
Can We Reformulate the Censorship?
128
Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
132
Structure of Naked Singularities
141
Questions on Collapse and Singularities
150
8. Is Our Universe Predictable?
168
Predictability Deﬁned
170
Is Relativity a Predictable Theory?
172
Singularities and Predictability
174
Rabbits Popping out of a Hat?
176
Restoring the Predictability
177
9. A Lab for Quantum Gravity
180
The Quest for Quantum Gravity
181
Need for Observational Data
187
Singularity Resolution in Quantum Gravity
189
Naked Singularity and Quantum Gravity
191
Quantum Stars?
194
10. The Frontiers
197
Observational Frontiers
197
Testing Censorship using Astronomical Observations
198
Super-Kerr Geometries
199
Observable Signatures of Naked Singularities
201
Distinguishing Black Holes and Naked Singularities
204
Shockwaves near a Singularity?
207

Contents
xiii
Black Hole Paradoxes
208
Infall into a Black Hole versus Naked Singularity
214
Emerging Perspective
216
Bibliographic Notes
219
Index
221


N1O
Our Universe
Man’s journey in search of the fundamental laws that govern the Uni-
verse has led us to some of the most fascinating insights on the nature
and structure of the Cosmos. Even the smallest child begins observ-
ing the Universe as soon as she arrives on Earth, and such observation
sparks curiosity and leads to questions about the Universe. The inquiry
gradually matures to intuitive, logical, and mathematical thinking and
analysis of the Cosmos’ basic nature and structure. This is the start of
our understanding of the Universe, leading to a wide variety of new
discoveries and inventions.
Early astronomers were amazed to learn that the Universe and phe-
nomena such as the occurrence of day and night, eclipses, ocean tides,
and the motions of planets, stars, and other heavenly bodies were not
arbitrary or random but followed speciﬁc patterns and fundamental
rules. Such an appreciation prompted an inquiry into the basic laws
governing these phenomena and a search for more of an understanding
of the world around us.
In due course, this led us to the body of knowledge that we today
call science. The quest has resulted in an impressive understanding of
the Universe and its basic happenings. This includes Einstein’s theory of
relativity, and quantum theory, which governs the tiny constituents of
matter. Today we have very large telescopes on Earth and in the skies
which probe the deepest recesses of the Cosmos. At the same time we
build mammoth accelerator machines that collide the tiniest of par-
ticles of matter at the fastest velocities possible. While the frontiers
of knowledge keep expanding, superb applications have frequently re-
sulted from the basic laws of nature that we have discovered, which
have made human life smoother and healthier.

2
Our Universe
Microcosm, Macrocosm, and Forces of Nature
We observe the Universe today in its smallest dimensions of atoms and
hadrons constituting the same in large particle colliders, while at the
largest cosmic scales we can see galaxies and their clusters millions of
kilometers away amidst a vast expanse. On the one hand, tiny suba-
tomic particles travel close to the speed of light and collide to create
a plethora of new basic particles. On the other hand, faraway galax-
ies collide and merge to give rise to new cosmic entities, while cosmic
structures constantly form and disperse. Our knowledge and concep-
tion of the Cosmos evolve as our search progresses (see Fig. 1.1 for a
historical perspective on the Universe around us).
Such observations of the Universe and the mathematical calculations
have shown that all these phenomena are governed by certain basic
laws and forces in nature. While day-to-day happenings in nature at
our own scales seem to be governed mainly by electric and magnetic
forces, at the scale of the atoms and elementary particles so-called weak
and strong nuclear forces govern key outcomes. When we move onto
the larger cosmic scales, it is fairly clear that more than any other force,
it is the force of gravity that counts and decides the natural phenomena,
such as the formation of galaxies and stars and the clustering of matter
on very large scales.
While different forces seem to rule different arenas and scales in the
Universe, man, however, has a passion to search for a certain unity
amidst all the diverse phenomena that surround us. We would like to
obtain a single logical structure that describes and explains nature in
its entirety. If possible we would also like to predict the Cosmos and its
happenings using such a framework.
In fact the word ‘physics’ comes from the Greek root ‘physis’, which
means the basic element or key principle of nature. For example, while
electricity and magnetism were observed as a collection of different and
diverse natural phenomena, it was James Clerk Maxwell’s theory from
the nineteenth century that gave a uniﬁed description of these phe-
nomena in a single logical framework with a system of mathematical
equations. Similarly, while the happenings within the atom and its nu-
cleus are now known to be governed by weak and strong nuclear forces,
contemporary, grand uniﬁed theories combine these forces with the
electromagnetic phenomena and again provide a uniﬁed description
of these happenings. On the other hand, when we move to the larger

Microcosm and Macrocosm
3
Figure 1.1 An ancient view of the Universe. While mankind is located at the
center of the Universe, with the celestial sphere and the dome of sky up above,
outside that lie various unknown forces and powerful entities, probably those
of air and water and ﬁre and others.
scales of space and time, namely planets, the solar system, and beyond
to the expanse of stars and galaxies, it has been known for a long time
that it is the force of gravity that governs the dynamics of these objects.
Explaining and predicting planetary motion due to the law of grav-
ity has been the greatest success of Newtonian mechanics. However,

4
Our Universe
Newtonian gravity requires an inﬁnite speed for the propagation of the
force of gravity. This is not consistent with the special theory of rela-
tivity as derived by Albert Einstein in 1905, where no speed greater than
that of light is possible. A new theory of gravity was therefore inevitable,
which came in the form of the general theory of relativity formulated
in 1915. General relativity, or the Einstein gravity, has been the most
successful theory of gravity, having passed several experimental and ob-
servational tests and providing many new exciting predictions about the
Universe.
Despite these successes, it must be admitted that a vast ocean of ig-
norance lies before us. Current cosmology tries to understand how
the Universe came into being, how galaxy formation was triggered,
and how the intricate cosmic web of galaxy clusters observable to-
day through gigantic telescopes came into being. Among others, the
formidable problems of the missing or dark matter and the unseen or
dark energy that drives the accelerated expansion recently observed in
the Universe are far from being well understood. At the microscopic
level, as we continue in our quest for the basic building blocks of mat-
ter, and for the key forces that govern them, newer and ﬁner layers of
reality emerge and open up before us.
Nevertheless, such an entirety of unfolding phenomena has not
discouraged us from our search. In fact, to meet such a daunting chal-
lenge, mankind has embarked on even bigger and ever more ambitious
missions to probe and understand the Cosmos, in both its microcos-
mic and macrocosmic realms. This is what has led to space telescopes
that see the farthest reaches of the Universe, and to the most pow-
erful of particle accelerators that probe the deep secrets of the tiniest
constituents of matter.
Thus, while we have been sharpening our technical instruments for
observing the Universe, we also have come to realize that intuition and
the mind, which are our very basic tools for understanding the Uni-
verse, need to be reﬁned and sharpened and understood better. An
opinion has emerged that without understanding the nature of the
mind, a better understanding of the Universe may not be possible (see
Fig. 1.2).
Needless to say, such a journey into the Cosmos has led us to some
fascinating landscapes that we had never imagined possible. Many of
the phenomena in nature certainly defy our basic and gut feelings
about the Universe and always surprise us. As we journey through

The Role of Gravity
5
Figure 1.2 The modern approach to the Cosmos sometimes prefers to see
man and the Universe as an integrated whole. While we would like to under-
stand our relation to the Universe in its entirety, the big mystery is: Can the
human mind really grasp the Universe? Whether it is conceptual frameworks
and theory or mathematical calculations and series of experiments, in the end
it is the human mind that must make sense of all that experience in the form
of coherent laws of nature. These laws may explain existing phenomena, and
also make new predictions about nature.
the frontier of knowledge, new domains of the unknown keep opening,
and perhaps such a scenario is always bound to arise.
The Role of Gravity
Gravity is the force that man has experienced and tried to understand
for ages. Clearly, it governs the Universe on the large scale that we see,
perceive, and experience. In the past, we observed planetary motion,

6
Our Universe
ocean tides, eclipses, and so on as manifestations of the force of gravity.
Today, we now in addition observe the motion and dynamics of stars
and galaxies, the powerful jets from active galactic nuclei, pulsars and
quasars, powerful gamma ray bursts, and other such phenomena that
occur in the skies.
In addition, there are now the intricate and intriguing concepts and
theories of black holes and spacetime singularities, time warps and
changing spacetime topologies, and so on. All these together make an
amazing spectrum of phenomena that gravity creates in the Cosmos.
Many new facets of gravity physics have opened up in recent decades,
going further than Newtonian dynamics, and are based largely on Ein-
stein’s theory of general relativity. We will describe later in some detail
the remarkable picture and various perspectives that have emerged
about the Universe that involve gravity in a fundamental way.
Two major revolutions that took place about a century ago in our
understanding of the Universe were relativity theory and quantum
theory. While the former dominates mainly at the very large scales of
the Universe and in very strong gravity ﬁelds, the latter has given us
a fairly good idea about the microscopic world of elementary particles
and their interactions in nature. Of course, the goal has been a uniﬁed
understanding of both these domains by obtaining a quantum grav-
ity theory, but that dream is still far from being realized. To that end
we need new theoretical insights and advances, and more observational
data about the Universe.
Our knowledge and conception of the observable Universe are reach-
ing a most interesting and crucial turning point. On the one hand, we
are probing the deepest recesses of matter by means of particle col-
lider experiments with the highest collision energies. This has revealed
new information about the world of tiny particles and about the ﬁelds
that cause these interactions. On the other hand, we are facing increas-
ing limitations to Earth-bound experiments, and formidable difﬁculties
arise when we try to understand these phenomena theoretically, due to
the complexity of the dynamics involved.
A possible solution may be that if we observe the Cosmos more in-
tensely and carefully, we may come across many more phenomena
where the basic forces of nature may be operating collectively in uni-
son. Such observations and signatures could give us crucial inputs for
our search for a uniﬁed theory of nature. In this sense, astrophysical
and astronomical observations are crucial for moving towards a deeper

The Role of Gravity
7
understanding of the Universe. At present, although we have a wealth
of observations coming in, major challenges to fundamental physics
and cosmology still remain unresolved.
In regard to the force of gravity, whenever physicists deal with very
strong gravity ﬁelds, such as in the late stages of massive collapsing stars,
a huge quantity of matter compacted in a small region such as the cen-
ter of a galaxy, or rapidly spinning neutron stars, they must use the
general theory of relativity to properly understand such phenomena.
Einstein’s theory of gravity is very rich, both conceptually and math-
ematically, and must be handled with very careful analysis and un-
derstanding. When applied appropriately to understanding physical
scenarios such as those above, it produces rather intricate and intrigu-
ing consequences, such as the formation of spacetime singularities,
black holes and time warps, and highly curved geometries which may
have remarkable observational consequences.
In such a context, the theory and observations of massive collaps-
ing stars may hold a basic key to the understanding of gravity. Such
a collapse necessarily gives rise to spacetime singularities, as predicted
by general relativity. We point out that if such singularities are visible to
observers far away in the Universe, they would then provide a wealth of
information about quantum gravity processes occurring in very strong
gravity ﬁelds which develop in such regions. Such naked singularities
developing in the gravitational collapse of massive stars could be viewed
as providing us with laboratories of very high energy that would be
unreachable at terrestrial levels.
As for Einstein’s theory of gravity, despite its remarkable features, we
face many key problems. One issue has been that general relativity is
a geometric theory of gravity with a mathematical structure very dif-
ferent from other theories of physics, such as Newtonian mechanics or
quantum theory. Therefore it has not been possible so far to obtain a
uniﬁed description of the laws of nature for all four fundamental forces
that we mentioned earlier. This has been recognized as one of the most
important and outstanding problems in modern physics today, namely
how to unify gravity with quantum mechanics. Efforts over the past
decades to obtain a uniﬁed theory of quantum gravity have included
string theories and loop quantum gravity.
As discussed here, rather than only going after purely theoretical
frameworks and attempts, which has been the case so far, it may be
beneﬁcial and rewarding to look for phenomena in the Universe where

8
Our Universe
quantum effects and gravity come together. In such scenarios, it may be
possible to observe genuine quantum gravity effects. This could give us
a much better handle to understanding quantum gravity theory and its
real workings and basic framework.
The point is, in the terrestrial experiments and many of the obser-
vations of the Universe so far, gravity has been a rather weak force. So
it stays apart and disconnected from rest of the basic forces in nature
and in particular quantum effects. However, as we shall argue, the
gravitational collapse of massive stars and the resulting spacetime sin-
gularities may be the natural phenomena where quantum and gravity
come together to operate in unison. The observations of such regions
in the Universe could provide us with the crucial missing steps which
we need for a uniﬁed theory. This would be an important transition
from general relativity, which is a purely classical theory without any
consideration of quantum mechanics.
Dynamical Evolution in the Universe
One of the key tasks for any physical theory is to describe and predict
the dynamical evolution of physical systems and the evolving phenom-
ena in the Universe. This could be at either a local or global level. For
cosmic systems, which are mainly governed by gravity, this is to be
accomplished using Einstein’s theory of general relativity (see Fig. 1.3).
Such phenomena, on very large scales, include the expansion of the
Universe as a whole, driven by gravity, the formation of galaxies and
clusters of galaxies, and other such large-scale structure formations. On
a somewhat smaller scale, there are formation processes that initiate
the life of a newborn star, and later the gravitational collapse of these
stars when they run out of their internal nuclear fuel. Thus we could be
working on very large scales of the Universe as a whole, or on relatively
smaller scales of stars and galaxies, where gravity essentially governs the
dynamical processes and evolution of these systems.
As has been observed in the Cosmos today using gigantic telescopes
either on Earth or in space, there is a continual dynamical change es-
sentially governed by gravity. Thus, at the largest scales, galaxies recede
from each other, or they can sometimes collide and merge together.
Then mammoth huge clouds of interstellar matter come together in a
slow gravitational collapse and trigger the formation of galaxies or clus-
ters. This can also make even larger ﬁlaments and voids in the Universe.

Dynamical Evolution in the Universe
9
Space at
t = t2
Space at
t = t1
S1
S2
t
Figure 1.3 In Einstein’s gravity theory, we would like to trace the dynamical
evolution of three-dimensional space as time moves forward. The evolution of
such a system, for example that of a cluster of galaxies, is governed by Einstein’s
equations. The locations of these galaxies and their distances from each other
change over time. Here S1 and S2 denote three-dimensional spaces (shown in
two dimensions), and the former evolves into the latter as time moves forward
from t1 to t2, as given by the ﬁeld equations of gravity. Similarly, we could work
out the evolution of the system in the past.
On a smaller scale, gravitational collapse can trigger star formation,
where a local cloud of matter contracts under its own gravity, heats up
enormously to cause nuclear burning within, and thus ﬁrst a proto-star
and then a star is born. Such star formation goes on in various regions
in the Universe all the time, and so does the gravitational collapse of
stars toward the end of their life-cycles.
In those cases where the system is very large and gravity is very
weak, a Newtonian approximation may work, but essentially it is Ein-
stein’s equations of general relativity that govern these phenomena. So
one needs to build mathematical models, using Einstein’s equations,
to describe these phenomena. Such solutions could be obtained either
through fully analytic techniques or through numerical models calcu-
lated with computers. In either case, the basic idea is to describe and
model these gravitational processes, understand their evolution in the
Universe, and as a result be able to make predictions.
As indicated earlier, it is not always easy to predict the dynamical ev-
olution of physical systems such as stars, galaxies, or the Universe as a

10
Our Universe
whole under the force of gravity within the framework of Einstein’s
theory of gravity. There are difﬁculties and complexities due to the non-
linear nature of gravity and to inevitable global aspects related to the
spacetime continuum that we must deal with. Also, non-trivial topolo-
gies for the Universe could arise with involved geometries giving rise
to otherwise unanticipated features. We must, however, look around
the mathematical as well as the physical landscape and try to pro-
ceed by ﬁnding smarter ways for creating new insights into these most
interesting cosmic phenomena of nature.
In our present discussion, we will be mainly interested in tracing the
dynamical evolution of massive stars within the framework of Einstein’s
theory of gravity. A massive star, when it runs out of internal nuclear
fuel toward the end of its life-cycle, undergoes a continual gravitational
collapse. General relativity predicts that a spacetime singularity must
arise as a result. Thus, a super-ultra-dense region in spacetime forms.
Such a singularity either is wrapped within a black hole or is a visible
naked singularity. It is only through tracing the dynamical evolution of
the massive matter cloud using Einstein’s equations that the ﬁnal fate
of such a star can be determined. We shall discuss these issues in detail
in later chapters.
Black Holes, Singularities,
and Quantum Gravity
A wide variety of phenomena are created by the all-pervasive force of
gravity in the Cosmos. It is therefore not surprising that the modern
science of gravitation and cosmology has introduced us to many of the
strangest ideas about the Universe. One of the most extraordinary and
unexpected is the ultimate fate of a massive star that has reached the
end of its life-cycle. A star derives its energy from the nuclear reaction
burning within and having exhausted the internal fuel that has sus-
tained it for millions of years as it shined and gave out heat and light,
the star is no longer able to hold itself up under its own weight and the
force of self-gravity. It starts collapsing, shrinking catastrophically in a
matter of seconds. Modest stars like the Sun also collapse toward the
end of their lives, but they then stabilize later at a smaller size of about
a thousand kilometers. The resulting stable conﬁgurations are called
white dwarfs. However, if a star has tens of times the mass of the Sun,
its gravity then overwhelms all the forces of nature that might possibly
halt its gravitational collapse.

Black Holes and Singularities
11
In that case, from a size of millions of kilometers in diameter, the star
crumples to a pinprick size, which is smaller than even the dot on an ‘i’,
and then goes on to shrink even further. It is a star’s continual or total
gravitational collapse which gives rise to a spacetime singularity as the
collapse end-state. The process of new star birth and gravitational col-
lapse at the end of the life-cycle is a continuously happening phenome-
non in the Universe, with a number of stars being born and dying daily.
Gravitational collapse of such massive stars is still a major unsolved
problem in the general theory of relativity. Although we now know
that a spacetime singularity must result, we do not know whether
it will be hidden within a black hole or visible to an observer far
away across the Universe, that is, not hidden within an event hori-
zon of gravity. Both outcomes are possible, as the ‘cosmic censorship
conjecture’ that naked singularities never form and must always be
cloaked within horizons does not always hold. It is an important is-
sue in gravitational physics to determine which will occur in what
circumstances. By now, there are several well-reasoned works of re-
search which give careful insight into the general relativity aspects
of this problem. These papers emphasize how the issue remains of
crucial importance in present-day black hole physics, and also pro-
vide a good springboard for those wishing to tackle this important
problem.
What then would be the ﬁnal fate of massive stars collapsing in the
Universe? This is one of the most exciting questions in astrophysics and
modern cosmology today, as an amazing interplay of the key forces of
nature take place here, including gravity and quantum mechanics. It
is possible that this phenomenon may hold the secrets to our search
for a uniﬁed understanding of the forces of nature. It may also have
exciting connections and implications for our very-high-energy obser-
vations in astronomy and astrophysics. This is an unresolved issue that
excites physicists and laypeople alike.
New results have revealed a close connection between the issues of
spacetime singularities, ﬁnal states of gravitational collapse for massive
stars, and deep cosmic conundrums such as the cosmic censorship con-
jecture and the paradox of predictability in the Universe, as well as
possible emerging implications for a quantum theory of gravity. The
likely connection with observations and implications for relativistic
astrophysics and black hole physics could be equally important.
Investigations into the ﬁnal fate of massive stars began some eight
decades ago when Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar questioned the fate

12
Our Universe
of stars such as the Sun. He showed that such a star, on exhausting
its internal nuclear fuel, would stabilize as a ‘white dwarf’, which is
about a thousand kilometers in size. Eminent scientists of the time,
in particular Arthur Eddington, refused to accept this result, asking
how a star could become so small. As is known, after a ﬁery debate
between the two men, Chandrasekhar left Cambridge to settle in
America. After many years, his prediction of white dwarfs was veriﬁed.
Further to this, it also became known that stars three to ﬁve times
more massive than the Sun give rise to what are called ‘neutron stars’.
These are just ten to ﬁfteen kilometers in size, and develop when the
star collapses after causing a supernova explosion of the outer layers of
the collapsing cloud of matter.
But when the star has a mass more than these speciﬁc limits, the
force of gravity is overwhelmingly supreme and it overtakes to shrink
the star in a continual gravitational collapse. No stable conﬁguration
is then possible, and the star that lived for millions of years will cata-
strophically collapse within a matter of seconds. What will be the ﬁnal
fate of such a continual gravitational collapse of a massive star? The an-
swer must be determined by Einstein’s theory of gravitation, as gravity
now is the sole force deciding the future evolution of the star: a space-
time singularity, which is an ultra-dense and extreme physical state of
matter, not ordinarily encountered in any of our usual experiences of
the physical world.
In such a scenario, as the gravitational collapse of the star progresses,
an ‘event horizon’ of gravity can possibly develop. Such a horizon is es-
sentially a one-way membrane that allows only entry. If the star enters
the horizon before it collapses to a singularity, the result is a black hole
that hides the ﬁnal spacetime singularity. Such a black hole becomes a
permanent graveyard for the collapsing star. On the other hand, if the
horizon is delayed or does not form as the star collapses, then the ﬁnal
outcome is a naked singularity. In this latter case, observers far away in the
Universe would have access to the physical processes taking place very
near the singularity.
As per our current understanding of physics, it was one such space-
time singularity, called the ‘Big Bang’, which created our expanding
Universe as we know it today. Such singularities will again be produced
when massive stars die and collapse in the Cosmos. This is the amaz-
ing place at the boundary of the Universe, if there is one, a region of
arbitrarily large densities billions of times more dense than the Sun.

Black Holes and Singularities
13
An enormous creation and destruction of particles could take place
in the vicinity of such a singularity, where densities, pressures, space-
time curvatures, and all other physical quantities diverge and take
arbitrarily large values. One could imagine this as the ‘cosmic interplay’
of the basic forces of nature coming together here in a uniﬁed man-
ner. This is because energies and all important physical quantities reach
their extreme values in the vicinity of a spacetime singularity. In such
a case, it should be the quantum gravity effects that dominate. Thus,
the collapsing star may hold secrets vital to man’s search for a uniﬁed
understanding of all forces of nature.
We could observe physical processes near regions very close to a
spacetime singularity if we were able to access this information. One
such example is the Big Bang singularity, which is, in principle, visible
because the entire Universe emerged from it. The question then arises
whether such singularities or super-ultra-dense regions that develop
again when massive stars collapse can be visible to faraway observers,
just as the Big Bang can be seen in principle.
The alternative is that the singularities of massive stars will always
be hidden in a black hole. The visibility or otherwise of such a newly
formed super-ultra-dense ﬁreball, which we can perhaps call a quantum
star, is one of the most exciting questions in astrophysics and modern
cosmology. That is because, in the case of a singularity being visible,
the astrophysical signatures and also those signaling the uniﬁcation of
the fundamental forces of nature occurring near the singularity then
become, in principle, observable.
The important point here is that, while general relativity implies that
the spacetime singularities must necessarily form whenever massive
stars collapse, it does not imply that the event horizon, which would
cover the singularity, also must form. Nonetheless, physicists assumed
that an event horizon does always form, hiding all the singularities of
gravitational collapse from observers far away in the Universe. This is
called the cosmic censorship conjecture, which is the foundation of current
theory about black holes and their modern astrophysical applications. If
the horizon does not form before the singularity, we will then be able to
observe the super-ultra-dense regions that form due to collapse of the
massive star, and the quantum gravity effects near the naked singularity
become observable.
In recent years, a series of gravitational collapse models where the
horizon fails to form or is delayed in the collapse of a massive star,

14
Our Universe
as shown by mathematical models or numerical simulations, have
been analyzed. This is an exciting scenario because the singularity then
becomes visible to external observers who can actually see the ex-
treme physics taking place in the vicinity of such ultimate ultra-dense
regions.
As we shall discuss here, it turns out that the gravitational collapse
of a massive star gives rise to either a black hole or a naked singularity,
depending on the internal conditions within the star. These include its
initial densities and pressure proﬁles, as well as the velocities of the col-
lapsing shells. Depending on these variables, the dynamical evolution of
the collapsing star under reasonable physical conditions, as determined
by Einstein’s theory of gravity, will lead to either the black hole or the
naked singularity as the ﬁnal state.
As such, gravitation theory and relativistic astrophysics have gone
through extensive development in recent decades, leading to the dis-
covery of quasars in the 1960s and other very-high-energy phenomena
in the Universe. For compact objects such as neutron stars and for
situations involving even higher energy densities and masses, strong
gravity ﬁelds governed by general relativity play an important role, as
the strong gravity causes the observed high-energy phenomena possess-
ing these intriguing physical properties. Several models for explaining
gamma ray bursts, which emit in a few seconds energy of the Sun’s en-
tire lifetime, have been proposed in terms of a collapsar, invoking the
collapse of a massive star as the mechanism required to produce the
extreme burst. The collapse of a massive star or much larger matter
clouds lies at the heart of the astrophysics of such phenomena. Gravi-
tational collapse is the physical process essential to the formation of a
star itself from interstellar clouds, in the formation of galaxies and gal-
axy clusters, and in a variety of cosmic phenomena including structure
formation in the Universe.
In a massive star’s continual collapse, where gravity is much more
powerful, we cannot use the approximations frequently used for a weak
gravity regime. It thus becomes inevitable to use general relativity to
deal with the issue of the ﬁnal fate of massive collapsing stars. We must
then trace the time evolution of the system using Einstein’s equations
of gravity. The star shrinks under its own gravity, which dominates all
other basic interactions such as the weak and strong forces that ear-
lier provided the outward pressure to balance gravity’s pull. Such a
general relativistic description would be valid up to very small length

Our Trajectory
15
scales, at which point quantum gravity effects take over and dominate
the physical processes. What we need to do here is to model the collapse
within the framework of general relativity, evolving it over time using
Einstein’s equations to determine what the ﬁnal conﬁguration will be.
This will give us insights into the possible ﬁnal fate for the collapse.
Our Trajectory
The phenomena in the Universe, at both the microscopic and macro-
scopic levels, frequently appear inﬁnite and fathomless. The amaze-
ment, however, is that even if we take a very small, simple-looking
occurrence and study it deeply, unique and beautiful processes and laws
of its ﬁner workings will be revealed. We can then extrapolate and de-
termine whether these laws apply as well to other phenomena in the
Cosmos. Often they do, and this is how we expand our picture of the
cosmic reality. Thus, the Universe reveals many amazing facets as we
continue to explore it.
In a similar spirit, in this book we will consider and study cosmic phe-
nomena, including that of the ﬁnal fate of collapsing massive stars. This
has been a particularly interesting issue in cosmology and astrophysics
and has given rise to concepts such as black holes and spacetime sin-
gularities. These concepts may, in turn, be closely related to our search
for a quantum theory of gravity, or the uniﬁcation of physics. We will
discuss developments which have led us in recent years to remarkable
conclusions about collapsing stars, black holes, singularities, and related
themes. We will also point to newly opened observational frontiers in
these areas.
We will show why observing those regions in the Universe where
ultra-strong gravity is operating is crucial for obtaining correct theo-
retical leads toward formulating a proper quantum theory of gravity,
because they may be the only places where gravity and quantum forces
are operating together.
Our main purpose here is to describe some of these developments
and the recently emerging frontiers, which may turn out to be exciting
keys to our understanding of the Universe. In the previous section we
summarized the basic story contained in what follows. We will now
describe the structure and sequence of the discussion that follows in
the next chapters.

16
Our Universe
We have indicated a few remarkable vistas, both theoretical and ob-
servational, that the physics of gravity has presented to us in recent
decades, especially from the perspective of Einstein’s theory of grav-
ity. In Chapter 2, we describe the key ingredients of this theory, which
has been fundamental in explaining the phenomena of gravity as ob-
served in the Universe. The basic paradigm shift that has occurred in
our concepts of space and time, as compared to Newtonian gravity, is
emphasized. We point out that this has led to many new conclusions
about the Universe as a whole.
In particular, the fascinating concept of black holes emerged when
the gravitational collapse of a massive star was investigated using Ein-
stein’s theory of gravity. We discuss this development in Chapter 3. The
furious debate that took place over the existence of spacetime singu-
larities is narrated in Chapter 4. Various possibilities for avoiding such
singularities are considered and it is concluded that under a wide set of
physically reasonable conditions, general relativity necessarily implies
the occurrence of spacetime singularities when massive stars collapse,
and in cosmology at the origin of the Universe.
If such singularities are hidden within event horizons of gravity, we
then have a ﬁrm basis for developing an entire physics of black holes
which can also be applied widely to astrophysical scenarios. Such a the-
ory, assuming that there are no visible or naked singularities occurring
in the collapse of massive stars, referred to earlier as the cosmic censor-
ship conjecture and fundamental to black hole physics, was developed
in the 1970s. Various aspects of this hypothesis are narrated in Chapter
5, and we point out the need to study gravitational collapse models via
general relativity.
When we study the collapse of massive stars in some detail, we can see
that visible or naked singularities do occur in gravitational collapse once
we use physically realistic assumptions. For example, a higher density at
the center of the collapsing star, which decreases as we move outward,
gives rise to a naked singularity at the ﬁnal stage. These conclusions and
the wide variety of collapse models investigated over the past years are
discussed in Chapter 6.
The occurrence of naked singularities in gravitational collapse gives
rise to several very intriguing questions and cosmic puzzles. Profound
issues such as the status of the cosmic censorship hypothesis ruling
out naked singularities, together with various questions about naked

Our Trajectory
17
singularities, will be discussed in Chapter 7. The conundrum related to
predictability in the Universe is discussed in Chapter 8.
If we accept that naked singularities can indeed form in a gravi-
tational collapse at the end of a massive star’s life-cycle, or in other
circumstances, that opens up a remarkable array of exciting possibilities.
This is because the observational signatures of the physical processes
occurring in the super-ultra-strong gravity regions where matter den-
sities and curvatures will be in the extreme then become visible to
external observers. Such physical processes would naturally involve
quantum gravity signatures, because both strong gravity and quantum
effects must work together in such regions. In Chapter 9, we discuss
whether a quantum gravity laboratory is created whenever a massive
star collapses to form a naked singularity. Finally, several recent, ex-
citing developments, together with possible observable consequences
of naked singularities which may distinguish them from their black
hole counterparts through astrophysical signatures, are considered in
Chapter 10.
The essential story that emerges is that according to general rela-
tivity, gravitational collapse of massive stars must proceed to create
spacetime singularities, where the usual laws of physics break down
and quantum gravity effects operate in strong ﬁelds near the singu-
larity at ultra-small length scales. We will highlight here a spectrum of
developments and results which deal with probably some of the most
exciting issues on which research in gravitation and cosmology is cur-
rently centered. We thus will discuss several interesting results about
the end-states of gravitational collapse, cosmic censorship, and black
holes and naked singularities. While no claim to completeness is made,
we hope that what is presented will paint an interesting view of the
landscape of gravity physics and the exciting cosmic frontiers that are
emerging.

N2O
The Fabric of Spacetime
In order to understand the Universe, we need to consider the physical
events happening within it. Any event, such as an eclipse or the birth of
a star or a galaxy, happens at a certain location in space and at a given
moment of time as measured by an observer. Thus we need to consider
space and time together in order to comprehend the set and sequence
of happenings in the Cosmos. It was such combined thinking on the
nature of space, time, and matter that led to Einstein’s theory of gravity,
which is the general theory of relativity.
In fact, for aeons man has known that the motions of bodies such
as the Sun, Moon, and planets follow regular and rhythmic cycles
against a background of stars on the celestial sphere. We tried to un-
derstand these cycles in order to predict, for example, when the next
eclipse will occur. The ancient civilizations of Egypt and Babylonia quite
successfully devised methods for predicting planetary motion. In fact,
Ptolemy’s tables would be able to tell us where the Moon will be tonight
with quite reasonable accuracy.
These developments led us to understand that it is the force of
gravity that governs phenomena such as planetary motion. This
understanding has evolved into the modern gravitation theory, which
is attired in the format of three-dimensional space and one-dimensional
time knotted together to form a spacetime continuum. Against such
a background, the force of gravity is described through the equations
of general relativity, and all matter, such as stars, planets, and galaxies,
move in an inexorable march from the past into the future.
Many of the amazing and intriguing phenomena in the Universe
that we discuss in physics today, such as black holes, the Big Bang as
the origin of the Universe, spacetime singularities, gravitational waves,
worm holes, and time warps, were predicted to exist as a direct conse-
quence of analyzing the properties of such a spacetime Universe and the
interactions of matter and geometry therein. This is within the frame-
work of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. We will discuss here key

The Force of Gravity
19
elements of Einstein gravity, which will help in understanding why the
theory produces some of the most remarkable insights and predictions
on the Universe.
The Force of Gravity
With the work of Galileo Galilei and observations from his telescope,
and with Johannes Kepler’s theory, and Tycho Brahe’s observations,
we moved from a geocentric cosmology where the Earth was taken
to be at the center of the Universe, to a heliocentric view of the Sun
and the planets moving around it. Compared to the geocentric model
where circles on circles were added to explain the observations, the
Keplerian use of elliptical orbits was much more neat and satisfactory.
Actually Kepler’s laws of planetary motion explain the movements of
these celestial objects extremely well.
It was, however, Isaac Newton who pointed out that these phenom-
ena can be explained and predicted rather beautifully well through
what he called the force of gravity. His formulation of the theory of
gravity was contained in his law of gravity, which states that any two
masses exert a gravitational force on each other, proportional to their
masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
them. Using this law of gravity and the newly developed mathemati-
cal tool of calculus, not only could he explain and derive Kepler’s laws
of planetary motion, but he could also predict new phenomena such as
what sort of orbits, say circles, ellipses, or other conical sections, celestial
objects will make round the Sun. Newton showed that this will depend
on the energy these objects possess. The Newtonian theory of gravity
was developed further by many mathematicians and physicists such
as Gauss, Euler, and Lagrange, and it culminated in a very successful
framework of classical Newtonian mechanics.
While the Newtonian theory reigned supreme for some three cen-
turies, in the nineteenth century important advances in physics related
to the phenomena of electricity and magnetism took place, when it
was realized that these phenomena are intimately related. For example,
any changing magnetic ﬁeld gives rise to an electric current and, con-
versely, a moving charge produces a magnetic ﬁeld. However, it turned
out that the electromagnetic phenomena were not quite consistent
with the overall framework and implications of Newtonian mechan-
ics. These forces were quite different from the force of gravity. For

20
The Fabric of Spacetime
example, electric forces can be attractive or repulsive, as opposed to
gravity, which is only attractive, and also electromagnetic disturbances
move with a ﬁnite speed, as opposed to the instantaneous interaction
of gravity assumed in Newton’s theory, which amounted to an inﬁnite
speed of interactions.
This became much clearer when James Clerk Maxwell formulated his
electromagnetic theory, which collectively explained these phenom-
ena. An important consequence of the four equations that Maxwell
derived was that a fundamental velocity, usually denoted by c, appeared
in these equations with which all electromagnetic interactions must
travel. Thus light, which is an electromagnetic wave, travels at this
speed c, which is measured to be about 3 × 1010 cm per second.
This basic velocity, however, did not conform to the laws of
Newtonian mechanics. For example, Newtonian theory predicted that
if the Earth travels with a velocity v in a certain direction, an observer
stationary on Earth should measure the velocity of a beam of light shot
in the direction of the Earth’s motion to be c – v. Similarly, it should be
c + v if the beam is in the opposite direction of the motion of Earth. The
physicists Albert Michelson and Edward Morley did such a measure-
ment and it was found to the great surprise of all that in either case the
velocity of light turned out to be c only. This violated the implications
of Newtonian mechanics.
It was thus increasingly clear that electromagnetic phenomena could
not be incorporated within the Newtonian mechanics framework and
that a new theory was needed to explain them collectively. It was Albert
Einstein who recognized that the velocity of light, c, was a fundamental
constant of nature, and that in all directions the velocity of light would
be the same. Based on the assumption that c was an absolute constant of
nature, he formulated the new theory which was called the special the-
ory of relativity. This gave results consistent with Maxwell’s theory of
electromagnetism, and in the limit when velocities are small compared
to c, the new theory reduced to the Newtonian mechanics results.
The term ‘relativity’ was used here because it was realized for the
ﬁrst time that, as opposed to the Newtonian mechanics, space and time
intervals as measured by different observers are not absolute and one
and the same, as was assumed earlier. Their measurements actually
depended on these observers and their velocities.
In such a case, it helped to think of space and time not as separate
entities but as forming a single spacetime continuum. Such a continuum is

Spacetime Continuum
21
an entity which is four dimensional, with three dimensions of space
and one dimension of time. The measurement of distances in such a
continuum is given by the so-called spacetime metric. The theory’s equa-
tions show that the magnitude of the spacetime intervals as measured by
such a metric would be the same and invariant for all inertial frames of
reference, namely for all observers who travel with a constant velocity
relative to each other.
It should be noted that just as electromagnetic theory required that
Newtonian mechanics had to be revised for special relativity mechan-
ics, in the same way special relativity also demanded that Newtonian
gravity had to be revised. This was because Newtonian theory assumes
that the gravitational interaction between masses propagates instanta-
neously, that is at an inﬁnite speed. But according to special relativity
mechanics, all interactions must have a speed less than or equal to that
of the speed of light. This prompted Einstein to construct a new theory
of gravity, consistent with special relativity mechanics, which was called
the general theory of relativity.
Spacetime Continuum
Newtonian gravity was very successful at the level of planets and solar
systems in making many useful predictions on dynamics and planetary
trajectories, so much so that scientists believed that they had essentially
solved all the mysteries of nature. However, Newtonian theory had to
be modiﬁed in view of later important developments in physical theory,
in particular the special theory of relativity.
We pointed out earlier how Newtonian theory was revised due to
contradictions with the nature of electromagnetic phenomena, and
then special relativity was revised to incorporate the force of gravity,
to become the theory of general relativity. In formulating the general
theory of relativity, Einstein made fundamental use of the idea of
the spacetime continuum. Basically the question was how to include
gravity within a four-dimensional description of space and time, so that
the theory reduces to special relativity with appropriate limits when
there is no gravity. The gravitation theory formulated by Einstein in
1915, consistent with special relativity, has been highly successful and
has opened up many new dimensions and vistas in our thinking about
the Cosmos as a whole.
The continuum of special relativity is ‘ﬂat’. Any point in such a
continuum is called an event, which has three space and one time

22
The Fabric of Spacetime
coordinates. These locate any happening by where it happened and at
what time. Because the velocity of light is taken now as the universal
maximum, any event can inﬂuence future events only in a ‘cone of in-
ﬂuence’, which is called its future light cone. The same is true for past
events as well (Fig. 2.1).
It is clear when we look at the Universe that all astronomical bod-
ies such as stars, planets, and galaxies are connected and governed by
the force of gravity. All the same, whenever we look at any astronom-
ical object, for example, a star twenty light years away in distance, we
are really looking back twenty years in time, because the light that
we see from the star today was actually emitted twenty years ago.
q
Future
Present
Past
Past
cone
Time
Light
rays
from p
r
Space
Future
cone
Paths of
material particles
s
p
Figure 2.1 In special relativity, the speed of light c is the maximum of all
speeds. For simplicity if we choose units so that c = 1, then given any event p in
spacetime, the set of all light rays from the same is given by a cone as shown.
Since material particles travel at a speed less than c, their paths must lie within
the cone, and these are called timelike trajectories. The light rays are called
null paths. The exterior of the cone is called the spacelike region for p, and no
communication from p can reach any other event r in this spacelike part. On
the other hand, happenings at p can inﬂuence any event q in its future, or any
event s in its past can in turn inﬂuence p.

Spacetime Continuum
23
This is strongly suggestive of the fact that space, time, and gravity are
intimately connected to each other.
In the case of special relativity physics, there is no gravity and the
spacetime curvatures are zero at all points. This would be a very good
approximation in laboratory settings on Earth, or locally in the Uni-
verse, where the force of gravity could be taken to be very small
compared to other physical forces which are much more dominant.
The key suggestion made by Einstein was that in order to understand
gravity, ﬁrst we need to see space and time as forming a single spacetime
continuum. This was a radical departure from the Newtonian way of con-
sidering them as separate and absolute entities. Second, gravity could no
longer be regarded as a ‘force’, but had to be seen as a manifestation of
the curvature of this spacetime continuum. In other words, the key ef-
fect of the ‘force of gravity’ is that it ‘curves’ the spacetime continuum,
which then no longer remains the ﬂat substratum of special relativity.
According to Einstein, the nature of spacetime is altered and it curves
in the presence of gravity. For a ﬂat surface, the particles on which no
forces are acting and light rays will travel in a straight line. In a curved
continuum also, they will still travel in the most efﬁcient manner, and
such paths are called geodesics in spacetime (Fig. 2.2). The problem with
Negative curvature
Positive curvature
Zero curvature
Figure 2.2 A two-dimensional analogy of the shortest paths. Depending on
the curvature of the space, the shortest paths, which are called geodesics, that
exist between points in that space may vary. In the usual ﬂat sheet medium
these are straight lines, but not so when the space is positively or nega-
tively curved. Such paths taken by material particles in a spacetime are called
timelike geodesics, and those by light rays are called null geodesics.

24
The Fabric of Spacetime
gravity then becomes how to describe how the spacetime continuum is
curved, and how to quantify the curvatures.
Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
The key difference between the Einstein gravity, or the general theory
of relativity, and Newtonian gravity is that rather than treating it as a
force, Einstein treated gravity as the curvature of the spacetime con-
tinuum. Thus a very weak gravitational ﬁeld or no gravity would cor-
respond to an almost or completely ﬂat spacetime geometry, whereas
very high gravity ﬁelds would be represented by high spacetime cur-
vatures. The basic model of general relativity is that of a spacetime
continuum, with a distance function which is called a Lorentzian metric, to
measure distances between nearby events and along paths of material
particles. Such a continuum structure of spacetime has been veriﬁed
to be valid up to the largest observable cosmological scales, and on the
smallest scales this will hold at least until quantum effects take over,
which is much below the radius of an elementary particle on the order
of 10–13cm.
So to take into account the force of gravity, we need to turn to gen-
eral relativity, which describes gravity as spacetime curvature. Einstein’s
ﬁeld equations related this curvature or spacetime geometry to the
matter content of the Universe. Thus, in general relativity, the Uni-
verse is modeled as a spacetime continuum which has a structure of a
four-dimensional differentiable manifold. This means that locally spacetime
is always ﬂat in a sufﬁciently small region around any point, but on a
larger scale that is not the case and it can have a more rich and varied
curved structure. An example of such a manifold is a two-dimensional
sphere. If we choose any point on its surface, there is always a small
enough region around the point which is ﬂat enough in the vicinity.
But when we go to a larger region, the non-zero global curvature of
the surface is immediately manifested.
Physically, what this means is that while on larger scales gravity will
prevail and curve spacetime, locally special relativity always holds in
a small neighborhood of any event. This was incorporated in general
relativity by Einstein in the form of the equivalence principle (Fig. 2.3). To
understand gravity in such a manner, we need to have a clear idea
on what is ‘curved’ and what is ‘ﬂat’. The mathematics that Einstein
used to determine this was that of Riemannian geometry, which is a

Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
25
Figure 2.3 The equivalence principle plays a basic role in the construction of
the general relativity theory. What it says is that locally the effects of gravity
can always be mimicked by an accelerated frame of reference. For example, a
person observes that when he drops balls on the surface of the Earth from a
height, they fall to the ground. Now if he were in a rocket going up in acceler-
ated fashion, he would similarly observe that the balls fall to the bottom. How
this was used in the construction of Einstein’s theory was that while globally
the spacetime universe may be curved, locally one can always choose a frame
of reference in which it looks ﬂat.

26
The Fabric of Spacetime
Flat surface
A
A
B
B
Curved surface
Figure 2.4 The basic idea of curvature is characterized by the notion of par-
allel transport. To see this, we can consider parallel transport of vectors on a
ﬂat surface, and that on a curved surface. As we go from point to point, we
make sure that the length and orientation of the vector do not change. In a
ﬂat surface, we then obtain the same vector at the end of the trip, independ-
ent of whatever path we take. But in a curved surface, the resultant vector will
be different depending on the path we have taken to reach the ﬁnal destina-
tion. Thus, the vector is no longer the same after the transport in a curved
medium.
curved surface geometry, two dimensional or higher, developed in the
nineteenth century by Bernhard Riemann and others. On such sur-
faces, the curvature of the surface is characterized by the notion of
‘parallel transport’. One can understand this with the help of two-
dimensional surfaces again, as shown in Fig. 2.4.
Thus the main point of general relativity is that gravity is represented
by curvature of the spacetime continuum. The speciﬁcation of this cur-
vature is determined by Riemannian geometry, which quantiﬁes these
curvatures as we move from point to point. What remains now is to
specify how the presence of matter and energy density curve spacetime.
This is given by the ﬁeld equations that Einstein constructed, relating
curvatures with the matter content of spacetime. So if we specify
the matter content, Einstein’s equations will tell us how spacetime is
curved or what is its detailed geometry. Just as the most efﬁcient path
to travel in a ﬂat geometry is a straight line, similarly material particles
and light rays travel along geodesic curves in spacetime.
So to get the full picture, we need to solve Einstein’s equations to-
gether with the geodesics. Typically, what we are looking for is, given

Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
27
a physical situation, a geometry of spacetime that describes this phys-
ical scenario. To do this, the physical parameters of the phenomenon
are speciﬁed and then Einstein’s equations are solved within these
constraints. Such a solution gives the geometry of the corresponding
spacetime model that describes this physical happening, in terms of
the spacetime metric. Such a metric typically consists of ten quanti-
ties which vary from point to point in spacetime and which specify
the gravitational potentials or gravity forces and curvatures at each of
these points and thus throughout spacetime. This completes the full
description of the phenomenon; the physical consequences are then to
be explored and predictions made for future physical events.
For example, suppose there is a massive star existing in the Uni-
verse, and we want to know how the physics behaves in its vicinity
(see Fig. 2.5). This scenario was worked out by Karl Schwarzschild in
1916, soon after Einstein gave his ﬁeld equations, and the solution is
now known as the Schwarzschild metric. This geometry described the grav-
itational ﬁeld around the star, and many of the experimental effects
and predictions of general relativity, such as the perihelion of Mercury,
were worked out using this metric. Similarly, the metric for the Uni-
verse as a whole, assuming it to be homogeneous and isotropic, was
worked out by Friedmann, Robertson, and Walker (FRW). The now
well-known image of the Big Bang Universe emerges from this FRW
Universe geometry.
Einstein’s theory certainly presents several very intriguing physical
and mathematical features and makes remarkable predictions on the
nature of the Universe. We can try to get an insight into why it does so.
First, Einstein’s formulation of gravity is, for sure, rather different
from other physical theories, both mathematically and in its structure
as a theory. In the Newtonian theory, gravity was described by a single
equation which gave the force of gravity between two masses as de-
termined by their magnitude and the distance between them. On the
other hand, general relativity describes gravity via Einstein’s ﬁeld equa-
tions, which involve ten quantities as given by the spacetime metric
with the physical meaning of gravitational potentials at any given space-
time event. All of these are functions of space and time coordinates.
Mathematically, Einstein’s equations are rather complex, differential
equations, nonlinear in their variables involved. Thus, to solve these
equations in order to obtain and understand the workings of the force

28
The Fabric of Spacetime
Sun
Actual star
Observed image
Earth
Earth
Figure 2.5 The bending of light due to gravity. We can consider a sheet of
cloth, which has a ﬂat geometry otherwise. But when a mass is dropped
into it, it becomes curved, curvature being higher closer to the location
of mass. The paths of light rays and the properties of a ﬂat geometry are
radically different from those in a curved geometry. These properties and es-
sentially the curvature of the medium then basically reﬂect and capture the
presence of mass or gravity in the continuum of space and time. Such a light-
bending effect was predicted by Einstein’s theory, which was veriﬁed later by
observations.
of gravity and to make models of physical phenomena based on them
becomes a rather non-trivial, complicated task.
The added richness of the Einstein gravity probably comes from the
fact that we are no longer dealing now with the Euclidean geometry
of space and time, as was the Newtonian case. We must now work
with a Riemannian geometry on a curved spacetime continuum to de-
scribe gravity. Such a geometry may be changing from point to point
in this substratum. As opposed to the Newtonian theory, where the
three-dimensional space and one dimension of time were treated as
absolute and entirely separate entities, general relativity treats these
as intertwined and mutually involved with each other. This inter-
woven fabric of space and time makes the four-dimensional spacetime

Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
29
continuum. Thus the entire physics now takes place in an arena of a
four-dimensional continuum.
This is a basic paradigm shift which has brought out ideas and pos-
sibilities about the Universe which were very hard even to imagine
previously. We now have the possibility of considering Universe models
with many non-trivial spacetime topologies, or universes with dimen-
sions, higher than the standard four dimensions, where there are extra
space dimensions that are compactiﬁed.
What is remarkable is, unlike all other physical theories, general
relativity incorporates and is based upon non-trivial geometric and
topological features for the overall geometry of the Universe. The latter
aspect, namely the topology, incorporates the key geometric differences
between objects and shapes. For example, a sphere and a doughnut are
topologically different from each other, or they do not have the same
topology. To see this difference, we can note that any circle drawn on
the spherical surface can be shrunk to a point, but the same is not true
for a doughnut (Fig. 2.6). On the other hand, any distorted sphere is
topologically equivalent to a perfect sphere.
Sphere
Doughnut
S1
S2
Figure 2.6 Topology characterizes different geometric shapes and ﬁgures and
speciﬁes the differences between them. We can, for example, consider a sphere
and a doughnut, to show that these objects have fundamentally different
shapes geometrically. For example, any circle S1 drawn on a sphere can be con-
tinuously shrunk to a zero radius. The same, however, is not possible for all
circles, e.g. S2, on the doughnut. This is basically due to the characteristic dif-
ferences these spaces have. The general theory of relativity as such permits any
possible topology for a spacetime universe, which Einstein’s ﬁeld equations do
not constrain in any manner. So different solutions can have different over-
all topologies. Such a scenario can have observational effects in cosmology,
depending on what model we choose to represent the Universe.

30
The Fabric of Spacetime
Physical Implications
General relativity has given rise to the most unusual aspects of the Uni-
verse, such as black holes, spacetime singularities, causality violations
and time travel, worm holes, gravitational waves, and other such fea-
tures. These are consequences of Einstein’s gravity and many of them
are totally novel aspects that were never anticipated by Newtonian
gravity. While several experimental predictions of relativity have now
been veriﬁed, other possibilities indicated by it are under strong theo-
retical and observational investigation.
The key reason Einstein’s theory predicts and includes such phe-
nomena is that, unlike all other physical theories including quantum
mechanics, which are purely local in terms of their dependence on
spacetime events, general relativity crucially incorporates global and
nonlinear aspects of space and time. This includes allowing for different
spacetime topologies for the Universe. The structure of general rela-
tivity as described earlier, together with the complexity of Einstein’s
equations, gives rise to the perception that the force of gravity is rather
different from the other three fundamental forces of nature. That is
perhaps why it has been so difﬁcult to obtain a quantum theory of
gravity that combines gravity with the rest of the forces of nature.
It is therefore natural that as of now only few physically useful and
meaningful solutions to Einstein’s equations have been obtained. These
include the Schwarzschild solution, which gives the spacetime geom-
etry around a point mass that describes a black hole. The geometry
around a static star will also be described by the same solution. Then
the Friedmann–Robertson–Walker solutions describe a homogeneous
and isotropic universe, which is basic to modern cosmology. There
are also other interesting solutions such as the Reissner–Nördstrom,
Kerr–Newman, and Vaidya geometries, which we shall discuss later.
After the theory of general relativity was constructed, most of the
research in past decades has been using analytical techniques. In recent
years, however, we have used computers and numerical techniques in-
creasingly in general relativity. It is possible that this developing ﬁeld of
numerical relativity will see much progress in coming years.
Despite these difﬁculties and limitations, Einstein’s theory has, in
fact, produced a number of insights and rather novel and intriguing di-
rections and areas to explore as far as our understanding of the Universe
is concerned. Some of these scenarios and possibilities are so unique

Physical Implications
31
that they stand apart from the rest of the physical Universe created
by the three other fundamental forces of nature. Thus, for example,
we have the Big Bang singularity, the Universe’s theoretical origin, as
a prediction of the general theory of relativity. This prediction, to-
gether with a host of observational developments such as those related
to cosmic microwave background radiation, has given rise to the ex-
citing ﬁeld of modern cosmology. Also, intriguing predictions such as
black holes, singularities, and gravity waves are currently being stud-
ied as frontier developments in modern physics (Fig. 2.7). These are
Naked
singularities
Black
holes
Big Bang
Gravity
waves
Multi-
verses
Time warps
Time
travel
Spacetime
singularities
Einstein
gravity
Figure 2.7 Remarkable predictions of Einstein’s theory. There are several
novel and important predictions that Einstein’s theory makes about the Uni-
verse. None of these would have been anticipated from Newtonian theory.
Constructing a gravity theory that is consistent with special relativity, namely
the general theory of relativity, leads to many intriguing features such as black
holes, singularities, and time warps. Many of these possibilities, such as multi-
verses, which are independent universes made in the creation process, gravity
waves, and naked singularities, are very much under current investigation.

32
The Fabric of Spacetime
the direct consequence of analyzing the properties of gravity within a
spacetime universe and the interactions of matter therein within the
framework of Einstein’s theory of gravity. Thus, several exact solutions
of Einstein’s equations and their properties give us a good idea of the
potential possibilities.
Soon after the ﬁeld equations of general relativity were formulated,
important developments fundamental to relativistic astrophysics
and cosmology took place. Firstly, Karl Schwarzschild worked out
a solution to Einstein’s equations in 1916 under several simplifying
assumptions, such as that spacetime was taken to be spherically
symmetric, containing a point mass at the center of symmetry but
totally empty otherwise, and far away from the center the geometry
was taken to be ﬂat. This became known as the Schwarzschild solution
and has subsequently become the basis of black hole physics. It has
been also a guiding principle for many of the experimental tests of the
general relativity theory.
Certain features of the Schwarzschild metric have been the subject of
major debates for gravitation theorists in the ensuing decades. First, the
gravitational potentials had a degeneracy at a certain value r = 2m where
m is the mass of the particle at the center and r is the radial coordinate.
It was thought that this represented a total breakdown and a singular-
ity in the description of physics around the object. Actually, it wasn’t
discovered until the 1960s that this was not the case, as we shall dis-
cuss later, and that the genuine spacetime singularity was present only
at the center, at r = 0. Finally, it became clear that the surface, r = 2m,
was the event horizon of what would be later called a black hole. Also,
there was much discussion as to whether the surface, r = 2m, is a genu-
ine physical feature of the spacetime geometry, which it was, as we shall
discuss later.
The second important development was to ﬁnd useful solutions to
Einstein’s equations which would be physically meaningful even if the
solutions were obtained under simpliﬁed and idealized assumptions. As
mentioned earlier, Einstein’s equations are a complicated set of non-
linear differential equations. Thus ﬁnding a fully general solution had
been a far-off dream. In 1922 Alexander Friedmann worked out a cos-
mological solution by assuming that the Universe is homogeneous and
isotropic. A kinematic geometry for such a Universe model was simi-
larly provided by Howard Robertson and Arthur Walker, which ﬁxed

Physical Implications
33
the metric for the Universe. This is now referred to as the FRW metric
of the Universe and is a key input for modern cosmology.
Further to this, from about the 1930s onwards, for many decades gen-
eral relativity was a somewhat dormant ﬁeld of activity. Einstein himself
was busy working toward generating a uniﬁed theory for ﬁelds. Much
of the effort then was focused on obtaining physically meaningful so-
lutions to Einstein’s equations. In this period, the Reissner–Nördstrom
solution, which was a generalization of the Schwarzschild metric with a
non-zero charge, and the Kerr and Kerr–Newman solutions, which in-
cluded the additional feature of rotation and charge, were obtained. The
Vaidya solution obtained in 1942 included the radiation in the exterior
of a star, which was another generalization of the Schwarzschild case.
An important development in the same period was the work of
Robert Oppenheimer, Herbert Snyder, and A. Datt (OSD) in the later
1930s, who modeled the gravitational collapse of a massive matter cloud
within the framework of full general relativity. Not much attention,
however, was paid to this at that time, as it was thought that a star
would never really shrink under its own gravity to such extremes. A
discussion on gravity waves was also initiated in this period.
It was, in fact, in the 1960s that the ﬁeld of gravity physics and rela-
tivistic astrophysics warmed up. The essential trigger was the discovery
of very-high-energy phenomena such as active galactic nuclei, quasars
and radio galaxies, which drew attention to earlier work of OSD. The
concept of black holes was developed further by John Wheeler, Roger
Penrose, Brandon Carter, Stephen Hawking, and others. The cosmic
censorship conjecture was put forward by Penrose in 1969, which stated
that generically the collapse of a massive star will end up as a black
hole. This was a big push to take forward the physics of black holes
and its applications in relativistic astrophysics. Many theoretical results
about black holes such as the area theorem and those dealing with
black hole thermodynamics were developed. Key physical properties of
black holes and their possible detection through astronomical obser-
vation have been discussed. This continues to be big area of research
for relativistic astrophysicists, astronomers, and gravitation theorists
alike.
Prior to this, during the 1960s and early 1970s, a big debate broke out
about the existence of spacetime singularities. It was widely thought
that the spacetime singularity present in solutions to models such as

34
The Fabric of Spacetime
the Schwarzschild and FRW would go away once more general models
without special symmetry conditions were considered. The singularity
theorems due to Hawking, Penrose, and Robert Geroch showed that,
however, spacetime singularities are present rather generically in the
general relativistic spacetimes, and also in other metric theories of grav-
ity. Very interesting and useful development took place during this time
to help understand the global and topological properties of general
spacetime, and the gravitational focusing within due to its matter–
energy density content. Based on this study it was determined that the
existence of singularities could be established in a general manner.
Further, an intense period of application of black holes in relativistic
astrophysics was initiated. Of course physicists have been very aware
that important issues such as establishing the cosmic censorship con-
jecture, which has been at the foundation of black hole physics and
its modern-day applications, remain unresolved despite much serious
effort. This has also given rise to efforts in recent years to work out grav-
itational collapse models within the framework of Einstein’s gravity.
This work has shown the formation of black holes and naked singu-
larities as ﬁnal states for a complete collapse of massive stars, as we shall
be discussing here.
The phenomenon of Hawking radiation, suggested in 1975, triggered
new efforts toward a quantum theory of gravity. The quantization
in curved background geometries was tried extensively and currently
much effort is being expended in loop quantum gravity formalism and
string theories. It has been generally agreed by researchers that com-
bining gravity and quantum theory in a single theoretical framework is
a formidable task, and no clear clues are yet available.
Among more recent developments have been the cosmological ob-
servations and related problems of dark energy and dark matter in the
Universe. There have been observational missions such as the Wilkin-
son Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) and the Planck mission in
recent decades. The main aim of these has been a detailed study of the
cosmic microwave background radiation. Many observations related to
the accelerated expansion of the Universe have also been made. The
theoretical possibilities of explaining this phenomenon include the ex-
istence of dark energy. Possibilities of various dark matter candidates
are under investigation. Much effort has also been made to under-
stand the physics of gravity waves, and their possible observational
detection.

Local and Global Aspects
35
All this effort has been greatly supported by the developing ﬁeld
of numerical relativity, with the arrival of very powerful comput-
ers. Computer simulations are useful in studying structure forma-
tion, and in modeling gravitational collapse in full general rela-
tivity. Such numerical efforts may generate new insights into the
nature and properties of Einstein’s complex equations. All in all,
this presents a very active and vibrant scenario for research in
the ﬁeld of gravity physics and its applications in astrophysics and
cosmology.
Local and Global Aspects
While other forces of nature such as electromagnetism and weak and
strong nuclear forces can be described purely locally, one of the most
important lessons resulting from general relativity is that the force of
gravity has both local and global aspects, described in terms of the local
and global spacetime geometry.
An interesting example of this is that while in a local region of space
and time special relativity is always valid and there are no causality vi-
olations taking place, on a larger scale the geometry of the Universe
could be such that an observer can enter her own past. The Gödel uni-
verse solution of Einstein’s equations, obtained by Kurt Gödel in 1942,
which included an overall rotation for the Cosmos, has such a property.
This is purely a global property of spacetime, even when locally the spe-
cial relativity physics is fully valid. The point is, in general relativity, on
the global scale the topology and geometry of the Universe can be very
different from those allowed by the Newtonian models, which allow no
other geometry other than Euclidean space.
Thus global aspects of spacetimes are very important in Einstein
gravity, and in fact it is these that give rise to the many novel features
of general relativity. Global considerations have been important in the
general theory of relativity right from its inception, and also for other
theories of gravity. The same is true for cosmology also by the very
deﬁnition and purpose of that science. Such a role for global aspects
becomes easier to understand if we note that even when locally the
laws of physics are of special relativity and spacetime is very nearly ﬂat,
the spacetime universe as a whole is made by smoothly joining these
local patches, which is what gives rise to a non-ﬂat, curved continuum.
There is an inherent freedom in how these locally ﬂat patches are to

36
The Fabric of Spacetime
be joined together, and this is what gives rise to different non-trivial
structures in spacetime models. Similar global features arise in other
theories of gravity as well, such as those of Brans and Dicke given
in 1961, which are metric theories of gravity based on a spacetime
continuum model.
We know that gravity is a very weak force such that the ratio of the
gravitational force to the electromagnetic force between an electron
and a proton is about 10–43. However, it turns out that despite being
the weakest force of the known fundamental interactions, gravity im-
plies remarkable conclusions as far as the overall large-scale structure
of the Universe is concerned. An example of this is the remarkable con-
clusion made by Alexander Friedmann in 1922 that the Universe must
have originated a ﬁnite time ago from an epoch of inﬁnite density and
curvatures if the evolving matter obeyed the dynamical equations of
general relativity, together with the assumptions of homogeneity and
isotropy for the Universe.
It is worth noting that despite such predominant global features
manifesting in the structure of gravitation theory, most of the calcula-
tions were done up until the early 1960s using a local coordinate system,
which was deﬁned in the neighborhood of a spacetime event. The key
aim was to solve Einstein’s equations using various simplifying assump-
tions, which by themselves form a complicated set of nonlinear partial
differential equations.
This scenario changed considerably when the so-called ‘Schwarz-
schild singularity’ problem arose in general relativity. The Schwarz-
schild solution of Einstein’s equations describes the gravitational ﬁeld
in the exterior of a spherically symmetric star where there is no matter
present and spacetime is empty. The spacetime metric gives the ‘dis-
tance’ between two inﬁnitesimally separated events in the spacetime
continuum, where the key parameter is m, which represents the mass
of the star or the central particle. Due to the spherical symmetry of the
problem, the metric coefﬁcients, or the gravitational potentials, were
written down in spherical coordinates, which are the coordinates on
a three-dimensional sphere. These are a radial coordinate, r, and two
other angular coordinates, the fourth coordinate being time. It turned
out that at the value r = 2m one of the metric components went to a
vanishing value and the other one blew up, pointing to an irregularity
in the spacetime metric.

Local and Global Aspects
37
It was thought initially that this represents a singularity in space-
time itself and that the physics goes seriously wrong at r = 2m. For many
decades after the Schwarzschild solution was found, this remained a
source of confusion and only after considerable effort was it realized
that this is, in fact, not a genuine spacetime singularity but merely a
coordinate defect. What really happens is that the coordinates used
break down at the r = 2m value, just as coordinates degenerate at the
poles of a two-dimensional sphere. That there is nothing physically
wrong at r = 2m was indicated by the ﬁniteness of spacetime curvatures
there. What was needed was a better coordinate system covering the
full spacetime, which was obtained by Martin Kruskal and G. Szekeres
in the 1960s. This may be regarded as an important insight involving
a global approach in gravitation theory. There were other similar de-
velopments which clariﬁed the role of spacetime topology and global
evolution issues, also known as the Cauchy problem in general rela-
tivity. These developments clariﬁed the role of global considerations in
Einstein gravity.
The understanding of global aspects in gravitation and cosmology
now came into its own and was highlighted by a detailed analysis of
the problem of spacetime singularities. As mentioned previously, it was
realized early on that an important implication in the study of cos-
mological models is that the Universe contains an inﬁnite curvature
singularity from which it originated. The Schwarzschild solution also
contains a genuine curvature singularity at the center where the space-
time curvature components blow up, as opposed to a mere coordinate
defect at r = 2m.
To begin with, such singularities were not taken seriously, and were
believed to be the only consequence of the exact symmetry conditions
assumed for these models while solving Einstein’s equations, and not
any genuine feature of the general relativity theory. It was thought that
the singularities would disappear once more realistic conditions were
used for spacetime models, and when the exact symmetries such as ho-
mogeneity and isotropy were replaced by more realistic assumptions in
the cosmological problem being studied.
But as mentioned earlier, the singularity theorems showed that
this was not the case. The spacetime structure was analyzed in de-
tail within the general framework of Einstein gravity. Using a rigorous
analysis of global properties of a general spacetime, it was shown that

38
The Fabric of Spacetime
under certain general and physically reasonable conditions such as
the positivity of energy, occurrence of trapped surfaces, and a suit-
able causality condition, the spacetime singularities would occur as an
inevitable feature for a wide range of gravitation theories.
This analysis involved a detailed examination of the causal structure
of spacetime, which was then combined with the study of focusing
that was caused by gravity on the families of timelike and null paths,
which are the trajectories in a spacetime of material particles and light
rays. The existence of spacetime singularities then follows for general
spacetimes. Such a singularity arises either in a cosmological scenario
where it provides the origin of the Universe or as the end-state of the
gravitational collapse of a massive star which has exhausted its nu-
clear fuel which earlier provided the pressure against the inward pull of
gravity.
The understanding of these global features of spacetime during this
phase of work resulted in the development of so-called singularity
theorems involving the evolution problem in relativity, black hole
physics, the structure of exact solutions of Einstein’s equations, and the
asymptotic structure of spacetimes.
Spacetime Foam
An important key question related to gravitation theory within a space-
time framework is to what extent the continuum spacetime model of
general relativity should be considered valid. Even if the Universe is
modeled quite well by a continuum picture at macroscopic and clas-
sical levels, will such a description survive at much smaller microscopic
scales?
This situation is similar to that of a fabric of cloth, which looks quite
continuous and whole when seen from far away on a larger scale. But on
going closer, we see that it is made up of many individual ﬁbers woven
together with many gaps inbetween. Similarly, one could ask whether
spacetime, which looks continuous on a larger scale, could actually be
discrete, and whether it is made of yet more basic and different smaller
components on a very small scale. In other words, one could ask what
are the ‘atoms’ constituting spacetime.
As an example, on a larger scale, the geometry of the Universe could
be described by a typical spacetime metric such as the FRW metric. This

Spacetime Foam
39
is a purely classical model, with the metric giving the local gravitational
potentials. However, the overall geometry and topology of the Universe
are left quite free by general relativity, which imposes no constraints. In
FRW models also, the geometry can be positively or negatively curved
or ﬂat, and the space can be like a three-dimensional sphere, or some
other entity depending on the curvatures of space. Then as we go to
ﬁner and ﬁner length scales typically on the order of the Planck length,
which is about 10–33 cm, classical theory does not hold and quantum
effects dominate. In such a case, there is no guarantee that space, or
spacetime itself, will have a ﬁxed topology at that microscopic level.
Do quantum ﬂuctuations in spacetime topology dominate at micro-
scopic levels, giving a foam-like structure to spacetime, rather than the
usually assumed continuum (Fig. 2.8)? If so, such effects will be quite
important when formulating any quantum theory of gravity. Probably,
it is our assumption of the smooth continuum structure for spacetime
that is causing many of the problems encountered at present. So the
Figure 2.8 On a larger macroscopic scale spacetime may present a smooth
continuous picture. But on a microscopic scale at very small distances, or at
very high energies and curvatures, quantum gravity effects may dominate.
These can manifest in a continuously changing spacetime topology from one
shape to the other, with different regions having different topologies, thus
effectively creating a foam-like structure. While we are far from making a
quantitative theory of such a quantum spacetime foam, such possibilities may
play an important role in our future understanding of the Universe.

40
The Fabric of Spacetime
issue is, what is the real structure of spacetime at microscopic levels and
at scales near the Planck length? The considerations on spacetime to-
pology could play an important role here. One can ask whether it is
reasonable to work with a ﬁxed spacetime topology in quantum grav-
ity, or will quantum ﬂuctuations not cause perturbations in its topology
as well? Researchers have been thinking of the possible relationships
between spacetime topology and quantum gravity.

N3O
Black Holes
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar pointed out, way back in 1934, that the
life-history of a star of small mass must be essentially different from that
of a star of large mass. Stars like the Sun, when they run out of their in-
ternal nuclear fuel, stabilize into smaller entities of about a thousand
kilometers in size, called white dwarfs. On the other hand, a star of
larger mass, beyond about 1.4 solar masses, cannot pass into this stage,
and as Chandrasekhar pointed out, ‘one is left speculating on other
possibilities’.
For decades, the question as to what is the ﬁnal fate of a massive star
has remained unanswered. In recent years much research has focused
on this issue, which has become one of the most important unresolved
problems in astrophysics and cosmology today.
Large-mass stars, when they run out of their internal nuclear fuel,
undergo a continual gravitational collapse, which is a catastrophic
shrinkage of the star’s size under the pull of its own gravity. In this case,
exciting outcomes for the collapsing star are predicted by the general
theory of relativity. These have profound implications for fundamental
physics and cosmology. We aim to discuss these developments here.
A model of continual collapse for a massive star using the general
theory of relativity was constructed for the ﬁrst time by Robert Op-
penheimer and Herbert Snyder in 1939, and by S. Datt in 1938 (OSD).
It was this calculation that gave rise to the concepts of black hole and
event horizon, even though these terms weren’t actually coined till the
1960s. We will discuss these developments here, and how they eventu-
ally led to many other themes in black hole physics in the later 1960s
and early 1970s, and formed the basis for several important astrophysical
applications of black holes in modern relativistic astrophysics.
Actually, the idea of a black hole is not new and is in fact natural
(Fig. 3.1). For example, consider a star and the particles or projectiles
escaping from it. It is a basic property of gravity that the heavier the
star is, the greater the pull of its gravity, and the greater the velocity an

42
Black Holes
Figure 3.1 Black hole, an artist’s conception.
object will need to escape from it. However, we know that the veloc-
ity of light is the maximum that any particle can approach. Therefore,
in principle, we can think of objects which are either so massive or so
compact that their escape velocity will be greater than that of light. In
that case, no material particle or even light rays will be able to escape
from the surface of such a body, which could be termed a ‘black hole’
for all practical purposes. In fact, Pierre-Simon Laplace alluded to such
a possibility way back in 1799.
Life of a Star
It would be appropriate to say that like human beings, stars also have
a certain life-cycle. They are born in gigantic clouds of dust and inter-
galactic material in the depths of space and time, in the faraway regions
of the Universe. Once they come into existence, they evolve and shine
for millions of years, and then eventually enter the phase of dissolution
and ﬁnal extinction.
Most of the shining life of a star is essentially hydrogen burning
inside, fusing into helium, and later into heavier elements. Finally,
when all the star’s matter is converted to iron, no more nuclear
processes are possible within and no new internal energy is produced.

Life of a Star
43
At this stage, the all-pervasive force of gravity takes over to determine
the star’s ﬁnal evolution.
Earlier in its life-cycle, there is a balance between the force of gravity
that pulls the star’s matter toward its center, and the outward pres-
sures generated by the internal fusion processes. This balance keeps the
star stable, maintaining a normal life of shining and radiating light and
energy produced within. Once internal pressures subside, gravity takes
over and the star begins to contract and collapse in on itself.
It is now known that for a star of small enough mass, comparable
to that of the Sun or somewhat larger, the natural white dwarf stage
is an initial step toward the star’s eventual extinction. On the other
hand, a star of larger mass, more than about 1.4 times the mass of the
Sun, cannot pass into a white dwarf ﬁnal state. Such stars, up to 3 to 5
solar masses in size, will settle into another stable conﬁguration, which
is called a neutron star. However, for even more massive stars, grav-
ity predicts continual and eventual total collapse. What will be its ﬁnal
fate? This is one of the most intriguing questions in modern astrophys-
ics and cosmology, with far-reaching consequences for fundamental
physics.
Stars are born in huge, faraway clouds of interstellar dust, mainly
when shockwaves, possibly generated by a supernova explosion else-
where, compress the matter together. Gravity then takes over and the
cloud shrinks further while its central temperatures rise. As the process
continues, at a certain stage nuclear burning is ignited within the core.
This is the birth of a star where the internal pressures generated by the
heat and light produced within resist any further contraction due to
gravity. In this case, a stable balance between the pressures generated
internally and the inward pull of gravity is ﬁnally reached.
There are star-forming regions in the Universe where conditions for
such processes to initiate are favorable and stars are continuously born
there, as we can observe by using the infra-red part of the light spec-
trum emitted from these regions. The stars born can be typically as
massive as our Sun, which is also a standard star, or a few times larger,
or even much more massive. Stars mainly burn their internal hydro-
gen, fusing it into helium atoms and releasing energy in the process.
Heavier elements such as carbon and oxygen are created in the process
and eventually this nuclear burning process stops or slows down when
much of the matter is converted to iron. Then the star cools and the in-
ternal pressures subside. Again, gravity, which is an ever-present force,
takes over and starts compressing the star inward.

44
Black Holes
When our Sun runs out of its internal fuel, its core will contract un-
der its own gravity, but it will be supported by a new quantum pressure
within created by very-fast-moving electrons, called the electron de-
generacy pressure. Such an object is called a white dwarf, which is about
a thousand kilometers in radius (Fig. 3.2).
Similarly, stars with masses greater than that of the Sun will settle
into a ﬁnal state, which is a neutron star, as mentioned earlier. This
state will be reached after an initial collapse and the star losing some
of its original mass. These are pure neutron objects created in the col-
lapse under the strong crush of gravity, which collapses even the atoms.
The quantum pressure of these neutrons support and balance the star,
which is barely some ten to ﬁfteen kilometers in size. The ﬁnal out-
come of collapse thus depends on the initial mass of the star, which
again stabilizes at a much smaller radius due to the balancing pressures
generated by either electrons or neutrons within. The outer layers of
the star are thrown off in the form of a supernova blast which is created
in the ﬁnal stage of the star’s collapse.
Life-cycle of a star
Average
star
Red giant
Planetary
nebula
White
dwarf
Neutron star
Black hole
Supernova
Red
supergiant
Massive star
Stellar
nebula
Figure 3.2 The depiction of ﬁnal states of stars of different masses. A small-
mass star, comparable to that of our sun, will eventually settle into a white
dwarf ﬁnal state. But for stars with larger masses there will be a supernova
explosion and a neutron star will form, or for even greater masses, there will
be a continual collapse and a black hole is believed to develop as the collapse
end-state.

Collapse of Massive Stars
45
Much more massive stars, larger than the neutron star mass limit,
cannot, however, settle into a white dwarf or neutron star state. This
is because internal quantum pressures due to electrons or neutrons
within are not enough to stabilize the collapsing star, as the inward
force of gravity is much more powerful. Therefore, a continual gravita-
tional collapse ensues, which no known physical force can halt. Such a
total collapse becomes inevitable once the star exhausts its internal nu-
clear fuel. In this sense, the life-history of a star of large mass is radically
different from that of small-mass stars.
Collapse of Massive Stars
A star as massive as ten or twenty times the Sun burns much faster and
lives only a few million years, compared to a lifetime of several billion
years for a smaller star such as the Sun. What is the ﬁnal fate of such a
massive star? This is one of the most important, unresolved problems in
astrophysics and cosmology today.
The fundamental question about the fate of massive stars was high-
lighted by Chandrasekhar (and also independently by Lev Landau), who
pointed out a major result of his investigations, which was basically that
the life-history of a small-mass star must be essentially different from
that of a large-mass star. In the case of a small-mass star, the natural
white dwarf stage is an initial step toward its complete extinction. How-
ever, a star that is larger than a certain critical limit cannot pass into the
white dwarf or neutron star type of equilibrium stage. We must then
speculate about other possibilities.
We can see the seeds of modern black hole physics already present
in the above inquiry. The issue of the end-state for large-mass stars re-
mained unresolved and elusive for a long time after Chandrasekhar’s
initial discussion. While his work pointed out the stable conﬁguration
limit for the formation of a white dwarf, the issue of the ﬁnal fate of
much larger stars remains very much unresolved today, because such a
star cannot settle either as a white dwarf or as a neutron star.
The issue is clearly important in both high-energy astrophysics and
cosmology. For example, our observations today on the existence of
dark energy in the Universe and the cosmic acceleration it produces
are intimately connected with observations of supernovae, which are
the product of collapsing stars. It is the observational evidence of
supernovae exploding far away in the Universe which tells us how the

46
Black Holes
Universe may be accelerating and the rate at which this acceleration is
taking place.
At the heart of such a supernova lies the phenomenon of cata-
strophic gravitational collapse of a massive star, wherein a powerful
shockwave is generated, blowing off the outer layers of the star. If a star
is able to throw off enough of its matter in such an explosion, it might
eventually settle as a neutron star. However, if matter accretes onto
the neutron star, there will be a further continual collapse, which we
will have to explore further. On the other hand, stars which are more
massive and well above the normal supernovae mass limit straightaway
enter a continual collapse mode at the end of their life-cycle without
any intermediate neutron star stage.
The ﬁnal fate of such a star is decided by the general theory of rela-
tivity. The point is that the usual laws of physics and quantum theory
explain the formation of white dwarfs and neutron stars in terms of
the electron degeneracy pressure and the neutron degeneracy pres-
sure, respectively. But such ‘quantum pressures’ are only able to resist a
star’s gravitational collapse when its mass is no more than about ﬁve to
eight solar masses at the very highest. When the initial mass is greater
than this, these pressures can no longer generate an equilibrium for
the star, and it collapses under the full seize of gravity, which shrinks it
completely. The other three fundamental forces of nature which were
signiﬁcant earlier are no longer important and the ﬁnal fate of the star
is now determined by the general theory of relativity.
The important point here is that stars which are tens of times the
mass of the Sun burn much faster and are far more luminous. Such
stars cannot endure more than about ten to twenty million years,
which is a much shorter lifespan than that of our Sun, which will
live much longer. Therefore, the question of the ﬁnal fate of such
short-lived massive stars is of central importance in astronomy and
astrophysics.
What needs to be investigated then is what happens in terms of the
ﬁnal outcome when such a massive star dies on exhausting its internal
nuclear fuel. The general theory of relativity predicts that the collaps-
ing massive star must terminate into a spacetime singularity, where
the matter energy densities, spacetime curvatures, and other physical
quantities all blow up. It then becomes crucial to know whether such
super-ultra-dense regions forming in the stellar collapse are visible to
an external observer, or whether they will always be hidden within a

A Black Hole is Born
47
black hole and an event horizon of gravity that possibly forms as the star
collapses. This is one of the most important open issues in the physics
of black holes today.
A Black Hole is Born
To understand the ﬁnal state of collapse for a massive star, we need to
trace the time evolution of the system and its dynamical progression
using Einstein’s equations of gravity. The star shrinks under the force
of its own gravity, which comes to dominate other basic interactions of
nature such as the weak and strong nuclear forces that typically provide
the outward pressure to balance the pull of gravity.
Einstein’s theory was ﬁrst used for understanding the ﬁnal fate of
massive collapsing stars by Oppenheimer and Snyder, and independ-
ently by Datt in the late 1930s. OSD studied the continual gravitational
collapse of a pressureless, homogeneous uniform density matter cloud
using the general theory of relativity. The most interesting result was
that the collapse, as it evolves in time, leads to the formation of what
was later called an event horizon. This is a one-way surface formed in
spacetime which causes a region of space and time to be invisible and
non-communicable to observers far away in the Universe. This hidden
region is called a black hole, though the terms black hole and event ho-
rizon were actually coined much later, in 1969, by John Wheeler. Thus,
the continual collapse of such a massive matter cloud in the OSD model
creates a black hole as the collapse end-state.
In order to deal with the complex Einstein equations, the OSD work
made several simplifying assumptions. Oppenheimer, Snyder, and Datt
assumed in their calculations that the density distribution within a star
is strictly homogeneous, that is it was taken to be uniform everywhere.
Also, they neglected the gas pressure forces within a spherical star, tak-
ing them to be zero, thus assuming the matter to be pressureless dust
only. Their calculations showed that an event horizon surface devel-
ops as collapse progresses, such that no material particles or photons
from the region inside the horizon escape. Once the star collapses to a
radius smaller than the horizon, it has entered the black hole region
in spacetime. It then collapses to a singularity of extreme density. For
a collapsing star to create a black hole, an event horizon must develop
prior to the formation of the ﬁnal singularity. Once the star enters the
event horizon surface, the causal structure of spacetime implies that

48
Black Holes
no material particles or light rays from that region can escape, and it is
entirely cut off from observers far away in the Universe.
What is obtained from the OSD model is an interior view of the col-
lapsing cloud. In general such a solution depends on the properties of
matter, equation of state, and the physical processes taking place within
the stellar interior. However, assuming the matter to be pressureless
dust and the density to be uniform makes it possible to solve the prob-
lem explicitly and analytically. In OSD’s case the energy–momentum
tensor is taken to be that of pressureless dust, and we solve Einstein’s
equations to determine the metric potentials; as a result, the geometry
of the collapsing dust ball is obtained.
To understand the process of how an event horizon and black hole
form when a massive star collapses, we ﬁrst note that the star eventually
collapses to a singularity of inﬁnite density and spacetime curvatures.
The general relativity calculation implies that as the star collapses the
force of gravity on its surface keeps growing and eventually a stage is
reached when no light signal emitted from its surface is able to es-
cape. This is the epoch when an event horizon has formed, and the
star then enters the black hole region of spacetime. The in-falling emit-
ter does not feel anything special when entering the horizon, but any
faraway observer stops seeing the light from it. The strong gravity of
the star causes this one-way membrane, that is the event horizon, to
form. Within the horizon the collapse continues to crush the star into
a spacetime singularity.
The physics accepted today for describing the formation of black
holes as the end-state of stellar collapse relies on the OSD dust model. In
this case, all the matter falls into the spacetime singularity at the same
time, while the event horizon forms earlier than the singularity, thus
fully covering it. This is how a black hole region in spacetime results
as the end-state of collapse. The issue of the ﬁnal fate of a gravitational
collapse must be probed within the framework of a suitable theory of
gravity, because the ultra-strong gravity effects will be important in
such a scenario. Hence, the OSD model uses the general theory of rel-
ativity to examine the ﬁnal fate of an idealized massive matter cloud,
as described earlier. As we noted, the dynamical collapse created the
spacetime singularity, which was preceded by an event horizon. This is
what developed as a black hole in spacetime. The singularity is hidden
inside such a black hole, and the collapse eventually settles to a ﬁnal
state which is the Schwarzschild geometry that we mentioned earlier.

Gravitational Collapse
49
Gravitational Collapse
It would be useful to discuss and understand the basic features of this
gravitational collapse scenario in some detail. For the collapsing spher-
ical homogeneous dust cloud, the collapse is initiated from a regular
conﬁguration at an initial time t = 0. Once the collapse has started,
it cannot be halted and the star continues shrinking to smaller and
smaller diameters. At the initial time and later, when the star surface
is outside the event horizon, which is also called its Schwarzschild radius,
any light ray emitted from the surface of the star can escape to a far-
away observer. However, once the star has collapsed below the event
horizon radius, which is at the value r = 2m, it has entered the black
hole region of no escape in spacetime. This region develops in space-
time as the collapse progresses, and is bounded by the event horizon
radius (Fig. 3.3).
Then the collapse of all the matter to an inﬁnite density and curva-
ture singularity at the center r = 0 happens. This inevitably takes place
in a ﬁnite proper time as measured by an observer sitting on the sur-
face of the star. Thus, the star collapses totally at a ﬁnite time in the
future and all its matter is crushed to the spacetime singularity at the
center. There is a singularity at the center now and the rest of spacetime
is empty, with its geometry described by the Schwarzschild metric. This
is called the Schwarzschild black hole.
Any event in this region within the Schwarzschild black hole is called
a trapped surface. This is a two-dimensional sphere in spacetime and its ba-
sic property is that both the outgoing and ingoing families of light rays
emitted from this point converge inward. So no light and therefore no
material particles emerge from this region. Such a black hole region
in the resulting Schwarzschild geometry ranges from the center to the
Schwarzschild surface, the event horizon being the outer boundary. On
the event horizon, the radial outward photons stay where they are, but
all the rest are dragged in toward the center of the black hole. No infor-
mation from this black hole can propagate outside the r = 2m region.
Since no emissions or light rays from the singularity can travel out to
an observer at inﬁnity, the singularity is causally disconnected from the
outside spacetime.
The spacetime region within and enclosed by the event horizon is
the black hole region. The size of the event horizon scales as the total
collapsing mass; that is, the larger the mass of the star, the larger the

50
Black Holes
Spacetime
singularity
Event
horizon
Apparent
horizon
Boundary
of the star
Light ray
r = 2m
r = 0
t
r
Initial surface
Collapsing
matter
Figure 3.3 The spacetime diagram for the dynamical evolution of a homo-
geneous spherical dust cloud collapse, as described by the Oppenheimer–
Snyder–Datt solution. Such a collapse creates a Schwarzschild black hole
in spacetime. The homogeneous dust cloud collapses from an initial epoch
of time where the density at all points within the star and other physical
quantities are all regular and well-behaved. The shaded region indicates the
collapsing matter. Light rays emitted from points on the surface of the star
would reach a faraway observer as long as the star has not entered the hori-
zon. But as the collapse progresses, an absolute event horizon forms which is a
wavefront at a radius r = 2m. No light ray from the star’s surface can then reach
an outside observer, and a black hole forms in spacetime, which is the region
bounded by the event horizon. The spacetime singularity forming at the cen-
ter due to the collapse of matter to inﬁnite density is completely hidden below
the event horizon and hence invisible to any outside observers.
event horizon. If the collapsing star is about ten solar masses, the event
horizon or black hole will be about 60 kilometers in diameter. Again,
any event that happens within the event horizon cannot send out a sig-
nal to faraway observers. On the other hand, events that occur outside
the horizon will be able to signal faraway observers.
The OSD collapse model eventually became a basic paradigm for the
black hole concept. It is thought that all massive stars in the Universe
will collapse to black holes at the end of their life-cycles as described

Horizon and Singularity
51
earlier, retaining all the qualitative features. Further to this, a very con-
siderable amount of research and astrophysical applications about black
holes, which occupy a major role in astrophysics and cosmology today,
has been developed in recent decades. Such black holes could suck in
more matter from their surroundings and grow larger and larger.
The Debate on Horizon and Singularity
Two important features stand out from the gravitational collapse sce-
nario mentioned above. The ﬁrst is the formation of an event horizon as
the collapse develops and the second is the eventual termination of col-
lapse in the singularity of inﬁnite density and curvatures. Both of these
eventually became the subject of much discussion and debate for many
years and have had a far-reaching impact on the further development
of gravitation theory, as we shall discuss here.
Interestingly, however, not much attention was initially paid to this
model after it was worked out. In fact, it was widely thought by grav-
itation theorists and astronomers at the time that it would be absurd
for a star to reach an ultra-dense state during its evolution. The rather
unusual features of the OSD model and their far-reaching implications
were, so to speak, already conspicuous. But these were mainly ignored
and an attitude prevailed that such an extreme contraction of a physi-
cally realistic star could never be realized in nature. It was believed that
there must be a way for the collapsing cloud to achieve equilibrium be-
fore it reaches a singularity stage. Also, Einstein wrote a paper in 1939
arguing that such a ﬁnal state for a star is not possible.
In fact, further to the advent of general relativity theory in 1915, grav-
itation physics was a relatively quiet ﬁeld, with few developments till
about the 1950s. However, the 1960s saw the emergence of new observa-
tions in astrophysics, such as quasars and very-high-energy phenomena
such as energetic galactic jets. These observations, together with im-
portant theoretical developments such as studying the global structure
of spacetimes and singularities, led to important results in black hole
physics and relativistic astrophysics and cosmology.
Thus, the discovery of quasars and radio galaxies in the 1960s re-
vived an interest in black hole physics through to the 1970s. Interest
in gravitational collapse scenarios was also rekindled because no other
physical processes had been able to explain the extreme energies wit-
nessed in quasars and energetic galactic jets. Resurgent interest in black
holes focused on their dynamical formation and physical properties

52
Black Holes
and the surrounding regions of spacetime. Attention was drawn again
to the dynamical gravitational collapse of massive stars and their ﬁ-
nal fate, and to black holes as possible physical mechanisms underlying
very-high-energy phenomena in the Universe.
Thus, the occurrence of event horizons and of spacetime singular-
ities became a matter of much discussion. The formation of an event
horizon is one of the most intriguing features to come out of OSD’s
study of the collapse of a massive star. Although terms and concepts
such as event horizon and black hole were not prevalent at the time,
physicists could immediately see the extreme features displayed by the
OSD model. This model for the continual collapse of a massive star has
the remarkable physical feature that as the collapse evolves to a certain
stage, the star enters the horizon and at that epoch the causal structure
of spacetime is such that no material particle or light ray can escape the
surface of the star. Another most intriguing feature as we noted is that
after the star has entered the horizon, after a ﬁnite time the physical
radius of the entire star shrinks to vanishing value and all the matter
ﬁnally collapses simultaneously to a singularity at the center.
So the main debate that came up further to the OSD model was that
researchers thought that both the spacetime singularity and the event
horizon appeared because this was a too idealized model. In fact, the oc-
currence of spacetime singularities was not new to researchers in the
1930s. However, it was believed that the singularity occurring in the
OSD model as well as in other important solutions to Einstein’s equa-
tions, such as the Schwarzschild and FRW models, would not occur in
more realistic solutions. Also, it was believed a horizon or black hole
would never occur because an actual star cannot be compacted to such
small sizes. As we shall discuss in the next chapter, the issue of the oc-
currence of singularities was resolved once the singularity theorems
showed that spacetime singularities occur for much more general sce-
narios. As for the event horizon, an assumption was made in the form
of the cosmic censorship conjecture, stating that all realistic massive
stars will collapse similarly to the OSD collapse, retaining the same
qualitative features. This meant that massive stars will collapse into a
spacetime singularity, which will be hidden within a black hole.
Black Hole Physics
As discussed earlier, further to the Schwarzschild and FRW solutions
and the OSD gravitational collapse model developed in the early

Black Hole Physics
53
decades following the positing of the general theory of relativity, the
two major issues of spacetime singularities and event horizons domi-
nated the discussion in gravity physics for many decades to come.
As for the problem of occurrence of spacetime singularities, as will
be discussed in the next chapter, we now know that singularities do
occur in general relativity in fairly generic situations under broad and
reasonable physical conditions. However, as of today we know very little
about the nature and structure of singularities and about their prop-
erties, as they can develop in various situations in general relativity in
either static or dynamically evolving models.
The second major issue has been the development of event horizons
and how they cover singularities during gravitational collapse. As we
saw in the OSD collapse scenario, the event horizon develops well
before the epoch of singularity, which is then fully hidden within
the ‘zone of no communication’ with external observers, i.e. within a
black hole.
With the issue of the occurrence of singularities being settled in the
early 1970s, physicists also assumed that whenever they occur, the sin-
gularities of collapse will be covered within event horizons, just as in the
OSD scenario. Such an assumption, ﬁrst proposed by Penrose in 1969,
is the cosmic censorship conjecture. In other words under reasonable phys-
ical conditions the ﬁnal outcome of gravitational collapse will always
be a black hole in spacetime, with the curvature singularity of collapse
always being hidden inside it.
Further to the censorship formulation, many important develop-
ments took place in black hole physics, which started in earnest, and
several important theoretical aspects as well as astrophysical applica-
tions of black holes began to develop. The classical as well as quantum
aspects of black holes were then explored and interesting thermo-
dynamic analogies for black holes were presented as a result. Many
astrophysical applications for the real Universe were then developed for
black holes, for example in models using black holes for the descrip-
tion of phenomena such as jets emitted from the centers of galaxies and
extremely energetic gamma ray bursts.
Researchers were aware that the homogeneous and pressureless dust
collapse is a very highly idealized model. The OSD model made these
assumptions simply because it was very difﬁcult to deal with Einstein’s
complicated equations, and there was no way to solve the system other-
wise. In fact, the study of any realistic dynamical gravitational collapse
models within Einstein gravity is a rather difﬁcult task due to the

54
Black Holes
nonlinearity and complexity of Einstein’s equations which govern the
dynamical evolution of the star. So not much progress was made for
many decades after the OSD work. It was always clear to physicists
that the study of more realistic models of the gravitational collapse of
massive stars was of utmost importance if black holes were to be taken
seriously. The OSD scenario neglects pressures that play an important
role in the dynamics of any realistic star and the density distribution
cannot be homogeneous and uniform. In real stars, the density is typ-
ically higher at the center, decreasing away from the center; they have
non-zero gas pressures within; and they have shapes other than exactly
spherical.
But physicists had an immediate and urgent motivation to make the
censorship assumption. Observations of very-high-energy phenomena
in the Universe in the early 1960s such as quasars, radio galaxies, and
active galactic nuclei were unexplainable in terms of any other known
physical mechanism. It appeared that strong gravity ﬁelds must be in-
volved here in a non-trivial manner and that general relativity needed
to be used in an extensive and rigorous manner to explain them. The
censorship hypothesis provided a major impetus to developments in
black hole physics. Assuming provisionally that it holds, physicists in-
vestigated the properties of black holes and created detailed laws of
black hole dynamics. They also utilized black holes to explain various
ultra-high-energy processes observed in the Universe, such as quasars
and X-ray-emitter binary star systems.
By the early 1970s physicists thought it pragmatic to assume censor-
ship and moved on with developing black hole physics in a big way. The
emphasis was on studying black hole solutions to Einstein’s equations
and their different properties and applications, rather than on gravita-
tional collapse, which was difﬁcult to investigate in any case. Black holes
were deﬁned in a general wayand their properties were studied in detail.
These developments occupied much of the researchers’ attention, who
also studied the implications for very high energy cosmic phenomena.
In the following, we describe some of the milestone developments in
black hole physics.
Schwarzschild Black Hole
The outcome of OSD gravitational collapse is a black hole, as we dis-
cussed earlier. It has two parts. At its core is the spacetime singularity

Black Hole Physics
55
where all the matter of the star has been compacted and crushed. Sur-
rounding the singularity is the region of space from which no escape
is possible to faraway observers. The circumference of such a region is
called the event horizon. Once any object or light rays have entered this
region, they can never escape. For the collapsing body also, once it en-
ters the horizon, no light emitted by it can escape and it is fully trapped
within the horizon. The ﬁnal geometry of this black hole is then the
Schwarzschild geometry as worked out by him in 1916 (Fig. 3.4).
To understand the formation of a black hole during collapse, the
concept of an escape cone is helpful. Consider the collapsing star and an
observer located on the surface of the star who keeps emitting beams
of light as the collapse proceeds. As shown in Fig. 3.3, as long as the star
has not entered the event horizon, the light emitted by the observer
can escape and reach a faraway observer. Once the observer reaches the
Photon
sphere
Singularity
Schwarzschild
radius
event
horizon
Figure 3.4 Typical structure of a Schwarzschild black hole. This is a spherical
object, at the center of which is located a spacetime singularity of inﬁnite grav-
ity and spacetime curvatures. The location of the event horizon is deﬁned by
the Schwarzschild radius and the region inside the horizon is the black hole,
which is the region of no escape for any particles or light rays that have entered
below the same. The photon sphere lies outside the event horizon.

56
Black Holes
horizon, all the light rays that he emits fall into the singularity at the
center, except one radial ray that just stays at the horizon, at a constant
distance from the singularity. Further to this, once the observer enters
the horizon, all the rays emitted fall into the singularity, and there is no
escape possible. Eventually the observer falls into the singularity, to be
crushed out of existence.
The black hole has clearly a very intense gravitational ﬁeld. There-
fore, the behavior of light rays and particle trajectories around a black
hole is quite important. An interesting aspect and manifestation of
these strong gravity ﬁelds is the existence of a photon sphere around the
black hole. This is a surface on which photons can in principle just coast
along in a circular orbit, without falling into the hole. As such it is an
unstable surface, where light ray orbits are also not stable, and these
photons can fall in the black hole or escape with a slightest perturba-
tion. The photon sphere plays an important role in the phenomenon of
gravitational lensing, or the bending of light rays by a black hole.
We note that just as the OSD collapse is a specialized model, the same
is true for the Schwarzschild black hole. Only if the star is made of
spherical dust with no pressure and is fully homogeneous will its col-
lapse create such a black hole. But most stars are inhomogeneous, are
not fully spherical, and also have rotation. Hence as the collapse pro-
ceeds, their shapes can distort and their rotation speed up. We need to
know how such changes affect the collapse as well as the formation of
black holes. It will be very difﬁcult to obtain fully solved analytic models
such as the OSD in such a case, and we may have to resort to numerical
models to trace the collapse for such a matter cloud.
Kerr Black Holes
The Kerr metric is a rotating axi-symmetric solution to Einstein’s
equations. As we pointed out earlier, the Schwarzschild geometry is
a natural outcome of the OSD collapse. However, no such collapse
model is known which would give rise to a Kerr geometry as the ﬁ-
nal collapse state. But the ‘no-hair theorem’ conjectures that typically
all collapsing conﬁgurations should end up creating a Kerr black hole.
While the only parameter that characterizes a Schwarzschild black hole
is its mass, a Kerr black hole is characterized by two parameters, namely
its mass and the spin.
Kerr black holes have found many astrophysical applications and
have interesting properties, one being they drag their surrounding

Black Hole Physics
57
spacetime in the same direction as their rotation. As shown by Roger
Penrose, this effect would allow a spinning black hole to be a source of
energy.
Recently, computer simulations by Ramesh Narayan and collabora-
tors showed that by dragging spacetime, an accreting black hole can
ﬂing out a small fraction of gas into powerful collimated relativistic jets.
Such jets have actually been known for decades and their energy source
has been a matter of debate. One popular explanation is that the power
comes from the black hole itself. Evidence from computer simulations
has shown that such a possibility is likely. There is also observational
evidence in favor of this interpretation.
Black Hole Thermodynamics
In the 1970s, the golden era of development of black hole physics, many
analogies were found for the behavior of black holes with the usual laws
of thermodynamics. For example, assuming what is called the asymp-
totic predictability for spacetime, which is essentially the same as the
cosmic censorship assumption together with faraway Minkowski ﬂat
behavior of spacetime, it was shown that the area of an event horizon
must always increase and that it can never decrease. This is in close
analogy to the second law of thermodynamics. This area theorem by
Hawking guarantees the monotonic growth of the surface area of any
black hole, provided the matter and ﬁelds interacting with it respect the
weak positive energy condition.
Similar analogies of black hole behavior with the ﬁrst and third laws
of thermodynamics have also been pointed out under various assump-
tions. These possibilities have created a lot of interest in black hole
physics. Of course, it is known that as for the second law or the area
theorem, in a cosmological background which is not asymptotically
ﬂat, the area theorem need not hold.
Quantum Black Holes
Further to developments in black hole thermodynamics such as those
just described, semi-classical gravity was explored in curved back-
ground spacetimes such as those of black holes. The most remarkable
result was the so-called Hawking radiation effect deduced by Stephen
Hawking in 1975. The event horizon causes the black hole to produce
a very slow and dim radiation outﬂow, which is the evaporation of the
black hole itself.

58
Black Holes
Eventually, the entire black hole will evaporate, but for normal black
holes with masses of the order of a few solar masses, this effect is ex-
traordinarily slow and not really observable. In any case, this result
made apparent the very intriguing possibilities that quantum gravity
might offer.
Observational Evidence
By its very deﬁnition, a black hole can never be seen directly, as it emits
no light. So a direct veriﬁcation of the existence of a black hole is not
possible. As such, no light from its surface, which is the event horizon,
can ever escape and reach a faraway observer.
The black hole, however, has an exceptionally strong gravitational
ﬁeld that affects its surroundings with observational implications. For
example, in real astrophysical situations, matter around a black hole
will fall into it. As falling matter from the accretion disk (see Fig. 3.5)
surrounding a black hole nears the black hole surface, which is the
event horizon, it will move with greater and greater speeds and will heat
Shock
Relativistic jet
0.1 lightyears
Supermassive black hole
Accretion disk
Opaque torus
(inner regions)
Figure 3.5 An
accretion
disk
of
incoming
and
in-falling
mat-
ter around a typical black hole. Adapted from Wikimedia Commons
(http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Galaxies_AGN_Inner-Structure-
of.jpg).

Black Hole Physics
59
up enormously. Such very hot matter will emit powerful X-rays which
provide a typical characteristic signature of a black hole’s existence in
the Universe.
Using this phenomenon, many X-ray telescopes today look for the
X-ray glows from the accretion disks surrounding compact objects be-
lieved to be black holes. One such most promising candidate is the
object Cygnus X-1, which has been under observational focus now for
quite some time.
Figure 3.6 We observe powerful jets emerging from the central regions
of galaxies. Black holes are thought to provide an explanation for this
phenomenon.

60
Black Holes
Astrophysical Applications
Black holes have been widely used to model very-high-energy astro-
physical phenomena observed in the Universe. These include powerful
jets emitted from galactic centers, quasars and gamma-ray bursts, and
other such phenomena. We mentioned earlier, for example, how Kerr
black holes could explain galactic jets (Fig. 3.6).
It is clear that no other usual forces can explain such extreme en-
ergy events in the Cosmos. Therefore, black holes, being very natural
consequences of general relativity, offer a somewhat natural alternative
in this direction. The ﬁeld is developing rapidly, with many observa-
tional missions and powerful computers for simulations having become
available in recent years.

N4O
Singularities
Soon after Einstein proposed his ﬁeld equations, the earliest solutions
found were the Schwarzschild metric and the Friedmann–Robertson–
Walker (FRW) cosmological models. Each of these contained a space-
time singularity where the curvatures and energy densities blow up
and the physical description then breaks down. In the Schwarzschild
solution, such a singularity would be present at the center, whereas for
the Friedmann models it is at the beginning of the Universe, where the
scale factor vanishes and all objects are crushed to a zero volume due to
inﬁnite gravitational tidal forces.
As we have indicated, the issue of the occurrence of a spacetime
singularity raised a major debate among gravitation physicists. This be-
came particularly intense in the late 1950s and the 1960s. Even though
the physical problem posed by the existence of such a strong curvature
singularity was realized immediately in these solutions, which turned
out to have several important implications for the experimental veri-
ﬁcation of general relativity, initially this phenomenon was not taken
seriously. Many researchers strongly believed that the singularity oc-
curring in solutions such as the Schwarzschild or FRW, or the one in
the OSD collapse model occurring when the matter cloud settles to its
ﬁnal Schwarzschild black hole state, is merely a result of strong symme-
try assumptions made while solving Einstein’s equations to obtain these
solutions. It has been suggested that when sufﬁciently general models
are worked out and the symmetry assumptions relaxed, then the more
realistic solutions will be singularity free. In particular, the work by Be-
linski and co-workers and the Mixmaster Universe model by Charles
Misner in 1960s are examples of efforts in this direction.
Subsequently, the distinction between a genuine spacetime singu-
larity and a mere coordinate singularity became clear and it was re-
alized that the singularity at the event horizon in the Schwarzschild
spacetime was only a coordinate singularity, which could be removed
by a suitable coordinate transformation. It was also clear, however, that

62
Singularities
the genuine curvature singularity at the center cannot be removed
by any such transformation. The hope was then that when more
general solutions are considered with a lesser degree of symmetry
requirements, such singularities will be avoided.
This issue of the existence of spacetime singularities in general
enough spacetimes in Einstein’s theory of gravity was settled only in
the late 1960s and early 1970s by the work of Stephen Hawking, Roger
Penrose, and Robert Geroch. Their results within a general spacetime
framework showed that a spacetime will necessarily admit singularities
within a rather broad scenario, provided it satisﬁes certain reasonable
physical conditions. Then a detailed analysis of the global properties of
the spacetime continuum showed that the existence of singularities was
a general feature of the general theory of relativity. Also these consider-
ations ensure the existence of singularities in other theories of gravity,
which are based on a spacetime continuum picture and which satisfy
the general physical conditions such as those described earlier. So the
scenario that emerges is that essentially for all classical spacetime the-
ories of gravity, the occurrence of singularities forms an inevitable and
integral part of the description of the physical reality.
In the vicinity of such a singularity, typically the energy densities,
spacetime curvatures, and all other physical quantities will blow up,
thus indicating the occurrence of super-ultra-dense regions in the Uni-
verse. The behavior of such regions may not be governed by the classical
gravity theory itself, which may, in fact, breakdown, having predicted
the existence of the singularity. Then a quantum gravitational theory is
the likely description of the physical phenomena and processes created
by such spacetime singularities in their vicinity.
We will narrate this development here, also examining whether it is
still possible to avoid the singularity by violating or relaxing some of the
basic assumptions made about their existence.
The Existence
Firstly, we must clarify what we mean by a spacetime singularity, and how to
characterize it. The singularities in the solutions to Einstein’s equations,
such as at the center of the Schwarzschild spacetime, and at the origin
of time in the FRW models, have great physical signiﬁcance as the space-
time curvatures and matter–energy densities blow up in their vicinity.

The Existence
63
There are families of particle trajectories or light rays which experience
inﬁnite tidal forces when they fall into such a singularity.
The trajectories of the free-falling particles or light rays in a
spacetime continuum are characterized by geodesic paths. In general rela-
tivity, these correspond to the shortest paths in usual physics, i.e. paths
along which particles and photons would travel in the most efﬁcient
manner. Typically, a spacetime singularity is meant to occur when such
a trajectory or particle comes to an abrupt end and vanishes suddenly
from the spacetime in a ﬁnite proper time, which is the time measured
by its own watch. It turns out that it is this notion of geodesic incompleteness
that characterizes such a behavior, and therefore the singularity in an
effective manner.
This characterization also enables the existence of singularities to
be proved by means of general enough theorems. Such singularity
theorems typically involve a consideration of the gravitational focus-
ing caused by the matter and curvatures in congruences of timelike
and null geodesics in a spacetime. The gravitational focusing turns
out to be the main cause of the singularity’s existence in the form of
non-spacelike incomplete geodesics in a spacetime.
As an example, the Big Bang singularity in the FRW cosmology
model admits such incomplete geodesics. All the galaxies are repre-
sented here by timelike geodesics. When we extend these paths back-
ward in time, they necessarily meet the singularity in the past at a ﬁnite
time, as measured by their own watch. Along these trajectories, as we
move onto the past closer to the singularity, all the physical quantities
such as densities and spacetime curvatures blow up and take arbitrarily
high values.
It is clear that if a spacetime contains incomplete non-spacelike
geodesics, there is a deﬁnite singular behavior present. In such a case,
a timelike observer or a photon suddenly disappears from the space-
time after a ﬁnite amount of proper time or the afﬁne parameter value
along the photon curve. The singularity theorems which result from
an analysis of gravitational focusing and global properties of a space-
time prove this incompleteness property for a wide class of spacetimes
under a set of rather general physical conditions.
The matter ﬁelds with positive energy density affect the causality re-
lations in a spacetime and cause focusing in the families of timelike and
null paths. The essential phenomenon that occurs here is that mat-
ter focuses the non-spacelike geodesics into pairs of focal points, where

64
Singularities
the nearby trajectories intersect each other. When the matter energy
density is positive, as would be the case for example within a massive
star, then the Raychaudhuri equation, which was derived in 1955 by
physicist Amal Kumar Raychaudhuri, implies that the effect of matter
on curvatures causes a focusing effect in the congruence of geodesics
due to gravitational attraction. This in general causes the neighboring
geodesics in the congruence to cross each other, to give rise to caustics
or focal points.
Using the above and certain other properties of a spacetime, sev-
eral singularity theorems which establish the non-spacelike geodesic
incompleteness under different sets of conditions were obtained, and
these are applicable to different physical situations. Mainly, there are
three general physically reasonable sets of assumptions for these theo-
rems. These rather general assumptions include the positivity of energy
density at a classical level, a suitable causality assumption that rules out
observers going back to their own past, and a condition typically im-
plying the existence of strong enough gravitational ﬁelds somewhere in
the Universe. This last condition was formulated in terms of the exist-
ence of trapped surfaces, which conﬁne light and material particles to a
certain region forever, as we discussed earlier.
The most general of these is the Hawking–Penrose theorem derived
in 1970, which is applicable in both the gravitational collapse situation
and the cosmological scenario. The main idea of the theorem’s proof
is that by using the causal structure analysis for a spacetime it can be
shown that there must be maximal length timelike curves between cer-
tain pairs of events. Now, a causal geodesic which is both future and past
complete and endless must contain pairs of focal points if the spacetime
satisﬁes a suitable energy condition ensuring that the particle trajec-
tories do encounter sufﬁcient matter as they propagate in the Universe
with a positive energy density. This is then used to draw the necessary
contradiction to show that the paths cannot go on endlessly, and that
the spacetime must be non-spacelike geodesically incomplete, which
means a singularity must develop (Fig. 4.1).
The issue of a singularity’s physical nature is important. There are
many types of singular behaviors possible in a spacetime and some of
these can be regarded as only mathematical pathologies, rather than
having any physical signiﬁcance. This is especially true if the curvatures
and other physical quantities remain ﬁnite along an incomplete
non-spacelike geodesic in the limit of approach to the singularity.

Can We Avoid Singularities?
65
Singularity
Observer
worldlines
Figure 4.1 A spacetime singularity is deﬁned by geodesic incompleteness.
There are timelike and null geodesics that end up at the singularity, either in
the future or in the past at a ﬁnite value of their parameters. Thus, for example,
an observer moving along a timelike geodesic will suddenly come to an end at
a ﬁnite value of his proper time when falling into a singularity.
A singularity will be physically important when there is a powerful
enough curvature growth along singular geodesics, the physical
interpretation and implications of which can then be considered.
The inevitable existence of singularities for wide classes of spacetime
universes under rather general physical conditions means that classical
gravity gives rise to regions in the Universe where densities and curva-
tures will grow without bounds, and where all other physical parame-
ters will diverge. Such a singularity implies the breakdown of general
relativity in that region and in a way means the end of spacetime itself.
Can We Avoid Singularities?
These results show that it is not possible to avoid the occurrence of sin-
gularities in spacetimes of general relativity by merely going to more
general cases with fewer and fewer symmetries. Because no symme-
tries for spacetimes were assumed in the considerations described in
the previous section, the results are quite general, subject only to a few
reasonable physical conditions.
Given the scenario above, we need to ask whether we can still avoid
the actual occurrence of singularities in the Universe. It is, of course,
clear that spacetime singularities are an inevitable feature for most
of the physically reasonable models of the Universe and gravitational

66
Singularities
systems within the framework of Einstein’s theory of gravity. It is also
seen that near such a spacetime singularity, the classical description
that predicted it must itself break down. The existence of singularities
in most classical theories of gravity under reasonable physical condi-
tions imply that in a sense Einstein’s gravity predicts its own limitations,
namely the regions of the Universe where it must break down and a
new and revised physical description must take over.
As the curvatures and all other physical quantities must diverge near
such a singularity, the quantum effects associated with gravity are very
likely to dominate such an arena. It is possible that these may re-
solve the classical singularity itself. However, we have no viable and
consistent quantum theory of gravity currently available, despite seri-
ous attempts over the past decades. Therefore, the issue of resolving
singularities produced by classical gravity remains very much open.
The other possibility is, of course, that some of the assumptions of
the singularity theorems may be violated, thus avoiding the singular-
ity occurrence. Even when these are fairly general physical conditions,
whether some of these actually break down and do not hold in physic-
ally realistic models should be investigated. This could possibly negate
the occurrence of singularities at the classical level itself. Such possibil-
ities mean a likely violation of causality in the spacetime, or no trapped
surfaces occurring in the dynamical evolution of the Universe, or a
possible violation of energy conditions.
The singularity theorems mentioned above assume causality in the
form of a suitable causality condition. The alternative is that causal-
ity is violated and a singularity does not occur. So the implication of
singularity theorems is that when there is enough matter present in
the spacetime, either the causality is violated or a boundary to the
Universe in the form of a singularity must occur. So the question is,
when a huge condensation of matter occurs in the Universe, will it
cause causality violation or a spacetime singularity? In the cosmological
case, such stress-energy density for initiating gravitational focusing will
be provided by the microwave background radiation and other matter
present in the Universe. Similarly, in the case of stellar collapse, trapped
surfaces may form as the collapse proceeds with growing density, pro-
viding a condition leading to the formation of a singularity or causality
violation.
Einstein’s equations by themselves do not rule out causality-violating
conﬁgurations that depend on the global topology of the spacetime.

Causality Violations
67
Hence the question of causality violations versus singularity needs a
careful examination as to whether causality violation can offer an al-
ternative to singularity formation. It proposes an interesting possibility
of being able to enter one’s own past while also avoiding the undesir-
able spacetime singularity. Similarly, it must be investigated whether
the violation of energy conditions or the non-occurrence of trapped
surfaces must be realized in order to achieve singularity avoidance in a
spacetime. We discuss some of these possibilities next.
Causality Violations
The general theory of relativity implies that spacetime must be locally
ﬂat and that the laws of special relativity must be valid locally in a neigh-
borhood for any event. However, the theory places no restriction on the
global geometry or topology of spacetime as a whole.
For example, let us consider the model of the ﬂat spacetime of special
relativity, called the Minkowski spacetime, which has a globally Euclid-
ean geometry of a four-dimensional space. The causal structure at any
event p is deﬁned by the future and past light cones at the event, which
are generated by the null geodesics at p. All the events which p can
inﬂuence by means of a timelike or null signal form the causal future of
p, which is the interior of the future light cone together with its bound-
ary. Similarly, its causal past consists of all those events which could
inﬂuence p with signals traveling at a speed less than or equal to that
of light.
In special relativity, the future and past light cones of any event never
meet each other. However, if we allow for arbitrary topologies for the
spacetime, globally the future light cone of p may bend over to enter
the past of p, thus giving rise to causality violations. For example, con-
sider the two-dimensional Minkowski space, which has a ﬂat geometry.
But if we bend it over, this space becomes a cylinder topologically, and
contains closed timelike curves through every point. Such causality vi-
olations allow observers to enter their own past and often this is not
considered physically desirable (Fig. 4.2).
The causal structure in a spacetime speciﬁes what events can be
related to each other by means of timelike or light signals. A typical
causality violation would mean that an event could be in its own past,
which is contrary to our normal understanding of time, and that of the
past and future. However, general relativity does allow for situations

68
Singularities
Time
Flat topology
Cylindrical topology
Space
Figure 4.2 A two-dimensional example of causality violation. The ﬂat
Minkowski spacetime has a Euclidean topology and it does not admit any cau-
sality violation. But if we curl it so as to join the arrowed lines, the topology
becomes that of a cylinder and the timelike worldlines can go to their own past
and cause causality violation in the form of closed timelike lines.
where causality violation is permitted in a spacetime universe, and the
Gödel solution, obtained by Kurt Gödel in 1949, provides an interesting
example.
To avoid such causality violations and other related irregular be-
havior, a number of regularity conditions are generally placed on a
spacetime. Such restrictions are often used as necessary conditions in
theorems which deduce the existence of spacetime singularities. The
question then is can one avoid spacetime singularities if one allows for
the violation of causality? Researchers have studied whether by vio-
lating causality conditions we can avoid spacetime singularities. But it
turns out that in most of the cases, violating causality causes spacetime
singularities in the form of null geodesic incompleteness. Thus, this
path for avoiding singularities does not look very promising.
If possible, we would, of course, like to rule out causality violations
on physical grounds, treating them as pathological behavior because we
would be able to enter our own past otherwise. But since causality viola-
tions are allowed, in principle, in general relativity, we must rule them
out only by an additional assumption to that effect.
There is, in fact, a hierarchy of causality conditions for a spacetime.
It may be causal, having no closed non-spacelike curves. But given an
event, future directed non-spacelike curves from this event could re-
turn to its arbitrarily close neighborhood in the spacetime. This is as

Energy Conditions and Trapped Surfaces
69
bad as a causality violation itself. The higher-order causality conditions
such as strong causality and stable causality rule out such behavior. Of
the higher-order causality conditions, much physical importance is at-
tached to the stable causality, which ensures that if a spacetime is causal,
its causality should not be disturbed with small perturbations in the
metric. Presumably, general relativity is a classical approximation to
some, as yet unknown, quantum theory of gravity in which the value of
the metric at a point will not be exactly known and small ﬂuctuations
in the values must be taken into account.
It turns out that if a spacetime is causal, but if any of the higher-order
causality conditions are violated, that also gives rise to singularities. An-
other question examined concerned the measure of causality-violating
sets when such a violation occurs. It turns out that in many cases,
the causality-violating sets in a spacetime will have a zero measure. In
other words, because causality-violating sets are negligible in content,
a causality violation cannot be taken very seriously. On the whole, this
situation implies that violating causality may not be considered a good
alternative to the occurrence of singularities.
Energy Conditions and Trapped Surfaces
Another possible way to avoid singularities is to violate the positive
energy conditions. This is another assumption made in the proofs for
singularity theorems. In fact, this possibility has been explored in some
detail and it turns out that as long as there is no gross or very powerful
violation of energy conditions over global regions in the Universe, this
will not help avoid singularities either.
For example, the energy condition can be violated locally at certain
spacetime points, or in certain regions of spacetimes due to the pecu-
liar physics there. But as long as the energy condition holds on average,
whereby the stress-energy density is positive in an integrated sense, then
spacetime singularities do occur.
On a global scale, there is observational evidence in the form of an
accelerating expansion of the Universe, which means that the Universe
may be dominated by an omnipresent dark energy ﬁeld. It is not clear,
however, as to what exactly such a ﬁeld would be, and what would be
its origin. It could be due to scalar ﬁelds or ghost ﬁelds ﬂoating in the
Universe, or due to a non-zero positive cosmological constant present
in Einstein’s equations corresponding to a vacuum energy density in

70
Singularities
the Universe. In such a case, the positive energy conditions may be vi-
olated, depending on the nature of these exotic ﬁelds. However, in the
earlier phases of the Universe where ordinary matter dominated, the
positive matter ﬁelds would again cause gravitational focusing. At these
epochs the energy conditions would hold even if they are violated at
the present epoch.
Again, this discussion is made in the context of a cosmological sce-
nario. When it comes to the gravitational collapse of massive stars,
clearly their density and overall energy content are dominated by the
ordinary matter ﬁelds we are much more familiar with. On the whole,
such matter certainly respects the energy conditions, except possibly
for some (if any) minor violations. Thus for gravitational collapse of
massive stars, we would expect the energy conditions to hold and the
conclusions on singularity occurrence stated earlier would apply.
Yet another possible way of avoiding singularity is to avoid the for-
mation of trapped surfaces that occur in the spacetime. Indeed, such a
route can give rise to geodesically complete spacetimes, as was shown
by Senovilla and co-workers in the 1990s. For the cosmological scenario,
what this effectively means is the condition that the matter energy den-
sities must fall off sufﬁciently rapidly as we move farther away in space
at any given epoch of time. There must be a fall-off in density on any
given space slice of a constant time in an averaged sense in order to avoid
the cosmological trapped surfaces. Whether such a condition is real-
izable in the Universe will need to be checked through observational
tests. A sufﬁciently uniform energy density, such as, say, the cosmic mi-
crowave background radiation, can in turn cause the cosmic trapping.
As for the massive stars, the densities are very high indeed and would
only grow in a gravitational collapse. Therefore, in collapse scenarios
the trapped surfaces are unlikely to be avoided.
Further to these considerations, it appears that, by and large, it would
be difﬁcult to avoid the occurrence of singularities by means of violating
some of the assumptions made by the singularity theorems. If we accept
that spacetime singularities do occur under fairly general conditions in
the framework of Einstein’s theory of gravity, or for classical gravity in
general, then we must consider the physical implications and conse-
quences of such a scenario for physics and cosmology. As noted, two
main arenas of physical relevance where spacetime singularities will
be inevitable are then the cosmological situation and the gravitational
collapse scenario for massive stars.

Fundamental Challenges
71
Fundamental Challenges
The existence of spacetime singularities in Einstein’s gravity and other
classical theories of gravitation poses intriguing challenges and fun-
damental questions in physics as well as in cosmology. These will
have far-reaching consequences on our current understanding of the
Universe and how we try to model it, as we try to show here.
The inevitable existence of singularities for wide classes of rather
general models of spacetimes means that classical gravity evolutions
give rise to regions in the spacetime Universe where the densities and
spacetime curvatures grow arbitrarily high and without bounds. This
also means that other relevant physical parameters will diverge as we
approach closer to the singularity region. To take a physical scenario,
such a phenomenon corresponds to a singularity that represents the
origin of the Universe. Secondly, whenever locally a large quantity of
matter and energy density collapses under the force of its own gravity,
a singularity will occur. This latter situation is effectively realized in the
gravitational collapse of a massive star in the Universe, which shrinks
catastrophically under its own gravity when the star has exhausted its
internal nuclear fuel, which earlier supplied the internal pressures to
halt the in-fall due to gravity.
Over the past decades, once the existence of spacetime singularities
was accepted, there have been major efforts to understand the physics
in a singularity’s vicinity, resulting in an entire physics of the early Uni-
verse and the inﬂation paradigm where the Universe expands exponen-
tially in its early phase. Depicted are the initial moments following the
Big Bang singularity from which the Universe is supposed to have orig-
inated. The complexities in this case are enormous, both physics-wise
and conceptually. The physics complexities arise because when trying
to understand the physics close to the hot Big Bang singularity, we are
dealing with the highest ever energy scales, never seen before in any
laboratory physics experiments. Our particle physics theories are then
stretched to an extreme where there is no deﬁnite or unique frame-
work available to deal with these phenomena. Understanding early
Universe physics has major consequences because it governs and affects
the most important physical phenomena such as later galaxy formation
and issues related to the large-scale structure of the Universe.
As for conceptual issues, the instantaneous Big Bang singularity gives
rise to a host of problems and puzzles, one of which is the ‘horizon

72
Singularities
problem’, which arises due to the causal structure of this spacetime.
Distinct regions of the Universe simply cannot interact with each other
due to the cosmic horizons in this model and it becomes extremely dif-
ﬁcult to explain the observed average overall current homogeneity of
the Universe on a large enough scale. There are other issues such as why
the current Universe looks so ﬂat, which is referred to as the ‘ﬂatness’
problem. As a possible solution to these dilemmas, inﬂationary models
for the early Universe have been proposed, various facets of which are
still very much under debate. The key issue, as far as the Big Bang singu-
larity is concerned, is that it happened only once in the past and there is
no way to probe it any further other than through current observations
of the Universe and extrapolation of the past. We must observe deeper
and deeper into space and back in time to understand the nature and
physics of this early Universe singularity.
As we mentioned earlier, the other class of spacetime singularities
occur in the gravitational collapse of massive stars. Unlike the Big Bang,
this kind of singularity occurs whenever a massive star collapses. Thus,
this is more amenable to observational tests.
There are several fundamental cosmic conundrums associated with
singularities of gravitational collapse. One of the most intriguing is
whether such a singularity will be visible to observers far away in the
Universe. The Big Bang singularity is visible to us in principle, as we get
to see its light and all the matter that came from it. But as we will dis-
cuss later, the singularity of a collapse can sometimes be hidden below
the event horizon of gravity, and therefore not always visible. The possi-
bility that all singularities of a collapse will be necessarily hidden inside
horizons is the cosmic censorship conjecture. This has not been proved,
and, in fact, singularities of collapse can be visible in many physical
circumstances.
When visible or naked singularities develop during gravitational col-
lapse, they give rise again to extremely intriguing physical possibilities
and questions, such as the possibility of observing ultra-high-energy
physical processes and quantum gravity effects. Such observations can
guide our efforts toward a quantum theory of gravity. But one co-
nundrum is whether this will break the so-called classical predictability
of the spacetime universe. We shall discuss these issues later in some
detail.
On the other hand, even when the singularity is hidden within
a black hole, that still gives rise to profound puzzles such as the

Fundamental Challenges
73
information paradox and issues with quantum unitarity. So the point is, even
if the cosmic censorship conjecture were correct and all singulari-
ties were hidden inside black holes only, we would still be faced with
many deep paradoxes not unique to naked singularities. It turns out
that paradoxes are associated with either black holes or singularities,
and perhaps what we need, if we are to generate a consistent picture, is
a more basic and fundamentally new approach.
It seems only reasonable to say that all these deep physical as well as
conceptual issues are closely connected with the very existence and for-
mation of spacetime singularities in dynamical gravitational processes
taking place in the Universe. While the Big Bang singularity happened
only once in the past, the singularities of collapse occur repeatedly, and
hence possess an interesting observational perspective and potential. We
will discuss some of these issues later, while also considering the most
intriguing physical implications in the process.

N5O
Cosmic Censorship
As discussed in the previous chapter, the debate on spacetime sin-
gularity culminated in the knowledge that singularities occur quite
generally in Einstein’s theory. They occur mainly in two circumstances,
namely gravitational collapse and cosmology. While the singularity
of cosmology occurred once at the beginning of the Universe, those
in collapse occur whenever a massive star collapses under its own
gravity.
While the singularity of cosmology is visible, for collapse there are,
in principle, two possibilities: either covered within horizons of grav-
ity, not visible to faraway observers in the Universe, or not enveloped
by horizons and visible to faraway observers. The OSD collapse model
shows that the singularity is covered by the horizon. Is this true for
a generic gravitational collapse? The assumption that this must be the
case whenever a massive star collapses is the cosmic censorship con-
jecture, which has become a fundamental assumption in black hole
physics and its astrophysical applications.
While black hole physics ﬂourished at a rapid pace in the 1970s and
later, both in theory and in its astrophysical applications, physicists were
aware of the need to prove the cosmic censorship conjecture (CCC).
They knew that if CCC does not hold then many of the basic, key re-
sults, such as the area theorem for black holes, will also fail to hold.
So serious efforts to formulate and give a proof for CCC have contin-
ued, even as black hole physics has developed vigorously on the CCC
assumption. This has been widely recognized as the single most impor-
tant problem in the theory and foundation of modern-day black hole
physics, and in gravitation physics.
We will discuss here the attempts over the past decades to formulate
and prove the CCC. It turns out that despite many serious attempts, the
CCC remains unproved; also no proper mathematical formulation for
the CCC has been made available. This is a big dilemma because, on the
one hand, black hole physics has developed so much, yet, on the other

What is a Naked Singularity?
75
hand, for the CCC, which is at its very foundation, we have no clue.
The only way out is to study gravitational collapse in further detail,
along the lines of the OSD work, but with much more realistic physical
conditions.
We will then consider the simplest physical generalization of the OSD
work along these lines, namely the dust collapse, which is inhomo-
geneous where the density of the matter cloud is not uniform in space.
It will then be shown that the structure of horizons and singularities
changes radically and in fact that we have visible, naked singularities
forming as the ﬁnal fate of gravitational collapse. Implications for the
cosmic censorship and further directions opening up are indicated.
What is a Naked Singularity?
The purpose of CCC is to rule out the naked singularities, especially
those that form in gravitational collapse. So ﬁrst we need to under-
stand what a visible naked singularity is. Then we can possibly answer
whether singularities are always covered by event horizons or can exist
without horizons.
As we noted earlier, the matter energy densities and spacetime
curvatures and all relevant physical quantities grow unboundedly as we
go closer in the limit of approach to a spacetime singularity. However,
it is intriguing to note that the singularity itself is not part of the
spacetime. That is because, at all events in the spacetime continuum,
regularity conditions such as well-behaved gravitational potentials and
the validity of special relativity in its small enough neighborhood are
to be respected. But such a description is not possible or does not hold
for a singularity if we consider it as part of the spacetime. Therefore,
at most we can regard it as some kind of a boundary to the Universe.
Thus, even when not in spacetime, a singularity inﬂuences all the
physics in the Universe. In fact, in the case of the Big Bang, it is the
creator of the Universe.
According to the Newtonian description, if we take any two bodies,
say the Earth and the Sun, the gravitational attraction between them
will be calculated as if all the mass was concentrated at the center of
each of these objects. Now if the Sun were to collapse into a black hole,
in a literal sense all of its mass would collapse into the center, and still
the bodies would feel the same gravitational force. Today, similar calcu-
lations are done in the framework of general relativity, to calculate, for
example, the gravitational radiation from a system of a black hole and a

76
Cosmic Censorship
star spinning around it and falling into it where all the mass of a black
hole is compacted at its center.
Main Characteristics
If we ask what a spacetime singularity really is, the answer would be, it is
a region where general relativity breaks down. In fact, we are aware that
singularities in any given theory indicate the limitation of the theory
and point to its breakdown. Similarly, the occurrence of singularities
in general relativity means there are regions of ultra-high densities
and curvatures in the Universe where Einstein’s gravity must break
down. While we know now the necessary existence of singularities,
namely that they must exist and form in dynamical processes involving
gravity in rather general physical circumstances as predicted by gen-
eral relativity, we know very little about their nature, structure, and
properties.
It follows that although spacetime singularities do occur, the theory
implies no direct connection between them and whether they are cov-
ered by event horizons. In principle, singularities can come with or
without horizons. Unless proved in a direct manner, there is no clear
physics motivation to show that singularities must be enveloped within
event horizons without ever being visible.
In this sense, a naked singularity is a spacetime singularity which can
communicate with observers far away in the Universe, as opposed to
the one hidden inside a black hole (Fig. 5.1). The latter cannot commu-
nicate with any event in spacetime. Thus, the key signature of a naked
singularity is that there are light rays and particle trajectories that ini-
tiate from the singularity or in an arbitrarily close vicinity, and which
reach out to observers far away in the Universe in the future (Fig. 5.1).
This would allow the ﬂow of information from close to the singularity
and ultra-dense regions to external observers.
In other words, there exist families of non-spacelike trajectories
which in the future go to inﬁnity and in the past terminate at the sin-
gularity. Also, as we travel closer to the singularity along these paths,
the densities and spacetime curvatures typically grow and diverge in
the limit of approach to singularity.
Such a phenomenon is not possible for a singularity within a black
hole. In that case, information falls in but never emerges from the vi-
cinity of the singularity. Thus, to check out whether the ﬁnal fate of a
given gravitational collapse is a black hole or a naked singularity, what

What is a Naked Singularity?
77
Figure 5.1 A naked singularity. As opposed to the black hole case, there are
outgoing light rays from the singularity which travel to observers far away in
the future (Scientiﬁc American, Feb 2009; Kenn Brown, Mondolithic Studio).
needs to be done is to determine whether families of future-directed
non-spacelike particle or photon trajectories emerge either from the
singularity or from its close vicinity.
Recent work in collapse shows that there are two types of singu-
larity, those enveloped by an event horizon and hidden within a black
hole, and those which are not. The second type are known as naked
singularities. Thus, both black hole and naked singularities will be the
possible outcomes of a gravitational collapse under regular and rea-
sonable physical conditions. However, as opposed to a black hole, the
naked singularity conﬁguration has rather different theoretical and
observational properties (Fig. 5.2).
To summarize, when a naked singularity develops, it is characterized
by three main important properties:
1. Firstly, there are families of inﬁnite light and particle trajectories
which emerge from the singularity region, with a past end-point
at the singularity.

78
Cosmic Censorship
Inﬁnity
Inﬁnity
Inﬁnity
Inﬁnity
Horizon
No emission
from this region
to faraway
observers
Causal curve
(a)
(b)
Light rays
escape to
inﬁnity
Figure 5.2 A schematic diagram of (a) a naked singularity and (b) a black hole.
The gravitational collapse terminating as a naked singularity has a very differ-
ent causal structure from that terminating as a black hole. While in the black
hole case a spacetime region of no communication to faraway observers always
develops, such a scenario need not happen in the naked singularity case. The
important difference is that in the former case the singularity is not visible be-
cause an event horizon covers it; in the latter case, the horizon may not form
or may not cover the singularity fully, which may become visible to faraway
observers as a result.
2. Secondly, a genuine curvature singularity has densities and cur-
vatures that become inﬁnite and grow very powerful in the limit
of approach to the singularity along these paths.
3. Finally, the overall spacetime satisﬁes all physical regularity con-
ditions, such that this becomes an interesting framework for
studying physical processes in ultra-strong gravity regimes.
Predictions of General Relativity
According to Einstein’s general theory of relativity, the collapse must
proceed to create a spacetime singularity, where physical parameters
such as energy density and spacetime curvatures blow up to arbitrarily
large values. The usual laws of physics break down near such a singu-
larity. This is the regime of ultra-strong gravity ﬁelds, with other basic
forces of nature playing only a secondary role. Quantum effects must
also become important in such strong ﬁelds at ultra-small length scales
near the singularity, and eventually what is needed is a quantum theory
of gravity which will resolve the singularity.
The outcome of a continual collapse in a fully general scenario of a
spacetime with an evolving matter ﬁeld is described by the singularity

What is a Naked Singularity?
79
theorems in general relativity. Although the theorems imply that
under fairly general conditions the singularities must occur, they give
no information on the singularities’ nature or structure or on their
physical properties and implications. Speciﬁcally, singularity theorems
assume the following conditions:
1. the positivity of energy density for matter ﬁelds;
2. a reasonable causal structure of the spacetime and
3. the development of trapped surfaces in the spacetime which
ensure that sufﬁcient mass is packed into a small enough region.
The theorems imply that when these three conditions are met, the
spacetime must contain a singularity.
It follows that for any general relativistic gravitational collapse de-
veloping from regular initial data in a spacetime without symmetry
conditions such as spherical symmetry necessarily holding, if the above
physically reasonable conditions are satisﬁed then the collapse will cre-
ate a spacetime singularity. The densities, curvatures, and other physi-
cal quantities will blow up in the limit of approach to such a singularity.
Thus, any physically realistic gravitational collapse of a massive star
at the end of its life-cycle must terminate into such a spacetime
singularity. The OSD collapse scenario discussed earlier is a special case
for a general gravitational collapse, instantaneously terminating as a
singularity, which is the ﬁnal end-state of a collapsing matter cloud.
What Relativity Does Not Imply
As stated above, however, singularity theorems predict only the
existence of spacetime singularities under a set of physically reasonable
conditions. They do not provide information on the nature and
structure or properties of such singularities. In particular, they give us
no information on whether such singularities, especially if they form in
gravitational collapse, will be covered by an event horizon, or whether
they will be visible to external observers in the Universe. All that the
singularity theorems show is that singularities must occur in the form
of geodesic incompleteness in a spacetime continuum. In other words,
of the two, the event horizon and the singularity, which one must
come ﬁrst as the star collapses is not answered by the theory of general
relativity.

80
Cosmic Censorship
Thus, the possibility remains that a spacetime singularity can de-
velop in gravitational collapse, yet not be covered by an event horizon,
allowing it to be causally connected to faraway observers in the Uni-
verse. In such a case, ultra-high-density and curvature regions will be
able to communicate with and send out signals to faraway observers.
In this sense, gravity predicts exciting outcomes for the ﬁnal fate of a
massive collapsing star, with profound implications for fundamental
physics.
Therefore, whether a strong curvature singularity that formed in a
realistic collapse will be visible or hidden from a faraway observer in the
Universe remains an open question in Einstein’s theory of gravity. The
key physical feature that decides whether a singularity is visible is the
interplay between the structure and time curve of the singularity and
that of the trapped surface formation in the spacetime.
Censoring the Cosmos
Within such a context the cosmic censorship, put forward by Roger
Penrose, can be seen really as an assumption about the behavior or
nature and properties of spacetime singularities, especially when they
occur in gravitational collapse. The CCC essentially states that the
singularities of collapse, whenever they occur, must always be hidden
within the event horizons of gravity, in the same way as happens in
the OSD collapse scenario. Thus, the key statement and assumption
here is that the OSD behavior will always generalize to all general and
physically realistic gravitational collapse scenarios taking place in the
Universe.
Further to the CCC proposal, many researchers have attempted to
prove the same within the framework of gravitation theory, the hope
being that a concrete theorem establishing censorship and ruling out
naked singularities can be derived, thus securing the foundation for
black hole physics and its numerous modern-day astrophysical applica-
tions. The outcome of such efforts has not, however, led us any closer
to possible proof of CCC. The crucial issue, then, is how to formulate
and prove the CCC in a rigorous manner.
CCC proposes that whenever a massive star undergoes a continual
gravitational collapse, the outcome will be a black hole that covers
the ﬁnal spacetime singularity of collapse. This generalizes the OSD
dust collapse scenario to a general collapse situation. At a deeper

Censoring the Cosmos
81
level, this amounts to assuming certain behavior and properties for
spacetime singularities occurring during collapse, and a constraint on
the nature of dynamical evolutions allowed for collapsing clouds in
general relativity.
As such and in principle, spacetime singularities and event horizons
are two totally different and independent entities in gravity dynamics.
Logically, the two possibilities are singularities that are covered by hori-
zons and those that are not. Cosmic censorship means that the second
class never occurs, or at least that nature will not allow it to occur
through some physical mechanism. So censorship suggests that when-
ever a spacetime singularity occurs, it must come with a horizon that
fully covers and hides it. However, no proof or speciﬁc mathematically
rigorous formulation of the CCC within the framework of gravitation
theory has been derived. It was soon realized that doing so would be
quite a difﬁcult task. It was also rather difﬁcult to work out explicitly
more general gravitational collapse models similar to the OSD case.
This latter effort would make it possible to study the nature of singu-
larities of collapse and to know whether they are always enveloped in a
horizon of gravity.
In such a case, the OSD model for collapse and formation of black
holes was the only scenario that could possibly explain very-high-
energy phenomena involving gravity. Physicists thus thought it pru-
dent to just assume CCC, hoping that its formulation and proof would
arrive in due course, and got busy in the 1970s constructing a detailed
physical framework for black holes. Such an effort gave rise to the body
of work on the basic theory of black holes, which included a study of
their fundamental properties, and also black hole thermodynamics and
other issues such as Hawking radiation. Also, applications of black holes
were developed in relativistic astrophysics with the goal of explaining
very-high-energy phenomena in the Universe. Meanwhile, the debate
on cosmic censorship continued and expanded in different directions,
as CCC turned out to be very difﬁcult to formulate or prove.
If a singularity is always covered by an event horizon and if CCC
is true, then that would provide a much needed basis for the theory
and astrophysical applications of black holes. On the other hand, if
the spacetime singularities which result from a massive star’s continual
collapse are visible to external observers, we would then have the op-
portunity to observe and investigate the Universe’s super-ultra-dense
regions which form due to gravitational collapse and where extreme

82
Cosmic Censorship
high-energy physics and quantum gravity effects are at work. The
crucial physical question here is whether we can really observe such
super-ultra-dense regions which develop when massive stars collapse,
in violation of the CCC.
Key Elements of Censorship
To be precise, the key elements crucial to the formulation of the CCC
are as follows:
1. Regular dynamics: Singularities must arise from the evolution of
regular matter ﬁelds through dynamical time development gov-
erned by Einstein’s equations.
2. Physical validity: The models must describe physically realistic con-
ﬁgurations or matter ﬁelds, typically those obeying positivity of
energy conditions.
3. Genericity: The collapse outcome must not be different, or change
suddenly, whenever a slight change is introduced into the model
in the form of slightly different matter ﬁelds or perturbing the
system’s symmetries.
It is clear that the last two conditions are subject to a rather broad
interpretation, allowing for different formulations of the CCC. As the
proof of such a general assertion will be difﬁcult, whereby the notion
of black holes is generalized to gravitational collapse situations other
than the exact spherically symmetric homogeneous dust case, it be-
comes necessary to rule out naked or visible singularities by means of
an explicit assumption, which is the CCC.
We can essentially state it as the following: If S is a partial Cauchy
surface, that is, an epoch of simultaneity from which collapse com-
mences, then there are no naked singularities to the future of S which
could be seen from the future null inﬁnity. This is true for the spherical
homogeneous dust collapse, where the resulting spacetime in the
future is asymptotically predictable and the censorship holds. Thus,
the breakdown of physical theory at the spacetime singularity does
not disturb prediction in the future for the outside asymptotically ﬂat
region. What will be the corresponding scenario for other collapse
situations when inhomogeneities, non-sphericity, etc. are allowed? It
is clear that the assumption of censorship in a suitable form is crucial
to basic results in black hole physics. In fact, when one considers

Censoring the Cosmos
83
gravitational collapse in a generic situation, the very existence of black
holes requires this hypothesis.
It is, of course, clear that naked singularities are a general feature aris-
ing in general relativistic gravitational collapse if we do not impose any
restrictions on the structure of the spacetime or its energy-momentum
content. This is because, as we know, Einstein’s equations connect the
matter-energy content of the spacetime with its geometry and curva-
tures. Now, we can choose ab initio a spacetime geometry with a naked
singularity, and then plug this into the left-hand side of Einstein’s equa-
tions, taking the matter tensor to be that quantity divided by 8π. Then
we naturally have a spacetime with naked singularities. But such a
scenario gives no guarantee that this matter will satisfy energy or reg-
ularity conditions, and it could be quite a weird matter. Therefore it
is clear that if censorship is to hold, we must impose various regularity
and energy conditions on the matter. In fact, as far as CCC is concerned,
it is a major problem to ﬁnd a satisfactory and mathematically rigorous
formulation of what is physically desired to be achieved. Developing a
suitable formulation would be a major advance toward the solution of
the main problem.
Astrophysical Developments
It was the hope of scientists, as they developed black hole physics, that a
derivation of the CCC would soon arrive. However, despite numerous
attempts over the past three decades, this has still not been realized. Ac-
tually, we do not even have any rigorous mathematical formulation of
the hypothesis. The reasons for this are becoming clear now as we will
discuss here. As per the singularity theorems we have discussed, singu-
larities are inevitable, but no such principles apply to the event horizon,
in particular as to when it exists or whether it covers the singularity. In
fact, the initial singularity in cosmology that created the observed Uni-
verse is not hidden inside a horizon, but it is visible in principle. Whether
this is also true for stars has been an elusive question because Einstein’s
equations are highly nonlinear and complex.
The CCC, nevertheless, has provided a major impetus to devel-
opments in black hole physics. Provisionally assuming that it holds,
physicists have investigated the properties of black holes and created de-
tailed laws of black hole dynamics and related aspects. They have also
applied the concept of black holes to explain various ultra-high-energy
processes, such as quasars and X-ray-emitter binary star systems.

84
Cosmic Censorship
Gravitation theory and relativistic astrophysics have gone through
extensive developments in recent decades, further to the discovery
of quasars in the 1960s and other very-high-energy phenomena such
as gamma ray bursts. For compact objects such as neutron stars and
situations involving very high energy densities and masses, strong grav-
ity ﬁelds governed by general relativity play an important role, which
physicists have applied to other high-energy phenomena. For example,
several models for explaining gamma ray bursts, which emit in a few
seconds the energy of the Sun’s entire lifetime, utilize the collapse of a
single massive star. Gravitational collapse of large matter clouds is the
key physical process basic to the formation of a star from interstellar
clouds, of galaxies and galaxy clusters, and of the Universe.
Efforts to Prove the Cosmic Censor
Unlike the idealized OSD homogeneous collapse scenario, real stars
have an inhomogeneous density, as well as non-zero pressures within
them as they collapse. Moreover, stars also rotate. Does every massive
star collapsing at the end of its life-cycle turn into a black hole, as the
OSD case speciﬁes? The CCC answers afﬁrmatively, namely, that the
singularity forming during collapse ends up being hidden within an
event horizon, never to be seen by external observers.
In the 1980s, Andrzej Krolak and Richard Newman wrote a series of
papers that tried formulating CCC mathematically rigorously and for
possible proofs. In 1988, Newman and I wrote a paper formulating and
proving a theorem that claimed a proof for censorship under a set of
assumptions on the spacetime. However, we later realized that the as-
sumptions used in the result we showed were too strong and probably
not physically realistic. Thus even when the theorem proved alright,
it could not be possibly regarded as a proof for CCC. Other similar
attempts have been made too.
It was at this point that we realized we needed a further detailed
investigation of gravitational collapse scenarios within the framework
of Einstein’s theory of gravity, along the lines of the OSD work, but
generalizing and choosing more physically realistic cases and scenarios.
The OSD model uses very idealistic and over-simpliﬁed assumptions,
mainly in order to solve Einstein’s complex system of equations. We
needed to see whether in physically realistic cases the ﬁnal fate of
gravitational collapse would be a black hole or a naked singularity. In
practical terms, this amounted to checking whether trapped surfaces

Censoring the Cosmos
85
and event horizons formed in more realistic collapses, and if so whether
that was before or after the occurrence of the spacetime singularity. As
we shall see, it is this latter factor that really decides whether the space-
time singularity of collapse will be naked or hidden and covered by the
event horizon.
Need for Collapse Studies
It was clear that we still did not have sufﬁcient information about the
various possibilities for gravitational collapse to decide on the issue of
CCC. Despite decades of serious effort, a proper, mathematically rig-
orous formulation of the censorship conjecture and its proof proved
too formidable. In view of the hypothesis’s importance, it was con-
cluded that the ﬁrst and foremost task should be to carry out a detailed
and careful examination of various gravitational collapse scenarios for
a realistic collapse conﬁguration, with inhomogeneities and pressures
included. These scenarios needed to be worked out and analyzed in
detail within the framework of Einstein gravity. Only such considera-
tions would enable us to determine the ﬁnal state of collapse in terms
of either a black hole or naked singularity.
Researchers examined several gravitational collapse scenarios in-
volving different forms of matter, including the collapse of inﬂowing
radiation shells, the spherical collapse of matter without pressure, that
is dust which is inhomogeneous, and also perfect ﬂuids which have
non-zero pressures. Some cases of non-spherical collapse were also in-
vestigated. A uniform pattern emerged in that naked singularities do
develop as the ﬁnal end-product of collapse. Further, in all these cases,
not just isolated trajectories but families of non-spacelike geodesics
come out of the naked singularity, providing a non-zero measure set of
trajectories. If only an isolated null trajectory emerged from the naked
singularity, that would amount to a single front being emitted. On the
other hand, the emission of a non-zero measure family of non-spacelike
curves makes it a more serious phenomenon. It also turned out that
the resulting naked singularity was gravitationally strong in that the
densities and curvatures diverged very powerfully in the limit of ap-
proach to the same. Thus, these turned out to be physically genuine
non-removable features for the spacetime of collapse.
Our purpose therefore should be to investigate how the introduction
of physically more realistic conditions and scenarios affects the collapse
ﬁnal state, which is a black hole in the OSD dust collapse scenario.

86
Cosmic Censorship
An investigation into the ﬁnal fate of collapse is important from both
the theoretical and observational point of view. At the theoretical level,
working out the collapse outcomes in general relativity is crucial to
the problem of asymptotic predictability, namely, whether a singularity
forming at the end-point of collapse will be covered by an event hori-
zon. The CCC remains fundamental to the theoretical foundation of
black hole physics and its numerous astrophysical applications, such as
the area theorem for black holes, laws of black hole thermodynamics,
the Hawking radiation effect, and predictability. On the observational
side it has important implications for the accretion of matter by black
holes and massive black holes at the center of galaxies. On the other
hand, the existence of visible or naked singularities would offer a new
approach to these issues and require our usual theoretical conception
of black holes to be reformulated.
Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
As an immediate generalization of the Oppenheimer–Snyder–Datt
homogeneous dust collapse, we can consider the collapse of inhomo-
geneous dust and examine the nature and structure of the resulting
singularity, with special reference to censorship and the occurrence of
black holes and naked singularities. The main reason for doing so is
that it could provide an explicitly clear picture of what is possible in
gravitational collapse.
Logically, the simplest physical generalization we can examine is
whether the outcome of a collapse would continue to be a black hole
once we allow for inhomogeneities, such as a higher density at the
center of the star.
How then should the conclusions given earlier for homogeneous
collapse be modiﬁed when the inhomogeneities of matter distribution
are taken into account? Clearly, it is important to include the effects
of inhomogeneities because typically a realistic collapse could start
from inhomogeneous data with a centrally peaked density proﬁle. This
problem was investigated in detail using the Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi
models, which describe the gravitational collapse of an inhomogeneous
spherically symmetric dust cloud. This is an inﬁnite-dimensional fam-
ily of solutions of Einstein’s equations, where the inside of the collapsing
star is inhomogeneous and the outside is vacuum. The OSD model is a
special case for this class of solutions.

Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
87
For a better insight, the researchers ﬁrst considered a single physical
factor, namely the introduction of inhomogeneity in the initial den-
sity distribution of the collapsing dust cloud. This relaxes the strict
homogeneous density assumption of the OSD collapse model and
makes it possible to examine how the collapse ﬁnal state is affected
when physically more realistic cases with inhomogeneity are consid-
ered. In the next chapter, we will discuss the introduction of other
physical features, such as non-zero pressures and non-sphericity, while
considering the ﬁnal fate of collapse.
What this investigation shows is that the introduction of inhomo-
geneities leads to a rather different picture of gravitational collapse. For
a collapse situation, we assume the density to have compact support on
an initial surface of constant time and the spacetime can be matched
at some boundary to the exterior Schwarzschild ﬁeld with a total mass
M enclosed within the dust ball. Using this framework, the nature of
singularities can be examined. In particular, the problem of the naked-
ness or otherwise of the singularity can be reduced to the existence of
real, positive roots of an algebraic equation, constructed out of the ba-
sic quantities characterizing the collapse, such as the mass function and
the velocity proﬁles of the cloud of matter.
It turns out that the introduction of inhomogeneity in the initial
density distribution of the star can effect a delay in the formation of
trapped surfaces and the event horizon, leading to a naked singularity
ﬁnal state of collapse. Such an inhomogeneous density proﬁle would be
much more realistic physically than the fully homogeneous density of
the cloud assumed by the OSD model, as stars have higher density at
their center with a slow decrease as we move radially outward.
Taking into account these inhomogeneities in the initial density pro-
ﬁle it is possible to show that the behavior of the horizon can change
drastically, thus leaving two different kinds of outcomes as the possible
result of a generic dust collapse. These are the black hole, in which the
horizon forms at a time anteceding the singularity, and the naked sin-
gularity, in which the horizon is delayed. The latter case allows light
rays to escape from the central singularity, where density and curva-
tures diverge, to reach faraway observers. Once the light rays escape,
then the material particles or the timelike geodesics will also escape.
Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi Models
It is worth noting that while dust models have received considerable at-
tention in the study of general relativity and although OSD worked out

88
Cosmic Censorship
the gravitational collapse of homogeneous dust in the late 1930s, the
solution to Einstein’s equations for the dust form of matter was worked
out fully, including inhomogeneities, by Georges Lemaitre and Richard
Tolman in the early 1930s. Their main motivation at that time was the
inclusion of inhomogeneities in cosmology.
As is known now, from a cosmological perspective the observed Uni-
verse is inhomogeneous up to the scale of several hundred megaparsecs.
We have clusters of galaxies, and also super-clusters, which are inho-
mogeneities in the Universe clustered in walls and voids. Therefore,
the homogeneity of the Universe, if at all achieved, is beyond this large
scale. Thus, considering an inhomogeneous solution to Einstein’s equa-
tions for the Universe is quite relevant physically in that sense. Further,
the overall homogeneity of the Universe is an assumption known as
the Copernican principle. Concerning the issue of the scale on which
the Universe begins to appear homogeneous, there is as yet no real
consensus, one reason being that it is difﬁcult to quantify the sizes of
super-clusters.
The conventional view has been that the Universe can approach ho-
mogeneity on scales larger than a few tens of megaparsecs. However,
recent work claims that very large-scale features in the Universe might
be problematic to explain in the standard model in which dark energy
is a cosmological constant. Some researchers have taken the more ex-
treme view that the Universe approaches homogeneity on even larger
scales, on the order of a gigaparsec. Whether this is actually the case
can only be decided by future observations. From such a perspective,
Andrzej Krasinski and others have made much use of the Lemaitre–
Tolman–Bondi (LTB) scenarios to model an inhomogeneous Universe
in cosmology.
For the gravitational collapse of massive stars, clearly density in-
homogeneities are relevant, as we noted. A detailed consideration of in-
homogeneous dust collapse was carried out by Hermann Bondi in 1959.
Therefore the general dust collapse models are sometimes referred to
as Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi collapse models.
The Nature of Singularity
Gravitational collapse studies of dust have a longhistory beginning with
the Oppenheimer–Snyder–Datt models. In particular, strict homo-
geneity is only an idealization and we must allow for inhomogeneities
of density in a matter cloud. In fact, soon after the CCC was proposed

Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
89
in 1969, researchers considered ‘shell-crossing’ singularities in dust col-
lapse models, which were shown to be naked singularities. One such
model was considered by Hans Seifert and others from Germany in
1973, wherein neighboring shells of matter intersected to create mo-
mentary singularities that were not covered by horizons. However,
these were not taken seriously because an observer would not be de-
stroyed and crushed to a zero volume while passing through the same,
which is the true sign of a genuine singularity. In this case, the observer
could sail through undamaged to another region of spacetime.
As we have noted, realistic stars have typically a higher density at the
center, slowly decreasing as one moves outward. In 1979 Douglas Eard-
ley and Larry Smarr performed a numerical simulation of such a model
with zero pressure, and an exact mathematical treatment by Demetrios
Christodoulou followed in 1984. The model revealed a naked singu-
larity at the center where the physical radius of the cloud becomes
zero. However, Richard P.A.C. Newman showed that this singularity is
again gravitationally weak in that curvatures do not diverge sufﬁciently
strongly in the vicinity of the singularity. Many researchers, including
Newman and I in 1988, unsuccessfully tried to formulate a rigorous
theorem that naked singularities are always weak.
What I realized then was that we simply did not know enough
about gravitational collapse to formulate a censorship theorem that
holds generally. We had to continue on the longer road of slowly
building up our knowledge by considering case studies. Subsequently,
researchers found scenarios of inhomogeneous pressureless collapse
where strong-curvature naked singularities, namely those which are
genuine crushing singularities, developed from regular initial con-
ditions. Such collapse models were derived by Kayll Lake and his
collaborators, our group, and others.
A full general treatment for the inhomogeneous dust collapse case
was given by Indresh Dwivedi and myself in 1993. While the homo-
geneous pressureless collapse considered by Oppenheimer and Snyder
produces a black hole, a more realistic density proﬁle with density
higher at the center and decreasing as one moves out can give rise to a
naked singularity, which is an intriguing situation indeed. Nonetheless,
these scenarios still ignore the effects of gas pressure.
We may ask here, how realistic is such a dust collapse picture? The
assumption of vanishing pressures, which can be important in the ﬁnal
stages of collapse, may be considered as the limitation of dust models.

90
Cosmic Censorship
On the other hand, it is also argued sometimes that in the ﬁnal stages
of collapse, the dust equation of state can be relevant and at higher
and higher densities the matter may behave more like dust. This was
the point of view, for example, suggested by R. Hagedorn in 1960s, and
also by Roger Penrose. Further, if there are no large negative pressures,
as implied by the validity of the energy conditions, then the pressure
might also contribute gravitationally in a positive manner to the effect
of dust and may not alter the conclusions.
It is, of course, important to consider collapse situations with non-
zero pressures, and if possible with reasonable equations of state.
Pressures may play an important role in the later stages of collapse and
we must investigate the possibility that pressure gradients can prevent
the occurrence of a naked singularity. Issues such as the existence and
termination of non-spacelike geodesic families and the strength of such
a singularity for collapse with pressure have been examined, which we
shall discuss in the next chapter.
Naked Singularity Formation
We can provide now a more detailed case study of a censorship-violating
collapse scenario and explain how the collapse proceeds in order to of-
fer a physical intuition as to why an event horizon does not form. It
turns out that allowing for a higher density proﬁle at the center of a col-
lapsing dust cloud leads to formation of a naked singularity in collapse,
rather than a black hole.
Let us consider this rather intriguing phenomenon in some detail,
and the physics that leads to naked singularity formation during col-
lapse. We will discuss the scenario depicting the collapse of a dust cloud
in the absence of gas pressure. The matter cloud begins collapse from a
position of rest, corresponding to the phase in a massive star’s life when
it has exhausted its internal fuel and gravity takes over. This is a classical
system governed by general relativity with all physical regularity condi-
tions being satisﬁed, such as positivity of energy density and regularity
of density and curvatures at the initial epoch when the collapse begins.
If the density was assumed to be homogeneous at the initial time, this
would be exactly the OSD model with the collapse giving rise to a black
hole.
We now consider the physically realistic situation where the density
of the star is higher at the center and decreases as one moves out from

Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
91
the central region. To determine the collapse end-state, we need to ex-
amine the trapping of light and matter as gravity ﬁelds become more
and more powerful. Eventually the equation of the trapped region
in the spacetime which decides the formation of the event horizon
developing dynamically as the collapse evolves can be determined.
The key factor here is the timing of the horizon during collapse. If the
horizon forms well before the ﬁnal singularity, the outcome is a black
hole, but if it is delayed as collapse evolves, we have visible ultra-dense
regions forming in the Universe. It turns out that sufﬁcient inhomo-
geneity in the density distribution at the initial time delays the horizon.
If the density decreases fast enough away from the center of the star,
the ﬁnal outcome is a naked singularity, but in a slow enough decrease
or nearly homogeneous case, a black hole results.
These collapse evolutions are depicted in Figs. 3.3 and 5.3. These
correspond to the homogeneous and inhomogeneous cases, respec-
tively. The arms of the cones denote paths of the ingoing and outgoing
light rays. In the homogeneous case, the collapse begins with regular in-
itial conditions where densities and curvatures are ﬁnite. As the collapse
progresses, these increase and the focusing effect on light and matter
grows. Then there comes a time when a region in the spacetime starts
developing such that light is simply unable to escape to any faraway
observer in the Universe. Once light is trapped, the same happens for
matter because it travels slower than the speed of light, with its trajec-
tory only within the cones. This corresponds to the light rays from the
surface of the star at a phase when the radius of the star has contracted
to a distance proportional to its mass. As the collapse progresses, since
the density is only time-dependent, the entire cloud ﬁnally is crushed
simultaneously to a singularity in the future. The trapping of light and
matter, however, occurs well before the ﬁnal singularity develops, and
therefore the singularity is totally hidden inside the black hole that
has formed. So no light signals or matter escapes from the ultra-dense
regions near the singularity.
The collapse, however, develops quite differently once density is no
longer homogeneous, as shown in Fig. 5.3. The light paths are shown as
collapse progresses and as the star gets denser and denser.
What happens in this case is that the entire cloud no longer col-
lapses simultaneously to the singularity because the matter density is
no longer homogeneous. The different matter shells arrive at differ-
ent times at the singularity, one after the other, with shells at larger

92
Cosmic Censorship
Spacetime
singularity
Event
horizon
Apparent
horizon
Outgoing
null geodesics
r = 2m
r = 0
t
r
Initial surface
Collapsing
matter
Figure 5.3 The collapse going to a naked singularity. The spacetime diagram
shown here corresponds to that of a dust collapse which is no longer homoge-
neous but has a density proﬁle which is higher at the center, as opposed to the
constant-density proﬁle used in the OSD model. All the regularity conditions
such as positivity of energy density are satisﬁed and the collapse initiates from a
regular set of initial conditions. In this case, an event horizon forms later, only
at the epoch of the singularity formation, and the ﬁrst event when the sin-
gularity forms becomes visible with many inﬁnite light rays coming out from
the singularity. A comparison with the corresponding black hole case (Fig. 3.3)
shows that in that case the horizon formed much earlier than the singularity.
radius coming later. As a result, at no stage before the epoch of for-
mation of the singularity are the light rays ever trapped, and rays and
particles can travel out from the super-ultra-dense regions which are
arbitrarily near to the spacetime singularity. This lack of trapping hap-
pens due to a deﬁcit in the focusing effect of gravity on light and matter.
Due to inhomogeneity and decreasing density of the star away from the
center, there is never enough total mass at any given epoch to cause
full light trapping, prior to the epoch of singularity formation. Roy
Maartens, Naresh Dadhich, and I analyzed this general relativistic ef-
fect of delay of horizon formation and related it to the shearing effects
due to gravity in a spacetime.

Inhomogeneous Dust Collapse
93
Physically, what does such a phenomenon imply and correspond to?
There are many possible interpretations, but one possibility is that this
may correspond to the creation of general relativistic shocks due to
inhomogeneity in such ultra-dense regions, which may allow for escape
and ejection of light and matter despite very high matter densities.
When such a naked singularity develops, it is characterized by three
main attributes. First, there are families of inﬁnitely many light and par-
ticle trajectories coming out from the singularity region. Second, it is a
genuine curvature singularity in that the densities and curvatures be-
come inﬁnite in the limit of approach to singularity along these paths.
Finally, the overall spacetime satisﬁes all physical regularity conditions,
so this becomes an interesting scenario for studying actual physical
processes in ultra-strong gravity regions.
How the Field Strength Grows
An important test of the physical signiﬁcance of a naked singularity is
its curvature strength. A detailed classiﬁcation and analysis of spacetime
singularities is available as far as their curvature strength and physical
signiﬁcance are concerned. A singularity is said to have strong curva-
ture if there is at least one non-spacelike trajectory falling into it along
which the spacetime curvatures diverge sufﬁciently fast in the limit of
approach to the singularity. The strength of a naked singularity has
been examined in several cases along non-spacelike trajectories termi-
nating at the naked singularity in the past, in the limit of approach to
the singularity. It turns out that we get strong curvature singularity
in a powerful sense in that curvatures diverge very rapidly along not
one but all non-spacelike geodesics meeting the naked singularity in
the past.
This leads to the useful conclusion that, in fact, strong-curvature
naked singularities can occur in general relativistic gravitational col-
lapse for several reasonable equations of state. The scenarios considered
here are reasonable in that the energy conditions are satisﬁed and the
collapse evolves from well-deﬁned initial data. Any possible formula-
tion of the cosmic censorship hypothesis must take into consideration
these situations and we must examine the structure of a naked singu-
larity and the possible general constraints.
It would be useful to know the behavior of the matter energy density
and gravitational ﬁeld strength during collapse to a singularity in typ-
ical models as described earlier. That would give us an idea as to how

94
Cosmic Censorship
serious and genuine such a singularity is, as opposed to a gravitationally
weak singularity, which is not genuine and possibly removable from the
spacetime.
Let us consider, for example, the cosmological Big Bang singularity.
In this case for the Friedmann models, the radiation density goes in-
versely as the fourth power of the scale factor of the Universe, namely
as 1/S4, where the scale factor S goes to 0 at the singularity. Thus, as S
becomes smaller, the radiation density diverges. The scale factor will go
as t1/2 in this case, where t is the time from Big Bang and we have S = 0
at t = 0. The equations of this cosmology then imply that the density
diverges as 1/t2 in the limit of approach to the singularity. Again, for the
Schwarzschild singularity, the density is, of course, zero throughout the
spacetime because it is a vacuum solution of Einstein’s equations. But
we can plot the gravitational strength in that case. For null geodesics,
i.e., the photon trajectories falling into the singularity, this will blow up
and diverge as 1/k2, where k is the afﬁne parameter along the geodesic
paths, with a zero value at the singularity.
The Schwarzschild metric is a static solution which does not change
over time, and the Big Bang is a dynamically evolving cosmological so-
lution. But in the spirit similar to above, we need to ask what is the den-
sity growth behavior for a given model of stellar collapse as we approach
the singularity. This point is particularly important for a naked singu-
larity, because in the limit of approach to it, if the density and spacetime
curvatures do not grow sufﬁciently strongly then it will be a gravita-
tionally weak singularity which may be removable from the spacetime.
In fact, further to the CCC proposal, there has been a constant search
on how to formulate and possibly prove a mathematically rigorous
statement of the CCC. One possibility researchers considered in de-
tail in the 1980s was that even when naked singularities formed, they
must be gravitationally weak. If this is the case, they can be removed
from the spacetime by mathematically extending them and thus need
not be taken seriously. Then this by itself would become a statement
for the CCC, namely that even if naked singularities occur in collapse
they must always be gravitationally weak. Such a conjecture, however,
turned out to be incorrect as classes of naked singularities of dust col-
lapse proved to be gravitationally very strong because the curvatures
became very powerful in the vicinity of the singularity.
In order to consider this collapse scenario, we know the evolution of
the cloud fully and can work out how the density grows in the limit

The Genericity Aspects
95
of approach to the singularity. For simplicity we can consider, for
example, the central line of the cloud, which is actually a timelike geo-
desic in this case. Then the evolution of the density turns out to be 1/t2,
where we have t = 0 at the singularity. Thus we see that the density and
curvatures grow very powerfully and blow up as we go closer to the
naked singularity.
The singularity is either covered in a black hole event horizon or vis-
ibly naked, depending on the nature of inhomogeneity in the cloud.
In either cases the above fact on curvature growth in the limit of ap-
proach to the singularity does not change. Of course, in the black hole
case we must calculate the density growth along the trajectories fall-
ing in the black hole, which hit the singularity at the center. In the
case when a naked singularity forms, there are families of non-spacelike
paths coming out from the singularity and we can go back along the
same, closer to the singularity, and calculate the density growth in the
limit of approach to the singularity.
In general, we can consider families of either photon or particle tra-
jectories, falling into or coming out of the singularity, and examine the
curvature growth along the trajectories. We can work out the density
growth or the curvature strength in the limit of approach to the sin-
gularity. The case discussed above turns out to be a strong-curvature
naked singularity in the sense that it is not removable from the space-
time. There is a powerful divergence of density in the approach to the
singularity, and it is found to be a genuine strong-curvature singularity.
The Genericity Aspects
The issue of the ﬁnal state of the gravitational collapse of massive stars
and cosmic censorship has seized researchers’ minds for many decades,
because it has proved to be an important debate, not only for black hole
physics and its astrophysical applications, but also for astrophysics and
astronomy. There have been several unsuccessful attempts to formu-
late the CCC in different forms. Each of these attempts has tried to
determine in different collapse models why naked singularity should
not occur, or if they do, then why they should be ‘non-generic’. If a
naked singularity, rather than a black hole, does develop in gravita-
tional collapse models which are physically more realistic than the OSD
solution, the natural question then is, how ‘generic’ or ‘typical’ is such a
naked singularity outcome? As such, trying to formulate ‘genericity’ in

96
Cosmic Censorship
Set B is not open
The inside of
set A is open
A
q
p
p
B
Figure 5.4 An open set is basically a region of full space where any chosen
point is surrounded by a continuous neighborhood which is fully part of the
set itself. The idea here is that if we make a small perturbation and move away
from that point, we still remain within the set. In the example above, the inside
of set A is open, because for any point such as p, we can always draw a small
circle around it which is fully contained within A. But set B, on the right, which
consists of a collection of scattered points is not open, because for any point
therein, any of its neighborhood will always contain points other than those
in set B. Such open sets play a very important role in deﬁning the geometry of
any given space.
gravitation theory is a difﬁcult task and no single deﬁnition is possible
or available. That is why many different ways have been attempted.
The idea is that if a naked singularity forms, if the set of initial condi-
tions from which it develops as the collapse evolves is not generic, then
the naked singularity may not be called generic. In other words, the
set of initial conditions from which the naked singularity arises should
form an open set of initial data (Fig. 5.4). Essentially, what this means is,
if a particular set of initial data gives rise to a naked singularity, then all
the ‘nearby’ initial data also must evolve into a naked singularity only.
Typically, the naked singularity is characterized by a past-incomplete
null geodesic from the future inﬁnity.
Within the general LTB dust collapse scenario that we discussed ear-
lier, we can consider this issue based on the general treatment that
Indresh Dwivedi and I gave in 1993 for the inhomogeneous dust col-
lapse. The essential picture that emerges and the general result that we
obtain for this system can be described in the following manner.
Two parameters fully determine the evolution and the ﬁnal fate
of collapse for the general dust system. The ﬁrst of these is the mass

The Genericity Aspects
97
function of the star, which speciﬁes the total mass within a given area
radius. The second parameter is the velocities of the collapsing shells
at the initial epoch. The energy conditions imply that mass is always
positive. As for the velocities of the shells there are different choices de-
pending on the physical system under consideration. For example, for a
collapse from rest which models the physical scenario of a star which
collapses from being initially at rest, the velocity function is deﬁned
appropriately.
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.9
33
34
35
Velocities 
of collapsing shells
Mass
36
Naked singularity
Black hole
37
Figure 5.5 The distribution of collapse end-states in terms of black holes and
naked singularities for a typical class of LTB models for inhomogeneous dust
collapse. In the present case, we have a centrally higher density proﬁle which
is physically more realistic as opposed to a constant proﬁle used in the homo-
geneous dust case of the OSD collapse models. As seen, the collapse ﬁnal states
for any given initial mass and velocity proﬁles for the collapsing shells are al-
most equally distributed as black holes and naked singularities. The outcome
depends on the choice of velocity proﬁles for any given mass proﬁle which
characterizes the initial density distribution for the cloud. (From F. Mena,
R. Tavakol and P. S. Joshi, Phys Rev D62 (2000), 044001)

98
Cosmic Censorship
The result we get is the following: In general, given any speciﬁc initial
density distribution that we may like to choose, there is a non-zero-
measure collection of velocity functions that take the star to either a
naked singularity or a black hole ﬁnal state, depending on the choice
we made for the velocities (see Fig. 5.5). Such a choice is freely available
with all regularity and physical reasonability conditions being satisﬁed.
This shows the genericity and stability of the naked singularity within
the given framework of a general dust collapse scenario. We shall dis-
cuss this feature in more detail later for other forms of matter. As we
consider in the next chapter, similar features arise when pressures and
other physical equations of state are incorporated for general collapsing
matter ﬁelds.

N6O
Naked Singularities
We saw in the previous chapter that for general dust collapse models,
both black holes and naked singularities develop quite naturally and
generically as the ﬁnal fate of gravitational collapse. As discussed in
some detail, introducing a higher density at the center naturally de-
lays the formation of trapped surfaces. The event horizon then fails to
envelop the ﬁnal singularity of collapse.
The above scenario was obtained through the introduction of the
physical feature that a realistic collapse must be inhomogeneous in its
density distribution. However, we need to examine how a naked sin-
gularity develops in the gravitational collapse of a massive star when
other physical features such as non-zero pressures, realistic equations
of state, and non-sphericity are also included. In particular, will the
naked singularity disappear when more general physical features are
taken into consideration?
As such, dust itself is an idealization and typically the collapsing star
will have non-zero pressures within. We can then ask whether a gravi-
tational collapse with non-zero pressures gives rise to black holes only,
thus doing away with the naked singularity. Further, a typical star need
not be exactly spherically symmetric, and can be also rotating. If we
allow for perturbations from sphericity, will that avoid naked singu-
larities? These questions basically relate to the issue that even if naked
singularities do develop in collapse, how realistic or ‘generic’ or ‘stable’
are they?
The point is that while raising such issues and investigating and con-
structing collapse models accordingly, if we ﬁnd that the introduction
of a certain physical feature during collapse necessarily removes the
formation of all visible singularities, then that may provide a useful pos-
sibility of formulating and proving the censorship conjecture through
physical means, rather than trying only mathematical formulations.
Toward such a purpose, many more scenarios and models of gravi-
tational collapse, more general and generic than the dust collapse

100
Naked Singularities
model, have been examined in past years. We will discuss some of those
here. The essential conclusion from these studies is that depending on
a star’s initial density and pressure proﬁles, there are velocity proﬁles
or dynamical evolutions of the collapsing matter shells that direct the
collapse to either a black hole or a naked singularity. It thus turns out
that naked singularities do develop in collapse from fairly generic initial
conditions.
Finally, we will ask the question ‘why does a naked singularity form
during collapse?’ In other words, we would like to know the physics
behind naked singularity formation, or what are the physical factors
that cause a naked singularity, rather than a black hole, to form as a
massive star’s ﬁnal state of collapse? The interesting role and the ﬁner
intricacies of general relativity come out here. We will see again how our
Newtonian intuitions can fail and how general relativity opens up paths
of communication even from the vicinity of super-ultra-high density
regions.
Collapsing a Massive Star
The
cosmic
censorship
conjecture
(CCC)
proposes
that
the
Oppenheimer–Snyder–Datt
(OSD)
homogeneous
dust
collapse
scenario must generalize to a generic situation of physically realistic
gravitational collapse of a massive star. However, as discussed in the
previous chapter, introducing inhomogeneities in dust collapse leads
to naked singularity ﬁnal states. It is clearly essential to examine the
introduction of further physical features to see what their effect is
on collapse ﬁnal states. To investigate this, many dynamical collapse
scenarios for cases such as clouds composed of dust, radiation, perfect
ﬂuids, and matter compositions with more general equations of state
have been examined in the past couple of decades.
To decide on the validity of censorship, we must study the dynami-
cal collapse of massive stars to determine their ﬁnal fate. In recent years,
detailed analytical research on gravitational collapse has given insights
into when black holes form and when they will not. Some models sug-
gest that visible ultra-dense regions, or naked singularities, may arise
naturally and generically as an outcome of collapse. If so, the implica-
tions are enormous and touch on nearly every aspect of astrophysics
and fundamental physics. They might account for extreme high energy
phenomena in the Universe that have deﬁed explanation. They may

Collapsing a Massive Star
101
also offer a laboratory for exploring quantum gravity effects that are
otherwise extremely difﬁcult to observe.
Unlike the idealized and rather special OSD model, real stars have an
inhomogeneous density, namely, higher at their centers, the pressure
within is not zero, and they also rotate. Will every massive star col-
lapsing toward the end of its life-cycle turn into a black hole? Cosmic
censorship supposes the answer to be yes, namely, that the singularity
forming during collapse always hides within an event horizon, never to
be seen by external observers. So whatever the physical conditions and
forces within massive stars may be, their eventual collapse must yield
a black hole. Censorship amounts to a constraint on the nature of al-
lowed dynamical evolution for collapsing clouds in general relativity.
The crucial physical question here, from the perspective of both grav-
itation theory and astrophysics, is can we really see and observe such
super-ultra-dense regions which develop when massive stars collapse?
We believe that the real way to make progress here is to go beyond
making a hypothesis, and to study the gravitational collapse processes
of massive stars using the dynamical equations of gravitation theory.
Extensive efforts in recent years and results in this direction are now
available, and we need to consider the possible implications if naked
singularities actually develop as result of a continual gravitational col-
lapse. The possible theoretical and observable consequences are to be
investigated.
The point is whether we can generalize the dust collapse conclusions
on the occurrence of a spacetime singularity during collapse and black
hole formation for more general matter ﬁelds and for non-spherical sit-
uations. While we know that the occurrence of a singularity is stable to
small perturbations in the initial data, there is no proof available that
it will continue to be hidden within a black hole and causally discon-
nected from outside observers when the collapse is not spherical or
when the matter is not exactly homogeneous dust.
There have been several important recent developments showing
that the ﬁnal fate of a collapsing star can be a naked singularity in
many physically reasonable collapse scenarios. Such a naked singular-
ity is very much like a black hole, though without its ‘black’ part, in
that it is a super-ultra-dense region of matter and curvatures in the
Universe which can communicate with or is visible to faraway ob-
servers. The naked singularity can result as a massive star’s collapse
ﬁnal state, depending on the structure of the star in terms of its internal

102
Naked Singularities
density and pressure proﬁles and the velocities of the collapsing shells.
This means that the ﬁnal fate of the star depends on the nature of the
initial data from which the collapsing cloud evolves and the possible
dynamical evolutions as allowed by Einstein’s equations of gravity.
Clearly, black holes and naked singularities, which are hypotheti-
cal astrophysical objects in nature, provide one of the most exciting
arenas in fundamental physics and cosmology. If naked singularities ac-
tually formed in the collapse of massive stars, this will have profound
implications for our observations of very-high-energy phenomena in
the Universe and for fundamental theories of nature. How do we re-
solve this profound theoretical as well as observational conundrum,
and what could be the future directions? What do current astronomical
observations imply for the ﬁnal fate of a massive collapsing star? What
will be the implications of these issues and considerations for any future
possible quantum theories of gravity? Are there any possible model so-
lutions which may help us resolve this cosmic puzzle? Taken as a whole,
it may not be an exaggeration if we describe these questions, and the
overall current situation, as one of the most important and fundamen-
tal theoretical challenges to have emerged through the theoretical as
well as observational developments in astronomy and astrophysics of
the past decades.
Gravitational Collapse Studies
Since we are interested in collapse, we require that the spacetime con-
tains a regular initial spacelike surface on which the matter ﬁelds have
a compact support, and that all physical quantities are well-behaved on
this surface. Also, the matter should satisfy a suitable energy condition
and Einstein’s equations should be satisﬁed. We say that the spacetime
contains a naked singularity if there is a future-directed non-spacelike
curve which reaches a faraway observer or inﬁnity in the future, and in
the past it terminates at the singularity.
To resolve the profound issue of cosmic censorship at the heart of
gravity physics which has no direct proof applying under general condi-
tions, researchers, including our group, have considered a variety of spe-
ciﬁc collapse scenarios which can provide many useful insights into the
ﬁnal fate of a massive star’s collapse. In essence, we have conducted a se-
ries of computational experiments to compile a list of conditions under
which gravitational collapse leads to a black hole or a naked singularity.

Gravitational Collapse Studies
103
Our strategy was to examine all possible courses of evolution for
a massive star as it collapses with a given set of physically reasonable
properties and regularity conditions. These latter are basic consistency
requirements such as having a positive amount of energy as the star
collapses under self-gravity. Mathematically, these are the allowed dy-
namical solutions to Einstein’s equations. We supply the initial data for
collapse in terms of initial density and pressure proﬁles of matter within
the star and the velocities of the collapsing concentric shells of gas. We
then compute the causal structure within the collapsing cloud, which
reveals how light and matter are trapped as gravity grows stronger
as collapse progresses. This decides whether the ﬁnal singularity of
collapse will be visible or covered by a horizon.
Over the past few years, we have developed a general formalism for
treating spherical collapse from regular initial data. General matter
ﬁelds can include realistic features such as pressure, inhomogeneities in
density distribution, and reasonable equations of state of matter. Physi-
cists are even beginning to consider situations where matter takes on
some other form, such as a fundamental quantum ﬁeld, or is converted
to radiation in a sudden phase transition in the very late stages of col-
lapse. What these works show in a generic manner is that collapse with
non-zero pressures can lead to either a black hole or a naked singularity.
The outcome is decided by the initial data and dynamical evolutions
as allowed by Einstein’s equations. It turns out that collapse ends in a
naked singularity in a wide variety of situations.
The singularities studied so far exhibit a wide variety of interesting
structures. In some models, only a part of it is visible, but then it is even-
tually covered by the event horizon. Elsewhere they can remain visible
forever. This depends on the form of collapsing matter, the equation of
state, and other properties. Basically, singularities come in all varieties,
depending on the model of collapse. Typically, the naked singularity
ﬁrst develops in the geometric center of collapse, but later can spread
to other regions, or become covered, as the collapse progresses.
As we will discuss later, the result of a naked singularity or a black
hole has more to do with the choice of initial data for ﬁeld equations,
rather than with the form of matter or the equation of state. The
generic conclusion from these studies is that both black holes and naked
singularities do develop as collapse end-states, for a realistic collapse
that incorporates inhomogeneities as well as non-zero pressures within
the interior of the collapsing matter cloud. Subject to various regularity

104
Naked Singularities
and energy conditions to ensure the model’s physical reasonableness, it
is the initial data, in terms of initial density, pressures, and velocity pro-
ﬁles of the collapsing shells, that determine the ﬁnal fate of collapse as
either a naked singularity or a black hole.
Such a scenario has important implications for cosmic censorship in
that in order to preserve the CCC we must avoid all such regular initial
data causing naked singularities. Therefore, a deeper understanding of
the initial data space is required in order to determine such initial data
and the kind of physical parameters they would specify. This would, in
other words, classify the range of physical parameters to be avoided for
any particular form of matter chosen, such as perfect ﬂuids or dust or
whatever else it may be, so that only black holes are allowed and not
naked singularities. This will pave the way for black hole physics to use
only those ranges of allowed parameter values that will produce black
holes, thus putting black hole physics on a more ﬁrm footing. Perhaps
we can say without exaggeration that this is where the real usefulness
of gravitational collapse studies lies.
Collapse with Non-zero Pressure
It is clear on physical grounds that non-zero pressures are quite impor-
tant during a star’s collapse, especially during its later stages. It is true
at the astrophysical level that when the inner pressures due to nuclear
burning within a massive star subside, then its continual gravitational
collapse is triggered. As the collapse progresses, pressures can again be-
come important and play an important role during the later stages. So
the basic question we must ask is, how can non-zero pressures mod-
ify the collapse scenario, especially as far as the ﬁnal state of collapse
is concerned? What researchers have found is that non-zero pressures
make no qualitative difference to the result, in that, again, both naked
singularities and black holes develop as collapse end-states. The only
difference is that the initial data space for collapse is more vast and
larger in this case. It now consists of density proﬁles, pressure proﬁles,
and initial shell velocities, which is a much larger space than the dust
collapse case we discussed earlier. In the latter, only the initial density
determines the ﬁnal state of collapse, when we consider collapse from
rest, and a combination of parameters determines the ﬁnal state.
For collapse with non-zero pressures, the key principle again re-
mains the same, namely the total mass within a given radius determines

Gravitational Collapse Studies
105
the trapping of light in either case. But now total mass is a more
complicated function of the parameters involved. This is what the gen-
eral formalism we refer to here deals with, which allows fully general
pressures to be incorporated and shows that both naked singularities
and black holes arise generically even when pressure is non-zero.
Although previously dust collapse models ignored pressure, the gen-
eral techniques developed to understand the dynamical evolution of
collapse did ﬁnd applications later, when collapse models with pressure
were considered. As is well known, under completely general con-
ditions it is not possible to fully solve Einstein’s system of equations
globally, the main reason being that these are a complicated set of non-
linear partial differential equations. But the relevant information about
the ﬁnal fate of collapse in the general form of matter ﬁelds and cur-
vature invariants can be extracted by an analysis of the behavior of the
solutions near the singularity and near the center of the cloud. This
helps us decide the local visibility or otherwise of the central singularity.
Gravitational collapse models with non-zero pressures have been
discussed and investigated in past years in detail by many groups,
including our own. Giulio Magli, Roberto Giambo and their collab-
orators in Italy, and Ken-ichi Nakao and others in Japan considered
a form of pressure generated by the rotation of particles within a
collapsing cloud. They showed how naked singularities develop as
end-states. Several models with a realistic equation of state, which
speciﬁes how the density and pressure within a cloud are related, were
also investigated, including models by Amos Ori and Tsvi Piran, and
by our group. Also Kayll Lake and collaborators considered various
collapse scenarios to ﬁnd similar results, and Tomohiro Harada and
Sanjay Jhingan studied perfect ﬂuid models.
Given the difﬁculties of solving Einstein’s equations, the system’s full
integration is not possible even in the simplest cases once pressures are
included. So the general line of inquiry and the main technique that
our group developed to deal with this problem can be outlined as fol-
lows: First, we consider the general structure of Einstein’s equations for
studying spherical collapse. We then describe how the equations can
be integrated up to ﬁrst order, thus obtaining the equation of motion
for the system. The regularity conditions and energy conditions that
give physically reasonable models are considered and imposed on the
models. The ﬁnal stages of collapse are then discussed, evaluating key

106
Naked Singularities
elements that determine when the outcome will be a black hole or a
naked singularity.
It can be shown that there is a speciﬁc function which is related to
the tangent of outgoing geodesics at the singularity, whose sign solely
determines the time of formation of trapped surfaces in relation to the
time of formation of the singularity. We also analyze the occurrence
of trapped surfaces during collapse and the possibility that radial null
geodesics do escape, thus making the singularity visible. We can show
how both features are related to the sign of the above-mentioned
function, thus obtaining a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the
visibility of the singularity.
These conclusions and models are by now fairly widely accepted, and
it is clear that physically reasonable gravitational collapse can create
a naked singularity. However, in the original statement of the cosmic
censorship conjecture, Roger Penrose included a condition, namely
that ‘generic’ gravitational collapse would always produce black holes.
Are the models we have just discussed generic? In fact, they are, in
the sense of the initial data for matter being fully generic, as required.
The key difﬁculty for such a requirement, however, is that there is
no mathematically well-formulated deﬁnition of genericity available
in gravitation theory that can be used to answer this question. Sta-
bility and genericity are extremely difﬁcult concepts to formulate in
general relativity, within the framework of a general spacetime with
a Lorentzian metric with an indeﬁnite signature, with no deﬁnite and
clear criteria available. In fact, there are formidable mathematical difﬁ-
culties in achieving this. So the only way to proceed is by asking further
questions, such as is there any perturbation of spherical symmetry that
will remove these naked singularities? Or will naked singularities form
in non-spherical collapse?
To summarize, the typical result that we obtain for spherical collapse
with non-zero pressures within a collapsing star is as follows: gravita-
tional collapse models with a general form of matter, together with
those such as directed radiation, dust, and perfect ﬂuids, imply a cer-
tain general pattern emerging about the ﬁnal outcome of gravitational
collapse. Basically it follows that the occurrence of a naked singularity
is related to the choice of initial data for the Einstein ﬁeld equations, and
will therefore occur from regular initial data within the general context
considered, subject to the matter satisfying energy conditions.

Gravitational Collapse Studies
107
The Equation of State
An equation of state is a constitutive relation that provides a link
between certain key quantities describing a system. Typically for a
collapsing matter cloud an equation of state is provided once we know
how the pressure is related to the energy density. Stars during their
equilibrium phase can be described by such equations of state, both
at the level of classical mechanics and within the context of general
relativity.
It is reasonable to believe that once the nuclear fuel that maintains
the star in equilibrium is exhausted, the collapse commences in a very
short time from an initial conﬁguration described by the same phys-
ical quantities related by the same equation of state. We can take the
pressures and densities as they were initially from the models at equilib-
rium, which is also true for other quantities appearing in the equation
of state. These values are all expressed in terms of the thermodynamical
variables of the system, such as temperature and the molecular weight
of the gas.
There are examples of simple, astrophysically relevant linear and
polytropic equations of states which have been considered, and for these
the collapse has been analyzed to understand its ﬁnal fate in terms of
black hole or a naked singularity. This is useful for possible astrophysical
and numerical applications. For example, researchers have considered
the collapse of a perfect ﬂuid, wherein the pressures are isotropic. The
dynamics is then fully ﬁxed by the initial conditions and so we see
how solving the equation of motion is equivalent to solving the whole
system of equations.
As we noted earlier, the introduction of an equation of state closes the
system of Einstein’s equations and so no freedom is left to specify any
further physical quantities. Gravitational collapse of a perfect ﬂuid with
a linear equation of state was studied by Rituparno Goswami and myself
to show that solutions exist such that both black holes and naked sin-
gularities are possible collapse outcomes, depending on the initial data
and the velocity distribution of the particles.
An interesting point to note here is that, as the collapse evolves,
the equation of state need not remain the same. It could vary, maybe
even abruptly as in some phase transitions, as would happen when the
nuclear saturation limit for the neutron star matter is reached. Actu-
ally, recent developments suggest that close to the formation of the

108
Naked Singularities
singularity, strong negative pressures might develop and the gravita-
tional ﬁeld might act repulsively, thus disrupting the collapsing cloud
and dispersing away the infalling matter. This kind of effect can be in-
ferred already at a classical level but it is more evident when quantum
corrections are considered, as we shall discuss later. This evidence sug-
gests that the equation of state relating pressure and density, which
must be always positive, evolves in a non-trivial manner during the
collapse. There could be a sharp transition in equations of state when
matter passes from one physical regime to another. With strong neg-
ative pressures, the speed of sound in the matter cloud can approach
the speed of light. It is clear that to account for such extreme situations
the usual linear and polytropic equations of state are not enough, and
so the equations of state describing ultra-compact objects are not well
understood.
Then we are left with the option of either dropping the equation of
state altogether or considering more exotic equations of state. Among
the latter, gases with exotic properties, such as the so-called Chaply-
gin gas, have been considered in order to account for possible sources
of dark energy and dark matter. Of course, dark energy effects are not
likely to be relevant for collapse at stellar scales but they might become
important for bigger objects, such as the compact ones dwelling at the
center of galaxies that have masses on the order of many million solar
masses.
Non-zero Cosmological Constant
While considering the collapse with non-zero pressures, it is natural
to ask about the role of the cosmological term introduced by Einstein
in his ﬁeld equations, where it appears as an additional term, and fre-
quently it is taken to be vanishing. However, in view of recent evidence
regarding dark energy and the observed acceleration of the Universe,
the possibility that we live in a Universe with a non-zero cosmological
term has resurfaced strongly. The role of the cosmological term is es-
sentially as a vacuum energy density, and depending on its positive or
negative sign, it may exert positive or negative pressures.
Researchers, including us, have investigated gravitational collapse
with a non-zero cosmological constant as well. The results show that
for the collapse of a compact object such as a massive star, the matter
densities are typically much higher than the vacuum energy density.
Therefore the collapse end-states in terms of either a black hole or a

Non-spherical Collapse
109
naked singularity remain unaltered. However, for a very large cloud
which has very small initial densities, the cosmological constant can
make a difference and when it is positive, it could sometimes trigger
the bounce of the cloud.
Non-spherical Collapse
While we have a good understanding now of spherical collapse for
a generic matter ﬁeld with pressures, non-spherical collapse remains
a major uncharted territory. Several recent studies have found non-
spherical models that also give rise to naked singularities. The question
is whether these situations are contrived. Fast-developing numerical
core collapse models in general relativity could be of help here.
What will be the ﬁnal fate of gravitational collapse which is not
spherically symmetric? The main phases of spherical collapse of a
massive star would be typically instability, implosion of matter, and
subsequent formation of an event horizon and a spacetime singularity
of inﬁnite density and curvature with inﬁnite gravitational tidal forces.
This singularity may or may not be fully covered by the horizon, as we
have already discussed. Again, small perturbations over the spherically
symmetric situation will leave the situation unchanged in the sense that
an event horizon will continue to form in the advanced stages of the
collapse.
The question then is, do horizons still form when the ﬂuctuations
from the spherical symmetry are high and the collapse is highly non-
spherical? It was shown by Kip Thorne in 1972 that when there is no
spherical symmetry, the collapse of inﬁnite cylinders does give rise to
naked singularities in general relativity that are not covered by event
horizons. This situation motivated Thorne to propose the followinghoop
conjecture for ﬁnite systems in an asymptotically ﬂat spacetime, which
characterizes the ﬁnal fate of non-spherical collapse: The horizons of
gravity form when and only when a mass, M, gets compacted in a re-
gion whose circumference, C, in every direction obeys C ≤2π(2GM/c2),
where G is Newton’s constant of gravity and c is the speed of light.
Thus, unlike the cosmic censorship conjecture, the hoop conjecture
does not rule out all naked singularities, but only makes a deﬁnite as-
sertion on the occurrence of event horizons in gravitational collapse.
We also note that the hoop conjecture is concerned with the forma-
tion of event horizons, and not naked singularities. Thus, even when

110
Naked Singularities
event horizons form, for example in the spherically symmetric case, it
does not rule out the existence of naked singularities. That is, it does
not imply that such horizons must always cover the singularities.
When it comes to non-spherical collapse, the situation is almost al-
ways complex enough to require numerical tracing of the collapse evo-
lutions. However, we note that apart from numerical simulations, some
analytic treatments of non-spherical collapse are also available. For ex-
ample, the non-spherical Szekeres models for irrotational dust which
have no symmetries, and which generalize the spherical Lemaitre–
Tolman–Bondi collapse, were studied by Andrzej Krolak and myself
to deduce the existence of strong-curvature central naked singularities.
The symmetries of a given model are typically characterized by what are
called Killing vectors for the spacetime. The Szekeres models have actu-
ally no Killing vectors, and in that sense they are quite interesting non-
spherical models. Therefore, this is a useful result which indicates that
naked singularities are not necessarily conﬁned to spherical symmetry.
Also, there are classes of spacetimes called gamma metrics, which
are non-spherical spacetimes admitting naked singularities, and these
models have been analyzed in some detail. All the same, it must be
noted that dynamical evolution of a non-spherical collapse still remains
a largely uncharted territory. Numerical models of collapse in full gen-
eral relativity must be used to tell us more about the collapse ﬁnal fate
in such a general situation.
Compared to this, in the spherical case, we can do mostly analytic
work, which is much more transparent. We use analytic techniques to
deal with Einstein’s equations in the spherical case, developing a gen-
eral formalism for general physical matter ﬁelds, including dust, perfect
ﬂuids, and radiation collapse. We can, in fact, solve Einstein’s equa-
tions at least partly, so as to determine the structure of trapped surface
geometry and the apparent horizon as the collapse evolves. This allows
us to explicitly determine whether there are families of null geodesics,
and in some cases other timelike curves, emerging from the singular-
ity, and the physical conditions determining their existence. That is,
these are photon trajectories which meet the singularity in the past,
and are future-directed and meet external observers in the spacetime,
making the singularity or the super-ultra-dense regions in its vicin-
ity visible. Therefore, this conclusively establishes that the singularity
is visible, as opposed to being covered within an event horizon. When
the collapse end-state will be a naked singularity, and when it will be

Non-spherical Collapse
111
a black hole, is explicitly characterized in terms of the initial data, such
as the density and the velocity proﬁles of the collapsing matter, and in
terms of the allowed evolutions of Einstein’s equations. The geometry
of trapped surfaces is worked out analytically, and the conclusions are,
by their very nature and methodology, coordinate independent.
The limitation, however, is that this formalism applies to spherical
collapse mainly, though for fully generic matter ﬁelds. Also it is seen
from the trapped surface geometry that this will be stable to small
perturbations in the spacetime geometry. It is true that most of the col-
lapse models analyzed so far are spherical. However, many physicists
believe, as Roy Kerr pointed out to me in a private conversation, that
if cosmic censorship is to hold as a basic principle of nature, it needs
to hold in the spherical class too, which has wide astrophysical signiﬁ-
cance. Therefore, analyzing these models could be of great value from
the perspective of censorship. This will help isolate the physical features
that cause naked singularities. On the other hand, some researchers
believe that the classes of collapse analyzed so far are good enough to
begin investigating the physics and astrophysical implications of naked
singularities.
The main question now is whether these situations are contrived.
Fast-developing numerical core collapse models in general relativity
could be of help here. The results so far also show that naked singu-
larities are, in fact, stable to small perturbations in the initial data of
matter ﬁelds, to the introduction of non-zero pressures in the cloud,
and so on. Therefore we have yet to ﬁnd and isolate precisely the kind
of perturbation that would make a given naked singularity go away.
These situations are what physicists call ‘generic’, that is, they are not
contrived, in that a tiny deviation in the initial data leads to much the
same outcome. However, we should emphasize the general ‘stability’
proof for the naked singularity yet remains to be achieved.
Clearly, the issue of the ﬁnal fate of a non-spherical collapse is closely
related to the stability and genericity of naked singularities. When we
are dealing with non-spherical collapse, this considers what happens to
the ‘deformations’ that mark the departure from spherical symmetry.
This is a major unsolved problem analytically, since the set of Einstein’s
equations describing the evolution of the cloud becomes immensely
complicated when deformations and rotation are taken into account.
There have been some attempts to study quasi-spherical and cylindrical
collapse in full generality, but the physical signiﬁcance of such models

112
Naked Singularities
remains somewhat obscure. We can say that the study of non-spherical
collapse within exact solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations is an area
where much work still needs to be done.
Since a comprehensive analytical treatment of collapse away from
spherical symmetry is still not available, the few insights that we have
in the ﬁnal fate of collapse of a non-spherical cloud come from numer-
ical relativity. The study of non-spherical collapse is related to cosmic
censorship through the so-called no-hair theorem, which essentially says
that any asymptotically ﬂat black hole vacuum solution of Einstein’s
equations must be identiﬁed by only three quantities, namely the mass,
charge, and angular momentum. This means that other vacuum solu-
tions characterized by some other quantity, such as higher multipole
moments for an axially symmetric spacetime, can have a naked singu-
larity, as is the case for the class of so-called Weyl metrics. Therefore
one crucial issue with non-spherical collapse is what happens to those
higher multipole moments during the collapsing phase.
If the collapsing cloud retains its non-spherical shape, then the ﬁnal
vacuum conﬁguration will not be represented by Schwarzschild or Kerr
geometries. Then naked singularities, like those present in axially sym-
metric vacuum spacetimes such as the Weyl class or the Tomimatsu–
Sato solution, could be present. On the other hand, the presence of
deformations might provide a modiﬁcation in the density distribution
of the collapsing source that opposes the pull of gravity, thus sug-
gesting that non-spherical sources might produce some equilibrium
conﬁguration before complete collapse settles to a singularity.
Recently, investigations have looked at the observational signatures
that such vacuum metrics would possess, and the possibility that the
Kerr metric might not be the best to describe the exterior of a rotat-
ing star is also suggested. If, on the other hand, higher-order multipole
moments are radiated away during collapse, then the ﬁnal conﬁgura-
tion is Schwarzschild or Kerr–Newman spacetime. For this to happen,
there must be a mechanism within the evolution of Einstein’s equa-
tions that explains why and how the higher multipole moments are
radiated away, which at present is a matter of speculation. Also, we are
still left with the possibility that the event-like naked singularities, like
those forming during collapse with spherical symmetry, might form. In
this sense the study of small perturbations of spherical symmetry shows
that the ﬁnal outcomes, whether black holes or naked singularities, are
most likely stable.

Numerical Simulations
113
Numerical Simulations
The investigations on gravitational collapse have been carried out on
both the analytical and numerical sides. Many questions on complete
collapse still remain unanswered from the theoretical side and also
from the observational perspective, like the mechanism behind super-
novae explosions and the origin of gamma ray bursts. To answer these,
computer simulations might prove very useful.
We will mention here a few of the results and open problems. Due
to difﬁculties in solving Einstein’s equations when non-trivial situations
are considered, such as non-spherical collapse with rotation, numerical
simulations can provide insights into problems currently not approach-
able analytically. The important ones are the ﬁnal fate of the complete
collapse of a massive cloud and the merger of two compact objects.
These phenomena are related to cosmic censorship as well as to astro-
physics. Numerical simulations make it possible to consider effects that
have been neglected in the analytical treatment, but are important in
the astrophysical context. Thus, they can be used to study the mech-
anism behind supernova explosions, core collapse, and high-energy
phenomena that occur when a star dies.
All these scenarios typically produce gravitational waves, the holy
grail of gravitational physics today, and so numerical modeling of how
these can be produced is very important to the success of experiments
such as LIGO and VIRGO. For example, the presence of electromagnetic
ﬁelds and accretion disks are crucial elements that will affect the process
by which the core of a star implodes and currently they can be studied
only with numerical simulations. So these may be the only means for
providing indications on how high-energy observed phenomena such
as relativistic jets or gamma ray bursts can occur.
The complete collapse of a massive cloud produces a singularity,
either covered or visible, depending on the initial conditions. Since di-
verging quantities cannot be handled numerically, a crucial issue of
such simulations is how singularities are treated or excised. A numerical
model where the singularity region is removed from the simulation re-
gardless of the presence of an apparent horizon may not provide much
insight about the issue of cosmic censorship. But it can still prove to
be very useful for understanding the issues of rotation and dissipation
of higher multipole moments that might settle the collapse to a Kerr
black hole or an axially symmetric naked singularity. On the other

114
Naked Singularities
hand, numerical models can be used to trace the apparent horizon in
more complicated matter models, thus giving some hint as to what
happens to trapped surfaces in realistic collapse scenarios.
Two main collapse scenarios have been investigated and these
are of crucial relevance from an astrophysical point of view. These
are the complete collapse of rotating bodies and the merger of two
compact objects. It is important to note that when one takes into
account enough elements to make the simulation closer to reality,
the time of computation grows enormously, thus requiring the use
of very powerful computers. So very often simulations have had to
restrict the space of parameters considered. Typically, simulations
have been carried out in one or two spatial dimensions only and it
was only recently that full 3D simulations of core collapse supernovae
and of binary mergers have been able to study these phenomena in
more detail. Furthermore, for the above reason, simulations that
consider the microscopic structure of matter, including neutrino
emissions and electroweak interactions, are generally limited to be
non-relativistic while fully general relativistic simulations typically
neglect the microscopic details of the matter cloud.
For the complete collapse of a rotating body, the main features were
investigated by Luciano Rezzolla, Lius Lehner, and others through nu-
merical simulations, namely the inﬂuence of rotation and magnetic
ﬁelds. These affect greatly the ﬁnal stages of collapse and are respon-
sible for the waveform of gravitational waves and the structure of an
accretion disk surrounding the ﬁnal compact object. The way in which
outer layers are ejected from the collapsing spinning body can help
us understand some questions that are crucial to cosmic censorship.
These include whether the collapse of a rotating body always ends in a
Kerr spacetime, or whether it is possible that a rapidly rotating object
collapses to a super-spinning Kerr solution.
Also, such simulations give useful insights into astrophysical ques-
tions such as how the matter ejected during collapse due to rotation
falls back on the compact object in the form of an accretion disk,
or what kind of features these accretion disks will present in terms
of thickness, angular momentum, and light emission, or how the
presence of a magnetic ﬁeld will affect the infall of particles and the
formation of high-energy jets.
Another interesting system is the merger of binary neutron stars or
black holes. The models describe the merger of two inspiraling compact
objects that can be taken to be black holes, neutron stars, or one black

Numerical Simulations
115
hole and a neutron star. The effect of unequal masses for the objects
on the ﬁnal conﬁgurations has been studied and a variety of scenarios
in which the system settles to a ﬁnal Kerr black hole with an accretion
disk have been proposed.
Such mergers may sometimes occur in the Universe and are a major
source of gravitational waves. So the simulation of waveforms emitted
during the merger is one of the important results of these simulations.
Also, the accretion disks and the mechanism by which matter from the
disk accretes onto the ﬁnal compact object is thought to be one possible
mechanism for producing gamma ray bursts.
Further, what is crucial to the cosmic censorship conjecture is that
the possible formation of super-spinning Kerr spacetimes has been
studied. In principle such a spacetime can result from the merger of two
rapidly rotating compact objects, from the increase in angular momen-
tum due to the inﬂow of particles from the accretion disk, or from the
complete collapse of a star with high angular momentum. There are
no deﬁnitive results on the possible formation of super-spinning Kerr
spacetimes, though there are arguments that suggest that overspinning
a Kerr black hole might not be possible. The discussion on these issues is
still very much open. What has become clear is that the mechanism by
which such a ﬁnal conﬁguration can, in principle, be produced is very
different from that for producing a Kerr black hole.
Also, some progress toward a viable description of the processes
that lead to type II supernovae explosions has been made. Many
different settings of numerical simulations considering the microscopic
effects have been carried out in order to provide a viable model for
producing the shockwaves that accompany the creation of these
supernovae. These simulations describe the core collapse of a star from
the microscopic point of view, taking into account nuclear interactions
and neutrino production. Within this ﬁeld a lot of progress has been
made during the past few years, with computational power ﬁnally
sufﬁcient for full 3D simulations and attention focused on the inﬂuence
of neutrino production during the explosion. But these simulations
still face a problem in that the efﬁciency of the explosion, even taking
‘neutrino heating’ into account, is not enough to produce a supernova.
What happens in the simulations is that the explosion dies out after a
few hundred kilometers.
We note that almost all models for type II supernovae explosions con-
sider a shockwave as that generated when infalling matter from the
outer shells reaches the inner compact core. The compact object at the

116
Naked Singularities
center constitutes a barrier onto which the matter from the outer lay-
ers bounces, thus creating the shockwave. The energy of the shockwave
is related to the size of the core that creates it. However, during a com-
plete collapse, it is still possible that another wall, a quantum-gravity
limit, exists at a shorter scale. This, as we have noted, is where general
relativity breaks down, predicting a singularity. It is possible that an-
other shockwave is created once this limit is reached. So if the structure
of collapse is such that no horizon exists at that time, it is then possible
that such a shockwave propagates outward, providing the missing en-
ergy for the explosion to occur. As far as we are aware, no simulations
taking these possible effects into account have been carried out yet, so
at present we do not know whether these constitute a viable solution
to the problem of the missing energy for type II supernovae explosions.
Some numerical studies of the collapse of a rotating gas cloud indi-
cate that a ﬁnal conﬁguration with over-spinning angular momentum
is unlikely to form under general conditions. So a Kerr black hole
might be a most probable ﬁnal outcome. But physicists have also started
to study the observational features of singular spacetimes as well in
order to gain a better understanding of what traces and effects such
over-spinning naked singularities could leave in the Universe if they
were allowed to happen. Of course we as yet have no proof that such
conﬁgurations will arise from the collapse of a cloud with regular in-
itial data, but equally we have no proof that such conﬁgurations are
forbidden.
The interesting work by Stuart Shapiro and Saul Teukolsky has
shown
that axially symmetric collapse can lead to the formation
of naked singularities, which comes in handy when discussing the
non-spherical case of oblate and prolate collapse. They considered the
collapse of collision-free particles and evolved it numerically. What
they discovered was that in a particular slicing there were no trapped
surfaces forming in the limit of approach to the singularity, which raises
a question as to whether the singularity is naked. What is interesting
is that this gives intriguing numerical information about the possible
ﬁnal fate of non-spherical dust collapse, indicating that it can very well
be a naked singularity. We need more information on non-spherical
collapse and this is an important step in that direction.
Another rather interesting phenomenon found numerically for
spherical collapse of a massless scalar ﬁeld is the critical behavior in col-
lapse, as seen by Matthew Choptuik. This work deals with a particular

Event-like and Object-like Singularities
117
family of scalar ﬁeld collapse models examined numerically. As the
parameter characterizing the family is varied, small black holes form,
followed by a naked singularity and then the ﬁeld disperses, thus
showing an intriguing numerical behavior.
Event-like and Object-like Singularities
We know that object-like singularities do develop from gravitational
collapse. For example, the Schwarzschild singularity, which is hidden
within a black hole, develops from homogeneous dust collapse. How-
ever, we have no exact analytic model in Einstein’s theory to create
a Kerr singularity or Kerr black hole from collapse. Can we obtain
an object-like long-lived naked singularity from gravitational collapse?
The answer turns out to be in the afﬁrmative.
While gravitational collapse predicts short-lived event-like naked
singularities in many models, the collapse could also produce long-
lived object-like naked singularities in several cases, as Daniele Mala-
farina, Ramesh Narayan, and myself have shown recently. What we
showed was that equilibrium conﬁgurations of regular matter sus-
tained by non-zero pressures are predicted by general relativity. These
objects could also provide an alternative to model astrophysical black
hole candidates such as the galactic center.
Within the class of ‘long-lived’ singularities the above is another kind
which presents intriguing possibilities. These are interior solutions that
describe a regular source with a singular center. This is a different kind
of ﬁnal state from the vacuum solutions such as the Kerr metric. These
involve a ﬁnite matter cloud with a boundary larger than the horizon,
with a singularity at its center.
Interior solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations have been considered
for decades as sources of the gravitational ﬁeld. A requirement in build-
ing such interiors used to be that the matter density should be regular
all the way to the center of the source. But there is no reason to impose
the condition that a stable conﬁguration cannot evolve with a singu-
larity at the center. These singularities model the region of arbitrarily
high density that develops at the center of the object and where grav-
ity exhibits extreme properties. It is then possible that such a source
is observationally different from a corresponding source with a reg-
ular interior or from a vacuum solution such as a black hole. Also,
if the overall density of the cloud is low enough, as is the case for

118
Naked Singularities
supermassive objects residing at the center of galaxies, then processes
happening close to the center, such as particle collisions and lensing,
can be visible to faraway observers.
As for the gravitational collapse, there are smaller, explosive, short-
lived phenomena like the collapse of the core of a star. These typically
involve very high energies and very short time scales. On the other
hand, the discovery of active galactic nuclei has led astronomers to sup-
pose that objects like supermassive black holes reside at the center of
galaxies. These objects are still not well understood and it is very plausi-
ble that processes such as gravitational collapse, on a much larger scale
and on much longer time scales, are crucial to their development.
In this connection, what we proposed was a class of solutions for
Einstein’s equations with naked singularities that arise asymptotically
for suitable matter models when the pressures opposing collapse man-
age to halt the process. Such a collapse process gives rise to an equi-
librium conﬁguration as the ﬁnal state. These models describe how an
initially regular matter cloud evolves to form an equilibrium with a
ﬁnite radius somewhat larger than the Schwarzschild radius and with
a naked singularity at the center. This process can require arbitrarily
long times for the equilibrium conﬁguration to be ﬁnally achieved, and
the average density of the cloud toward the ﬁnal equilibrium can re-
main small. This suggests that such a model can describe the formation
of supermassive objects other than a black hole that can dwell at the
galaxy centers. Such an object, if it actually existed, would bear cer-
tain properties for the surrounding accretion disk different to those
of the accretion disk around a black hole, thus making it in principle
observationally distinguishable.
Having obtained the equilibrium object models with a singularity at
the center, we compared their observational properties with a black
hole of same mass. In particular, we studied the accretion disks in both
cases. It is known that a standard thin accretion disk can exist only at
those radii where stable circular orbits are available. Therefore for a
Schwarzschild black hole an accretion disk will have its inner edge at a
ﬁnite radius away from the center and outside its event horizon. Inside
this radius, the accreting gas plunges or free-falls.
This, however, is not the case for a naked singularity object, where
the accretion disk extends very close to the singularity. Such a scenario
implies several interesting consequences. Speciﬁcally, we showed that,
in principle, a slowly evolving gravitationally collapsing perfect ﬂuid

Collapse Scenarios
119
cloud can asymptotically settle to a static spherically symmetric equilib-
rium conﬁguration with arbitrarily large density at the center, without
an event horizon. We then considered one such conﬁguration with a
ﬁnite outer radius and constructed a toy model. We investigated the
observational signatures of a thermal accretion disk in this spacetime
and compared them with the signatures expected for a disk around a
black hole of the same mass. It turns out that several notable and in-
teresting differences emerge. A disk around a naked singularity is much
more luminous than that around an equivalent black hole. Also, such
an accretion disk around a naked singularity has a spectrum with a
high-frequency power law segment that carries a major fraction of the
total luminosity.
What follows from such an analysis is that at least some naked sin-
gularities can, in principle, be distinguished observationally from black
holes of the same mass. Clearly, such a scenario, if it holds more gener-
ally, would have several useful and interesting implications. The point
is that these naked singularity models are easily distinguishable from
a black hole of the same mass. So it would be useful and interest-
ing to use observational data on astrophysical black hole candidates to
test whether the presence of a similar naked singularity is allowed and
possible.
Collapse Scenarios
It is natural to ask here the questions how can any signal escape from
super and ultra-strong gravity regions, and why should any visible
singularity form at all in gravitational collapse? Basically, the question
is, why does a naked singularity form? In order to get an insight into
this question, we ﬁrst summarize below some of the outcomes of vari-
ous collapse scenarios, and the special features that arise in each of these
cases.
• Dust collapse: In this case, given any regular density proﬁle or the
mass function for the cloud, the collapse ﬁnal state is either a black
hole or naked singularity, depending on the choice of velocity
proﬁles for the collapsing shells. To give a typical scenario, while
homogeneous density results in black hole formation, an inhomo-
geneous density, higher at the center, which is physically a much
more realistic case, gives rise to a naked singularity. Basically what

120
Naked Singularities
we ﬁnd is that sufﬁcient inhomogeneity causes a naked singularity
to form.
• Perfect ﬂuids: In this case, several numerical as well as analytic results
have been obtained and many models of collapse have been stud-
ied. It is seen that both black holes and naked singularities form
as collapse outcomes. From the perspective of the cosmic censor-
ship conjecture, the important point is that the introduction of
pressures does not change the collapse outcome qualitatively, as
was the case in dust collapse.
• Spherical collapse with non-zero tangential pressure, but vanishing radial pressure:
In this class of collapse models, which is also called the Einstein
cluster models, fully analytic and transparent treatment of collapse
is possible. Explicit analysis of many models provides considerable
analytic insights into gravitational collapse outcomes and it is seen
that both black holes and naked singularities are obtained as ﬁnal
states.
• General matter ﬁelds: The collapse for fully general matter ﬁelds, sub-
ject to positive energy conditions and regularity of initial data, with
both non-zero radial and tangential pressures have been consid-
ered by researchers. It is seen that given any regular initial data of
density and pressure proﬁles, there are vast classes of evolutions
determined by Einstein’s equations that take the system to either
a black hole or a naked singularity outcome, depending on the
choice of initial data and the evolutions made.
• Vaidya radiation collapse models: This speciﬁc class of collapse models
has provided considerable insight into the ﬁnal fate of collapse
in terms of black holes or naked singularities. Here the collapse
of radiation shells is analyzed using the Vaidya class of spacetime
geometries. The particular advantage is that the analytic treat-
ment is very clear and transparent. As a result, the causal structure
near the singularity comes out clearly and we can also see how
the horizons are avoided to allow the singularity to be visible. The
interesting fact is that the time rate of collapse or the speed of ac-
cretion of matter at the center decides the black hole or naked
singularity outcome.
• Massless scalar ﬁelds collapse: Both the numerical and analytic treat-
ments for gravitational collapse of this form of matter have
been investigated in considerable detail, in particular the mod-
els admitting the symmetry of self-similarity, which is a kind

Collapse Scenarios
121
of scale invariance. Various intriguing features such as the for-
mation of black holes of very small mass, critical behavior, and
naked singularities have been found to occur. The naked sin-
gularity forming in these models is claimed to be ‘non-generic’,
depending on the deﬁnition adopted of genericity. Scalar ﬁelds
with a non-zero potential have also been examined by researchers.
The interesting feature again is that an eternally visible singu-
larity is seen to form. Also, the cloud can radiate away all its
mass energy as the collapse evolves.
• Non-spherical collapse: Only a few somewhat special models have been
discussed in this case analytically. While some insight on black hole
and naked singularity formation has been obtained, largely this
remains an uncharted area. In some cases of oblate and prolate
collapse models worked out numerically, as considered by Stuart
Shapiro and Saul Teukolsky, the absence of trapped surfaces is seen
in a particular slicing as we approach the singularity, which is very
suggestive of possible generic behavior in non-spherical collapse.
• Collapse with a non-zero cosmological constant: A cosmological constant
in Einstein’s equations can play a role for the ﬁnal fate of col-
lapse which researchers have considered. Basically, depending on
its positive or negative sign, it exerts negative or positive pressures.
For the collapse of compact objects such as stars, the end-states in
terms of black hole or naked singularity remain unchanged. But
for rather large matter clouds with very small initial densities, it
does make a difference and a bounce of the cloud may be triggered,
avoiding the singularity when the cosmological term is positive,
which corresponds to a negative pressure effect.
• Collapse in higher-dimensional spacetimes: Researchers have considered
many models of collapse in higher-dimensional spacetime geome-
tries, mainly within a classical context, to examine whether by
going to higher dimensions cosmic censorship can be restored. It is
seen, however, that the main results obtained in the usual four di-
mensions do not qualitatively change. Therefore it turns out that
this approach is not able to restore the censorship conjecture.
• Gravitational collapse in other theories of gravity: Again, the motivation has
been similar, namely whether naked singularities can be avoided
if we go to alternate theories of gravity, such as higher-derivative
theories of gravity. Options such as the Lovelock gravity and
introducing the Gauss–Bonnet term have been explored. Again,
conclusions similar to Einstein’s theory result.

122
Naked Singularities
This list summarizes the physical scenarios for gravitational collapse
that have been considered and analyzed so far. The main issue has
been whether they result in an event horizon formation. Taken as a
whole, these works, which have been carried out over the past couple
of decades, generate a fairly exhaustive picture of gravitational col-
lapse outcomes using Einstein’s gravity theory, and give a fairly good
idea of when a black hole or a naked singularity develops as the col-
lapse outcome. The general formalism for spherical collapse that we
mentioned earlier includes a large number of the above cases toward
Figure 6.1 Naked singularity and its environment. The embedding diagram
as an artist’s impression (Scientiﬁc American, February 2009; Kenn Brown, Mon-
dolithic Studio).

Why a Naked Singularity Forms
123
predicting collapse outcomes (Fig. 6.1 gives a schematic picture of a
naked singularity and its environment).
Why a Naked Singularity Forms
It is natural to ask what is the physics that causes a naked singularity
rather than a black hole to develop? The intriguing question is, why all
the particles and energy are allowed to escape from extremely strong
gravity ﬁelds. We have examined this issue in some detail to highlight
the role inhomogeneities and shearing effects in a spacetime play in
distorting the geometry of horizons forming in collapse.
In Newtonian gravity, it is only the matter density that determines
the gravitational ﬁeld. In Einstein theory, however, density is just one
attribute, and various curvature and scalar quantities play an equally
important role in dictating the overall nature of the ﬁeld. Our results
show that when the density is inhomogeneous or higher at the cen-
ter of a collapsing star, the trapping of light and matter during collapse
is delayed, allowing them to escape. This is a general relativistic effect
wherein even if the densities are very high, paths are created for light
or matter to escape due to inhomogeneously collapsing matter ﬁelds,
and these physical features naturally lead to a naked singularity for-
mation. Thus, it is the amount of inhomogeneity that counts toward
distorting the horizons. If it is very small, below a critical limit, a black
hole will form; otherwise, with sufﬁcient inhomogeneity trapping is de-
layed and a naked singularity forms. This criticality comes out again
quite clearly in the Vaidya class of radiation collapse models, where it
is the rate of cloud collapse that determines the black hole or naked
singularity formation.
What happens is, if a matter cloud with zero pressure inside has a
strong density gradient, then the event horizon formation will depend
on the comparatively dense inner regions of the star, but these regions
may, for simple geometric reasons, lack the requisite total mass. The
point is, in the case of such an inhomogeneous collapse, if the density
falls off rapidly enough away from the center of the star at any given
instant of time, then there is never enough mass in a given radius to
cause total trapping of light. This is what helps create the visibility of
the singularity.

124
Naked Singularities
This happens in the physically realistic situation when a star’s in-
itial density is falling away at a suitable rate from the center, rather
than being constant. For example, if the difference between the den-
sity at the center and at a small radius away increases proportionally
to either the ﬁrst power of the radius or its square, then there is never
enough mass within a given radius to cause light trapping and the col-
lapse end-state is necessarily a naked singularity. But for a slow enough
change, or when it just vanishes, which is the homogeneous case, the
collapse produces a black hole. Thus we ﬁnd that sufﬁcient inhomo-
geneity in density distribution within a collapsing star causes a naked
singularity.
In other cases, the salient issue could be the collapse timescale. For
example, in radiation collapse models, it is how fast the cloud is collaps-
ing that decides whether light is trapped. If the collapse is fast enough,
there is never enough time to accumulate enough mass in a given re-
gion to cause light to be trapped. In general, for stars with different
forms of matter and equations of state, and with different initial den-
sity and pressure proﬁles, there are a variety of physical factors that can
delay or not allow light to be trapped, thus allowing the singularity to
be visible.
The key point is the physically realistic nature of the gravitational
collapse models being considered. Researchers have been very careful
to ensure that all the physical regularity conditions, such as the energy
condition and the regularity of the initial data, are well preserved. If that
were not done, we would consider the work to be rather insigniﬁcant. It
is because physical reasonability has been ensured that the gravitational
collapse work of recent years has become interesting and worthy of at-
tention, invoking international discussion on the fundamental issues of
the ﬁnal fate of gravitational collapse and the related cosmic censorship.
Our idea has been to clarify what speciﬁc general relativistic ef-
fects, as opposed to Newtonian ones, come into play in deciding
whether a singularity is clothed. We want to make it very clear why
naked singularities develop and what are the physical factors respon-
sible. What is needed is more physical insight as to what happens
and what is the physics of naked singularity formation. When a star
which is inhomogeneous undergoes collapse, the trapping of light
fails to happen early enough to cause the event horizon to form
before the singularity. In that case, at least part of the singular-
ity becomes visible. This is probably related to the salient issue of

Why a Naked Singularity Forms
125
the collapse timescales and more investigation is needed for a better
understanding.
In the speciﬁc examples that we considered for dust, the key general
relativistic effect that comes into play is the spacetime shear, caused
entirely by the inhomogeneities. Such shearing effects distort the space-
time geometry and avoid trapped surfaces, allowing light rays to escape.
The key point in these cases is that the structure of an apparent hori-
zon is radically affected and altered once inhomogeneity in density or
pressure is allowed. In other words, the trapping of light is delayed as
soon as we depart from the homogeneous collapse case we discussed
here.
We note that compared to the life-cycles of stars, as shown in Fig 3.2,
the collapse studies of recent years imply a paradigm change in our
conception of what is possible as the ﬁnal fate of a massive star’s physi-
cally realistic gravitational collapse. While middle-mass stars, after their
initial collapse, may settle as a neutron star after a supernova explo-
sion, high-mass stars can become a black hole or a naked singularity
after a continual collapse, depending on their internal conﬁguration
(Fig. 6.2).
Feather
weight
star
Bantam
weight
star
Heavy
weight
star
White
Dwarf
Neutron
star
Black Hole
OR
Exploding
Fireball
The fate of a star depends on its mass
Figure 6.2 What is the ﬁnal fate of a massive star? The current studies on grav-
itational collapse, and those conducted in recent years, point to a basic change
in the perception on this issue. When a star is more massive than a critical limit
so as to enter a continual collapse governed by the general theory of relativity,
then its ﬁnal fate can be either a black hole or a naked singularity, depending
on the internal structure of the star.

126
Naked Singularities
Observational Aspects and Quantum Gravity
As the results discussed in the previous sections point out, when a
massive star collapses continually toward the end of its life-cycle, the
outcomes predicted by the general theory of relativity are either a
black hole or a naked singularity, depending on the internal structure
of the star.
Now, these are two rather different objects or happenings in the Uni-
verse, and their observational properties should be radically different
from each other. The black hole is characterized by an event horizon, a
one-way membrane that matter and light can enter but cannot escape
from. On the other hand, a naked singularity is the super-ultra-dense
visible region of Universe where densities, curvatures, and all other
physical quantities take extreme values. Quantum gravity effects should
be important closer to the singularity and govern the physics there,
manifesting themselves in observations of such a region.
The key point we want to make is that the black hole and naked
singularity outcomes of gravitational collapse have rather different ob-
servational signatures, through which it should be possible to decide
whether a physically realistic collapse of a massive star will terminate
into one or the other. There has been some recent progress in this
direction in terms of the accretion disk properties for a black hole and a
naked singularity, and also certain other possible observable differences
may arise in each of these cases. We shall discuss some of these aspects
later.
Also, when a naked singularity happens, small inhomogeneities in
the matter densities very close to the singularity epoch can spread out
and magnify enormously to create extremely energetic shockwaves.
This, in turn, may have connections to extraordinary high-energy
astrophysical phenomena in the Universe, such as cosmic gamma
ray bursts, which we do not fully understand today. While these are
possibilities at the moment and only few have been explored, the fact
that general relativity predicts black holes and singularities as physic-
ally reasonable collapse outcomes gives enough motivation for further
examination.
Furthermore, as we mentioned earlier, clues to constructing the
quantum theory of gravity, a uniﬁed theory of forces of nature, may
possibly emerge through observing such ultra-high-density regions in

Observational Aspects and Quantum Gravity
127
the Universe, if the collapse of a massive star resulted in a naked singu-
larity. The crucial question then is will we be able to see such a cosmic
dance drama of collapsing stars in the theater of skies when a visible
singularity develops? Or will the black hole curtain hide it away forever,
even before the cosmic play can barely begin? Only future observations
of massive collapsing stars in the Universe will tell.

N7O
Cosmic Conundrums
There are many questions and cosmic puzzles that come up, both
theoretically and observationally, if naked singularities do indeed form
as the ﬁnal fate of gravitational collapse of massive stars. In fact, some
of these are already being discussed and investigated actively and vigor-
ously. Such a scenario is natural as well as necessary, because we now
have an intricate and important paradigm shift from the thinking that
only black holes will form whenever a massive star undergoes gravita-
tional collapse at the end of its life-cycle. Various questions have arisen
and need to be examined carefully if we are to move ahead with the
physical implications.
The point is, if cosmic censorship does not hold in an unqualiﬁed
manner, and if both black holes and naked singularities can develop,
then we essentially need to change our perspective on black hole phys-
ics and its numerous applications in relativistic astrophysics. We will
discuss some of these issues in the present chapter.
Can We Reformulate the Censorship?
Further to the developments and new results discussed so far within
the framework of general relativity, the key important question that
again arises is can we really hope to formulate and prove the cos-
mic censorship conjecture (CCC) in one form or another? If we are
to prove censorship, what are the possible directions and avenues still
open? It has now become clear that imposing standard physical re-
quirements such as regularity of the initial data or energy conditions is
not really enough to guarantee the absence of strong-curvature naked
singularities forming as end-states of collapse. Is there then a way of
reformulating the CCC?
We are thus compelled to ask at this stage the following: Is CCC
correct as a basic principle of nature? If Yes, how to realize this, and

Can We Reformulate the Censorship?
129
if No, what are the implications? Clearly, the answers have profound
implications for fundamental physics and cosmology.
What is unambiguously clear so far is that censorship is certainly not
correct in an unqualiﬁed form, as it is sometimes taken to be. It is also
clear that singularities appear in a wide variety of forms, and from a
wide array of scenarios in general relativity. Therefore, to rule out all
naked singularities at once with a single cosmic censorship theorem
does not seem possible. So if cosmic censorship holds, it will be in a
highly reﬁned and ﬁne-tuned form, with suitable conditions, and in a
formulation yet to be achieved.
Toward this end, the work on gravitational collapse completed so
far has surely played an important role. The collapse models analyzed
so far have provided us with important pointers as to what features
must be avoided so that only black holes are created. On the other
hand, if we consider naked singularities, investigating the quantum and
astrophysical processes in the vicinity of such visible ultra-dense re-
gions predicted by dynamical collapse models can give rise to intriguing
physical consequences as we point out and discuss later.
The implications of these developments and the gravitational col-
lapse studies for cosmic censorship are certainly important. We can now
say with conﬁdence that we cannot formulate censorship in a rather
general way, such as ‘Collapse of any massive star makes a black hole
only’ or ‘Any physically realistic gravitational collapse must end in a
black hole only’, because there are now many counter-examples. It fol-
lows that any formulation for cosmic censorship must carefully specify
when a black hole will develop in collapse. More speciﬁcally, we must
examine the gravitational collapse scenarios carefully and isolate the
features that cause a naked singularity to arise. Physicists believed for
a long time that spherical collapse must yield a black hole only, and
naked singularities arise, if they do at all, in non-spherical collapse only.
We now know this is not the case, as shown by explicit collapse models.
This also explains why our earlier efforts to prove a fully general CCC
theorem did not succeed.
In other words, if we are considering the gravitational collapse of a
massive matter cloud, there will be speciﬁc and ﬁne-tuned conditions
which we must set on the initial data, such as matter densities and
pressure proﬁles, and the allowed dynamical evolutions of Einstein’s
equations, so that the collapse end-state will be a black hole only. The
key aim is to ensure that in a continual general relativistic collapse,

130
Cosmic Conundrums
when a spacetime singularity develops, the event horizon will develop
prior to the singularity.
As an example, we note the case of dust collapse. If the density does
not increase from the center of the cloud outward (such an increase
would be unrealistic), and we must get the black hole as the collapse
end-state, then the density proﬁle must be so ﬁne-tuned that it is fully
homogeneous at the initial epoch from when the collapse develops.
Also, the velocity proﬁle for the collapsing shells has to be so tuned, so
that the density remains necessarily homogeneous at all later epochs.
Only then do we get a black hole ﬁnal state. In all other cases, a naked
singularity develops. Similar ﬁne-tunings will be necessary for more
general collapse of different forms of matter, depending on the nature
of the stress-energy tensor and the equation of state.
In such a scenario, a general statement for CCC seems very difﬁcult
or nearly impossible to make. The best we can do is to specify a set of
conditions for a given collapse scenario so that it terminates in a black
hole. It would then be natural and appropriate to accept that at the
level of theory, both black holes and naked singularities do occur as the
ﬁnal fate of a massive matter cloud’s continual gravitational collapse
within the framework of general relativity. Faced with such a situation,
we must look for possible alternatives which restore the cosmic censor-
ship in some suitable form, while still respecting the collapse models
investigated so far. This is an essential and inevitable exercise to place
black hole physics on a sound footing.
We now mention a few possible alternatives in this direction, but
the list is clearly not exhaustive and there may be other ideas worth
exploring.
• Can we specify the initial conditions in collapse whereby only a black hole will result
as the ﬁnal state?
We may want to specify a set of conditions so that the evolving collapse
from regular initial data for a given matter ﬁeld has the horizon devel-
oping prior to the development of the singularity. While some general
indications are available here for spherical collapse, any general formu-
lation in this direction is far from obtainable as yet. It is clear from an
astrophysical perspective that such an effort is crucial to ensure the
validity and applicability of black hole physics.

Can We Reformulate the Censorship?
131
• Should censorship be valid only for vacuum general relativity?
A radical proposal is to consider cosmic censorship in vacuum gen-
eral relativity only, where the spacetime contains no matter ﬁelds at all.
We can ask whether in a pure gravity framework, without any mat-
ter ﬁelds, cosmic censorship holds. If this can be achieved, then the
idea would be to disregard any naked singularities arising in the grav-
itational collapse of matter clouds as ‘singularities arising from matter’
only, rather than from pure gravity itself, which would by itself obey
the CCC. However, there has been no essential progress in this direction
so far, and likewise on how to formulate such a statement in a math-
ematically rigorous manner and on how to proceed to any possible
proof.
• Should censorship hold only for select forms of matter ﬁelds?
Another possibility is that cosmic censorship holds only for certain spe-
ciﬁc matter collapse models. This is an idea placed in the middle, in
that we can allow for ‘selective’ or ‘suitable’ matter ﬁelds only, such as
a Maxwell ﬁeld or massless scalar ﬁeld, regarding them as ‘fundamental
ﬁelds’ in some sense. Then we could ask whether the censorship will
hold for spacetimes with such matter ﬁelds.
The point here is to claim that ﬂuid models, such as perfect ﬂuids
and dust, can be disregarded because they fail to give an account of the
microscopic properties of matter. The naked singularities occurring in
these collapse models can then be regarded as presumably due to the
lack of a description of fundamental interactions, which will possibly
resolve them at either a classical or quantum level.
This idea is in line with the possibility that either classical or quantum
corrections would intervene to resolve the singularity. Nevertheless,
considering only classical general relativity, the fundamental ﬁelds that
can be studied in this respect are the electromagnetic and scalar ﬁelds,
and naked singularities have been shown to occur in the massless sca-
lar ﬁeld collapse, as shown by the analytic studies of Christodoulou
and numerical studies by Choptuik and others. However, it has been
claimed that these are non-generic by a certain deﬁnition of genericity.
On the other hand, a full quantum treatment of the last stages of col-
lapse is missing at present, leaving such a reformulation of CCC only at
the stage of a proposal and again a conjecture.

132
Cosmic Conundrums
The basic point here is that these ideas lack any connection with
the issue of horizon formation as the system dynamically evolves. In
fact, if we agree to the idea that singularities must be resolved when we
take into account the microscopic structure of matter, then there is no
need to conjecture that they can sometimes arise hidden within a ho-
rizon and sometimes not. Then the whole issue of cosmic censorship
becomes redundant.
Another important point, from an astrophysical perspective, is that
disregarding all the matter forms such as dust and perfect ﬂuids with
different reasonable and physically well-motivated equations of state,
which have been widely used and studied in astrophysical contexts, will
also be far from widely acceptable. In fact, collapse models with matter
ﬁelds such as these have been studied and applied in astrophysics for
decades, and to rule them out just for the sake of a possible formulation
of a hypothesis does not seem to be reasonable.
The key point here is that in the end the physical problem we need
to investigate is that of the ﬁnal fate of a massive collapsing star when it
begins to shrink gravitationally. The massless scalar ﬁelds suitable for a
cosmic censorship statement have not yet been observed in nature, and
it may be unreasonable to assume that very massive stars are composed
of or are dominated bymassless scalar ﬁelds only, even in the later stages
of their gravitational collapse. In fact, matter ﬁelds such as perfect ﬂu-
ids, radiation collapse models, and dust collapse have been considered
by many researchers to be quite useful and important for studying the
physical problem of a star’s collapse. That is why so many studies of
matter cloud collapse have been conducted over the past years.
• Whenever naked singularities occur in collapse, must they always be non-generic
and non-stable?
With the collapse studies done so far and with the results that we have
discussed, this appears to be the only plausible alternative which has
some potential for realization. We will discuss this issue in some detail
in the next section.
Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
While Chandrasekhar pointed out in the early 1930s that a massive star’s
ﬁnal fate will be radically different from that of a small-mass star, Op-
penheimer, Snyder, and Datt (OSD) studied this problem in the latter
1930s using the general theory of relativity. As we have emphasized,

Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
133
it was crucial to use the full general relativity. They found that the
idealized uniform star without pressure collapsed to a black hole, which
is a result fundamental to modern-day black hole physics, laying the
foundation for current studies on collapse.
Further to OSD’s work, Einstein was greatly interested in the issue of
the ﬁnal fate of a massive gravitationally collapsing star, but he could
not accept such a ﬁnal fate as a black hole. It was later clear, however,
that his method of halting the collapse did not work. Continual col-
lapse is inevitable for massive stars, and so we are squarely faced with
the problem of their ﬁnal state.
The conundrum lay dormant till about the latter 1960s when Hawk-
ing, Penrose, and Geroch took up a detailed study on global features of
spacetimes which implied that singularities are inevitable in physically
important situations of collapse and cosmology. The issue of singu-
larities of collapse being covered by event horizons was then settled
only through the assumption of cosmic censorship. But with no proof
for CCC even after decades of effort, it was clear that a careful and de-
tailed study of collapse was imperative, as we have described in previous
chapters. Clearly, the issues at stake have been enormous for astrophys-
ics and cosmology, with far-reaching consequences for fundamental
physics.
If we can show that all naked singularities are non-generic or not
stable in some suitable sense, then that will help formulate the cosmic
censorship. We can then try to formalize this in some suitable manner
as a rigorous theorem eventually.
In view of the gravitational collapse models worked out so far, this is
one of the most important questions to ask. Because if we can conclu-
sively show that whenever naked singularities develop in collapse, they
must be non-generic or unstable in a suitably well-deﬁned and proper
mathematical sense, then that will provide a good basis for a possible
formulation and proof for CCC.
Early Efforts to Show Non-genericity
It was suggested that when matter satisﬁed some suitable physical con-
ditions, such as positive energy density for the classical matter of which
a normal star is composed, then all naked singularities forming in the
collapse will be avoided and the outcome will be only black holes, in
conformity with the CCC. If preliminary efforts support such a con-
cept, then the idea would be to formulate a theorem to that effect and
try to prove it rigorously, which then becomes a censorship theorem or

134
Cosmic Conundrums
a proof for CCC. This would be the same as saying that while naked
singularities may form for arbitrary matter, they will not form for phys-
ical ﬁelds that satisfy energy conditions, and are therefore non-generic
in that way.
It turned out, however, from the example of inhomogeneous dust
collapse and the Vaidya models for collapse of radiation shells, that such
a formulation does not work. Naked singularities do, in fact, develop
in collapse for matter where energy conditions ensuring positive mass-
energy density are satisﬁed.
Another important effort to show the non-genericity of naked singu-
larities was to try and prove that even if naked singularities did occur
in gravitational collapse, they must all be necessarily ‘gravitationally
weak’, and hence non-generic in this sense. Such a weak singularity is
only a mathematical feature in the solution to the Einstein equations.
But it will not be there in physical situations, because the spacetime can
be extended through it.
From such a perspective, the Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi (LTB) col-
lapse models were analyzed in great detail. The general dust collapse
models and the equations they contain are rather complicated. The
computer simulation work of Doug Eardley and Larry Smarr in 1979
indicated that the collapse of these more general LTB models may
produce a naked singularity. An analytic treatment was later given
by Christodoulou in 1984. However, Richard Newman showed in 1986
that these naked singularities were in fact gravitationally weak, and
therefore possibly removable from the spacetime.
Then in the 1980s Newman and Krolak tried to prove theorems to
establish the weakness of singularity. It was this scenario that drew at-
tention to the earlier work by George Lemaitre and Richard Tolman,
who had worked out a fully general solution to Einstein’s equations
for the dust form of matter in the early 1930s. The OSD model was a
homogeneous dust collapse model. Could then the ﬁnal fate of collapse
be worked out even when inhomogeneities were allowed by using the
more general solutions given by Lemaitre and Tolman? These solutions
were basically in a cosmological context. Hermann Bondi in the latter
1950s recast the equations in a format so that the collapse aspect of these
models was better highlighted. Thus, these collapse models came to be
generally known as the Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi models.
However, other researchers such as Kayll Lake and collaborators and
our work looked for collapse models which produced strong-curvature
naked singularities. These efforts succeeded and a fully general analysis

Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
135
of dust collapse was ﬁnally developed. Another spacetime geometry
that greatly helped us to understand better the nature of singularity
during collapse was the Vaidya geometry that described the collapse of
radiation shells. This metric was found by Prahlad Vaidya in 1942 in the
context of generalizing the vacuum Schwarzschild metric to that for a
radiating star geometry.
Detailed analysis over the past couple of decades of the spacetime
geometries for inhomogeneous dust using the LTB metric and for
radiation shells greatly helped us to arrive at an understanding of the
nature of singularity in general relativistic gravitational collapse. It is
the collapsing star’s internal structure, such as its density and pressure
proﬁles, and various factors like the speed of collapse, the shearing
forces inside, etc. that determine the ﬁnal outcome of collapse in
terms of either a black hole or a naked singularity, and determine
the strength of the singularity. The study of Vaidya and LTB models
opened up the study of many more physically realistic collapse models
with non-zero pressures.
There were other similar efforts to show the ‘non-genericity’ of
naked singularities in different manners; all of these failed in one way or
another, but we will not go into detail. These in a way again point out
how efforts to arrive at a suitable mathematically rigorous statement
on cosmic censorship have not worked out so far.
Such efforts, however, have focused our attention on the question
as to what genericity in general relativity really means. A naked singu-
larity may occur for a particular physically relevant scenario, but the
question that has been always asked is how ‘generic’ is such a phenom-
enon. Of course, genericity or stability have no speciﬁc deﬁnitions in
general relativity. So the same question has taken many different forms,
as we will discuss next.
What are Genericity and Stability?
In his original statement of the CCC, Roger Penrose included a condi-
tion, namely that ‘generic’ gravitational collapse always produces black
holes. As such there is no mathematically well-formulated deﬁnition of
genericity available in general relativity that can be used to answer this
question. Stability and genericity are extremely difﬁcult concepts to for-
mulate precisely in general relativity, with no deﬁnite criteria available.
There are mathematical complexities and physical issues in achieving
the same, especially in gravitation theory.

136
Cosmic Conundrums
That is why, as of today, these remain more general ideas and per-
ceptions, and physicists use them differently in different situations as
per the demand of the physical scenario concerned. This is certainly
why we do not have any suitable mathematical formulation of cos-
mic censorship as yet. So the only way to proceed is by asking further
questions, such as is there any perturbation of spherical symmetry that
would remove these naked singularities, will naked singularities form
in non-spherical collapse, and so on.
We are interested in this issue in the context of gravitational col-
lapse outcomes. While it is generally accepted that both black holes and
naked singularities do form as the ﬁnal fate of a continual gravitational
collapse, what is not yet clear is the distribution of these outcomes
in the space of all allowed outcomes of collapse. The collapse models
discussed here and the considerations we give may be of some help
and may throw light on the distribution of black holes and naked
singularity solutions in the initial data space.
The important question then is whether the genericity and stability
of such naked singularities arise from regular initial data. Will the initial
data subspace, which gives rise to naked singularity as the end-state of
collapse, have zero measure in a suitable sense? Based on such a crite-
rion, we would be able to reformulate the censorship hypothesis more
suitably.
To be speciﬁc, the major difﬁculty in obtaining a unique and well-
posed deﬁnition for genericity comes from the non-uniqueness of the
concept of ‘nearness’ itself in a given spacetime continuum. Mathemat-
ically, this is characterized by the ‘topology’, or the ‘open sets’ of the
spacetime. For example, in order to quantify when two spacetime ge-
ometries are ‘nearby’ or ‘close’ to each other, we can deﬁne a certain
topology of the space of all spacetime metrics by requiring that the val-
ues of the metric components be ‘nearby’ in their numerical values. On
the other hand, we can also require that the derivatives or the rates of
change of these metric functions also be nearby in value. The problem is
that the resulting topologies in each case will be quite different, and so
the ‘nearness’ in one topology will not be so for another. This fact is inti-
mately connected to the basic problem of arriving at a well-formulated
deﬁnition of cosmic censorship itself.
From such a perspective, studies have been carried out on the col-
lapse of a massless scalar ﬁeld. For example, Christodoulou showed that
if we consider self-similar massless scalar ﬁeld collapse, the initial data

Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
137
leading to naked singularity have a ‘positive codimension’, in a certain
space of initial data. This led to the conclusion that the occurrence of
naked singularity in this case is not generic. On the other hand, Ravi
Saraykar and others showed that the naked singularity occurrence is
generic for certain types of matter ﬁelds such as inhomogeneous dust.
Therefore, the issue of genericity and stability of naked singularities re-
mains wide open even for spherically symmetric models, and more so if
we wish to consider departure from spherical symmetry, with different
forms of matter ﬁeld.
If we want to explain this difﬁculty in another way, we need to adopt
some deﬁnition for stability and genericity for collapse outcomes. This
will always need reference to a speciﬁc space of initial data that is being
considered. What is ‘stable’ or ‘generic’ in a certain space of initial data,
say for that of an inhomogeneous dust, need not be stable in a larger
space of data, for example that of the perfect ﬂuid collapse.
To give an analogy, this is similar to the statement that a point or a
line interval are both ‘non-generic’ and ‘zero-measure’ sets in a plane,
but the interval is certainly ‘generic’ in a line, with a non-zero meas-
ure therein. Similarly, the plane is non-generic in a three-dimensional
space. What this means is that the context of the overall space is im-
portant when we consider the issues of genericity and stability. This
is frequently not mentioned while making statements about the non-
genericity of naked singularities.
In summary, essentially, we say that a certain outcome of collapse
in terms of either black hole or naked singularity from a given set of
initial data is stable if there exists a whole neighborhood of that initial
data set which leads to the same outcome. The neighborhood must be
suitably deﬁned within the speciﬁc space of initial data that we are con-
sidering. Also, we say that a certain outcome is generic, within a speciﬁc
space of initial data, if the measure of the subset of initial data leading
to that outcome in the original initial data space is non-zero. Again the
measure must be deﬁned in a suitable natural way.
The Current Scenario
With these deﬁnitions, we investigated the initial data sets leading
to black holes and naked singularities for different types of general
matter models, including dust and perfect ﬂuids. We showed that
the initial data set leading the collapse to a naked singularity, just
like that leading to a black hole, forms an open subset of a suitable

138
Cosmic Conundrums
space comprising the initial data, with respect to an appropriate dis-
tance function. Also, when considering the measure theoretic aspects
of this open set it is seen that it has a positive measure. Thus the basic
result that follows is that both black holes and naked singularities are
‘generic’ outcomes of a complete gravitational collapse, once genericity
is deﬁned in a suitable sense in an appropriate space of initial data.
So the models of gravitational collapse analyzed so far are generic in
the sense of initial data for matter being fully generic as required. The
results also show that naked singularities are, in fact, stable to small
perturbations in the initial data of matter ﬁelds, to the introduction of
non-zero pressures in the cloud, and so on. Actually, we have yet to ﬁnd
and isolate the kind of perturbation that would make a given naked sin-
gularity go away. These situations are what physicists call ‘generic’, that
is, they are not contrived. A tiny deviation in the initial data leads to
much the same outcome. However, we should emphasize that a gen-
eral ‘stability’ proof for the naked singularity remains to be achieved.
As mentioned, that must wait till a proper stability criterion is formu-
lated in general relativity, which is not available as yet and which is a
rather complex issue.
In this connection, the following recent result that has come out
of collapse studies throws a useful light on the issue of genericity and
stability of collapse outcomes: for a spherical gravitational collapse of
a general matter ﬁeld, satisfying the energy and regularity conditions,
given any regular density and pressure proﬁles at the initial epoch,
there always exist classes of velocity proﬁles for the collapsing shells and
dynamical evolutions as determined by Einstein’s equations, such that
depending on the choice made, the collapse ﬁnal state is either a black
hole or a naked singularity (Fig. 7.1).
As for perturbations of initial conditions, we could ask what if we
perturb an already-formed naked singularity. The above tells us that if
a particular initial conﬁguration in collapse gave rise to a naked singu-
larity, there is an open set of nearby initial data that will give the same
result. This kind of stability offers a certain physical reality to naked
singularities.
The inhomogeneous dust collapse case we discussed above is a special
case of the scenario stated earlier. In that case of course, the conclu-
sions are much more transparent. What determines fully the ﬁnal fate
of collapse are the initial density and velocity proﬁles for the collaps-
ing shells of matter. We can see here clearly how the different choices

Are Naked Singularities Stable and Generic?
139
Black
hole
ρ0(r), pθ0(r), pr0(r)
Naked
singularity
Initial
surface
E′(r)
E(r)
Figure 7.1 How initial data takes the collapse to either a black hole or a naked
singularity. The above is a schematic diagram for the evolution of spherical
collapse for a generic matter ﬁeld, with inhomogeneities as well as non-zero
pressures included. Here the quantities ρ0, pθ0, and pr0 specify the initial data set
in terms of the density and pressure proﬁles and E(r), E′(r) are possible velocity
proﬁles. The typical result is that, for any given matter initial proﬁle, there
are velocity proﬁles that take the collapse to either the black hole or naked
singularity outcome, depending on the choice made, and vice versa.
of these proﬁles for the collapsing cloud determine the two ﬁnal states
of collapse, and how each of the black hole and naked singularity states
turns out to be ‘generic’ in terms of their being distributed in the space
of ﬁnal states.
The result we have in this case is that given any regular initial den-
sity proﬁle for the collapsing dust cloud, there are velocity proﬁles that
take the collapse to a black hole ﬁnal state, and other velocity proﬁles
that take it to a naked singularity ﬁnal state. In other words, the overall
available velocity proﬁles are divided into two distinct classes, namely
those which take the given density proﬁle to a black hole, and those
that take the collapse evolution to a naked singularity. The same holds
conversely; namely, if we choose a speciﬁc velocity proﬁle, then the

140
Cosmic Conundrums
overall density proﬁle space is divided into two segments, one taking the
collapse to black hole ﬁnal states and the other taking it to naked sin-
gularity ﬁnal states. This clarity of results give us much understanding
on the ﬁnal fate of a collapsing matter cloud.
While dust collapse is very useful to investigate, much more inter-
esting is the collapse with non-zero pressures which are important
physical forces within a collapsing star. We brieﬂy mention below a
typical scenario of collapse with a non-zero pressure component.
For possible insight into the genericity of naked singularity forma-
tion during collapse, we studied the ﬁnal outcomes of collapse once
pressures were introduced in the collapsing cloud. Speciﬁcally, we in-
vestigated the effect of introducing small pressure perturbations in the
collapse dynamics of the classic OSD model that terminates in a black
hole ﬁnal state, which would hopefully tell us about the OSD black
hole’s stability. What we found was that there exist classes of pressure
perturbations such that introducing the smallest pressure within the
collapsing OSD cloud changes the end-state to the formation of a naked
singularity. This can also be viewed as a ﬁrst-order perturbation of the
known spacetime metric describing the dust cloud. Thus, we come
to understand the role played by pressures in a well-known gravita-
tional collapse scenario, and a speciﬁc and physically reasonable but
generic enough class of perturbations is considered to provide good in-
sight. From this analysis we gain useful and important clariﬁcation of
the structure of the censorship principle, which as yet remains to be
properly understood.
In light of this discussion, it is worth noting that in recent years
there have been many studies on the stability of black hole solutions. In
particular, the instability of Reissner–Nordström black holes has been
focused on, which are of interest because the extremal black holes with
equal charge and mass are of special interest in higher-dimensional and
string theories. Interesting instabilities for Reissner–Nordström black
holes in de Sitter backgrounds have been reported by Vitor Cardoso and
colleagues both numerically and analytically; gravitational instabilities
in Kerr spacetimes have also been studied.
It follows that gravitational collapse is a rather intriguing phenome-
non. While in Newtonian gravity, it is density or mass that determines
the interaction, in Einstein gravity the spacetime curvatures and causal
structure play a major role. Event horizons may or may not form
as the mass densities grow during the collapse. As a consequence,

Structure of Naked Singularities
141
many intriguing features result. The connections and implications for
any possible quantum gravity formulations are puzzling and rather
exciting.
It is worth noting that the issue of the ﬁnal fate of massive stars
and that of gravitational collapse has attracted the attention of the best
minds. The discussion and debate have been ongoing for many decades
and many research groups have participated internationally. That is be-
cause of the extremely rich tapestry of basic ideas interwoven here, and
because of the issue’s importance in astrophysics and cosmology.
Structure of Naked Singularities
Very little is known about the structure and properties of spacetime
singularities. But if they are always hidden within the event horizons
of gravity, we are probably not much bothered about them as we
shall never encounter them. However, if we accept that physically re-
alistic gravitational collapse gives rise to naked singularities under a
wide spectrum of reasonable conditions, then the important question
that arises is: What are the properties and structure of these naked
singularities? How visible singularities affect the surrounding Universe
will crucially depend on this. The answer must come, of course, from
the gravitational collapse studies carried out so far.
The collapse models studied and the resulting singularities exhibit
a wide variety of interesting structure. We need to try to obtain their
common features, and determine implications for as well as connec-
tion to the CCC. In some models, part of the singularity is visible
but then is covered by the horizon eventually; elsewhere, they can re-
main visible forever. This depends on the form of matter collapsing,
the equation of state used, and other properties. Typically, the naked
singularity develops in the geometric center of collapse to begin with,
but later it can spread to other regions, or get covered, as the collapse
progresses.
Is a Singularity’s Mass Always Vanishing or Negative?
A question is asked sometimes about the mass of naked singularities,
namely if they are always ‘massless’, because typically in spherical col-
lapse the naked singularity forming at the center of the cloud has its
mass function tending to a vanishing value in the limit of approach to
the singularity.

142
Cosmic Conundrums
It is useful and interesting to note, however, that this need not always
be the case. For example, in higher-dimensional gravity researchers
found timelike naked singularities developing, which are massive both
within Einstein theory and in alternative theories of gravity. Massive
singularities are present in solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations in
classical relativity as well, the most famous probably being the one
appearing in the Kerr solution, where it has a positive mass and is
naked if the object is rotating sufﬁciently fast, higher than a critical
value. However, at present we do not know whether such a Kerr naked
singularity can form via some physically viable dynamical collapse
process.
In any case, in our opinion what really matters when a singularity
is visible is that super-ultra-dense regions where the densities and cur-
vatures do blow up are visible to external observers in the Universe.
That is of actual physical consequence, rather than the ‘mass’ of the
classical singularity itself, which is, in fact, not an object or part of space-
time. Since the naked singularity itself may be eventually resolved when
quantum gravity effects are taken into account, talking about the ‘mass’
of the classical singularity may not be of much physical signiﬁcance in
the ﬁnal analysis.
Given the examples of massive timelike singularities and others such
as those just described, and also other examples of collapse evolutions
determined so far, it is clear that naked singularities, when they form
during collapse, come in many varieties and with varying properties,
depending on the physical situations as well as the form of matter
considered and other such factors. This may be one of the reasons
why it has not been possible so far to rule them out by some kind of
general theorem. Therefore, in our view, it is very likely that impos-
ing different restrictions will not help preserve the CCC. As we noted
earlier, imposing ad hoc conditions of various types has not helped re-
cover the censorship over the past many years, and we can always ﬁnd
counter-examples that do not respect these.
Also, there has been some discussion on negative mass Schwarzschild
singularities. It has been asked whether naked singularities, when-
ever they form, must have a negative mass similar to that in the
Schwarzschild case. As we clariﬁed earlier, that is not the case.
Generically, if we take the case of a spherically symmetric collapse, the
mass function has a vanishing or positive value in the limit of approach
to the singularity which is visible.

Structure of Naked Singularities
143
In fact, it is desirable to impose all possible physical reasonability
conditions such as positive mass-energy density and regularity of the
initial data from which the collapse evolves. Only after that can we ask
whether naked singularities still form. The idea is to see whether naked
singularities develop during gravitational collapse that is developing
from regular initial data and under physically reasonable conditions.
The answer that follows is in the afﬁrmative, as shown by many studies
we discussed earlier. These singularities have no negative mass. We note
that constructing models with naked singularities which have a nega-
tive mass is, of course, possible, but the physical validity of the same is
far from clear. In fact, the negative mass Schwarzschild singularity has
not been obtained as a result of any dynamical collapse evolution, and
to that extent it is not physical.
Are Singularities Always Momentary Events?
Are naked singularities always pointlike in time, or can they be also ex-
tended? This is partly related to whether they are like an object or an
event. In typical spherically symmetric collapse models, when consid-
ered in co-moving coordinates, the ﬁrst point of the singularity curve
is visible. From it, families of non-spacelike curves come out. The later
points in co-moving time, of the singularity curve, get hidden under
the horizon.
Thus, we must ask whether naked singularities, when they form, are
always momentary or can they be extended in time? We point out here
that depending on the collapse scenario, the form of matter, and the
equation of state considered, the naked singularity can be pointlike,
or it can also extend in the co-moving time. Naked singularities can
be ‘timelike’ or ‘null’, and it has been determined that the timelike
singularities, when they form in collapse, are extended typically.
Whether singularities are pointlike or null, the structure of the fam-
ilies of geodesics coming out from the singularity have been analyzed
in detail. It has been shown that non-zero measure of non-spacelike
curves emerge from a pointlike naked singularity. As far as the dis-
tant external observer is concerned, once he gets to see the ﬁrst ray of
the singularity, for all times to come the null or timelike paths from
the singularity will keep reaching him. This is also related to whether
naked singularities are always null. As we have pointed out, they can
be timelike and extended through the space, rather than being null and
pointlike.

144
Cosmic Conundrums
We note that, as opposed to naked singularities developing during
collapse, which are sometimes like an event, those occurring during
the super-spinning Kerr geometry or many other vacuum models are
ever-lasting, and in that sense they are like an object. Although such
solutions occur in general relativity, till recently what was not clear
is whether such object-like naked singularities arose from dynamical
physical processes in gravity physics. In this connection, we have dis-
cussed a class of gravitational collapse models which gives rise to the
ﬁnal conﬁguration which contains an ever-lasting naked singularity
that develops during collapse from regular initial data.
Do Naked Singularities Violate Causality?
An issue sometimes mentioned in connection to the occurrence of
naked singularities is the possible violation of causality that can hap-
pen in certain spacetimes. Causality violation in a spacetime amounts
to having closed timelike curves. An observer moving on such a trajec-
tory would ﬁnd herself eventually at the initial event in space and time
even though locally the clock never went backward.
The most well-known examples of such spacetimes are the Gödel
universe and the solution by Frank Tipler for a spacetime outside a ro-
tating cylinder. Also, closed timelike curves can be present in familiar
solutions such as the Kerr metric. The singularity theorems show that
singularities form generically in Einstein gravity when causality is pro-
tected. But these theorems are not very helpful when exploring the
connection between causality violations and singularities.
The closed timelike curves are present in Kerr spacetime, but they
are conﬁned inside the horizon of the Kerr black hole. Therefore, an
observer entering the horizon would be able to travel back in time but
would not be able to return to the outside Universe. Thus, the causal
structure of the external spacetime is preserved. In some cases, closed
timelike curves can be accessed by any observer in the Kerr metric,
allowing therefore the theoretical possibility of time travel.
From this example, it may be tempting to think that naked singu-
larities would typically allow for causality violations to occur in the
Universe, thus making them undesirable. It is possible that the presence
of the horizon would hide the closed timelike curves, thus discon-
necting them from the rest of the Universe. Although this is true in
some cases, there are also dynamical spacetimes such as those of the
LTB models which admit naked singularities but which have no closed

Structure of Naked Singularities
145
timelike curves. It follows that, in general, there is no direct connec-
tion between these two phenomena of causality violation in a spacetime
and the occurrence of naked singularities. Actually in known spherical
collapse models the causality is always preserved whenever the naked
singularity results as the collapse ﬁnal state.
We note that even when singularity theorems assume certain cau-
sality conditions, the spacetime singularities and causality violation are
two independent phenomena. Therefore, in general, the connection, if
any, between spacetime singularities, and in particular naked singulari-
ties and causality violations is far from clear and could be rather subtle.
One of the reasons could be that different kinds of naked singularities
need to be treated differently. For example, what holds true for the
Kerr solution need not be true for the Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi metric.
A spacetime without rotation, such as the LTB collapse model, could
not have closed timelike curves and would therefore respect causality
regardless of the presence of a naked singularity.
It also appears that causality violations need to be better deﬁned
and studied in order to understand what is really undesirable about
them. The possibility of closed timelike curves by itself could not be
enough to make a spacetime ‘physically unrealistic’. If we try to sum-
marize, causality violations can occur at three levels. First, they could
be microscopic, in which case closed timelike curves can occur at that
level, thus being resolved or included by an eventual theory of quan-
tum gravity. Second, there may be local scale causality violations, in
which case the closed curves can occur at planetary or galactic level.
This gives rise to the possibility of time travel with all the connected
paradoxes. Finally, the causality violations could be at a cosmological
scale. In that case these can occur only on time scales comparable with
the life of the Universe and thus have little bearing on our local picture
of the Cosmos. These closed timelike curves probably cannot be ruled
out in principle.
As noted by many researchers, global causality requirements for the
whole Universe might be too restrictive since we are able to experience
only a limited and local portion of the Universe. From the fact that cau-
sality holds here and now, it might be far-fetched, though not impos-
sible, to conclude that causality holds globally for the entire Universe.
Also, non-local correlations have been studied in quantum mechanics
for many years and it seems not impossible that at a microscopic level
a full theory of quantum mechanics coupled to gravity might allow for
some kind of causality violations to occur.

146
Cosmic Conundrums
So ﬁnally we may be left only with the second class of causality
violations described above, namely the local scale violations, to be con-
sidered as undesirable in principle. Within this class, can we say that
naked singularities and closed timelike curves are linked in some way?
As was pointed out by Bill Bonner, examples of spacetimes without
singularities but with closed timelike curves have been known since the
early days of general relativity. But such solutions cannot be obtained
from the evolution of a regular matter cloud. As such, the possible re-
lation that might link the occurrence of closed timelike curves with
the behavior of the event horizon that could eventually cover the sin-
gularity has not been investigated so far, leaving at present the issue of
causality violation separated from cosmic censorship.
Local versus Global Visibility
When a matter cloud collapses, an event horizon might form, covering
the singularity. But rays may still come out of the singularity, though
staying within the event horizon only, and then fall back into it. Such
a singularity is called a locally naked singularity. On the other hand, if the
rays coming out from the singularity reach observers far away in the
Universe, then it is called globally naked.
In other words, a singularity is said to be at least locally naked if there
exist outgoing null or timelike trajectories that reach some observer in
spacetime. In this sense, for example, the singularity in the Reissner–
Nördstrom spacetime is locally naked, since observers located within
the radius of the event horizon, but not outside it, can be reached by
the non-spacelike geodesics coming from the singularity. On the other
hand, a singularity is said to be globally visible if there exist outgoing
non-spacelike geodesics that reach observers at future spatial or null
inﬁnity. In this case no horizon is present before the singularity, and
the light rays coming from the singularity can be seen by faraway future
observers (Fig. 7.2).
Global and local visibility are, of course, related to cosmic censor-
ship. Cosmic censorship comes in various forms and formulations and
over the years certain forms which allow for the existence of locally
visible singularities have been proposed. There are two main formula-
tions of the conjecture, strong cosmic censorship and weak cosmic censorship, and
which form we assume will have implications for the local and global
properties of the spacetime to be studied. The weak cosmic censor pos-
tulates that a singularity cannot be seen by observers at null inﬁnity,

Structure of Naked Singularities
147
r
t
rb
Schwarzschild
exterior
Interior of the cloud
0
Light rays
t0
ts
tah
t
rb
Interior of the cloud
0
Light
rays
t0
ts
tah
r
Schwarzschild
exterior
(a) Global visibility
(b) Local visibility
Figure 7.2 Local versus global visibility of the naked singularity. (a) shows
the globally visible singularity, and (b) the local visibility. Basically, whether
the singularity will be locally or globally visible is decided by the structure
of the apparent horizon, which is the boundary of trapped surfaces in the
spacetime. The rays may come out of the singularity, but if they enter the ap-
parent horizon before they come out of the cloud, then they are trapped and
fall back again to the singularity. On the other hand, if the horizon structure is
such that the escaping rays need not enter the same, then they move out and
reach the faraway observers in the spacetime.
thus allowing for locally naked singularities to occur. In this case when
we study formation of the singularity and of the apparent horizon, we
need not worry about the global structure of the horizon itself. Ac-
tually, proving that there are future-directed outgoing null geodesics
coming from the singularity is enough to ensure local visibility.
As an example, we could consider the LTB collapse scenario. We in-
dicated earlier that the local visibility of a singularity is determined by
the density being inhomogeneous and higher at the center. This holds
regardless of where the boundary of the cloud is taken. On the other
hand, a careful analysis of the behavior of the apparent horizon shows
that for some of these matter models the horizon curve, while increas-
ing in a neighborhood of the center, can decrease afterward. In that
case, the singularity is eventually covered from the point of view of
observers at future inﬁnity.
It has been shown that for a ﬁxed position of the boundary of the
star, there is a range of values of the degree of inhomogeneity for which
the singularity is only locally naked and a range of values for which
it is globally naked. From a mathematical point of view, this is not
relevant, since in dust models we always have the freedom to choose

148
Cosmic Conundrums
the boundary of the star as we like. Therefore for any given matter pro-
ﬁle we can always ensure global visibility by choosing the boundary at
an appropriate radius.
The issue is somewhat different when we apply the formalism to
collapsing stars with non-zero pressures. First, the pressures should typ-
ically vanish at the boundary, and this may affect the way the boundary
and the mass proﬁle are related. Furthermore, in this case the total mass
and the radius of the boundary are ﬁxed by realistic physical values for
a star, depending on the stellar model chosen. It can then very well
happen that even though the singularity that forms at the end of col-
lapse is locally visible, it might not be globally visible. Based on these
considerations, we can see that for more elaborate and realistic matter
models, which include pressures and different layers of matter, the issue
of global visibility for a given collapse model remains open.
Can Energy Come out of a Naked Singularity?
Even if a naked singularity forms in collapse, the singularity by itself
does not necessarily have to radiate matter or energy, thus bearing
a signature that is detectable from far away in the Universe. Such
singularities at the end of collapse, unlike those in the super-spinning
Kerr metric, are more like events rather than an object, being a
moment when collapsing matter reaches its ﬁnal doom, something
like the Big Bang in reverse. Questions such as what will come out of a
naked singularity are then not really meaningful; ‘things’ do not have
to come out of it. What we really see is not the singularity itself but the
signature of processes that occur under extreme conditions of matter
near this epoch, such as the shockwaves due to inhomogeneities in
this ultra-dense medium, or possibly the quantum gravity effects in its
vicinity.
Generally, when considering a complete gravitational collapse, it is
often assumed that the boundaries set by the electromagnetic and nu-
clear forces are surpassed and nothing can really halt the collapse.
Therefore, in the ultra-high-density regions that surround the singu-
larity, the pull of gravity is thought to be so strong that nothing can
escape it. We would be inclined to think then that even if naked singu-
larities exist, they would have no impact on the rest of the Universe,
since no signal can escape their gravitational ﬁeld. But there are other
ways by which naked singularities could, in principle, leave a trace in

Structure of Naked Singularities
149
the outside Universe. From the study of exact solutions of the ﬁeld
equations we see that there are scenarios in which the process of for-
mation of the singularity can be accompanied by an emission of energy.
For example, it is plausible that the ﬁnal singularity may not actu-
ally occur because some physical processes could disrupt the singularity
formation and instead create a shockwave through which the matter-
energy that was collapsing is ejected away. Such a shockwave would be
immensely energetic and it would bear a clear signature of the level at
which it has arisen.
This raises the issue of possible observational features that a naked
singularity might have. Have we observed similar phenomena in the
Universe already? The answer is, we do not know as yet. Since the stellar
structure in realistic cases is much more complicated than in the ideal-
ized analytical models and because it involves many layers of different
materials with different properties, it is clear that whatever might come
from such a Planck-scale event would be scattered, absorbed, and emit-
ted many times before an actual signal comes out at the surface of the
star. Therefore, of the many highly energetic events known to happen
when a star collapses under its own gravity, we do not know whether
any of them bears the signature of the Planck-scale physics happening
very close to the center.
For example, we as yet do not have a comprehensive model that
explains how supernovae explode. As we have discussed, computer
simulations describing what happens at the core of the star when it ex-
plodes have difﬁculty producing the amount of energy necessary for
the shockwaves to propagate through all the layers of the star, thus
generating the explosion. It seems not unreasonable to consider the
possibility that a barrier at a scale smaller than the Schwarzschild ra-
dius might provide this missing energy, though there are still no studies
in this direction. A similar reasoning might apply also to gamma ray
bursts, a very energetic phenomenon created from the core collapse
of a star that is still far from being well understood. It is possible that
the gamma ray bursts are created in the exploding outer layers of the
star, and therefore it is not a direct effect of some possible quantum
barrier. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which the explosion is related
to the collapse of the inner core is still not well understood and it is
likely that certain kinds of these phenomena are linked to gravitational
collapse.

150
Cosmic Conundrums
On the other hand, it is also possible that some energy comes out
from the vicinity of singularity by classical effects only. In fact, if we
allow for negative pressures to occur during collapse at a purely classi-
cal level, we ﬁnd immediately that the mass of the collapsing star must
be radiated away during the process. Negative pressures close to the for-
mation of the singularity could expel the inner shells whose particles
would then collide with the infalling outer shells with very high ener-
gies. Particle collisions would then occur with arbitrarily high center
of mass energy, thus turning the collapsing cloud into an immense
particle accelerator. Such a scenario was considered by Mandar Patil,
Daniele Malafarina, and myself.
Questions on Collapse and Singularities
Apart from the several major issues on gravitational collapse outcomes
that we have been discussing, there are also important questions and
intriguing curiosities that arise when we discuss black holes and naked
singularities. The point is that as collapse models are being studied for
predicting the formation of visible singularities, different points arise
about their nature, structure, and properties. These need to be dis-
cussed in order to bring clarity and transparency to the issues involved
and we consider below some of these questions.
Is Cosmic Censorship Right or Wrong as a Basic Principle of Nature?
Clearly, the answer to this crucially important question has profound
implications for fundamental physics and cosmology. What comes out
unambiguously from the work so far is that censorship is certainly not
correct in an unqualiﬁed form, as it is sometimes taken to be. If true,
it will be in a highly reﬁned or ﬁne-tuned form only, with suitable
conditions and a formulation that has yet to be achieved. The work
on gravitational collapse so far will play an important role here to
achieve such a likely formulation. On the other hand, investigating
the quantum and astrophysical processes in the vicinity of such visible
ultra-dense regions predicted can give rise to intriguing physical
consequences. In fact, many physicists have taken this path in recent
years.
We note that it is not just the curvature values alone that deter-
mine the event horizon formation in general relativity. It is the light
cone structure, or the causal structure of spacetime that counts cru-
cially. The causal structure and global properties mainly arise due to the

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
151
nonlinearity of Einstein’s equations and they determine features such
as event horizon formation, many times independently of curvatures.
So in collapse models, depending on the physical properties within the
star, the event horizon may develop earlier or later, and the singularity
may or may not be visible.
What Then is the Status of Naked Singularities versus Censorship Today? Can
Cosmic Censorship Survive in Some Limited and Specialized Form, and Can We
Properly Formulate It after All These Studies in Recent Years on Gravitational
Collapse?
This is a major puzzle today that we discussed in some detail earlier. Re-
cent studies on formation of naked singularities as collapse end-states
for many realistic models have brought to the forefront intriguing basic
questions at both the classical and quantum level, which may have sig-
niﬁcant physical relevance. Some of these are: If the super-ultra-dense
regions forming in a physically realistic collapse of a massive star are
visible to faraway observers in spacetime, what are the observable astro-
physical consequences? What is the causal structure of spacetime in the
vicinity of a singularity, as decided by the internal dynamics of col-
lapse which evolves from regular initial data? How early or late will
the horizons develop in a physically realistic gravitational collapse, as
determined by the astrophysical conditions within the star? When a
naked singularity forms, is it possible to observe the quantum gravity
effects taking place in the ultra-strong-gravity regions? Can we envisage
a connection to observed ultra-high-energy phenomena such as cosmic
gamma ray bursts?
A continuing study of collapse phenomena within a general and
physically realistic framework may be the only way to answer these
issues. This could lead to novel physical insights and possibilities emerg-
ing from the intricacies of gravitational force and the nature of gravity.
The useful feature that has emerged from work on collapse mod-
els so far is that we now have several important constraints for any
possible formulation of censorship. It has been shown that several
versions of censorship proposed earlier will not hold due to explicit
counter-examples becoming available. Clearly, analyzing gravitational
collapse plays a crucial role here. Only if we understand why naked sin-
gularities develop as collapse end-states in many realistic models can
there emerge any pointer or lead to a practical and provable version of
censorship.

152
Cosmic Conundrums
While General Relativity May Predict, in Principle, the Existence of Both Black
Holes and Naked Singularities, What Would a Physically Realistic Continual
Collapse of a Massive Star in Nature End up with? Will It Always Create a
Black Hole?
The results available so far on collapse show that the ﬁnal outcome will
depend on the internal structure of the star, such as its initial density
and pressure proﬁles, and the velocities of the collapsing shells. For ex-
ample, in the dust collapse, the homogeneous collapse will go to a black
hole, but a physically more realistic inhomogeneous proﬁle with den-
sity higher at the center will result in a naked singularity. This means
that, under physically reasonable conditions, a massive star is more
likely to form a naked singularity. Taking into account quantum effects
could then make the star explode, as we will discuss later. So a revision
in scientiﬁc thinking could occur with more data.
The point is that there exist interesting and clean systems of collaps-
ing conﬁgurations worked out in past years where the event horizons
are delayed as the matter cloud collapses, respecting the usual physi-
cal reasonability conditions. In such scenarios, we have no reason to say
naked singularities are unphysical.
What is the Nature and Structure of Spacetime Singularities?
Apart from the existence of spacetime singularities, we currently know
very little about the global structure of Einstein’s equations, and about
the nature and structure of singularities. Singularities mean the tra-
jectories of free-falling material particles or photons will come to a
sudden end and just disappear from the spacetime. For particles, this
will happen after a ﬁnite proper time as measured along their timelike
trajectory. But we have no information about the nature or the physical
signiﬁcance of the singularities. For example, we do not know whether
the densities and curvatures will necessarily blow up along the paths
falling into such singularities, though there are many examples where
in fact they do. We also do not know whether they come covered within
horizons of gravity.
How Important Are Inhomogeneities, and at What Scales
Would the Universe Attain Homogeneity?
Inhomogeneities in matter distribution are important for both the
larger scales and small scales in the Universe, as this is an observed

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
153
phenomenon. Recent observations of structures in the Universe show
that it would be inhomogeneous at the very large scales of even hun-
dreds of megaparsecs. Even though it is conceivable that homogeneity
is again recovered when the averaging is done on a still larger scale,
which is statistical homogeneity, it would be highly desirable to incor-
porate features such as perturbations from exact homogeneity. Toward
this purpose, we could model the observable Universe in a more
general way, where the spacelike surfaces of constant time need not
admit the exact symmetries of homogeneity or isotropy. Recently re-
searchers have found that such an effort to include inhomogeneities in
cosmological considerations can provide new and alternative solutions
to the dark energy problem in cosmology.
For local objects such as stars, as we have already discussed, the
inhomogeneities in the density distribution have far-reaching conse-
quences as far as the black holes and naked singularity outcomes of
collapse are concerned.
Can We Obtain a General Solution to Einstein’s Equations?
This major issue remains very much open. While it would be a formida-
ble task analytically, the dividends for the effort toward such a goal need
not be small. As yet, we know only some simple solutions to Einstein’s
equations, such as the Schwarzschild and FRW geometry, and much of
the current activity in gravity physics is based on these models. A more
general solution could generate many new insights in gravitation phys-
ics, and help us understand formidable issues such as cosmic censorship
much better.
Would New Mathematical Formulations of Relativity, Such as Those Used in
Loop Gravity or Twistor Theory, Help Decide the Question of Censorship?
Such new formulations could be of help to decide on censorship. How-
ever, in our view, it is essentially only a more vigorous study of the
gravitational collapse phenomena that can tell us more on this basic
issue. It is only such studies which have yielded so far several important
leads as we discussed here.
Clearly, if some new formalism helps us study the collapse better
and more efﬁciently, that will be useful. The question of censorship is
whether the ﬁnal state of continual collapse of a massive star will be
necessarily a black hole. To decide on this, we must study the collapse
itself by whatever means, within the original or any new formalism of

154
Cosmic Conundrums
general relativity. It is possible that new techniques or formalism could
make the complex study of collapse more tractable. In fact, it is because
we could devise a set of techniques to work with Einstein’s equations
in some detail that we could make certain progress in this direction, as
discussed here.
Are Alternative Theories of Gravity Better Than General Relativity?
While the general theory of relativity is considered by far the most
successful theory to describe the force of gravity, there have been
other theories proposed over past decades to describe gravitational phe-
nomena. Some of these include the Brans-Dicke theory, scalar-tensor
theories, and more recently theories with modiﬁed action compared to
Einstein’s theory, and theories with higher-order derivative terms.
Most of these theories are based on a spacetime continuum frame-
work only, but differ mainly in the detail of the equations that describe
the action and behavior of the gravitational force. Thus, they are likely
to have similar qualitative behavior, such as the occurrence of space-
time singularities. Also, most tests of gravitation theories mainly deal
with solar system phenomena, and in that regime, all these theories
essentially give the same or quite similar results. In such a scenario,
the motivation for an alternative theory reduces considerably as gen-
eral relativity has been veriﬁed reasonably well in the experimental tests
so far.
Thus, it would seem that the real modiﬁcation of general relativity
would be relevant more in a quantum regime, rather than looking for
its classical alternatives. What we mean is that general relativity may be
taken as a proper description for gravity at a classical level, but when the
regime of very strong gravity ﬁelds and extremely small length scales is
encountered, then a different quantum gravity framework is needed to
describe the true nature of these phenomena.
Are We Suggesting That the Conditions Needed to Have an Event Horizon Are
Not Satisﬁed in Nature So There May Not Be Any Horizons at All? What
about All the Evidence for the Existence of Black Holes Then?
That is not being suggested. The work on collapse so far has shown that
for a massive collapsing star it is possible, under very realistic physical
conditions, that trapped surfaces are actually delayed, and a singularity
could become visible. An example is when the density of the star is

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
155
homogeneous in space, a black hole will form as the collapse end-state.
But if the density is higher at the center, which is a physically more real-
istic case, then trapping is delayed and a visible singularity forms. Many
models have been studied and under other sets of realistic conditions,
black holes can form. So, black holes and naked singularities can de-
velop as collapse end-states, depending on the set of physical conditions
under which the collapse operates.
What course will nature take? It is for the observations to decide that,
and further theoretical work may also help. Maybe both phenomena
are realized in nature, as predicted by general relativity, under different
sets of physical conditions.
During Collapse, Does One Continue through the Horizon and Singularity
Unhindered?
At the event horizon, nothing special happens, just that the outgoing
rays get trapped and are no longer able to escape to any larger radii. The
falling particles continue to fall and will hit the singularity at the center.
As for the singularity, using some kind of quantum gravity model, one
may be able to continue through the same, but we do not know as yet
and need a good quantum gravity theory ﬁrst.
When Considering the Collapse of a Mass Conﬁguration, to What External
Vacuum Do We Match the Interior so That the Spacetime is Complete?
In the collapse of inhomogeneous dust, the exterior is a Schwarzschild
spcaetime. But in matter with pressure and with more general equa-
tions of state the matching would be to the generalized Vaidya metric.
These details and matching have been worked out.
What Decides Whether a Given Spacetime Geometry Has a Naked Singularity?
Given a metric, for example, that for inhomogeneous dust which is the
Lemaitre–Tolman–Bondi form, or the radiation collapse as given by the
Vaidya metric, we can study the null geodesics or other particle trajec-
tories to decide on this question if they come out from the singularity
to the observer.
Also, researchers have carried out a general analysis of collapse and
Einstein’s equations, somewhat in the spirit of the singularity theorems,
to analyze when the trapped surfaces would form. It can be shown that
it is the geometry of the trapped surfaces that makes the singularity

156
Cosmic Conundrums
visible. In each case, it is not necessary to write an explicit metric, and
the conclusions can be drawn under a general set of conditions for a
spacetime.
Must Event Horizons Always Form as We Go from Low- to High-Curvature
Regions near a Spacetime Singularity?
It is not just the local density or curvature values that determine the
light paths or event horizon in general relativity. The causal structure
of spacetime and the global properties of light cones are the crucial
factors. Detailed studies of collapse models imply that gravity can be
arbitrarily large and dense in a stellar collapse but still not necessarily
inescapable. High density or curvature values do not necessarily mean
an event horizon is present. In Newtonian gravity, density is the sole
parameter that determines the behavior of a gravitational ﬁeld. But
in general relativity, there are ten gravitational metric potentials, and
these give rise to novel features for gravity and its interactions in the
Universe.
Sometimes the theories of modern physics such as spacetime theo-
ries or quantum phenomena look a bit mysterious. Indeed, it is difﬁcult
for our intuition to comprehend the spacetime continuum, which is
the key substratum underlying the Einstein gravity. Much of our com-
mon beliefs or off-the-cuff thinking is challenged by unusual or striking
conclusions which arise as we pursue the logical path. So the best way
to proceed is just to follow the logical and mathematical consequences
of the theory, and then to check whether we ﬁnd such phenomena
occurring in nature.
Are Naked Singularities Basically Black Holes, But without an Event Horizon?
Like black holes, for the naked singularity case also there will be a point
of inﬁnite density. But there will not be the ‘point of no return’ as there
is with black holes. In addition, if naked singularities exist, it will be
possible to observe them directly. So naked singularities are like black
holes, except for the black part.
Also, many points on naked singularities have become clear now.
For example, the effect of pressure and whether it can avoid singu-
larities was discussed extensively for many years, but now we know
that non-zero pressures do not avoid naked singularities. Also, naked
singularities need not always be neutral; there are charged or spinning
examples as well. They also need not involve negative masses, which is

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
157
unphysical. Again, it is not true that the collapse work is based on ‘dust’
assumptions only. A thorough analysis of that case was completed some
time ago, and collapse models with non-zero pressures have been con-
sidered by many groups, some of which were described earlier. Today we
have a general formalism available for treating spherical collapse with
non-zero pressures, and clear criteria are available to decide when it will
terminate in a black hole or naked singularity. We note that sometimes
the dust case is also regarded as an important approximation to real
scenarios. That is why the Oppenheimer–Snyder dust collapse is very
important and forms the foundation of black hole physics.
Could the Collapsing Star Radiate Away All Its Mass,
So That No Spacetime Singularity Forms?
Many authors have studied collapse with outgoing radiation. The point
is whether it would be possible in a catastrophic collapse for the star
to radiate away so much mass in such a short time so as to reach a
non-singular end-state. That seems rather unlikely, at least at the clas-
sical level, given the usual mechanisms of mass transfer we have. Thus,
much work remains to be done to give such a possibility any concrete
and acceptable shape, if it is viable at all.
Is a Naked Singularity an Object or an Event?
In many of the gravitational collapse scenarios we discussed, a naked
singularity is like an ‘event’. But there are also cases such as the
Kerr solutions where it is like an ‘object’, where there may be effec-
tively a super-dense remnant governed by quantum gravity, which was
generated by gravitational processes.
The singularity may exist for a long time, or it could momentar-
ily exist in the frame of the collapsing star and then blast itself off in
a shockwave due to quantum gravity-generated repulsive pressures.
Thus, super-dense remnants governed by quantum gravity, visible to
faraway observers for either short or longer periods of time, can be cre-
ated. Most calculations so far have established the existence of naked
singularity in collapse, but there are not yet many simulations to
explore the after-effects of such, which is a matter of further research.
While event-like, short-lived naked singularities readily form in
many models of collapse, there are also collapse models that give rise
to object-like, long-lived naked singularities. This could happen in
a collapse scenario that slows down in time, as we discussed earlier.

158
Cosmic Conundrums
Interior
geometry
r = 0
Generalized
  Vaidya
      metric
Outgoing
radiation
Figure 7.3 A star can emit and lose its mass and energy classically as it evolve
in collapse.
When a singularity during collapse is visible, then other astrophysical
processes such as shockwave formation or quantum gravity processes
near the singularity may build up and take over. This may result in a
ﬂash-like phenomenon in the Universe, creating a burst-like scenario,
thus throwing off practically all the matter of the star (see Fig. 7.3). The
ﬁnal outcome will be a burst-like phenomenon from the ﬁnal stages
of collapse, and the singularity would be resolved. Such ‘event-like’
or ‘momentary’ visible singularities could be quite interesting as they
might have some astrophysical relevance for transient phenomena in
the Universe.
Do We Have Dark Energy Stars?
Other than black holes and singularities, more exotic compact objects
such as boson stars or gravastars have been conjectured by researchers.
In many cases, to form such objects we need exotic matter, which al-
most always violates positive energy conditions. An equilibrium also
must be ensured, as typiﬁed by such a possible black star, and we may
possibly invoke some new forces of nature other than what we already
know, or in any case some gross violation of energy conditions must
take place.
In the Case of Collapse Terminating in a Naked Singularity,
What Will a Faraway Observer See?
In some models such as dust collapse, the singularity is visible only tem-
porarily, and an event horizon eventually forms to cloak it, which is

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
159
what happens from a local point of view. But for a distant observer,
the horizon is labeled by the inﬁnite Schwarzschild time. So in prin-
ciple, the observer can always see the central naked singularity. It is true
though that the light or gravitational-wave signals, if any, emitted from
the singularity suffer very large gravitational redshift, and so in prac-
tice it is impossible at a sufﬁciently late stage to catch such signals due
to the limitation of the sensitivity of the detector. In other words, for
these models, the singularity is visible, but an event horizon eventually
forms, and the naked singularity settles down into very deep gravita-
tional potential near the horizon and so it is ﬁnally invisible due to the
large redshift.
Here we are discussing the emission from the classical naked singu-
larity itself. But in physical reality the singularity may be smeared out
by the quantum effects and what we may actually have is an ultra-high-
density and ultra-high-curvature quantum gravity object of the order
of the Planck length or bigger. This may emit in similar Planck wave-
lengths. While this radiation also may suffer a big redshift as it emerges,
in principle it could be visible, and may give us potentially the signatures
of quantum gravity physics which takes place close to such a visible
ﬁreball.
The point is that even if a naked singularity forms during collapse,
the singularity by itself does not have to radiate matter or energy. Such
a singularity is more like an event rather than an object, a moment
when collapsing matter reaches its ﬁnal doom, like the Big Bang in
reverse. In fact, the comparison with the Big Bang is interesting here,
as it is a naked singularity with an inﬁnite redshift. How do we ever
‘see’ it? Why does the Universe expand away from it, rather than col-
lapsing onto itself, when it is such a strong gravity ﬁeld? Just as the
Universe comes from the Big Bang, similarly there could be observa-
ble effects emanating from the naked singularity forming in a massive
star collapse.
Are Gravitational Waves or Shockwaves Created near Spacetime Singularities
or during Gravitational Collapse, and Can We Observe Them?
The ﬁnal stages of a massive gravitationally collapsing star can be a very
energetic phenomenon and it is likely that they are associated with
the production of gravitational waves in a burstlike fashion. Such a
possibility needs to be investigated in a detailed manner.
If the singularity is hidden within a black hole, no such effects are able
to escape. Only the physical phenomena occurring outside the event

160
Cosmic Conundrums
horizon can travel to faraway observers. This is at the level of classical
general relativity. Quantum considerations can cause a black hole to re-
lease Hawking radiation, but that would be too faint to ever be detected.
If, on the other hand, the massive star terminates in a naked singularity,
the horizon formation is delayed or avoided. In such a case, the gravity
waves or the shockwaves generated in its vicinity, as well as the
quantum gravity effects taking place close to these ultra-strong-gravity
regions, will be able in principle to propagate to faraway observers.
Primordial Black Holes or Primordial Naked Singularities?
Generically, inhomogeneous or non-spherical collapse is more prone to
delay the horizon formation during collapse, and so may generate vis-
ible singularities. We have considered mainly compact stars collapsing.
But it would be interesting to consider the early Universe and investi-
gate collapse to ﬁnd whether the singularities formed were more likely
to be primordial naked singularities instead of primordial black holes.
Since, According to Quantum Theory, Black Holes Emit Thermal Radiation and
Undergo Hawking Evaporation Because of the Separation of
Particle-Antiparticle Pairs near the Horizon, Will a Naked Singularity Also
Disappear This Way, or Get Resolved through Quantum Gravity?
The event horizon is a crucial factor in the evaporation of a black
hole through quantum effects. But in a naked singularity case, it is
still possible for the event horizon to disappear or evaporate away
through other quantum or classical processes. The effects of quantum
gravity, for example, could generate a huge negative pressure, caus-
ing the star to emit most of its mass in late collapse stages, as we will
discuss later. Further, classical processes such as powerful shock for-
mations caused by inhomogeneities in matter densities near the naked
singularity could also cause it to explode away.
The question of quantum effects near a spacetime singularity remains
one of the most intriguing issues. There is no complete quantum the-
ory of gravity available as yet, but quantum effects could be important
in strong gravity ﬁelds even before full quantum gravity becomes oper-
ational at the Planck scales. Examining quantum effects could give an
idea of possible features present in the full quantum gravity. In many

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
161
cases quantum effects diverge in the vicinity of a singularity, suggest-
ing that in quantum gravity there may be a possibility of singularity
resolution.
Can We Have a ‘Quantum Censor’, Even If Classical Censorship Fails,
or a Quantum Explosion of Naked Singularities?
Singularities could be interpreted as indicating the incompleteness of
classical theory. The problems currently faced by the physics of black
holes, such as the information paradox and the teleological nature of
event horizons, are also, in our view, manifestations of stretching the
classical theory too far. The interesting point about visible singularities
is that they offer the possibility of observing quantum gravity effects,
even when the ﬁnal singularity is smeared away, as trapped surfaces do
not form till very late in collapse evolution.
Similar to the Hawking evaporation of a black hole, will a naked
singularity also explode away? As matter becomes extremely dense and
hot, quantum effects, gravitational and others, become relevant in the
evolution of the process. Hawking radiation might explain why mini
or micro black holes, possibly created during the Big Bang, do not ex-
ist. Smaller black holes would rapidly evaporate, and hence have long
since disappeared. The event horizon is a necessary condition for the
Hawking radiation mechanism.
It is possible for the star to disappear or evaporate through either
quantum or classical processes in the case of naked singularity evo-
lution. An example that we will discuss is that of a toy model where
quantum gravity effects generate a huge negative pressure for the star
to emit away most of its mass in a ﬁnal burstlike fashion. There could
also be classical processes such as powerful shock formation due to in-
homogeneities in matter densities close to the naked singularity. This
may again make the star explode away, but the detailed mechanism is
not known.
Can We Break a Black Hole by Throwing into It Charged or Rotating Particles?
Let us suppose a black hole did form as the ﬁnal end-state of a mas-
sive star’s gravitational collapse. There is a constraint in this case for
the horizon to survive, namely that the black hole must not contain
too much charge or spin too fast. Otherwise, the horizon cannot be
sustained; it will breakdown, and the singularity within will be visible.

162
Cosmic Conundrums
Even if the black hole formed with a small enough charge and angu-
lar momentum, the key astrophysical processes in its surroundings,
including that of the accretion of matter, could increase its charge or
spin. Such matter could be typically a lot of particles and outer layers
of the collapsing star, which will fall into the black hole with great
velocity; the matter could be classical or quantized, and with charge
and angular momentum. Through ‘charging up’ or ‘over-spinning’ the
black hole, the infalling particles could eliminate the event horizon.
Thus, the very fundamental characteristic of a black hole, namely its
trait of gobbling up the matter all around it and keep growing, could
become its own nemesis and a cause of its destruction (see Fig. 7.4).
So even if a massive star collapsed into a black hole rather than a
naked singularity, important issues remain, such as the black hole’s
ability to withstand particles with charge or large angular momentum
falling in and converting the black hole into a naked singularity by
eliminating its event horizon.
Many researchers have claimed in recent years that this is possible,
and have provided models for creating naked singularities this way. But
there are others who claim there are physical effects which would save
the black hole from over-spinning, and the issue is out with the jury.
The point is, in general, the stability of an event horizon and a black
hole in this respect continues to be an important issue even if a black
hole formed during the collapse of a massive star.
‘Shooting away’ the event horizon?
Figure 7.4 Can we break a black hole? Debate continues on whether this is
possible.

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
163
The primary concern of the censorship hypothesis is, of course, for-
mation of black holes only as collapse end-states, and their stability as
described is a secondary issue. So what this means for censorship is that
the collapsing massive star should not retain or carry too much charge
or spin; otherwise, it will end up as a naked singularity, rather than a
black hole.
It is worth noting that typically when some charge or enough angu-
lar momentum falls into a black hole, the event horizon structure
could completely change. For example, a Schwarzschild black hole has
no charge and the horizon fully covers the singularity. But as soon as we
drop a small charge into it, the horizon structure changes, it becomes a
Reissner–Nördstrom black hole, and the singularity can become visible,
at least locally.
Why Is the Big Bang Singularity Uncloaked by an Event Horizon?
Would a ‘Big Crunch’ Singularity Also Be Naked?
Let us consider any observer in the Friedmann Universe. If there is
any past-directed timelike or null trajectory from this observer, ex-
tended maximally into the past, it will meet the Big Bang singularity.
In other words, there are timelike or null photon paths from the sin-
gularity coming out, which reach the observer. In this way the Big Bang
singularity is visible, in fact to all observers. This nature of singularity
is entirely different from the case, for example, of the homogeneous
density Oppenheimer–Snyder collapse model singularity, where no
future-directed non-spacelike curves from the singularity reach any
faraway observer at inﬁnity. But if we consider more realistic models
with a higher density at the center, the singularity of collapse turns
out to be visible, and this feature turns out to be generic for more gen-
eral matter ﬁelds and general initial density and pressure proﬁles from
which collapse develops, as we have discussed here.
As for the big crunch singularity, the situation is entirely different.
It is a singularity that is in our future, if it occurs. In FRW models
time travel is not possible, so it will not be visible to us. Only if some
very complicated topologies for the Universe are allowed, permitting
causality violation, can a future singularity possibly be visible.
Do Naked Singularities Violate Causality?
The statement that is sometimes made, namely that naked singularities
are bad because they give rise to closed timelike curves and causality

164
Cosmic Conundrums
violation, which could allow your parents to be dead before you were
born, is incorrect. In fact, in the collapse scenarios we discussed, there
are no closed timelike curves developing near the naked singularity,
and the spacetime is perfectly regular and causal. Something as physical
as a higher density at its center, rather than a uniform density cloud,
could lead to a visible singularity.
Would the Universe Permit Non-trivial Geometries and Topologies?
The question here is, compared to the usual Euclidean geometries we
are familiar with, what other non-trivial global geometries a realis-
tic Universe model may permit. While Einstein’s equations reveal how
the local physics operates, the global geometry and topology of the
spacetime are left completely free. A non-trivial global topology, for
example, could permit causality violations in a spacetime. Typically,
we rule these out by means of an explicit assumption, but the issue of
global topology of the Universe remains, which would have important
implications for cosmology as well as observations on the Universe. In
fact, many researchers have recently discussed the global geometry and
topology of the Universe from the perspective of current observations
in cosmology.
Thus, we also examined the relationship between topology change in
a spacetime and the occurrence of naked singularities and also the con-
nection between the strength of naked singularities and the disruption
in causal structure that they may cause. As Ravi Saraykar and myself
have shown, it turns out that a topology change in the spacetime causes
naked singularities.
What Are the Recent New Results on Collapse and Singularities?
Recent developments can be roughly classiﬁed as follows: First, there
is a set of results, from us and others, regarding the stability aspects
of naked singularities as well as black holes. These results show that
naked singularities are not necessarily unstable, in the sense that in
the space of initial data from which the gravitational collapse of a mas-
sive star evolves, there are open sets of initial data which give rise to a
naked singularity, and the same holds true for a black hole. So, a sort of
genericity is seen for naked singularity formation. Also there are results
which show the instability of black holes in higher dimensions.
In our view, the key problem in all these considerations is that there
is no ﬁxed notion or any precise deﬁnition of stability available in

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
165
Einstein’s gravitation theory, mainly due to mathematical ambiguity
and complexity. Therefore, in our view, this is not an issue that can be
clearly resolved one way or the other. But the point that comes out is
that it is no longer easy to argue in simple terms that naked singularities
are unstable and therefore are to be discarded.
This situation has given rise to another set of efforts. Researchers have
thought: suppose both black holes and naked singularities do develop
in nature as collapse end-states when a massive star dies. Can we obser-
vationally verify this? In other words, can we distinguish between them
observationally and through astronomical or astrophysical signatures?
What are the observational signatures of naked singularities, if they oc-
cur at all in nature, and how do they differ from black holes? In the
past few years, results have become available in this direction and the
main ones are these. First, the accretion disks around black holes and
naked singularities will have signiﬁcantly different properties, as shown
by Daniele Malafarina, Ramesh Narayan, and me. These offer character-
istic differences which we could possibly access observationally. Second,
there are results now on how very-high-energy particle collisions will
occur much more effectively in a naked singularity background than in
a black hole spacetime. Finally, there are differences in the gravitational
lensing signatures for black holes and for naked singularities which thus
offers the possibility of observationally distinguishing whether a poten-
tial high-mass object, e.g. the galactic center, is a black hole or a naked
singularity.
This last effort could answer the interesting question of what a naked
singularity actually looks like. The accretion disk of a naked singular-
ity is much brighter and more luminous, and the spectral luminosity
features are rather different. Thus, an initial guess would be, as we de-
scend into the singularity, a huge increase in brightness and light. Of
course, going too close will destroy us, as is the property of the singu-
larity, so the better thing to do is to go as near as possible and then
come back.
In View of the Current Scenario, What Are the New Emerging Directions and
Research Frontiers? What is the Current Perspective on Cosmic Censorship?
Let’s consider the second question ﬁrst. There is no doubt that the issue
of cosmic censorship and gravitational collapse has broad appeal and
interest. We hope the discussions here highlight the crucial points and

166
Cosmic Conundrums
main physics issues involved, within the broad context and proper ori-
entation. We would prefer to be circumspect, and review and describe
all the important related views carefully in an appropriate framework.
Our own research has always taken and adopted such a point of view.
There are many interesting and exciting physics issues here, of much
interest to the broader spectrum of astronomy and astrophysics. While
dealing with these, we should be careful on all possible aspects. We have
tried to achieve this here and to strike the right balance.
There is, however, an urgent need to think about these issues in an
open and transparent manner, rather than just avoiding doing it. There
is a strong need for such a cause rather than just making assumptions as
is often done due to lack of proper information. For a general and pop-
ular audience it might be better to be more circumspect and say that
the status of censorship is not as ﬁrmly established as many physicists
assume. In doing so, we would like to be representatives not only of
our own ideas but also of an entire scientiﬁc community, and we hope
our discussion here presents the case both for and against cosmic cen-
sorship, describing not just our own opinions, but also those of other
physicists. With much interest in the topic today, an even-handedness
of approach is a necessity and the priority is more with recent ﬁndings
than with general background information.
Coming to the ﬁrst question, we have pointed out that the ﬁnal fate
of gravitational collapse of a massive star is an exciting research fron-
tier in black hole physics and gravitation theory today. The outcomes
are fundamentally important to the basic theory and to astrophysical
applications, and for modern gravitation physics. We have highlighted
certain key challenges in the ﬁeld, and also have reviewed several re-
cent interesting developments. Of course, no claim to completeness has
been made, and there are other interesting problems in the ﬁeld as well.
We mention here a few points which we think are interesting, and
which may have an impact on future development in the ﬁeld:
1. The genericity of the collapse outcomes, in terms of black holes
and naked singularities, needs to be understood carefully and in
further detail. It is by and large well accepted now that general
relativity does allow and give rise to both black holes and naked
singularities as the ﬁnal fate of collapse, evolving from regular in-
itial data and under reasonable physical conditions. What is not
yet fully clear is the distribution of these outcomes in the space of

Questions on Collapse and Singularities
167
all allowed outcomes for collapse. The collapse models discussed
already and the considerations we have given would be of help in
this direction, and may throw light on the distribution of black
holes and naked singularity solutions in the initial data space.
2. Many of the models of gravitational collapse analyzed so far are
spherical. So non-spherical collapse needs to be understood much
better. While there are models which illustrate what the depar-
tures from spherical symmetry could do, some other analytical
models of collapse for matter clouds with cylindrical symmetry
have also been studied. However, we note that, on the whole,
not very much is known about non-spherical collapse. Numerical
relativity could probably be of help in this direction. Also, an-
other alternative would be to use global methods to deal with the
spacetime geometry involved, as used in the case of singularity
theorems in general relativity.
3. At the very least, the collapse models studied so far do help us
gain much insight into the structure of cosmic censorship, what-
ever ﬁnal form it may have. On the other hand, there have also
been attempts where researchers have explored physical applica-
tions and implications of the naked singularities investigated so
far. If we could ﬁnd astrophysical applications for the models that
predict naked singularities, and possibly try to test the models
through observational methods and the signatures predicted, that
could offer an interesting avenue for obtaining further insight
into this problem as a whole.
4. An attractive recent possibility in that connection is to explore
naked singularities as possible particle accelerators, as we have
tried. Also, the accretion disks surrounding a naked singularity,
wherein the matter particles are attracted toward or repulsed
away from the singularities with great velocities, could provide
an excellent venue for testing such effects and may lead to pre-
dictions of important observational signatures for distinguishing
between black holes and naked singularities in astrophysical phe-
nomena, as some researchers have recently attempted.
5. Finally, further considerations of the quantum gravity effects in
the vicinity of naked singularities, which are super-ultra-strong-
gravity regions, could yield intriguing theoretical insights into the
phenomena of collapse, as we will discuss in the next chapter.

N8O
Is Our Universe Predictable?
The detailed collapse calculations of recent years show that the ﬁnal
fate of a massive collapsing star could be a naked singularity. The con-
cern expressed at times has been that the future of a naked singularity
is unpredictable, because unpredictable inputs may emerge.
This has physical relevance and implications as well as interesting
philosophical aspects for the issue of predictability in the Universe. It
is sometimes argued that the breakdown of censorship means violation
of predictability in the spacetime, which must be avoided. It has been
suggested that we have no way of knowing what a naked singularity
may radiate or emit unless we study the physics in such ultra-dense re-
gions, whereby we can then predict the Universe only partly but not
fully in the future of any given epoch of time.
To put it differently, the event horizon of a black hole hides the
super-ultra-dense region from us, and therefore the fact that we do not
understand such regions has no effect on our ability to predict what
happens in the Universe at large and far away. But if no such horizon
exists, then the ultra-dense region might, in fact, play an important and
even decisive role in the rest of the Universe, and our ignorance of such
regions would then become an issue of more than merely academic
interest.
The issue of whether our Universe is fully predictable, at least within
a classical and non-quantum perspective, has been an important one.
There have been exciting discussions about predictability in the Uni-
verse. Within the context of cosmology and fundamental physics, it is
thought to be obvious that the classical theories must be all fully pre-
dictable, in a sense to be properly deﬁned, whereas the unpredictability
is basically and essentially associated with quantum phenomena only.
We note, however, that an unpredictability at such a level is, in fact,
quite common in general relativity, and it is not always necessarily
related to cosmic censorship violation. Even black holes themselves
need not fully respect predictability of this kind when they rotate or

Is Our Universe Predictable?
169
have some charge. As an example, if we drop an electric charge into
an uncharged black hole, the spacetime geometry radically changes its
character and is no longer predictable from a regular initial epoch of
time. A charged black hole admits a naked singularity which is visible
to an observer within the horizon. A similar situation holds when the
black hole is rotating. As we have discussed, there is a debate going on
whether it is possible to over-charge or over-rotate a black hole so that
the singularity that is visible to observers within the horizon becomes
visible to external faraway observers, too.
Also, if such a black hole was big enough on a cosmological scale,
the observer within the horizon could survive in principle for millions
of years happily without falling into the singularity, and would thus
be able to observe the naked singularity. So only the purest of black
holes with no charge or rotation at all could respect full predictability,
whereas other physically realistic black holes with charge or rotation
could not. As such, there are many models of the Universe in general
relativity that are not totally predictable. In them, spacetime cannot be
neatly separated into space and time so as to allow initial data at a given
moment of time to fully determine the future.
So what is the origin of such non-predictable features, even at a clas-
sical level, in general relativity? We would like to highlight that the
classical theories of gravity, such as the general theory of relativity, are,
in fact, not ‘predictable’ in the usual sense of the word associated with
Newtonian mechanics, which is certainly a predictable framework. Un-
like Newtonian gravity, Einstein’s theory is a non-local theory which
allows for intricate possibilities such as black holes and time warps.
The issue is closely associated with the existence of black holes, Cauchy
horizons, and spacetime singularities in the general theory of relativ-
ity. It is a theory which allows for non-trivial geometry and topology
for spacetime with several non-local features. The highly nonlinear na-
ture of Einstein’s equations allows for departures from what we may
call ‘Newtonian predictability’.
In our view, the real breakdown of predictability is the occurrence
of spacetime singularities, whose existence probably indicates the true
limitation of classical gravity theory. It does not matter then whether
they are hidden. The real solution of the problem is the resolution of
the singularity itself through either a quantum theory of gravity or
in some way at the classical level itself. Hiding the singularity within
a black hole may not be the real solution and it may be just shifting the

170
Is Our Universe Predictable?
problem elsewhere, and some of the current major paradoxes faced by
black holes could as well be a manifestation of the same.
Predictability Deﬁned
In general relativity, a given ‘epoch’ of time can be represented by a
spacelike surface. This is a three-dimensional space at a given moment
of time. For example, in the standard Friedmann models of cosmol-
ogy, there is such an epoch of simultaneity, from which the Universe
evolves in future, given the physical variables and initial data on this
surface.
We need to specify what is meant by ‘predictability’ in general relativ-
ity. Given regular initial data in terms of densities and pressure proﬁles
for the matter, and a velocity proﬁle for how it evolves at an initial
epoch of time, we would like to know the evolution for all time in the
future. This means data are given on a spacelike three-dimensional sur-
face, also called a hypersurface, and the aim is to predict the future and
past evolutions in the spacetime for all times. Such a requirement is
also termed the global hyperbolicity of the spacetime. A globally hyperbolic
spacetime is a fully predictable Universe; it admits a Cauchy surface, which
is a spacelike hypersurface where the data can be evolved for all times in
the past and future. Simple enough spacetimes such as the Minkowski
or Schwarzschild are globally hyperbolic, but the Reissner–Nördstrom
or Kerr geometries are not.
Thus, in general relativity, predictability is formulated in mathemati-
cal terms as the existence of a Cauchy surface in the spacetime universe.
Given such a spacelike three-dimensional surface, the evolution equa-
tions of relativity then predict all the future and past events in the
Universe in terms of the initial data speciﬁed on this initial surface.
This also ﬁxes the entire spacetime topology and geometry of the full
Universe as S × R, where S is the Cauchy surface and R is the real line.
A naked singularity is characterized by the existence of light rays and
particles that emerge from it. Typically, in all the collapse models that
have been discussed, there is a family of future-directed non-spacelike
curves that reach external observers, and when extended into the past
the curves meet the singularity. The ﬁrst light ray that comes out from
the singularity marks the boundary of the region that can be predicted
from any regular initial surface in the spacetime, and is called the Cauchy
horizon for the spacetime. The causal structure of the spacetime will

Predictability Deﬁned
171
r
t
rb
Vaidya exterior
Collapsing shells
0
Minkowski
region
Cauchy horizon
Quantum gravity region
Singularity
Primary
collisions
Secondary
collisions
Figure 8.1 Typically the existence of a naked singularity is characterized by
the Cauchy horizon forming as the collapse develops. The ﬁrst light ray com-
ing out of the singularity is the Cauchy horizon. The region of spacetime
beyond a Cauchy horizon cannot be predicted from a spacelike surface of
simultaneity in the past. Very-high-energy particle collisions can occur close
to such a Cauchy horizon.
differ signiﬁcantly in the two cases, when there is a Cauchy horizon
and when there is none. A typical gravitational collapse to a naked
singularity, with the Cauchy horizon forming, is shown in Fig. 8.1.
Suppose we are in a non-globally hyperbolic universe and want to
know where exactly our ability to predict events breaks down in such a
spacetime. It will be useful to take an example. Consider the Reissner–
Nördstrom spacetime which is not globally hyperbolic. We can begin on
a spacelike surface with all the data on it in our computer. As we evolve
on our world line, for a certain time to come, we would be fully able
to predict physics at later epochs, using the data already available. But,
later, we will enter a region of spacetime which contains non-spacelike
curves which come from either the inﬁnity or singularity, and can bring
potentially new information from there which we did not have to begin
with. This happens when we cross the Cauchy horizon. We must then
supplement our original data with this new information in order to do

172
Is Our Universe Predictable?
physics. Many important solutions of Einstein’s equations have such a
property and they are non-globally hyperbolic.
Global hyperbolicity means that from a given epoch of simultaneity,
all of the Universe, both in future and its past, can be predicted. The sig-
niﬁcance of this is that the physical data given on this spacelike surface
fully determine all physical quantities in the future or the past at these
events through hyperbolic equations of relativity. In this sense, the en-
tire evolution in the spacetime is fully deterministic. The spacetime is
then ‘foliated’ by the spacelike surfaces evolving in a cosmic time. If
there is no such spacelike surface, then the Universe is not globally
hyperbolic, and there is only a limited region which is fully predictable
from an initial slice.
The cosmic censorship fully holds in a globally hyperbolic spacetime,
but then there cannot be charged or some classes of rotating black
holes, because they are not globally hyperbolic. In fact, typically a given
solution of Einstein’s equations will not be globally hyperbolic as this
is a very strong condition on the spacetime. A Cauchy horizon sepa-
rates the predictable and non-predictable regions of the Universe. The
Oppenheimer–Snyder model is fully predictable in this sense, and so is
the cosmological spacetime of the FRW metric, or the ﬂat Minkowski
spacetime. In any collapse leading to a naked singularity, there is
similarly a Cauchy horizon, just as for charged or rotating black holes.
Is Relativity a Predictable Theory?
In general relativity there have been many solutions obtained, subject
to very reasonable physical conditions, which are not globally hyper-
bolic. These include the Reissner–Nördstrom solution, which is a black
hole with charge, the Kerr solution, the Gödel universe, and other cos-
mological models including the anti-de Sitter spacetime, which is very
important in string theory. In fact, only the simplest of the models,
such as the Schwarzschild and FRW, are globally hyperbolic, whereas
most other useful solutions, which are obtained once we include phys-
ical quantities such as charge or rotation to solve Einstein’s equations,
are not.
Thus, global hyperbolicity or ‘predictability’ is a very strong addi-
tional condition or constraint to be imposed on the spacetime for
Einstein’s theory, which is not globally hyperbolic on its own despite be-
ing a purely classical theory. The existence of such a ‘non-predictability’

Is Relativity a Predictable Theory?
173
in spacetimes is characterized by the existence of ‘Cauchy horizons’
in the Universe. These mark the boundaries of the spacetime region
which can be fully predicted from the data on a given ‘initial’ spacelike
hypersurface. Cauchy horizons in spacetimes can arise from many fac-
tors. Typically, they can be traced to be closely related to the existence
of spacetime singularities, the global spacetime topology, which is not
determined by Einstein’s equations but is left free, and also by physical
quantities such as the charge and rotation included in the physical con-
siderations toward determining the spacetime geometry and solutions
to Einstein’s equations.
What this means is that such an ‘unpredictability’ is somewhat com-
mon in general relativity. There are, in fact, many different ways in
which predictability breaks down in general relativity; singularities are
not the only cause. For example, the Gödel Universe is geodesically
complete and singularity free, but it still strongly violates global
hyperbolicity.
So we could ask: Does our notion of predictability in the Universe
need any modiﬁcations? Currently, this means that the initial data at
the ‘present’ moment ﬁx the entire past and future evolution ‘once and
for all’, and there is no possibility for any ‘new creations’ in future.
The question is, even if we hide naked singularities in horizons, what
shall we do with all the other kinds of ‘non-predictable’ situations that
arise in general relativity? Therefore, in our view, the predictability ar-
gument does not help much either for or against censorship or naked
singularity, and must be viewed essentially separately. Such an unpre-
dictability being quite common in gravitation theory, the real solution
may be the removal of the singularity itself.
It is worth noting that the general theory of relativity admits several
features that are considered quite unusual for a classical theory. The
causality violation is, of course, a predictability breakdown in itself, but
there are wormholes, non-trivial spacetime topologies, a very natural
formation of Cauchy horizons, and other such features which do not
respect global hyperbolicity. What this means is that naked singulari-
ties are not special here as far as ‘predictability’ or global hyperbolicity
violation is concerned. They are as good or as bad as any of these other
features of general relativity, and we need to accept them as such in
order to make further progress.
The predictability requirement, as used today in general relativity,
rules out any topology change for the spacetime as it evolves toward
the future. But we know that topology changes do occur, for example

174
Is Our Universe Predictable?
when two black holes collide and merge. If we believe that galaxies
have black holes at their centers, then predictability is necessarily vio-
lated whenever galaxy collisions occur. Also, at very small scales, where
quantum effects are to be included, a favorite picture is that of ‘space-
time foam’, which is a continually changing spacetime topology. Again,
this is ruled out if we insist on ‘predictability’ as above and impose no
topology change.
Singularities and Predictability
Spacetime singularities in cosmology or collapse are inevitable features
in Einstein’s gravity. While the Big Bang singularity which created the
Universe and all of us is visible, the singularities arising from the col-
lapse of massive stars can be either covered within event horizons of
gravity, which are black holes, or without horizons, thus being naked
singularities. One of the arguments against naked singularities is that
these are undesirable as they break predictability in the Universe.
As we noted earlier, while naked singularities do cause Cauchy hori-
zons, they are not the only ones to do so. Cauchy horizons arise in many
physically reasonable circumstances, as we discussed earlier, so they
seem more natural and common than global hyperbolicity, which is a
rather too strong extra condition to be assumed on a general relativistic
spacetime. Such a predictability loss happens in many physically rea-
sonable situations, so even in the absence of naked singularities, global
hyperbolicity is far from guaranteed.
Naked singularities are super-ultra-high-energy regions where quan-
tum effects are dominant, and so are the most likely places in which
quantum gravity effects might arise. Then we would have a chance of
observing signals due to quantum gravity processes.
It has been suggested that if all singularities were hidden within black
holes, then predictability would be restored. However, we recall that
black holes create a set of fundamental paradoxes, such as ‘information
loss’. In our view, the real problem is the classical singularities them-
selves, whether hidden in black holes or visible. What we really need is
a resolution and better understanding of singularities, probably using
quantum gravity. Assuming cosmic censorship and hiding the singu-
larities may not be the real solution to these basic problems, because
cosmic censorship may be only a partial solution to the key issues,

Singularities and Predictability
175
or just shifting the problem elsewhere, manifesting as current major
paradoxes in black hole physics.
In our view, the real breakdown of predictability is the occurrence of
the spacetime singularity itself, which indicates the true limitation of
classical gravity theory. It does not matter whether it is hidden within
an event horizon. The real solution of the problem would be the res-
olution of the singularity, either through a quantum theory of gravity
or in some way at the classical level itself. Thus, it may be useful to
study the physics of the visible super-ultra-density regions indicated by
naked singularities, which may offer possible removal of the singularity
through quantum gravity and possibly also predictability, if the physics
of these regions is understood better.
How does this ‘unpredictability’ manifest itself? Basically it is in our
inability to predict the future fully from the physical data and quantities
given at the current epoch of time.
But then it is useful to note that over the past years strong arguments
have been given already against assuming this sort of ‘predictability’ for
the Universe. A good example is the argument by Stephen Hawking to
justify his general singularity theorem. When Roger Penrose provided
the ﬁrst singularity theorem in 1965, one of the conditions assumed
was that spacetime is globally hyperbolic; that is, it admits a Cauchy
surface and is predictable in the sense we have discussed above. But
Hawking argued that global hyperbolicity is too strong a condition,
that it is not physical or something which can be assumed easily. He
pointed out that:
1. If there was a Cauchy surface for spacetime, we would be able
to predict the state of the Universe any time in the past or fu-
ture if we knew the physical data on the surface. However, how
is it really possible to know such data unless we are in the future
of every point of the surface? That is impossible in most physical
cases, so there is no physically compelling reason to believe that
the Universe admits a Cauchy surface, and that it is predictable in
the above sense.
2. There are a number of most useful solutions to Einstein’s equa-
tions which do not admit a Cauchy surface. Among them are
anti-de Sitter, plane wave solutions, Taub-NUT space, and the
Reissner–Nordstrom charged black hole case. Thus, there could

176
Is Our Universe Predictable?
be extra information coming from inﬁnity or a singularity which
would upset the predictions made simply on the basis of the data
on the surface.
For these reasons Hawking argued that Penrose’s theorem, which
assumes global hyperbolicity, is not physical enough, and that the
theorem must therefore be generalized so that it holds in actual physi-
cally realistic conditions. It was, in fact, argued that the real weakness of
the theorem was the requirement that spacetime has a Cauchy surface,
or that assuming predictability or determinism is a physical weakness.
Then Hawking assumed a much weaker condition, namely the causal-
ity only of spacetime, and the more general Hawking–Penrose theorem
was proved in 1970.
The above discussion brings to light the useful point that there is
really no argument against naked singularities on the count that they
violate global hyperbolicity. Because in any case we have agreed that
the Universe does not have to be globally hyperbolic, and that it is too
restrictive a condition to physically assume.
Actually our ability to predict the future breaks down as soon as the
spacetime singularity occurs, whether it is covered or visible. Because at
the singularity, the observer is suddenly destroyed, so we can no longer
evolve the spacetime beyond it. So the thing to focus on is the removal
or resolution of the singularity itself, which is the real breakdown of
predictability, if any. Therefore, it is hardly unnatural or something to
be alarmed about if a visible singularity arises out of a physically realistic
collapse. It is just another reason for the spacetime not to be globally
hyperbolic.
In some sense, we could say that not having global hyperbolicity
means that the Universe has reserved its own right and freedom to do
what it wants in the future, independently of our current knowledge
of it at this moment of time. So the issues here are profound and in-
teresting, and with richness in fundamental physics. They may also be
important for science and philosophy in general where a considerable
discussion continues.
Rabbits Popping out of a Hat?
If naked singularities occur, do we have a ‘rabbit out of a hat’ model?
If future events are determined by completely arbitrary boundary

Restoring the Predictability
177
conditions at singularities, does it not sound virtually like magic? Does
the indeterminism emanate from the naked singularity, or from inﬁn-
ity? Is it really the case that something might ‘pop’ out of the singularity
like a rabbit out of a hat? Do we envisage that a quantum gravity theory
will eliminate it and restore determinism everywhere in spacetime? The
question is, what precisely does it mean for the evolution not to be de-
terministic, and whether an element of randomness intrudes, and if so,
how does it manifest itself?
To clarify this, we can ask the following. Suppose we are sitting in
a non-globally-hyperbolic spacetime. Where exactly does our ability to
predict events to happen fail? That is, fail ‘in principle’, because this abil-
ity always fails ‘in practice’ as we lack sufﬁciently precise measurements.
Does this introduce an element of magic into the world, namely that
things happen for no reason? If so, it would be disturbing to see this in a
classical theory. What we ask is the key physical question: namely, does
an element of randomness intrude, and if so how does it manifest?
As we noted earlier, the spacetimes which are non-globally hyper-
bolic are as ﬁne and acceptable in general relativity as those which
actually are. There are many ways in which a universe may not be ‘de-
terministic’ or ‘predictable’ in the above sense. What really happens
in the naked singularity case is that the information on the present
spacelike surface does not determine physics at all points in the future
in such models. What is needed then is for us to understand and study
physical processes in the ultra-super-dense regions close to the singu-
larity. Once we do that, we may be able to tell what is likely to come
out of such regions, whereas the singularity itself should be resolved
through quantum gravity.
On determinism and predictability, we can say that indeterminism is
not just a problem for quantum physics, but also for classical systems,
such as chaos and nonlinearity. Perhaps what we call determinism, in
terms of ‘predicting’ the future and past using ﬁrst-order differential
equations, may need a change. The point is there are good examples in
general relativity where traditional global determinism breaks down,
and the occurrence of naked singularities is only one such example.
Restoring the Predictability
Sometimes we hear the argument that naked singularities are not
desirable because if they existed, then whenever a massive star collapsed

178
Is Our Universe Predictable?
in the faraway Universe, a massive burst of radiation and high-energy
particles will be emitted and wipe out planets such as Earth from
existence. But there is no reason for such a fear, as by conservation of
energy, a star will not radiate away more than the total mass-energy
density it has. So if such a ﬁreball happened in the faraway Universe
because of a massive star’s collapse, the total radiation reaching us
will be minuscule, or on a similar order of what we see in gamma ray
bursts today that take place in the faraway Universe. Even if a naked
singularity happened in our own galaxy, there is no such danger; the
total radiation in our direction would be less than a massive solar
ﬂare pointed to Earth. In that sense, naked singularities do not break
predictability in any serious physical way.
It may be useful to note that researchers found an interesting behav-
ior near Cauchy horizons, namely that particles collide with very high
energies and that Planck-scale physics could possibly occur there. In a
way this creates a singularity at the Cauchy horizon, marking an end
of spacetime. Then spacetime terminates at the Cauchy horizon itself
whenever a naked singularity happens in gravitational collapse. Since
these mark the boundary of spacetime, predictability is restored, be-
cause the rest of spacetime is predictable before the Cauchy horizon
formed. This would be an interesting possibility to probe further.
General relativity is the best theory we have today for describing
gravity at the classical level and it has been quite successful in experi-
mental tests. But we know that it is not complete, in that it must have
spacetime singularities, covered and naked. At such singularities pre-
dictability breaks down and so does the theory itself. In a way the theory
is predicting its own breakdown. Other theories of classical gravity are
no better, but for different reasons.
One approach could be that we accept that general relativity is not
complete as a classical theory, which would be valid only till quantum
gravity effects take over in super-high-density regions. We need to study
and understand the physics and quantum gravity processes in these
regions indicated by naked singularity, which may resolve the singu-
larity, and that way also possibly restore the predictability once a better
understanding is obtained.
As we understand gravity physics better, one important point emerg-
ing is that black holes are no better than naked singularities as far as pre-
dictability is concerned. We may hide the singularity within a horizon,
but as many recent results have shown, event horizons and black

Restoring the Predictability
179
holes have their own problems, such as information loss, causality para-
dox, and the inﬁnite-density singularity sitting at the center. In fact, the
debate going on currently about the stability of the black hole horizon,
in connection with the ﬁrewall proposal or the throwing in of charges
or spinning particles in a hole raises doubt about the black hole’s stabil-
ity. At the classical level, even if it formed in collapse, the event horizon
could break up and the singularity become visible.
As for general relativity, there are many different ways in which
predictability breaks down; singularities are not the only cause. For ex-
ample, the Gödel universe is geodesically complete and singularity free,
but it still violates global hyperbolicity in a bad way by admitting cau-
sality violation. Actually, general relativity does admit many features
which may be considered disturbing for a classical theory. Apart from
causality violation, which is a predictability breakdown, there can be
worm holes, weird spacetime topology, and so on. These violate global
hyperbolicity in different ways, and at a classical level. So there is no spe-
cial offense to be taken on naked singularities on that count. In fact, if
we so desire, we may take the breakdown of global hyperbolicity as the
breakdown of classical physics, and then study quantum gravity to do
better. That is what we do when we study quantum effects near naked
singularity, as we will discuss in the next chapter.

N9O
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
If naked singularities do indeed arise in the Universe as gravitational
collapse ﬁnal states of massive stars, then clearly they will have their
own quantum aspects which would be of much interest. As we empha-
sized earlier, these are the regions where quantum gravity effects will be
important and dominating. When these are able to propagate away to
faraway and external observers in the Universe, we can wonder whether
they will provide us with a possible cosmic laboratory for testing and
examining how quantum gravity works. If so, this could be an exciting
prospect and a novel direction for our search for a quantum theory of
gravity and towards the uniﬁcation of the forces of nature.
It is widely believed that when we have a reasonable and com-
plete quantum theory of gravity available, all spacetime singularities,
whether naked or inside black holes, will be resolved and smeared away.
However, this has not been realized so far, and as of now it remains
an open question whether quantum gravity will remove naked singu-
larities. After all, the occurrence of spacetime singularities could be a
purely classical phenomenon. On the other hand, there are also argu-
ments that singularities may not actually go away in quantum gravity.
In any case, the important issue is whether the extreme strong grav-
ity regions formed due to gravitational collapse are visible to faraway
observers. It is quite clear that the collapse could certainly proceed
classically, at least till the quantum gravity starts governing and domi-
nating the dynamical evolution at Planck-scale lengths, that is, till the
extreme gravity conﬁgurations have developed due to collapse. The key
point is that it is the visibility or otherwise of such ultra-dense regions,
and whether they are classical or quantum in nature, that is under
discussion.
What is important is that classical gravity implies the existence of
ultra-strong-gravity regions, where both classical and quantum grav-
ity aspects come into their own. In fact, if naked singularities do

The Quest for Quantum Gravity
181
develop during gravitational collapse, then in a literal sense we come
face to face with the laws of quantum gravity.
In this way, the gravitational collapse phenomenon has the potential
to provide us with a possibility of actually testing the laws of quan-
tum gravity. In the case of a black hole developing during the collapse
of a ﬁnite-sized object such as a massive star, such strong-gravity re-
gions are necessarily hidden behind an event horizon of gravity, which
would be well before the physical conditions become extreme near
the singularity. In that case, the quantum effects, even if they cause
qualitative changes closer to the singularity, will be of no physical con-
sequence. This is because no causal communications are allowed from
such regions. On the other hand, if the causal structure were of a
naked singularity, then the communications from such a quantum
gravity-dominated extreme-curvature ball would be visible in principle.
This will be so either through direct physical processes near a strong-
curvature naked singularity or via the secondary effects, such as the
shocks produced in the surrounding medium.
We will elaborate on some of these aspects here and future perspec-
tives are indicated, mentioning possible directions toward resolving the
cosmic puzzles as created by recent discoveries on gravitational collapse
and black holes.
The Quest for Quantum Gravity
Whenever we discuss spacetime singularities, a consideration of quan-
tum effects in the vicinity of the singularity becomes important, be-
cause when the curvatures grow arbitrarily high near a singularity,
then the classical general relativity can be relied upon less and less
and the quantum effects must become important to dominate. How-
ever, despite serious attempts over the past half-century, we have no
quantum theory of gravity available which can be used to examine the
quantum effects near a classical singularity, or to study whether the
singularity can be avoided in a quantum gravity theory.
The key issue toward a quantum theory of gravity is that all familiar
methods we use in quantizing other physical ﬁelds, and which work
very well for them, fail and run into serious problems when applied
to the gravitational ﬁeld. Actually, these difﬁculties seem to be related
to the fact that global issues become important as soon as we try
to describe the gravitational ﬁeld. So novel ideas and techniques are

182
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
needed and also there are several profound conceptual issues which
need serious attention.
Why do we need to quantize gravity and why should we go over
to a quantum theory of gravitation? There are compelling arguments
for this. The fundamental forces of nature known to us, namely the
electromagnetic ﬁeld, and the weak and strong nuclear forces, with
the exception of gravity, have been quantized. So if we want a uni-
ﬁed theory, then gravity must also be quantized. Also, the idea that
all fundamental interactions in nature are described by a single, uni-
ﬁed conceptual framework, being the manifestation of a single basic
ﬁeld, is rather appealing. The uniﬁcation of the electric and magnetic
forces was achieved by Maxwell in the nineteenth century with the
theory of electromagnetic ﬁelds. The Weinberg–Salam theory then pro-
vided a uniﬁed quantum treatment for the electromagnetic and weak
interactions, namely the electoweak theory. Then the grand uniﬁed
theories included the strong nuclear forces in this scheme. Therefore,
the aesthetic motivation to include gravity also is rather compelling.
As is known, Einstein himself spent considerable effort trying to unify
gravitation with electromagnetic theory and other forces of nature.
General relativity theory and quantum theory have been very suc-
cessful in their own domains, namely the macroscopic Universe gov-
erned by gravity and the microscopic world of elementary particles.
These theories explain the observed phenomena and make predictions
which are veriﬁed to a high degree of accuracy. However, their con-
ceptual frameworks have no similarities and we have no clue as to any
common underlying structure.
General relativity assumes the arena of a spacetime as the basic
framework, assuming a continuum differentiable manifold structure
where a metric tensor deﬁnes the causal structure with light cones de-
termining the propagation of particles. Such a metric is composed of
ten independent functions which obey Einstein’s equations that involve
the second derivatives of the metric tensor. Typically, for any given
physical system, the components of the metric tensor are obtained by
solving Einstein’s equations. On the other hand, quantum theory is
based on a Hilbert space of the state vectors describing any given state of
the quantum mechanical system. Then physical ﬁelds are represented
by linear operators acting on these vectors to produce real numbers
which are interpreted as the results of measurements.

The Quest for Quantum Gravity
183
The explanation for such a diversity in approach could be that
gravity, compared to other forces of nature, is extremely weak. The
strength of the gravitational force between two elementary particles is
much weaker than the other forces between them. The scale at which
a classical description breaks down for a particular theory depends on
the masses and charges of the particles involved and the values of the
fundamental constants involved. For the quantum theory of gravity,
the length scale at which quantum effects will become important is
determined by the values of the velocity of light, c, the Planck constant,
¯h, and the Newtonian constant of gravity, G. A unique length scale is
decided by these three constants as given by ℓp = (G¯h/c3)1/2, which is
called the Planck length. In cgs units it has the value of about 10–33 cm,
which is the fundamental length scale when quantum gravity effects
will be important. As it happens, the values of fundamental constants
are such that the Planck length is very small and the corresponding
Planck energy very high compared to the laboratory scales at which we
normally operate.
This allows us to use general relativity for the purposes of astro-
physics and cosmology, and quantum theory for atomic and suba-
tomic physics. Even though they look different at the laboratory scale,
experience so far has shown us that both frameworks must be only
different approximations of the same quantum gravity theory, when
suitable limits are taken. Such a uniﬁed quantum gravity theory should
become important at the Planck length scales and the Planck energies.
Several approaches for quantizing general relativity have been tried.
These include covariant quantization, the canonical method, the path
integral approach, and other similar methods. Attempts have also been
made to modify general relativity, such as higher-order gravity. None of
these ideas has worked successfully and they run into one or more for-
midable difﬁculties. The main reason behind such difﬁculties appears
to be the rather unconventional structure of general relativity com-
pared to other fundamental theories of physics. In general relativity,
the metric tensor plays a dual role. The metric functions determine the
kinematic arena, in that the metric determines the causality, light cone
structure, and spacelike surfaces of spacetime. On the other hand, it
is also a dynamical quantity playing the role equivalent to the Newto-
nian potential. Thus, there is no a priori background given in general
relativity in which one propagates the physical ﬁelds.

184
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
In contrast, for example, to the Maxwell theory, the background
is the Minkowski spacetime in which electromagnetic ﬁelds are
characterized by the ﬁeld tensor. Here the ﬂat spacetime provides a
kinematic framework in which the Minkowski ﬂat metric deﬁnes the
light cones and the spacelike surfaces in which the ﬁeld propagates.
Given the values of the ﬁeld on one spacelike surface, the values on
a future spacelike surface are determined. But in the general theory
of relativity, no background spacetime is given a priori. It must be
constructed by solving Einstein’s equations for the metric potentials.
These potentials then determine spacetime as a kinematic arena and
play the role of dynamical variables also. Such a dual role basically is
a characterization of the equivalence principle, giving Einstein’s theory
its elegance. But it also raises conceptual difﬁculties when we try to
quantize the gravitational force.
Covariant Approach
The covariant approach attempts to solve the quantization problem by
mimicking the method for electromagnetic ﬁelds. Here the metric of
general relativity is broken into two parts. These are the ﬂat metric and
an additional part that contains the rest of the nonlinearities of the met-
ric tensor. There is much conceptual simplicity in this method in that
to ﬁrst order in the perturbed part this gives a free spin-2 ﬁeld theory
in the Minkowski spacetime. Including the full nonlinear part reduces
the general relativity to a self-interacting spin-2 ﬁeld theory in the ﬂat
Minkowski spacetime. This allows us to use the familiar perturbation
methods of quantum ﬁeld theories to obtain a formal perturbation
series. But the major trouble is that the perturbation theory generated
this way is not renormalizable. The squared Planck length, ℓ2
p, enters the
perturbation series as an expansion parameter in this case. To achieve ﬁ-
niteness it is required that the series be ﬁnite in each order but there are
many difﬁculties in achieving this goal.
The recent supergravity theories have been an initiative in a simi-
lar spirit. The idea was to couple gravity with suitably chosen matter
ﬁelds. The hope is that the inﬁnities of the bosonic ﬁelds, including
those of gravity, will be cancelled by those of the fermionic ﬁelds to get
a renormalized theory of gravity interacting with matter. The most re-
ﬁned theory here, which is called the N = 8 supergravity, has several
good features such as some cancellation of inﬁnities. The Hamiltonian
is manifestly positive and the theory is unitary as well. The drawback,

The Quest for Quantum Gravity
185
however, is that again the theory is not renormalizable. Despite many
fresh attempts, there is no solution to these issues in sight.
Loop Quantum Gravity
The other major quantization effort, namely the canonical quantiza-
tion, can be used for a theory cast in the Hamiltonian form. This is
possible for the general theory of relativity. The state of the system
is described by wave functions of the conﬁguration variables and
the time evolution of the system is determined by the Schrödinger
equation that uses the Hamiltonian operator derived from the classical
Hamiltonian of the theory. The serious issue here has been a constraint
equation which must be solved in order to reduce to the variables
which represent only the true dynamical degrees of freedom. Several
attempts have been made to get rid of this issue, the most successful
being the loop quantum gravity approach by Abhay Ashtekar and
others. This deﬁnes a set of new variables to deal with the equations of
canonical quantum gravity.
In the usual set of canonical variables, the canonical equations are
non-polynomial and cannot be solved in the full quantum gravity.
With the introduction of new variables, all such equations become
polynomials and this offers a range of possibilities for addressing
traditional questions which could not be solved earlier. Particularly
interesting here has been the loop space representation developed by
Lee Smolin and others, where the quantum states are expressed as
functionals of closed loops on a spatial three-dimensional manifold.
This allows one to generate an inﬁnite-dimensional space of solutions
for all of the quantum constraints which includes the Fock space of
states in the weak ﬁeld limit.
Path Integrals
The path integral approach has been tried out to quantize gravity. The
major problem here is the deﬁnition of measure on the space of all
paths in consideration. We could foliate the spacetime and consider
all possible three-geometries on each spacelike surface. The amplitude
in question is that of going from a given spatial metric on the initial
hypersurface to another given spatial geometry at the ﬁnal spacelike
hypersurface. Each of these amplitudes is given by the action functional
and the path integral is the sum over all such possible paths. However,
the foliation given for the spacetime is not unique but is quite arbitrary.

186
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
Therefore, the initial and ﬁnal times given here are rather arbitrary. So
the physical meaning of the amplitude here is far from clear, apart from
the question of measure mentioned above.
String Theories
An effort toward quantum gravity has been the development of string
theories in particle physics. Here, instead of point particles and asso-
ciated ﬁelds, one-dimensional objects, called strings, are considered as
fundamental physical objects. In that case, familiar physical particles,
including the zero rest mass spin-2 gravitons, arise as different com-
ponents of these string excitations. The theory can have only one free
parameter and hence it needs a very minimal external input, with the
coupling ﬁxed automatically. So this theory could have been the theory
of everything, containing all physical information. The string model
would be unitary and it is believed it is ﬁnite order by order in the
perturbation theory. The trouble, however, is when summed, the per-
turbation series diverges quite powerfully. Of course, such divergences
are also there in theories such as quantum electrodynamics. But quan-
tum electrodynamics already assumes the ﬂat Minkowski background,
continuum spacetime structure, and so on. So we could blame such
inﬁnities on these external factors. On the other hand, string theory
leaves very little outside the scope of itself and must solve the problem
of inﬁnities within its own parameters.
Other Approaches and the Outlook
In addition to the methods just described, other approaches to achiev-
ing the quantization of the gravitation ﬁeld have also been tried. They
include the Euclidean path integral approach of Stephen Hawking, and
the twistor approach initiated by Roger Penrose.
Researchers have also tried to modify Einstein’s equations so that the
resulting quantum gravity turns out to be renormalizable via the covar-
iant approach. Here the Lagrangian is modiﬁed by adding terms quad-
ratic in curvature which means the ﬁeld equations involve the fourth
derivatives of the metric tensor. It turns out that these approaches have
their own difﬁculties of one kind or another.
The present state of quantizing the gravitational ﬁeld and the history
of efforts to do so indicate that the usual perturbative approach that
worked so well in particle physics and quantum ﬁeld theories may not

Need for Observational Data
187
produce the desired results. It looks clear that before we can formu-
late a working theory of quantum gravity, profound conceptual issues
and problems involving global and topological concepts must be ad-
dressed. These may concern the very fundamental nature and structure
of spacetime itself. It also appears necessary to understand better the
non-perturbative aspects of gravity as implied by the basic approach in
general relativity and the role these may play in quantum gravity.
In fact, we should emphasize that the attempts toward quantization
of the gravitational force very probably involve non-perturbative and
global questions concerning the structure of spacetime itself. Without
such an effort, progress here does not appear very likely. It is possible
that in string theory, the non-perturbative and global methods might
lead to a solution of the current problems.
All the same, we note that despite major issues of quantum grav-
ity remaining unsolved, the theory of a quantized free matter ﬁeld
in a ﬁxed curved background is a well-deﬁned issue which has been
studied in detail. This is only an approximation to the full quantum
gravity with quantum matter ﬁelds, but it gives an idea of the pos-
sible quantum effects in the full theory. Such a theory predicts the
creation of particles by the gravitational ﬁeld, and when applied to the
case of a black hole geometry, this particle creation implies a thermal
spectrum of emission with a temperature proportional to the surface
gravity of the black hole as was shown by Hawking in 1975. Such an
effect also shows an interesting relationship between black holes and
thermodynamics.
In summary, at present, we have no mechanism or complete theory
to deal with both quantum effects and the intense force of gravity
together. However, a quantum gravity theory should take over from
purely classical general relativity near spacetime singularities and in
the very advanced stages of the gravitational collapse of massive stars.
Spacetime singularities may indicate the incompleteness of the classical
gravity theory. It is possible that when quantum effects are combined
with the gravitational force, the classical singularity of Einstein’s gravity
may be resolved.
Need for Observational Data
In view of the scenario mentioned above and taking into account
the enormous difﬁculties that we have been facing in constructing a

188
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
quantum gravity theory through purely theoretical means, it is clear
that some kind of observational inputs will be essential.
We need to ask where the quantum gravity effects will be most im-
portant in the Universe. Two possibilities that emerge are the early
Universe, and the late stages of a massive star’s gravitational collapse.
In each of these cases we have the situation where the densities and
spacetime curvatures grow to extreme limits so quantum effects will
become very important. The early Universe is the vicinity of the Big
Bang singularity, and as for collapse, it would create a singularity either
within a black hole or as a naked singularity. Thus, rather natural can-
didates for the regions where quantum gravity effects will be important
are the vicinity of the spacetime singularities in the Universe.
As such, any quantum gravity theory should have certain observa-
tional implications in a natural manner. This is because, ﬁrst, the Planck
energies are only a few orders of magnitude higher than the energies in-
volved in the grand uniﬁed theories. So the possibility is not ruled out
that quantum gravity could have useful implications for the grand uni-
ﬁed theories of weak and strong interactions. Second, general relativity
itself predicts the existence of spacetime singularities where curvatures
and densities become unboundedly high, as we pointed out. Near the
singularity and near the Planck length scale, quantum gravity will be
important and the physics close to the singularity will be described by
quantum gravity only. In this way, for example, we need quantum grav-
ity to describe the very early Universe near the Big Bang singularity
which was the origin of the Universe. The behavior of physical ﬁelds in
this phase will have observational implications for the later evolution of
the Universe and the observations which are subsequently made.
Similarly, another important physical issue is whether the extreme
gravity regions formed during a massive star’s gravitational collapse
are visible to external observers in the Universe. An afﬁrmative an-
swer means that such a collapse provides a good laboratory for studying
quantum gravity effects in the Cosmos. This may generate clues for an
as-yet unknown theory of quantum gravity. Quantum gravity theories
in the making, such as string theory or loop quantum gravity, are
very much in need of some kind of observational data and inputs.
Without that, it appears nearly impossible to constrain the plethora of
possibilities.
The key point is to try and observe regions in the Universe where
quantum gravity effects are important and dominate the physics. If we

Singularity Resolution
189
can get observable signals and data from such regions, that would
possibly provide us with quite useful clues toward constructing a proper
and complete quantum theory of gravity.
Singularity Resolution in Quantum Gravity
Supposing that we do make a revolutionary breakthrough and ﬁnally
construct a quantum theory of gravity, a question that is frequently
asked is whether such a theory will have no singularities.
As for the spacetime singularities of Einstein gravity, in fact, the
very existence of singularity could become questionable when quan-
tum effects are taken into account. There have been several proposals
for possible singularity resolution when quantum effects are incorpo-
rated. For example, Bryce DeWitt suggested in the 1960s the possibility
for singularity avoidance within a quantum framework by imposing a
speciﬁc condition related to the vanishing of the wave function at the
singular boundary, where the state functional for the Universe vanishes
at the singularity.
There have been similar attempts. As there is no quantum theory of
gravity available today, several different approaches have been tried out
to study this problem. These include quantizing the homogeneous and
isotropic Friedmann models, or quantizing only part of the degrees of
freedom of the metric tensor. The basic difﬁculty here is that in the
absence of a consistent and complete quantum gravity theory, there is
no unique scheme to apply. As was anticipated by Dieter Brill in 1975,
there are a variety of ways of viewing the singularity and the quantum
theory of the Universe, and depending upon the procedure used, the
singularity may or may not be avoided. Hence, we must try out various
alternatives as well as possible model calculations which may eventu-
ally lead to a better insight on the status of singularities in quantum
gravity.
It was in this spirit that an approach to study the quantum effects
near a spacetime singularity was initiated and developed by Jayant
Narlikar and collaborators, where a limited range of perturbations of
the metric tensor were quantized, namely the conformal degree of
freedom of the spacetime metric. Using both the path integral and op-
erator methods we can see in this case that the quantum effects must
diverge in the vicinity of a classical spacetime singularity. This offers
the possibility that the singularity can be avoided when the quantum

190
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
effects are taken into account. No doubt it remains an open question
as to how the results will be changed when the quantization of other
degrees of freedom is taken into account; thus, the approach is not
complete. However, it has the merit of deducing deﬁnite conclusions
and to that extent it provides insight into the quantum effects near a
singularity. It would seem that even when the quantization of other
degrees of freedom is included, several basic features may continue to
be relevant. This may be so in a semi-classical approximation where the
propagation of quantum matter ﬁelds is considered on a ﬁxed classical
background. So such an approach of quantization of the conformal fac-
tor can also be viewed as the quantization of a scalar ﬁeld on a ﬁxed
spacetime background.
The point above is that despite the elegance of the path integral ap-
proach, it is beset with problems such as the question of measure on
the space of all paths. On the other hand, the operator approach in
quantum theory is more direct and has an intuitive appeal. This is used
here to ﬁnd the time evolution of quantum effects, and a wide range
of spacetimes can be covered to examine such effects near the singu-
larity. We can also consider the measure of singular geometries in the
space of all allowed geometries when the quantum effects are taken into
account. Both the cosmological context and the homogeneous gravita-
tional collapse can be considered for quantum effects near singularities,
and the same near a Schwarzschild singularity within a black hole is also
examined.
There are also views, however, that a quantum theory of gravity
will not resolve singularities, suggesting that singularities are, in fact,
physical attributes of nature rather than mere theoretical artifacts. The
question here is whether singularities are mathematical requirements
only, or are they physical? We have many cases where gravitational tidal
forces diverge at the singularity. In order to understand this, we need to
ask what will be the physical processes that will cause or lead to the for-
mation of such singularities. We need to know whether such processes
will be necessarily possible physically. In fact, this is one of the main rea-
sons why we have all along preferred to study a series of explicit collapse
models to ﬁnd out what happens as the ﬁnal state and we then try to
understand the nature of the singularities that result.
In this connection, Gary Horowitz and collaborators have argued in
recent years that singularities would exist in all theories of quantum
gravity as well, in order to regulate these theories. The argument is

Singularity and Quantum Gravity
191
that singularities must exist in such theories if these are to have stable
ground states. In other words, if we argue that all singularities will be
necessarily resolved in quantum gravity theories, then the theory will
fail to have a stable ground state. This is how we argue for the need for
singularities in the theory.
One of the main reasons why it has been argued many times that
quantum gravity may be singularity free is that there will be terms in
the action which are very small at low curvatures and small energies,
but will become important at high curvatures. These will create vio-
lations of the positivity of energy conditions that are needed to prove
the singularity theorems. But researchers have argued that certain
classes of timelike singularities, which are visible singularities, cannot be
resolved in this way, because if we try to resolve and remove the singu-
larities, then the theory will have no stable ground state. So it is argued
that all reasonable theories must admit timelike singularities. Thus, the
claim is that for a broad class of theories this must happen. However, we
do not know for sure about singularities in quantum gravity theories
because their structure is not clear.
In general, the issue, namely whether singularities are merely ‘math-
ematical’, as opposed to being ‘physical’, is very interesting indeed.
At the classical level, gravity theory certainly admits spacetime singu-
larities, and that is a mathematically proven fact. All the same, if sin-
gularities are visible to faraway observers, then they would surely have
physical consequences as well, in that the super-ultra-dense regions in
the spacetime will be observable to those far away in the Universe.
Naked Singularity and Quantum Gravity
For very massive stars with tens of solar masses, which far exceed the
Chandrasekhar limit which is about 1.4 solar masses, a total gravita-
tional collapse is inevitable as it would appear quite unlikely for the star
to throw off almost all its mass to become light enough to achieve sta-
bility in the form of a neutron star or a white dwarf. The ﬁnal fate of
collapse is then a spacetime singularity of inﬁnite curvature and den-
sity. Quantum gravity effects will be important in the advanced stages of
such a collapse at the scales of Planck length. When taken into account,
these may avoid the singularity, but any deﬁnite formulation of this
idea is far from achieved and calls for an as-yet non-existent quantum
gravity theory.

192
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
In any case, a region of matter as compact as on the order of Planck
lengths where quantum gravity effects become important may be con-
sidered a spacetime singularity for all practical purposes. If such a
singularity is always covered by an event horizon and hidden within
a black hole, as happens for the spherically symmetric homogeneous
dust collapse, the censorship holds. On the other hand, the occurrence
of a naked singularity gives us the possibility of observing super-ultra-
dense regions in the Universe and the physics taking place there. For
both possible outcomes of collapse of a dying massive star, namely black
hole or naked singularity, we ﬁnd the formation of a singularity, a wad
of matter so dense that the laws of physics break down and we need new
laws to describe it. Anything that hits the singularity is destroyed.
In the case of a black hole forming, the singularity is ‘clothed’ by the
event horizon. Nothing that falls through this surface can ever get back
out, and no information escapes. On the other hand, objects that fall
toward a naked singularity, visible to outside observers, can in princi-
ple reverse course right up to the moment of impact. Conventional
wisdom has it that a large star eventually collapses to a black hole,
but new theoretical models that we have discussed here suggest that
it might instead become a naked singularity. Sorting out what hap-
pens is one of the most important unresolved problems in astrophysics
and cosmology. The discovery of naked singularities would transform
the search for a uniﬁed theory of physics, not least by providing direct
observational tests of such a theory.
As discussed above, it is possible that when we have a reasonable
and complete quantum theory of gravity available, spacetime singular-
ities, whether naked or hidden inside black holes, will be resolved. As
of now, it remains an open question whether quantum gravity will re-
move singularities. The occurrence of spacetime singularities could be
a purely classical phenomenon, and whether they are naked or covered
should not be relevant, because quantum gravity will possibly remove
them all.
In any case, the important and real issue is whether the extreme
strong-gravity regions formed due to gravitational collapse are visible to
faraway observers. It is quite clear that the gravitational collapse would
certainly proceed classically, at least till quantum gravity starts govern-
ing and dominating the dynamical evolution at the scales on the order
of the Planck length, i.e. till the extreme gravity conﬁgurations have
already developed due to collapse. The point is, it is the visibility or

Singularity and Quantum Gravity
193
Collapsing
matter
Naked singularity
Black hole
Quantum gravity
fuzzy region
Event
horizon
Event
horizon
Figure 9.1 Even if a naked singularity is resolved by the quantum gravity
effects which are inevitable in super-high-energy domains, the ultra-strong-
gravity region that develops during gravitational collapse will still be visible
to external observers in the Universe. This is quite opposite to the black hole
scenario where such a possibility can never be realized.
otherwise of such ultra-dense regions that is under discussion, whether
they be classical or quantum (see Fig. 9.1).
What is important is that classical gravity implies the existence of
ultra-strong gravity regions, where both classical and quantum gravity
come into their own. In fact, if naked singularities do develop during
gravitational collapse, then in a literal sense we come face to face with
the laws of quantum gravity, whenever such an event occurs in the
Universe. In this way, the gravitational collapse phenomenon has the
potential of providing us with a possibility of actually testing the laws of
quantum gravity. In the case of a black hole developing during the col-
lapse of a ﬁnite-sized object such as a massive star, such strong-gravity
regions are necessarily hidden behind an event horizon of gravity, and
this would be well before the physical conditions became extreme near
the spacetime singularity. In that case, quantum effects, even if they
caused qualitative changes closer to the singularity, will be of no phys-
ical consequence, as no causal communications are then allowed from
such regions.
On the other hand, if the causal structure were that of a naked
singularity, then the communications from such a quantum gravity-
dominated extreme-curvature ball would be visible in principle.
This will be so either through direct physical processes near a

194
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
strong-curvature naked singularity or via secondary effects, such as the
shocks produced in the surrounding medium.
In view of recent results on gravitational collapse, and various prob-
lems with the black hole paradigm, a possibility worth considering is
the delay or avoidance of horizon formation as the star evolves while
collapsing under gravity. This happens when collapse into a naked
singularity takes place, where the horizon does not form early enough
or is avoided. In such a case, in the late stages of collapse, a star radiating
away most of its mass might offer a way out of the black hole conun-
drums, while also resolving the singularity issue, because now there is
no mass left to form the curvature singularity. The purpose is to re-
solve the black hole paradoxes and avoid the singularity, either visible or
within a black hole, which actually indicates the breakdown of physical
theory. The current work on gravitational collapse suggests interesting
possibilities in this direction.
Quantum Stars?
We could say quite realistically that a laboratory similar to that provided
by the early Universe is created during the collapse of a massive star.
However, the Big Bang, which is also a naked singularity in that it is
in principle visible to all observers, happened only once in the life of
the Universe and is therefore a unique event. But a naked singularity of
gravitational collapse could offer an opportunity to explore and observe
the quantum gravity effects every time a massive star in the Universe
ends its life.
The important questions we could ask are: If in realistic astrophysical
situations the star terminates as a naked singularity, would there be any
observable consequences which reﬂect the quantum gravity signatures
in the ultra-strong-gravity region? Do naked singularities have physical
properties different from those of a black hole? Such questions underlie
our study of gravitational collapse.
Let us consider the scenario when a collapsing star terminates as a
naked singularity, making the ultra-super-strong-gravity regions visi-
ble to external observers. In this context, we have considered a cloud
that has collapsed into a naked singularity ﬁnal state, and introduced
quantum gravity effects as suggested by the loop quantum gravity for-
malism. What we found was that the quantum effects generated an
extremely powerful repulsive force within the cloud. Classically the

Quantum Stars?
195
cloud would have terminated as a naked singularity, but quantum ef-
fects caused a burstlike emission of matter in the very last phases of
collapse, thus dispersing away the star and dissolving the naked singu-
larity. The density remained ﬁnite and the singularity was avoided. We
could possibly expect this to be a basic feature of other quantum gravity
theories as well.
For a realistic star, its catastrophic collapse at the end of its life-cycle
takes place in a matter of seconds. A star that has lived millions of years
collapses in only tens of seconds. It is shown by the above results that in
the very last fraction of a microsecond, almost a quarter of its total mass
must be emitted due to quantum effects. Therefore this would appear
like a massive abrupt burst to an external observer far away. Typically,
such a burst would also carry with it speciﬁc signatures of quantum
effects taking place in such ultra-dense regions. In our case, these in-
cluded a sudden dip in the intensity of emission, just before the ﬁnal
burstlike evaporation due to quantum gravity.
The question is whether such unique astrophysical signatures may be
detected by modern experiments and observations. In that case we may
ask what they would reveal about quantum gravity, and whether there
are any new insights into other aspects of cosmology and fundamental
theories of physics such as string theory.
What we have found is that the stage at which the burst occurs
during the gravitational collapse and the energy emitted depend on a
quantization parameter in the theory. It is interesting to note that for
all theoretically favored choices of this parameter the energy emitted
in the radiation would be extreme. The emission mechanism of the
burst must be further investigated. The constituents of such a burst
may include extreme-energy gamma rays, cosmic rays, and neutrinos.
This raises the interesting possibility of using upcoming experiments
such as the Extreme Universe Space Observatory (EUSO) hosted by the
JEM space station, which may have the needed sensitivity to provide us
with a test of this prediction. These experiments could provide us with
a proof or signature of quantum gravity. Future astronomical experi-
ments could then constrain the parameters in quantum gravity in the
same way as particle accelerators at CERN and Fermilab constrain the
parameters for the standard model.
Interestingly, these experiments, which may constrain the value of
the quantization parameter in the theory, would also have conse-
quences for cosmology. This is because loop quantum cosmology on

196
A Lab for Quantum Gravity
which our work is based also changes the picture of cosmological dy-
namics in the very early Universe. For example, it can change the
way inﬂation occurs and it has been shown that such a change has
observable signatures in the cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMBR), in the form of a suppression of power at large scales, as
observed by the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP). Ob-
servable effects of quantum gravity in CMBR are also controlled by the
same quantization parameter which determines the details of energy
emission in the burst we have considered, and the way a dying star
would dim before the burst occurs. Thus, any constraints on the quan-
tization parameters would have direct consequences for cosmology as
well as astrophysics.
The key point here is that the very ﬁnal ultra-dense regions of the star
are no longer hidden within a horizon as in the black hole case. There-
fore, the exciting possibility of observing these quantum effects arises
now, independently of the quantum gravity theory used. An astrophys-
ical connection to extreme high energy phenomena in the Universe,
such as gamma ray bursts that have deﬁed any explanation so far, may
not be ruled out. Japanese researchers have also examined the possible
generation of gravity waves from such ultra-strong-gravity regions.
We note that the naked singularity is resolved once the quantum
gravity effects are introduced. Such a resolution of naked singularity
through quantum gravity would be a philosophically satisfying possi-
bility. Then, when a massive star undergoes a gravitational collapse, this
might create a laboratory for quantum gravity in the form of what we
may call a quantum star, which we may possibly access, also suggesting in-
triguing connections to high energy astrophysical phenomena in the
Universe. The present situation poses one of the most interesting chal-
lenges which have emerged through work on gravitational collapse.

N10O
The Frontiers
The work of recent years in gravitation theory and on collapse and
black holes brings out several most intriguing and exciting prospects
and possibilities, at both the theoretical and observational levels. We
discuss here some of these emerging directions.
As an example, an important question is, if naked singularities which
emerge as plausible astrophysical objects do occur in nature, then how
do we distinguish them from their black hole counterparts? Could
major observational missions, the existing ones as well as those com-
ing up, help in this direction? Recent work points to an answer in this
connection and we will consider the developments here as to how to
distinguish black holes and naked singularities observationally.
Other important evolving directions include an increasing attention
to the black hole paradoxes in recent years. While black holes form dur-
ing collapse in gravitation theory, it is being realized that the existence
of event horizons causes some rather fundamental and formidable dif-
ﬁculties, such as the information paradox as well as the teleological
paradoxes. We discuss some of these issues and point out how recent
work on gravitational collapse points to possible resolutions.
Observational Frontiers
It is clear that black holes and naked singularities, as outcomes of a
massive star’s gravitational collapse, are radically different from each
other in their theoretical and basic properties. So their observational
properties should also be quite different. If naked singularities exist in
nature, would they be observationally distinguishable from their black
hole counterparts? Will they offer any unique observational signatures
which we can use to possibly detect them?
Considering the observational aspects of the Universe, the centers of
galaxies are expected to harbor supermassive black holes, or in any case
a huge central massive core. The active galactic nuclei (AGNs) may be
powered by a black hole central engine. It is also believed that powerful

198
The Frontiers
gamma ray bursts originate from the collapse of massive stars. We con-
sider here the implications of recent developments such as these, and
inquire into the possible observational signatures of naked singularities
if they exist in nature.
As for the work on the gravitational collapse of massive stars, its rele-
vance and impact in astrophysics and cosmology should be highlighted.
The main physics excitement is the possible observational consequences
of the physical processes in the super-ultra-dense regions that may
form as a result of a star’s gravitational collapse, and which may be
visible to external observers in the Universe. Apart from this, at a
theoretical level the entire issue is crucial to black hole physics and
relativistic astrophysics, as is widely agreed upon today.
As for the astronomical missions, the basic issue is one of sensitiv-
ity. How accurately and precisely can we measure and determine the
concerned parameters such as rotation? A number of present and fu-
ture astronomical missions could be of help here. One of these is the
square-kilometer array (SKA) radio telescope. It has a collecting area ex-
ceeding a factor of hundred compared to that of other radio telescopes.
SKA astronomers have pointed out they will have the desired sensi-
tivity to determine the vital fundamental issues in gravitation physics,
such as cosmic censorship and no-hair theorems, and to decide on their
validity.
Other missions that could, in principle, provide considerable ob-
servational data are those currently hunting for gravitational waves.
Gravitational wave astronomy will soon probably claim its ﬁrst detec-
tion of waves. In coming years the ﬁrst observations should be made
by experiments such as LIGO and VIRGO, which are currently just
below the threshold for observation. Then gravitational wave astron-
omy will become an active ﬁeld with possibly large amounts of data to
be checked against theoretical predictions, which will almost certainly
have a strong impact on open theoretical issues such as the cosmic
censorship problem.
Testing Censorship using Astronomical
Observations
With many high power technology missions to observe the Cosmos,
can we not just observe the skies carefully to determine the validity of
cosmic censorship? What could astronomical observations possibly tell
us about censorship and its validity?

Super-Kerr Geometries
199
To answer these questions, ﬁrst, we need to distinguish the two
main candidates for naked singularities, which are quite different from
each other and bear rather different observational signatures. The ﬁrst,
which has been discussed in detail already, is the naked singularity that
results at the end of a spherical collapse. When we are dealing with a
star’s collapse, a naked singularity will happen at the center of the col-
lapsing cloud and eventually will most likely be covered by the event
horizon at the end of the collapse. This is a transient event and so its
observational signature may be in the form of a short-lived explosive
event. Similar phenomena have been observed in the Universe, for ex-
ample gamma ray bursts, which are believed to originate from the core
collapse of massive stars. However, a link between such events and the
possible existence of a naked singularity at the core of the collapse has
not been thoroughly investigated.
On the other side, we have scenarios such as the super-spinning
Kerr solution or some axially symmetric vacuum metrics. These are de-
rived as exact solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations and they generally
present naked singularities. We do not know yet whether such conﬁg-
urations arise from a dynamical process such as collapse. So one could
ask whether these metrics could represent some real object existing in
the Universe. How these kind of objects form from the collapse of an
initially regular star is still unanswered and little is known about the
behavior of a realistic source during the ﬁnal stages of collapse. How-
ever, recently researchers have investigated these vacuum solutions in
order to understand what observational properties they might have and
to see whether they could be detected by current observations.
The point is that if we see objects with sufﬁciently high angular
momentum compared to their mass, then the possibility of the non-
existence of an event horizon increases drastically, and we may be able
to say whether naked singularities exist in astrophysical reality. The
prime survey targets here include the innermost regions of our galaxy
and globular clusters, which are vast collections of the oldest stars.
Super-Kerr Geometries
The rotating Kerr metric is a solution for a source with angular
momentum. Here the nature of a compact object, or the super-massive
central object at the center in a galaxy, is decided by the ratio of its mass

200
The Frontiers
and the spin angular momentum per unit mass. For a rotating object
described by the Kerr metric, if the ratio of angular momentum to mass
is smaller than 1, then this is a black hole, but for a larger ratio it is
a naked singularity, as the event horizon then does not exist. Such a
Kerr naked singularity could form from three different processes. The
ﬁrst is the complete collapse of a rotating star with mass exceeding the
neutron star limit. The possibility that collapse of such an object forms
a super-spinning Kerr metric has been suggested by researchers and
has been also investigated in some numerical simulations. Also, a Kerr
naked singularity can form by the inﬂow of angular momentum due to
accreting particles or the merger of rapidly spinning compact objects.
We could measure the mass and spin ratios for compact objects and
for the galactic center. There have been suggestions to use the shadow
cast by the compact object to test this ratio in stellar-mass objects, or
using the X-ray energy spectrum emitted by the accretion disk might
also be useful. It is also possible to use certain observable properties of
gravitational lensing that depend upon the rate of spin. A number of
proposals to measure this carefully have been made by Andrzej Krolak
using pulsar observations, gravitational waves, and the spectra of X-ray
binaries.
Could such naked singularities form in some realistic physical pro-
cesses? From the measurement of X-ray binary systems there are indi-
cations that black holes with a mass-to-spin ratio very close to unity
exist in the Universe. Furthermore, compact objects such as neutron
stars with very high spin can also exist in nature. It would also be inter-
esting to study how the spin of an object is affected when it undergoes
an inﬂow of mass and angular momentum due to an accretion disk.
Such inﬂows have been studied in order to understand whether the
particles falling onto a black hole can contribute to increasing the an-
gular momentum, thus reaching the critical limit and removing the
horizon.
The idea of over-spinning a black hole can be traced back to a
thought experiment proposed by Robert Wald and it has important im-
plications for cosmic censorship. These are some of the astrophysical
possibilities by which a Kerr singularity, either covered or naked, could
be obtained. If such a process proved to be physically viable, then the
investigation of the observational properties of Kerr naked singularities
would become important for astrophysics. Similarly, the inverse pro-
cedure has also been investigated, amounting to slowing down a Kerr

Observable Signatures
201
naked singularity to a black hole by means of infalling counter-rotating
particles, which has a greater efﬁciency than the opposite process.
Studies have been carried out to understand how the process of
angular momentum transfer works during the merger of two compact
objects such as neutron stars with high spin. If the angular momentum
is not dissipated away during the merger, these events could give rise to
a ﬁnal conﬁguration in the form of a super-spinning Kerr singularity.
Numerical simulations by Luciano Rezzolla have examined such possi-
bilities and these indicate that the ‘sub-Kerr’ models are more likely to
happen in such processes.
The Kerr metric is, of course, only one of the vacuum exact solutions
with angular momentum. There are other such solutions too, and the
Kerr is only one of the members of this family. Cosimo Bambi recently
tried to study the observational properties of some of these metrics. But
at present it is not clear whether the rotating compact objects in the
Universe are represented by the Kerr metric or some more complicated
axially symmetric spacetimes.
Observable Signatures of Naked Singularities
As we discussed, the black hole has a sibling, the naked singularity.
Physicists long thought and hoped that it did not exist. But the stars
may have a different story to tell. What we may really need is to check
for the observable signatures of naked singularities, if these actually
exist in nature.
We noted that naked singularities that appear in solutions of Ein-
stein’s equations can take various forms. Mainly, they could be ‘long-
lived’ as in the case of super-Kerr solutions, or ‘short-lived’ as in the case
of those forming in certain classes of gravitational collapse models. So
possibly their observational features might be different as well. If such
objects do exist, then it is important in astrophysical considerations
to study how they might interact with the surrounding environment.
This will help us understand whether they can be observed and how.
So the key question when considering observational aspects of naked
singularities is, would there be any observational signatures emerging
from their vicinity, and if so, can we distinguish the signature from that
of other astrophysical objects, such as black holes?
We have noted that the singularity itself is not a part of the space-
time, so we are actually considering the ultra-dense regions near the

202
The Frontiers
singularity where general relativity breaks down and quantum grav-
itational effects become operational. So we can argue that quantum
gravity theory is needed to resolve the quantities that diverge and make
predictions on the observational signature of such objects. But a naked
singularity may present some observable features at the classical level
in view of its distinct causal structure. To check the observable features
of a naked singularity, we can consider relativistic effects at extremely
high densities, or study effects due to modiﬁed theories of gravity for
interiors with very strong ﬁelds, or model the possible quantum grav-
ity effects either in the semiclassical approximation or by adapting
theories such as loop quantum gravity or string gravity, at least for some
toy models.
Where could the observational signatures of naked singularities lie?
If we consider naked singularities that appear as collapse end-states,
we need to consider explosive and high energy events in the Universe.
These models expose the ultra-high-density region at the time of for-
mation of the singularity while the outer shells are still falling inward.
In such a case, powerful shockwaves emanating from the super-dense
region at scales smaller than the Schwarzschild radius, possibly due to
quantum effects or repulsive classical effects, and collisions of particles
near the Cauchy horizon could have effects on the outer layers. These
would be quite different from the black hole formation case, where
the most dense regions are conﬁned within the horizon and do not
communicate with the exterior.
On the other hand, naked singularities such as those of the
super-spinning Kerr solution will have different kinds of observational
signatures. The most prominent features would be how the singularity
could affect incoming particles, in the form of light bending in gravi-
tational lensing, in particle collisions close to the singularity, or in the
properties of accretion disks, as we will discuss later.
A short-lived naked singularity should look more like a transient
event. The search for cosmic point sources and transient events has
been, of course, going on for many years. For example, the construc-
tion of the ice cube experiment at the Amundsen–Scott South Pole
station was completed some time ago. The detector has thousands of
photomultipliers deployed and buried in ice at about two kilometers.
One of the main goals of the ice cube experiment is to detect astro-
physical sources of high energy neutrinos and to eventually identify
the sources of high energy cosmic radiation. Also, using timing and

Observable Signatures
203
directional information from other telescopes, more focused searches
for neutrinos in coincidence with observed events such as gamma ray
bursts (GRBs), active galactic nuclei (AGN), pulsars, and other sources
could be made. Important information on the nature of sources might
emerge from such analysis.
Also, GRB astronomy is progressing well with instruments such as
the Fermi Gamma Ray Space Telescope. GRBs are now known to be
certainly the most powerful explosions in the Universe. They release
an energy of something like 1051 ergs in tens of seconds in gamma rays.
As of now, the most distant measured redshift for GRBs is close to 9 or
even of order 10 for some galaxies. The detectability of GRBs at such
high redshifts encourages us to believe that they may become impor-
tant cosmological probes. The origin of the bursts lasting longer than
a few seconds is now believed to be a core collapse supernova of a mas-
sive, rapidly rotating star. On the other hand, shorter events could be
generated from neutron stars or black hole mergers.
While objects such as black holes are frequently invoked to explain
the dynamics of GRBs, as yet no clear theoretical understanding of
them is available. It is, however, clear that the gravitational collapse
of massive stars at the end of their life-cycles is the root cause of the
long GRBs. As black holes and naked singularities are the natural
outcome of such a collapse, it is certainly interesting to ask whether
GRB explosions exhibit the observational signatures of naked singu-
larities. Although researchers have looked into this question in some
detail, a more extensive analysis of different aspects of the problem is
necessary.
As for the experimental and observational side, it would be good to
know in the collapse ending in a naked singularity, whether we are
able to make an estimate of the range of expected gamma and neu-
trino luminosities, and the corresponding spectra, as produced by such
an ultra-dense ﬁreball, which is the naked singularity. It would also be
good to assess the star mass range that would lead to such a ﬁreball, or
what is even better, the proper event rate in time and a volume of space,
at the present epoch, so that a ﬂux can be estimated.
From an experimental perspective, the prediction of a jet of gamma
rays and neutrinos not associated with a visible optical source could be
possible proof of a naked singularity. Questions could be asked, such as
what is the likely energy of the neutrinos? There have been suggestions

204
The Frontiers
from Govind Swarup and others for a search for ultra-high-energy
neutrinos of > 1021 eV, possibly using a multibeam system of the giant
meterwave radio telescope at Pune, and also the Ooty radio telescope
of TIFR. What would be the possibility of ﬁnding a naked singularity
source then?
It is clear that having obtained the theoretical implications from gen-
eral relativity, in the end we must see what the observations imply and
teach us. So far our effort has been to see what Einstein gravity tells us
on the problem of collapse, and the physicists have been busy exploring
the models available within its framework. The theoretical ﬁndings so
far and the observational prospects emerging could bring new young
researchers closer to the problem of cosmic censorship.
Distinguishing Black Holes and
Naked Singularities
The black hole candidates from observations belong to mainly two
classes. These are stellar-mass black holes that form either from the
collapse of very massive stars or from merger and accretion processes.
When they have an orbiting companion, we can measure their mass
from the orbital periods of the companion. Similar measurement can
be made when the black hole is surrounded by a gas disk. Then there are
supermassive black holes possibly at the center of galaxies. Their total
mass can be estimated from the orbital period of nearby stars, which is
typically in millions of solar masses. For both kinds of black hole candi-
dates the angular momentum can be inferred from the analysis of the
observed X-ray emission. But this measurement would rely on some
assumptions and it is not clear whether Kerr naked singularities would
present a similar spectrum.
The idea behind such investigations is to examine the physical re-
ality of naked singularities. From works such as these, we see that
naked singular spacetimes cannot be ruled out with the present knowl-
edge that we have of these sources. These theoretical models provide a
framework for testing observations coming from stellar and supermas-
sive black hole candidates. In fact, some observations in the millimeter
wavelength of the supermassive object at the galactic center suggest
that the Kerr limit might be broken.
As for the naked singularity, the key question is what could
be observed that would distinguish between black hole and naked

Distinguishing Black Holes and Naked Singularities
205
singularity? While gravitational collapse has been investigated exten-
sively over the past decades within the framework of gravitation theory,
what needs to be explored are the observable signatures that would dis-
tinguish black holes from naked singularities, which are hypothetical
astrophysical objects in nature predicted by the gravitation theory. We
must then explore what special astrophysical consequences the latter
may have.
We discussed earlier the existence, and then the genericity and sta-
bility of occurrence, of naked singularities in a gravitational collapse.
As for singularities that result from collapse which may have observa-
tional signatures in the form of an explosive event, at present we do not
know exactly how they would look different from an explosive event
originating from collapse where the central ultra-high-dense region is
a black hole.
It can be argued that gravity is attractive and nothing opposes gravity
at the very last stages of collapse, so nothing could in principle come
out of the singular central region that develops at the end of collapse.
Also, the core of a collapsing star would be so dense that the mean-free
path of a particle trying to escape would be extremely short, so perhaps
it is unlikely that anything can escape from that region. On the other
hand, at present we are not able to consider quantum effects that appear
at the core when density reaches critical values. Possibly these will give
rise to strong negative pressures that can disrupt collapse and create a
shockwave that might propagate to the outer shells, thus dissipating
away the mass of the star.
Also, the simulations of core collapse supernovae ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
duplicate what happens at the last stages of collapse. They ﬁnd some en-
ergy missing in such a way that the explosion cannot, in fact, take place.
So it is possible, in principle, that this energy may come from a shock-
wave emanating from the central non-trapped ultra-dense region, and
that naked singularities could, in fact, trigger the type II supernovae. At
present, this is a matter of speculation and if we are to distinguish black
holes fromnaked singularities observationally, it might help to consider
axially symmetric naked singular solutions such as the Kerr spacetime.
In such a case, assuming that a Kerr naked singularity or some other
object with a visible singularity exists in the Universe, we may ask: How
can we distinguish it from a black hole or another compact object of the
same mass? At present, there are three main observational possibilities
that can be used to distinguish a naked singularity from a black hole.

206
The Frontiers
Accretion Disk Properties
The ﬁrst one is the study of accretion disks. It has been shown that the
accretion properties of particles falling onto a naked singularity would
be very different from those of a black hole of the same mass, and that
the resulting accretion disks would be observationally very different in
each case. The properties of accretion disks have been studied in terms
of radiant energy, ﬂux, and luminosity, in a Kerr-like geometry with a
naked singularity and the differences from a black hole accretion disk
have been investigated.
Also, a naked singularity gives rise to powerful repulsive forces that
create an outﬂow of particles from the accretion disk on the equatorial
plane. This outﬂow, which is not present in the black hole case, could
be, in principle, distinguished from the jets of particles believed to be
ejected from a black hole’s polar region and which are due to strong
electromagnetic ﬁelds. Further, when charged test particles are con-
sidered, the accretion disk properties for the naked singularity in the
Reissner–Nördstrom spacetime are seen to be observationally different
from those of black holes.
Gravitational Lensing
Another way of distinguishing black holes from naked singularities
would be to use gravitational lensing. It has been argued by researchers
that in many important cases the lensing features of light passing close
to a naked singularity will be observationally different from those of a
black hole. Several different conﬁgurations have been studied, includ-
ing a Kerr-like solution of Einstein’s equations for the center of galaxies
and the lensing properties were studied. It was found that the behav-
ior of the bending angle of light rays will be affected differently in
each case. This would make these objects observationally different from
black holes. The possibility is that if the center of a galaxy is rotating fast
enough to harbor a naked singularity, the observational signatures will
manifest in gravitational lensing.
Particle Collisions near a Naked Singularity
Finally, a third way of distinguishing black holes from naked singu-
larities is from particle collisions and particle acceleration near the
singularity. It is actually possible that the repulsive effects due to a
singularity can deviate a class of infalling particles, making them out-
going eventually. These could then collide with some other ingoing

Shockwaves near a Singularity?
207
particle and the energy of collision could be arbitrarily large. This en-
ergy depends on the impact parameter of the outgoing particle with
respect to the singularity. The net effect is thus creating a very high-
energy collision similar to that of an immense particle accelerator,
which would be impossible in the vicinity of a Kerr black hole. In recent
years such possibilities have been examined in detail.
Shockwaves near a Singularity?
We are investigating the question here as to how would an event that
leads to a naked singularity be observationally distinguished from one
that will be shrouded by a horizon. Can one be quantitative, even in the
framework of a thought experiment?
Apart from what we discussed earlier, a possibility that may arise
is would there be shocks generated within the cloud in later collapse
stages? Let us consider a collapse event that goes to a naked singularity.
Basically, this means that as the collapse progresses, there is no light or
matter trapping developing. As a result, the super-ultra-dense regions
forming in collapse are visible in principle and no longer wrapped under
horizons. Now we know from our detailed collapse studies that basic-
ally this happens because of inhomogeneities in densities and pressure
proﬁles close to the center of the cloud. As the current physics of shock-
waves tell us, in the ultra-dense regions, such inhomogeneities would
give rise to powerful shocks. Can these shocks be used to blow away
most of the star during the very late stages of collapse? In this thought
experiment, the star collapses, and in the very ﬁnal stages, close to
the visible singularity formation, a powerful shock develops due to in-
homogeneity (see Fig. 10.1). So, in a matter of these ﬁnal seconds, much
of the star’s mass is blown off, and we can probably estimate the mass
and radiation thrown out to make it quantitative. Such a phenomenon
also perhaps answers the question as to how the naked singularity event
will be different from the black hole one, where no such phenomena
can, in principle, take place.
We have several astrophysical images from the Hubble Space Tele-
scope, and also other astronomical missions have obtained images
which vividly display astrophysical shocks. Such shockwaves pro-
duce glowing ﬁlaments of gas, for example, and one of the brightest
supernova of 2007 provided a very interesting picture. It would be
interesting to examine the connection of these events to gravitational
collapse.

208
The Frontiers
Shock wave
Infalling material
Singularity
Outgoing
material
Figure 10.1 Shockwaves near a naked singularity, an artist’s impression (Scien-
tiﬁc American, Feb 2009; Kenn Brown, Mondolithic Studio).
What we need is somehow to get a picture of the geometry around
a naked singularity using appropriate astrophysical phenomena as basic
inputs. We need to make use of actual astrophysical observations of the
compact gravitationally collapsing objects, and try to obtain a picture
of a singularity’s surroundings as it forms during a massive star’s dy-
namical collapse. Is it possible that a key physical implication of a naked
singularity could be very powerful shockwaves from its vicinity? This
may characterize the geometry of the cloud around it. That some of the
most powerful shocks that we observe today in the skies could be naked
singularities may not be ruled out. While this is far from ‘proved’, there
are hardly any very good explanations available for such shocks either.
To look at it another way, the very powerful relativistic shocks gen-
erated due to inhomogeneities and spacetime shear near a singularity
can distort the nearby space enough to allow the matter and light to
be thrown off to the exterior from regions close to the singularity due
to the enormous energy of such shocks. Such a gravity typhoon has
no event horizon cover and so the singularity may become a visible
explosive event.
Black Hole Paradoxes
While black holes have been one of the most spectacular predictions of
the general theory of relativity and play a central role in modern physics
and astrophysics, it has been increasingly realized that they are plagued
by fundamental paradoxes that remain unresolved to this day.

Black Hole Paradoxes
209
First, the black hole event horizon is teleological in nature. This
means that we must know the entire future spacetime of the Universe
to determine the current location of the horizon. This would be es-
sentially impossible. Second, any information which is carried by the
infalling matter is lost once the material falls through the event hori-
zon. The black hole later evaporates by emitting Hawking radiation, but
the lost information does not reappear, which has the rather disturbing
consequence that quantum unitarity is violated.
The standard picture of black hole formation is motivated by the
classic OSD model that studied the collapse of a dust cloud of uniform
density. The key feature of this idealized collapse model, as shown in
Fig. 3.3, is that the event horizon forms already at a spacetime point
where local conditions in the infalling dust cloud are perfectly nor-
mal, and the density and curvature are ﬁnite. The singularity, where
the curvature diverges, forms later in the future. The location of the
horizon depends on the entire future history of infalling matter, includ-
ing matter shells, which fall in at later times and whose very existence
is unknown to the gas falling during collapse.
This illustrates the teleological nature of the event horizon, namely
that its location is determined by the entire future history of spacetime,
a profoundly paradoxical situation. In our view, the teleological para-
dox is essentially caused by the fact that the event horizon is causally
cut off from the singularity, a consequence of the cosmic censorship
assumption.
The second problem is that black holes run into a major conﬂict
with quantum theory. A black hole swallows all information carried
by matter falling in through the event horizon. When the hole sub-
sequently evaporates by emitting Hawking radiation, the mass energy
that was swallowed is returned to the external Universe, but in an un-
correlated mixed form that carries no information. Thus, a black hole
takes in pure quantum states and converts them to mixed states. This
violates quantum unitarity, which is a rather disturbing prospect and is
dubbed the black hole information paradox.
The above paradoxes have attracted considerable attention over the
years and various solutions have been proposed. A rather radical solu-
tion was suggested recently in which the event horizon is replaced by a
ﬁrewall. According to this proposal, an infalling observer encounters
a ﬁrewall of outgoing bolts of radiation at the horizon and is de-
stroyed. Thus, the event horizon is replaced by a curvature singularity,

210
The Frontiers
which is the ﬁrewall associated with outgoing radiation at the hori-
zon. The information carried in by the observer is absorbed at the
ﬁrewall and is presumably returned via pure quantum states when the
singularityradiates or the hole evaporates, thus solving the information
paradox. Proponents of the ﬁrewall hypothesis present it as the most
conservative resolution of the information paradox.
The ﬁrewall proposal, however, faces several objections, including
the fact that CPT invariance (charge, parity and time reversal invari-
ance) of quantum gravity rules out the model. In our view, the most
serious problem is the fact that the ﬁrewall is by construction located at
the event horizon, but the location of the horizon is determined tel-
eologically. Somehow, the ﬁrewall singularity must sense the future
spacetime and thereby decide where it ought to be located. There is no
information, either under local conditions of the collapsing matter or
in signals received from the past, that provides any indication that a
ﬁrewall must form.
As an alternative to the ﬁrewall model, Stephen Hawking recently
proposed that gravitational collapse produces only an apparent hori-
zon but not a true event horizon, and that therefore no information
needs to be lost in the collapse. In order to avoid the horizon, Hawking
suggests that the region of the collapsed object inside the event horizon
develops a chaotic metric and matter ﬁelds. Such a chaotic collapsed
object would radiate chaotically but deterministically, so quantum
unitarity is preserved. However, the chaos model again suffers from
the teleological problem. Chaos must be generated at and inside the
horizon, but the puzzle is how does the infalling material know that
it should become chaotic when local conditions are perfectly normal
and when the location of the horizon must be determined by all of
the future. Moreover, for near-spherically symmetric collapse models
such as those considered here, any chaos is likely to be restricted to
regions close to the singularity, and the causal structure of the solu-
tion does not permit signals to propagate from this region out to the
horizon.
It would seem, however, that the problems described above arise
as a result of assuming CCC, which has been taken often as a foun-
dational principle for black hole physics. The CCC, motivated by the
OSD model, suggests that the singularity is always cut off from the ex-
ternal Universe. This has the profound consequence that it rules out
any signals or communication from the singularity or its vicinity to
the event horizon. In other words, no worldline at the horizon ever

Black Hole Paradoxes
211
receives any information from the past about the singularity. The only
way the horizon can ﬁnd out about the existence of the singularity is by
receiving information from the future, again causing the teleological
problem.
We could suggest that this is possibly the root cause of the black hole
paradoxes that we are facing today. Recently, Ramesh Narayan and I
proposed that the above paradoxes are restricted to a particularly ideal-
ized class of collapse models and black holes in which the event horizon,
which deﬁnes the boundary of the black hole, forms initially, and the
singularity in the interior of the black hole forms at a later time. In
contrast, gravitational collapse under more reasonable and physically
more realistic initial conditions often leads to models in which the event
horizon and the singularity form simultaneously. In such a case, we
may mitigate the causality and teleological paradoxes and at the same
time the two recently proposed solutions to the information paradox,
namely the ‘ﬁrewall’ and ‘classical chaos’, are supported.
A reasonable alternative would emerge if we agree that any solution
to the information paradox, such as ﬁrewall or chaos, requires informa-
tion to be received at the horizon about the existence of a singularity
in the spacetime, and moreover, that this information should be re-
ceived via signals from the past. If such signals are able to reach the
event horizon, they could carry information related to ‘new physics’
that might emerge in the vicinity of the singularity due to the extreme
nature of all physical quantities there, and this information could po-
tentially provide a causal trigger to generate either a ﬁrewall or chaos.
By this reasoning, cosmic censorship and ﬁrewalls or chaos are mu-
tually incompatible, since cosmic censorship requires the future of a
worldline to determine its present behavior, which is a teleological
communication.
As we have discussed here, it is now known that for large classes of
physically reasonable and realistic gravitational collapse models cosmic
censorship is transcended. In these solutions, the event horizon either is
delayed or does not form at all, allowing a naked spacetime singularity
to be visible to the external Universe. Moreover, such solutions are by
no means ﬁne-tuned. They occur under a wide range of physically rea-
sonable initial conditions. For such more realistic collapse models, the
causal structure is typically as shown in Fig. 5.3.
The key difference from the diagram in Fig. 3.3 for this scenario is
that the event horizon now originates at the singularity itself, and the
singularity becomes naked. Signals emitted at or near the singularity

212
The Frontiers
can have different histories. An inﬁnite family of rays escapes to inﬁnity,
making the singularity at least partially visible. Some rays are trapped
and fall back on the singularity, and a select few rays travel along the
horizon, connecting the singularity to points on the horizon. The ex-
istence of these last rays, namely the null geodesics that emerge from
the singularity and travel along the event horizon, is the key point we
highlight here.
In this case, the singularity can communicate with the entire event
horizon. So new physics, e.g. ﬁrewall or chaos, could thus be triggered
on the horizon by signals from the singularity, i.e. from the past. Be-
cause of the presence of a naked singularity, this model violates cosmic
censorship, which is rather restrictive and is conﬁned to special models
such as the OSD case. Correspondingly, there is no teleological para-
dox. A wide range of physically reasonable initial conditions of the cloud
gives collapse with the causal structure shown here.
From the study of many realistic collapse models, it follows that the
causal structure shown in Fig. 5.3 is as plausible as the standard OSD
solution of Fig. 3.3, and possibly more realizable in realistic physical situ-
ations. The model in Fig. 5.3 produces a radically different scenario from
that of the OSD picture of collapse, which has formed the basis of all dis-
cussions so far on the causal structure of black holes, the information
paradox, cosmic censorship, etc. Fluid at the center of the cloud with an
initial density peak no longer enters the horizon when it is physically
very regular with modest density and curvature. Instead, by the time
this matter reaches the horizon, it has already attained extremely high
densities and has an arbitrarily large spacetime curvature. We expect
the matter to behave very much like the hot Big Bang in reverse, and
to become arbitrarily hot and radiation-dominated. Moreover, as the
curvature approaches the Planck scale, or other appropriate scale, new
physical phenomena associated with quantum gravity should emerge.
Most importantly, signals from this ultra-dense region in the quantum
gravity regime will ﬂow out along the horizon, conceivably modifying
physics throughout the horizon.
This could happen in two ways, namely, a causally consistent version
of the ﬁrewall or the chaos model. Both models require some exotic
phenomenon, a singular ﬁrewall or chaotic dynamics, to switch on sud-
denly at the horizon. To trigger such a behavior, a warning of some sort
must reach ﬂuid that is about to cross the horizon. Because of cosmic
censorship, no such warning from the past is possible if the collapse

Black Hole Paradoxes
213
behaves as in Fig. 3.3. In contrast, when the event horizon connects to
the singularity in the past, as in the case of the naked singularity sce-
nario shown in Fig. 5.3, signals from the singularity travel to all points
on the horizon. Since the singularity is a region of extreme physical
conditions corresponding to the quantum gravity regime, signals origi-
nating from here could, in principle, trigger the necessary behavior for
the ﬁrewall and chaos models. We do not as yet know a speciﬁc trigger
mechanism; the focus here is on establishing causality.
In one scenario, the quantum matter at the singularity is radiated
away along outgoing rays. The maximum burst of radiation will argu-
ably be along the event horizon because close to that surface and below
the singularity the densities, pressures, and all other physical quantities
attain their maximum and unbounded values. The ﬁrewall could then
originate at the naked singularity and propagate as a singular wall of
outgoing radiation. Material farther out in the cloud will approach the
ﬁrewall and, even though its own local properties may be quite regular,
when it hits the singularity at the ﬁrewall, it will be absorbed and will
add to the ﬁrewall. We do not have any explanation of how the latter
might happen, but neither was an explanation offered with the original
ﬁrewall hypothesis. Our contribution here is to show that it is possible
to have a ﬁrewall originate at a singular point and then evolve causally,
without any need for a teleological connection to the future.
What we mean here is that a ﬁrewall or chaos model could po-
tentially be causally consistent without having to invoke teleological
properties. With reference to chaos from gravitational collapse, we
know that the inner region of Kerr geometry is unstable and might be
chaotic. If the collapse of a massive rotating star results in a conﬁgura-
tion described by the Kerr metric on the outside, this may offer a way
of producing chaos in the interior, as suggested by Hawking. But the
unstable region does not extend outside the inner horizon and so chaos
cannot propagate all the way to the outer horizon as needed to solve the
information paradox. Thus the chaos model requires some other trig-
ger to generate the necessary turbulence. Our proposal here is a possible
solution.
So it is likely that some of the problems that have plagued black hole
physics might be the result of (i) relying on the classical OSD picture
of gravitational collapse of a constant-density cloud, in which the event
horizon forms much earlier than the singularity, and (ii) assuming that
this model and its associated cosmic censorship describes the generic

214
The Frontiers
behavior of collapse. By making use of physically more realistic grav-
itational collapse models, e.g. those with initial density higher at the
center, a very different picture of black hole formation through col-
lapse emerges in which the horizon and the singularity generically form
at the same epoch. Such models violate cosmic censorship and can
potentially resolve the event horizon and information paradoxes.
Infall into a Black Hole versus Naked Singularity
What it would be like for an observer to fall into a black hole versus
into a naked singularity, and what are the differences? As opposed to
the experience of falling through an event horizon, what would one see
and what tidal forces and other effects would be suffered? There have
been many descriptions of the descent into a black hole and we would
like to know similarly what a naked singularity descent would look like.
We will try to make a few speculative remarks here as to how the
descent into a naked singularity would be different from that for a black
hole. As is known, for the black hole case there is the ‘redshift effect’ as
one goes closer and closer to the event horizon. As the observer nears
the horizon, the light that she emits gets dimmer and dimmer, even-
tually going beyond any observable limit as the person falls into the
black hole. After a ﬁnite time, she is simply out of vision for a faraway
observer. There is no such effect near what would be the horizon in
the naked singularity case. Thus, the observer would be able to con-
vey all the information as she goes closer to the singularity, because
even if bent, the light rays do manage to come out to faraway observers
in this spacetime geometry. In particular, the quantum gravity effects
and signatures happening closer to the singularity can, in principle, be
conveyed to observers far away in the Universe. In both cases, how-
ever, there will be growing spacetime curvatures as the observer nears
the singularity. Thus, at some ﬁnite distance away from the singularity,
the curvatures and densities will be so strong that the observer will be
ripped out of existence.
In the naked singularity case, we could send in an un-manned mis-
sion or a robot to descend into the singularity. Such a robot would be
able to send out signals and information, however close it is to this ob-
ject, as long as it is not destroyed ultimately in the limit very close to
the singularity. But even then and in any case, the information sent
out related to the ultra-strong-gravity regions and the quantum gravity

Infall into a Black Hole
215
signatures obtained will be simply far greater and immense than in
the black hole case, where no information would be available once the
observer is close enough to the horizon.
Suppose a spaceship moves toward a naked singularity. Once it is
close enough, in the same way as usually happens in the black hole case,
a warning message from the central computer of the ship would go off,
namely that the spaceship had begun an unplanned acceleration, just
as if it were close to a planet or a star. If there is a camera pointing in
the direction of the ﬂight, in the black hole case the camera would not
show any such astronomical body close by. However, in the naked sin-
gularity case, the camera pointing the direction of ﬂight would show a
small but rather bright object far away. First, the observer might think
she is approaching a bright star. However, a comparison with availa-
ble stellar spectra in her computer would immediately reveal this is no
ordinary star, because the quantum gravity effects very near the singu-
larity should add very different and novel unexpected features to the
spectrum of the object. The unusual kind of brightness of the object
would be enough to create a suspicion that this is no ordinary star, but
even if not at this stage, soon she would realize she is approaching a
rather novel object.
From the measurements of the acceleration and other parameters,
the scientiﬁc software of the central computer of the spaceship would
measure the total mass of the object harboring the naked singularity at
the center as it may be. As the mission approaches closer to the naked
singularity, the spacetime curvatures and accelerations increase mani-
fold, to millions of times the usual gravitational acceleration on Earth.
The camera now sees a much brighter object at the center. This bright-
ness or the object seen is not actually the naked singularity itself. What
may be seen is the quantum resolved singularity, or the compact quan-
tum gravity region, that we may call a quantum star. The brightness and
luminosity seen is that of the bright accretion disk around this object,
and emissions from the super-ultra-high-energy collisions of particles
happening in the vicinity of the object. The classical ‘naked singular-
ity’, as predicted by the Einstein gravity, by itself does not or need not
emit light or energy directly.
The central computer of the spaceship would analyze the spectra
of the light and emissions received from the vicinity of the naked
singularity and would then ﬁnd many remarkable new features of
super-ultra-high-energy particle collisions near the naked singularity,

216
The Frontiers
a cosmic accelerator as yet unseen in terrestrial experiments. Also, it
may be found that the spectrum contains many remarkable but as
yet totally new and unseen features and signatures, which may be the
characteristics of the quantum gravity processes taking place near the
singularity. These data may contain clues for the construction of a
quantum gravity theory. When the scientists on Earth receive these
data, it would keep them busy for a number of years to devise appro-
priate theories which may possibly fulﬁll our dream of a uniﬁed theory
for nature, and where gravity and the quantum forces come together.
As the spaceship approaches closer and closer, the brightness the
camera sees increases, as the accretion disk gets much brighter and
more luminous. The computer could possibly relay the message:
‘Brighter than a thousand suns . . .’, and unlike the black hole case, this
message may reach the faraway observers in the Universe.
Emerging Perspective
Cosmic censorship has been the foundation for the laws of black holes
such as the area theorem and others, and their astrophysical applica-
tions. But these are not free of major paradoxes. First, all the matter
entering a black hole must collapse into a spacetime singularity of in-
ﬁnite density and curvatures, where all known laws of physics break
down. This is some kind of instability at the classical level itself. This
was a reason why many gravitation theorists of the 1940s and 1950s ob-
jected to black hole formation, and Einstein himself repeatedly argued
against such a ﬁnal fate of a collapsing star, writing a paper in 1939 to
this effect. Second, as is well known and has been widely discussed in
the past few years, a black hole, by potentially destroying information,
appears to contradict the basic principles of quantum theory. In that
sense, the very formation of a black hole with a singularity within it ap-
pears to come laden with inherent problems. It is far from clear how we
would resolve these basic troubles even if censorship were correct.
No doubt, the biggest argument in support of censorship would be
that it would justify and validate the extensive formalism and laws of
black hole physics and its astrophysical applications so far. But with-
out any rigorous formulation and in the absence of any proof, such an
assumption by itself does not carry us too far.
In view of such problems with the black hole paradigm, a possibil-
ity worth considering is the delay or avoidance of horizon formation as

Emerging Perspective
217
the star collapses under gravity. This happens when collapse to a naked
singularity takes place, namely, where the horizon does not form early
enough or is avoided. In such a case, if the star could radiate away most
of its mass in the late stages of collapse, this may offer a way out of
the black hole conundrum, while also resolving the singularity issue,
because now there is no mass left to form the singularity.
Our discussions so far have conveyed that the ﬁnal fate of collapse
is one of the most fundamental issues in current physics of black holes
and cosmology, and there is a broad agreement on this by scientists. This
is also a popular topic of great interest for experts as well as laypersons,
even those who are not physics aﬁcionados, and one may ﬁnd that the
breadth of material and the outreach of the issues is compelling, the
issues treated being at the frontier, and some of the most exciting ones
under current debate in modern physics for justiﬁed reasons. It gen-
erates new and basic thinking on these key problems of fundamental
physics.
Black holes are fundamental to modern physics today. Their con-
nections with both fundamental physics and modern cosmology and
astrophysics are most intriguing. Our goal here has been to convey that
the research in this arena is far from over, and is in fact getting more
interesting by the day. Gravitational collapse of massive stars plays a
key role here, and spacetime singularities may have many more hidden
secrets.
We believe the considerations we have gone through here show that
gravitational collapse, which is essentially the investigation of dynami-
cal evolutions of matter ﬁelds under the force of gravity in a spacetime
Universe, provides one of the most exciting research frontiers in grav-
itation physics and high energy astrophysics. As we have shown, there
are issues here which have deep relevance for both theory and obser-
vational aspects in astrophysics. These problems are of importance for
the basics of gravitation theory and quantum gravity, and have inspired
a philosophical interest and inquiry into the nature and structure of
spacetime, causality, and predictability in the Universe.
Active research is happening in many of these frontline areas as the
discussion here has shown. If we are to list some of the most interesting
topics, from our own personal perspective, these may include genericity
and stability of collapse outcomes in terms of black holes and naked
singularities, examining the quantum gravity effects near spacetime

218
The Frontiers
singularities, observational and astrophysical signatures of the collapse
outcomes, and other related issues.
Speciﬁcally, one of the interesting and important questions is if naked
singularities, which are hypothetical astrophysical objects, do actually
form in nature, what distinct observational signatures would they pres-
ent? In other words, how we would distinguish black holes from naked
singularities is an important issue. There have already been some devel-
opments and efforts on this issue in recent years, as we indicated earlier.
The point here is that there are already very high energy astrophysical
phenomena being observed today, with several observational missions
working from both ground and space. Black holes and naked singular-
ities, which are logical consequences of the general theory of relativity
as we consider the gravitational collapse of a massive star, would appear
to be the leading candidates to explain these phenomena. Thus, the ob-
servational signatures that each of these present, and their astrophysical
consequences, will naturally be of much interest for future theoretical
as well as computational research and for their applications.
In our view, there is much scope for both theoretical and observa-
tional investigations in these frontier areas, which may have much to
reveal about our quest on basic issues in quantum gravity, fundamen-
tal physics, and gravity theories, and toward the expanding frontiers of
modern high energy astrophysical observations.

Bibliographic Notes
We give a few references here which may be useful to a reader who
wants to know more and pursue these issues further, and we mention
some of our work that has been used partly in the presentation here.
1. For several aspects of black holes, gravitational collapse, and re-
lated issues and the development of the subject, we refer to
Kip S. Thorne: Black Holes & Time Warps (W. W. Norton, 1994).
Many intricacies of gravitation theory come out beautifully in the
discussions here.
2. Astrophysical aspects of collapsing stars are very well discussed
by J. C. Wheeler: Cosmic Catastrophes (Cambridge University Press,
2000).
3. More detailed introductions to Einstein gravity can be found in
several excellent texts, e.g. Jim Hartle, Gravity: An Introduction to Ein-
stein’s General Relativity (Addison-Wesley, 2002); Bernard F. Schutz,
First Course in General Relativity (Cambridge University Press, 2012);
and R. Wald, General Relativity (University of Chicago Press, 2010).
4. Additional details including technical aspects of gravitational col-
lapse, cosmic censorship, and various current debates in black
hole physics can be found in the following and the references
cited therein: (i) Pankaj S. Joshi and Ramesh Narayan, ‘Black
Holes, Firewalls and Chaos from Gravitation Collapse’ (e-Print:
arXiv:1402.3055 [hep-th]); (ii) Pankaj S. Joshi and Daniele Malafa-
rina, ‘Recent Developments in Gravitational Collapse and Space-
time Singularities’, IJMPD, 20 (2011), 2641 (e-Print: arXiv:1201.3660
[gr-qc]); (iii) Pankaj S. Joshi, Daniele Malafarina, and Ravindra V.
Saraykar, ‘Genericity Aspects in Gravitational Collapse to Black
Holes and Naked Singularities’, IJMPD, 21 (2012), 1250066 (e-Print:
arXiv:1107.3749 [gr-qc]).
5. Further results on global aspects of gravitation, spacetime singu-
larities, and other related aspects can be obtained from S. W.
Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis: The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime
(Cambridge University Press, 1973), and Pankaj S. Joshi, Global As-
pects in Gravitation and Cosmology (Oxford University Press, 1993), and
Gravitational Collapse and Spacetime Singularities (Cambridge University
Press, 2010).


Index
A
accretion disk, 59
active galactic nuclei, 197
apparent horizon, 147, 210
Ashtekar, Abhay, 185
asymptotic predictability, 57
B
Big Bang, 75
black hole, 12, 47
accretion disk, 206
and genericity, 133
and initial conditions, 130
area theorem, 57
break-up of, 161
information paradox, 209
over-spinning, 200
paradoxes, 170, 208, 211
physics,
astrophysical applications of, 74
primordial, 160
teleological paradox, 211
thermodynamic, 57
Bondi, Hermann, 88
Bonner, Bill, 146
Brahe, Tycho, 19
Brill, Dieter, 189
C
Cardoso, Vitor, 140
Carter, Brandon, 33
Cauchy horizon, 170
Cauchy surface, 170
causality condition, 79
higher order, 68
causality violation, 68
Chandrasekhar limit, 191
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan, 11, 41
chaos model, 213
chaotic collapsed object, 210
Chaplygin gas, 108
Choptuik, Matthew, 116
Christodoulou, Demetrios, 89
classical predictability, 72
collapse
later stages of, 104
numerical simulations of, 113
with non-zero pressure, 104
collapse scenarios, 119
collapse studies, 85
compact object, 200
conformal freedom, 189
Copernican principle, 88
cosmic censorship, 13
and global hyperbolicity, 172
and violation of predictability, 168
astronomical observations, 198
efforts for proof, 84
proof for, 81
reformulation of, 128
status of, 151
strong, 146
weak, 146
cosmic censorship conjecture, 53
cosmic microwave background
radiation, 196
cosmological term, 108
covariant quantization, 183
critical behavior, 116
Cygnus X-1, 59
cylindrical collapse, 111
D
Dadhich, Naresh, 92
dark energy, 4
dark energy star, 158
dark matter, 4
Datt, B., 33
determinism, 177
DeWitt Bryce, 189
differentiable manifold, 24
dust collapse, 116
homogeneous, 87
inhomogeneous, 87
perturbed, 184
Dwivedi, Indresh, 89, 96

222
Index
dynamical evolution
of massive stars, 9
of Universe, 9
E
Eddington, Arthur, 12
Einstein, Albert, 4
Einstein equations, 27
general solution of, 153
electromagnetism, 2
energy condition, 69, 79
equation of state, 107
equilibrium conﬁguration, 118
equivalence principle, 24
escape cone, 55
event horizon, 11, 47, 213
conditions for, 154
teleological nature, 161, 211
Extreme Universe Space Observatory, 195
F
ﬁrewall, 209
Friedmann, Alexander, 32
Friedmann–Robertson–Walker metric, 39
fundamental ﬁelds, 131
future asymptotically predictable, 82
G
gamma metrics, 110
gamma ray bursts, 6, 203
general relativity, 4
generic collapse, 106
genericity
deﬁnition of, 135
geodesic incompleteness, 63
geodesic paths, 63
geodesics, 24
null, 24
timelike, 24
Geroch, Robert, 62
Giambo, Roberto, 105
global hyperbolicity, 170
Gödel, Kurt, 35
Goswami, Rituparno, 107
gravitational collapse, 9
catastrophic, 46
inhomogeneous, 86
physically realistic, 152
pressureless, 47
quantum aspects, 180
spherically symmetric, 86
study of, 102
gravitational lensing, 206
gravitational waves, 115, 198
gravity
alternative theories, 121, 154
higher dimensional, 142
H
Hagedorn, R., 90
Harada, Tomohiro, 105
Hawking, Stephen, 33, 62
Hawking evaporation, 161
Hawking radiation, 34
Hawking–Penrose theorem, 64
high-energy jets, 114
hoop conjecture, 109
Horowitz, Gary, 190
Hubble Space Telescope, 207
hypersurface, 170
I
information paradox, 73
inhomogeneities, 153
initial conditions
perturbations of, 138
J
Jhingan, Sanjay, 105
K
Kepler, Johannes, 19
Kepler’s laws, 19
Kerr, Roy, 111
Kerr black hole, 56
Kerr metric, 200
Kerr singularity, 200
Killing vectors, 110
Krasinski, Andrzej, 88
Kruskal, Martin, 37
L
Lake, Kayll, 89
Landau, Lev, 45
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 42
Lehner, Lius, 114
Lemaitre, George, 88
light cone, 22
linear equation of state, 107

Index
223
loop quantum gravity, 185, 194
Lorentzian metric, 24
M
Maartens, Roy, 92
macrocosm, 4
Magli, Giulio, 105
Malafarina, Daniele, 150
massive star
catastrophic collapse, 46
collapse of, 45
ﬁnal fate of, 45
massless singularity, 141
Maxwell, James Clerk, 2
merger of inspiraling black holes, 114
microcosm, 4
Minowski spacetime, 184
multiverses, 32
N
Nakao, Ken-ichi, 105
naked singularity, 12, 75
accretion disk, 206
and Cauchy horizon, 171
and causality violation, 144, 163
as astrophysical object, 197
as particle accelerator, 167
astrophysical processes near, 129
causal structure, 193
distinguishing from black holes, 204
emission from, 159
energy from, 148
event-like, 202
ever-lasting, 144
formation of, 90
generic, 95
genericity of, 134
globally visible, 146
gravity waves from, 196
infall, 214
Kerr, 205
large redshift, 159
locally visible, 146
object or event, 157
observable signatures, 201
observational aspects and quantum
gravity, 126
observational properties, 77
particle collisions, 207
primordial, 160
quantum explosion of, 161
quantum gravity resolution, 160
strong curvature, 181
Narayan, Ramesh, 57, 165, 211
Narlikar, Jayant, 189
neutron star, 43
Newman, Richard, 89
Newton, Isaac, 19
Newtonian gravity, 21
Newtonian mechanics, 20, 21
no-hair theorem, 112
non-spherical collapse, 109
null paths, 22
null singularities, 143
O
open set, 96, 136
Oppenheimer, Robert, 33
Ori, Amos, 105
OSD model, 48, 53
P
partial Cauchy surface, 82
path integrals, 185
Patil, Mandar, 150
Penrose, Roger, 33, 62
photon sphere, 56
Piran, Tsvi, 105
Planck length, 180, 183
positivity of energy, 64
predictability, 17, 168, 217
deﬁned, 170
Q
quantum black holes, 57
quantum censor, 161
quantum gravity, 189
covariant approach, 184
observable consequences, 194
observational data, 188
signals, 212
quantum star, 13, 215
quantum stars, 194
quantum theory, 6
quantum unitarity, 73, 209
quasi-spherical collapse, 111

224
Index
R
Raychaudhuri, Amal Kumar, 64
Reissner-Nördstrom spacetime, 146, 171
relativistic astrophysics, 41
Rezzolla, Luciano, 114
S
Saraykar, Ravi, 137
Schwarzschild, Karl, 32
Schwarzschild black hole, 49, 54
Schwarzschild metric, 27
Schwarzschild radius, 49
Schwarzschild singularity, 36, 94, 142
Schwarzschild solution, 30
Seifert, Hans, 89
Shapiro, Stuart, 116
shearing effects, 123
shell-crossings, 89
shockwave, 149
singularity
and predictability, 174
as momentary event, 143
Big Bang, 163
big crunch, 163
curvature strength of, 93
debate on, 51
event-like and object-like, 117
existence of, 62
mathematical, 191
nature and structure of, 152
nature of, 64, 88
physical, 191
properties of, 76
quantum effects near, 181
resolution of, 66
shockwaves near, 159, 207
structure of, 141
timelike, 191
singularity theorems, 79
Smolin, Lee, 185
Snyder, Herbert, 33
spacetime
and topology change, 173
continuum, 20
diagram, 21
foliation, 172
globally hyperbolic, 170
higher dimensional, 121
interval, 21
matching to exterior, 155
metric, 21
topology, 29
topology of, 67
spacetime continuum, 23
spacetime foam, 38
spacetime singularity, 62
special relativity, 21
square-kilometer array, 198
stability
deﬁnition of, 164
stability formulation, 106
stable causality, 69
star
ﬁnal fate of, 49
large mass, 43
life of, 42
nuclear process within, 42
small mass, 43
string theory, 186
strong nuclear forces, 182
strong-curvature singularity, 80
supergravity, 184
supernova, 46
Swarup, Govind, 204
Szekeres, G., 37
Szekeres models, 110
T
Teukolsky, Saul, 116
Thorne, Kip, 109
time warps, 32
timelike paths, 22
timelike singularities, 143
Tipler, Frank, 144
Tolman, Richard, 88
topology
for a doughnut, 29
for a sphere, 29
trapped surface, 49, 69
twistor theory, 153
U
Universe, 10
accelerated expansion of, 4
homogeneous and isotropic, 189
predictability of, 168
topology of, 164

Index
225
V
Vaidya, Prahlad, 135
Vaidya radiation collapse, 120
W
Wald, Robert, 200
weak nuclear forces, 182
Weinberg–Salam theory, 182
Weyl metrics, 112
Wheeler, John, 33
white dwarf, 12, 43
Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe, 196
X
X-ray binaries, 200


