
THE COLLECTED ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER

By Arthur Schopenhauer
 
Contents
Preliminary Note
Biographical Note
On Authorship And Style
On Noise
On Reading And Books
The Emptiness Of Existence
On Women
Thinking For Oneself
Short Dialogue On The Indestructibility Of Our True Being By Death
Religion--A Dialogue
A Few Words On Pantheism
The Christian System
Psychological Observations
Metaphysics Of Love
Physiognomy
On Suicide
Counsels and Maxims
Human Nature
Government
Free-Will And Fatalism
Character
Moral Instinct
Ethical Reflections
The Art of Controversy
On The Study Of Latin
On Men Of Learning
On Criticism
On Reputation
On Genius
On the Wisdom of Life
PRELIMINARY.
When Schopenhauer was asked where he wished to be buried, he answered,
"Anywhere; they will find me;" and the stone that marks his grave at Frankfort
bears merely the inscription "Arthur Schopenhauer," without even the date of his
birth or death. Schopenhauer, the pessimist, had a sufficiently optimistic

conviction that his message to the world would ultimately be listened to--a
conviction that never failed him during a lifetime of disappointments, of neglect
in quarters where perhaps he would have most cherished appreciation; a
conviction that only showed some signs of being justified a few years before his
death. Schopenhauer was no opportunist; he was not even conciliatory; he never
hesitated to declare his own faith in himself, in his principles, in his philosophy;
he did not ask to be listened to as a matter of courtesy but as a right--a right for
which he would struggle, for which he fought, and which has in the course of
time, it may be admitted, been conceded to him.
Although everything that Schopenhauer wrote was written more or less as
evidence to support his main philosophical thesis, his unifying philosophical
principle, the essays in this volume have an interest, if not altogether apart, at
least of a sufficiently independent interest to enable them to be considered on
their own merits, without relation to his main idea. And in dissociating them, if
one may do so for a moment (their author would have scarcely permitted it!),
one feels that one enters a field of criticism in which opinions can scarcely vary.
So far as his philosophy is concerned, this unanimity does not exist; he is one of
the best abused amongst philosophers; he has many times been explained and
condemned exhaustively, and no doubt this will be as many times repeated.
What the trend of his underlying philosophical principal was, his metaphysical
explanation of the world, is indicated in almost all the following essays, but
chiefly in the "Metaphysics of Love," to which the reader may be referred.
These essays are a valuable criticism of life by a man who had a wide
experience of life, a man of the world, who possessed an almost inspired faculty
of observation. Schopenhauer, of all men, unmistakably observed life at first
hand. There is no academic echo in his utterances; he is not one of a school; his
voice has no formal intonation; it is deep, full-chested, and rings out its words
with all the poignancy of individual emphasis, without bluster, but with unfailing
conviction. He was for his time, and for his country, an adept at literary form;
but he used it only as a means. Complicated as his sentences occasionally are, he
says many sharp, many brilliant, many epigrammatic things, he has the manner
of the famous essayists, he is paradoxical (how many of his paradoxes are now
truisms!); one fancies at times that one is almost listening to a creation of
Molière, but these fireworks are not merely a literary display, they are used to
illumine what he considers to be the truth. Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai
seul est aimable, he quotes; he was a deliberate and diligent searcher after truth,
always striving to attain the heart of things, to arrive at a knowledge of first
principles. It is, too, not without a sort of grim humour that this psychological
vivisectionist attempts to lay bare the skeleton of the human mind, to tear away

all the charming little sentiments and hypocrisies which in the course of time
become a part and parcel of human life. A man influenced by such motives, and
possessing a frank and caustic tongue, was not likely to attain any very large
share of popular favour or to be esteemed a companionable sort of person. The
fabric of social life is interwoven with a multitude of delicate evasions, of small
hypocrisies, of matters of tinsel sentiment; social intercourse would be
impossible, if it were not so. There is no sort of social existence possible for a
person who is ingenuous enough to say always what he thinks, and, on the
whole, one may be thankful that there is not. One naturally enough objects to
form the subject of a critical diagnosis and exposure; one chooses for one's
friends the agreeable hypocrites of life who sustain for one the illusions in which
one wishes to live. The mere conception of a plain-speaking world is calculated
to reduce one to the last degree of despair; it is the conception of the intolerable.
Nevertheless it is good for mankind now and again to have a plain speaker, a
"mar feast," on the scene; a wizard who devises for us a spectacle of
disillusionment, and lets us for a moment see things as he honestly conceives
them to be, and not as we would have them to be. But in estimating the value of
a lesson of this sort, we must not be carried too far, not be altogether convinced.
We may first take into account the temperament of the teacher; we may ask, is
his vision perfect? We may indulge in a trifling diagnosis on our own account.
And in an examination of this sort we find that Schopenhauer stands the test
pretty well, if not with complete success. It strikes us that he suffers perhaps a
little from a hereditary taint, for we know that there is an unmistakable
predisposition to hypochondria in his family; we know, for instance, that his
paternal grandmother became practically insane towards the end of her life, that
two of her children suffered from some sort of mental incapacity, and that a
third, Schopenhauer's father, was a man of curious temper and that he probably
ended his own life. He himself would also have attached some importance, in a
consideration of this sort, to the fact, as he might have put it, that his mother,
when she married, acted in the interests of the individual instead of
unconsciously fulfilling the will of the species, and that the offspring of the
union suffered in consequence. Still, taking all these things into account, and
attaching to them what importance they may be worth, one is amazed at the
clearness of his vision, by his vigorous and at moments subtle perception. If he
did not see life whole, what he did see he saw with his own eyes, and then told
us all about it with unmistakable veracity, and for the most part simply,
brilliantly. Too much importance cannot be attached to this quality of seeing
things for oneself; it is the stamp of a great and original mind; it is the principal
quality of what one calls genius.

In possessing Schopenhauer the world possesses a personality the richer; a
somewhat garrulous personality it may be; a curiously whimsical and sensitive
personality, full of quite ordinary superstitions, of extravagant vanities, selfish,
at times violent, rarely generous; a man whom during his lifetime nobody quite
knew, an isolated creature, self-absorbed, solely concerned in his elaboration of
the explanation of the world, and possessing subtleties which for the most part
escaped the perception of his fellows; at once a hermit and a boulevardier. His
was essentially a great temperament; his whole life was a life of ideas, an
intellectual life. And his work, the fruit of his life, would seem to be standing the
test of all great work--the test of time. It is not a little curious that one so little
realised in his own day, one so little lovable and so little loved, should now
speak to us from his pages with something of the force of personal utterance, as
if he were actually with us and as if we knew him, even as we know Charles
Lamb and Izaak Walton, personalities of such a different calibre. And this man
whom we realise does not impress us unfavourably; if he is without charm, he is
surely immensely interesting and attractive; he is so strong in his intellectual
convictions, he is so free from intellectual affectations, he is such an ingenuous
egotist, so naïvely human; he is so mercilessly honest and independent, and, at
times (one may be permitted to think), so mistaken.
R.D.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.
Arthur Schopenhauer was born at No. 117 of the Heiligengeist Strasse, at
Dantzic, on February 22, 1788. His parents on both sides traced their descent
from Dutch ancestry, the great-grandfather of his mother having occupied some
ecclesiastical position at Gorcum. Dr. Gwinner in his Life does not follow the
Dutch ancestry on the father's side, but merely states that the great-grandfather
of Schopenhauer at the beginning of the eighteenth century rented a farm, the
Stuthof, in the neighbourhood of Dantzic. This ancestor, Andreas Schopenhauer,
received here on one occasion an unexpected visit from Peter the Great and
Catherine, and it is related that there being no stove in the chamber which the
royal pair selected for the night, their host, for the purpose of heating it, set fire
to several small bottles of brandy which had been emptied on the stone floor. His
son Andreas followed in the footsteps of his father, combining a commercial
career with country pursuits. He died in 1794 at Ohra, where he had purchased
an estate, and to which he had retired to spend his closing years. His wife (the
grandmother of Arthur) survived him for some years, although shortly after his

death she was declared insane and incapable of managing her affairs. This
couple had four sons: the eldest, Michael Andreas, was weak-minded; the
second, Karl Gottfried, was also mentally weak and had deserted his people for
evil companions; the youngest son, Heinrich Floris, possessed, however, in a
considerable degree the qualities which his brothers lacked. He possessed
intelligence, a strong character, and had great commercial sagacity; at the same
time, he took a definite interest in intellectual pursuits, reading Voltaire, of
whom he was more or less a disciple, and other French authors, possessing a
keen admiration for English political and family life, and furnishing his house
after an English fashion. He was a man of fiery temperament and his appearance
was scarcely prepossessing; he was short and stout; he had a broad face and
turned-up nose, and a large mouth. This was the father of our philosopher.
When he was thirty-eight, Heinrich Schopenhauer married, on May 16,
1785, Johanna Henriette Trosiener, a young lady of eighteen, and daughter of a
member of the City Council of Dantzic. She was at this time an attractive,
cultivated young person, of a placid disposition, who seems to have married
more because marriage offered her a comfortable settlement and assured position
in life, than from any passionate affection for her wooer, which, it is just to her
to say, she did not profess. Heinrich Schopenhauer was so much influenced by
English ideas that he desired that his first child should be born in England; and
thither, some two years after their marriage, the pair, after making a détour on
the Continent, arrived. But after spending some weeks in London Mrs.
Schopenhauer was seized with home-sickness, and her husband acceded to her
entreaties to return to Dantzic, where a child, the future philosopher, was shortly
afterwards born. The first five years of the child's life were spent in the country,
partly at the Stuthof which had formerly belonged to Andreas Schopenhauer, but
had recently come into the possession of his maternal grandfather.
Five years after the birth of his son, Heinrich Schopenhauer, in
consequence of the political crisis, which he seems to have taken keenly to heart,
in the affairs of the Hanseatic town of Dantzic, transferred his business and his
home to Hamburg, where in 1795 a second child, Adele, was born. Two years
later, Heinrich, who intended to train his son for a business life, took him, with
this idea, to Havre, by way of Paris, where they spent a little time, and left him
there with M. Grégoire, a commercial connection. Arthur remained at Havre for
two years, receiving private instruction with this man's son Anthime, with whom
he struck up a strong friendship, and when he returned to Hamburg it was found
that he remembered but few words of his mother-tongue. Here he was placed in
one of the principal private schools, where he remained for three years. Both his
parents, but especially his mother, cultivated at this time the society of literary

people, and entertained at their house Klopstock and other notable persons. In
the summer following his return home from Havre he accompanied his parents
on a continental tour, stopping amongst other places at Weimar, where he saw
Schiller. His mother, too, had considerable literary tastes, and a distinct literary
gift which, later, she cultivated to some advantage, and which brought her in the
production of accounts of travel and fiction a not inconsiderable reputation. It is,
therefore, not surprising that literary tendencies began to show themselves in her
son, accompanied by a growing distaste for the career of commerce which his
father wished him to follow. Heinrich Schopenhauer, although deprecating these
tendencies, considered the question of purchasing a canonry for his son, but
ultimately gave up the idea on the score of expense. He then proposed to take
him on an extended trip to France, where he might meet his young friend
Anthime, and then to England, if he would give up the idea of a literary calling,
and the proposal was accepted.
In the spring of 1803, then, he accompanied his parents to London, where,
after spending some time in sight-seeing, he was placed in the school of Mr.
Lancaster at Wimbledon. Here he remained for three months, from July to
September, laying the foundation of his knowledge of the English language,
while his parents proceeded to Scotland. English formality, and what he
conceived to be English hypocrisy, did not contrast favourably with his earlier
and gayer experiences in France, and made an extremely unfavourable
impression upon his mind; which found expression in letters to his friends and to
his mother.
On returning to Hamburg after this extended excursion abroad,
Schopenhauer was placed in the office of a Hamburg senator called Jenisch, but
he was as little inclined as ever to follow a commercial career, and secretly
shirked his work so that he might pursue his studies. A little later a somewhat
unexplainable calamity occurred. When Dantzic ceased to be a free city, and
Heinrich Schopenhauer at a considerable cost and monetary sacrifice transferred
his business to Hamburg, the event caused him much bitterness of spirit. At
Hamburg his business seems to have undergone fluctuations. Whether these
further affected his spirit is not sufficiently established, but it is certain,
however, that he developed peculiarities of manner, and that his temper became
more violent. At any rate, one day in April 1805 it was found that he had either
fallen or thrown himself into the canal from an upper storey of a granary; it was
generally concluded that it was a case of suicide.
Schopenhauer was seventeen at the time of this catastrophe, by which he
was naturally greatly affected. Although by the death of his father the influence
which impelled him to a commercial career was removed, his veneration for the

dead man remained with him through life, and on one occasion found expression
in a curious tribute to his memory in a dedication (which was not, however,
printed) to the second edition of Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. "That I
could make use of and cultivate in a right direction the powers which nature
gave me," he concludes, "that I could follow my natural impulse and think and
work for countless others without the help of any one; for that I thank thee, my
father, thank thy activity, thy cleverness, thy thrift and care for the future.
Therefore I praise thee, my noble father. And every one who from my work
derives any pleasure, consolation, or instruction shall hear thy name and know
that if Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer had not been the man he was, Arthur
Schopenhauer would have been a hundred times ruined."
The year succeeding her husband's death, Johanna Schopenhauer removed
with her daughter to Weimar, after having attended to the settlement of her
husband's affairs, which left her in possession of a considerable income. At
Weimar she devoted herself to the pursuit of literature, and held twice a week a
sort of salon, which was attended by Goethe, the two Schlegels, Wieland,
Heinrich Meyer, Grimm, and other literary persons of note. Her son meanwhile
continued for another year at the "dead timber of the desk," when his mother,
acting under the advice of her friend Fernow, consented, to his great joy, to his
following his literary bent.
During the next few years we find Schopenhauer devoting himself
assiduously to acquiring the equipment for a learned career; at first at the
Gymnasium at Gotha, where he penned some satirical verses on one of the
masters, which brought him into some trouble. He removed in consequence to
Weimar, where he pursued his classical studies under the direction of Franz
Passow, at whose house he lodged. Unhappily, during his sojourn at Weimar his
relations with his mother became strained. One feels that there is a sort of
autobiographical interest in his essay on women, that his view was largely
influenced by his relations with his mother, just as one feels that his particular
argument in his essay on education is largely influenced by the course of his own
training.
On his coming of age Schopenhauer was entitled to a share of the paternal
estate, a share which yielded him a yearly income of about £150. He now
entered himself at the University of Göttingen (October 1809), enrolling himself
as a student of medicine, and devoting himself to the study of the natural
sciences, mineralogy, anatomy, mathematics, and history; later, he included
logic, physiology, and ethnography. He had always been passionately devoted to
music and found relaxation in learning to play the flute and guitar. His studies at
this time did not preoccupy him to the extent of isolation; he mixed freely with

his fellows, and reckoned amongst his friends or acquaintances, F.W. Kreise,
Bunsen, and Ernst Schulze. During one vacation he went on an expedition to
Cassel and to the Hartz Mountains. It was about this time, and partly owing to
the influence of Schulze, the author of Aenesidemus, and then a professor at the
University of Göttingen, that Schopenhauer came to realise his vocation as that
of a philosopher.
During his holiday at Weimar he called upon Wieland, then seventy-eight
years old, who, probably prompted by Mrs. Schopenhauer, tried to dissuade him
from the vocation which he had chosen. Schopenhauer in reply said, "Life is a
difficult question; I have decided to spend my life in thinking about it." Then,
after the conversation had continued for some little time, Wieland declared
warmly that he thought that he had chosen rightly. "I understand your nature," he
said; "keep to philosophy." And, later, he told Johanna Schopenhauer that he
thought her son would be a great man some day.
Towards the close of the summer of 1811 Schopenhauer removed to Berlin
and entered the University. He here continued his study of the natural sciences;
he also attended the lectures on the History of Philosophy by Schleiermacher,
and on Greek Literature and Antiquities by F.A. Wolf, and the lectures on "Facts
of Consciousness" and "Theory of Science" by Fichte, for the last of whom, as
we know indeed from frequent references in his books, he had no little contempt.
A year or so later, when the news of Napoleon's disaster in Russia arrived, the
Germans were thrown into a state of great excitement, and made speedy
preparations for war. Schopenhauer contributed towards equipping volunteers
for the army, but he did not enter active service; indeed, when the result of the
battle of Lützen was known and Berlin seemed to be in danger, he fled for safety
to Dresden and thence to Weimar. A little later we find him at Rudolstadt,
whither he had proceeded in consequence of the recurrence of differences with
his mother, and remained there from June to November 1813, principally
engaged in the composition of an essay, "A Philosophical Treatise on the
Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason," which he offered to the
University of Jena as an exercise to qualify for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy, and for which a diploma was granted. He published this essay at his
own cost towards the end of the year, but it seems to have fallen flatly from the
press, although its arguments attracted the attention and the sympathy of Goethe,
who, meeting him on his return to Weimar in November, discussed with him his
own theory of colour. A couple of years before, Goethe, who was opposed to the
Newtonian theory of light, had brought out his Farbenlehre (colour theory). In
Goethe's diary Schopenhauer's name frequently occurs, and on the 24th
November 1813 he wrote to Knebel: "Young Schopenhauer is a remarkable and

interesting man.... I find him intellectual, but I am undecided about him as far as
other things go." The result of this association with Goethe was his Ueber das
Sehn und die Farben ("On Vision and Colour"), published at Leipzig in 1816, a
copy of which he forwarded to Goethe (who had already seen the MS.) on the
4th May of that year. A few days later Goethe wrote to the distinguished
scientist, Dr. Seebeck, asking him to read the work. In Gwinner's Life we find
the copy of a letter written in English to Sir C.L. Eastlake: "In the year 1830, as I
was going to publish in Latin the same treatise which in German accompanies
this letter, I went to Dr. Seebeck of the Berlin Academy, who is universally
admitted to be the first natural philosopher (in the English sense of the word
meaning physiker) of Germany; he is the discoverer of thermo-electricity and of
several physical truths. I questioned him on his opinion on the controversy
between Goethe and Newton; he was extremely cautious and made me promise
that I should not print and publish anything of what he might say, and at last,
being hard pressed by me, he confessed that indeed Goethe was perfectly right
and Newton wrong, but that he had no business to tell the world so. He has died
since, the old coward!"
In May 1814 Schopenhauer removed from Weimar to Dresden, in
consequence of the recurrence of domestic differences with his mother. This was
the final break between the pair, and he did not see her again during the
remaining twenty-four years of her life, although they resumed correspondence
some years before her death. It were futile to attempt to revive the dead bones of
the cause of these unfortunate differences between Johanna Schopenhauer and
her son. It was a question of opposing temperaments; both and neither were at
once to blame. There is no reason to suppose that Schopenhauer was ever a
conciliatory son, or a companionable person to live with; in fact, there is plenty
to show that he possessed trying and irritating qualities, and that he assumed an
attitude of criticism towards his mother that could not in any circumstances be
agreeable. On the other hand, Anselm Feuerbach in his Memoirs furnishes us
with a scarcely prepossessing picture of Mrs. Schopenhauer: "Madame
Schopenhauer," he writes, "a rich widow. Makes profession of erudition.
Authoress. Prattles much and well, intelligently; without heart and soul. Self-
complacent, eager after approbation, and constantly smiling to herself. God
preserve us from women whose mind has shot up into mere intellect."
Schopenhauer meanwhile was working out his philosophical system, the
idea of his principal philosophical work. "Under my hands," he wrote in 1813,
"and still more in my mind grows a work, a philosophy which will be an ethics
and a metaphysics in one:--two branches which hitherto have been separated as
falsely as man has been divided into soul and body. The work grows, slowly and

gradually aggregating its parts like the child in the womb. I became aware of one
member, one vessel, one part after another. In other words, I set each sentence
down without anxiety as to how it will fit into the whole; for I know it has all
sprung from a single foundation. It is thus that an organic whole originates, and
that alone will live.... Chance, thou ruler of this sense-world! Let me live and
find peace for yet a few years, for I love my work as the mother her child. When
it is matured and has come to birth, then exact from me thy duties, taking interest
for the postponement. But, if I sink before the time in this iron age, then grant
that these miniature beginnings, these studies of mine, be given to the world as
they are and for what they are: some day perchance will arise a kindred spirit,
who can frame the members together and 'restore' the fragment of antiquity."[1]
By March 1817 he had completed the preparatory work of his system, and
began to put the whole thing together; a year later Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung: vier Bücher, nebst einem Anhange, der die Kritik der Kantischen
Philosophie enthält ("The World as Will and Idea; four books, with an appendix
containing a criticism on the philosophy of Kant"). Some delay occurring in the
publication, Schopenhauer wrote one of his characteristically abusive letters to
Brockhaus, his publisher, who retorted "that he must decline all further
correspondence with one whose letters, in their divine coarseness and rusticity,
savoured more of the cabman than of the philosopher," and concluded with a
hope that his fears that the work he was printing would be good for nothing but
waste paper, might not be realised.[2] The work appeared about the end of
December 1818 with 1819 on the title-page. Schopenhauer had meanwhile
proceeded in September to Italy, where he revised the final proofs. So far as the
reception of the work was concerned there was reason to believe that the fears of
Brockhaus would be realised, as, in fact, they came practically to be. But in the
face of this general want of appreciation, Schopenhauer had some crumbs of
consolation. His sister wrote to him in March (he was then staying at Naples)
that Goethe "had received it with great joy, immediately cut the thick book, and
began instantly to read it. An hour later he sent me a note to say that he thanked
you very much and thought that the whole book was good. He pointed out the
most important passages, read them to us, and was greatly delighted.... You are
the only author whom Goethe has ever read seriously, it seems to me, and I
rejoice." Nevertheless the book did not sell. Sixteen years later Brockhaus
informed Schopenhauer that a large number of copies had been sold at waste
paper price, and that he had even then a few in stock. Still, during the years
1842-43, Schopenhauer was contemplating the issue of a second edition and
making revisions for that purpose; when he had completed the work he took it to
Brockhaus, and agreed to leave the question of remuneration open. In the

following year the second edition was issued (500 copies of the first volume, and
750 of the second), and for this the author was to receive no remuneration. "Not
to my contemporaries," says Schopenhauer with fine conviction in his preface to
this edition, "not to my compatriots--to mankind I commit my now completed
work, in the confidence that it will not be without value for them, even if this
should be late recognised, as is commonly the lot of what is good. For it cannot
have been for the passing generation, engrossed with the delusion of the
moment, that my mind, almost against my will, has uninterruptedly stuck to its
work through the course of a long life. And while the lapse of time has not been
able to make me doubt the worth of my work, neither has the lack of sympathy;
for I constantly saw the false and the bad, and finally the absurd and senseless,
stand in universal admiration and honour, and I bethought myself that if it were
not the case, those who are capable of recognising the genuine and right are so
rare that we may look for them in vain for some twenty years, then those who
are capable of producing it could not be so few that their works afterwards form
an exception to the perishableness of earthly things; and thus would be lost the
reviving prospect of posterity which every one who sets before himself a high
aim requires to strengthen him."[3]
When Schopenhauer started for Italy Goethe had provided him with a letter
of introduction to Lord Byron, who was then staying at Venice, but
Schopenhauer never made use of the letter; he said that he hadn't the courage to
present himself. "Do you know," he says in a letter, "three great pessimists were
in Italy at the same time--Byron, Leopardi, and myself! And yet not one of us
has made the acquaintance of the other." He remained in Italy until June 1819,
when he proceeded to Milan, where he received distressing news from his sister
to the effect that a Dantzic firm, in which she and her mother had invested all
their capital, and in which he himself had invested a little, had become bankrupt.
Schopenhauer immediately proposed to share his own income with them. But
later, when the defaulting firm offered to its creditors a composition of thirty per
cent, Schopenhauer would accept nothing less than seventy per cent in the case
of immediate payment, or the whole if the payment were deferred; and he was so
indignant at his mother and sister falling in with the arrangement of the debtors,
that he did not correspond with them again for eleven years. With reference to
this affair he wrote: "I can imagine that from your point of view my behaviour
may seem hard and unfair. That is a mere illusion which disappears as soon as
you reflect that all I want is merely not to have taken from me what is most
rightly and incontestably mine, what, moreover, my whole happiness, my
freedom, my learned leisure depend upon;--a blessing which in this world people
like me enjoy so rarely that it would be almost as unconscientious as cowardly

not to defend it to the uttermost and maintain it by every exertion. You say,
perhaps, that if all your creditors were of this way of thinking, I too should come
badly off. But if all men thought as I do, there would be much more thinking
done, and in that case probably there would be neither bankruptcies, nor wars,
nor gaming tables."[4]
In July 1819, when he was at Heidelberg, the idea occurred to him of
turning university lecturer, and took practical shape the following summer, when
he delivered a course of lectures on philosophy at the Berlin University. But the
experiment was not a success; the course was not completed through the want of
attendance, while Hegel at the same time and place was lecturing to a crowded
and enthusiastic audience. This failure embittered him, and during the next few
years there is little of any moment in his life to record. There was one incident,
however, to which his detractors would seem to have attached more importance
than it was worth, but which must have been sufficiently disturbing to
Schopenhauer--we refer to the Marquet affair. It appears on his returning home
one day he found three women gossiping outside his door, one of whom was a
seamstress who occupied another room in the house. Their presence irritated
Schopenhauer (whose sensitiveness in such matters may be estimated from his
essay "On Noise"), who, finding them occupying the same position on another
occasion, requested them to go away, but the seamstress replied that she was an
honest person and refused to move. Schopenhauer disappeared into his
apartments and returned with a stick. According to his own account, he offered
his arm to the woman in order to take her out; but she would not accept it, and
remained where she was. He then threatened to put her out, and carried his threat
into execution by seizing her round the waist and putting her out. She screamed,
and attempted to return. Schopenhauer now pushed her out; the woman fell, and
raised the whole house. This woman, Caroline Luise Marquet, brought an action
against him for damages, alleging that he had kicked and beaten her.
Schopenhauer defended his own case, with the result that the action was
dismissed. The woman appealed, and Schopenhauer, who was contemplating
going to Switzerland, did not alter his plans, so that the appeal was heard during
his absence, the judgment reversed, and he was mulcted in a fine of twenty
thalers. But the unfortunate business did not end here. Schopenhauer proceeded
from Switzerland to Italy, and did not return to Berlin until May 1825. Caroline
Marquet renewed her complaints before the courts, stating that his ill-usage had
occasioned a fever through which she had lost the power of one of her arms, that
her whole system was entirely shaken, and demanding a monthly allowance as
compensation. She won her case; the defendant had to pay three hundred thalers
in costs and contribute sixty thalers a year to her maintenance while she lived.

Schopenhauer on returning to Berlin did what he could to get the judgment
reversed, but unsuccessfully. The woman lived for twenty years; he inscribed on
her death certificate, "Obit anus, obit onus"
The idea of marriage seems to have more or less possessed Schopenhauer
about this time, but he could not finally determine to take the step. There is
sufficient to show in the following essays in what light he regarded women.
Marriage was a debt, he said, contracted in youth and paid off in old age.
Married people have the whole burden of life to bear, while the unmarried have
only half, was a characteristically selfish apothegm. Had not all the true
philosophers been celibates--Descartes, Leibnitz, Malebranche, Spinoza, and
Kant? The classic writers were of course not to be considered, because with
them woman occupied a subordinate position. Had not all the great poets
married, and with disastrous consequences? Plainly, Schopenhauer was not the
person to sacrifice the individual to the will of the species.
In August 1831 he made a fortuitous expedition to Frankfort-on-the-Main--
an expedition partly prompted by the outbreak of cholera at Berlin at the time,
and partly by the portent of a dream (he was credulous in such matters) which at
the beginning of the year had intimated his death. Here, however, he practically
remained until his death, leading a quiet, mechanically regular life and devoting
his thoughts to the development of his philosophic ideas, isolated at first, but as
time went on enjoying somewhat greedily the success which had been denied
him in his earlier days. In February 1839 he had a moment of elation when he
heard from the Scientific Society of Drontheim that he had won the prize for the
best essay on the question, "Whether free will could be proved from the evidence
of consciousness," and that he had been elected a member of the Society; and a
corresponding moment of despondency when he was informed by the Royal
Danish Academy of the Sciences at Copenhagen, in a similar competition, that
his essay on "Whether the source and foundation of ethics was to be sought in an
intuitive moral idea, and in the analysis of other derivative moral conceptions, or
in some other principle of knowledge," had failed, partly on the ground of the
want of respect which it showed to the opinions of the chief philosophers. He
published these essays in 1841 under the title of "The Two Fundamental
Problems of Ethics," and ten years later Parerga und Paralipomena the
composition of which had engaged his attention for five or six years. The latter
work, which proved to be his most popular, was refused by three publishers, and
when eventually it was accepted by Hayn of Berlin, the author only received ten
free copies of his work as payment. It is from this book that all except one of the
following essays have been selected; the exception is "The Metaphysics of
Love," which appears in the supplement of the third book of his principal work.

The second edition of Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung appeared in 1844, and
was received with growing appreciation. Hitherto he had been chiefly known in
Frankfort as the son of the celebrated Johanna Schopenhauer; now he came to
have a following which, if at first small in numbers, were sufficiently
enthusiastic, and proved, indeed, so far as his reputation was concerned, helpful.
Artists painted his portrait; a bust of him was made by Elizabeth Ney. In the
April number of the Westminster Review for 1853 John Oxenford, in an article
entitled "Iconoclasm in German Philosophy," heralded in England his
recognition as a writer and thinker; three years later Saint-René Taillandier, in
the Revue des Deux Mondes, did a similar service for him in France. One of his
most enthusiastic admirers was Richard Wagner, who in 1854 sent him a copy of
his Der Ring der Nibelungen, with the inscription "In admiration and gratitude."
The Philosophical Faculty of the University of Leipzic offered a prize for an
exposition and criticism of his philosophical system. Two Frenchmen, M.
Foucher de Careil and M. Challemel Lacour, who visited Schopenhauer during
his last days, have given an account of their impressions of the interview, the
latter in an article entitled, "Un Bouddhiste Contemporain en Allemagne," which
appeared in the Revue des Deux Mondes for March 15th, 1870. M. Foucher de
Careil gives a charming picture of him:--
"Quand je le vis, pour la première fois, en 1859, à la table de l'hôtel
d'Angleterre, à Francfort, c'était déjà un vieillard, à l'oeil d'un bleu vif et limpide,
à la lèvre mince et légèrement sarcastique, autour de laquelle errait un fin
sourire, et dont le vaste front, estompé de deux touffes de cheveux blancs sur les
côtés, relevait d'un cachet de noblesse et de distinction la physionomie petillante
d'esprit et de malice. Les habits, son jabot de dentelle, sa cravate blanche
rappelaient un vieillard de la fin du règne de Louis XV; ses manières étaient
celles d'un homme de bonne compagnie. Habituellement réservé et d'un naturel
craintif jusqu'à la méfiance, il ne se livrait qu'avec ses intimes ou les étrangers de
passage à Francfort. Ses mouvements étaient vifs et devenaient d'une pétulance
extraordinaire dans la conversation; il fuyait les discussions et les vains combats
de paroles, mais c'était pour mieux jouir du charme d'une causerie intime. Il
possédait et parlait avec une égale perfection quatre langues: le français,
l'anglais, l'allemand, l'italien et passablement l'espagnol. Quand il causait, la
verve du vieillard brodait sur le canevas un peu lourd de l'allemand ses
brilliantes arabesques latines, grecques, françaises, anglaises, italiennes. C'était
un entrain, une précision et des sailles, une richesse de citations, une exactitude
de détails qui faisait couler les heures; et quelquefois le petit cercle de ses
intimes l'écoutait jusqu'à minuit, sans qu'un moment de fatigue se fût peint sur
ses traits ou que le feu de son regard se fût un instant amorti. Sa parole nette et

accentuée captivait l'auditoire: elle peignait et analysait tout ensemble; une
sensibilité délicate en augmentait le feu; elle était exacte et précise sur toutes
sortes de sujets."
Schopenhauer died on the 20th September 1860, in his seventy-third year,
peacefully, alone as he had lived, but not without warning. One day in April,
taking his usual brisk walk after dinner, he suffered from palpitation of the heart,
he could scarcely breathe. These symptoms developed during the next few
months, and Dr. Gwinner advised him to discontinue his cold baths and to
breakfast in bed; but Schopenhauer, notwithstanding his early medical training,
was little inclined to follow medical advice. To Dr. Gwinner, on the evening of
the 18th September, when he expressed a hope that he might be able to go to
Italy, he said that it would be a pity if he died now, as he wished to make several
important additions to his Parerga; he spoke about his works and of the warm
recognition with which they had been welcomed in the most remote places. Dr.
Gwinner had never before found him so eager and gentle, and left him
reluctantly, without, however, the least premonition that he had seen him for the
last time. On the second morning after this interview Schopenhauer got up as
usual, and had his cold bath and breakfast. His servant had opened the window
to let in the morning air and had then left him. A little later Dr. Gwinner arrived
and found him reclining in a corner of the sofa; his face wore its customary
expression; there was no sign of there having been any struggle with death.
There had been no struggle with death; he had died, as he had hoped he would
die, painlessly, easily.
In preparing the above notice the writer has to acknowledge her
indebtedness to Dr. Gwinner's Life and Professor Wallace's little work on the
same subject, as well as to the few other authorities that have been available.--
THE TRANSLATOR.
FOOTNOTES:
[1] Wallace's Life, pp. 95, 96.
[2] Wallace, p. 108.
[3] Haldane and Kemp's The World as Will and Idea.
[4] Wallace, p. 145.
ON AUTHORSHIP AND STYLE.
There are, first of all, two kinds of authors: those who write for the subject's
sake, and those who write for writing's sake. The first kind have had thoughts or
experiences which seem to them worth communicating, while the second kind

need money and consequently write for money. They think in order to write, and
they may be recognised by their spinning out their thoughts to the greatest
possible length, and also by the way they work out their thoughts, which are
half-true, perverse, forced, and vacillating; then also by their love of evasion, so
that they may seem what they are not; and this is why their writing is lacking in
definiteness and clearness.
Consequently, it is soon recognised that they write for the sake of filling up
the paper, and this is the case sometimes with the best authors; for example, in
parts of Lessing's Dramaturgie, and even in many of Jean Paul's romances. As
soon as this is perceived the book should be thrown away, for time is precious.
As a matter of fact, the author is cheating the reader as soon as he writes for the
sake of filling up paper; because his pretext for writing is that he has something
to impart. Writing for money and preservation of copyright are, at bottom, the
ruin of literature. It is only the man who writes absolutely for the sake of the
subject that writes anything worth writing. What an inestimable advantage it
would be, if, in every branch of literature, there existed only a few but excellent
books! This can never come to pass so long as money is to be made by writing.
It seems as if money lay under a curse, for every author deteriorates directly he
writes in any way for the sake of money. The best works of great men all come
from the time when they had to write either for nothing or for very little pay.
This is confirmed by the Spanish proverb: honra y provecho no caben en un saco
(Honour and money are not to be found in the same purse). The deplorable
condition of the literature of to-day, both in Germany and other countries, is due
to the fact that books are written for the sake of earning money. Every one who
is in want of money sits down and writes a book, and the public is stupid enough
to buy it. The secondary effect of this is the ruin of language.
A great number of bad authors eke out their existence entirely by the
foolishness of the public, which only will read what has just been printed. I refer
to journalists, who have been appropriately so-called. In other words, it would be
"day labourer."
*
Again, it may be said that there are three kinds of authors. In the first place,
there are those who write without thinking. They write from memory, from
reminiscences, or even direct from other people's books. This class is the most
numerous. In the second, those who think whilst they are writing. They think in
order to write; and they are numerous. In the third place, there are those who
have thought before they begin to write. They write solely because they have
thought; and they are rare.
Authors of the second class, who postpone their thinking until they begin to

write, are like a sportsman who goes out at random--he is not likely to bring
home very much. While the writing of an author of the third, the rare class, is
like a chase where the game has been captured beforehand and cooped up in
some enclosure from which it is afterwards set free, so many at a time, into
another enclosure, where it is not possible for it to escape, and the sportsman has
now nothing to do but to aim and fire--that is to say, put his thoughts on paper.
This is the kind of sport which yields something.
But although the number of those authors who really and seriously think
before they write is small, only extremely few of them think about the subject
itself; the rest think only about the books written on this subject, and what has
been said by others upon it, I mean. In order to think, they must have the more
direct and powerful incentive of other people's thoughts. These become their
next theme, and therefore they always remain under their influence and are
never, strictly speaking, original. On the contrary, the former are roused to
thought through the subject itself, hence their thinking is directed immediately to
it. It is only among them that we find the authors whose names become
immortal. Let it be understood that I am speaking here of writers of the higher
branches of literature, and not of writers on the method of distilling brandy.
It is only the writer who takes the material on which he writes direct out of
his own head that is worth reading. Book manufacturers, compilers, and the
ordinary history writers, and others like them, take their material straight out of
books; it passes into their fingers without its having paid transit duty or
undergone inspection when it was in their heads, to say nothing of elaboration.
(How learned many a man would be if he knew everything that was in his own
books!) Hence their talk is often of such a vague nature that one racks one's
brains in vain to understand of what they are really thinking. They are not
thinking at all. The book from which they copy is sometimes composed in the
same way: so that writing of this kind is like a plaster cast of a cast of a cast, and
so on, until finally all that is left is a scarcely recognisable outline of the face of
Antinous. Therefore, compilations should be read as seldom as possible: it is
difficult to avoid them entirely, since compendia, which contain in a small space
knowledge that has been collected in the course of several centuries, are
included in compilations.
No greater mistake can be made than to imagine that what has been written
latest is always the more correct; that what is written later on is an improvement
on what was written previously; and that every change means progress. Men
who think and have correct judgment, and people who treat their subject
earnestly, are all exceptions only. Vermin is the rule everywhere in the world: it
is always at hand and busily engaged in trying to improve in its own way upon

the mature deliberations of the thinkers. So that if a man wishes to improve
himself in any subject he must guard against immediately seizing the newest
books written upon it, in the assumption that science is always advancing and
that the older books have been made use of in the compiling of the new. They
have, it is true, been used; but how? The writer often does not thoroughly
understand the old books; he will, at the same time, not use their exact words, so
that the result is he spoils and bungles what has been said in a much better and
clearer way by the old writers; since they wrote from their own lively knowledge
of the subject. He often leaves out the best things they have written, their most
striking elucidations of the matter, their happiest remarks, because he does not
recognise their value or feel how pregnant they are. It is only what is stupid and
shallow that appeals to him. An old and excellent book is frequently shelved for
new and bad ones; which, written for the sake of money, wear a pretentious air
and are much eulogised by the authors' friends. In science, a man who wishes to
distinguish himself brings something new to market; this frequently consists in
his denouncing some principle that has been previously held as correct, so that
he may establish a wrong one of his own. Sometimes his attempt is successful
for a short time, when a return is made to the old and correct doctrine. These
innovators are serious about nothing else in the world than their own priceless
person, and it is this that they wish to make its mark. They bring this quickly
about by beginning a paradox; the sterility of their own heads suggests their
taking the path of negation; and truths that have long been recognised are now
denied--for instance, the vital power, the sympathetic nervous system, generatio
equivoca, Bichat's distinction between the working of the passions and the
working of intelligence, or they return to crass atomism, etc., etc. Hence the
course of science is often retrogressive.
To this class of writers belong also those translators who, besides
translating their author, at the same time correct and alter him, a thing that
always seems to me impertinent. Write books yourself which are worth
translating and leave the books of other people as they are. One should read, if it
is possible, the real authors, the founders and discoverers of things, or at any rate
the recognised great masters in every branch of learning, and buy second-hand
books rather than read their contents in new ones.
It is true that inventis aliquid addere facile est, therefore a man, after having
studied the principles of his subject, will have to make himself acquainted with
the more recent information written upon it. In general, the following rule holds
good here as elsewhere, namely: what is new is seldom good; because a good
thing is only new for a short time.
What the address is to a letter the title should be to a book--that is, its

immediate aim should be to bring the book to that part of the public that will be
interested in its contents. Therefore, the title should be effective, and since it is
essentially short, it should be concise, laconic, pregnant, and if possible express
the contents in a word. Therefore a title that is prolix, or means nothing at all, or
that is indirect or ambiguous, is bad; so is one that is false and misleading: this
last may prepare for the book the same fate as that which awaits a wrongly
addressed letter. The worst titles are those that are stolen, such titles that is to say
that other books already bear; for in the first place they are a plagiarism, and in
the second a most convincing proof of an absolute want of originality. A man
who has not enough originality to think out a new title for his book will be much
less capable of giving it new contents. Akin to these are those titles which have
been imitated, in other words, half stolen; for instance, a long time after I had
written "On Will in Nature," Oersted wrote "On Mind in Nature."
*
A book can never be anything more than the impression of its author's
thoughts. The value of these thoughts lies either in the matter about which he has
thought, or in the form in which he develops his matter--that is to say, what he
has thought about it.
The matter of books is very various, as also are the merits conferred on
books on account of their matter. All matter that is the outcome of experience, in
other words everything that is founded on fact, whether it be historical or
physical, taken by itself and in its widest sense, is included in the term matter. It
is the motif that gives its peculiar character to the book, so that a book can be
important whoever the author may have been; while with form the peculiar
character of a book rests with the author of it. The subjects may be of such a
nature as to be accessible and well known to everybody; but the form in which
they are expounded, what has been thought about them, gives the book its value,
and this depends upon the author. Therefore if a book, from this point of view, is
excellent and without a rival, so also is its author. From this it follows that the
merit of a writer worth reading is all the greater the less he is dependent on
matter--and the better known and worn out this matter, the greater will be his
merit. The three great Grecian tragedians, for instance, all worked at the same
subject.
So that when a book becomes famous one should carefully distinguish
whether it is so on account of its matter or its form.
Quite ordinary and shallow men are able to produce books of very great
importance because of their matter, which was accessible to them alone. Take,
for instance, books which give descriptions of foreign countries, rare natural
phenomena, experiments that have been made, historical events of which they

were witnesses, or have spent both time and trouble in inquiring into and
specially studying the authorities for them.
On the other hand, it is on form that we are dependent, where the matter is
accessible to every one or very well known; and it is what has been thought
about the matter that will give any value to the achievement; it will only be an
eminent man who will be able to write anything that is worth reading. For the
others will only think what is possible for every other man to think. They give
the impress of their own mind; but every one already possesses the original of
this impression.
However, the public is very much more interested in matter than in form,
and it is for this very reason that it is behindhand in any high degree of culture. It
is most laughable the way the public reveals its liking for matter in poetic works;
it carefully investigates the real events or personal circumstances of the poet's
life which served to give the motif of his works; nay, finally, it finds these more
interesting than the works themselves; it reads more about Goethe than what has
been written by Goethe, and industriously studies the legend of Faust in
preference to Goethe's Faust itself. And when Bürger said that "people would
make learned expositions as to who Leonora really was," we see this literally
fulfilled in Goethe's case, for we now have many learned expositions on Faust
and the Faust legend. They are and will remain of a purely material character.
This preference for matter to form is the same as a man ignoring the shape and
painting of a fine Etruscan vase in order to make a chemical examination of the
clay and colours of which it is made. The attempt to be effective by means of the
matter used, thereby ministering to this evil propensity of the public, is
absolutely to be censured in branches of writing where the merit must lie
expressly in the form; as, for instance, in poetical writing. However, there are
numerous bad dramatic authors striving to fill the theatre by means of the matter
they are treating. For instance, they place on the stage any kind of celebrated
man, however stripped of dramatic incidents his life may have been, nay,
sometimes without waiting until the persons who appear with him are dead.
The distinction between matter and form, of which I am here speaking, is
true also in regard to conversation. It is chiefly intelligence, judgment, wit, and
vivacity that enable a man to converse; they give form to the conversation.
However, the matter of the conversation must soon come into notice--in other
words, that about which one can talk to the man, namely, his knowledge. If this
is very small, it will only be his possessing the above-named formal qualities in
a quite exceptionally high degree that will make his conversation of any value,
for his matter will be restricted to things concerning humanity and nature, which
are known generally. It is just the reverse if a man is wanting in these formal

qualities, but has, on the other hand, knowledge of such a kind that it lends value
to his conversation; this value, however, will then entirely rest on the matter of
his conversation, for, according to the Spanish proverb, mas sabe el necio en su
casa, que el sabio en la agena.
A thought only really lives until it has reached the boundary line of words;
it then becomes petrified and dies immediately; yet it is as everlasting as the
fossilised animals and plants of former ages. Its existence, which is really
momentary, may be compared to a crystal the instant it becomes crystallised.
As soon as a thought has found words it no longer exists in us or is serious
in its deepest sense.
When it begins to exist for others it ceases to live in us; just as a child frees
itself from its mother when it comes into existence. The poet has also said:
"Ihr müsst mich nicht durch Widerspruch verwirren! Sobald man spricht,
beginnt man schon zu irren."
The pen is to thought what the stick is to walking, but one walks most
easily without a stick, and thinks most perfectly when no pen is at hand. It is
only when a man begins to get old that he likes to make use of a stick and his
pen.
A hypothesis that has once gained a position in the mind, or been born in it,
leads a life resembling that of an organism, in so far as it receives from the outer
world matter only that is advantageous and homogeneous to it; on the other
hand, matter that is harmful and heterogeneous to it is either rejected, or if it
must be received, cast off again entirely.
Abstract and indefinite terms should be employed in satire only as they are
in algebra, in place of concrete and specified quantities. Moreover, it should be
used as sparingly as the dissecting knife on the body of a living man. At the risk
of forfeiting his life it is an unsafe experiment.
For a work to become immortal it must possess so many excellences that it
will not be easy to find a man who understands and values them all; so that there
will be in all ages men who recognise and appreciate some of these excellences;
by this means the credit of the work will be retained throughout the long course
of centuries and ever-changing interests, for, as it is appreciated first in this
sense, then in that, the interest is never exhausted.
An author like this, in other words, an author who has a claim to live on in
posterity, can only be a man who seeks in vain his like among his
contemporaries over the wide world, his marked distinction making him a
striking contrast to every one else. Even if he existed through several
generations, like the wandering Jew, he would still occupy the same position; in
short, he would be, as Ariosto has put it, lo fece natura, e poi ruppe lo stampo. If

this were not so, one would not be able to understand why his thoughts should
not perish like those of other men.
In almost every age, whether it be in literature or art, we find that if a
thoroughly wrong idea, or a fashion, or a manner is in vogue, it is admired.
Those of ordinary intelligence trouble themselves inordinately to acquire it and
put it in practice. An intelligent man sees through it and despises it, consequently
he remains out of the fashion. Some years later the public sees through it and
takes the sham for what it is worth; it now laughs at it, and the much-admired
colour of all these works of fashion falls off like the plaster from a badly-built
wall: and they are in the same dilapidated condition. We should be glad and not
sorry when a fundamentally wrong notion of which we have been secretly
conscious for a long time finally gains a footing and is proclaimed both loudly
and openly. The falseness of it will soon be felt and eventually proclaimed
equally loudly and openly. It is as if an abscess had burst.
The man who publishes and edits an article written by an anonymous critic
should be held as immediately responsible for it as if he had written it himself;
just as one holds a manager responsible for bad work done by his workmen. In
this way the fellow would be treated as he deserves to be--namely, without any
ceremony.
An anonymous writer is a literary fraud against whom one should
immediately cry out, "Wretch, if you do not wish to admit what it is you say
against other people, hold your slanderous tongue."
An anonymous criticism carries no more weight than an anonymous letter,
and should therefore be looked upon with equal mistrust. Or do we wish to
accept the assumed name of a man, who in reality represents a société anonyme,
as a guarantee for the veracity of his friends?
The little honesty that exists among authors is discernible in the
unconscionable way they misquote from the writings of others. I find whole
passages in my works wrongly quoted, and it is only in my appendix, which is
absolutely lucid, that an exception is made. The misquotation is frequently due
to carelessness, the pen of such people has been used to write down such trivial
and banal phrases that it goes on writing them out of force of habit. Sometimes
the misquotation is due to impertinence on the part of some one who wants to
improve upon my work; but a bad motive only too often prompts the
misquotation--it is then horrid baseness and roguery, and, like a man who
commits forgery, he loses the character for being an honest man for ever.
Style is the physiognomy of the mind. It is a more reliable key to character
than the physiognomy of the body. To imitate another person's style is like
wearing a mask. However fine the mask, it soon becomes insipid and intolerable

because it is without life; so that even the ugliest living face is better. Therefore
authors who write in Latin and imitate the style of the old writers essentially
wear a mask; one certainly hears what they say, but one cannot watch their
physiognomy--that is to say their style. One observes, however, the style in the
Latin writings of men who think for themselves, those who have not deigned to
imitate, as, for instance, Scotus Erigena, Petrarch, Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza,
etc.
Affectation in style is like making grimaces. The language in which a man
writes is the physiognomy of his nation; it establishes a great many differences,
beginning from the language of the Greeks down to that of the Caribbean
islanders.
We should seek for the faults in the style of another author's works, so that
we may avoid committing the same in our own.
In order to get a provisional estimate of the value of an author's productions
it is not exactly necessary to know the matter on which he has thought or what it
is he has thought about it,--this would compel one to read the whole of his
works,--but it will be sufficient to know how he has thought. His style is an
exact expression of how he has thought, of the essential state and general quality
of his thoughts. It shows the formal nature--which must always remain the same-
-of all the thoughts of a man, whatever the subject on which he has thought or
what it is he has said about it. It is the dough out of which all his ideas are
kneaded, however various they may be. When Eulenspiegel was asked by a man
how long he would have to walk before reaching the next place, and gave the
apparently absurd answer Walk, his intention was to judge from the man's
walking how far he would go in a given time. And so it is when I have read a
few pages of an author, I know about how far he can help me.
In the secret consciousness that this is the condition of things, every
mediocre writer tries to mask his own natural style. This instantly necessitates
his giving up all idea of being naïve, a privilege which belongs to superior minds
sensible of their superiority, and therefore sure of themselves. For instance, it is
absolutely impossible for men of ordinary intelligence to make up their minds to
write as they think; they resent the idea of their work looking too simple. It
would always be of some value, however. If they would only go honestly to
work and in a simple way express the few and ordinary ideas they have really
thought, they would be readable and even instructive in their own sphere. But
instead of that they try to appear to have thought much more deeply than is the
case. The result is, they put what they have to say into forced and involved
language, create new words and prolix periods which go round the thought and
cover it up. They hesitate between the two attempts of communicating the

thought and of concealing it. They want to make it look grand so that it has the
appearance of being learned and profound, thereby giving one the idea that there
is much more in it than one perceives at the moment. Accordingly, they
sometimes put down their thoughts in bits, in short, equivocal, and paradoxical
sentences which appear to mean much more than they say (a splendid example
of this kind of writing is furnished by Schelling's treatises on Natural
Philosophy); sometimes they express their thoughts in a crowd of words and the
most intolerable diffuseness, as if it were necessary to make a sensation in order
to make the profound meaning of their phrases intelligible--while it is quite a
simple idea if not a trivial one (examples without number are supplied in Fichte's
popular works and in the philosophical pamphlets of a hundred other miserable
blockheads that are not worth mentioning), or else they endeavour to use a
certain style in writing which it has pleased them to adopt--for example, a style
that is so thoroughly Kat' e'xochae'u profound and scientific, where one is
tortured to death by the narcotic effect of long-spun periods that are void of all
thought (examples of this are specially supplied by those most impertinent of all
mortals, the Hegelians in their Hegel newspaper commonly known as Jahrbücher
der wissenschaftlichen Literatur); or again, they aim at an intellectual style
where it seems then as if they wish to go crazy, and so on. All such efforts
whereby they try to postpone the nascetur ridiculus mus make it frequently
difficult to understand what they really mean. Moreover, they write down words,
nay, whole periods, which mean nothing in themselves, in the hope, however,
that some one else will understand something from them. Nothing else is at the
bottom of all such endeavours but the inexhaustible attempt which is always
venturing on new paths, to sell words for thoughts, and by means of new
expressions, or expressions used in a new sense, turns of phrases and
combinations of all kinds, to produce the appearance of intellect in order to
compensate for the want of it which is so painfully felt. It is amusing to see how,
with this aim in view, first this mannerism and then that is tried; these they
intend to represent the mask of intellect: this mask may possibly deceive the
inexperienced for a while, until it is recognised as being nothing but a dead
mask, when it is laughed at and exchanged for another.
We find a writer of this kind sometimes writing in a dithyrambic style, as if
he were intoxicated; at other times, nay, on the very next page, he will be high-
sounding, severe, and deeply learned, prolix to the last degree of dulness, and
cutting everything very small, like the late Christian Wolf, only in a modern
garment. The mask of unintelligibility holds out the longest; this is only in
Germany, however, where it was introduced by Fichte, perfected by Schelling,
and attained its highest climax finally in Hegel, always with the happiest results.

And yet nothing is easier than to write so that no one can understand; on the
other hand, nothing is more difficult than to express learned ideas so that every
one must understand them. All the arts I have cited above are superfluous if the
writer really possesses any intellect, for it allows a man to show himself as he is
and verifies for all time what Horace said: Scribendi recte sapere est et
principium et fons.
But this class of authors is like certain workers in metal, who try a hundred
different compositions to take the place of gold, which is the only metal that can
never have a substitute. On the contrary, there is nothing an author should guard
against more than the apparent endeavour to show more intellect than he has;
because this rouses the suspicion in the reader that he has very little, since a man
always affects something, be its nature what it may, that he does not really
possess. And this is why it is praise to an author to call him naïve, for it signifies
that he may show himself as he is. In general, naïveté attracts, while anything
that is unnatural everywhere repels. We also find that every true thinker
endeavours to express his thoughts as purely, clearly, definitely, and concisely as
ever possible. This is why simplicity has always been looked upon as a token,
not only of truth, but also of genius. Style receives its beauty from the thought
expressed, while with those writers who only pretend to think it is their thoughts
that are said to be fine because of their style. Style is merely the silhouette of
thought; and to write in a vague or bad style means a stupid or confused mind.
Hence, the first rule--nay, this in itself is almost sufficient for a good style--
is this, that the author should have something to say. Ah! this implies a great
deal. The neglect of this rule is a fundamental characteristic of the philosophical,
and generally speaking of all the reflective authors in Germany, especially since
the time of Fichte. It is obvious that all these writers wish to appear to have
something to say, while they have nothing to say. This mannerism was
introduced by the pseudo-philosophers of the Universities and may be discerned
everywhere, even among the first literary notabilities of the age. It is the mother
of that forced and vague style which seems to have two, nay, many meanings, as
well as of that prolix and ponderous style, le stile empesé; and of that no less
useless bombastic style, and finally of that mode of concealing the most awful
poverty of thought under a babble of inexhaustible chatter that resembles a
clacking mill and is just as stupefying: one may read for hours together without
getting hold of a single clearly defined and definite idea. The Halleschen,
afterwards called the Deutschen Jahrbücher, furnishes almost throughout
excellent examples of this style of writing. The Germans, by the way, from force
of habit read page after page of all kinds of such verbiage without getting any
definite idea of what the author really means: they think it all very proper and do

not discover that he is writing merely for the sake of writing. On the other hand,
a good author who is rich in ideas soon gains the reader's credit of having really
and truly something to say; and this gives the intelligent reader patience to
follow him attentively. An author of this kind will always express himself in the
simplest and most direct manner, for the very reason that he really has something
to say; because he wishes to awaken in the reader the same idea he has in his
own mind and no other. Accordingly he will be able to say with Boileau--
"Ma pensée au grand jour partout s'offre et s'expose, Et mon vers, bien ou
mal, dit toujours quelque chose;"
while of those previously described writers it may be said, in the words of
the same poet, et qui parlant beaucoup ne disent jamais rien. It is also a
characteristic of such writers to avoid, if it is possible, expressing themselves
definitely, so that they may be always able in case of need to get out of a
difficulty; this is why they always choose the more abstract expressions: while
people of intellect choose the more concrete; because the latter bring the matter
closer to view, which is the source of all evidence. This preference for abstract
expressions may be confirmed by numerous examples: a specially ridiculous
example is the following. Throughout German literature of the last ten years we
find "to condition" almost everywhere used in place of "to cause" or "to effect."
Since it is more abstract and indefinite it says less than it implies, and
consequently leaves a little back door open to please those whose secret
consciousness of their own incapacity inspires them with a continual fear of all
definite expressions. While with other people it is merely the effect of that
national tendency to immediately imitate everything that is stupid in literature
and wicked in life; this is shown in either case by the quick way in which it
spreads. The Englishman depends on his own judgment both in what he writes
and what he does, but this applies less to the German than to any other nation. In
consequence of the state of things referred to, the words "to cause" and "to
effect" have almost entirely disappeared from the literature of the last ten years,
and people everywhere talk of "to condition." The fact is worth mentioning
because it is characteristically ridiculous. Everyday authors are only half
conscious when they write, a fact which accounts for their want of intellect and
the tediousness of their writings; they do not really themselves understand the
meaning of their own words, because they take ready-made words and learn
them. Hence they combine whole phrases more than words--phrases banales.
This accounts for that obviously characteristic want of clearly defined thought;
in fact, they lack the die that stamps their thoughts, they have no clear thought of
their own; in place of it we find an indefinite, obscure interweaving of words,
current phrases, worn-out terms of speech, and fashionable expressions. The

result is that their foggy kind of writing is like print that has been done with old
type. On the other hand, intelligent people really speak to us in their writings,
and this is why they are able to both move and entertain us. It is only intelligent
writers who place individual words together with a full consciousness of their
use and select them with deliberation. Hence their style of writing bears the same
relation to that of those authors described above, as a picture that is really
painted does to one that has been executed with stencil. In the first instance
every word, just as every stroke of the brush, has some special significance,
while in the other everything is done mechanically. The same distinction may be
observed in music. For it is the omnipresence of intellect that always and
everywhere characterises the works of the genius; and analogous to this is
Lichtenberg's observation, namely, that Garrick's soul was omnipresent in all the
muscles of his body. With regard to the tediousness of the writings referred to
above, it is to be observed in general that there are two kinds of tediousness--an
objective and a subjective. The objective form of tediousness springs from the
deficiency of which we have been speaking--that is to say, where the author has
no perfectly clear thought or knowledge to communicate. For if a writer
possesses any clear thought or knowledge it will be his aim to communicate it,
and he will work with this end in view; consequently the ideas he furnishes are
everywhere clearly defined, so that he is neither diffuse, unmeaning, nor
confused, and consequently not tedious. Even if his fundamental idea is wrong,
yet in such a case it will be clearly thought out and well pondered; in other
words, it is at least formally correct, and the writing is always of some value.
While, for the same reason, a work that is objectively tedious is at all times
without value. Again, subjective tediousness is merely relative: this is because
the reader is not interested in the subject of the work, and that what he takes an
interest in is of a very limited nature. The most excellent work may therefore be
tedious subjectively to this or that person, just as, vice versâ, the worst work may
be subjectively diverting to this or that person: because he is interested in either
the subject or the writer of the book.
It would be of general service to German authors if they discerned that
while a man should, if possible, think like a great mind, he should speak the
same language as every other person. Men should use common words to say
uncommon things, but they do the reverse. We find them trying to envelop
trivial ideas in grand words and to dress their very ordinary thoughts in the most
extraordinary expressions and the most outlandish, artificial, and rarest phrases.
Their sentences perpetually stalk about on stilts. With regard to their delight in
bombast, and to their writing generally in a grand, puffed-up, unreal,
hyperbolical, and acrobatic style, their prototype is Pistol, who was once

impatiently requested by Falstaff, his friend, to "say what you have to say, like a
man of this world!"[5]
There is no expression in the German language exactly corresponding to
stile empesé; but the thing itself is all the more prevalent. When combined with
unnaturalness it is in works what affected gravity, grandness, and unnaturalness
are in social intercourse; and it is just as intolerable. Poverty of intellect is fond
of wearing this dress; just as stupid people in everyday life are fond of assuming
gravity and formality.
A man who writes in this preziös style is like a person who dresses himself
up to avoid being mistaken for or confounded with the mob; a danger which a
gentleman, even in his worst clothes, does not run. Hence just as a plebeian is
recognised by a certain display in his dress and his tiré à quatre épingles, so is an
ordinary writer recognised by his style.
If a man has something to say that is worth saying, he need not envelop it in
affected expressions, involved phrases, and enigmatical innuendoes; but he may
rest assured that by expressing himself in a simple, clear, and naïve manner he
will not fail to produce the right effect. A man who makes use of such artifices
as have been alluded to betrays his poverty of ideas, mind, and knowledge.
Nevertheless, it is a mistake to attempt to write exactly as one speaks.
Every style of writing should bear a certain trace of relationship with the
monumental style, which is, indeed, the ancestor of all styles; so that to write as
one speaks is just as faulty as to do the reverse, that is to say, to try and speak as
one writes. This makes the author pedantic, and at the same time difficult to
understand.
Obscurity and vagueness of expression are at all times and everywhere a
very bad sign. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred they arise from vagueness of
thought, which, in its turn, is almost always fundamentally discordant,
inconsistent, and therefore wrong. When a right thought springs up in the mind it
strives after clearness of expression, and it soon attains it, for clear thought
easily finds its appropriate expression. A man who is capable of thinking can
express himself at all times in clear, comprehensible, and unambiguous words.
Those writers who construct difficult, obscure, involved, and ambiguous phrases
most certainly do not rightly know what it is they wish to say: they have only a
dull consciousness of it, which is still struggling to put itself into thought; they
also often wish to conceal from themselves and other people that in reality they
have nothing to say. Like Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, they wish to appear to
know what they do not know, to think what they do not think, and to say what
they do not say.
Will a man, then, who has something real to impart endeavour to say it in a

clear or an indistinct way? Quintilian has already said, plerumque accidit ut
faciliora sint ad intelligendum et lucidiora multo, quae a doctissimo quoque
dicuntur.... Erit ergo etiam obscurior, quo quisque deterior.
A man's way of expressing himself should not be enigmatical, but he should
know whether he has something to say or whether he has not. It is an uncertainty
of expression which makes German writers so dull. The only exceptional cases
are those where a man wishes to express something that is in some respect of an
illicit nature. As anything that is far-fetched generally produces the reverse of
what the writer has aimed at, so do words serve to make thought
comprehensible; but only up to a certain point. If words are piled up beyond this
point they make the thought that is being communicated more and more obscure.
To hit that point is the problem of style and a matter of discernment; for every
superfluous word prevents its purpose being carried out. Voltaire means this
when he says: l'adjectif est l'ennemi du substantif. (But, truly, many authors try
to hide their poverty of thought under a superfluity of words.)
Accordingly, all prolixity and all binding together of unmeaning
observations that are not worth reading should be avoided. A writer must be
sparing with the reader's time, concentration, and patience; in this way he makes
him believe that what he has before him is worth his careful reading, and will
repay the trouble he has spent upon it. It is always better to leave out something
that is good than to write down something that is not worth saying. Hesiod's
[Greek: pleon haemisu pantos][6] finds its right application. In fact, not to say
everything! Le secret pour être ennuyeux, c'est de tout dire. Therefore, if
possible, the quintessence only! the chief matter only! nothing that the reader
would think for himself. The use of many words in order to express little thought
is everywhere the infallible sign of mediocrity; while to clothe much thought in a
few words is the infallible sign of distinguished minds.
Truth that is naked is the most beautiful, and the simpler its expression the
deeper is the impression it makes; this is partly because it gets unobstructed hold
of the hearer's mind without his being distracted by secondary thoughts, and
partly because he feels that here he is not being corrupted or deceived by the arts
of rhetoric, but that the whole effect is got from the thing itself. For instance,
what declamation on the emptiness of human existence could be more
impressive than Job's: Homo, natus de muliere, brevi vivit tempore, repletus
multis miseriis, qui, tanquam flos, egreditur et conteritur, et fugit velut umbra. It
is for this very reason that the naïve poetry of Goethe is so incomparably greater
than the rhetorical of Schiller. This is also why many folk-songs have so great an
effect upon us. An author should guard against using all unnecessary rhetorical
adornment, all useless amplification, and in general, just as in architecture he

should guard against an excess of decoration, all superfluity of expression--in
other words, he must aim at chastity of style. Everything that is redundant has a
harmful effect. The law of simplicity and naïveté applies to all fine art, for it is
compatible with what is most sublime.
True brevity of expression consists in a man only saying what is worth
saying, while avoiding all diffuse explanations of things which every one can
think out for himself; that is, it consists in his correctly distinguishing between
what is necessary and what is superfluous. On the other hand, one should never
sacrifice clearness, to say nothing of grammar, for the sake of being brief. To
impoverish the expression of a thought, or to obscure or spoil the meaning of a
period for the sake of using fewer words shows a lamentable want of judgment.
And this is precisely what that false brevity nowadays in vogue is trying to do,
for writers not only leave out words that are to the purpose, but even
grammatical and logical essentials.[7]
Subjectivity, which is an error of style in German literature, is, through the
deteriorated condition of literature and neglect of old languages, becoming more
common. By subjectivity I mean when a writer thinks it sufficient for himself to
know what he means and wants to say, and it is left to the reader to discover
what is meant. Without troubling himself about his reader, he writes as if he
were holding a monologue; whereas it should be a dialogue, and, moreover, a
dialogue in which he must express himself all the more clearly as the questions
of the reader cannot be heard. And it is for this very reason that style should not
be subjective but objective, and for it to be objective the words must be written
in such a way as to directly compel the reader to think precisely the same as the
author thought. This will only be the case when the author has borne in mind that
thoughts, inasmuch as they follow the law of gravity, pass more easily from head
to paper than from paper to head. Therefore the journey from paper to head must
be helped by every means at his command. When he does this his words have a
purely objective effect, like that of a completed oil painting; while the subjective
style is not much more certain in its effect than spots on the wall, and it is only
the man whose fantasy is accidentally aroused by them that sees figures; other
people only see blurs. The difference referred to applies to every style of writing
as a whole, and it is also often met with in particular instances; for example, I
read in a book that has just been published: I have not written to increase the
number of existing books. This means exactly the opposite of what the writer
had in view, and is nonsense into the bargain.
A man who writes carelessly at once proves that he himself puts no great
value on his own thoughts. For it is only by being convinced of the truth and
importance of our thoughts that there arises in us the inspiration necessary for

the inexhaustible patience to discover the clearest, finest, and most powerful
expression for them; just as one puts holy relics or priceless works of art in
silvern or golden receptacles. It was for this reason that the old writers--whose
thoughts, expressed in their own words, have lasted for thousands of years and
hence bear the honoured title of classics--wrote with universal care. Plato,
indeed, is said to have written the introduction to his Republic seven times with
different modifications. On the other hand, the Germans are conspicuous above
all other nations for neglect of style in writing, as they are for neglect of dress,
both kinds of slovenliness which have their source in the German national
character. Just as neglect of dress betrays contempt for the society in which a
man moves, so does a hasty, careless, and bad style show shocking disrespect for
the reader, who then rightly punishes it by not reading the book.
FOOTNOTES:
[5] Schopenhauer here gives an example of this bombastic style which
would be of little interest to English readers.--TRANSLATOR.
[6] Opera et dies, v. 40.
[7] Schopenhauer here at length points out various common errors in the
writing and speaking of German which would lose significance in a translation.--
TR.
ON NOISE.
Kant has written a treatise on The Vital Powers; but I should like to write a
dirge on them, since their lavish use in the form of knocking, hammering, and
tumbling things about has made the whole of my life a daily torment. Certainly
there are people, nay, very many, who will smile at this, because they are not
sensitive to noise; it is precisely these people, however, who are not sensitive to
argument, thought, poetry or art, in short, to any kind of intellectual impression:
a fact to be assigned to the coarse quality and strong texture of their brain
tissues. On the other hand, in the biographies or in other records of the personal
utterances of almost all great writers, I find complaints of the pain that noise has
occasioned to intellectual men. For example, in the case of Kant, Goethe,
Lichtenberg, Jean Paul; and indeed when no mention is made of the matter it is
merely because the context did not lead up to it. I should explain the subject we
are treating in this way: If a big diamond is cut up into pieces, it immediately
loses its value as a whole; or if an army is scattered or divided into small bodies,
it loses all its power; and in the same way a great intellect has no more power
than an ordinary one as soon as it is interrupted, disturbed, distracted, or

diverted; for its superiority entails that it concentrates all its strength on one
point and object, just as a concave mirror concentrates all the rays of light
thrown upon it. Noisy interruption prevents this concentration. This is why the
most eminent intellects have always been strongly averse to any kind of
disturbance, interruption and distraction, and above everything to that violent
interruption which is caused by noise; other people do not take any particular
notice of this sort of thing. The most intelligent of all the European nations has
called "Never interrupt" the eleventh commandment. But noise is the most
impertinent of all interruptions, for it not only interrupts our own thoughts but
disperses them. Where, however, there is nothing to interrupt, noise naturally
will not be felt particularly. Sometimes a trifling but incessant noise torments
and disturbs me for a time, and before I become distinctly conscious of it I feel it
merely as the effort of thinking becomes more difficult, just as I should feel a
weight on my foot; then I realise what it is.
But to pass from genus to species, the truly infernal cracking of whips in
the narrow resounding streets of a town must be denounced as the most
unwarrantable and disgraceful of all noises. It deprives life of all peace and
sensibility. Nothing gives me so clear a grasp of the stupidity and
thoughtlessness of mankind as the tolerance of the cracking of whips. This
sudden, sharp crack which paralyses the brain, destroys all meditation, and
murders thought, must cause pain to any one who has anything like an idea in his
head. Hence every crack must disturb a hundred people applying their minds to
some activity, however trivial it may be; while it disjoints and renders painful
the meditations of the thinker; just like the executioner's axe when it severs the
head from the body. No sound cuts so sharply into the brain as this cursed
cracking of whips; one feels the prick of the whip-cord in one's brain, which is
affected in the same way as the mimosa pudica is by touch, and which lasts the
same length of time. With all respect for the most holy doctrine of utility, I do
not see why a fellow who is removing a load of sand or manure should obtain
the privilege of killing in the bud the thoughts that are springing up in the heads
of about ten thousand people successively. (He is only half-an-hour on the road.)
Hammering, the barking of dogs, and the screaming of children are
abominable; but it is only the cracking of a whip that is the true murderer of
thought. Its object is to destroy every favourable moment that one now and then
may have for reflection. If there were no other means of urging on an animal
than by making this most disgraceful of all noises, one would forgive its
existence. But it is quite the contrary: this cursed cracking of whips is not only
unnecessary but even useless. The effect that it is intended to have on the horse
mentally becomes quite blunted and ineffective; since the constant abuse of it

has accustomed the horse to the crack, he does not quicken his pace for it. This is
especially noticeable in the unceasing crack of the whip which comes from an
empty vehicle as it is being driven at its slowest rate to pick up a fare. The
slightest touch with the whip would be more effective. Allowing, however, that
it were absolutely necessary to remind the horse of the presence of the whip by
continually cracking it, a crack that made one hundredth part of the noise would
be sufficient. It is well known that animals in regard to hearing and seeing notice
the slightest indications, even indications that are scarcely perceptible to
ourselves. Trained dogs and canary birds furnish astonishing examples of this.
Accordingly, this cracking of whips must be regarded as something purely
wanton; nay, as an impudent defiance, on the part of those who work with their
hands, offered to those who work with their heads. That such infamy is endured
in a town is a piece of barbarity and injustice, the more so as it could be easily
removed by a police notice requiring every whip cord to have a knot at the end
of it. It would do no harm to draw the proletariat's attention to the classes above
him who work with their heads; for he has unbounded fear of any kind of head
work. A fellow who rides through the narrow streets of a populous town with
unemployed post-horses or cart-horses, unceasingly cracking with all his
strength a whip several yards long, instantly deserves to dismount and receive
five really good blows with a stick. If all the philanthropists in the world,
together with all the legislators, met in order to bring forward their reasons for
the total abolition of corporal punishment, I would not be persuaded to the
contrary.
But we can see often enough something that is even still worse. I mean a
carter walking alone, and without any horses, through the streets incessantly
cracking his whip. He has become so accustomed to the crack in consequence of
its unwarrantable toleration. Since one looks after one's body and all its needs in
a most tender fashion, is the thinking mind to be the only thing that never
experiences the slightest consideration or protection, to say nothing of respect?
Carters, sack-bearers (porters), messengers, and such-like, are the beasts of
burden of humanity; they should be treated absolutely with justice, fairness,
forbearance and care, but they ought not to be allowed to thwart the higher
exertions of the human race by wantonly making a noise. I should like to know
how many great and splendid thoughts these whips have cracked out of the
world. If I had any authority, I should soon produce in the heads of these carters
an inseparable nexus idearum between cracking a whip and receiving a
whipping.
Let us hope that those nations with more intelligence and refined feelings
will make a beginning, and then by force of example induce the Germans to do

the same.[8] Meanwhile, hear what Thomas Hood says of them (Up the Rhine):
"For a musical people they are the most noisy I ever met with" That they are so
is not due to their being more prone to making a noise than other people, but to
their insensibility, which springs from obtuseness; they are not disturbed by it in
reading or thinking, because they do not think; they only smoke, which is their
substitute for thought. The general toleration of unnecessary noise, for instance,
of the clashing of doors, which is so extremely ill-mannered and vulgar, is a
direct proof of the dulness and poverty of thought that one meets with
everywhere. In Germany it seems as though it were planned that no one should
think for noise; take the inane drumming that goes on as an instance. Finally, as
far as the literature treated of in this chapter is concerned, I have only one work
to recommend, but it is an excellent one: I mean a poetical epistle in terzo rimo
by the famous painter Bronzino, entitled "De' Romori: a Messer Luca Martini" It
describes fully and amusingly the torture to which one is put by the many kinds
of noises of a small Italian town. It is written in tragicomic style. This epistle is
to be found in Opere burlesche del Berni, Aretino ed altri, vol. ii. p. 258,
apparently published in Utrecht in 1771.
The nature of our intellect is such that ideas are said to spring by abstraction
from observations, so that the latter are in existence before the former. If this is
really what takes place, as is the case with a man who has merely his own
experience as his teacher and book, he knows quite well which of his
observations belong to and are represented by each of his ideas; he is perfectly
acquainted with both, and accordingly he treats everything correctly that comes
before his notice. We might call this the natural mode of education.
On the other hand, an artificial education is having one's head crammed full
of ideas, derived from hearing others talk, from learning and reading, before one
has anything like an extensive knowledge of the world as it is and as one sees it.
The observations which produce all these ideas are said to come later on with
experience; but until then these ideas are applied wrongly, and accordingly both
things and men are judged wrongly, seen wrongly, and treated wrongly. And so
it is that education perverts the mind; and this is why, after a long spell of
learning and reading, we enter the world, in our youth, with views that are partly
simple, partly perverted; consequently we comport ourselves with an air of
anxiety at one time, at another of presumption. This is because our head is full of
ideas which we are now trying to make use of, but almost always apply wrongly.
This is the result of [Greek: hysteron proteron] (putting the cart before the
horse), since we are directly opposing the natural development of our mind by
obtaining ideas first and observations last; for teachers, instead of developing in
a boy his faculties of discernment and judgment, and of thinking for himself,

merely strive to stuff his head full of other people's thoughts. Subsequently, all
the opinions that have sprung from misapplied ideas have to be rectified by a
lengthy experience; and it is seldom that they are completely rectified. This is
why so few men of learning have such sound common sense as is quite common
among the illiterate.
*
From what has been said, the principal point in education is that one's
knowledge of the world begins at the right end; and the attainment of which
might be designated as the aim of all education. But, as has been pointed out,
this depends principally on the observation of each thing preceding the idea one
forms of it; further, that narrow ideas precede broader; so that the whole of one's
instruction is given in the order that the ideas themselves during formation must
have followed. But directly this order is not strictly adhered to, imperfect and
subsequently wrong ideas spring up; and finally there arises a perverted view of
the world in keeping with the nature of the individual--a view such as almost
every one holds for a long time, and most people to the end of their lives. If a
man analyses his own character, he will find that it was not until he reached a
very ripe age, and in some cases quite unexpectedly, that he was able to rightly
and clearly understand many matters of a quite simple nature.
Previously, there had been an obscure point in his knowledge of the world
which had arisen through his omitting something in his early education, whether
he had been either artificially educated by men or just naturally by his own
experience. Therefore one should try to find out the strictly natural course of
knowledge, so that by keeping methodically to it children may become
acquainted with the affairs of the world, without getting false ideas into their
heads, which frequently cannot be driven out again. In carrying this out, one
must next take care that children do not use words with which they connect no
clear meaning. Even children have, as a rule, that unhappy tendency of being
satisfied with words instead of wishing to understand things, and of learning
words by heart, so that they may make use of them when they are in a difficulty.
This tendency clings to them afterwards, so that the knowledge of many learned
men becomes mere verbosity.
However, the principal thing must always be to let one's observations
precede one's ideas, and not the reverse as is usually and unfortunately the case;
which may be likened to a child coming into the world with its feet foremost, or
a rhyme begun before thinking of its reason. While the child's mind has made a
very few observations one inculcates it with ideas and opinions, which are,
strictly speaking, prejudices. His observations and experience are developed
through this ready-made apparatus instead of his ideas being developed out of

his own observations. In viewing the world one sees many things from many
sides, consequently this is not such a short or quick way of learning as that
which makes use of abstract ideas, and quickly comes to a decision about
everything; therefore preconceived ideas will not be rectified until late, or it may
be they are never rectified. For, when a man's view contradicts his ideas, he will
reject at the outset what it renders evident as one-sided, nay, he will deny it and
shut his eyes to it, so that his preconceived ideas may remain unaffected. And so
it happens that many men go through life full of oddities, caprices, fancies, and
prejudices, until they finally become fixed ideas. He has never attempted to
abstract fundamental ideas from his own observations and experience, because
he has got everything ready-made from other people; and it is for this very
reason that he and countless others are so insipid and shallow. Instead of such a
system, the natural system of education should be employed in educating
children. No idea should be impregnated but what has come through the medium
of observations, or at any rate been verified by them. A child would have fewer
ideas, but they would be well-grounded and correct. It would learn to measure
things according to its own standard and not according to another's. It would
then never acquire a thousand whims and prejudices which must be eradicated
by the greater part of subsequent experience and education. Its mind would
henceforth be accustomed to thoroughness and clearness; the child would rely on
its own judgment, and be free from prejudices. And, in general, children should
not get to know life, in any aspect whatever, from the copy before they have
learnt it from the original. Instead, therefore, of hastening to place mere books in
their hands, one should make them gradually acquainted with things and the
circumstances of human life, and above everything one should take care to guide
them to a clear grasp of reality, and to teach them to obtain their ideas directly
from the real world, and to form them in keeping with it--but not to get them
from elsewhere, as from books, fables, or what others have said--and then later
to make use of such ready-made ideas in real life. The result will be that their
heads are full of chimeras and that some will have a wrong comprehension of
things, and others will fruitlessly endeavour to remodel the world according to
those chimeras, and so get on to wrong paths both in theory and practice. For it
is incredible how much harm is done by false notions which have been
implanted early in life, only to develop later on into prejudices; the later
education which we get from the world and real life must be employed in
eradicating these early ideas. And this is why, as is related by Diogenes Laertius,
Antisthenes gave the following answer: [Greek: erotaetheis ti ton mathaematon
anankaiotaton, ephae, "to kaka apomathein."] (Interrogatus quaenam esset
disciplina maxime necessaria, Mala, inquit, dediscere.)

*
Children should be kept from all kinds of instruction that may make errors
possible until their sixteenth year, that is to say, from philosophy, religion, and
general views of every description; because it is the errors that are acquired in
early days that remain, as a rule, ineradicable, and because the faculty of
judgment is the last to arrive at maturity. They should only be interested in such
things that make errors impossible, such as mathematics, in things which are not
very dangerous, such as languages, natural science, history, and so forth; in
general, the branches of knowledge which are to be taken up at any age must be
within reach of the intellect at that age and perfectly comprehensible to it.
Childhood and youth are the time for collecting data and getting to know
specially and thoroughly individual and particular things. On the other hand, all
judgment of a general nature must at that time be suspended, and final
explanations left alone. One should leave the faculty of judgment alone, as it
only comes with maturity and experience, and also take care that one does not
anticipate it by inculcating prejudice, when it will be crippled for ever.
On the contrary, the memory is to be specially exercised, as it has its
greatest strength and tenacity in youth; however, what has to be retained must be
chosen with the most careful and scrupulous consideration. For as it is what we
have learnt well in our youth that lasts, we should take the greatest possible
advantage of this precious gift. If we picture to ourselves how deeply engraven
on our memory the people are whom we knew during the first twelve years of
our life, and how indelibly imprinted are also the events of that time, and most of
the things that we then experienced, heard, or learnt, the idea of basing education
on this susceptibility and tenacity of the youthful mind will seem natural; in that
the mind receives its impressions according to a strict method and a regular
system. But because the years of youth that are assigned to man are only few,
and the capacity for remembering, in general, is always limited (and still more so
the capacity for remembering of the individual), everything depends on the
memory being filled with what is most essential and important in any department
of knowledge, to the exclusion of everything else. This selection should be made
by the most capable minds and masters in every branch of knowledge after the
most mature consideration, and the result of it established. Such a selection must
be based on a sifting of matters which are necessary and important for a man to
know in general, and also for him to know in a particular profession or calling.
Knowledge of the first kind would have to be divided into graduated courses,
like an encyclopædia, corresponding to the degree of general culture which each
man has attained in his external circumstances; from a course restricted to what
is necessary for primary instruction up to the matter contained in every branch of

the philosophical faculty. Knowledge of the second kind would, however, be
reserved for him who had really mastered the selection in all its branches. The
whole would give a canon specially devised for intellectual education, which
naturally would require revision every ten years. By such an arrangement the
youthful power of the memory would be put to the best advantage, and it would
furnish the faculty of judgment with excellent material when it appeared later on.
*
What is meant by maturity of knowledge is that state of perfection to which
any one individual is able to bring it, when an exact correspondence has been
effected between the whole of his abstract ideas and his own personal
observations: whereby each of his ideas rests directly or indirectly on a basis of
observation, which alone gives it any real value; and likewise he is able to place
every observation that he makes under the right idea corresponding to it.
Maturity of knowledge is the work of experience alone, and consequently
of time. For the knowledge we acquire from our own observation is, as a rule,
distinct from that we get through abstract ideas; the former is acquired in the
natural way, while the latter comes through good and bad instruction and what
other people have told to us. Consequently, in youth there is generally little
harmony and connection between our ideas, which mere expressions have fixed,
and our real knowledge, which has been acquired by observation. Later they
both gradually approach and correct each other; but maturity of knowledge does
not exist until they have become quite incorporated. This maturity is quite
independent of that other kind of perfection, the standard of which may be high
or low, I mean the perfection to which the capacities of an individual may be
brought; it is not based on a correspondence between the abstract and intuitive
knowledge, but on the degree of intensity of each.
The most necessary thing for the practical man is the attainment of an exact
and thorough knowledge of what is really going on in the world; but it is also the
most irksome, for a man may continue studying until old age without having
learnt all that is to be learnt; while one can master the most important things in
the sciences in one's youth. In getting such a knowledge of the world, it is as a
novice that the boy and youth have the first and most difficult lessons to learn;
but frequently even the matured man has still much to learn. The study is of
considerable difficulty in itself, but it is made doubly difficult by novels, which
depict the ways of the world and of men who do not exist in real life. But these
are accepted with the credulity of youth, and become incorporated with the
mind; so that now, in the place of purely negative ignorance, a whole framework
of wrong ideas, which are positively wrong, crops up, subsequently confusing
the schooling of experience and representing the lesson it teaches in a false light.

If the youth was previously in the dark, he will now be led astray by a will-o'-
the-wisp: and with a girl this is still more frequently the case. They have been
deluded into an absolutely false view of life by reading novels, and expectations
have been raised that can never be fulfilled. This generally has the most harmful
effect on their whole lives. Those men who had neither time nor opportunity to
read novels in their youth, such as those who work with their hands, have
decided advantage over them. Few of these novels are exempt from reproach--
nay, whose effect is contrary to bad. Before all others, for instance, Gil Blas and
the other works of Le Sage (or rather their Spanish originals); further, The Vicar
of Wakefield, and to some extent the novels of Walter Scott. Don Quixote may
be regarded as a satirical presentation of the error in question.
FOOTNOTES:
[8] According to a notice from the Munich Society for the Protection of
Animals, the superfluous whipping and cracking were strictly forbidden in
Nuremberg in December 1858.
ON READING AND BOOKS.
Ignorance is degrading only when it is found in company with riches. Want
and penury restrain the poor man; his employment takes the place of knowledge
and occupies his thoughts: while rich men who are ignorant live for their
pleasure only, and resemble a beast; as may be seen daily. They are to be
reproached also for not having used wealth and leisure for that which lends them
their greatest value.
When we read, another person thinks for us: we merely repeat his mental
process. It is the same as the pupil, in learning to write, following with his pen
the lines that have been pencilled by the teacher. Accordingly, in reading, the
work of thinking is, for the greater part, done for us. This is why we are
consciously relieved when we turn to reading after being occupied with our own
thoughts. But, in reading, our head is, however, really only the arena of some
one else's thoughts. And so it happens that the person who reads a great deal--
that is to say, almost the whole day, and recreates himself by spending the
intervals in thoughtless diversion, gradually loses the ability to think for himself;
just as a man who is always riding at last forgets how to walk. Such, however, is
the case with many men of learning: they have read themselves stupid. For to
read in every spare moment, and to read constantly, is more paralysing to the
mind than constant manual work, which, at any rate, allows one to follow one's
own thoughts. Just as a spring, through the continual pressure of a foreign body,

at last loses its elasticity, so does the mind if it has another person's thoughts
continually forced upon it. And just as one spoils the stomach by overfeeding
and thereby impairs the whole body, so can one overload and choke the mind by
giving it too much nourishment. For the more one reads the fewer are the traces
left of what one has read; the mind is like a tablet that has been written over and
over. Hence it is impossible to reflect; and it is only by reflection that one can
assimilate what one has read if one reads straight ahead without pondering over
it later, what has been read does not take root, but is for the most part lost.
Indeed, it is the same with mental as with bodily food: scarcely the fifth part of
what a man takes is assimilated; the remainder passes off in evaporation,
respiration, and the like.
From all this it may be concluded that thoughts put down on paper are
nothing more than footprints in the sand: one sees the road the man has taken,
but in order to know what he saw on the way, one requires his eyes.
*
No literary quality can be attained by reading writers who possess it: be it,
for example, persuasiveness, imagination, the gift of drawing comparisons,
boldness or bitterness, brevity or grace, facility of expression or wit, unexpected
contrasts, a laconic manner, naïveté, and the like. But if we are already gifted
with these qualities--that is to say, if we possess them potentia--we can call them
forth and bring them to consciousness; we can discern to what uses they are to
be put; we can be strengthened in our inclination, nay, may have courage, to use
them; we can judge by examples the effect of their application and so learn the
correct use of them; and it is only after we have accomplished all this that we
actu possess these qualities. This is the only way in which reading can form
writing, since it teaches us the use to which we can put our own natural gifts;
and in order to do this it must be taken for granted that these qualities are in us.
Without them we learn nothing from reading but cold, dead mannerisms, and we
become mere imitators.
*
The health officer should, in the interest of one's eyes, see that the
smallness of print has a fixed minimum, which must not be exceeded. When I
was in Venice in 1818, at which time the genuine Venetian chain was still being
made, a goldsmith told me that those who made the catena fina turned blind at
thirty.
*
As the strata of the earth preserve in rows the beings which lived in former
times, so do the shelves of a library preserve in a like manner the errors of the
past and expositions concerning them. Like those creatures, they too were full of

life in their time and made a great deal of noise; but now they are stiff and
fossilised, and only of interest to the literary palaeontologist.
*
According to Herodotus, Xerxes wept at the sight of his army, which was
too extensive for him to scan, at the thought that a hundred years hence not one
of all these would be alive. Who would not weep at the thought in looking over a
big catalogue that of all these books not one will be in existence in ten years'
time?
It is the same in literature as in life. Wherever one goes one immediately
comes upon the incorrigible mob of humanity. It exists everywhere in legions;
crowding, soiling everything, like flies in summer. Hence the numberless bad
books, those rank weeds of literature which extract nourishment from the corn
and choke it.
They monopolise the time, money, and attention which really belong to
good books and their noble aims; they are written merely with a view to making
money or procuring places. They are not only useless, but they do positive harm.
Nine-tenths of the whole of our present literature aims solely at taking a few
shillings out of the public's pocket, and to accomplish this, author, publisher, and
reviewer have joined forces.
There is a more cunning and worse trick, albeit a profitable one.
Littérateurs, hack-writers, and productive authors have succeeded, contrary to
good taste and the true culture of the age, in bringing the world elegante into
leading-strings, so that they have been taught to read a tempo and all the same
thing--namely, the newest books order that they may have material for
conversation in their social circles. Bad novels and similar productions from the
pen of writers who were once famous, such as Spindler, Bulwer, Eugène Sue,
and so on, serve this purpose. But what can be more miserable than the fate of a
reading public of this kind, that feels always impelled to read the latest writings
of extremely commonplace authors who write for money only, and therefore
exist in numbers? And for the sake of this they merely know by name the works
of the rare and superior writers, of all ages and countries.
Literary newspapers, since they print the daily smatterings of commonplace
people, are especially a cunning means for robbing from the aesthetic public the
time which should be devoted to the genuine productions of art for the
furtherance of culture.
Hence, in regard to our subject, the art of not reading is highly important.
This consists in not taking a book into one's hand merely because it is interesting
the great public at the time--such as political or religious pamphlets, novels,
poetry, and the like, which make a noise and reach perhaps several editions in

their first and last years of existence. Remember rather that the man who writes
for fools always finds a large public: and only read for a limited and definite
time exclusively the works of great minds, those who surpass other men of all
times and countries, and whom the voice of fame points to as such. These alone
really educate and instruct.
One can never read too little of bad, or too much of good books: bad books
are intellectual poison; they destroy the mind.
In order to read what is good one must make it a condition never to read
what is bad; for life is short, and both time and strength limited.
*
Books are written sometimes about this, sometimes about that great thinker
of former times, and the public reads these books, but not the works of the man
himself. This is because it wants to read only what has just been printed, and
because similis simili gaudet, and it finds the shallow, insipid gossip of some
stupid head of to-day more homogeneous and agreeable than the thoughts of
great minds. I have to thank fate, however, that a fine epigram of A.B. Schlegel,
which has since been my guiding star, came before my notice as a youth:
"Leset fleizig die Alten, die wahren eigentlich Alten Was die Neuen davon
sagen bedeutet nicht viel."
Oh, how like one commonplace mind is to another! How they are all
fashioned in one form! How they all think alike under similar circumstances, and
never differ! This is why their views are so personal and petty. And a stupid
public reads the worthless trash written by these fellows for no other reason than
that it has been printed to-day, while it leaves the works of great thinkers
undisturbed on the bookshelves.
Incredible are the folly and perversity of a public that will leave unread
writings of the noblest and rarest of minds, of all times and all countries, for the
sake of reading the writings of commonplace persons which appear daily, and
breed every year in countless numbers like flies; merely because these writings
have been printed to-day and are still wet from the press. It would be better if
they were thrown on one side and rejected the day they appeared, as they must
be after the lapse of a few years. They will then afford material for laughter as
illustrating the follies of a former time.
It is because people will only read what is the newest instead of what is the
best of all ages, that writers remain in the narrow circle of prevailing ideas, and
that the age sinks deeper and deeper in its own mire.
*
There are at all times two literatures which, although scarcely known to
each other, progress side by side--the one real, the other merely apparent. The

former grows into literature that lasts. Pursued by people who live for science or
poetry, it goes its way earnestly and quietly, but extremely slowly; and it
produces in Europe scarcely a dozen works in a century, which, however, are
permanent. The other literature is pursued by people who live on science or
poetry; it goes at a gallop amid a great noise and shouting of those taking part,
and brings yearly many thousand works into the market. But after a few years
one asks, Where are they? where is their fame, which was so great formerly?
This class of literature may be distinguished as fleeting, the other as permanent.
*
It would be a good thing to buy books if one could also buy the time to read
them; but one usually confuses the purchase of books with the acquisition of
their contents. To desire that a man should retain everything he has ever read, is
the same as wishing him to retain in his stomach all that he has ever eaten. He
has been bodily nourished on what he has eaten, and mentally on what he has
read, and through them become what he is. As the body assimilates what is
homogeneous to it, so will a man retain what interests him; in other words, what
coincides with his system of thought or suits his ends. Every one has aims, but
very few have anything approaching a system of thought. This is why such
people do not take an objective interest in anything, and why they learn nothing
from what they read: they remember nothing about it.
Repetitio est mater studiorum. Any kind of important book should
immediately be read twice, partly because one grasps the matter in its entirety
the second time, and only really understands the beginning when the end is
known; and partly because in reading it the second time one's temper and mood
are different, so that one gets another impression; it may be that one sees the
matter in another light.
Works are the quintessence of a mind, and are therefore always of by far
greater value than conversation, even if it be the conversation of the greatest
mind. In every essential a man's works surpass his conversation and leave it far
behind. Even the writings of an ordinary man may be instructive, worth reading,
and entertaining, for the simple reason that they are the quintessence of that
man's mind--that is to say, the writings are the result and fruit of his whole
thought and study; while we should be dissatisfied with his conversation.
Accordingly, it is possible to read books written by people whose conversation
would give us no satisfaction; so that the mind will only by degrees attain high
culture by finding entertainment almost entirely in books, and not in men.
There is nothing that so greatly recreates the mind as the works of the old
classic writers. Directly one has been taken up, even if it is only for half-an-hour,
one feels as quickly refreshed, relieved, purified, elevated, and strengthened as if

one had refreshed oneself at a mountain stream. Is this due to the perfections of
the old languages, or to the greatness of the minds whose works have remained
unharmed and untouched for centuries? Perhaps to both combined. This I know,
directly we stop learning the old languages (as is at present threatening) a new
class of literature will spring up, consisting of writing that is more barbaric,
stupid, and worthless than has ever yet existed; that, in particular, the German
language, which possesses some of the beauties of the old languages, will be
systematically spoilt and stripped by these worthless contemporary scribblers,
until, little by little, it becomes impoverished, crippled, and reduced to a
miserable jargon.
Half a century is always a considerable time in the history of the universe,
for the matter which forms it is always shifting; something is always taking
place. But the same length of time in literature often goes for nothing, because
nothing has happened; unskilful attempts don't count; so that we are exactly
where we were fifty years previously.
To illustrate this: imagine the progress of knowledge among mankind in the
form of a planet's course. The false paths the human race soon follows after any
important progress has been made represent the epicycles in the Ptolemaic
system; after passing through any one of them the planet is just where it was
before it entered it. The great minds, however, which really bring the race further
on its course, do not accompany it on the epicycles which it makes every time.
This explains why posthumous fame is got at the expense of contemporary fame,
and vice versâ. We have an instance of such an epicycle in the philosophy of
Fichte and Schelling, crowned by Hegel's caricature of it. This epicycle issued
from the limit to which philosophy had been finally brought by Kant, where I
myself took it up again later to carry it further. In the interim the false
philosophers I have mentioned, and some others, passed through their epicycle,
which has just been terminated; hence the people who accompanied them are
conscious of being exactly at the point from which they started.
This condition of things shows why the scientific, literary, and artistic spirit
of the age is declared bankrupt about every thirty years. During that period the
errors have increased to such an extent that they fall under the weight of their
absurdity; while at the same time the opposition to them has become stronger. At
this point there is a crash, which is followed by an error in the opposite direction.
To show the course that is taken in its periodical return would be the true
practical subject of the history of literature; little notice is taken of it, however.
Moreover, through the comparative shortness of such periods, the data of remote
times are with difficulty collected; hence the matter can be most conveniently
observed in one's own age. An example of this taken from physical science is

found in Werter's Neptunian geology. But let me keep to the example already
quoted above, for it is nearest to us. In German philosophy Kant's brilliant period
was immediately followed by another period, which aimed at being imposing
rather than convincing. Instead of being solid and clear, it aimed at being
brilliant and hyperbolical, and, in particular, unintelligible; instead of seeking
truth, it intrigued. Under these circumstances philosophy could make no
progress. Ultimately the whole school and its method became bankrupt. For the
audacious, sophisticated nonsense on the one hand, and the unconscionable
praise on the other of Hegel and his fellows, as well as the apparent object of the
whole affair, rose to such a pitch that in the end the charlatanry of the thing was
obvious to everybody; and when, in consequence of certain revelations, the
protection that had been given it by the upper classes was withdrawn, it was
talked about by everybody. This most miserable of all the philosophies that have
ever existed dragged down with it into the abyss of discredit the systems of
Fichte and Schelling, which had preceded it. So that the absolute philosophical
futility of the first half of the century following upon Kant in Germany is
obvious; and yet the Germans boast of their gift for philosophy compared with
foreigners, especially since an English writer, with malicious irony, called them
a nation of thinkers.
Those who want an example of the general scheme of epicycles taken from
the history of art need only look at the School of Sculpture which flourished in
the last century under Bernini, and especially at its further cultivation in France.
This school represented commonplace nature instead of antique beauty, and the
manners of a French minuet instead of antique simplicity and grace. It became
bankrupt when, under Winckelmann's direction, a return was made to the antique
school. Another example is supplied in the painting belonging to the first quarter
of this century. Art was regarded merely as a means and instrument of mediaeval
religious feeling, and consequently ecclesiastical subjects alone were chosen for
its themes. These, however, were treated by painters who were wanting in
earnestness of faith, and in their delusion they took for examples Francesco
Francia, Pietro Perugino, Angelico da Fiesole, and others like them, even
holding them in greater esteem than the truly great masters who followed. In
view of this error, and because in poetry an analogous effort had at the same
time met with favour, Goethe wrote his parable Pfaffenspiel. This school,
reputedly capricious, became bankrupt, and was followed by a return to nature,
which made itself known in genre pictures and scenes of life of every
description, even though it strayed sometimes into vulgarity.
It is the same with the progress of the human mind in the history of
literature, which is for the most part like the catalogue of a cabinet of

deformities; the spirit in which they keep the longest is pigskin. We do not need
to look there for the few who have been born shapely; they are still alive, and we
come across them in every part of the world, like immortals whose youth is ever
fresh. They alone form what I have distinguished as real literature, the history of
which, although poor in persons, we learn from our youth up out of the mouths
of educated people, and not first of all from compilations. As a specific against
the present prevailing monomania for reading literary histories, so that one may
be able to chatter about everything without really knowing anything, let me refer
you to a passage from Lichtenberg which is well worth reading (vol. ii. p. 302 of
the old edition).
But I wish some one would attempt a tragical history of literature, showing
how the greatest writers and artists have been treated during their lives by the
various nations which have produced them and whose proudest possessions they
are. It would show us the endless fight which the good and genuine works of all
periods and countries have had to carry on against the perverse and bad. It would
depict the martyrdom of almost all those who truly enlightened humanity, of
almost all the great masters in every kind of art; it would show us how they, with
few exceptions, were tormented without recognition, without any to share their
misery, without followers; how they existed in poverty and misery whilst fame,
honour, and riches fell to the lot of the worthless; it would reveal that what
happened to them happened to Esau, who, while hunting the deer for his father,
was robbed of the blessing by Jacob disguised in his brother's coat; and how
through it all the love of their subject kept them up, until at last the trying fight
of such a teacher of the human race is ended, the immortal laurel offered to him,
and the time come when it can be said of him
"Der schwere Panzer wird zum Flügelkleide Kurz ist der Schmerz,
unendlich ist die Freude."
THE EMPTINESS OF EXISTENCE.
This emptiness finds its expression in the whole form of existence, in the
infiniteness of Time and Space as opposed to the finiteness of the individual in
both; in the flitting present as the only manner of real existence; in the
dependence and relativity of all things; in constantly Becoming without Being;
in continually wishing without being satisfied; in an incessant thwarting of one's
efforts, which go to make up life, until victory is won. Time, and the
transitoriness of all things, are merely the form under which the will to live,
which as the thing-in-itself is imperishable, has revealed to Time the futility of

its efforts. Time is that by which at every moment all things become as nothing
in our hands, and thereby lose all their true value.
*
What has been exists no more; and exists just as little as that which has
never been. But everything that exists has been in the next moment. Hence
something belonging to the present, however unimportant it may be, is superior
to something important belonging to the past; this is because the former is a
reality and related to the latter as something is to nothing.
A man to his astonishment all at once becomes conscious of existing after
having been in a state of non-existence for many thousands of years, when,
presently again, he returns to a state of non-existence for an equally long time.
This cannot possibly be true, says the heart; and even the crude mind, after
giving the matter its consideration, must have some sort of presentiment of the
ideality of time. This ideality of time, together with that of space, is the key to
every true system of metaphysics, because it finds room for quite another order
of things than is to be found in nature. This is why Kant is so great.
Of every event in our life it is only for a moment that we can say that it is;
after that we must say for ever that it was. Every evening makes us poorer by a
day. It would probably make us angry to see this short space of time slipping
away, if we were not secretly conscious in the furthest depths of our being that
the spring of eternity belongs to us, and that in it we are always able to have life
renewed.
Reflections of the nature of those above may, indeed, establish the belief
that to enjoy the present, and to make this the purpose of one's life, is the greatest
wisdom; since it is the present alone that is real, everything else being only the
play of thought. But such a purpose might just as well be called the greatest
folly, for that which in the next moment exists no more, and vanishes as
completely as a dream, can never be worth a serious effort.
*
Our existence is based solely on the ever-fleeting present. Essentially,
therefore, it has to take the form of continual motion without there ever being
any possibility of our finding the rest after which we are always striving. It is the
same as a man running downhill, who falls if he tries to stop, and it is only by his
continuing to run on that he keeps on his legs; it is like a pole balanced on one's
finger-tips, or like a planet that would fall into its sun as soon as it stopped
hurrying onwards. Hence unrest is the type of existence.
In a world like this, where there is no kind of stability, no possibility of
anything lasting, but where everything is thrown into a restless whirlpool of
change, where everything hurries on, flies, and is maintained in the balance by a

continual advancing and moving, it is impossible to imagine happiness. It cannot
dwell where, as Plato says, continual Becoming and never Being is all that takes
place. First of all, no man is happy; he strives his whole life long after imaginary
happiness, which he seldom attains, and if he does, then it is only to be
disillusioned; and as a rule he is shipwrecked in the end and enters the harbour
dismasted. Then it is all the same whether he has been happy or unhappy in a life
which was made up of a merely ever-changing present and is now at an end.
Meanwhile it surprises one to find, both in the world of human beings and
in that of animals, that this great, manifold, and restless motion is sustained and
kept going by the medium of two simple impulses--hunger and the instinct of
sex, helped perhaps a little by boredom--and that these have the power to form
the primum mobile of so complex a machinery, setting in motion the variegated
show!
Looking at the matter a little closer, we see at the very outset that the
existence of inorganic matter is being constantly attacked by chemical forces
which eventually annihilates it. While organic existence is only made possible
by continual change of matter, to keep up a perpetual supply of which it must
consequently have help from without. Therefore organic life is like balancing a
pole on one's hand; it must be kept in continual motion, and have a constant
supply of matter of which it is continually and endlessly in need. Nevertheless it
is only by means of this organic life that consciousness is possible.
Accordingly this is a finite existence, and its antithesis would be an infinite,
neither exposed to any attack from without nor in want of help from without, and
hence [Greek: aei hosautos on], in eternal rest; [Greek: oute gignomenon, oute
apollymenon], without change, without time, and without diversity; the negative
knowledge of which is the fundamental note of Plato's philosophy. The denial of
the will to live reveals the way to such a state as this.
*
The scenes of our life are like pictures in rough mosaic, which have no
effect at close quarters, but must be looked at from a distance in order to discern
their beauty. So that to obtain something we have desired is to find out that it is
worthless; we are always living in expectation of better things, while, at the
same time, we often repent and long for things that belong to the past. We accept
the present as something that is only temporary, and regard it only as a means to
accomplish our aim. So that most people will find if they look back when their
life is at an end, that they have lived their lifelong ad interim, and they will be
surprised to find that something they allowed to pass by unnoticed and
unenjoyed was just their life--that is to say, it was the very thing in the
expectation of which they lived. And so it may be said of man in general that,

befooled by hope, he dances into the arms of death.
Then again, there is the insatiability of each individual will; every time it is
satisfied a new wish is engendered, and there is no end to its eternally insatiable
desires.
This is because the Will, taken in itself, is the lord of worlds; since
everything belongs to it, it is not satisfied with a portion of anything, but only
with the whole, which, however, is endless. Meanwhile it must excite our pity
when we consider how extremely little this lord of the world receives, when it
makes its appearance as an individual; for the most part only just enough to
maintain the body. This is why man is so very unhappy.
In the present age, which is intellectually impotent and remarkable for its
veneration of what is bad in every form--a condition of things which is quite in
keeping with the coined word "Jetztzeit" (present time), as pretentious as it is
cacophonic--the pantheists make bold to say that life is, as they call it, "an end-in
itself." If our existence in this world were an end-in-itself, it would be the most
absurd end that was ever determined; even we ourselves or any one else might
have imagined it.
Life presents itself next as a task, the task, that is, of subsisting de gagner sa
vie. If this is solved, then that which has been won becomes a burden, and
involves the second task of its being got rid of in order to ward off boredom,
which, like a bird of prey, is ready to fall upon any life that is secure from want.
So that the first task is to win something, and the second, after the
something has been won, to forget about it, otherwise it becomes a burden.
That human life must be a kind of mistake is sufficiently clear from the fact
that man is a compound of needs, which are difficult to satisfy; moreover, if they
are satisfied, all he is granted is a state of painlessness, in which he can only give
himself up to boredom. This is a precise proof that existence in itself has no
value, since boredom is merely the feeling of the emptiness of life. If, for
instance, life, the longing for which constitutes our very being, had in itself any
positive and real value, boredom could not exist; mere existence in itself would
supply us with everything, and therefore satisfy us. But our existence would not
be a joyous thing unless we were striving after something; distance and obstacles
to be overcome then represent our aim as something that would satisfy us--an
illusion which vanishes when our aim has been attained; or when we are
engaged in something that is of a purely intellectual nature, when, in reality, we
have retired from the world, so that we may observe it from the outside, like
spectators at a theatre. Even sensual pleasure itself is nothing but a continual
striving, which ceases directly its aim is attained. As soon as we are not engaged
in one of these two ways, but thrown back on existence itself, we are convinced

of the emptiness and worthlessness of it; and this it is we call boredom. That
innate and ineradicable craving for what is out of the common proves how glad
we are to have the natural and tedious course of things interrupted. Even the
pomp and splendour of the rich in their stately castles is at bottom nothing but a
futile attempt to escape the very essence of existence, misery.
*
That the most perfect manifestation of the will to live, which presents itself
in the extremely subtle and complicated machinery of the human organism, must
fall to dust and finally deliver up its whole being to dissolution, is the naïve way
in which Nature, invariably true and genuine, declares the whole striving of the
will in its very essence to be of no avail. If it were of any value in itself,
something unconditioned, its end would not be non-existence. This is the
dominant note of Goethe's beautiful song:
"Hoch auf dem alten Thurme steht Des Helden edler Geist."
That man is nothing but a phenomenon, that he is not-the-thing-in-itself--I
mean that he is not [Greek: ontos on]--is proved by the fact that death is a
necessity.
And how different the beginning of our life is to the end! The former is
made up of deluded hopes, sensual enjoyment, while the latter is pursued by
bodily decay and the odour of death.
The road dividing the two, as far as our well-being and enjoyment of life
are concerned, is downhill; the dreaminess of childhood, the joyousness of
youth, the troubles of middle age, the infirmity and frequent misery of old age,
the agonies of our last illness, and finally the struggle with death--do all these
not make one feel that existence is nothing but a mistake, the consequences of
which are becoming gradually more and more obvious?
It would be wisest to regard life as a desengaño, a delusion; that everything
is intended to be so is sufficiently clear.
Our life is of a microscopical nature; it is an indivisible point which, drawn
out by the powerful lenses of Time and Space, becomes considerably magnified.
Time is an element in our brain which by the means of duration gives a
semblance of reality to the absolutely empty existence of things and ourselves.
How foolish it is for a man to regret and deplore his having made no use of
past opportunities, which might have secured him this or that happiness or
enjoyment! What is there left of them now? Only the ghost of a remembrance!
And it is the same with everything that really falls to our lot. So that the form of
time itself, and how much is reckoned on it, is a definite way of proving to us the
vanity of all earthly enjoyment.
Our existence, as well as that of all animals, is not one that lasts, it is only

temporary, merely an existentia fluxa, which may be compared to a water-mill in
that it is constantly changing.
It is true that the form of the body lasts for a time, but only on condition
that the matter is constantly changing, that the old matter is thrown off and new
added. And it is the chief work of all living creatures to secure a constant supply
of suitable matter. At the same time, they are conscious that their existence is so
fashioned as to last only for a certain time, as has been said. This is why they
attempt, when they are taking leave of life, to hand it over to some one else who
will take their place. This attempt takes the form of the sexual instinct in self-
consciousness, and in the consciousness of other things presents itself
objectively--that is, in the form of genital instinct. This instinct may be
compared to the threading of a string of pearls; one individual succeeding
another as rapidly as the pearls on the thread. If we, in imagination, hasten on
this succession, we shall see that the matter is constantly changing in the whole
row just as it is changing in each pearl, while it retains the same form: we will
then realise that we have only a quasi-existence. That it is only Ideas which
exist, and the shadow-like nature of the thing corresponding to them, is the basis
of Plato's teachings.
That we are nothing but phenomena as opposed to the thing-in-itself is
confirmed, exemplified, and made clear by the fact that the conditio sine qua non
of our existence is a continual flowing off and flowing to of matter which, as
nourishment, is a constant need. So that we resemble such phenomena as smoke,
fire, or a jet of water, all of which die out or stop directly there is no supply of
matter. It may be said then that the will to live presents itself in the form of pure
phenomena which end in nothing. This nothingness, however, together with the
phenomena, remain within the boundary of the will to live and are based on it. I
admit that this is somewhat obscure.
If we try to get a general view of humanity at a glance, we shall see
everywhere a constant fighting and mighty struggling for life and existence; that
mental and bodily strength is taxed to the utmost, and opposed by threatening
and actual dangers and woes of every kind.
And if we consider the price that is paid for all this, existence, and life
itself, it will be found that there has been an interval when existence was free
from pain, an interval, however, which was immediately followed by boredom,
and which in its turn was quickly terminated by fresh cravings.
That boredom is immediately followed by fresh needs is a fact which is also
true of the cleverer order of animals, because life has no true and genuine value
in itself, but is kept in motion merely through the medium of needs and illusion.
As soon as there are no needs and illusion we become conscious of the absolute

barrenness and emptiness of existence.
If one turns from contemplating the course of the world at large, and in
particular from the ephemeral and mock existence of men as they follow each
other in rapid succession, to the detail of life, how like a comedy it seems!
It impresses us in the same way as a drop of water, crowded with infusoria,
seen through a microscope, or a little heap of cheese-mites that would otherwise
be invisible. Their activity and struggling with each other in such little space
amuse us greatly. And it is the same in the little span of life--great and earnest
activity produces a comic effect.
No man has ever felt perfectly happy in the present; if he had it would have
intoxicated him.
ON WOMEN.
These few words of Jouy, Sans les femmes le commencement de notre vie
seroit privé de secours, le milieu de plaisirs et la fin de consolation, more exactly
express, in my opinion, the true praise of woman than Schiller's poem, Würde
der Frauen, which is the fruit of much careful thought and impressive because of
its antithesis and use of contrast. The same thing is more pathetically expressed
by Byron in Sardanapalus, Act i, Sc. 2:--
"The very first Of human life must spring from woman's breast, Your first
small words are taught you from her lips, Your first tears quench'd by her, and
your last sighs Too often breathed out in a woman's hearing, When men have
shrunk from the ignoble care Of watching the last hour of him who led them."
Both passages show the right point of view for the appreciation of women.
One need only look at a woman's shape to discover that she is not intended
for either too much mental or too much physical work. She pays the debt of life
not by what she does but by what she suffers--by the pains of child-bearing, care
for the child, and by subjection to man, to whom she should be a patient and
cheerful companion. The greatest sorrows and joys or great exhibition of
strength are not assigned to her; her life should flow more quietly, more gently,
and less obtrusively than man's, without her being essentially happier or
unhappier.
*
Women are directly adapted to act as the nurses and educators of our early
childhood, for the simple reason that they themselves are childish, foolish, and
short-sighted--in a word, are big children all their lives, something intermediate
between the child and the man, who is a man in the strict sense of the word.

Consider how a young girl will toy day after day with a child, dance with it and
sing to it; and then consider what a man, with the very best intentions in the
world, could do in her place.
*
With girls, Nature has had in view what is called in a dramatic sense a
"striking effect," for she endows them for a few years with a richness of beauty
and a, fulness of charm at the expense of the rest of their lives; so that they may
during these years ensnare the fantasy of a man to such a degree as to make him
rush into taking the honourable care of them, in some kind of form, for a
lifetime--a step which would not seem sufficiently justified if he only considered
the matter. Accordingly, Nature has furnished woman, as she has the rest of her
creatures, with the weapons and implements necessary for the protection of her
existence and for just the length of time that they will be of service to her; so that
Nature has proceeded here with her usual economy. Just as the female ant after
coition loses her wings, which then become superfluous, nay, dangerous for
breeding purposes, so for the most part does a woman lose her beauty after
giving birth to one or two children; and probably for the same reasons.
Then again we find that young girls in their hearts regard their domestic or
other affairs as secondary things, if not as a mere jest. Love, conquests, and all
that these include, such as dressing, dancing, and so on, they give their serious
attention.
*
The nobler and more perfect a thing is, the later and slower is it in reaching
maturity. Man reaches the maturity of his reasoning and mental faculties
scarcely before he is eight-and-twenty; woman when she is eighteen; but hers is
reason of very narrow limitations. This is why women remain children all their
lives, for they always see only what is near at hand, cling to the present, take the
appearance of a thing for reality, and prefer trifling matters to the most
important. It is by virtue of man's reasoning powers that he does not live in the
present only, like the brute, but observes and ponders over the past and future;
and from this spring discretion, care, and that anxiety which we so frequently
notice in people. The advantages, as well as the disadvantages, that this entails,
make woman, in consequence of her weaker reasoning powers, less of a partaker
in them. Moreover, she is intellectually short-sighted, for although her intuitive
understanding quickly perceives what is near to her, on the other hand her circle
of vision is limited and does not embrace anything that is remote; hence
everything that is absent or past, or in the future, affects women in a less degree
than men. This is why they have greater inclination for extravagance, which
sometimes borders on madness. Women in their hearts think that men are

intended to earn money so that they may spend it, if possible during their
husband's lifetime, but at any rate after his death.
As soon as he has given them his earnings on which to keep house they are
strengthened in this belief. Although all this entails many disadvantages, yet it
has this advantage--that a woman lives more in the present than a man, and that
she enjoys it more keenly if it is at all bearable. This is the origin of that
cheerfulness which is peculiar to woman and makes her fit to divert man, and in
case of need, to console him when he is weighed down by cares. To consult
women in matters of difficulty, as the Germans used to do in old times, is by no
means a matter to be overlooked; for their way of grasping a thing is quite
different from ours, chiefly because they like the shortest way to the point, and
usually keep their attention fixed upon what lies nearest; while we, as a rule, see
beyond it, for the simple reason that it lies under our nose; it then becomes
necessary for us to be brought back to the thing in order to obtain a near and
simple view. This is why women are more sober in their judgment than we, and
why they see nothing more in things than is really there; while we, if our
passions are roused, slightly exaggerate or add to our imagination.
It is because women's reasoning powers are weaker that they show more
sympathy for the unfortunate than men, and consequently take a kindlier interest
in them. On the other hand, women are inferior to men in matters of justice,
honesty, and conscientiousness. Again, because their reasoning faculty is weak,
things clearly visible and real, and belonging to the present, exercise a power
over them which is rarely counteracted by abstract thoughts, fixed maxims, or
firm resolutions, in general, by regard for the past and future or by consideration
for what is absent and remote. Accordingly they have the first and principal
qualities of virtue, but they lack the secondary qualities which are often a
necessary instrument in developing it. Women may be compared in this respect
to an organism that has a liver but no gall-bladder.[9] So that it will be found
that the fundamental fault in the character of women is that they have no "sense
of justice." This arises from their deficiency in the power of reasoning already
referred to, and reflection, but is also partly due to the fact that Nature has not
destined them, as the weaker sex, to be dependent on strength but on cunning;
this is why they are instinctively crafty, and have an ineradicable tendency to lie.
For as lions are furnished with claws and teeth, elephants with tusks, boars with
fangs, bulls with horns, and the cuttlefish with its dark, inky fluid, so Nature has
provided woman for her protection and defence with the faculty of
dissimulation, and all the power which Nature has given to man in the form of
bodily strength and reason has been conferred on woman in this form. Hence,
dissimulation is innate in woman and almost as characteristic of the very stupid

as of the clever. Accordingly, it is as natural for women to dissemble at every
opportunity as it is for those animals to turn to their weapons when they are
attacked; and they feel in doing so that in a certain measure they are only making
use of their rights. Therefore a woman who is perfectly truthful and does not
dissemble is perhaps an impossibility. This is why they see through
dissimulation in others so easily; therefore it is not advisable to attempt it with
them. From the fundamental defect that has been stated, and all that it involves,
spring falseness, faithlessness, treachery, ungratefulness, and so on. In a court of
justice women are more often found guilty of perjury than men. It is indeed to be
generally questioned whether they should be allowed to take an oath at all. From
time to time there are repeated cases everywhere of ladies, who want for
nothing, secretly pocketing and taking away things from shop counters.
*
Nature has made it the calling of the young, strong, and handsome men to
look after the propagation of the human race; so that the species may not
degenerate. This is the firm will of Nature, and it finds its expression in the
passions of women. This law surpasses all others in both age and power. Woe
then to the man who sets up rights and interests in such a way as to make them
stand in the way of it; for whatever he may do or say, they will, at the first
significant onset, be unmercifully annihilated. For the secret, unformulated, nay,
unconscious but innate moral of woman is: We are justified in deceiving those
who, because they care a little for us,--that is to say for the individual,--imagine
they have obtained rights over the species. The constitution, and consequently
the welfare of the species, have been put into our hands and entrusted to our care
through the medium of the next generation which proceeds from us; let us fulfil
our duties conscientiously.
But women are by no means conscious of this leading principle in
abstracto, they are only conscious of it in concreto, and have no other way of
expressing it than in the manner in which they act when the opportunity arrives.
So that their conscience does not trouble them so much as we imagine, for in the
darkest depths of their hearts they are conscious that in violating their duty
towards the individual they have all the better fulfilled it towards the species,
whose claim upon them is infinitely greater. (A fuller explanation of this matter
may be found in vol. ii., ch. 44, in my chief work, Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung.)
Because women in truth exist entirely for the propagation of the race, and
their destiny ends here, they live more for the species than for the individual, and
in their hearts take the affairs of the species more seriously than those of the
individual. This gives to their whole being and character a certain frivolousness,

and altogether a certain tendency which is fundamentally different from that of
man; and this it is which develops that discord in married life which is so
prevalent and almost the normal state.
It is natural for a feeling of mere indifference to exist between men, but
between women it is actual enmity. This is due perhaps to the fact that odium
figulinum in the case of men, is limited to their everyday affairs, but with
women embraces the whole sex; since they have only one kind of business. Even
when they meet in the street, they look at each other like Guelphs and
Ghibellines. And it is quite evident when two women first make each other's
acquaintance that they exhibit more constraint and dissimulation than two men
placed in similar circumstances. This is why an exchange of compliments
between two women is much more ridiculous than between two men. Further,
while a man will, as a rule, address others, even those inferior to himself, with a
certain feeling of consideration and humanity, it is unbearable to see how
proudly and disdainfully a lady of rank will, for the most part, behave towards
one who is in a lower rank (not employed in her service) when she speaks to her.
This may be because differences of rank are much more precarious with women
than with us, and consequently more quickly change their line of conduct and
elevate them, or because while a hundred things must be weighed in our case,
there is only one to be weighed in theirs, namely, with which man they have
found favour; and again, because of the one-sided nature of their vocation they
stand in closer relationship to each other than men do; and so it is they try to
render prominent the differences of rank.
*
It is only the man whose intellect is clouded by his sexual instinct that could
give that stunted, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and short-legged race the
name of the fair sex; for the entire beauty of the sex is based on this instinct. One
would be more justified in calling them the unaesthetic sex than the beautiful.
Neither for music, nor for poetry, nor for fine art have they any real or true sense
and susceptibility, and it is mere mockery on their part, in their desire to please,
if they affect any such thing.
This makes them incapable of taking a purely objective interest in anything,
and the reason for it is, I fancy, as follows. A man strives to get direct mastery
over things either by understanding them or by compulsion. But a woman is
always and everywhere driven to indirect mastery, namely through a man; all her
direct mastery being limited to him alone. Therefore it lies in woman's nature to
look upon everything only as a means for winning man, and her interest in
anything else is always a simulated one, a mere roundabout way to gain her
ends, consisting of coquetry and pretence. Hence Rousseau said, Les femmes, en

général, n'aiment aucun art, ne se connoissent à aucun et n'ont aucun génie
(Lettre à d'Alembert, note xx.). Every one who can see through a sham must
have found this to be the case. One need only watch the way they behave at a
concert, the opera, or the play; the childish simplicity, for instance, with which
they keep on chattering during the finest passages in the greatest masterpieces. If
it is true that the Greeks forbade women to go to the play, they acted in a right
way; for they would at any rate be able to hear something. In our day it would be
more appropriate to substitute taceat mulier in theatro for taceat mulier in
ecclesia; and this might perhaps be put up in big letters on the curtain.
Nothing different can be expected of women if it is borne in mind that the
most eminent of the whole sex have never accomplished anything in the fine arts
that is really great, genuine, and original, or given to the world any kind of work
of permanent value. This is most striking in regard to painting, the technique of
which is as much within their reach as within ours; this is why they pursue it so
industriously. Still, they have not a single great painting to show, for the simple
reason that they lack that objectivity of mind which is precisely what is so
directly necessary in painting. They always stick to what is subjective. For this
reason, ordinary women have no susceptibility for painting at all: for natura non
facet saltum. And Huarte, in his book which has been famous for three hundred
years, Examen de ingenios para las scienzias, contends that women do not
possess the higher capacities. Individual and partial exceptions do not alter the
matter; women are and remain, taken altogether, the most thorough and
incurable philistines; and because of the extremely absurd arrangement which
allows them to share the position and title of their husbands they are a constant
stimulus to his ignoble ambitions. And further, it is because they are philistines
that modern society, to which they give the tone and where they have sway, has
become corrupted. As regards their position, one should be guided by
Napoleon's maxim, Les femmes n'ont pas de rang; and regarding them in other
things, Chamfort says very truly: Elles sont faites pour commercer avec nos
faiblesses avec notre folie, mais non avec notre raison. Il existe entre elles et les
hommes des sympathies d'épiderme et très-peu de sympathies d'esprit d'âme et
de caractère. They are the sexus sequior, the second sex in every respect,
therefore their weaknesses should be spared, but to treat women with extreme
reverence is ridiculous, and lowers us in their own eyes. When nature divided
the human race into two parts, she did not cut it exactly through the middle! The
difference between the positive and negative poles, according to polarity, is not
merely qualitative but also quantitative. And it was in this light that the ancients
and people of the East regarded woman; they recognised her true position better
than we, with our old French ideas of gallantry and absurd veneration, that

highest product of Christian-Teutonic stupidity. These ideas have only served to
make them arrogant and imperious, to such an extent as to remind one at times
of the holy apes in Benares, who, in the consciousness of their holiness and
inviolability, think they can do anything and everything they please.
In the West, the woman, that is to say the "lady," finds herself in a fausse
position; for woman, rightly named by the ancients sexus sequior, is by no
means fit to be the object of our honour and veneration, or to hold her head
higher than man and to have the same rights as he. The consequences of this
fausse position are sufficiently clear. Accordingly, it would be a very desirable
thing if this Number Two of the human race in Europe were assigned her natural
position, and the lady-grievance got rid of, which is not only ridiculed by the
whole of Asia, but would have been equally ridiculed by Greece and Rome. The
result of this would be that the condition of our social, civil, and political affairs
would be incalculably improved. The Salic law would be unnecessary; it would
be a superfluous truism. The European lady, strictly speaking, is a creature who
should not exist at all; but there ought to be housekeepers, and young girls who
hope to become such; and they should be brought up not to be arrogant, but to be
domesticated and submissive. It is exactly because there are ladies in Europe that
women of a lower standing, that is to say, the greater majority of the sex, are
much more unhappy than they are in the East. Even Lord Byron says (Letters
and Papers, by Thomas Moore, vol. ii. p. 399), Thought of the state of women
under the ancient Greeks--convenient enough. Present state, a remnant of the
barbarism of the chivalric and feudal ages--artificial and unnatural. They ought
to mind home--and be well fed and clothed--but not mixed in society. Well
educated, too, in religion--but to read neither poetry nor politics--nothing but
books of piety and cookery. Music--drawing--dancing--also a little gardening
and ploughing now and then. I have seen them mending the roads in Epirus with
good success. Why not, as well as hay-making and milking?
*
In our part of the world, where monogamy is in force, to marry means to
halve one's rights and to double one's duties. When the laws granted woman the
same rights as man, they should also have given her a masculine power of
reason. On the contrary, just as the privileges and honours which the laws decree
to women surpass what Nature has meted out to them, so is there a proportional
decrease in the number of women who really share these privileges; therefore the
remainder are deprived of their natural rights in so far as the others have been
given more than Nature accords.
For the unnatural position of privilege which the institution of monogamy,
and the laws of marriage which accompany it, assign to the woman, whereby she

is regarded throughout as a full equivalent of the man, which she is not by any
means, cause intelligent and prudent men to reflect a great deal before they make
so great a sacrifice and consent to so unfair an arrangement. Therefore, whilst
among polygamous nations every woman finds maintenance, where monogamy
exists the number of married women is limited, and a countless number of
women who are without support remain over; those in the upper classes vegetate
as useless old maids, those in the lower are reduced to very hard work of a
distasteful nature, or become prostitutes, and lead a life which is as joyless as it
is void of honour. But under such circumstances they become a necessity to the
masculine sex; so that their position is openly recognised as a special means for
protecting from seduction those other women favoured by fate either to have
found husbands, or who hope to find them. In London alone there are 80,000
prostitutes. Then what are these women who have come too quickly to this most
terrible end but human sacrifices on the altar of monogamy? The women here
referred to and who are placed in this wretched position are the inevitable
counterbalance to the European lady, with her pretensions and arrogance. Hence
polygamy is a real benefit to the female sex, taking it as a whole. And, on the
other hand, there is no reason why a man whose wife suffers from chronic
illness, or remains barren, or has gradually become too old for him, should not
take a second. Many people become converts to Mormonism for the precise
reasons that they condemn the unnatural institution of monogamy. The
conferring of unnatural rights upon women has imposed unnatural duties upon
them, the violation of which, however, makes them unhappy. For example, many
a man thinks marriage unadvisable as far as his social standing and monetary
position are concerned, unless he contracts a brilliant match. He will then wish
to win a woman of his own choice under different conditions, namely, under
those which will render safe her future and that of her children. Be the
conditions ever so just, reasonable, and adequate, and she consents by giving up
those undue privileges which marriage, as the basis of civil society, alone can
bestow, she must to a certain extent lose her honour and lead a life of loneliness;
since human nature makes us dependent on the opinion of others in a way that is
completely out of proportion to its value. While, if the woman does not consent,
she runs the risk of being compelled to marry a man she dislikes, or of
shrivelling up into an old maid; for the time allotted to her to find a home is very
short. In view of this side of the institution of monogamy, Thomasius's
profoundly learned treatise, de Concubinatu, is well worth reading, for it shows
that, among all nations, and in all ages, down to the Lutheran Reformation,
concubinage was allowed, nay, that it was an institution, in a certain measure
even recognised by law and associated with no dishonour. And it held this

position until the Lutheran Reformation, when it was recognised as another
means for justifying the marriage of the clergy; whereupon the Catholic party
did not dare to remain behindhand in the matter.
It is useless to argue about polygamy, it must be taken as a fact existing
everywhere, the mere regulation of which is the problem to be solved. Where are
there, then, any real monogamists? We all live, at any rate for a time, and the
majority of us always, in polygamy. Consequently, as each man needs many
women, nothing is more just than to let him, nay, make it incumbent upon him to
provide for many women. By this means woman will be brought back to her
proper and natural place as a subordinate being, and the lady, that monster of
European civilisation and Christian-Teutonic stupidity, with her ridiculous claim
to respect and veneration, will no longer exist; there will still be women, but no
unhappy women, of whom Europe is at present full. The Mormons' standpoint is
right.
*
In India no woman is ever independent, but each one stands under the
control of her father or her husband, or brother or son, in accordance with the
law of Manu.
It is certainly a revolting idea that widows should sacrifice themselves on
their husband's dead body; but it is also revolting that the money which the
husband has earned by working diligently for all his life, in the hope that he was
working for his children, should be wasted on her paramours. Medium tenuere
beati. The first love of a mother, as that of animals and men, is purely
instinctive, and consequently ceases when the child is no longer physically
helpless. After that, the first love should be reinstated by a love based on habit
and reason; but this often does not appear, especially where the mother has not
loved the father. The love of a father for his children is of a different nature and
more sincere; it is founded on a recognition of his own inner self in the child,
and is therefore metaphysical in its origin.
In almost every nation, both of the new and old world, and even among the
Hottentots, property is inherited by the male descendants alone; it is only in
Europe that one has departed from this. That the property which men have with
difficulty acquired by long-continued struggling and hard work should
afterwards come into the hands of women, who, in their want of reason, either
squander it within a short time or otherwise waste it, is an injustice as great as it
is common, and it should be prevented by limiting the right of women to inherit.
It seems to me that it would be a better arrangement if women, be they widows
or daughters, only inherited the money for life secured by mortgage, but not the
property itself or the capital, unless there lacked male descendants. It is men who

make the money, and not women; therefore women are neither justified in
having unconditional possession of it nor capable of administrating it. Women
should never have the free disposition of wealth, strictly so-called, which they
may inherit, such as capital, houses, and estates. They need a guardian always;
therefore they should not have the guardianship of their children under any
circumstances whatever. The vanity of women, even if it should not be greater
than that of men, has this evil in it, that it is directed on material things--that is to
say, on their personal beauty and then on tinsel, pomp, and show. This is why
they are in their right element in society. This it is which makes them inclined to
be extravagant, especially since they possess little reasoning power.
Accordingly, an ancient writer says, [Greek: Gunae to synolon esti dapanaeron
physei].[10] Men's vanity, on the other hand, is often directed on non-material
advantages, such as intellect, learning, courage, and the like. Aristotle explains
in the Politics[11] the great disadvantages which the Spartans brought upon
themselves by granting too much to their women, by allowing them the right of
inheritance and dowry, and a great amount of freedom; and how this contributed
greatly to the fall of Sparta. May it not be that the influence of women in France,
which has been increasing since Louis XIII.'s time, was to blame for that gradual
corruption of the court and government which led to the first Revolution, of
which all subsequent disturbances have been the result? In any case, the false
position of the female sex, so conspicuously exposed by the existence of the
"lady," is a fundamental defect in our social condition, and this defect,
proceeding from the very heart of it, must extend its harmful influence in every
direction. That woman is by nature intended to obey is shown by the fact that
every woman who is placed in the unnatural position of absolute independence
at once attaches herself to some kind of man, by whom she is controlled and
governed; this is because she requires a master. If she, is young, the man is a
lover; if she is old, a priest.
FOOTNOTES:
[9] Let me refer to what I have said in my treatise on The Foundation of
Morals, §71.
[10] Brunck's Gnomici poetae graeci v. 115.
[11] Bk. I., ch. 9.

THINKING FOR ONESELF.
The largest library in disorder is not so useful as a smaller but orderly one;
in the same way the greatest amount of knowledge, if it has not been worked out
in one's own mind, is of less value than a much smaller amount that has been
fully considered. For it is only when a man combines what he knows from all
sides, and compares one truth with another, that he completely realises his own
knowledge and gets it into his power. A man can only think over what he knows,
therefore he should learn something; but a man only knows what he has
pondered.
A man can apply himself of his own free will to reading and learning, while
he cannot to thinking. Thinking must be kindled like a fire by a draught and
sustained by some kind of interest in the subject. This interest may be either of a
purely objective nature or it may be merely subjective. The latter exists in
matters concerning us personally, but objective interest is only to be found in
heads that think by nature, and to whom thinking is as natural as breathing; but
they are very rare. This is why there is so little of it in most men of learning.
The difference between the effect that thinking for oneself and that reading
has on the mind is incredibly great; hence it is continually developing that
original difference in minds which induces one man to think and another to read.
Reading forces thoughts upon the mind which are as foreign and heterogeneous
to the bent and mood in which it may be for the moment, as the seal is to the wax
on which it stamps its imprint. The mind thus suffers total compulsion from
without; it has first this and first that to think about, for which it has at the time
neither instinct nor liking.
On the other hand, when a man thinks for himself he follows his own
impulse, which either his external surroundings or some kind of recollection has
determined at the moment. His visible surroundings do not leave upon his mind
one single definite thought as reading does, but merely supply him with material
and occasion to think over what is in keeping with his nature and present mood.
This is why much reading robs the mind of all elasticity; it is like keeping a
spring under a continuous, heavy weight. If a man does not want to think, the
safest plan is to take up a book directly he has a spare moment.
This practice accounts for the fact that learning makes most men more
stupid and foolish than they are by nature, and prevents their writings from being
a success; they remain, as Pope has said,
"For ever reading, never to be read."--Dunciad iii. 194.
Men of learning are those who have read the contents of books. Thinkers,
geniuses, and those who have enlightened the world and furthered the race of

men, are those who have made direct use of the book of the world.
*
Indeed, it is only a man's own fundamental thoughts that have truth and life
in them. For it is these that he really and completely understands. To read the
thoughts of others is like taking the remains of some one else's meal, like putting
on the discarded clothes of a stranger.
The thought we read is related to the thought which rises in us, as the
fossilised impress of a prehistoric plant is to a plant budding out in spring.
*
Reading is merely a substitute for one's own thoughts. A man allows his
thoughts to be put into leading-strings.
Further, many books serve only to show how many wrong paths there are,
and how widely a man may stray if he allows himself to be led by them. But he
who is guided by his genius, that is to say, he who thinks for himself, who thinks
voluntarily and rightly, possesses the compass wherewith to find the right
course. A man, therefore, should only read when the source of his own thoughts
stagnates; which is often the case with the best of minds.
It is sin against the Holy Spirit to frighten away one's own original thoughts
by taking up a book. It is the same as a man flying from Nature to look at a
museum of dried plants, or to study a beautiful landscape in copperplate. A man
at times arrives at a truth or an idea after spending much time in thinking it out
for himself, linking together his various thoughts, when he might have found the
same thing in a book; it is a hundred times more valuable if he has acquired it by
thinking it out for himself. For it is only by his thinking it out for himself that it
enters as an integral part, as a living member into the whole system of his
thought, and stands in complete and firm relation with it; that it is fundamentally
understood with all its consequences, and carries the colour, the shade, the
impress of his own way of thinking; and comes at the very moment, just as the
necessity for it is felt, and stands fast and cannot be forgotten. This is the perfect
application, nay, interpretation of Goethe's
"Was du ererbt von deinen Vätern hast Erwirb es um es zu besitzen."
The man who thinks for himself learns the authorities for his opinions only
later on, when they serve merely to strengthen both them and himself; while the
book-philosopher starts from the authorities and other people's opinions,
therefrom constructing a whole for himself; so that he resembles an automaton,
whose composition we do not understand. The other man, the man who thinks
for himself, on the other hand, is like a living man as made by nature. His mind
is impregnated from without, which then bears and brings forth its child. Truth
that has been merely learned adheres to us like an artificial limb, a false tooth, a

waxen nose, or at best like one made out of another's flesh; truth which is
acquired by thinking for oneself is like a natural member: it alone really belongs
to us. Here we touch upon the difference between the thinking man and the mere
man of learning. Therefore the intellectual acquirements of the man who thinks
for himself are like a fine painting that stands out full of life, that has its light
and shade correct, the tone sustained, and perfect harmony of colour. The
intellectual attainments of the merely learned man, on the contrary, resemble a
big palette covered with every colour, at most systematically arranged, but
without harmony, relation, and meaning.
*
Reading is thinking with some one else's head instead of one's own. But to
think for oneself is to endeavour to develop a coherent whole, a system, even if
it is not a strictly complete one. Nothing is more harmful than, by dint of
continual reading, to strengthen the current of other people's thoughts. These
thoughts, springing from different minds, belonging to different systems, bearing
different colours, never flow together of themselves into a unity of thought,
knowledge, insight, or conviction, but rather cram the head with a Babylonian
confusion of tongues; consequently the mind becomes overcharged with them
and is deprived of all clear insight and almost disorganised. This condition of
things may often be discerned in many men of learning, and it makes them
inferior in sound understanding, correct judgment, and practical tact to many
illiterate men, who, by the aid of experience, conversation, and a little reading,
have acquired a little knowledge from without, and made it always subordinate
to and incorporated it with their own thoughts.
The scientific thinker also does this to a much greater extent. Although he
requires much knowledge and must read a great deal, his mind is nevertheless
strong enough to overcome it all, to assimilate it, to incorporate it with the
system of his thoughts, and to subordinate it to the organic relative unity of his
insight, which is vast and ever-growing. By this means his own thought, like the
bass in an organ, always takes the lead in everything, and is never deadened by
other sounds, as is the case with purely antiquarian minds; where all sorts of
musical passages, as it were, run into each other, and the fundamental tone is
entirely lost.
*
The people who have spent their lives in reading and acquired their wisdom
out of books resemble those who have acquired exact information of a country
from the descriptions of many travellers. These people can relate a great deal
about many things; but at heart they have no connected, clear, sound knowledge
of the condition of the country. While those who have spent their life in thinking

are like the people who have been to that country themselves; they alone really
know what it is they are saying, know the subject in its entirety, and are quite at
home in it.
*
The ordinary book-philosopher stands in the same relation to a man who
thinks for himself as an eye-witness does to the historian; he speaks from his
own direct comprehension of the subject.
Therefore all who think for themselves hold at bottom much the same
views; when they differ it is because they hold different points of view, but when
these do not alter the matter they all say the same thing. They merely express
what they have grasped from an objective point of view. I have frequently
hesitated to give passages to the public because of their paradoxical nature, and
afterwards to my joyful surprise have found the same thoughts expressed in the
works of great men of long ago.
The book-philosopher, on the other hand, relates what one man has said and
another man meant, and what a third has objected to, and so on. He compares,
weighs, criticises, and endeavours to get at the truth of the thing, and in this way
resembles the critical historian. For instance, he will try to find out whether
Leibnitz was not for some time in his life a follower of Spinoza, etc. The curious
student will find striking examples of what I mean in Herbart's Analytical
Elucidation of Morality and Natural Right, and in his Letters on Freedom. It
surprises us that such a man should give himself so much trouble; for it is
evident that if he had fixed his attention on the matter he would soon have
attained his object by thinking a little for himself.
But there is a small difficulty to overcome; a thing of this kind does not
depend upon our own will. One can sit down at any time and read, but not--
think. It is with thoughts as with men: we cannot always summon them at
pleasure, but must wait until they come. Thought about a subject must come of
its own accord by a happy and harmonious union of external motive with mental
temper and application; and it is precisely that which never seems to come to
these people.
One has an illustration of this in matters that concern our personal interest.
If we have to come to a decision on a thing of this kind we cannot sit down at
any particular moment and thrash out the reasons and arrive at a decision; for
often at such a time our thoughts cannot be fixed, but will wander off to other
things; a dislike to the subject is sometimes responsible for this. We should not
use force, but wait until the mood appears of itself; it frequently comes
unexpectedly and even repeats itself; the different moods which possess us at the
different times throwing another light on the matter. It is this long process which

is understood by a ripe resolution. For the task of making up our mind must be
distributed; much that has been previously overlooked occurs to us; the aversion
also disappears, for, after examining the matter closer, it seems much more
tolerable than it was at first sight.
And in theory it is just the same: a man must wait for the right moment;
even the greatest mind is not always able to think for itself at all times. Therefore
it is advisable for it to use its spare moments in reading, which, as has been said,
is a substitute for one's own thought; in this way material is imported to the mind
by letting another think for us, although it is always in a way which is different
from our own. For this reason a man should not read too much, in order that his
mind does not become accustomed to the substitute, and consequently even
forget the matter in question; that it may not get used to walking in paths that
have already been trodden, and by following a foreign course of thought forget
its own. Least of all should a man for the sake of reading entirely withdraw his
attention from the real world: as the impulse and temper which lead one to think
for oneself proceed oftener from it than from reading; for it is the visible and real
world in its primitiveness and strength that is the natural subject of the thinking
mind, and is able more easily than anything else to rouse it. After these
considerations it will not surprise us to find that the thinking man can easily be
distinguished from the book-philosopher by his marked earnestness, directness,
and originality, the personal conviction of all his thoughts and expressions: the
book-philosopher, on the other hand, has everything second-hand; his ideas are
like a collection of old rags obtained anyhow; he is dull and pointless,
resembling a copy of a copy. His style, which is full of conventional, nay, vulgar
phrases and current terms, resembles a small state where there is a circulation of
foreign money because it coins none of its own.
*
Mere experience can as little as reading take the place of thought. Mere
empiricism bears the same relation to thinking as eating to digestion and
assimilation. When experience boasts that it alone, by its discoveries, has
advanced human knowledge, it is as though the mouth boasted that it was its
work alone to maintain the body.
The works of all really capable minds are distinguished from all other
works by a character of decision and definiteness, and, in consequence, of
lucidity and clearness. This is because minds like these know definitely and
clearly what they wish to express--whether it be in prose, in verse, or in music.
Other minds are wanting in this decision and clearness, and therefore may be
instantly recognised.
The characteristic sign of a mind of the highest standard is the directness of

its judgment. Everything it utters is the result of thinking for itself; this is shown
everywhere in the way it gives expression to its thoughts. Therefore it is, like a
prince, an imperial director in the realm of intellect. All other minds are mere
delegates, as may be seen by their style, which has no stamp of its own.
Hence every true thinker for himself is so far like a monarch; he is absolute,
and recognises nobody above him. His judgments, like the decrees of a monarch,
spring from his own sovereign power and proceed directly from himself. He
takes as little notice of authority as a monarch does of a command; nothing is
valid unless he has himself authorised it. On the other hand, those of vulgar
minds, who are swayed by all kinds of current opinions, authorities, and
prejudices, are like the people which in silence obey the law and commands.
*
The people who are so eager and impatient to settle disputed questions, by
bringing forward authorities, are really glad when they can place the
understanding and insight of some one else in the field in place of their own,
which are deficient. Their number is legion. For, as Seneca says, "Unusquisque
mavult credere, quam judicare."
The weapon they commonly use in their controversies is that of authorities:
they strike each other with it, and whoever is drawn into the fray will do well not
to defend himself with reason and arguments; for against a weapon of this kind
they are like horned Siegfrieds, immersed in a flood of incapacity for thinking
and judging. They will bring forward their authorities as an argumentum ad
verecundiam and then cry victoria.
*
In the realm of reality, however fair, happy, and pleasant it may prove to be,
we always move controlled by the law of gravity, which we must be unceasingly
overcoming. While in the realm of thought we are disembodied spirits,
uncontrolled by the law of gravity and free from penury.
This is why there is no happiness on earth like that which at the propitious
moment a fine and fruitful mind finds in itself.
*
The presence of a thought is like the presence of our beloved. We imagine
we shall never forget this thought, and that this loved one could never be
indifferent to us. But out of sight out of mind! The finest thought runs the risk of
being irrevocably forgotten if it is not written down, and the dear one of being
forsaken if we do not marry her.
*
There are many thoughts which are valuable to the man who thinks them;
but out of them only a few which possess strength to produce either repercussion

or reflex action, that is, to win the reader's sympathy after they have been written
down. It is what a man has thought out directly for himself that alone has true
value. Thinkers may be classed as follows: those who, in the first place, think for
themselves, and those who think directly for others. The former thinkers are the
genuine, they think for themselves in both senses of the word; they are the true
philosophers; they alone are in earnest. Moreover, the enjoyment and happiness
of their existence consist in thinking. The others are the sophists; they wish to
seem, and seek their happiness in what they hope to get from other people; their
earnestness consists in this. To which of these two classes a man belongs is soon
seen by his whole method and manner. Lichtenberg is an example of the first
class, while Herder obviously belongs to the second.
*
When one considers how great and how close to us the problem of
existence is,--this equivocal, tormented, fleeting, dream-like existence--so great
and so close that as soon as one perceives it, it overshadows and conceals all
other problems and aims;--and when one sees how all men--with a few and rare
exceptions--are not clearly conscious of the problem, nay, do not even seem to
see it, but trouble themselves about everything else rather than this, and live on
taking thought only for the present day and the scarcely longer span of their own
personal future, while they either expressly give the problem up or are ready to
agree with it, by the aid of some system of popular metaphysics, and are satisfied
with this;--when one, I say, reflects upon this, so may one be of the opinion that
man is a thinking being only in a very remote sense, and not feel any special
surprise at any trait of thoughtlessness or folly; but know, rather, that the
intellectual outlook of the normal man indeed surpasses that of the brute,--whose
whole existence resembles a continual present without any consciousness of the
future or the past--but, however, not to such an extent as one is wont to suppose.
And corresponding to this, we find in the conversation of most men that
their thoughts are cut up as small as chaff, making it impossible for them to spin
out the thread of their discourse to any length. If this world were peopled by
really thinking beings, noise of every kind would not be so universally tolerated,
as indeed the most horrible and aimless form of it is.[12] If Nature had intended
man to think she would not have given him ears, or, at any rate, she would have
furnished them with air-tight flaps like the bat, which for this reason is to be
envied. But, in truth, man is like the rest, a poor animal, whose powers are
calculated only to maintain him during his existence; therefore he requires to
have his ears always open to announce of themselves, by night as by day, the
approach of the pursuer.
FOOTNOTES:

[12] See Essay on Noise, p. 28.

SHORT DIALOGUE ON
THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF OUR TRUE BEING BY DEATH.
Thrasymachos. Tell me briefly, what shall I be after my death? Be clear and
precise.
Philalethes. Everything and nothing.
Thras. That is what I expected. You solve the problem by a contradiction.
That trick is played out.
Phil. To answer transcendental questions in language that is made for
immanent knowledge must assuredly lead to a contradiction.
Thras. What do you call transcendental knowledge, and what immanent? It
is true these expressions are known to me, for my professor used them, but only
as predicates of God, and as his philosophy had exclusively to do with God, their
use was quite appropriate. For instance, if God was in the world, He was
immanent; if He was somewhere outside it, He was transcendent. That is clear
and comprehensible. One knows how things stand. But your old-fashioned
Kantian doctrine is no longer understood. There has been quite a succession of
great men in the metropolis of German learning----
Phil. (aside). German philosophical nonsense!
Thras.----such as the eminent Schleiermacher and that gigantic mind Hegel;
and to-day we have left all that sort of thing behind, or rather we are so far ahead
of it that it is out of date and known no more. Therefore, what good is it?
Phil. Transcendental knowledge is that which, going beyond the boundary
of possible experience, endeavours to determine the nature of things as they are
in themselves; while immanent knowledge keeps itself within the boundary of
possible experience, therefore it can only apply to phenomena. As an individual,
with your death there will be an end of you. But your individuality is not your
true and final being, indeed it is rather the mere expression of it; it is not the
thing-in-itself but only the phenomenon presented in the form of time, and
accordingly has both a beginning and an end. Your being in itself, on the
contrary, knows neither time, nor beginning, nor end, nor the limits of a given
individuality; hence no individuality can be without it, but it is there in each and
all. So that, in the first sense, after death you become nothing; in the second, you
are and remain everything. That is why I said that after death you would be all
and nothing. It is difficult to give you a more exact answer to your question than
this and to be brief at the same time; but here we have undoubtedly another
contradiction; this is because your life is in time and your immortality in
eternity. Hence your immortality may be said to be something that is
indestructible and yet has no endurance--which is again contradictory, you see.

This is what happens when transcendental knowledge is brought within the
boundary of immanent knowledge; in doing this some sort of violence is done to
the latter, since it is used for things for which it was not intended.
Thras. Listen; without I retain my individuality I shall not give a sou for
your immortality.
Phil. Perhaps you will allow me to explain further. Suppose I guarantee that
you will retain your individuality, on condition, however, that you spend three
months in absolute unconsciousness before you awaken.
Thras. I consent to that.
Phil. Well then, as we have no idea of time when in a perfectly unconscious
state, it is all the same to us when we are dead whether three months or ten
thousand years pass away in the world of consciousness. For in the one case, as
in the other, we must accept on faith and trust what we are told when we awake.
Accordingly it will be all the same to you whether your individuality is restored
to you after the lapse of three months or ten thousand years.
Thras. At bottom, that cannot very well be denied.
Phil. But if, at the end of those ten thousand years, some one has quite
forgotten to waken you, I imagine that you would have become accustomed to
that long state of non-existence, following such a very short existence, and that
the misfortune would not be very great. However, it is quite certain that you
would know nothing about it. And again, it would fully console you to know that
the mysterious power which gives life to your present phenomenon had never
ceased for one moment during the ten thousand years to produce other
phenomena of a like nature and to give them life.
Thras. Indeed! And so it is in this way that you fancy you can quietly, and
without my knowing, cheat me of my individuality? But you cannot cozen me in
this way. I have stipulated for the retaining of my individuality, and neither
mysterious forces nor phenomena can console me for the loss of it. It is dear to
me, and I shall not let it go.
Phil. That is to say, you regard your individuality as something so very
delightful, excellent, perfect, and incomparable that there is nothing better than
it; would you not exchange it for another, according to what is told us, that is
better and more lasting?
Thras. Look here, be my individuality what it may, it is myself,
"For God is God, and I am I."
I--I--I want to exist! That is what I care about, and not an existence which
has to be reasoned out first in order to show that it is mine.
Phil. Look what you are doing! When you say, I--I--I want to exist you
alone do not say this, but everything, absolutely everything, that has only a

vestige of consciousness. Consequently this desire of yours is just that which is
not individual but which is common to all without distinction. It does not
proceed from individuality, but from existence in general; it is the essential in
everything that exists, nay, it is that whereby anything has existence at all;
accordingly it is concerned and satisfied only with existence in general and not
with any definite individual existence; this is not its aim. It has the appearance of
being so because it can attain consciousness only in an individual existence, and
consequently looks as if it were entirely concerned with that. This is nothing but
an illusion which has entangled the individual; but by reflection, it can be
dissipated and we ourselves set free. It is only indirectly that the individual has
this great longing for existence; it is the will to live in general that has this
longing directly and really, a longing that is one and the same in everything.
Since, then, existence itself is the free work of the will, nay, the mere reflection
of it, existence cannot be apart from will, and the latter will be provisionally
satisfied with existence in general, in so far, namely, as that which is eternally
dissatisfied can be satisfied. The will is indifferent to individuality; it has
nothing to do with it, although it appears to, because the individual is only
directly conscious of will in himself. From this it is to be gathered that the
individual carefully guards his own existence; moreover, if this were not so, the
preservation of the species would not be assured. From all this it follows that
individuality is not a state of perfection but of limitation; so that to be freed from
it is not loss but rather gain. Don't let this trouble you any further, it will,
forsooth, appear to you both childish and extremely ridiculous when you
completely and thoroughly recognise what you are, namely, that your own
existence is the universal will to live.
Thras. You are childish yourself and extremely ridiculous, and so are all
philosophers; and when a sedate man like myself lets himself in for a quarter of
an hour's talk with such fools, it is merely for the sake of amusement and to
while away the time. I have more important matters to look to now; so, adieu!
RELIGION.
A DIALOGUE.
Demopheles. Between ourselves, dear old friend, I am sometimes
dissatisfied with you in your capacity as philosopher; you talk sarcastically about
religion, nay, openly ridicule it. The religion of every one is sacred to him, and
so it should be to you.
Philalethes. Nego consequentiam! I don't see at all why I should have

respect for lies and frauds because other people are stupid. I respect truth
everywhere, and it is precisely for that reason that I cannot respect anything that
is opposed to it. My maxim is, Vigeat veritas, et pereat mundus, the same as the
lawyer's Fiat justitia, et pereat mundus. Every profession ought to have an
analogous device.
Demop. Then that of the medical profession would be, Fiant pilulae, et
pereat mundus, which would be the easiest to carry out.
Phil. Heaven forbid! Everything must be taken cum grano salis.
Demop. Exactly; and it is just for that reason that I want you to accept
religion cum grano salis, and to see that the needs of the people must be met
according to their powers of comprehension. Religion affords the only means of
proclaiming and making the masses of crude minds and awkward intelligences,
sunk in petty pursuits and material work, feel the high import of life. For the
ordinary type of man, primarily, has no thought for anything else but what
satisfies his physical needs and longings, and accordingly affords him a little
amusement and pastime. Founders of religion and philosophers come into the
world to shake him out of his torpidity and show him the high significance of
existence: philosophers for the few, the emancipated; founders of religion for the
many, humanity at large. For [Greek: philosophon plaethos adynaton einai], as
your friend Plato has said, and you should not forget it. Religion is the
metaphysics of the people, which by all means they must keep; and hence it
must be eternally respected, for to discredit it means taking it away. Just as there
is popular poetry, popular wisdom in proverbs, so too there must be popular
metaphysics; for mankind requires most certainly an interpretation of life, and it
must be in keeping with its power of comprehension. So that this interpretation
is at all times an allegorical investiture of the truth, and it fulfils, as far as
practical life and our feelings are concerned--that is to say, as a guidance in our
affairs, and as a comfort and consolation in suffering and death--perhaps just as
much as truth itself could, if we possessed it. Don't be hurt at its unpolished,
baroque, and apparently absurd form, for you, with your education and learning,
cannot imagine the roundabout ways that must be used in order to make people
in their crude state understand deep truths. The various religions are only various
forms in which the people grasp and understand the truth, which in itself they
could not grasp, and which is inseparable from these forms. Therefore, my dear
fellow, don't be displeased if I tell you that to ridicule these forms is both
narrow-minded and unjust.
Phil. But is it not equally narrow-minded and unjust to require that there
shall be no other metaphysics but this one cut out to meet the needs and
comprehension of the people? that its teachings shall be the boundary of human

researches and the standard of all thought, so that the metaphysics of the few, the
emancipated, as you call them, must aim at confirming, strengthening, and
interpreting the metaphysics of the people? That is, that the highest faculties of
the human mind must remain unused and undeveloped, nay, be nipped in the
bud, so that their activity may not thwart the popular metaphysics? And at
bottom are not the claims that religion makes just the same? Is it right to have
tolerance, nay, gentle forbearance, preached by what is intolerance and cruelty
itself? Let me remind you of the heretical tribunals, inquisitions, religious wars
and crusades, of Socrates' cup of poison, of Bruno's and Vanini's death in the
flames. And is all this to-day something belonging to the past? What can stand
more in the way of genuine philosophical effort, honest inquiry after truth, the
noblest calling of the noblest of mankind, than this conventional system of
metaphysics invested with a monopoly from the State, whose principles are
inculcated so earnestly, deeply, and firmly into every head in earliest youth as to
make them, unless the mind is of miraculous elasticity, become ineradicable?
The result is that the basis of healthy reasoning is once and for all deranged--in
other words, its feeble capacity for thinking for itself, and for unbiassed
judgment in regard to everything to which it might be applied, is for ever
paralysed and ruined.
Demop, Which really means that the people have gained a conviction which
they will not give up in order to accept yours in its place.
Phil. Ah! if it were only conviction based on insight, one would then be
able to bring forward arguments and fight the battle with equal weapons. But
religions admittedly do not lend themselves to conviction after argument has
been brought to bear, but to belief as brought about by revelation. The capacity
for belief is strongest in childhood; therefore one is most careful to take
possession of this tender age. It is much more through this than through threats
and reports of miracles that the doctrines of belief take root. If in early childhood
certain fundamental views and doctrines are preached with unusual solemnity
and in a manner of great earnestness, the like of which has never been seen
before, and if, too, the possibility of a doubt about them is either completely
ignored or only touched upon in order to show that doubt is the first step to
everlasting perdition; the result is that the impression will be so profound that, as
a rule, that is to say in almost every case, a man will be almost as incapable of
doubting the truth of those doctrines as he is of doubting his own existence.
Hence it is scarcely one in many thousands that has the strength of mind to
honestly and seriously ask himself--is that true? Those who are able to do this
have been more appropriately styled strong minds, esprits forts, than is
imagined. For the commonplace mind, however, there is nothing so absurd or

revolting but what, if inoculated in this way, the firmest belief in it will take root.
If, for example, the killing of a heretic or an infidel were an essential matter for
the future salvation of the soul, almost every one would make it the principal
object of his life, and in dying get consolation and strength from the
remembrance of his having succeeded; just as, in truth, in former times almost
every Spaniard looked upon an auto da fé as the most pious of acts and one most
pleasing to God.
We have an analogy to this in India in the Thugs, a religious body quite
recently suppressed by the English, who executed numbers of them. They
showed their regard for religion and veneration for the goddess Kali by
assassinating at every opportunity their own friends and fellow-travellers, so that
they might obtain their possessions, and they were seriously convinced that
thereby they had accomplished something that was praiseworthy and would
contribute to their eternal welfare. The power of religious dogma, that has been
inculcated early, is so great that it destroys conscience, and finally all
compassion and sense of humanity. But if you wish to see with your own eyes,
and close at hand, what early inoculation of belief does, look at the English.
Look at this nation, favoured by nature before all others, endowed before all
others with reason, intelligence, power of judgment, and firmness of character;
look at these people degraded, nay, made despicable among all others by their
stupid ecclesiastical superstition, which among their other capacities appears like
a fixed idea, a monomania. For this they have to thank the clergy in whose hands
education is, and who take care to inculcate all the articles, of belief at the
earliest age in such a way as to result in a kind of partial paralysis of the brain;
this then shows itself throughout their whole life in a silly bigotry, making even
extremely intelligent and capable people among them degrade themselves so that
they become quite an enigma to us. If we consider how essential to such a
masterpiece is inoculation of belief in the tender age of childhood, the system of
missions appears no longer merely as the height of human importunity,
arrogance, and impertinence, but also of absurdity; in so far as it does not
confine itself to people who are still in the stage of childhood, such as the
Hottentots, Kaffirs, South Sea Islanders, and others like them, among whom it
has been really successful. While, on the other hand, in India the Brahmans
receive the doctrines of missionaries either with a smile of condescending
approval or refuse them with a shrug of their shoulders; and among these people
in general, notwithstanding the most favourable circumstances, the missionaries'
attempts at conversion are usually wrecked. An authentic report in vol. xxi. of
the Asiatic Journal of 1826 shows that after so many years of missionary activity
in the whole of India (of which the English possessions alone amount to one

hundred and fifteen million inhabitants) there are not more than three hundred
living converts to be found; and at the same time it is admitted that the Christian
converts are distinguished for their extreme immorality. There are only three
hundred venal and bribed souls out of so many millions. I cannot see that it has
gone better with Christianity in India since then, although the missionaries are
now trying, contrary to agreement, to work on the children's minds in schools
exclusively devoted to secular English instruction, in order to smuggle in
Christianity, against which, however, the Hindoos are most jealously on their
guard. For, as has been said, childhood is the time, and not manhood, to sow the
seeds of belief, especially where an earlier belief has taken root. An acquired
conviction, however, that is assumed by matured converts serves, generally, as
only the mask for some kind of personal interest. And it is the feeling that this
could hardly be otherwise that makes a man, who changes his religion at
maturity, despised by most people everywhere; a fact which reveals that they do
not regard religion as a matter of reasoned conviction but merely as a belief
inoculated in early childhood, before it has been put to any test. That they are
right in looking at religion in this way is to be gathered from the fact that it is not
only the blind, credulous masses, but also the clergy of every religion, who, as
such, have studied its sources, arguments, dogmas and differences, who cling
faithfully and zealously as a body to the religion of their fatherland;
consequently it is the rarest thing in the world for a priest to change from one
religion or creed to another. For instance, we see that the Catholic clergy are
absolutely convinced of the truth of all the principles of their Church, and that
the Protestants are also of theirs, and that both defend the principles of their
confession with like zeal. And yet the conviction is the outcome merely of the
country in which each is born: the truth of the Catholic dogma is perfectly clear
to the clergy of South Germany, the Protestant to the clergy of North Germany.
If, therefore, these convictions rest on objective reasons, these reasons must be
climatic and thrive like plants, some only here, some only there. The masses
everywhere, however, accept on trust and faith the convictions of those who are
locally convinced.
Demop. That doesn't matter, for essentially it makes no difference. For
instance, Protestantism in reality is more suited to the north, Catholicism to the
south.
Phil. So it appears. Still, I take a higher point of view, and have before me a
more important object, namely, the progress of the knowledge of truth among
the human race. It is a frightful condition of things that, wherever a man is born,
certain propositions are inculcated in his earliest youth, and he is assured that
under penalty of forfeiting eternal salvation he may never entertain any doubt

about them; in so far, that is, as they are propositions which influence the
foundation of all our other knowledge and accordingly decide for ever our point
of view, and if they are false, upset it for ever. Further, as the influences drawn
from these propositions make inroads everywhere into the entire system of our
knowledge, the whole of human knowledge is through and through affected by
them. This is proved by every literature, and most conspicuously by that of the
Middle Age, but also, in too great an extent, by that of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. We see how paralysed even the minds of the first rank of all those
epochs were by such false fundamental conceptions; and how especially all
insight into the true substance and working of Nature was hemmed in on every
side. During the whole of the Christian period Theism lay like a kind of
oppressive nightmare on all intellectual effort, and on philosophical effort in
particular, hindering and arresting all progress. For the men of learning of those
epochs, God, devil, angels, demons, hid the whole of Nature; no investigation
was carried out to the end, no matter sifted to the bottom; everything that was
beyond the most obvious causal nexus was immediately attributed to these; so
that, as Pomponatius expressed himself at the time, Certe philosophi nihil
verisimile habent ad haec, quare necesse est, ad Deum, ad angelos et daemones
recurrere. It is true that there is a suspicion of irony in what this man says, as his
malice in other ways is known, nevertheless he has expressed the general way of
thinking of his age. If any one, on the other hand, possessed that rare elasticity of
mind which alone enabled him to free himself from the fetters, his writings, and
he himself with them, were burnt; as happened to Bruno and Vanini. But how
absolutely paralysed the ordinary mind is by that early metaphysical preparation
may be seen most strikingly, and from its most ridiculous side, when it
undertakes to criticise the doctrines of a foreign belief. One finds the ordinary
man, as a rule, merely trying to carefully prove that the dogmas of the foreign
belief do not agree with those of his own; he labours to explain that not only do
they not say the same, but certainly do not mean the same thing as his. With that
he fancies in his simplicity that he has proved the falsity of the doctrines of the
alien belief. It really never occurs to him to ask the question which of the two is
right; but his own articles of belief are to him as à priori certain principles. The
Rev. Mr. Morrison has furnished an amusing example of this kind in vol. xx. of
the Asiatic Journal wherein he criticises the religion and philosophy of the
Chinese.
Demop. So that's your higher point of view. But I assure you that there is a
higher still. Primum vivere, deinde philosophari is of more comprehensive
significance than one supposes at first sight. Before everything else, the raw and
wicked tendencies of the masses ought to be restrained, in order to protect them

from doing anything that is extremely unjust, or committing cruel, violent, and
disgraceful deeds. If one waited until they recognised and grasped the truth one
would assuredly come too late. And supposing they had already found truth, it
would surpass their powers of comprehension. In any case it would be a mere
allegorical investiture of truth, a parable, or a myth that would be of any good to
them. There must be, as Kant has said, a public standard of right and virtue, nay,
this must at all times flutter high. It is all the same in the end what kind of
heraldic figures are represented on it, if they only indicate what is meant. Such
an allegorical truth is at all times and everywhere, for mankind at large, a
beneficial substitute for an eternally unattainable truth, and in general, for a
philosophy which it can never grasp; to say nothing of its changing its form
daily, and not having as yet attained any kind of general recognition. Therefore
practical aims, my good Philalethes, have in every way the advantage of
theoretical.
Phil. This closely resembles the ancient advice of Timaeus of Locrus, the
Pythagorean: [Greek: tas psychas apeirgomes pseudesi logois, ei ka mae agaetai
alathesi].[13] And I almost suspect that it is your wish, according to the fashion
of to-day, to remind me--
"Good friend, the time is near When we may feast off what is good in
peace."
And your recommendation means that we should take care in time, so that
the waves of the dissatisfied, raging masses may not disturb us at table. But the
whole of this point of view is as false as it is nowadays universally liked and
praised; this is why I make haste to put in a protest against it. It is false that state,
justice, and law cannot be maintained without the aid of religion and its articles
of belief, and that justice and police regulations need religion as a complement in
order to carry out legislative arrangements. It is false if it were repeated a
hundred times. For the ancients, and especially the Greeks, furnish us with
striking instantia in contrarium founded on fact. They had absolutely nothing of
what we understand by religion. They had no sacred documents, no dogma to be
learnt, and its acceptance advanced by every one, and its principles inculcated
early in youth. The servants of religion preached just as little about morals, and
the ministers concerned themselves very little about any kind of morality or in
general about what the people either did or left undone. No such thing. But the
duty of the priests was confined merely to temple ceremonies, prayers, songs,
sacrifices, processions, lustrations, and the like, all of which aimed at anything
but the moral improvement of the individual. The whole of their so-called
religion consisted, and particularly in the towns, in some of the deorum majorum
gentium having temples here and there, in which the aforesaid worship was

conducted as an affair of state, when in reality it was an affair of police. No one,
except the functionaries engaged, was obliged in any way to be present, or even
to believe in it. In the whole of antiquity there is no trace of any obligation to
believe in any kind of dogma. It was merely any one who openly denied the
existence of the gods or calumniated them that was punished; because by so
doing he insulted the state which served these gods; beyond this every one was
allowed to think what he chose of them. If any one wished to win the favour of
these gods privately by prayer or sacrifice he was free to do so at his own cost
and risk; if he did not do it, no one had anything to say against it, and least of all
the State. Every Roman had his own Lares and Penates at home, which were,
however, at bottom nothing more than the revered portraits of his ancestors. The
ancients had no kind of decisive, clear, and least of all dogmatically fixed ideas
about the immortality of the soul and a life hereafter, but every one in his own
way had lax, vacillating, and problematical ideas; and their ideas about the gods
were just as various, individual, and vague. So that the ancients had really no
religion in our sense of the word. Was it for this reason that anarchy and
lawlessness reigned among them? Is not law and civil order rather so much their
work, that it still constitutes the foundation of ours? Was not property perfectly
secure, although it consisted of slaves for the greater part? And did not this
condition of things last longer than a thousand years?
So I cannot perceive, and must protest against the practical aims and
necessity of religion in the sense which you have indicated, and in such general
favour to-day, namely, as an indispensable foundation of all legislative
regulations. For from such a standpoint the pure and sacred striving after light
and truth, to say the least, would seem quixotic and criminal if it should venture
in its feeling of justice to denounce the authoritative belief as a usurper who has
taken possession of the throne of truth and maintained it by continuing the
deception.
Demop. But religion is not opposed to truth; for it itself teaches truth. Only
it must not allow truth to appear in its naked form, because its sphere of activity
is not a narrow auditory, but the world and humanity at large, and therefore it
must conform to the requirements and comprehension of so great and mixed a
public; or, to use a medical simile, it must not present it pure, but must as a
medium make use of a mythical vehicle. Truth may also be compared in this
respect to certain chemical stuffs which in themselves are gaseous, but which for
official uses, as also for preservation or transmission, must be bound to a firm,
palpable base, because they would otherwise volatilise. For example, chlorine is
for all such purposes applied only in the form of chlorides. But if truth, pure,
abstract, and free from anything of a mythical nature, is always to remain

unattainable by us all, philosophers included, it might be compared to fluorine,
which cannot be presented by itself alone, but only when combined with other
stuffs. Or, to take a simpler simile, truth, which cannot be expressed in any other
way than by myth and allegory, is like water that cannot be transported without a
vessel; but philosophers, who insist upon possessing it pure, are like a person
who breaks the vessel in order to get the water by itself. This is perhaps a true
analogy. At any rate, religion is truth allegorically and mythically expressed, and
thereby made possible and digestible to mankind at large. For mankind could by
no means digest it pure and unadulterated, just as we cannot live in pure oxygen
but require an addition of four-fifths of nitrogen. And without speaking
figuratively, the profound significance and high aim of life can only be revealed
and shown to the masses symbolically, because they are not capable of grasping
life in its real sense; while philosophy should be like the Eleusinian mysteries,
for the few, the elect.
Phil. I understand. The matter resolves itself into truth putting on the dress
of falsehood. But in doing so it enters into a fatal alliance. What a dangerous
weapon is given into the hands of those who have the authority to make use of
falsehood as the vehicle of truth! If such is the case, I fear there will be more
harm caused by the falsehood than good derived from the truth. If the allegory
were admitted to be such, I should say nothing against it; but in that case it
would be deprived of all respect, and consequently of all efficacy. Therefore the
allegory must assert a claim, which it must maintain, to be true in sensu proprio
while at the most it is true in sensu allegorico. Here lies the incurable mischief,
the permanent evil; and therefore religion is always in conflict, and always will
be with the free and noble striving after pure truth.
Demop. Indeed, no. Care has been taken to prevent that. If religion may not
exactly admit its allegorical nature, it indicates it at any rate sufficiently.
Phil. And in what way does it do that?
Demop. In its mysteries. Mystery is at bottom only the theological terminus
technicus for religious allegory. All religions have their mysteries. In reality, a
mystery is a palpably absurd dogma which conceals in itself a lofty truth, which
by itself would be absolutely incomprehensible to the ordinary intelligence of
the raw masses. The masses accept it in this disguise on trust and faith, without
allowing themselves to be led astray by its absurdity, which is palpable to them;
and thereby they participate in the kernel of the matter so far as they are able. I
may add as an explanation that the use of mystery has been attempted even in
philosophy; for example, when Pascal, who was pietest, mathematician, and
philosopher in one, says in this threefold character: God is everywhere centre
and nowhere periphery. Malebranche has also truly remarked, La liberté est un

mystère. One might go further, and maintain that in religions everything is really
mystery. For it is utterly impossible to impart truth in sensu proprio to the
multitude in its crudity; it is only a mythical and allegorical reflection of it that
can fall to its share and enlighten it. Naked truth must not appear before the eyes
of the profane vulgar; it can only appear before them closely veiled. And it is for
this reason that it is unfair to demand of a religion that it should be true in sensu
proprio, and that, en passant. Rationalists and Supernaturalists of to-day are so
absurd. They both start with the supposition that religion must be the truth; and
while the former prove that it is not, the latter obstinately maintain that it is; or
rather the former cut up and dress the allegory in such a way that it could be true
in sensu proprio but would in that case become a platitude. The latter wish to
maintain, without further dressing, that it is true in sensu proprio, which, as they
should know, can only be carried into execution by inquisitions and the stake.
While in reality, myth and allegory are the essential elements of religion, but
under the indispensable condition (because of the intellectual limitations of the
great masses) that it supplies enough satisfaction to meet those metaphysical
needs of mankind which are ineradicable, and that it takes the place of pure
philosophical truth, which is infinitely difficult, and perhaps never attainable.
Phil. Yes, pretty much in the same way as a wooden leg takes the place of a
natural one. It supplies what is wanting, does very poor service for it, and claims
to be regarded as a natural leg, and is more or less cleverly put together. There is
a difference, however, for, as a rule, the natural leg was in existence before the
wooden one, while religion everywhere has gained the start of philosophy.
Demop. That may be; but a wooden leg is of great value to those who have
no natural leg. You must keep in view that the metaphysical requirements of
man absolutely demand satisfaction; because the horizon of his thoughts must be
defined and not remain unlimited. A man, as a rule, has no faculty of judgment
for weighing reasons, and distinguishing between what is true and what is false.
Moreover, the work imposed upon him by nature and her requirements leaves
him no time for investigations of that kind, or for the education which they
presuppose. Therefore it is entirely out of the question to imagine he will be
convinced by reasons; there is nothing left for him but belief and authority. Even
if a really true philosophy took the place of religion, at least nine-tenths of
mankind would only accept it on authority, so that it would be again a matter of
belief; for Plato's [Greek: philosophon plaethos adynaton einai] will always hold
good. Authority, however, is only established by time and circumstances, so that
we cannot bestow it on that which has only reason to commend it; accordingly,
we must grant it only to that which has attained it in the course of history, even if
it is only truth represented allegorically. This kind of truth, supported by

authority, appeals directly to the essentially metaphysical temperament of man--
that is, to his need of a theory concerning the riddle of existence, which thrusts
itself upon him, and arises from the consciousness that behind the physical in the
world there must be a metaphysical, an unchangeable something, which serves
as the foundation of constant change. It also appeals to the will, fears, and hopes
of mortals living in constant need; religion provides them with gods, demons, to
whom they call, appease, and conciliate. Finally, it appeals to their moral
consciousness, which is undeniably present, and lends to it that authenticity and
support from without--a support without which it would not easily maintain
itself in the struggle against so many temptations. It is exactly from this side that
religion provides an inexhaustible source of consolation and comfort in the
countless and great sorrows of life, a comfort which does not leave men in death,
but rather then unfolds its full efficacy. So that religion is like some one taking
hold of the hand of a blind person and leading him, since he cannot see for
himself; all that the blind person wants is to attain his end, not to see everything
as he walks along.
Phil. This side is certainly the brilliant side of religion. If it is a fraus it is
indeed a pia fraus; that cannot be denied. Then priests become something
between deceivers and moralists. For they dare not teach the real truth, as you
yourself have quite correctly explained, even if it were known to them; which it
is not. There can, at any rate, be a true philosophy, but there can be no true
religion: I mean true in the real and proper understanding of the word, not
merely in that flowery and allegorical sense which you have described, a sense
in which every religion would be true only in different degrees. It is certainly
quite in harmony with the inextricable admixture of good and evil, honesty and
dishonesty, goodness and wickedness, magnanimity and baseness, which the
world presents everywhere, that the most important, the most lofty, and the most
sacred truths can make their appearance only in combination with a lie, nay, can
borrow strength from a lie as something that affects mankind more powerfully;
and as revelation must be introduced by a lie. One might regard this fact as the
monogram of the moral world. Meanwhile let us not give up the hope that
mankind will some day attain that point of maturity and education at which it is
able to produce a true philosophy on the one hand, and accept it on the other.
Simplex sigillum veri: the naked truth must be so simple and comprehensible
that one can impart it to all in its true form without any admixture of myth and
fable (a pack of lies)--in other words, without masking it as religion.
Demop. You have not a sufficient idea of the wretched capacities of the
masses.
Phil. I express it only as a hope; but to give it up is impossible. In that case,

if truth were in a simpler and more comprehensible form, it would surely soon
drive religion from the position of vicegerent which it has so long held. Then
religion will have fulfilled her mission and finished her course; she might then
dismiss the race which she has guided to maturity and herself retire in peace.
This will be the euthanasia of religion. However, as long as she lives she has two
faces, one of truth and one of deceit. According as one looks attentively at one or
the other one will like or dislike her. Hence religion must be regarded as a
necessary evil, its necessity resting on the pitiful weak-mindedness of the great
majority of mankind, incapable of grasping the truth, and consequently when in
extremity requires a substitute for truth.
Demop. Really, one would think that you philosophers had truth lying in
readiness, and all that one had to do was to lay hold of it.
Phil. If we have not got it, it is principally to be ascribed to the pressure
under which philosophy, at all periods and in all countries, has been held by
religion. We have tried to make not only the expression and communication of
truth impossible, but even the contemplation and discovery of it, by giving the
minds of children in earliest childhood into the hands of priests to be worked
upon; to have the groove in which their fundamental thoughts are henceforth to
run so firmly imprinted, as in principal matters, to become fixed and determined
for a lifetime. I am sometimes shocked to see when I take into my hand the
writings of even the most intelligent minds of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, and especially if I have just left my oriental studies, how paralysed
and hemmed in on all sides they are by Jewish notions. Prepared in this way, one
cannot form any idea of the true philosophy!
Demop. And if, moreover, this true philosophy were discovered, religion
would not cease to exist, as you imagine. There cannot be one system of
metaphysics for everybody; the natural differences of intellectual power in
addition to those of education make this impossible. The great majority of
mankind must necessarily be engaged in that arduous bodily labour which is
requisite in order to furnish the endless needs of the whole race. Not only does
this leave the majority no time for education, for learning, or for reflection; but
by virtue of the strong antagonism between merely physical and intellectual
qualities, much excessive bodily labour blunts the understanding and makes it
heavy, clumsy, and awkward, and consequently incapable of grasping any other
than perfectly simple and palpable matters. At least nine-tenths of the human
race comes under this category. People require a system of metaphysics, that is,
an account of the world and our existence, because such an account belongs to
the most natural requirements of mankind. They require also a popular system of
metaphysics, which, in order for it to be this, must combine many rare qualities;

for instance, it must be exceedingly lucid, and yet in the right places be obscure,
nay, to a certain extent, impenetrable; then a correct and satisfying moral system
must be combined with its dogmas; above everything, it must bring
inexhaustible consolation in suffering and death. It follows from this that it can
only be true in sensu allegorico and not in sensu proprio. Further, it must have
the support of an authority which is imposing by its great age, by its general
recognition, by its documents, together with their tone and statements--qualities
which are so infinitely difficult to combine that many a man, if he stopped to
reflect, would not be so ready to help to undermine a religion, but would
consider it the most sacred treasure of the people. If any one wants to criticise
religion he should always bear in mind the nature of the great masses for which
it is destined, and picture to himself their complete moral and intellectual
inferiority. It is incredible how far this inferiority goes and how steadily a spark
of truth will continue to glimmer even under the crudest veiling of monstrous
fables and grotesque ceremonies, adhering indelibly, like the perfume of musk,
to everything which has come in contact with it. As an illustration of this, look at
the profound wisdom which is revealed in the Upanishads, and then look at the
mad idolatry in the India of to-day, as is revealed in its pilgrimages, processions,
and festivities, or at the mad and ludicrous doings of the Saniassi of the present
time. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that in all this madness and absurdity
there yet lies something that is hidden from view, something that is in
accordance with, or a reflection of the profound wisdom that has been
mentioned. It requires this kind of dressing-up for the great brute masses. In this
antithesis we have before us the two poles of humanity:--the wisdom of the
individual and the bestiality of the masses, both of which, however, find their
point of harmony in the moral kingdom. Who has not thought of the saying from
the Kurral--"Vulgar people look like men; but I have never seen anything like
them." The more highly cultured man may always explain religion to himself
cum grano salis; the man of learning, the thoughtful mind, may, in secret,
exchange it for a philosophy. And yet one philosophy would not do for
everybody; each philosophy by the laws of affinity attracts a public to whose
education and mental capacities it is fitted. So there is always an inferior
metaphysical system of the schools for the educated plebeians, and a higher
system for the élite. Kant's lofty doctrine, for example, was degraded to meet the
requirements of the schools, and ruined by Fries, Krug, Salat, and similar people.
In short, Goethe's dictum is as applicable here as anywhere: One does not suit
all. Pure belief in revelation and pure metaphysics are for the two extremes; and
for the intermediate steps mutual modifications of both in countless
combinations and gradations. The immeasurable differences which nature and

education place between men have made this necessary.
Phil. This point of view reminds me seriously of the mysteries of the
ancients which you have already mentioned; their aim at bottom seems to have
lain in remedying the evil arising out of the differences of mental capacities and
education. Their plan was to single out of the great multitude a few people, to
whom the unveiled truth was absolutely incomprehensible, and to reveal the
truth to them up to a certain point; then out of these they singled out others to
whom they revealed more, as they were able to grasp more; and so on up to the
Epopts. And so we got [Greek: mikra, kai meizona, kai megista mystaeria]. The
plan was based on a correct knowledge of the intellectual inequality of mankind.
Demop. To a certain extent the education in our lower, middle, and high
schools represents the different forms of initiation into the mysteries.
Phil. Only in a very approximate way, and this only in so far as subjects of
higher knowledge were written about exclusively in Latin. But since that has
ceased to be so all the mysteries are profaned.
Demop. However that may be, I wish to remind you, in speaking of
religion, that you should grasp it more from the practical and less from the
theoretical side. Personified metaphysics may be religion's enemy, yet
personified morality will be its friend. Perhaps the metaphysics in all religions is
false; but the morality in all is true. This is to be surmised from the fact that in
their metaphysics they contradict each other, while in their morality they agree.
Phil. Which furnishes us with a proof of the rule of logic, that a true
conclusion may follow from false premises.
Demop. Well, stick to your conclusion, and be always mindful that religion
has two sides. If it can't stand when looked at merely from the theoretical--in
other words, from its intellectual side, it appears, on the other hand, from the
moral side as the only means of directing, training, and pacifying those races of
animals gifted with reason, whose kinship with the ape does not exclude a
kinship with the tiger. At the same time religion is, in general, a sufficient
satisfaction for their dull metaphysical needs. You appear to me to have no
proper idea of the difference, wide as the heavens apart, of the profound breach
between your learned man, who is enlightened and accustomed to think, and the
heavy, awkward, stupid, and inert consciousness of mankind's beasts of burden,
whose thoughts have taken once and for all the direction of fear about their
maintenance, and cannot be put in motion in any other; and whose muscular
power is so exclusively exercised that the nervous power which produces
intelligence is thereby greatly reduced. People of this kind must absolutely have
something that they can take hold of on the slippery and thorny path of their life,
some sort of beautiful fable by means of which things can be presented to them

which their crude intelligence could most certainly only understand in picture
and parable. It is impossible to approach them with subtle explanations and fine
distinctions. If you think of religion in this way, and bear in mind that its aims
are extremely practical and only subordinately theoretical, it will seem to you
worthy of the highest respect.
Phil. A respect which would finally rest on the principle that the end
sanctifies the means. However, I am not in favour of a compromise on a basis of
that sort. Religion may be an excellent means of curbing and controlling the
perverse, dull, and malicious creatures of the biped race; in the eyes of the friend
of truth every fraus, be it ever so pia, must be rejected. It would be an odd way
to promote virtue through the medium of lies and deception. The flag to which I
have sworn is truth. I shall remain faithful to it everywhere, and regardless of
success, I shall fight for light and truth. If I see religion hostile, I shall--
Demop. But you will not! Religion is not a deception; it is true, and the
most important of all truths. But because, as has already been said, its doctrines
are of such a lofty nature that the great masses cannot grasp them immediately;
because, I say, its light would blind the ordinary eye, does it appear concealed in
the veil of allegory and teach that which is not exactly true in itself, but which is
true according to the meaning contained in it: and understood in this way
religion is the truth.
Phil. That would be very probable, if it were allowed to be true only in an
allegorical sense. But it claims to be exactly true, and true in the proper sense of
the word: herein lies the deception, and it is here that the friend of truth must
oppose it.
Demop. But this deception is a conditio sine qua non. If religion admitted
that it was merely the allegorical meaning in its doctrines that was true, it would
be deprived of all efficacy, and such rigorous treatment would put an end to its
invaluable and beneficial influence on the morals and feelings of mankind.
Instead of insisting on that with pedantic obstinacy, look at its great
achievements in a practical way both as regards morality and feelings, as a guide
to conduct, as a support and consolation to suffering humanity in life and death.
How greatly you should guard against rousing suspicion in the masses by
theoretical wrangling, and thereby finally taking from them what is an
inexhaustible source of consolation and comfort to them; which in their hard lot
they need very much more than we do: for this reason alone, religion ought not
to be attacked.
Phil. With this argument Luther could have been beaten out of the field
when he attacked the selling of indulgences; for the letters of indulgence have
furnished many a man with irreparable consolation and perfect tranquillity, so

that he joyfully passed away with perfect confidence in the little packet of them
which he firmly held in his hand as he lay dying, convinced that in them he had
so many cards of admission into all the nine heavens. What is the use of grounds
of consolation and peacefulness over which is constantly hanging the Damocles-
sword of deception? The truth, my friend, the truth alone holds good, and
remains constant and faithful; it is the only solid consolation; it is the
indestructible diamond.
Demop. Yes, if you had truth in your pocket to bless us with whenever we
asked for it. But what you possess are only metaphysical systems in which
nothing is certain but the headaches they cost. Before one takes anything away
one must have something better to put in its place.
Phil. I wish you would not continually say that. To free a man from error
does not mean to take something from him, but to give him something. For
knowledge that something is wrong is a truth. No error, however, is harmless;
every error will cause mischief sooner or later to the man who fosters it.
Therefore do not deceive any one, but rather admit you are ignorant of what you
do not know, and let each man form his own dogmas for himself. Perhaps they
will not turn out so bad, especially as they will rub against each other and
mutually rectify errors; at any rate the various opinions will establish tolerance.
Those men who possess both knowledge and capacity may take up the study of
philosophy, or even themselves advance the history of philosophy.
Demop. That would be a fine thing! A whole nation of naturalised
metaphysicians quarrelling with each other, and eventualiter striking each other.
Phil. Well, a few blows here and there are the sauce of life, or at least a very
slight evil compared with priestly government--prosecution of heretics,
plundering of the laity, courts of inquisition, crusades, religious wars, massacres
of St. Bartholomew, and the like. They have been the results of chartered
popular metaphysics: therefore I still hold that one cannot expect to get grapes
from thistles, or good from lies and deception.
Demop. How often must I repeat that religion is not a lie, but the truth itself
in a mythical, allegorical dress? But with respect to your plan of each man
establishing his own religion, I had still something to say to you, that a
particularism like this is totally and absolutely opposed to the nature of mankind,
and therefore would abolish all social order. Man is an animal metaphysicum--in
other words, he has surpassingly great metaphysical requirements; accordingly
he conceives life above all in its metaphysical sense, and from that standpoint
wishes to grasp everything. Accordingly, odd as it may sound with regard to the
uncertainty of all dogmas, accord in the fundamental elements of metaphysics is
the principal thing, in so much as it is only among people who hold the same

views on this question that a genuine and lasting fellowship is possible. As a
result of this, nations resemble and differ from each other more in religion than
in government, or even language. Consequently, the fabric of society, the State,
will only be perfectly firm when it has for a basis a system of metaphysics
universally acknowledged. Such a system, naturally, can only be a popular
metaphysical one--that is, a religion. It then becomes identified with the
government, with all the general expressions of the national life, as well as with
all sacred acts of private life. This was the case in ancient India, among the
Persians, Egyptians, Jews, also the Greeks and Romans, and it is still the case
among the Brahman, Buddhist, and Mohammedan nations. There, are three
doctrines of faith in China, it is true, and the one that has spread the most,
namely, Buddhism, is exactly the doctrine that is least protected by the State; yet
there is a saying in China that is universally appreciated and daily applied, the
three doctrines are only one--in other words, they agree in the main thing. The
Emperor confesses all three at the same time, and agrees with them all. Europe is
the confederacy of Christian States; Christianity is the basis of each of its
members and the common bond of all; hence Turkey, although it is in Europe, is
really not to be reckoned in it. Similarly the European princes are such "by the
grace of God," and the Pope is the delegate of God; accordingly, as his throne
was the highest, he wished all other thrones to be looked upon only as held in fee
from him. Similarly Archbishops and Bishops, as such, had temporal authority,
just as they have still in England a seat and voice in the Upper House; Protestant
rulers are, as such, heads of their churches; in England a few years ago this was a
girl of eighteen. By the revolt from the Pope, the Reformation shattered the
European structure, and, in particular, dissolved the true unity of Germany by
abolishing its common faith; this unity, which had as a matter of fact come to
grief, had accordingly to be replaced later by artificial and purely political bonds.
So you see how essentially connected is unity of faith with common order and
every state. It is everywhere the support of the laws and the constitution--that is
to say, the foundation of the social structure, which would stand with difficulty if
faith did not lend power to the authority of the government and the importance
of the ruler.
Phil. Oh, yes, princes look upon God as a goblin, wherewith to frighten
grown-up children to bed when nothing else is of any avail; it is for this reason
that they depend so much on God. All right; meanwhile I should like to advise
every ruling lord to read through, on a certain day every six months, the fifteenth
chapter of the First Book of Samuel, earnestly and attentively; so that he may
always have in mind what it means to support the throne on the altar. Moreover,
since burning at the stake, that ultima ratio theologorum, is a thing of the past,

this mode of government has lost its efficacy. For, as you know, religions are
like glowworms: before they can shine it must be dark. A certain degree of
general ignorance is the condition of every religion, and is the element in which
alone it is able to exist. While, as soon as astronomy, natural science, geology,
history, knowledge of countries and nations have spread their light universally,
and philosophy is finally allowed to speak, every faith which is based on miracle
and revelation must perish, and then philosophy will take its place. In Europe the
day of knowledge and science dawned towards the end of the fifteenth century
with the arrival of the modern Greek philosophers, its sun rose higher in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which were so productive, and scattered the
mists of the Middle Age. In the same proportion, both Church and Faith were
obliged to gradually disappear; so that in the eighteenth century English and
French philosophers became direct antagonists, until finally, under Frederick the
Great, Kant came and took away from religious belief the support it had
formerly received from philosophy, and emancipated the ancilla theologiae in
that he attacked the question with German thoroughness and perseverance,
whereby it received a less frivolous, that is to say, a more earnest tone. As a
result of this we see in the nineteenth century Christianity very much weakened,
almost stripped entirely of serious belief, nay, fighting for its own existence;
while apprehensive princes try to raise it up by an artificial stimulant, as the
doctor tries to revive a dying man by the aid of a drug. There is a passage from
Condorcet's Des Progrès de l'esprit humain, which seems to have been written as
a warning to our epoch: Le zèle religieux des philosophes et des grands n'était
qu'une dévotion politique: et toute religion, qu'on se permet de défendre comme
une croyance qu'il est utile de laisser au peuple, ne peut plus espérer qu'une
agonie plus ou moins prolongée. In the whole course of the events which I have
pointed out you may always observe that belief and knowledge bear the same
relation to each other as the two scales of a balance: when the one rises the other
must fall. The balance is so sensitive that it indicates momentary influences. For
example, in the beginning of this century the predatory excursions of French
robbers under their leader Buonaparte, and the great efforts that were requisite to
drive them out and to punish them, had led to a temporary neglect of science,
and in consequence to a certain decrease in the general propagation of
knowledge; the Church immediately began to raise her head again and Faith to
be revived, a revival partly of a poetical nature, in keeping with the spirit of the
times. On the other hand, in the more than thirty years' peace that followed,
leisure and prosperity promoted the building up of science and the spread of
knowledge in an exceptional degree, so that the result was what I have said, the
dissolution and threatened fall of religion. Perhaps the time which has been so

often predicted is not far distant, when religion will depart from European
humanity, like a nurse whose care the child has outgrown; it is now placed in the
hands of a tutor for instruction. For without doubt doctrines of belief that are
based only on authority, miracles, and revelation are only of use and suitable to
the childhood of humanity. That a race, which all physical and historical data
confirm as having been in existence only about a hundred times the life of a man
sixty years old, is still in its first childhood is a fact that every one will admit.
Demop. If instead of prophesying with undisguised pleasure the downfall of
Christianity, you would only consider how infinitely indebted European
humanity is to it, and to the religion which, after the lapse of some time,
followed Christianity from its old home in the East! Europe received from it a
drift which had hitherto been unknown to it--it learnt the fundamental truth that
life cannot be an end-in-itself, but that the true end of our existence lies beyond
it. The Greeks and Romans had placed this end absolutely in life itself, so that, in
this sense, they may most certainly be called blind heathens. Correspondingly,
all their virtues consist in what is serviceable to the public, in what is useful; and
Aristotle says quite naïvely, "Those virtues must necessarily be the greatest
which are the most useful to others" ([Greek: anankae de megistas einai aretas
tas tois allois chraesimotatas], Rhetor. I. c. 9). This is why the ancients
considered love for one's country the greatest virtue, although it is a very
doubtful one, as it is made up of narrowness, prejudice, vanity, and an
enlightened self-interest. Preceding the passage that has just been quoted,
Aristotle enumerates all the virtues in order to explain them individually. They
are Justice, Courage, Moderation, Magnificence ([Greek: megaloprepeia]),
Magnanimity, Liberality, Gentleness, Reasonableness, and Wisdom. How
different from the Christian virtues! Even Plato, without comparison the most
transcendental philosopher of pre-Christian antiquity, knows no higher virtue
than Justice; he alone recommends it unconditionally and for its own sake, while
all the other philosophers make a happy life--vita beata--the aim of all virtue;
and it is acquired through the medium of moral behaviour. Christianity released
European humanity from its superficial and crude absorption in an ephemeral,
uncertain, and hollow existence.
... coelumque tueri Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
Accordingly, Christianity does not only preach Justice, but the Love of
Mankind, Compassion, Charity, Reconciliation, Love of one's Enemies,
Patience, Humility, Renunciation, Faith, and Hope. Indeed, it went even further:
it taught that the world was of evil and that we needed deliverance; consequently
it preached contempt of the world, self-denial, chastity, the giving up of one's
own will, that is to say, turning away from life and its phantom-like pleasures; it

taught further the healing power of suffering, and that an instrument of torture is
the symbol of Christianity, I willingly admit that this serious and only correct
view of life had spread in other forms throughout Asia thousands of years
previously, independently of Christianity as it is still; but this view of life was a
new and tremendous revelation to European humanity. For it is well known that
the population of Europe consists of Asiatic races who, driven out from their
own country, wandered away, and by degrees hit upon Europe: on their long
wanderings they lost the original religion of their homes, and with it the correct
view of life; and this is why they formed in another climate religions for
themselves which were somewhat crude; especially the worship of Odin, the
Druidic and the Greek religions, the metaphysical contents of which were small
and shallow. Meanwhile there developed among the Greeks a quite special, one
might say an instinctive, sense of beauty, possessed by them alone of all the
nations of the earth that have ever existed--a peculiar, fine, and correct sense of
beauty, so that in the mouths of their poets and in the hands of their artists, their
mythology took an exceptionally beautiful and delightful form. On the other
hand, the earnest, true, and profound import of life was lost to the Greeks and
Romans; they lived like big children until Christianity came and brought them
back to the serious side of life.
Phil. And to form an idea of the result we need only compare antiquity with
the Middle Age that followed--that is, the time of Pericles with the fourteenth
century. It is difficult to believe that we have the same kind of beings before us.
There, the finest development of humanity, excellent constitutional regulations,
wise laws, cleverly distributed offices, rationally ordered freedom, all the arts, as
well as poetry and philosophy, at their best; the creation of works which after
thousands of years have never been equalled and are almost works of a higher
order of beings, whom we can never approach; life embellished by the noblest
fellowship, as is portrayed in the Banquet of Xenophon. And now look at this
side, if you can. Look at the time when the Church had imprisoned the minds,
and violence the bodies of men, whereby knights and priests could lay the whole
weight of life on the common beast of burden--the third estate. There you have
club-law, feudalism, and fanaticism in close alliance, and in their train shocking
uncertainty and darkness of mind, a corresponding intolerance, discord of faiths,
religious wars, crusades, persecution of heretics and inquisitions; as the form of
fellowship, chivalry, an amalgam of savagery and foolishness, with its pedantic
system of absurd affectations, its degrading superstitions, and apish veneration
for women; the survival of which is gallantry, deservedly requited by the
arrogance of women; it affords to all Asiatics continual material for laughter, in
which the Greeks would have joined. In the golden Middle Age the matter went

as far as a formal and methodical service of women and enjoined deeds of
heroism, cours d'amour, bombastic Troubadour songs and so forth, although it is
to be observed that these last absurdities, which have an intellectual side, were
principally at home in France; while among the material phlegmatic Germans
the knights distinguished themselves more by drinking and robbing. Drinking
and hoarding their castles with plunder were the occupations of their lives; and
certainly there was no want of stupid love-songs in the courts. What has changed
the scene so? Migration and Christianity.
Demop. It is a good thing you reminded me of it. Migration was the source
of the evil, and Christianity the dam on which it broke. Christianity was the
means of controlling and taming those raw, wild hordes who were washed in by
the flood of migration. The savage man must first of all learn to kneel, to
venerate, and to obey; it is only after that, that he can be civilised. This was done
in Ireland by St. Patrick, in Germany by Winifred the Saxon, who was a genuine
Boniface. It was migration of nations, this last movement of Asiatic races
towards Europe, followed only by their fruitless attempts under Attila, Gengis
Khan, and Timur, and, as a comic after-piece, by the gipsies: it was migration of
nations which swept away the humanity of the ancients. Christianity was the
very principle which worked against this savagery, just as later, through the
whole of the Middle Age, the Church and its hierarchy were extremely necessary
to place a limit to the savagery and barbarism of those lords of violence, the
princes and knights: it was the ice-breaker of this mighty flood. Still, the general
aim of Christianity is not so much to make this life pleasant as to make us
worthy of a better. It looks beyond this span of time, this fleeting dream, in order
to lead us to eternal salvation. Its tendency is ethical in the highest sense of the
word, a tendency which had hitherto been unknown in Europe; as I have already
pointed out to you by comparing the morality and religion of the ancients with
those of Christianity.
Phil. That is right so far as theory is concerned; but look at the practice. In
comparison with the Christian centuries that followed, the ancient world was
undoubtedly less cruel than the Middle Age, with its deaths by frightful torture,
its countless burnings at the stake; further, the ancients were very patient,
thought very highly of justice, and frequently sacrificed themselves for their
country, showed traits of magnanimity of every kind, and such genuine
humanity, that, up to the present time, an acquaintance with their doings and
thoughts is called the study of Humanity. Religious wars, massacres, crusades,
inquisitions, as well as other persecutions, the extermination of the original
inhabitants of America and the introduction of African slaves in their place, were
the fruits of Christianity, and among the ancients one cannot find anything

analogous to this, anything to counterpoise it; for the slaves of the ancients, the
familia, the vernae, were a satisfied race and faithfully devoted to their masters,
and as widely distinct from the miserable negroes of the sugar plantations, which
are a disgrace to humanity, as they were in colour. The censurable toleration of
pederasty, for which one chiefly reproaches the morality of the ancients, is a
trifle compared with the Christian horrors I have cited, and is not so rare among
people of to-day as it appears to be. Can you then, taking everything into
consideration, maintain that humanity has really become morally better by
Christianity?
Demop. If the result has not everywhere corresponded with the purity and
accuracy of the doctrine, it may be because this doctrine has been too noble, too
sublime for humanity, and its aim set too high: to be sure, it was much easier to
comply with heathen morality or with the Mohammedan. It is precisely what is
most elevated that is the most open to abuse and deception--abusus optimi
pessimus; and therefore those lofty doctrines have sometimes served as a pretext
for the most disgraceful transactions and veritable crimes. The downfall of the
ancient institutions, as well as of the arts and sciences of the old world, is, as has
been said, to be ascribed to the invasion of foreign barbarians. Accordingly, it
was inevitable that ignorance and savagery got the upper hand; with the result
that violence and fraud usurped their dominion, and knights and priests became a
burden to mankind. This is partly to be explained by the fact that the new
religion taught the lesson of eternal and not temporal welfare, that simplicity of
heart was preferable to intellectual knowledge, and it was averse to all worldly
pleasures which are served by the arts and sciences. However, in so far as they
could be made serviceable to religion they were promoted, and so flourished to a
certain extent.
Phil. In a very narrow sphere. The sciences were suspicious companions,
and as such were placed under restrictions; while fond ignorance, that element so
necessary to the doctrines of faith, was carefully nourished.
Demop. And yet what humanity had hitherto acquired in the shape of
knowledge, and handed down in the works of the ancients, was saved from ruin
by the clergy, especially by those in the monasteries. What would have happened
if Christianity had not come in just before the migration of nations?
Phil. It would really be an extremely useful inquiry if some one, with the
greatest frankness and impartiality, tried to weigh exactly and accurately the
advantages and disadvantages derived from religions. To do this, it would be
necessary to have a much greater amount of historical and psychological data
than either of us has at our command. Academies might make it a subject for a
prize essay.

Demop. They will take care not to do that.
Phil. I am surprised to hear you say that, for it is a bad look-out for religion.
Besides, there are also academies which make it a secret condition in submitting
their questions that the prize should be given to the competitor who best
understands the art of flattering them. If we, then, could only get a statistician to
tell us how many crimes are prevented yearly by religious motives, and how
many by other motives. There would be very few of the former. If a man feels
himself tempted to commit a crime, certainly the first thing which presents itself
to his mind is the punishment he must suffer for it, and the probability that he
will be punished; after that comes the second consideration, that his reputation is
at stake. If I am not mistaken, he will reflect by the hour on these two obstacles
before religious considerations ever come into his mind. If he can get away from
these two first safeguards against crime, I am convinced that religion alone will
very rarely keep him back from it.
Demop. I believe, however, that it will do so very often; especially when its
influence works through the medium of custom, and thereby immediately makes
a man shrink from the idea of committing a crime. Early impressions cling to
him. As an illustration of what I mean, consider how many a man, and especially
if he is of noble birth, will often, in order to fulfil some promise, make great
sacrifices, which are instigated solely by the fact that his father has often
impressed it upon him in childhood that "a man of honour, or a gentleman, or a
cavalier, always keeps his word inviolate."
Phil. And that won't work unless there is a certain innate probitas. You must
not ascribe to religion what is the result of innate goodness of character, by
which pity for the one who would be affected by the crime prevents a man from
committing it. This is the genuine moral motive, and as such it is independent of
all religions.
Demop. But even this moral motive has no effect on the masses unless it is
invested with a religious motive, which, at any rate, strengthens it. However,
without any such natural foundation, religious motives often in themselves alone
prevent crime: this is not a matter of surprise to us in the case of the multitude,
when we see that even people of good education sometimes come under the
influence, not indeed of religious motives, which fundamentally are at least
allegorically true, but of the most absurd superstitions, by which they are guided
throughout the whole of their lives; as, for instance, undertaking nothing on a
Friday, refusing to sit down thirteen at table, obeying chance omens, and the
like: how much more likely are the masses to be guided by such things. You
cannot properly conceive the great limitations of the raw mind; its interior is
entirely dark, especially if, as is often the case, a bad, unjust, and wicked heart is

its foundation. Men like these, who represent the bulk of humanity, must be
directed and controlled meanwhile, as well as possible, even if it be by really
superstitious motives, until they become susceptible to truer and better ones. Of
the direct effect of religion, one may give as an instance a common occurrence
in Italy, namely, that of a thief being allowed to replace what he has stolen
through the medium of his confessor, who makes this the condition of his
absolution. Then think of the case of an oath, where religion shows a most
decided influence: whether it be because a man places himself expressly in the
position of a mere moral being, and as such regards himself as solemnly
appealed to,--as seems to be the case in France, where the form of the oath is
merely "je le jure"; and among the Quakers, whose solemn "yea" or "nay" takes
the place of the oath;--or whether it is because a man really believes he is
uttering something that will forfeit his eternal happiness,--a belief which is
obviously only the investiture of the former feeling. At any rate, religious
motives are a means of awakening and calling forth his moral nature. A man will
frequently consent to take a false oath, but suddenly refuse to do so when it
comes to the point; whereby truth and right come off victorious.
Phil. But false oaths are still oftener sworn, whereby truth and right are
trodden underfoot with the clear knowledge of all the witnesses of the act. An
oath is the jurist's metaphysical pons asinorum, and like this should be used as
seldom as ever possible. When it cannot be avoided, it should be taken with
great solemnity, always in the presence of the clergy--nay, even in a church or in
a chapel adjoining the court of justice.... This is precisely why the French
abstract formulary of the oath is of no value. By the way, you are right to cite the
oath as an undeniable example of the practical efficacy of religion. I must, in
spite of everything you have said, doubt whether the efficacy of religion goes
much beyond this. Just think, if it were suddenly declared by public
proclamation that all criminal laws were abolished; I believe that neither you nor
I would have the courage to go home from here alone under the protection of
religious motives. On the other hand, if in a similar way all religions were
declared to be untrue; we would, under the protection of the laws alone, live on
as formerly, without any special increase in our fears and measures of
precaution. But I will even go further: religions have very frequently a decidedly
demoralising influence. It may be said generally that duties towards God are the
reverse of duties towards mankind; and that it is very easy to make up for lack of
good behaviour towards men by adulation of God. Accordingly, we see in all
ages and countries that the great majority of mankind find it much easier to beg
admission into Heaven by prayers than to deserve it by their actions. In every
religion it soon comes to be proclaimed that it is not so much moral actions as

faith, ceremonies, and rites of every kind that are the immediate objects of the
Divine will; and indeed the latter, especially if they are bound up with the
emoluments of the clergy, are considered a substitute for the former. The
sacrifice of animals in temples, or the saying of masses, the erection of chapels
or crosses by the roadside, are soon regarded as the most meritorious works; so
that even a great crime may be expiated by them, as also by penance, subjection
to priestly authority, confessions, pilgrimages, donations to the temple and its
priests, the building of monasteries and the like; until finally the clergy appear
almost only as mediators in the corruption of the gods. And if things do not go
so far as that, where is the religion whose confessors do not consider prayers,
songs of praise, and various kinds of devotional exercise, at any rate, a partial
substitute for moral conduct? Look at England, for instance, where the audacious
priestcraft has mendaciously identified the Christian Sunday with the Jewish
Sabbath, in spite of the fact that it was ordained by Constantine the Great in
opposition to the Jewish Sabbath, and even took its name, so that Jehovah's
ordinances for the Sabbath--i.e., the day on which the Almighty rested, tired
after His six days' work, making it therefore essentially the last day of the week--
might be conferred on the Christian Sunday, the dies solis, the first day of the
week which the sun opens in glory, the day of devotion and joy. The result of
this fraud is that in England "Sabbath breaking," or the "desecration of the
Sabbath," that is, the slightest occupation, whether it be of a useful or
pleasurable nature, and any kind of game, music, knitting, or worldly book, are
on Sundays regarded as great sins. Must not the ordinary man believe that if, as
his spiritual guides impress upon him, he never fails in a "strict observance of
the holy Sabbath and a regular attendance on Divine Service,"--in other words, if
he invariably whiles away his time on a Sunday, and never fails to sit two hours
in church to listen to the same Litany for the thousandth time, and to babble it
with the rest a tempo, he may reckon on indulgence in here and there little sins
which he at times allows himself? Those devils in human form, the slave-owners
and slave-traders in the Free States of North America (they should be called the
Slave States), are, in general, orthodox, pious Anglicans, who look upon it as a
great sin to work on Sundays; and confident in this, and their regular attendance
at church, they expect to gain eternal happiness. The demoralising influence of
religion is less problematical than its moral influence. On the other hand, how
great and how certain that moral influence must be to make amends for the
horrors and misery which religions, especially the Christian and Mohammedan
religions, have occasioned and spread over the earth! Think of the fanaticism, of
the endless persecutions, the religious wars, that sanguinary frenzy of which the
ancients had no idea; then, think of the Crusades, a massacre lasting two hundred

years, and perfectly unwarrantable, with its war-cry, It is God's will, so that it
might get into its possession the grave of one who had preached love and
endurance; think of the cruel expulsion and extermination of the Moors and Jews
from Spain; think of the massacres, of the inquisitions and other heretical
tribunals, the bloody and terrible conquests of the Mohammedans in three
different parts of the world, and the conquest of the Christians in America,
whose inhabitants were for the most part, and in Cuba entirely, exterminated;
according to Las Casas, within forty years twelve million persons were
murdered--of course, all in majorem Dei gloriam, and for the spreading of the
Gospel, and because, moreover, what was not Christian was not looked upon as
human. It is true I have already touched upon these matters; but when in our day
"the Latest News from the Kingdom of God" is printed, we shall not be tired of
bringing older news to mind. And in particular, let us not forget India, that
sacred soil, that cradle of the human race, at any rate of the race to which we
belong, where first Mohammedans, and later Christians, were most cruelly
infuriated against the followers of the original belief of mankind; and the
eternally lamentable, wanton, and cruel destruction and disfigurement of the
most ancient temples and images, still show traces of the monotheistic rage of
the Mohammedans, as it was carried on from Marmud the Ghaznevid of
accursed memory, down to Aureng Zeb, the fratricide, whom later the
Portuguese Christians faithfully tried to imitate by destroying the temples and
the auto da fé of the inquisition at Goa. Let us also not forget the chosen people
of God, who, after they had, by Jehovah's express and special command, stolen
from their old and faithful friends in Egypt the gold and silver vessels which had
been lent to them, made a murderous and predatory excursion into the Promised
Land, with Moses at their head, in order to tear it from the rightful owners, also
at Jehovah's express and repeated commands, knowing no compassion, and
relentlessly murdering and exterminating all the inhabitants, even the women
and children (Joshua x., xi.); just because they were not circumcised and did not
know Jehovah, which was sufficient reason to justify every act of cruelty against
them. For the same reason, in former times the infamous roguery of the patriarch
Jacob and his chosen people against Hamor, King of Shalem, and his people is
recounted to us with glory, precisely because the people were unbelievers. Truly,
it is the worst side of religions that the believers of one religion consider
themselves allowed everything against the sins of every other, and consequently
treat them with the utmost viciousness and cruelty; the Mohammedans against
the Christians and Hindoos; the Christians against the Hindoos, Mohammedans,
Americans, Negroes, Jews, heretics, and the like. Perhaps I go too far when I say
all religions; for in compliance with truth, I must add that the fanatical horrors,

arising from religion, are only perpetrated by the followers of the monotheistic
religions, that is, of Judaism and its two branches, Christianity and Islamism.
The same is not reported of the Hindoos and Buddhists, although we know, for
instance, that Buddhism was driven out about the fifth century of our era by the
Brahmans from its original home in the southernmost part of the Indian
peninsula, and afterwards spread over the whole of Asia; yet we have, so far as I
know, no definite information of any deeds of violence, of wars and cruelties by
which this was brought about. This may, most certainly, be ascribed to the
obscurity in which the history of those countries is veiled; but the extremely
mild character of their religion, which continually impresses upon us to be
forbearing towards every living thing, as well as the circumstance that
Brahmanism properly admits no proselytes by reason of its caste system, leads
us to hope that its followers may consider themselves exempt from shedding
blood to any great extent, and from cruelty in any form. Spence Hardy, in his
excellent book on Eastern Monachism, p. 412, extols the extraordinary tolerance
of the Buddhists, and adds his assurance that the annals of Buddhism furnish
fewer examples of religious persecution than those of any other religion. As a
matter of fact, intolerance is only essential to monotheism: an only god is by his
nature a jealous god, who cannot permit any other god to exist. On the other
hand, polytheistic gods are by their nature tolerant: they live and let live; they
willingly tolerate their colleagues as being gods of the same religion, and this
tolerance is afterwards extended to alien gods, who are, accordingly, hospitably
received, and later on sometimes attain even the same rights and privileges; as in
the case of the Romans, who willingly accepted and venerated Phrygian,
Egyptian, and other foreign gods. Hence it is the monotheistic religions alone
that furnish us with religious wars, persecutions, and heretical tribunals, and also
with the breaking of images, the destruction of idols of the gods; the
overthrowing of Indian temples and Egyptian colossi, which had looked on the
sun three thousand years; and all this because a jealous God had said: "Thou
shalt make no graven image," etc. To return to the principal part of the matter:
you are certainly right in advocating the strong metaphysical needs of mankind;
but religions appear to me to be not so much a satisfaction as an abuse of those
needs. At any rate we have seen that, in view of the progress of morality, its
advantages are for the most part problematical, while its disadvantages, and
especially the enormities which have appeared in its train, are obvious. Of course
the matter becomes quite different if we consider the utility of religion as a
mainstay of thrones; for in so far as these are bestowed "by the grace of God,"
altar and throne are closely related. Accordingly, every wise prince who loves
his throne and his family will walk before his people as a type of true religion;

just as even Machiavelli, in the eighteenth chapter of his book, urgently
recommended religion to princes. Moreover, it may be added that revealed
religions are related to philosophy, exactly as the sovereigns by the grace of God
are to the sovereignty of the people; and hence the two former terms of the
parallel are in natural alliance.
Demop. Oh, don't adopt that tone! But consider that in doing so you are
blowing the trumpet of ochlocracy and anarchy, the arch-enemy of all legislative
order, all civilisation, and all humanity.
Phil. You are right. It was only a sophism, or what the fencing-master calls
a feint. I withdraw it therefore. But see how disputing can make even honest men
unjust and malicious. So let us cease.
Demop. It is true I regret, after all the trouble I have taken, that I have not
altered your opinion in regard to religion; on the other hand, I can assure you
that everything you have brought forward has not shaken my conviction of its
high value and necessity.
Phil. I believe you; for as it is put in Hudibras:
"He that complies against his will Is of his own opinion still."
I find consolation, however, in the fact that in controversies and in taking
mineral waters, it is the after-effects that are the true ones.
Demop. I hope the after-effect may prove to be beneficial in your case.
Phil. That might be so if I could only digest a Spanish proverb.
Demop. And that is?
Phil. Detras de la cruz está el Diablo.
Demop. Which means?
Phil Wait--"Behind the cross stands the devil."
Demop. Come, don't let us separate from each other with sarcasms, but
rather let us allow that religion, like Janus, or, better still, like the Brahman god
of death, Yama, has two faces, and like him, one very friendly and one very
sullen. Each of us, however, has only fixed his eyes on one.
Phil. You are right, old fellow.
FOOTNOTES:
[13] De Anim. Mundi, p. 104, d. Steph.
A FEW WORDS ON PANTHEISM.
The controversy between Theism and Pantheism might be presented in an
allegorical or dramatic form by supposing a dialogue between two persons in the
pit of a theatre at Milan during the performance of a piece. One of them,

convinced that he is in Girolamo's renowned marionette-theatre, admires the art
by which the director gets up the dolls and guides their movements. "Oh, you are
quite mistaken," says the other, "we're in the Teatro della Scala; it is the manager
and his troupe who are on the stage; they are the persons you see before you; the
poet too is taking a part."
The chief objection I have to Pantheism is that it says nothing. To call the
world "God" is not to explain it; it is only to enrich our language with a
superfluous synonym for the word "world." It comes to the same thing whether
you say "the world is God," or "God is the world." But if you start from "God"
as something that is given in experience, and has to be explained, and they say,
"God is the world," you are affording what is to some extent an explanation, in
so far as you are reducing what is unknown to what is partly known (ignotum
per notius); but it is only a verbal explanation. If, however, you start from what
is really given, that is to say, from the world, and say, "the world is God," it is
clear that you say nothing, or at least you are explaining what is unknown by
what is more unknown.
Hence, Pantheism presupposes Theism; only in so far as you start from a
god, that is, in so far as you possess him as something with which you are
already familiar, can you end by identifying him with the world; and your
purpose in doing so is to put him out of the way in a decent fashion. In other
words, you do not start clear from the world as something that requires
explanation; you start from God as something that is given, and not knowing
what to do with him, you make the world take over his role. This is the origin of
Pantheism. Taking an unprejudiced view of the world as it is, no one would
dream of regarding it as a god. It must be a very ill-advised god who knows no
better way of diverting himself than by turning into such a world as ours, such a
mean, shabby world, there to take the form of innumerable millions who live
indeed, but are fretted and tormented, and who manage to exist a while together,
only by preying on one another; to bear misery, need and death, without measure
and without object, in the form, for instance, of millions of negro slaves, or of
the three million weavers in Europe who, in hunger and care, lead a miserable
existence in damp rooms or the cheerless halls of a factory. What a pastime this
for a god, who must, as such, be used to another mode of existence!
We find accordingly that what is described as the great advance from
Theism to Pantheism, if looked at seriously, and not simply as a masked
negation of the sort indicated above, is a transition from what is unproved and
hardly conceivable to what is absolutely absurd. For however obscure, however
loose or confused may be the idea which we connect with the word "God," there
are two predicates which are inseparable from it, the highest power and the

highest wisdom. It is absolutely absurd to think that a being endowed with these
qualities should have put himself into the position described above. Theism, on
the other hand, is something which is merely unproved; and if it is difficult to
look upon the infinite world as the work of a personal, and therefore individual,
Being, the like of which we know only from our experience of the animal world,
it is nevertheless not an absolutely absurd idea. That a Being, at once almighty
and all-good, should create a world of torment is always conceivable; even
though we do not know why he does so; and accordingly we find that when
people ascribe the height of goodness to this Being, they set up the inscrutable
nature of his wisdom as the refuge by which the doctrine escapes the charge of
absurdity. Pantheism, however, assumes that the creative God is himself the
world of infinite torment, and, in this little world alone, dies every second, and
that entirely of his own will; which is absurd. It would be much more correct to
identify the world with the devil, as the venerable author of the Deutsche
Theologie has, in fact, done in a passage of his immortal work, where he says,
"Wherefore the evil spirit and nature are one, and where nature is not overcome,
neither is the evil adversary overcome."
It is manifest that the Pantheists give the Sansara the name of God. The
same name is given by the Mystics to the Nirvana. The latter, however, state
more about the Nirvana than they know, which is not done by the Buddhists,
whose Nirvana is accordingly a relative nothing. It is only Jews, Christians, and
Mohammedans who give its proper and correct meaning to the word "God."
The expression, often heard now-a-days, "the world is an end-in-itself,"
leaves it uncertain whether Pantheism or a simple Fatalism is to be taken as the
explanation of it. But, whichever it be, the expression looks upon the world from
a physical point of view only, and leaves out of sight its moral significance,
because you cannot assume a moral significance without presenting the world as
means to a higher end. The notion that the world has a physical but not a moral
meaning, is the most mischievous error sprung from the greatest mental
perversity.

THE CHRISTIAN SYSTEM.
When the Church says that, in the dogmas of religion, reason is totally
incompetent and blind, and its use to be reprehended, it is in reality attesting the
fact that these dogmas are allegorical in their nature, and are not to be judged by
the standard which reason, taking all things sensu proprio, can alone apply. Now
the absurdities of a dogma are just the mark and sign of what is allegorical and
mythical in it. In the case under consideration, however, the absurdities spring
from the fact that two such heterogeneous doctrines as those of the Old and New
Testaments had to be combined. The great allegory was of gradual growth.
Suggested by external and adventitious circumstances, it was developed by the
interpretation put upon them, an interpretation in quiet touch with certain
deeplying truths only half realized. The allegory was finally completed by
Augustine, who penetrated deepest into its meaning, and so was able to conceive
it as a systematic whole and supply its defects. Hence the Augustinian doctrine,
confirmed by Luther, is the complete form of Christianity; and the Protestants of
to-day, who take Revelation sensu proprio and confine it to a single individual,
are in error in looking upon the first beginnings of Christianity as its most
perfect expression. But the bad thing about all religions is that, instead of being
able to confess their allegorical nature, they have to conceal it; accordingly, they
parade their doctrine in all seriousness as true sensu proprio, and as absurdities
form an essential part of these doctrines, you have the great mischief of a
continual fraud. And, what is worse, the day arrives when they are no longer true
sensu proprio, and then there is an end of them; so that, in that respect, it would
be better to admit their allegorical nature at once. But the difficulty is to teach
the multitude that something can be both true and untrue at the same time. And
as all religions are in a greater or less degree of this nature, we must recognize
the fact that mankind cannot get on without a certain amount of absurdity, that
absurdity is an element in its existence, and illusion indispensable; as indeed
other aspects of life testify. I have said that the combination of the Old
Testament with the New gives rise to absurdities. Among the examples which
illustrate what I mean, I may cite the Christian doctrine of Predestination and
Grace, as formulated by Augustine and adopted from him by Luther; according
to which one man is endowed with grace and another is not. Grace, then, comes
to be a privilege received at birth and brought ready into the world; a privilege,
too, in a matter second to none in importance. What is obnoxious and absurd in
this doctrine may be traced to the idea contained in the Old Testament, that man
is the creation of an external will, which called him into existence out of nothing.
It is quite true that genuine moral excellence is really innate; but the meaning of

the Christian doctrine is expressed in another and more rational way by the
theory of metempsychosis, common to Brahmans and Buddhists. According to
this theory, the qualities which distinguish one man from another are received at
birth, are brought, that is to say, from another world and a former life; these
qualities are not an external gift of grace, but are the fruits of the acts committed
in that other world. But Augustine's dogma of Predestination is connected with
another dogma, namely, that the mass of humanity is corrupt and doomed to
eternal damnation, that very few will be found righteous and attain salvation, and
that only in consequence of the gift of grace, and because they are predestined to
be saved; whilst the remainder will be overwhelmed by the perdition they have
deserved, viz., eternal torment in hell. Taken in its ordinary meaning, the dogma
is revolting, for it comes to this: it condemns a man, who may be, perhaps,
scarcely twenty years of age, to expiate his errors, or even his unbelief, in
everlasting torment; nay, more, it makes this almost universal damnation the
natural effect of original sin, and therefore the necessary consequence of the
Fall. This is a result which must have been foreseen by him who made mankind,
and who, in the first place, made them not better than they are, and secondly, set
a trap for them into which he must have known they would fall; for he made the
whole world, and nothing is hidden from him. According to this doctrine, then,
God created out of nothing a weak race prone to sin, in order to give them over
to endless torment. And, as a last characteristic, we are told that this God, who
prescribes forbearance and forgiveness of every fault, exercises none himself,
but does the exact opposite; for a punishment which comes at the end of all
things, when the world is over and done with, cannot have for its object either to
improve or deter, and is therefore pure vengeance. So that, on this view, the
whole race is actually destined to eternal torture and damnation, and created
expressly for this end, the only exception being those few persons who are
rescued by election of grace, from what motive one does not know.
Putting these aside, it looks as if the Blessed Lord had created the world for
the benefit of the devil! it would have been so much better not to have made it at
all. So much, then, for a dogma taken sensu proprio. But look at it sensu
allegorico, and the whole matter becomes capable of a satisfactory interpretation.
What is absurd and revolting in this dogma is, in the main, as I said, the simple
outcome of Jewish theism, with its "creation out of nothing," and really foolish
and paradoxical denial of the doctrine of metempsychosis which is involved in
that idea, a doctrine which is natural, to a certain extent self-evident, and, with
the exception of the Jews, accepted by nearly the whole human race at all times.
To remove the enormous evil arising from Augustine's dogma, and to modify its
revolting nature, Pope Gregory I., in the sixth century, very prudently matured

the doctrine of Purgatory, the essence of which already existed in Origen (cf.
Bayle's article on Origen, note B.). The doctrine was regularly incorporated into
the faith of the Church, so that the original view was much modified, and a
certain substitute provided for the doctrine of metempsychosis; for both the one
and the other admit a process of purification. To the same end, the doctrine of
"the Restoration of all things" [Greek: apokatastasis] was established, according
to which, in the last act of the Human Comedy, the sinners one and all will be
reinstated in integrum. It is only Protestants, with their obstinate belief in the
Bible, who cannot be induced to give up eternal punishment in hell. If one were
spiteful, one might say, "much good may it do them," but it is consoling to think
that they really do not believe the doctrine; they leave it alone, thinking in their
hearts, "It can't be so bad as all that."
The rigid and systematic character of his mind led Augustine, in his austere
dogmatism and his resolute definition of doctrines only just indicated in the
Bible and, as a matter of fact, resting on very vague grounds, to give hard
outlines to these doctrines and to put a harsh construction on Christianity: the
result of which is that his views offend us, and just as in his day Pelagianism
arose to combat them, so now in our day Rationalism does the same. Take, for
example, the case as he states it generally in the De Civitate Dei, Bk. xii. ch. 21.
It comes to this: God creates a being out of nothing, forbids him some things,
and enjoins others upon him; and because these commands are not obeyed, he
tortures him to all eternity with every conceivable anguish; and for this purpose,
binds soul and body inseparably together, so that, instead, of the torment
destroying this being by splitting him up into his elements, and so setting him
free, he may live to eternal pain. This poor creature, formed out of nothing! At
least, he has a claim on his original nothing: he should be assured, as a matter of
right, of this last retreat, which, in any case, cannot be a very evil one: it is what
he has inherited. I, at any rate, cannot help sympathizing with him. If you add to
this Augustine's remaining doctrines, that all this does not depend on the man's
own sins and omissions, but was already predestined to happen, one really is at a
loss what to think. Our highly educated Rationalists say, to be sure, "It's all false,
it's a mere bugbear; we're in a state of constant progress, step by step raising
ourselves to ever greater perfection." Ah! what a pity we didn't begin sooner; we
should already have been there.
In the Christian system the devil is a personage of the greatest importance.
God is described as absolutely good, wise and powerful; and unless he were
counterbalanced by the devil, it would be impossible to see where the
innumerable and measureless evils, which predominate in the world, come from,
if there were no devil to account for them. And since the Rationalists have done

away with the devil, the damage inflicted on the other side has gone on growing,
and is becoming more and more palpable; as might have been foreseen, and was
foreseen, by the orthodox. The fact is, you cannot take away one pillar from a
building without endangering the rest of it. And this confirms the view, which
has been established on other grounds, that Jehovah is a transformation of
Ormuzd, and Satan of the Ahriman who must be taken in connection with him.
Ormuzd himself is a transformation of Indra.
Christianity has this peculiar disadvantage, that, unlike other religions, it is
not a pure system of doctrine: its chief and essential feature is that it is a history,
a series of events, a collection of facts, a statement of the actions and sufferings
of individuals: it is this history which constitutes dogma, and belief in it is
salvation. Other religions, Buddhism, for instance, have, it is true, historical
appendages, the life, namely, of their founders: this, however, is not part and
parcel of the dogma but is taken along with it. For example, the Lalitavistara
may be compared with the Gospel so far as it contains the life of Sakya-muni,
the Buddha of the present period of the world's history: but this is something
which is quite separate and different from the dogma, from the system itself: and
for this reason; the lives of former Buddhas were quite other, and those of the
future will be quite other, than the life of the Buddha of to-day. The dogma is by
no means one with the career of its founder; it does not rest on individual
persons or events; it is something universal and equally valid at all times. The
Lalitavistara is not, then, a gospel in the Christian sense of the word; it is not the
joyful message of an act of redemption; it is the career of him who has shown
how each one may redeem himself. The historical constitution of Christianity
makes the Chinese laugh at missionaries as story-tellers.
I may mention here another fundamental error of Christianity, an error
which cannot be explained away, and the mischievous consequences of which
are obvious every day: I mean the unnatural distinction Christianity makes
between man and the animal world to which he really belongs. It sets up man as
all-important, and looks upon animals as merely things. Brahmanism and
Buddhism, on the other hand, true to the facts, recognize in a positive way that
man is related generally to the whole of nature, and specially and principally to
animal nature; and in their systems man is always represented by the theory of
metempsychosis and otherwise, as closely connected with the animal world. The
important part played by animals all through Buddhism and Brahmanism,
compared with the total disregard of them in Judaism and Christianity, puts an
end to any question as to which system is nearer perfection, however much we in
Europe may have become accustomed to the absurdity of the claim. Christianity
contains, in fact, a great and essential imperfection in limiting its precepts to

man, and in refusing rights to the entire animal world. As religion fails to protect
animals against the rough, unfeeling and often more than bestial multitude, the
duty falls to the police; and as the police are unequal to the task, societies for the
protection of animals are now formed all over Europe and America. In the whole
of uncircumcised Asia, such a procedure would be the most superfluous thing in
the world, because animals are there sufficiently protected by religion, which
even makes them objects of charity. How such charitable feelings bear fruit may
be seen, to take an example, in the great hospital for animals at Surat, whither
Christians, Mohammedans and Jews can send their sick beasts, which, if cured,
are very rightly not restored to their owners. In the same way when a Brahman
or a Buddhist has a slice of good luck, a happy issue in any affair, instead of
mumbling a Te Deum, he goes to the market-place and buys birds and opens
their cages at the city gate; a thing which may be frequently seen in Astrachan,
where the adherents of every religion meet together: and so on in a hundred
similar ways. On the other hand, look at the revolting ruffianism with which our
Christian public treats its animals; killing them for no object at all, and laughing
over it, or mutilating or torturing them: even its horses, who form its most direct
means of livelihood, are strained to the utmost in their old age, and the last
strength worked out of their poor bones until they succumb at last under the
whip. One might say with truth, Mankind are the devils of the earth, and the
animals the souls they torment. But what can you expect from the masses, when
there are men of education, zoologists even, who, instead of admitting what is so
familiar to them, the essential identity of man and animal, are bigoted and stupid
enough to offer a zealous opposition to their honest and rational colleagues,
when they class man under the proper head as an animal, or demonstrate the
resemblance between him and the chimpanzee or ourang-outang. It is a revolting
thing that a writer who is so pious and Christian in his sentiments as Jung
Stilling should use a simile like this, in his Scenen aus dem Geisterreich. (Bk. II.
sc. i., p. 15.) "Suddenly the skeleton shriveled up into an indescribably hideous
and dwarf-like form, just as when you bring a large spider into the focus of a
burning glass, and watch the purulent blood hiss and bubble in the heat." This
man of God then was guilty of such infamy! or looked on quietly when another
was committing it! in either case it comes to the same thing here. So little harm
did he think of it that he tells us of it in passing, and without a trace of emotion.
Such are the effects of the first chapter of Genesis, and, in fact, of the whole of
the Jewish conception of nature. The standard recognized by the Hindus and
Buddhists is the Mahavakya (the great word),—"tat-twam-asi" (this is thyself),
which may always be spoken of every animal, to keep us in mind of the identity
of his inmost being with ours. Perfection of morality, indeed! Nonsense.

The fundamental characteristics of the Jewish religion are realism and
optimism, views of the world which are closely allied; they form, in fact, the
conditions of theism. For theism looks upon the material world as absolutely
real, and regards life as a pleasant gift bestowed upon us. On the other hand, the
fundamental characteristics of the Brahman and Buddhist religions are idealism
and pessimism, which look upon the existence of the world as in the nature of a
dream, and life as the result of our sins. In the doctrines of the Zendavesta, from
which, as is well known, Judaism sprang, the pessimistic element is represented
by Ahriman. In Judaism, Ahriman has as Satan only a subordinate position; but,
like Ahriman, he is the lord of snakes, scorpions, and vermin. But the Jewish
system forthwith employs Satan to correct its fundamental error of optimism,
and in the Fall introduces the element of pessimism, a doctrine demanded by the
most obvious facts of the world. There is no truer idea in Judaism than this,
although it transfers to the course of existence what must be represented as its
foundation and antecedent.
The New Testament, on the other hand, must be in some way traceable to
an Indian source: its ethical system, its ascetic view of morality, its pessimism,
and its Avatar, are all thoroughly Indian. It is its morality which places it in a
position of such emphatic and essential antagonism to the Old Testament, so that
the story of the Fall is the only possible point of connection between the two. For
when the Indian doctrine was imported into the land of promise, two very
different things had to be combined: on the one hand the consciousness of the
corruption and misery of the world, its need of deliverance and salvation through
an Avatar, together with a morality based on self-denial and repentance; on the
other hand the Jewish doctrine of Monotheism, with its corollary that "all things
are very good" [Greek: panta kala lian]. And the task succeeded as far as it
could, as far, that is, as it was possible to combine two such heterogeneous and
antagonistic creeds.
As ivy clings for the support and stay it wants to a rough-hewn post,
everywhere conforming to its irregularities and showing their outline, but at the
same time covering them with life and grace, and changing the former aspect
into one that is pleasing to the eye; so the Christian faith, sprung from the
wisdom of India, overspreads the old trunk of rude Judaism, a tree of alien
growth; the original form must in part remain, but it suffers a complete change
and becomes full of life and truth, so that it appears to be the same tree, but is
really another.
Judaism had presented the Creator as separated from the world, which he
produced out of nothing. Christianity identifies this Creator with the Saviour,
and through him, with humanity: he stands as their representative; they are

redeemed in him, just as they fell in Adam, and have lain ever since in the bonds
of iniquity, corruption, suffering and death. Such is the view taken by
Christianity in common with Buddhism; the world can no longer be looked at in
the light of Jewish optimism, which found "all things very good": nay, in the
Christian scheme, the devil is named as its Prince or Ruler ([Greek: ho archon
tou kosmoutoutou.] John 12, 33). The world is no longer an end, but a means:
and the realm of everlasting joy lies beyond it and the grave. Resignation in this
world and direction of all our hopes to a better, form the spirit of Christianity.
The way to this end is opened by the Atonement, that is the Redemption from
this world and its ways. And in the moral system, instead of the law of
vengeance, there is the command to love your enemy; instead of the promise of
innumerable posterity, the assurance of eternal life; instead of visiting the sins of
the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generations, the Holy Spirit
governs and overshadows all.
We see, then, that the doctrines of the Old Testament are rectified and their
meaning changed by those of the New, so that, in the most important and
essential matters, an agreement is brought about between them and the old
religions of India. Everything which is true in Christianity may also be found in
Brahmanism and Buddhism. But in Hinduism and Buddhism you will look in
vain for any parallel to the Jewish doctrines of "a nothing quickened into life," or
of "a world made in time," which cannot be humble enough in its thanks and
praises to Jehovah for an ephemeral existence full of misery, anguish and need.
Whoever seriously thinks that superhuman beings have ever given our race
information as to the aim of its existence and that of the world, is still in his
childhood. There is no other revelation than the thoughts of the wise, even
though these thoughts, liable to error as is the lot of everything human, are often
clothed in strange allegories and myths under the name of religion. So far, then,
it is a matter of indifference whether a man lives and dies in reliance on his own
or another's thoughts; for it is never more than human thought, human opinion,
which he trusts. Still, instead of trusting what their own minds tell them, men
have as a rule a weakness for trusting others who pretend to supernatural sources
of knowledge. And in view of the enormous intellectual inequality between man
and man, it is easy to see that the thoughts of one mind might appear as in some
sense a revelation to another.
PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
Every animal, and especially man, requires, in order to exist and get on in

the world, a certain fitness and proportion between his will and his intellect. The
more exact and true this fitness and proportion are by nature, the easier, safer,
and pleasanter it will be for him to get through the world. At the same time, a
mere approximation to this exact point will protect him from destruction. There
is, in consequence, a certain scope within the limits of exactness and fitness of
this so-called proportion. The normal proportion is as follows. As the object of
the intellect is to be the light and guide of the will on its path, the more violent,
impetuous, and passionate the inner force of the will, the more perfect and clear
must be the intellect which belongs to it; so that the ardent efforts of the will, the
glow of passion, the vehemence of affection, may not lead a man astray or drive
him to do things that he has not given his consideration or are wrong or will ruin
him; which will infallibly be the case when a very strong will is combined with a
very weak intellect. On the other hand, a phlegmatic character, that is to say, a
weak and feeble will, can agree and get on with little intellect; a moderate will
only requires a moderate intellect. In general, any disproportion between the will
and intellect--that is to say, any deviation from the normal proportion referred
to--tends to make a man unhappy; and the same thing happens when the
disproportion is reversed. The development of the intellect to an abnormal
degree of strength and superiority, thereby making it out of all proportion to the
will, a condition which constitutes the essence of true genius, is not only
superfluous but actually an impediment to the needs and purposes of life. This
means that, in youth, excessive energy in grasping the objective world,
accompanied by a lively imagination and little experience, makes the mind
susceptible to exaggerated ideas and a prey even to chimeras; and this results in
an eccentric and even fantastic character. And when, later, this condition of mind
no longer exists and succumbs to the teaching of experience, the genius will
never feel so much at home or take up his position in the everyday world or in
civic life, and move with the ease of a man of normal intellect; indeed, he is
often more apt to make curious mistakes. For the ordinary mind is so perfectly at
home in the narrow circle of its own ideas and way of grasping things that no
one can control it in that circle; its capacities always remain true to their original
purpose, namely, to look after the service of the will; therefore it applies itself
unceasingly to this end without ever going beyond it. While the genius, as I have
stated, is at bottom a monstrum per excessum; just as conversely the passionate,
violent, and unintelligent man, the brainless savage, is a monstrum per dejectum.
*
The will to live, which forms the innermost kernel of every living being, is
most distinctly apparent in the highest, that is to say in the cleverest, order of
animals, and therefore in them we may see and consider the nature of the will

most clearly. For below this order of animals the will is not so prominent, and
has a less degree of objectivation; but above the higher order of animals, I mean
in men, we get reason, and with reason reflection, and with this the faculty for
dissimulation, which immediately throws a veil over the actions of the will. But
in outbursts of affection and passion the will exhibits itself unveiled. This is
precisely why passion, when it speaks, always carries conviction, whatever the
passion may be; and rightly so. For the same reason, the passions are the
principal theme of poets and the stalking-horse of actors. And it is because the
will is most striking in the lower class of animals that we may account for our
delight in dogs, apes, cats, etc.; it is the absolute naïveté of all their expressions
which charms us so much.
What a peculiar pleasure it affords us to see any free animal looking after
its own welfare unhindered, finding its food, or taking care of its young, or
associating with others of its kind, and so on! This is exactly what ought to be
and can be. Be it only a bird, I can look at it for some time with a feeling of
pleasure; nay, a water-rat or a frog, and with still greater pleasure a hedgehog, a
weazel, a roe, or a deer. The contemplation of animals delights us so much,
principally because we see in them our own existence very much simplified.
There is only one mendacious creature in the world--man. Every other is
true and genuine, for it shows itself as it is, and expresses itself just as it feels.
An emblematical or allegorical expression of this fundamental difference is to be
found in the fact that all animals go about in their natural state; this largely
accounts for the happy impression they make on us when we look at them; and
as far as I myself am concerned, my heart always goes out to them, particularly
if they are free animals. Man, on the other hand, by his silly dress becomes a
monster; his very appearance is objectionable, enhanced by the unnatural
paleness of his complexion,--the nauseating effect of his eating meat, of his
drinking alcohol, his smoking, dissoluteness, and ailments. He stands out as a
blot on Nature. And it was because the Greeks were conscious of this that they
restricted themselves as far as possible in the matter of dress.
*
Much that is attributed to force of habit ought rather to be put down to the
constancy and immutability of original, innate character, whereby we always do
the same thing under the same circumstances; which happens the first as for the
hundredth time in consequence of the same necessity. While force of habit, in
reality, is solely due to indolence seeking to save the intellect and will the work,
difficulty, and danger of making a fresh choice; so that we are made to do to-day
what we did yesterday and have done a hundred times before, and of which we
know that it will gain its end.

But the truth of the matter lies deeper; for it can be explained more clearly
than appears at first sight. The power of inertia applied to bodies which may be
moved by mechanical means only, becomes force of habit when applied to
bodies which are moved by motives. The actions which we do out of sheer force
of habit occur, as a matter of fact, without any individual separate motive
exercised for the particular case; hence we do not really think of them. It was
only when each action at first took place that it had a motive; after that it became
a habit; the secondary after-effect of this motive is the present habit, which is
sufficient to carry on the action; just as a body, set in motion by a push, does not
need another push in order to enable it to continue its motion; it will continue in
motion for ever if it is not obstructed in any way. The same thing applies to
animals; training is a habit which is forced upon them. The horse draws a cart
along contentedly without being urged to do so; this motion is still the effect of
those lashes with the whip which incited him at first, but which by the law of
inertia have become perpetuated as habit. There is really something more in all
this than a mere parable; it is the identity of the thing in question, that is to say of
the will, at very different degrees of its objectivation, by which the same law of
motion takes such different forms.
*
Viva muchos años! is the ordinary greeting in Spain, and it is usual
throughout the whole world to wish people a long life. It is not a knowledge of
what life is that explains the origin of such a wish, but rather knowledge of what
man is in his real nature: namely, the will to live.
The wish which every one has, that he may be remembered after his death,
and which those people with aspirations have for posthumous fame, seems to me
to arise from this tenacity to life. When they see themselves cut off from every
possibility of real existence they struggle after a life which is still within their
reach, even if it is only an ideal--that is to say, an unreal one.
*
We wish, more or less, to get to the end of everything we are interested in
or occupied with; we are impatient to get to the end of it, and glad when it is
finished. It is only the general end, the end of all ends, that we wish, as a rule, as
far off as possible.
*
Every separation gives a foretaste of death, and every meeting a foretaste of
the resurrection. This explains why even people who were indifferent to each
other, rejoice so much when they meet again after the lapse of twenty or thirty
years.
*

The deep sorrow we feel on the death of a friend springs from the feeling
that in every individual there is a something which we cannot define, which is
his alone and therefore irreparable. Omne individuum ineffabile. The same
applies to individual animals. A man who has by accident fatally wounded a
favourite animal feels the most acute sorrow, and the animal's dying look causes
him infinite pain.
*
It is possible for us to grieve over the death of our enemies and adversaries,
even after the lapse of a long time, almost as much as over the death of our
friends--that is to say, if we miss them as witnesses of our brilliant success.
*
That the sudden announcement of some good fortune may easily have a
fatal effect on us is due to the fact that our happiness and unhappiness depend
upon the relation of our demands to what we get; accordingly, the good things
we possess, or are quite sure of possessing, are not felt to be such, because the
nature of all enjoyment is really only negative, and has only the effect of
annulling pain; whilst, on the other hand, the nature of pain or evil is really
positive and felt immediately. With the possession, or the certain prospect of it,
our demands instantly rise and increase our desire for further possession and
greater prospects. But if the mind is depressed by continual misfortune, and the
claims reduced to a minimum, good fortune that comes suddenly finds no
capacity for its acceptance. Neutralised by no previous claims, it now has
apparently a positive effect, and accordingly its whole power is exercised; hence
it may disorganise the mind--that is to say, be fatal to it. This is why, as is well
known, one is so careful to get a man first to hope for happiness before
announcing it, then to suggest the prospect of it, then little by little make it
known, until gradually all is known to him; every portion of the revelation loses
the strength of its effect because it is anticipated by a demand, and room is still
left for more. In virtue of all this, it might be said that our stomach for good
fortune is bottomless, but the entrance to it is narrow. What has been said does
not apply to sudden misfortunes in the same way. Since hope always resists
them, they are for this reason rarely fatal. That fear does not perform an
analogous office in cases of good fortune is due to the fact that we are
instinctively more inclined to hope than to fear; just as our eyes turn of
themselves to light in preference to darkness.
*
Hope is to confuse the desire that something should occur with the
probability that it will. Perhaps no man is free from this folly of the heart, which
deranges the intellect's correct estimation of probability to such a degree as to

make him think the event quite possible, even if the chances are only a thousand
to one. And still, an unexpected misfortune is like a speedy death-stroke; while a
hope that is always frustrated, and yet springs into life again, is like death by
slow torture.
He who has given up hope has also given up fear; this is the meaning of the
expression desperate. It is natural for a man to have faith in what he wishes, and
to have faith in it because he wishes it. If this peculiarity of his nature, which is
both beneficial and comforting, is eradicated by repeated hard blows of fate, and
he is brought to a converse condition, when he believes that something must
happen because he does not wish it, and what he wishes can never happen just
because he wishes it; this is, in reality, the state which has been called
desperation.
*
That we are so often mistaken in others is not always precisely due to our
faulty judgment, but springs, as a rule as Bacon says, from intellectus luminis
sicci non est, sec recipit infusionem a voluntate et affectibus: for without
knowing it, we are influenced for or against them by trifles from the very
beginning. It also often lies in the fact that we do not adhere to the qualities
which we really discover in them, but conclude from these that there are others
which we consider inseparable from, or at any rate incompatible with, them. For
instance, when we discern generosity, we conclude there is honesty; from lying
we conclude there is deception; from deception, stealing, and so on; and this
opens the door to many errors, partly because of the peculiarity of human nature,
and partly because of the one-sidedness of our point of view. It is true that
character is always consistent and connected; but the roots of all its qualities lies
too deep to enable one to decide from special data in a given case which
qualities can, and which cannot exist together.
*
The use of the word person in every European language to signify a human
individual is unintentionally appropriate; persona really means a player's mask,
and it is quite certain that no one shows himself as he is, but that each wears a
mask and plays a rôle. In general, the whole of social life is a continual comedy,
which the worthy find insipid, whilst the stupid delight in it greatly.
*
It often happens that we blurt out things that may in some kind of way be
harmful to us, but we are silent about things that may make us look ridiculous;
because in this case effect follows very quickly on cause.
*
The ordinary man who has suffered injustice burns with a desire for

revenge; and it has often been said that revenge is sweet. This is confirmed by
the many sacrifices made merely for the sake of enjoying revenge, without any
intention of making good the injury that one has suffered. The centaur Nessus
utilised his last moments in devising an extremely clever revenge, and the fact
that it was certain to be effective sweetened an otherwise bitter death. The same
idea, presented in a more modern and plausible way, occurs in Bertolotti's novel,
Le due Sorelle which has been translated into three languages. Walter Scott
expresses mankind's proneness to revenge in words as powerful as they are true:
"Vengeance is the sweetest morsel to the mouth that ever was cooked in hell!" I
shall now attempt a psychological explanation of revenge. All the suffering that
nature, chance, or fate have assigned to us does not, ceteris paribus, pain us so
much as suffering which is brought upon us by the arbitrary will of another. This
is due to the fact that we regard nature and fate as the original rulers of the
world; we look upon what befalls us, through them, as something that might
have befallen every one else. Therefore in a case of suffering which arises from
this source, we bemoan the fate of mankind in general more than we do our own.
On the other hand, suffering inflicted on us through the arbitrary will of another
is a peculiarly bitter addition to the pain or injury caused, as it involves the
consciousness of another's superiority, whether it be in strength or cunning, as
opposed to our own weakness. If compensation is possible, it wipes out the
injury; but that bitter addition, "I must submit to that from you," which often
hurts more than the injury itself, is only to be neutralised by vengeance. For by
injuring the man who has injured us, whether it be by force or cunning, we show
our superiority, and thereby annul the proof of his. This gives that satisfaction to
the mind for which it has been thirsting. Accordingly, where there is much pride
or vanity there will be a great desire for revenge. But as the fulfilment of every
wish proves to be more or less a delusion, so is also the wish for revenge. The
expected enjoyment is mostly embittered by pity; nay, gratified revenge will
often lacerate the heart and torment the mind, for the motive which prompts the
feeling of it is no longer active, and what is left is the testimony of our
wickedness.
*
The pain of an ungratified desire is small compared with that of repentance;
for the former has to face the immeasurable, open future; the latter the past,
which is closed irrevocably.
*
Money is human happiness in abstracto; so that a man who is no longer
capable of enjoying it in concrete gives up his whole heart to it.
*

Moroseness and melancholy are very opposite in nature; and melancholy is
more nearly related to happiness than to moroseness. Melancholy attracts;
moroseness repels. Hypochondria not only makes us unreasonably cross and
angry over things concerning the present; not only fills us with groundless fears
of imaginative mishaps for the future; but also causes us to unjustly reproach
ourselves concerning our actions in the past.
Hypochondria causes a man to be always searching for and racking his
brain about things that either irritate or torment him. The cause of it is an internal
morbid depression, combined often with an inward restlessness which is
temperamental; when both are developed to their utmost, suicide is the result.
*
What makes a man hard-hearted is this, that each man has, or fancies he
has, sufficient in his own troubles to bear. This is why people placed in happier
circumstances than they have been used to are sympathetic and charitable. But
people who have always been placed in happy circumstances are often the
reverse; they have become so estranged to suffering that they have no longer any
sympathy with it; and hence it happens that the poor sometimes show themselves
more benevolent than the rich.
On the other hand, what makes a man so very curious, as may be seen in the
way he will spy into other people's affairs, is boredom, a condition which is
diametrically opposed to suffering;--though envy also often helps in creating
curiosity.
*
At times, it seems as though we wish for something, and at the same time
do not wish for it, so that we are at once both pleased and troubled about it. For
instance, if we have to undergo some decisive test in some affair or other, in
which to come off victorious is of great importance to us; we both wish that the
time to be tested were here, and yet dread the idea of its coming. If it happens
that the time, for once in a way, is postponed, we are both pleased and sorry, for
although the postponement was unexpected, it, however, gives us momentary
relief. We have the same kind of feeling when we expect an important letter
containing some decision of moment, and it fails to come.
In cases like these we are really controlled by two different motives; the
stronger but more remote being the desire to stand the test, and to have the
decision given in our favour; the weaker, which is closer at hand, the desire to be
left in peace and undisturbed for the present, and consequently in further
enjoyment of the advantage that hoping on in uncertainty has over what might
possibly be an unhappy issue. Consequently, in this case the same happens to
our moral vision as to our physical, when a smaller object near at hand conceals

from view a bigger object some distance away.
*
The course and affairs of our individual life, in view of their true meaning
and connection, are like a piece of crude work in mosaic. So long as one stands
close in front of it, one cannot correctly see the objects presented, or perceive
their importance and beauty; it is only by standing some distance away that both
come into view. And in the same way one often understands the true connection
of important events in one's own life, not while they are happening, or even
immediately after they have happened, but only a long time afterwards.
Is this so, because we require the magnifying power of imagination, or
because a general view can only be got by looking from a distance? or because
one's emotions would otherwise carry one away? or because it is only the school
of experience that ripens our judgment? Perhaps all these combined. But it is
certain that it is only after many years that we see the actions of others, and
sometimes even our own, in their true light. And as it is in one's own life, so it is
in history.
*
Why is it, in spite of all the mirrors in existence, no man really knows what
he looks like, and, therefore, cannot picture in his mind his own person as he
pictures that of an acquaintance? This is a difficulty which is thwarted at the
very outset by gnothi sauton--know thyself.
This is undoubtedly partly due to the fact that a man can only see himself in
the glass by looking straight towards it and remaining quite still; whereby the
play of the eye, which is so important, and the real characteristic of the face is, to
a great extent, lost. But co-operating with this physical impossibility, there
appears to be an ethical impossibility analogous to it. A man cannot regard the
reflection of his own face in the glass as if it were the face of some one else--
which is the condition of his seeing himself objectively. This objective view
rests with a profound feeling on the egoist's part, as a moral being, that what he
is looking at is not himself; which is requisite for his perceiving all his defects as
they really are from a purely objective point of view; and not until, then can he
see his face reflected as it really and truly is. Instead of that, when a man sees his
own person in the glass the egoistic side of him always whispers, It is not
somebody else, but I myself, which has the effect of a noli me tangere, and
prevents his taking a purely objective view. Without the leaven of a grain of
malice, it does not seem possible to look at oneself objectively.
*
No one knows what capacities he possesses for suffering and doing until an
opportunity occurs to bring them into play; any more than he imagines when

looking into a perfectly smooth pond with a mirror-like surface, that it can
tumble and toss and rush from rock to rock, or leap as high into the air as a
fountain;--any more than in ice-cold water he suspects latent warmth.
*
That line of Ovid's,
"Pronaque cum spectent animalia cetera terram,"
is only applicable in its true physical sense to animals; but in a figurative
and spiritual sense, unfortunately, to the great majority of men too. Their
thoughts and aspirations are entirely devoted to physical enjoyment and physical
welfare, or to various personal interests which receive their importance from
their relation to the former; but they have no interests beyond these. This is not
only shown in their way of living and speaking, but also in their look, the
expression of their physiognomy, their gait and gesticulations; everything about
them proclaims in terram prona! Consequently it is not to them, but only to those
nobler and more highly endowed natures, those men who really think and
observe things round them, and are the exceptions in the human race, that the
following lines are applicable:
"Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri Jussitt et erectos ad sidera tollere
vultus."
*
Why is "common" an expression of contempt? And why are "uncommon,"
"extraordinary," "distinguished," expressions of approbation? Why is everything
that is common contemptible?
Common, in its original sense, means that which is peculiar and common to
the whole species, that is to say that which is innate in the species. Accordingly,
a man who has no more qualities than those of the human species in general is a
"common man" "Ordinary man" is a much milder expression, and is used more
in reference to what is intellectual, while common is used more in a moral sense.
What value can a being have that is nothing more than like millions of its
kind? Millions? Nay, an infinitude, an endless number of beings, which Nature
in secula seculorum unceasingly sends bubbling forth from her inexhaustible
source; as generous with them as the smith with the dross that flies round his
anvil.
So it is evidently only right that a being which has no other qualities than
those of the species, should make no claim to any other existence than that
confined to and conditioned by the species.
I have already several times explained[14] that whilst animals have only the
generic character, it falls to man's share alone to have an individual character.
Nevertheless, in most men there is in reality very little individual character; and

they may be almost all classified. Ce sont des espèces. Their desires and
thoughts, like their faces, are those of the whole species--at any rate, those of the
class of men to which they belong, and they are therefore of a trivial, common
nature, and exist in thousands. Moreover, as a rule one can tell pretty exactly
beforehand what they will say and do. They have no individual stamp: they are
like manufactured goods. If, then, their nature is absorbed in that of the species,
must not their existence be too? The curse of vulgarity reduces man to the level
of animals, for his nature and existence are merged in that of the species only. It
is taken for granted that anything that is high, great, or noble by its very nature
stands isolated in a world where no better expression can be found to signify
what is base and paltry than the term which I have mentioned as being generally
used--namely, common.
*
According as our intellectual energy is strained or relaxed will life appear to
us either so short, petty, and fleeting, that nothing can happen of sufficient
importance to affect our feelings; nothing is of any importance to us--be it
pleasure, riches, or even fame, and however much we may have failed, we
cannot have lost much; or vice versâ, life will appear so long, so important, so all
in all, so grave, and so difficult that we throw ourselves into it with our whole
soul, so that we may get a share of its possessions, make ourselves sure of its
prizes, and carry out our plans. The latter is the immanent view of life; it is what
Gracian means by his expression, tomar muy de veras el vivir (life is to be taken
seriously); while for the former, the transcendental view, Ovid's non est tanti is a
good expression; Plato's a still better, [Greek: oute ti ton anthropinon axion hesti,
megalaes spoudaes] (nihil, in rebus humanis, magno studio dignum est).
The former state of mind is the result of the intellect having gained
ascendency over consciousness, where, freed from the mere service of the will, it
grasps the phenomena of life objectively, and so cannot fail to see clearly the
emptiness and futility of it. On the other hand, it is the will that rules in the other
condition of mind, and it is only there to lighten the way to the object of its
desires. A man is great or small according to the predominance of one or the
other of these views of life.
*
It is quite certain that many a man owes his life's happiness solely to the
circumstance that he possesses a pleasant smile, and so wins the hearts of others.
However, these hearts would do better to take care to remember what Hamlet put
down in his tablets--that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain.
*
People of great and brilliant capacities think little of admitting or exposing

their faults and weaknesses. They regard them as something for which they have
paid, and even are of the opinion that these weaknesses, instead of being a
disgrace to them, do them honour. This is especially the case when they are
errors that are inseparable from their brilliant capacities--conditiones sine quibus
non, or, as George Sand expressed it, chacun a les défauts de ses vertus.
On the contrary, there are people of good character and irreproachable
minds, who, rather than admit their few little weaknesses, carefully conceal
them, and are very sensitive if any reference is made to them; and this just
because their whole merit consists in the absence of errors and defects; and
hence when these errors come to light they are immediately held in less esteem.
*
Modesty, in people of moderate ability, is merely honesty, but in people of
great talent it is hypocrisy. Hence it is just as becoming in the latter to openly
admit the regard they have for themselves, and not to conceal the fact that they
are conscious of possessing exceptional capabilities, as it is in the former to be
modest. Valerius Maximus gives some very good examples of this in his chapter
de fiducia sui.
*
Man even surpasses all the lower order of animals in his capacity for being
trained. Mohammedans are trained to pray five times a day with their faces
turned towards Mecca; and they do it regularly. Christians are trained to make
the sign of the Cross on certain occasions, and to bow, and so forth; so that
religion on the whole is a real masterpiece of training--that is to say, it trains
people what they are to think; and the training, as is well known, cannot begin
too early. There is no absurdity, however palpable it may be, which may not be
fixed in the minds of all men, if it is inculcated before they are six years old by
continual and earnest repetition. For it is the same with men as with animals, to
train them with perfect success one must begin when they are very young.
Noblemen are trained to regard nothing more sacred than their word of
honour, to believe earnestly, rigidly, and firmly in the inane code of knight-
errantry, and if necessary to seal their belief by death, and to look upon a king as
a being of a higher order. Politeness and compliments, and particularly our
courteous attitude towards ladies, are the result of training; and so is our esteem
for birth, position, and title. And so is our displeasure at certain expressions
directed against us, our displeasure being proportionate to the expression used.
The Englishman has been trained to consider his being called no gentleman a
crime worthy of death--a liar, a still greater crime; and so, the Frenchman, if he
is called a coward; a German, if he is called a stupid. Many people are trained to
be honest in some particular direction, whilst in everything else they exhibit very

little honesty; so that many a man will not steal money, but he will steal
everything that will afford him enjoyment in an indirect way. Many a
shopkeeper will deceive without scruple, but he will on no condition whatever
steal.
*
The doctor sees mankind in all its weakness; the lawyer in all its
wickedness; the theologian in all its stupidity.
*
Opinion obeys the same law as the swing of the pendulum: if it goes
beyond the centre of gravity on one side, it must go as far beyond on the other. It
is only after a time that it finds the true point of rest and remains stationary.
*
Distance in space decreases the size of things, for it contracts them and so
makes their defects and deficiencies disappear. This is why everything looks so
much finer in a contracting mirror or in a camera obscura than it is in reality; and
the past is affected in the same way in the course of time. The scenes and events
that happened long ago, as well as the persons who took part in them, become a
delight to the memory, which ignores everything that is immaterial and
disagreeable. The present possesses no such advantage; it always seems to be
defective. And in space, small objects near at hand appear to be big, and if they
are very near, they cover the whole of our field of vision; but as soon as we stand
some little distance away they become minute and finally invisible. And so it is
with time: the little affairs and misfortunes of everyday life excite in us emotion,
anxiety, vexation, passion, for so long as they are quite near us, they appear big,
important, and considerable; but as soon as the inexhaustible stream of time has
carried them into the distance they become unimportant; they are not worth
remembering and are soon forgotten, because their importance merely consisted
in being near.
*
It is only now and then that a man learns something; but he forgets the
whole day long.
Our memory is like a sieve, that with time and use holds less and less; in so
far, namely, as the older we get, the quicker anything we have entrusted to our
memory slips through it, while anything that was fixed firmly in it, when we
were young, remains. This is why an old man's recollections are the clearer the
further they go back, and the less clear the nearer they approach the present; so
that his memory, like his eyes, becomes long-sighted ([Greek: presbus]).
That sometimes, and apparently without any reason, long-forgotten scenes
suddenly come into the memory, is, in many cases, due to the recurrence of a

scarcely perceptible odour, of which we were conscious when those scenes
actually took place; for it is well known that odours more easily than anything
else awaken memories, and that, in general, something of an extremely trifling
nature is all that is necessary to call up a nexus idearum.
And by the way, I may say that the sense of sight has to do with the
understanding,[15] the sense of hearing with reason,[16] and the sense of smell
with memory, as we see in the present case. Touch and taste are something real,
and dependent on contact; they have no ideal side.
*
Memory has also this peculiarity attached to it, that a slight state of
intoxication very often enhances the remembrance of past times and scenes,
whereby all the circumstances connected with them are recalled more distinctly
than they could be in a state of sobriety; on the other hand, the recollection of
what one said or did while in a state of intoxication is less clear than usual, nay,
one does not recollect at all if one has been very drunk. Therefore, intoxication
enhances one's recollection of the past, while, on the other hand, one remembers
little of the present, while in that state.
*
That arithmetic is the basest of all mental activities is proved by the fact
that it is the only one that can be accomplished by means of a machine. Take, for
instance, the reckoning machines that are so commonly used in England at the
present time, and solely for the sake of convenience. But all analysis finitorum et
infinitorum is fundamentally based on calculation. Therefore we may gauge the
"profound sense of the mathematician," of whom Lichtenberg has made fun, in
that he says: "These so-called professors of mathematics have taken advantage
of the ingenuousness of other people, have attained the credit of possessing
profound sense, which strongly resembles the theologians' profound sense of
their own holiness."
*
As a rule, people of very great capacities will get on better with a man of
extremely limited intelligence than with a man of ordinary intelligence; and it is
for the same reason that the despot and the plebeians, the grandparents and the
grandchildren, are natural allies.
*
I am not surprised that people are bored when they are alone; they cannot
laugh when they are alone, for such a thing seems foolish to them. Is laughter,
then, to be regarded as merely a signal for others, a mere sign, like a word? It is
a want of imagination and dulness of mind generally ([Greek: anaisthaesia kai
bradytaes psychaes]), as Theophrastus puts it, that prevents people from

laughing when they are alone. The lower animals neither laugh when they are
alone nor in company.
Nyson, the misanthropist, was surprised as he was laughing to himself by
one of these people, who asked him why he laughed when he was alone. "That is
just why I was laughing," was the answer.
*
People who do not go to the theatre are like those who make their toilet
without a looking-glass;--but it is still worse to come to a decision without
seeking the advice of a friend. For a man may have the most correct and
excellent judgment in everything else but in his own affairs; because here the
will at once deranges the intellect. Therefore a man should seek counsel. A
doctor can cure every one but himself; this is why he calls in a colleague when
he is ill.
*
The natural gesticulation of everyday life, such as accompanies any kind of
lively conversation, is a language of its own, and, moreover, is much more
universal than the language of words; so far as it is independent of words, and
the same in all nations; although each nation makes use of gesticulation in
proportion to its vivacity, and in individual nations, the Italian, for instance, it is
supplemented by some few gesticulations which are merely conventional, and
have therefore only local value.
Its universal use is analogous to logic and grammar, since it expresses the
form and not the matter of conversation. However, it is to be distinguished from
them since it has not only an intellectual relation but also a moral--that is, it
defines the movements of the will. And so it accompanies conversation, just as a
correctly progressive bass accompanies a melody, and serves in the same way to
enhance the effect. The most interesting fact about gesticulation is that as soon
as conversation assumes the same form there is a repetition of the same gesture.
This is the case, however varied the matter, that is to say, the subject-matter,
may be. So that I am able to understand quite well the general nature of a
conversation--in other words, the mere form and type of it, while looking out of
a window--without hearing a word spoken. It is unmistakably evident that the
speaker is arguing, advancing his reasons, then modifying them, then urging
them, and drawing his conclusion in triumph; or it may be he is relating some
wrong that he has suffered, plainly depicting in strong and condemnatory
language the stupidity and stubbornness of his opponents; or he is speaking of
the splendid plan he has thought out and put in execution, explaining how it
became a success, or perhaps failed because fate was unfavourable; or perhaps
he is confessing that he was powerless to act in the matter in question; or

recounting that he noticed and saw through, in good time, the evil schemes that
had been organised against him, and by asserting his rights or using force
frustrated them and punished their author; and a hundred other things of a
similar kind. But what gesticulation alone really conveys to me is the essential
matter--be it of a moral or intellectual nature--of the whole conversation in
abstracto. That is to say the quintessence, the true substance of the conversation,
remains identical whatever has brought about the conversation, and consequently
whatever the subject-matter of it may be.
The most interesting and amusing part of the matter, as has been said, is the
complete identity of the gestures for denoting the same kind of circumstances,
even if they are used by most diverse people; just as the words of a language are
alike for every one and liable to such modifications as are brought about by a
slight difference in accent or education. And yet these standing forms of
gesticulation which are universally observed are certainly the outcome of no
convention; they are natural and original, a true language of nature, which may
have been strengthened by imitation and custom. It is incumbent on an actor, as
is well known, and on a public speaker, to a less extent, to make a careful study
of gesture--a study which must principally consist in the observation and
imitation of others, for the matter cannot very well be based on abstract rules;
with the exception of some quite general leading principles--as, for instance, that
the gesture must not follow the word, but rather immediately precede it, in order
to announce it and thereby rouse attention.
The English have a peculiar contempt for gesticulation, and regard it as
something undignified and common; this seems to me to be only one of those
silly prejudices of English fastidiousness. For it is a language which nature has
given to every one and which every one understands; therefore to abolish and
forbid it for no other reason than to gratify that so much extolled, gentlemanly
feeling, is a very dubious thing to do.
*
The state of human happiness, for the most part, is like certain groups of
trees, which seen from a distance look wonderfully fine; but if we go up to them
and among them, their beauty disappears; we do not know wherein it lay, for it is
only trees that surround us. And so it happens that we often envy the position of
others.
FOOTNOTES:
[14] Grundpr. der Ethik, p. 48; Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, vol. i. p.
338.
[15] Vierfache Wurzel, § 21.
[16] Pererga, vol. ii. § 311.

METAPHYSICS OF LOVE.
We are accustomed to see poets principally occupied with describing the
love of the sexes. This, as a rule, is the leading idea of every dramatic work, be it
tragic or comic, romantic or classic, Indian or European. It in no less degree
constitutes the greater part of both lyric and epic poetry, especially if in these we
include the host of romances which have been produced every year for centuries
in every civilised country in Europe as regularly as the fruits of the earth. All
these works are nothing more than many-sided, short, or long descriptions of the
passion in question. Moreover, the most successful delineations of love, such,
for example, as Romeo and Juliet, La Nouvelle Héloise, and Werther, have
attained immortal fame.
Rochefoucauld says that love may be compared to a ghost since it is
something we talk about but have never seen, and Lichtenberg, in his essay
Ueber die Macht der Liebe, disputes and denies its reality and naturalness--but
both are in the wrong. For if it were foreign to and contradicted human nature--
in other words, if it were merely an imaginary caricature, it would not have been
depicted with such zeal by the poets of all ages, or accepted by mankind with an
unaltered interest; for anything artistically beautiful cannot exist without truth.
"Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable."--BOIL.
Experience, although not that of everyday, verifies that that which as a rule
begins only as a strong and yet controllable inclination, may develop, under
certain conditions, into a passion, the ardour of which surpasses that of every
other. It will ignore all considerations, overcome all kinds of obstacles with
incredible strength and persistence. A man, in order to have his love gratified,
will unhesitatingly risk his life; in fact, if his love is absolutely rejected, he will
sacrifice his life into the bargain. The Werthers and Jacopo Ortis do not only
exist in romances; Europe produces every year at least half-a-dozen like them:
sed ignotis perierunt mortibus illi: for their sufferings are chronicled by the
writer of official registers or by the reporters of newspapers. Indeed, readers of
the police news in English and French newspapers will confirm what I have said.
Love drives a still greater number of people into the lunatic asylum. There
is a case of some sort every year of two lovers committing suicide together
because material circumstances happen to be unfavourable to their union. By the
way, I cannot understand how it is that such people, who are confident of each
other's love, and expect to find their greatest happiness in the enjoyment of it, do
not avoid taking extreme steps, and prefer suffering every discomfort to

sacrificing with their lives a happiness which is greater than any other they can
conceive. As far as lesser phases and passages of love are concerned, all of us
have them daily before our eyes, and, if we are not old, the most of us in our
hearts.
After what has been brought to mind, one cannot doubt either the reality or
importance of love. Instead, therefore, of wondering why a philosopher for once
in a way writes on this subject, which has been constantly the theme of poets,
rather should one be surprised that love, which always plays such an important
rôle in a man's life, has scarcely ever been considered at all by philosophers, and
that it still stands as material for them to make use of.
Plato has devoted himself more than any one else to the subject of love,
especially in the Symposium and the Phaedrus; what he has said about it,
however, comes within the sphere of myth, fable, and raillery, and only applies
for the most part to the love of a Greek youth. The little that Rousseau says in his
Discours sur l'inégalité is neither true nor satisfactory. Kant's disquisition on
love in the third part of his treatise, Ueber das Gefühl des Schönen und
Erhabenen, is very superficial; it shows that he has not thoroughly gone into the
subject, and therefore it is somewhat untrue. Finally, Platner's treatment of it in
his Anthropology will be found by every one to be insipid and shallow.
To amuse the reader, on the other hand, Spinoza's definition deserves to be
quoted because of its exuberant naïveté: Amor est titillatio, concomitante idea
causae externae (Eth. iv., prop. 44). It is not my intention to be either influenced
or to contradict what has been written by my predecessors; the subject has forced
itself upon me objectively, and has of itself become inseparable from my
consideration of the world. Moreover, I shall expect least approval from those
people who are for the moment enchained by this passion, and in consequence
try to express their exuberant feelings in the most sublime and ethereal images.
My view will seem to them too physical, too material, however metaphysical,
nay, transcendent it is fundamentally.
First of all let them take into consideration that the creature whom they are
idealising to-day in madrigals and sonnets would have been ignored almost
entirely by them if she had been born eighteen years previously.
Every kind of love, however ethereal it may seem to be, springs entirely
from the instinct of sex; indeed, it is absolutely this instinct, only in a more
definite, specialised, and perhaps, strictly speaking, more individualised form. If,
bearing this in mind, one considers the important rôle which love plays in all its
phases and degrees, not only in dramas and novels, but also in the real world,
where next to one's love of life it shows itself as the strongest and most active of
all motives; if one considers that it constantly occupies half the capacities and

thoughts of the younger part of humanity, and is the final goal of almost every
human effort; that it influences adversely the most important affairs; that it
hourly disturbs the most earnest occupations; that it sometimes deranges even
the greatest intellects for a time; that it is not afraid of interrupting the
transactions of statesmen or the investigations of men of learning; that it knows
how to leave its love-letters and locks of hair in ministerial portfolios and
philosophical manuscripts; that it knows equally well how to plan the most
complicated and wicked affairs, to dissolve the most important relations, to
break the strongest ties; that life, health, riches, rank, and happiness are
sometimes sacrificed for its sake; that it makes the otherwise honest, perfidious,
and a man who has been hitherto faithful a betrayer, and, altogether, appears as a
hostile demon whose object is to overthrow, confuse, and upset everything it
comes across: if all this is taken into consideration one will have reason to ask--
"Why is there all this noise? Why all this crowding, blustering, anguish, and
want? Why should such a trifle play so important a part and create disturbance
and confusion in the well-regulated life of mankind?" But to the earnest
investigator the spirit of truth gradually unfolds the answer: it is not a trifle one
is dealing with; the importance of love is absolutely in keeping with the
seriousness and zeal with which it is prosecuted. The ultimate aim of all love-
affairs, whether they be of a tragic or comic nature, is really more important than
all other aims in human life, and therefore is perfectly deserving of that profound
seriousness with which it is pursued.
As a matter of fact, love determines nothing less than the establishment of
the next generation. The existence and nature of the dramatis personae who
come on to the scene when we have made our exit have been determined by
some frivolous love-affair. As the being, the existentia of these future people is
conditioned by our instinct of sex in general, so is the nature, the essentia, of
these same people conditioned by the selection that the individual makes for his
satisfaction, that is to say, by love, and is thereby in every respect irrevocably
established. This is the key of the problem. In applying it, we shall understand it
more fully if we analyse the various degrees of love, from the most fleeting
sensation to the most ardent passion; we shall then see that the difference arises
from the degree of individualisation of the choice. All the love-affairs of the
present generation taken altogether are accordingly the meditatio compositionis
generationis futurae, e qua iterum pendent innumerae generationes of mankind.
Love is of such high import, because it has nothing to do with the weal or woe of
the present individual, as every other matter has; it has to secure the existence
and special nature of the human race in future times; hence the will of the
individual appears in a higher aspect as the will of the species; and this it is that

gives a pathetic and sublime import to love-affairs, and makes their raptures and
troubles transcendent, emotions which poets for centuries have not tired of
depicting in a variety of ways. There is no subject that can rouse the same
interest as love, since it concerns both the weal and woe of the species, and is
related to every other which only concerns the welfare of the individual as body
to surface.
This is why it is so difficult to make a drama interesting if it possesses no
love motive; on the other hand, the subject is never exhausted, although it is
constantly being utilised.
What manifests itself in the individual consciousness as instinct of sex in
general, without being concentrated on any particular individual, is very plainly
in itself, in its generalised form, the will to live. On the other hand, that which
appears as instinct of sex directed to a certain individual, is in itself the will to
live as a definitely determined individual. In this case the instinct of sex very
cleverly wears the mask of objective admiration, although in itself it is a
subjective necessity, and is, thereby, deceptive. Nature needs these stratagems in
order to accomplish her ends. The purpose of every man in love, however
objective and sublime his admiration may appear to be, is to beget a being of a
definite nature, and that this is so, is verified by the fact that it is not mutual love
but possession that is the essential. Without possession it is no consolation to a
man to know that his love is requited. In fact, many a man has shot himself on
finding himself in such a position. On the other hand, take a man who is very
much in love; if he cannot have his love returned he is content simply with
possession. Compulsory marriages and cases of seduction corroborate this, for a
man whose love is not returned frequently finds consolation in giving handsome
presents to a woman, in spite of her dislike, or making other sacrifices, so that he
may buy her favour.
The real aim of the whole of love's romance, although the persons
concerned are unconscious of the fact, is that a particular being may come into
the world; and the way and manner in which it is accomplished is a secondary
consideration. However much those of lofty sentiments, and especially of those
in love, may refute the gross realism of my argument, they are nevertheless in
the wrong. For is not the aim of definitely determining the individualities of the
next generation a much higher and nobler aim than that other, with its exuberant
sensations and transcendental soap-bubbles? Among all earthly aims is there one
that is either more important or greater? It alone is in keeping with that deep-
rooted feeling inseparable from passionate love, with that earnestness with
which it appears, and the importance which it attaches to the trifles that come
within its sphere. It is only in so far as we regard this end as the real one that the

difficulties encountered, the endless troubles and vexations endured, in order to
attain the object we love, appear to be in keeping with the matter. For it is the
future generation in its entire individual determination which forces itself into
existence through the medium of all this strife and trouble. Indeed, the future
generation itself is already stirring in the careful, definite, and apparently
capricious selection for the satisfaction of the instinct of sex which we call love.
That growing affection of two lovers for each other is in reality the will to live of
the new being, of which they shall become the parents; indeed, in the meeting of
their yearning glances the life of a new being is kindled, and manifests itself as a
well-organised individuality of the future. The lovers have a longing to be really
united and made one being, and to live as such for the rest of their lives; and this
longing is fulfilled in the children born to them, in whom the qualities inherited
from both, but combined and united in one being, are perpetuated. Contrarily, if
a man and woman mutually, persistently, and decidedly dislike each other, it
indicates that they could only bring into the world a badly organised, discordant,
and unhappy being. Therefore much must be attached to Calderon's words, when
he calls the horrible Semiramis a daughter of the air, yet introduces her as a
daughter of seduction, after which follows the murder of the husband.
Finally, it is the will to live presenting itself in the whole species, which so
forcibly and exclusively attracts two individuals of different sex towards each
other. This will anticipates in the being, of which they shall become the parents,
an objectivation of its nature corresponding to its aims. This individual will
inherit the father's will and character, the mother's intellect, and the constitution
of both. As a rule, however, an individual takes more after the father in shape
and the mother in stature, corresponding to the law which applies to the
offspring of animals.... It is impossible to explain the individuality of each man,
which is quite exceptional and peculiar to him alone; and it is just as impossible
to explain the passion of two people for each other, for it is equally individual
and uncommon in character; indeed, fundamentally both are one and the same.
The former is explicite what the latter was implicite.
We must consider as the origin of a new individual and true punctum
saliens of its life the moment when the parents begin to love each other--to fancy
each other, as the English appropriately express it. And, as has been said, in the
meeting of their longing glances originates the first germ of a new being, which,
indeed, like all germs, is generally crushed out. This new individual is to a
certain extent a new (Platonic) Idea; now, as all Ideas strive with the greatest
vehemence to enter the phenomenal sphere, and to do this, ardently seize upon
the matter which the law of causality distributes among them all, so this
particular Idea of a human individuality struggles with the greatest eagerness and

vehemence for its realisation in the phenomenal. It is precisely this vehement
desire which is the passion of the future parents for one another. Love has
countless degrees, and its two extremes may be indicated as [Greek: Aphroditae
pandaemos] and [Greek: ourania]; nevertheless, in essentials it is the same
everywhere.
According to the degree, on the other hand, it will be the more powerful the
more individualised it is--that is to say, the more the loved individual, by virtue
of all her qualities, is exclusively fit to satisfy the lover's desire and needs
determined by her own individuality. If we investigate further we shall
understand more clearly what this involves. All amorous feeling immediately
and essentially concentrates itself on health, strength, and beauty, and
consequently on youth; because the will above all wishes to exhibit the specific
character of the human species as the basis of all individuality. The same applies
pretty well to everyday courtship ([Greek: Aphroditae pandaemos]). With this
are bound up more special requirements, which we will consider individually
later on, and with which, if there is any prospect of gratification, there is an
increase of passion. Intense love, however, springs from a fitness of both
individualities for each other; so that the will, that is to say the father's character
and the mother's intellect combined, exactly complete that individual for which
the will to live in general (which exhibits itself in the whole species) has a
longing--a longing proportionate to this its greatness, and therefore surpassing
the measure of a mortal heart; its motives being in a like manner beyond the
sphere of the individual intellect. This, then, is the soul of a really great passion.
The more perfectly two individuals are fitted for each other in the various
respects which we shall consider further on, the stronger will be their passion for
each other. As there are not two individuals exactly alike, a particular kind of
woman must perfectly correspond with a particular kind of man--always in view
of the child that is to be born. Real, passionate love is as rare as the meeting of
two people exactly fitted for each other. By the way, it is because there is a
possibility of real passionate love in us all that we understand why poets have
depicted it in their works.
Because the kernel of passionate love turns on the anticipation of the child
to be born and its nature, it is quite possible for friendship, without any
admixture of sexual love, to exist between two young, good-looking people of
different sex, if there is perfect fitness of temperament and intellectual capacity.
In fact, a certain aversion for each other may exist also. The reason of this is that
a child begotten by them would physically or mentally have discordant qualities.
In short, the child's existence and nature would not be in harmony with the
purposes of the will to live as it presents itself in the species.

In an opposite case, where there is no fitness of disposition, character, and
mental capacity, whereby aversion, nay, even enmity for each other exists, it is
possible for love to spring up. Love of this kind makes them blind to everything;
and if it leads to marriage it is a very unhappy one.
And now let us more thoroughly investigate the matter. Egoism is a quality
so deeply rooted in every personality that it is on egotistical ends only that one
may safely rely in order to rouse the individual to activity.
To be sure, the species has a prior, nearer, and greater claim on the
individual than the transient individuality itself; and yet even when the
individual makes some sort of conscious sacrifice for the perpetuation and future
of the species, the importance of the matter will not be made sufficiently
comprehensible to his intellect, which is mainly constituted to regard individual
ends.
Therefore Nature attains her ends by implanting in the individual a certain
illusion by which something which is in reality advantageous to the species
alone seems to be advantageous to himself; consequently he serves the latter
while he imagines he is serving himself. In this process he is carried away by a
mere chimera, which floats before him and vanishes again immediately, and as a
motive takes the place of reality. This illusion is instinct. In most instances
instinct may be regarded as the sense of the species which presents to the will
whatever is of service to the species. But because the will has here become
individual it must be deceived in such a manner for it to discern by the sense of
the individual what the sense of the species has presented to it; in other words,
imagine it is pursuing ends concerning the individual, when in reality it is
pursuing merely general ends (using the word general in its strictest sense).
Outward manifestation of instinct can be best observed in animals, where
the part it plays is most significant; but it is in ourselves alone that we can get to
know its internal process, as of everything internal. It is true, it is thought that
man has scarcely any instinct at all, or at any rate has only sufficient instinct
when he is born to seek and take his mother's breast. But as a matter of fact man
has a very decided, clear, and yet complicated instinct--namely, for the selection,
both earnest and capricious, of another individual, to satisfy his instinct of sex.
The beauty or ugliness of the other individual has nothing whatever to do with
this satisfaction in itself, that is in so far as it is a matter of pleasure based upon a
pressing desire of the individual. The regard, however, for this satisfaction,
which is so zealously pursued, as well as the careful selection it entails, has
obviously nothing to do with the chooser himself, although he fancies that it has.
Its real aim is the child to be born, in whom the type of the species is to be
preserved in as pure and perfect a form as possible. For instance, different

phases of degeneration of the human form are the consequences of a thousand
physical accidents and moral delinquencies; and yet the genuine type of the
human form is, in all its parts, always restored; further, this is accomplished
under the guidance of the sense of beauty, which universally directs the instinct
of sex, and without which the satisfaction of the latter would deteriorate to a
repulsive necessity.
Accordingly, every one in the first place will infinitely prefer and ardently
desire those who are most beautiful--in other words, those in whom the character
of the species is most purely defined; and in the second, every one will desire in
the other individual those perfections which he himself lacks, and he will
consider imperfections, which are the reverse of his own, beautiful. This is why
little men prefer big women, and fair people like dark, and so on. The ecstasy
with which a man is filled at the sight of a beautiful woman, making him
imagine that union with her will be the greatest happiness, is simply the sense of
the species. The preservation of the type of the species rests on this distinct
preference for beauty, and this is why beauty has such power.
We will later on more fully state the considerations which this involves. It
is really instinct aiming at what is best in the species which induces a man to
choose a beautiful woman, although the man himself imagines that by so doing
he is only seeking to increase his own pleasure. As a matter of fact, we have here
an instructive solution of the secret nature of all instinct which almost always, as
in this case, prompts the individual to look after the welfare of the species. The
care with which an insect selects a certain flower or fruit, or piece of flesh, or the
way in which the ichneumon seeks the larva of a strange insect so that it may lay
its eggs in that particular place only, and to secure which it fears neither labour
nor danger, is obviously very analogous to the care with which a man chooses a
woman of a definite nature individually suited to him. He strives for her with
such ardour that he frequently, in order to attain his object, will sacrifice his
happiness in life, in spite of all reason, by a foolish marriage, by some love-
affair which costs him his fortune, honour, and life, even by committing crimes.
And all this in accordance with the will of nature which is everywhere sovereign,
so that he may serve the species in the most efficient manner, although he does
so at the expense of the individual.
Instinct everywhere works as with the conception of an end, and yet it is
entirely without one. Nature implants instinct where the acting individual is not
capable of understanding the end, or would be unwilling to pursue it.
Consequently, as a rule, it is only given prominently to animals, and in particular
to those of the lowest order, which have the least intelligence. But it is only in
such a case as the one we are at present considering that it is also given to man,

who naturally is capable of understanding the end, but would not pursue it with
the necessary zeal--that is to say, he would not pursue it at the cost of his
individual welfare. So that here, as in all cases of instinct, truth takes the form of
illusion in order to influence the will....
All this, however, on its part throws light upon the instinct of animals.
They, too, are undoubtedly carried away by a kind of illusion, which represents
that they are working for their own pleasure, while it is for the species that they
are working with such industry and self-denial. The bird builds its nest; the
insect seeks a suitable place wherein to lay its eggs, or even hunts for prey,
which it dislikes itself, but which must be placed beside the eggs as food for the
future larvae; the bee, the wasp, and the ant apply themselves to their skilful
building and extremely complex economy. All of them are undoubtedly
controlled by an illusion which conceals the service of the species under the
mask of an egotistical purpose.
This is probably the only way in which to make the inner or subjective
process, from which spring all manifestations of instinct, intelligible to us. The
outer or objective process, however, shows in animals strongly controlled by
instinct, as insects for instance, a preponderance of the ganglion--i.e., subjective
nervous system over the objective or cerebral system. From which it may be
concluded that they are controlled not so much by objective and proper
apprehension as by subjective ideas, which excite desire and arise through the
influence of the ganglionic system upon the brain; accordingly they are moved
by a certain illusion....
The great preponderance of brain in man accounts for his having fewer
instincts than the lower order of animals, and for even these few easily being led
astray. For instance, the sense of beauty which instinctively guides a man in his
selection of a mate is misguided when it degenerates into the proneness to
pederasty. Similarly, the blue-bottle (Musca vomitoria), which instinctively
ought to place its eggs in putrified flesh, lays them in the blossom of the Arum
dracunculus, because it is misled by the decaying odour of this plant. That an
absolutely generic instinct is the foundation of all love of sex may be confirmed
by a closer analysis of the subject--an analysis which can hardly be avoided.
In the first place, a man in love is by nature inclined to be inconstant, while
a woman constant. A man's love perceptibly decreases after a certain period;
almost every other woman charms him more than the one he already possesses;
he longs for change: while a woman's love increases from the very moment it is
returned. This is because nature aims at the preservation of the species, and
consequently at as great an increase in it as possible.... This is why a man is
always desiring other women, while a woman always clings to one man; for

nature compels her intuitively and unconsciously to take care of the supporter
and protector of the future offspring. For this reason conjugal fidelity is artificial
with the man but natural to a woman. Hence a woman's infidelity, looked at
objectively on account of the consequences, and subjectively on account of its
unnaturalness, is much more unpardonable than a man's.
In order to be quite clear and perfectly convinced that the delight we take in
the other sex, however objective it may seem to be, is nevertheless merely
instinct disguised, in other words, the sense of the species striving to preserve its
type, it will be necessary to investigate more closely the considerations which
influence us in this, and go into details, strange as it may seem for these details
to figure in a philosophical work. These considerations may be classed in the
following way:--
Those that immediately concern the type of the species, id est, beauty; those
that concern other physical qualities; and finally, those that are merely relative
and spring from the necessary correction or neutralisation of the one-sided
qualities and abnormities of the two individuals by each other. Let us look at
these considerations separately.
The first consideration that influences our choice and feelings is age....
The second consideration is that of health: a severe illness may alarm us for
the time being, but an illness of a chronic nature or even cachexy frightens us
away, because it would be transmitted.
The third consideration is the skeleton, since it is the foundation of the type
of the species. Next to old age and disease, nothing disgusts us so much as a
deformed shape; even the most beautiful face cannot make amends for it--in fact,
the ugliest face combined with a well-grown shape is infinitely preferable.
Moreover, we are most keenly sensible of every malformation of the skeleton;
as, for instance, a stunted, short-legged form, and the like, or a limping gait
when it is not the result of some extraneous accident: while a conspicuously
beautiful figure compensates for every defect. It delights us. Further, the great
importance which is attached to small feet! This is because the size of the foot is
an essential characteristic of the species, for no animal has the tarsus and
metatarsus combined so small as man; hence the uprightness of his gait: he is a
plantigrade. And Jesus Sirach has said[17] (according to the improved
translation by Kraus), "A woman that is well grown and has beautiful feet is like
pillars of gold in sockets of silver." The teeth, too, are important, because they
are essential for nourishment, and quite peculiarly hereditary.
The fourth consideration is a certain plumpness, in other words, a
superabundance of the vegetative function, plasticity.... Hence excessive
thinness strikingly repels us.... The last consideration that influences us is a

beautiful face. Here, too, the bone parts are taken into account before everything
else. So that almost everything depends on a beautiful nose, while a short
retroussé one will mar all. A slight upward or downward turn of the nose has
often determined the life's happiness of a great many maidens; and justly so, for
the type of the species is at stake.
A small mouth, by means of small maxillae, is very essential, as it is the
specific characteristic of the human face as distinguished from the muzzle of the
brutes. A receding, as it were, a cut-away chin is particularly repellent, because
mentum prominulum is a characteristic belonging exclusively to our species.
Finally, we come to the consideration of beautiful eyes and a beautiful
forehead; they depend upon the psychical qualities, and in particular, the
intellectual, which are inherited from the mother. The unconscious
considerations which, on the other hand, influence women in their choice
naturally cannot be so accurately specified. In general, we may say the
following:--That the age they prefer is from thirty to thirty-five. For instance,
they prefer men of this age to youths, who in reality possess the highest form of
human beauty. The reason for this is that they are not guided by taste but by
instinct, which recognises in this particular age the acme of generative power. In
general, women pay little attention to beauty, that is, to beauty of face; they
seem to take it upon themselves alone to endow the child with beauty. It is
chiefly the strength of a man and the courage that goes with it that attract them,
for both of these promise the generation of robust children and at the same time
a brave protector for them. Every physical defect in a man, any deviation from
the type, a woman may, with regard to the child, eradicate if she is faultless in
these parts herself or excels in a contrary direction. The only exceptions are
those qualities which are peculiar to the man, and which, in consequence, a
mother cannot bestow on her child; these include the masculine build of the
skeleton, breadth of shoulder, small hips, straight legs, strength of muscle,
courage, beard, and so on. And so it happens that a woman frequently loves an
ugly man, albeit she never loves an unmanly man, because she cannot neutralise
his defects.
The second class of considerations that are the source of love are those
depending on the psychical qualities. Here we shall find that a woman
universally is attracted by the qualities of a man's heart or character, both of
which are inherited from the father. It is mainly firmness of will, determination
and courage, and may be honesty and goodness of heart too, that win a woman
over; while intellectual qualifications exercise no direct or instinctive power over
her, for the simple reason that these are not inherited from the father. A lack of
intelligence carries no weight with her; in fact, a superabundance of mental

power or even genius, as abnormities, might have an unfavourable effect. And so
we frequently find a woman preferring a stupid, ugly, and ill-mannered man to
one who is well-educated, intellectual, and agreeable. Hence, people of
extremely different temperament frequently marry for love--that is to say, he is
coarse, strong, and narrow-minded, while she is very sensitive, refined, cultured,
and aesthetic, and so on; or he is genial and clever, and she is a goose.
"Sic visum Veneri; cui placet impares Formas atque animos sub juga aënea
Saevo mittere cum joco."
The reason for this is, that she is not influenced by intellectual
considerations, but by something entirely different, namely, instinct. Marriage is
not regarded as a means for intellectual entertainment, but for the generation of
children; it is a union of hearts and not of minds. When a woman says that she
has fallen in love with a man's mind, it is either a vain and ridiculous pretence on
her part or the exaggeration of a degenerate being. A man, on the other hand, is
not controlled in instinctive love by the qualities of the woman's character; this is
why so many a Socrates has found his Xantippe, as for instance, Shakespeare,
Albrecht Dürer, Byron, and others. But here we have the influence of intellectual
qualities, because they are inherited from the mother; nevertheless their
influence is easily overpowered by physical beauty, which concerns more
essential points, and therefore has a more direct effect. By the way, it is for this
reason that mothers who have either felt or experienced the former influence
have their daughters taught the fine arts, languages, etc., so that they may prove
more attractive. In this way they hope by artificial means to pad the intellect, just
as they do their bust and hips if it is necessary to do so. Let it be understood that
here we are simply speaking of that attraction which is absolutely direct and
instinctive, and from which springs real love. That an intelligent and educated
woman esteems intelligence and brains in a man, and that a man after deliberate
reasoning criticises and considers the character of his fianceé, are matters which
do not concern our present subject. Such things influence a rational selection in
marriage, but they do not control passionate love, which is our matter.
Up to the present I have taken into consideration merely the absolute
considerations--id est, such considerations as apply to every one. I now come to
the relative considerations, which are individual, because they aim at rectifying
the type of the species which is defectively presented and at correcting any
deviation from it existing in the person of the chooser himself, and in this way
lead back to a pure presentation of the type. Hence each man loves what he
himself is deficient in. The choice that is based on relative considerations--that
is, has in view the constitution of the individual--is much more certain, decided,
and exclusive than the choice that is made after merely absolute considerations;

consequently real passionate love will have its origin, as a rule, in these relative
considerations, and it will only be the ordinary phases of love that spring from
the absolute. So that it is not stereotyped, perfectly beautiful women who are
wont to kindle great passions. Before a truly passionate feeling can exist,
something is necessary that is perhaps best expressed by a metaphor in
chemistry--namely, the two persons must neutralise each other, like acid and
alkali to a neutral salt. Before this can be done the following conditions are
essential. In the first place, all sexuality is one-sided. This one-sidedness is more
definitely expressed and exists in a higher degree in one person than in another;
so that it may be better supplemented and neutralised in each individual by one
person than by another of the opposite sex, because the individual requires a
one-sidedness opposite to his own in order to complete the type of humanity in
the new individual to be generated, to the constitution of which everything
tends....
The following is necessary for this neutralisation of which we are speaking.
The particular degree of his manhood must exactly correspond to the particular
degree of her womanhood in order to exactly balance the one-sidedness of each.
Hence the most manly man will desire the most womanly woman, and vice
versâ, and so each will want the individual that exactly corresponds to him in
degree of sex. Inasmuch as two persons fulfil this necessary relation towards
each other, it is instinctively felt by them and is the origin, together with the
other relative considerations, of the higher degrees of love. While, therefore, two
lovers are pathetically talking about the harmony of their souls, the kernel of the
conversation is for the most part the harmony concerning the individual and its
perfection, which obviously is of much more importance than the harmony of
their souls--which frequently turns out to be a violent discord shortly after
marriage.
We now come to those other relative considerations which depend on each
individual trying to eradicate, through the medium of another, his weaknesses,
deficiencies, and deviations from the type, in order that they may not be
perpetuated in the child that is to be born or develop into absolute abnormities.
The weaker a man is in muscular power, the more will he desire a woman who is
muscular; and the same thing applies to a woman....
Nevertheless, if a big woman choose a big husband, in order, perhaps, to
present a better appearance in society, the children, as a rule, suffer for her folly.
Again, another very decided consideration is complexion. Blonde people fancy
either absolutely dark complexions or brown; but it is rarely the case vice versâ.
The reason for it is this: that fair hair and blue eyes are a deviation from the type
and almost constitute an abnormity, analogous to white mice, or at any rate

white horses. They are not indigenous to any other part of the world but Europe,-
-not even to the polar regions,--and are obviously of Scandinavian origin. En
passant, it is my conviction that a white skin is not natural to man, and that by
nature he has either a black or brown skin like our forefathers, the Hindoos, and
that the white man was never originally created by nature; and that, therefore,
there is no race of white people, much as it is talked about, but every white man
is a bleached one. Driven up into the north, where he was a stranger, and where
he existed only like an exotic plant, in need of a hothouse in winter, man in the
course of centuries became white. The gipsies, an Indian tribe which emigrated
only about four centuries ago, show the transition of the Hindoo's complexion to
ours. In love, therefore, nature strives to return to dark hair and brown eyes,
because they are the original type; still, a white skin has become second nature,
although not to such an extent as to make the dark skin of the Hindoo repellent
to us.
Finally, every man tries to find the corrective of his own defects and
aberrations in the particular parts of his body, and the more conspicuous the
defect is the greater is his determination to correct it. This is why snub-nosed
persons find an aquiline nose or a parrot-like face so indescribably pleasing; and
the same thing applies to every other part of the body. Men of immoderately
long and attenuated build delight in a stunted and short figure. Considerations of
temperament also influence a man's choice. Each prefers a temperament the
reverse of his own; but only in so far as his is a decided one.
A man who is quite perfect in some respect himself does not, it is true,
desire and love imperfection in this particular respect, yet he can be more easily
reconciled to it than another man, because he himself saves the children from
being very imperfect in this particular. For instance, a man who has a very white
skin himself will not dislike a yellowish complexion, while a man who has a
yellowish complexion will consider a dazzlingly white skin divinely beautiful. It
is rare for a man to fall in love with a positively ugly woman, but when he does,
it is because exact harmony in the degree of sex exists between them, and all her
abnormities are precisely the opposite to, that is to say, the corrective of his.
Love in these circumstances is wont to attain a high degree.
The profoundly earnest way in which we criticise and narrowly consider
every part of a woman, while she on her part considers us; the scrupulously
careful way we scrutinise, a woman who is beginning to please us; the fickleness
of our choice; the strained attention with which a man watches his fiancée; the
care he takes not to be deceived in any trait; and the great importance he attaches
to every more or less essential trait,--all this is quite in keeping with the
importance of the end. For the child that is to be born will have to bear a similar

trait through its whole life; for instance, if a woman stoops but a little, it is
possible for her son to be inflicted with a hunchback; and so in every other
respect. We are not conscious of all this, naturally. On the contrary, each man
imagines that his choice is made in the interest of his own pleasure (which, in
reality, cannot be interested in it at all); his choice, which we must take for
granted is in keeping with his own individuality, is made precisely in the interest
of the species, to maintain the type of which as pure as possible is the secret task.
In this case the individual unconsciously acts in the interest of something higher,
that is, the species. This is why he attaches so much importance to things to
which he might, nay, would be otherwise indifferent. There is something quite
singular in the unconsciously serious and critical way two young people of
different sex look at each other on meeting for the first time; in the scrutinising
and penetrating glances they exchange, in the careful inspection which their
various traits undergo. This scrutiny and analysis represent the meditation of the
genius of the species on the individual which may be born and the combination
of its qualities; and the greatness of their delight in and longing for each other is
determined by this meditation. This longing, although it may have become
intense, may possibly disappear again if something previously unobserved
comes to light. And so the genius of the species meditates concerning the
coming race in all who are yet not too old. It is Cupid's work to fashion this race,
and he is always busy, always speculating, always meditating. The affairs of the
individual in their whole ephemeral totality are very trivial compared with those
of this divinity, which concern the species and the coming race; therefore he is
always ready to sacrifice the individual regardlessly. He is related to these
ephemeral affairs as an immortal being is to a mortal, and his interests to theirs
as infinite to finite. Conscious, therefore, of administering affairs of a higher
order than those that concern merely the weal and woe of the individual, he
administers them with sublime indifference amid the tumult of war, the bustle of
business, or the raging of a plague--indeed, he pursues them into the seclusion of
the cloisters.
It has been seen that the intensity of love grows with its individuation; we
have shown that two individuals may be so physically constituted, that, in order
to restore the best possible type of the species, the one is the special and perfect
complement of the other, which, in consequence, exclusively desires it. In a case
of this kind, passionate love arises, and as it is bestowed on one object, and one
only--that is to say, because it appears in the special service of the species--it
immediately assumes a nobler and sublimer nature. On the other hand, mere
sexual instinct is base, because, without individuation, it is directed to all, and
strives to preserve the species merely as regards quantity with little regard for

quality. Intense love concentrated on one individual may develop to such a
degree, that unless it is gratified all the good things of this world, and even life
itself, lose their importance. It then becomes a desire, the intensity of which is
like none other; consequently it will make any kind of sacrifice, and should it
happen that it cannot be gratified, it may lead to madness or even suicide.
Besides these unconscious considerations which are the source of passionate
love, there must be still others, which we have not so directly before us.
Therefore, we must take it for granted that here there is not only a fitness of
constitution but also a special fitness between the man's will and the woman's
intellect, in consequence of which a perfectly definite individual can be born to
them alone, whose existence is contemplated by the genius of the species for
reasons to us impenetrable, since they are the very essence of the thing-in-itself.
Or more strictly speaking, the will to live desires to objectivise itself in an
individual which is precisely determined, and can only be begotten by this
particular father and this particular mother. This metaphysical yearning of the
will in itself has immediately, as its sphere of action in the circle of human
beings, the hearts of the future parents, who accordingly are seized with this
desire. They now fancy that it is for their own sakes they are longing for what at
present has purely a metaphysical end, that is to say, for what does not come
within the range of things that exist in reality. In other words, it is the desire of
the future individual to enter existence, which has first become possible here, a
longing which proceeds from the primary source of all being and exhibits itself
in the phenomenal world as the intense love of the future parents for each other,
and has little regard for anything outside itself. In fact, love is an illusion like no
other; it will induce a man to sacrifice everything he possesses in the world, in
order to obtain this woman, who in reality will satisfy him no more than any
other. It also ceases to exist when the end, which was in reality metaphysical,
has been frustrated perhaps by the woman's barrenness (which, according to
Hufeland, is the result of nineteen accidental defects in the constitution), just as
it is frustrated daily in millions of crushed germs in which the same
metaphysical life-principle struggles to exist; there is no other consolation in this
than that there is an infinity of space, time, and matter, and consequently
inexhaustible opportunity, at the service of the will to live.
Although this subject has not been treated by Theophrastus Paracelsus, and
my entire train of thought is foreign to him, yet it must have presented itself to
him, if even in a cursory way, when he gave utterance to the following
remarkable words, written in quite a different context and in his usual desultory
style: Hi sunt, quos Deus copulavit, ut eam, quae fuit Uriae et David; quamvis ex
diametro (sic enim sibi humana mens persuadebat) cum justo et legitimo

matrimonio pugnaret hoc ... sed propter Salomonem, qui aliunde nasci non
potuit, nisi ex Bathseba, conjuncto David semine, quamvis meretrice, conjunxit
eos Deus.[18]
The yearning of love, the [Greek: himeros], which has been expressed in
countless ways and forms by the poets of all ages, without their exhausting the
subject or even doing it justice; this longing which makes us imagine that the
possession of a certain woman will bring interminable happiness, and the loss of
her, unspeakable pain; this longing and this pain do not arise from the needs of
an ephemeral individual, but are, on the contrary, the sigh of the spirit of the
species, discerning irreparable means of either gaining or losing its ends. It is the
species alone that has an interminable existence: hence it is capable of endless
desire, endless gratification, and endless pain. These, however, are imprisoned in
the heart of a mortal; no wonder, therefore, if it seems like to burst, and can find
no expression for the announcements of endless joy or endless pain. This it is
that forms the substance of all erotic poetry that is sublime in character, which,
consequently, soars into transcendent metaphors, surpassing everything earthly.
This is the theme of Petrarch, the material for the St. Preuxs, Werthers, and
Jacopo Ortis, who otherwise could be neither understood nor explained. This
infinite regard is not based on any kind of intellectual, nor, in general, upon any
real merits of the beloved one; because the lover frequently does not know her
well enough; as was the case with Petrarch.
It is the spirit of the species alone that can see at a glance of what value the
beloved one is to it for its purposes. Moreover, great passions, as a rule, originate
at first sight:
"Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight."
--SHAKESPEARE, As You Like It, iii. 5.
Curiously enough, there is a passage touching upon this in Guzmann de
Alfarache, a well-known romance written two hundred and fifty years ago by
Mateo Aleman: No es necessario para que uno ame, que pase distancia de
tiempo, que siga discurso, in haga eleccion, sino que con aquella primera y sola
vista, concurran juntamente cierta correspondencia ó consonancia, ó lo que acá
solemos vulgarmente decir, una confrontacion de sangre, à que por particular
influxo suelen mover las estrellas. (For a man to love there is no need for any
length of time to pass for him to weigh considerations or make his choice, but
only that a certain correspondence and consonance is encountered on both sides
at the first and only glance, or that which is ordinarily called a sympathy of
blood, to which a peculiar influence of the stars generally impels.) Accordingly,
the loss of the beloved one through a rival, or through death, is the greatest pain
of all to those passionately in love; just because it is of a transcendental nature,

since it affects him not merely as an individual, but also assails him in his
essentia aeterna, in the life of the species, in whose special will and service he
was here called. This is why jealousy is so tormenting and bitter, and the giving
up of the loved one the greatest of all sacrifices. A hero is ashamed of showing
any kind of emotion but that which may be the outcome of love; the reason for
this is, that when he is in love it is not he, but the species which is grieving. In
Calderon's Zenobia the Great there is a scene in the second act between Zenobia
and Decius where the latter says, Cielos, luego tu me quieres? Perdiera cien mil
victorias, Volviérame, etc. (Heavens! then you love me? For this I would
sacrifice a thousand victories, etc.) In this case honour, which has hitherto
outweighed every other interest, is driven out of the field directly love--i.e., the
interest of the species--comes into play and discerns something that will be of
decided advantage to itself; for the interest of the species, compared with that of
the mere individual, however important this may be, is infinitely more important.
Honour, duty, and fidelity succumb to it after they have withstood every other
temptation--the menace of death even. We find the same going on in private life;
for instance, a man has less conscience when in love than in any other
circumstances. Conscience is sometimes put on one side even by people who are
otherwise honest and straightforward, and infidelity recklessly committed if they
are passionately in love--i.e., when the interest of the species has taken
possession of them. It would seem, indeed, as if they believed themselves
conscious of a greater authority than the interests of individuals could ever
confer; this is simply because they are concerned in the interest of the species.
Chamfort's utterance in this respect is remarkable: Quand un homme et une
femme ont l'un pour l'autre une passion violente, il me semble toujours que
quelque soient les obstacles qui les séparent, un mari, des parens, etc.; les deux
amans sont l'un à l'autre, de par la Nature, qu'ils s'appartiennent de droit devin,
malgré les lois et les conventions humaines.... From this standpoint the greater
part of the Decameron seems a mere mocking and jeering on the part of the
genius of the species at the rights and interests of the individual which it treads
underfoot. Inequality of rank and all similar relations are put on one side with
the same indifference and disregarded by the genius of the species, if they thwart
the union of two people passionately in love with one another: it pursues its ends
pertaining to endless generations, scattering human principles and scruples
abroad like chaff.
For the same reason, a man will willingly risk every kind of danger, and
even become courageous, although he may otherwise be faint-hearted. What a
delight we take in watching, either in a play or novel, two young lovers fighting
for each other--i.e., for the interest of the species--and their defeat of the old

people, who had only in view the welfare of the individual! For the struggling of
a pair of lovers seems to us so much more important, delightful, and
consequently justifiable than any other, as the species is more important than the
individual.
Accordingly, we have as the fundamental subject of almost all comedies the
genius of the species with its purposes, running counter to the personal interests
of the individuals presented, and, in consequence, threatening to undermine their
happiness. As a rule it carries out its ends, which, in keeping with true poetic
justice, satisfies the spectator, because the latter feels that the purposes of the
species widely surpass those of the individual. Hence he is quite consoled when
he finally takes leave of the victorious lovers, sharing with them the illusion that
they have established their own happiness, while, in truth, they have sacrificed it
for the welfare of the species, in opposition to the will of the discreet old people.
It has been attempted in a few out-of-the-way comedies to reverse this state
of things and to effect the happiness of the individuals at the cost of the ends of
the species; but here the spectator is sensible of the pain inflicted on the genius
of the species, and does not find consolation in the advantages that are assured to
the individuals.
Two very well-known little pieces occur to me as examples of this kind: La
reine de 16 ans, and Le mariage de raison.
In the love-affairs that are treated in tragedies the lovers, as a rule, perish
together: the reason for this is that the purposes of the species, whose tools the
lovers were, have been frustrated, as, for instance, in Romeo and Juliet, Tancred,
Don Carlos, Wallenstein, The Bride of Messina, and so on.
A man in love frequently furnishes comic as well as tragic aspects; for
being in the possession of the spirit of the species and controlled by it, he no
longer belongs to himself, and consequently his line of conduct is not in keeping
with that of the individual. It is fundamentally this that in the higher phases of
love gives such a poetical and sublime colour, nay, transcendental and
hyperphysical turn to a man's thoughts, whereby he appears to lose sight of his
essentially material purpose. He is inspired by the spirit of the species, whose
affairs are infinitely more important than any which concern mere individuals, in
order to establish by special mandate of this spirit the existence of an indefinitely
long posterity with this particular and precisely determined nature, which it can
receive only from him as father and his loved one as mother, and which,
moreover, as such never comes into existence, while the objectivation of the will
to live expressly demands this existence. It is the feeling that he is engaged in
affairs of such transcendent importance that exalts the lover above everything
earthly, nay, indeed, above himself, and gives such a hyperphysical clothing to

his physical wishes, that love becomes, even in the life of the most prosaic, a
poetical episode; and then the affair often assumes a comical aspect. That
mandate of the will which objectifies itself in the species presents itself in the
consciousness of the lover under the mask of the anticipation of an infinite
happiness, which is to be found in his union with this particular woman. This
illusion to a man deeply in love becomes so dazzling that if it cannot be attained,
life itself not only loses all charm, but appears to be so joyless, hollow, and
uninteresting as to make him too disgusted with it to be afraid of the terrors of
death; this is why he sometimes of his own free will cuts his life short. The will
of a man of this kind has become engulfed in that of the species, or the will of
the species has obtained so great an ascendency over the will of the individual
that if such a man cannot be effective in the manifestation of the first, he
disdains to be so in the last. The individual in this case is too weak a vessel to
bear the infinite longing of the will of the species concentrated upon a definite
object. When this is the case suicide is the result, and sometimes suicide of the
two lovers; unless nature, to prevent this, causes insanity, which then enshrouds
with its veil the consciousness of so hopeless a condition. The truth of this is
confirmed yearly by various cases of this description.
However, it is not only unrequited love that leads frequently to a tragic end;
for requited love more frequently leads to unhappiness than to happiness. This is
because its demands often so severely clash with the personal welfare of the
lover concerned as to undermine it, since the demands are incompatible with the
lover's other circumstances, and in consequence destroy the plans of life built
upon them. Further, love frequently runs counter not only to external
circumstances but to the individuality itself, for it may fling itself upon a person
who, apart from the relation of sex, may become hateful, despicable, nay, even
repulsive. As the will of the species, however, is so very much stronger than that
of the individual, the lover shuts his eyes to all objectionable qualities, overlooks
everything, ignores all, and unites himself for ever to the object of his passion.
He is so completely blinded by this illusion that as soon as the will of the species
is accomplished the illusion vanishes and leaves in its place a hateful companion
for life. From this it is obvious why we often see very intelligent, nay,
distinguished men married to dragons and she-devils, and why we cannot
understand how it was possible for them to make such a choice. Accordingly, the
ancients represented Amor as blind. In fact, it is possible for a lover to clearly
recognise and be bitterly conscious of horrid defects in his fiancée's disposition
and character--defects which promise him a life of misery--and yet for him not
to be filled with fear:
"I ask not, I care not, If guilt's in thy heart; I know that I love thee,

Whatever thou art."
For, in truth, he is not acting in his own interest but in that of a third person,
who has yet to come into existence, albeit he is under the impression that he is
acting in his own But it is this very acting in some one else's interest which is
everywhere the stamp of greatness and gives to passionate love the touch of the
sublime, making it a worthy subject for the poet. Finally, a man may both love
and hate his beloved at the same time. Accordingly, Plato compares a man's love
to the love of a wolf for a sheep. We have an instance of this kind when a
passionate lover, in spite of all his exertions and entreaties, cannot obtain a
hearing upon any terms.
"I love and hate her."--SHAKESPEARE, Cymb. iii. 5.
When hatred is kindled, a man will sometimes go so far as to first kill his
beloved and then himself. Examples of this kind are brought before our notice
yearly in the newspapers. Therefore Goethe says truly:
"Bei aller verschmähten Liebe, beim höllichen Elemente! Ich wollt', ich
wüsst' was ärger's, das ich fluchen könnte!"
It is in truth no hyperbole on the part of a lover when he calls his beloved's
coldness, or the joy of her vanity, which delights in his suffering, cruelty. For he
has come under the influence of an impulse which, akin to the instinct of
animals, compels him in spite of all reason to unconditionally pursue his end and
discard every other; he cannot give it up. There has not been one but many a
Petrarch, who, failing to have his love requited, has been obliged to drag through
life as if his feet were either fettered or carried a leaden weight, and give vent to
his sighs in a lonely forest; nevertheless there was only one Petrarch who
possessed the true poetic instinct, so that Goethe's beautiful lines are true of him:
"Und wenn der Mensch in seiner Quaal verstummt, Gab mir ein Gott, zu
sagen, wie ich leide."
As a matter of fact, the genius of the species is at continual warfare with the
guardian genius of individuals; it is its pursuer and enemy; it is always ready to
relentlessly destroy personal happiness in order to carry out its ends; indeed, the
welfare of whole nations has sometimes been sacrificed to its caprice.
Shakespeare furnishes us with such an example in Henry VI Part III., Act iii.,
Scenes 2 and 3. This is because the species, in which lies the germ of our being,
has a nearer and prior claim upon us than the individual, so that the affairs of the
species are more important than those of the individual. Sensible of this, the
ancients personified the genius of the species in Cupid, notwithstanding his
having the form of a child, as a hostile and cruel god, and therefore one to be
decried as a capricious and despotic demon, and yet lord of both gods and men.
[Greek: Su d' o theon tyranne k' anthropon, Eros.] (Tu, deorum

hominumque tyranne, Amor!)
Murderous darts, blindness, and wings are Cupid's attributes. The latter
signify inconstancy, which as a rule comes with the disillusion following
possession.
Because, for instance, love is based on an illusion and represents what is an
advantage to the species as an advantage to the individual, the illusion
necessarily vanishes directly the end of the species has been attained. The spirit
of the species, which for the time being has got the individual into its possession,
now frees him again. Deserted by the spirit, he relapses into his original state of
narrowness and want; he is surprised to find that after all his lofty, heroic, and
endless attempts to further his own pleasure he has obtained but little; and
contrary to his expectation, he finds that he is no happier than he was before. He
discovers that he has been the dupe of the will of the species. Therefore, as a
rule, a Theseus who has been made happy will desert his Ariadne. If Petrarch's
passion had been gratified his song would have become silent from that moment,
as that of the birds as soon as the eggs are laid.
Let it be said in passing that, however much my metaphysics of love may
displease those in love, the fundamental truth revealed by me would enable them
more effectually than anything else to overcome their passion, if considerations
of reason in general could be of any avail. The words of the comic poet of
ancient times remain good: Quae res in se neque consilium, neque modum habet
ullum, eam consilio regere non potes. People who marry for love do so in the
interest of the species and not of the individuals. It is true that the persons
concerned imagine they are promoting their own happiness; but their real aim,
which is one they are unconscious of, is to bring forth an individual which can
be begotten by them alone. This purpose having brought them together, they
ought henceforth to try and make the best of things. But it very frequently
happens that two people who have been brought together by this instinctive
illusion, which is the essence of passionate love, are in every other respect
temperamentally different. This becomes apparent when the illusion wears off,
as it necessarily must.
Accordingly, people who marry for love are generally unhappy, for such
people look after the welfare of the future generation at the expense of the
present. Quien se casa por amores, ha de vivir con dolores (He who marries for
love must live in grief), says the Spanish proverb. Marriages de convenance,
which are generally arranged by the parents, will turn out the reverse. The
considerations in this case which control them, whatever their nature may be, are
at any rate real and unable to vanish of themselves. A marriage of this kind
attends to the welfare of the present generation to the detriment of the future, it is

true; and yet this remains problematical.
A man who marries for money, and not for love, lives more in the interest
of the individual than in that of the species; a condition exactly opposed to truth;
therefore it is unnatural and rouses a certain feeling of contempt. A girl who
against the wish of her parents refuses to marry a rich man, still young, and
ignores all considerations of convenance, in order to choose another instinctively
to her liking, sacrifices her individual welfare to the species. But it is for this
very reason that she meets with a certain approval, for she has given preference
to what was more important and acted in the spirit of nature (of the species)
more exactly; while the parents advised only in the spirit of individual egoism.
As the outcome of all this, it seems that to marry means that either the
interest of the individual or the interest of the species must suffer. As a rule one
or the other is the case, for it is only by the rarest and luckiest accident that
convenance and passionate love go hand in hand. The wretched condition of
most persons physically, morally, and intellectually may be partly accounted for
by the fact that marriages are not generally the result of pure choice and
inclination, but of all kinds of external considerations and accidental
circumstances. However, if inclination to a certain degree is taken into
consideration, as well as convenience, this is as it were a compromise with the
genius of the species. As is well known, happy marriages are few and far
between, since marriage is intended to have the welfare of the future generation
at heart and not the present.
However, let me add for the consolation of the more tender-hearted that
passionate love is sometimes associated with a feeling of quite another kind--
namely, real friendship founded on harmony of sentiment, but this, however,
does not exist until the instinct of sex has been extinguished. This friendship will
generally spring from the fact that the physical, moral, and intellectual qualities
which correspond to and supplement each other in two individuals in love, in
respect of the child to be born, will also supplement each other in respect of the
individuals themselves as opposite qualities of temperament and intellectual
excellence, and thereby establish a harmony of sentiment.
The whole metaphysics of love which has been treated here is closely
related to my metaphysics in general, and the light it throws upon this may be
said to be as follows.
We have seen that a man's careful choice, developing through innumerable
degrees to passionate love, for the satisfaction of his instinct of sex, is based
upon the fundamental interest he takes in the constitution of the next generation.
This overwhelming interest that he takes verifies two truths which have been
already demonstrated.

First: Man's immortality, which is perpetuated in the future race. For this
interest of so active and zealous a nature, which is neither the result of reflection
nor intention, springs from the innermost characteristics and tendencies of our
being, could not exist so continuously or exercise such great power over man if
the latter were really transitory and if a race really and totally different to himself
succeeded him merely in point of time.
Second: That his real nature is more closely allied to the species than to the
individual. For this interest that he takes in the special nature of the species,
which is the source of all love, from the most fleeting emotion to the most
serious passion, is in reality the most important affair in each man's life, the
successful or unsuccessful issue of which touches him more nearly than anything
else. This is why it has been pre-eminently called the "affair of the heart."
Everything that merely concerns one's own person is set aside and sacrificed, if
the case require it, to this interest when it is of a strong and decided nature.
Therefore in this way man proves that he is more interested in the species than in
the individual, and that he lives more directly in the interest of the species than
in that of the individual.
Why, then, is a lover so absolutely devoted to every look and turn of his
beloved, and ready to make any kind of sacrifice for her? Because the immortal
part of him is yearning for her; it is only the mortal part of him that longs for
everything else. That keen and even intense longing for a particular woman is
accordingly a direct pledge of the immortality of the essence of our being and of
its perpetuity in the species.
To regard this perpetuity as something unimportant and insufficient is an
error, arising from the fact that in thinking of the continuity of the species we
only think of the future existence of beings similar to ourselves, but in no
respect, however, identical with us; and again, starting from knowledge directed
towards without, we only grasp the outer form of the species as it presents itself
to us, and do not take into consideration its inner nature. It is precisely this inner
nature that lies at the foundation of our own consciousness as its kernel, and
therefore is more direct than our consciousness itself, and as thing-in-itself
exempt from the principium individuationis--is in reality identical and the same
in all individuals, whether they exist at the same or at different times.
This, then, is the will to live--that is to say, it is exactly that which so
intensely desires both life and continuance, and which accordingly remains
unharmed and unaffected by death. Further, its present state cannot be improved,
and while there is life it is certain of the unceasing sufferings and death of the
individual. The denial of the will to live is reserved to free it from this, as the
means by which the individual will breaks away from the stem of the species,

and surrenders that existence in it.
We are wanting both in ideas and all data as to what it is after that. We can
only indicate it as something which is free to be will to live or not to live.
Buddhism distinguishes the latter case by the word Nirvana. It is the point which
as such remains for ever impenetrable to all human knowledge.
Looking at the turmoil of life from this standpoint we find all occupied with
its want and misery, exerting all their strength in order to satisfy its endless
needs and avert manifold suffering, without, however, daring to expect anything
else in return than merely the preservation of this tormented individual existence
for a short span of time. And yet, amid all this turmoil we see a pair of lovers
exchanging longing glances--yet why so secretly, timidly, and stealthily?
Because these lovers are traitors secretly striving to perpetuate all this misery
and turmoil that otherwise would come to a timely end.
FOOTNOTES:
[17] Ch. xxvi. 23.
[18] De vita longa i. 5.
PHYSIOGNOMY.
That the outside reflects the inner man, and that the face expresses his
whole character, is an obvious supposition and accordingly a safe one,
demonstrated as it is in the desire people have to see on all occasions a man who
has distinguished himself by something good or evil, or produced some
exceptional work; or if this is denied them, at any rate to hear from others what
he looks like. This is why, on the one hand, they go to places where they
conjecture he is to be found; and on the other, why the press, and especially the
English press, tries to describe him in a minute and striking way; he is soon
brought visibly before us either by a painter or an engraver; and finally,
photography, on that account so highly prized, meets this necessity in a most
perfect way.
It is also proved in everyday life that each one inspects the physiognomy of
those he comes in contact with, and first of all secretly tries to discover their
moral and intellectual character from their features. This could not be the case if,
as some foolish people state, the outward appearance of a man is of no
importance; nay, if the soul is one thing and the body another, and the latter
related to the soul as the coat is to the man himself.
Rather is every human face a hieroglyph, which, to be sure, admits of being
deciphered--nay, the whole alphabet of which we carry about with us. Indeed,

the face of a man, as a rule, bespeaks more interesting matter than his tongue, for
it is the compendium of all which he will ever say, as it is the register of all his
thoughts and aspirations. Moreover, the tongue only speaks the thoughts of one
man, while the face expresses a thought of nature. Therefore it is worth while to
observe everybody attentively; even if they are not worth talking to. Every
individual is worthy of observation as a single thought of nature; so is beauty in
the highest degree, for it is a higher and more general conception of nature: it is
her thought of a species. This is why we are so captivated by beauty. It is a
fundamental and principal thought of Nature; whereas the individual is only a
secondary thought, a corollary.
In secret, everybody goes upon the principle that a man is what he looks;
but the difficulty lies in its application. The ability to apply it is partly innate and
partly acquired by experience; but no one understands it thoroughly, for even the
most experienced may make a mistake. Still, it is not the face that deceives,
whatever Figaro may say, but it is we who are deceived in reading what is not
there. The deciphering of the face is certainly a great and difficult art. Its
principles can never be learnt in abstracto. Its first condition is that the man must
be looked at from a purely objective point of view; which is not so easy to do.
As soon as, for instance, there is the slightest sign of dislike, or affection, or fear,
or hope, or even the thought of the impression which we ourselves are making
on him--in short, as soon as anything of a subjective nature is present, the
hieroglyphics become confused and falsified. The sound of a language is only
heard by one who does not understand it, because in thinking of the significance
one is not conscious of the sign itself; and similarly the physiognomy of a man is
only seen by one to whom it is still strange--that is to say, by one who has not
become accustomed to his face through seeing him often or talking to him.
Accordingly it is, strictly speaking, the first glance that gives one a purely
objective impression of a face, and makes it possible for one to decipher it. A
smell only affects us when we first perceive it, and it is the first glass of wine
which gives us its real taste; in the same way, it is only when we see a face for
the first time that it makes a full impression upon us. Therefore one should
carefully attend to the first impression; one should make a note of it, nay, write it
down if the man is of personal importance--that is, if one can trust one's own
sense of physiognomy. Subsequent acquaintance and intercourse will erase that
impression, but it will be verified one day in the future.
En passant, let us not conceal from ourselves the fact that this first
impression is as a rule extremely disagreeable: but how little there is in the
majority of faces! With the exception of those that are beautiful, good-natured,
and intellectual--that is, the very few and exceptional,--I believe a new face for

the most part gives a sensitive person a sensation akin to a shock, since the
disagreeable impression is presented in a new and surprising combination.
As a rule it is indeed a sorry sight. There are individuals whose faces are
stamped with such naïve vulgarity and lowness of character, such an animal
limitation of intelligence, that one wonders how they care to go out with such a
face and do not prefer to wear a mask. Nay, there are faces a mere glance at
which makes one feel contaminated. One cannot therefore blame people, who
are in a position to do so, if they seek solitude and escape the painful sensation
of "seeing new faces." The metaphysical explanation of this rests on the
consideration that the individuality of each person is exactly that by which he
should be reclaimed and corrected.
If any one, on the other hand, will be content with a psychological
explanation, let him ask himself what kind of physiognomy can be expected in
those whose minds, their whole life long, have scarcely ever entertained
anything but petty, mean, and miserable thoughts, and vulgar, selfish, jealous,
wicked, and spiteful desires. Each one of these thoughts and desires has left its
impress on the face for the length of time it existed; all these marks, by frequent
repetition, have eventually become furrows and blemishes, if one may say so.
Therefore the appearance of the majority of people is calculated to give one a
shock at first sight, and it is only by degrees that one becomes accustomed to a
face--that is to say, becomes so indifferent to the impression as to be no longer
affected by it.
But that the predominating facial expression is formed by countless fleeting
and characteristic contortions is also the reason why the faces of intellectual men
only become moulded gradually, and indeed only attain their sublime expression
in old age; whilst portraits of them in their youth only show the first traces of it.
But, on the other hand, what has just been said about the shock one receives at
first sight coincides with the above remark, that it is only at first sight that a face
makes its true and full impression. In order to get a purely objective and true
impression of it, we must stand in no kind of relation to the person, nay, if
possible, we must not even have spoken to him. Conversation makes one in
some measure friendly disposed, and brings us into a certain rapport, a reciprocal
subjective relation, which immediately interferes with our taking an objective
view. As everybody strives to win either respect or friendship for himself, a man
who is being observed will immediately resort to every art of dissembling, and
corrupt us with his airs, hypocrisies, and flatteries; so that in a short time we no
longer see what the first impression had clearly shown us. It is said that "most
people gain on further acquaintance" but what ought to be said is that "they
delude us" on further acquaintance. But when these bad traits have an

opportunity of showing themselves later on, our first impression generally
receives its justification. Sometimes a further acquaintance is a hostile one, in
which case it will not be found that people gain by it. Another reason for the
apparent advantage of a further acquaintance is, that the man whose first
appearance repels us, as soon as we converse with him no longer shows his true
being and character, but his education as well--that is to say, not only what he
really is by nature, but what he has appropriated from the common wealth of
mankind; three-fourths of what he says does not belong to him, but has been
acquired from without; so that we are often surprised to hear such a minotaur
speak so humanly. And on a still further acquaintance, the brutality of which his
face gave promise, will reveal itself in all its glory. Therefore a man who is
gifted with a keen sense of physiognomy should pay careful attention to those
verdicts prior to a further acquaintance, and therefore genuine. For the face of a
man expresses exactly what he is, and if he deceives us it is not his fault but
ours. On the other hand, the words of a man merely state what he thinks, more
frequently only what he has learnt, or it may be merely what he pretends to
think. Moreover, when we speak to him, nay, only hear others speak to him, our
attention is taken away from his real physiognomy; because it is the substance,
that which is given fundamentally, and we disregard it; and we only pay
attention to its pathognomy, its play of feature while speaking. This, however, is
so arranged that the good side is turned upwards.
When Socrates said to a youth who was introduced to him so that he might
test his capabilities, "Speak so that I may see you" (taking it for granted that he
did not simply mean "hearing" by "seeing"), he was right in so far as it is only in
speaking that the features and especially the eyes of a man become animated,
and his intellectual powers and capabilities imprint their stamp on his features:
we are then in a position to estimate provisionally the degree and capacity of his
intelligence; which was precisely Socrates' aim in that case. But, on the other
hand, it is to be observed, firstly, that this rule does not apply to the moral
qualities of a man, which lie deeper; and secondly, that what is gained from an
objective point of view by the clearer development of a man's countenance while
he is speaking, is again from a subjective point of view lost, because of the
personal relation into which he immediately enters with us, occasioning a slight
fascination, does not leave us unprejudiced observers, as has already been
explained. Therefore, from this last standpoint it might be more correct to say:
"Do not speak in order that I may see you."
For to obtain a pure and fundamental grasp of a man's physiognomy one
must observe him when he is alone and left to himself. Any kind of society and
conversation with another throw a reflection upon him which is not his own,

mostly to his advantage; for he thereby is placed in a condition of action and
reaction which exalts him. But, on the contrary, if he is alone and left to himself
immersed in the depths of his own thoughts and sensations, it is only then that he
is absolutely and wholly himself. And any one with a keen, penetrating eye for
physiognomy can grasp the general character of his whole being at a glance. For
on his face, regarded in and by itself, is indicated the ground tone of all his
thoughts and efforts, the arrêt irrevocable of his future, and of which he is only
conscious when alone.
The science of physiognomy is one of the principal means of a knowledge
of mankind: arts of dissimulation do not come within the range of physiognomy,
but within that of mere pathognomy and mimicry. This is precisely why I
recommend the physiognomy of a man to be studied when he is alone and left to
his own thoughts, and before he has been conversed with; partly because it is
only then that his physiognomy can be seen purely and simply, since in
conversation pathognomy immediately steps in, and he then resorts to the arts of
dissimulation which he has acquired; and partly because personal intercourse,
even of the slightest nature, makes us prejudiced, and in consequence impairs
our judgment.
Concerning our physiognomy in general, it is still to be observed that it is
much easier to discover the intellectual capacities of a man than his moral
character. The intellectual capacities take a much more outward direction. They
are expressed not only in the face and play of his features, but also in his walk,
nay, in every movement, however slight it may be. One could perhaps
discriminate from behind between a blockhead, a fool, and a man of genius. A
clumsy awkwardness characterises every movement of the blockhead; folly
imprints its mark on every gesture, and so do genius and a reflective nature.
Hence the outcome of La Bruyere's remark: Il n'y a rien de si délié, de si simple,
et de si imperceptible où il n'y entrent des manières, qui nous décèlent: un sot ni
n'entre, ni ne sort, ni ne s'assied, ni ne se lève, ni ne se tait, ni n'est sur ses
jambes, comme un homme d'esprit. This accounts for, by the way, that instinct
stir et prompt which, according to Helvetius, ordinary people have of
recognising people of genius and of running away from them. This is to be
accounted for by the fact that the larger and more developed the brain, and the
thinner, in relation to it, the spine and nerves, the greater not only is the
intelligence, but also at the same time the mobility and pliancy of all the limbs;
because they are controlled more immediately and decisively by the brain;
consequently everything depends more on a single thread, every movement of
which precisely expresses its purpose. The whole matter is analogous to, nay
dependent on, the fact that the higher an animal stands in the scale of

development, the easier can it be killed by wounding it in a single place. Take,
for instance, batrachia: they are as heavy, clumsy, and slow in their movements
as they are unintelligent, and at the same time extremely tenacious of life. This is
explained by the fact that with a little brain they have a very thick spine and
nerves. But gait and movement of the arms are for the most part functions of the
brain; because the limbs receive their motion, and even the slightest modification
of it, from the brain through the medium of the spinal nerves; and this is
precisely why voluntary movements tire us. This feeling of fatigue, like that of
pain, has its seat in the brain, and not as we suppose in the limbs, hence motion
promotes sleep; on the other hand, those motions that are not excited by the
brain, that is to say, the involuntary motions of organic life, of the heart and
lungs, go on without causing fatigue: and as thought as well as motion is a
function of the brain, the character of its activity is denoted in both, according to
the nature of the individual. Stupid people move like lay figures, while every
joint of intellectual people speaks for itself. Intellectual qualities are much better
discerned, however, in the face than in gestures and movements, in the shape and
size of the forehead, in the contraction and movement of the features, and
especially in the eye; from the little, dull, sleepy-looking eye of the pig, through
all gradations, to the brilliant sparkling eye of the genius. The look of wisdom,
even of the best kind, is different from that of genius, since it bears the stamp of
serving the will; while that of the latter is free from it. Therefore the anecdote
which Squarzafichi relates in his life of Petrarch, and has taken from Joseph
Brivius, a contemporary, is quite credible--namely, that when Petrarch was at the
court of Visconti, and among many men and titled people, Galeazzo Visconti
asked his son, who was still a boy in years and was afterwards the first Duke of
Milan, to pick out the wisest man of those present. The boy looked at every one
for a while, when he seized Petrarch's hand and led him to his father, to the great
admiration of all present. For nature imprints her stamp of dignity so distinctly
on the distinguished among mankind that a child can perceive it. Therefore I
should advise my sagacious countrymen, if they ever again wish to trumpet a
commonplace person as a genius for the period of thirty years, not to choose for
that end such an inn-keeper's physiognomy as was possessed by Hegel, upon
whose face nature had written in her clearest handwriting the familiar title,
commonplace person. But what applies to intellectual qualities does not apply to
the moral character of mankind; its physiognomy is much more difficult to
perceive, because, being of a metaphysical nature, it lies much deeper, and
although moral character is connected with the constitution and with the
organism, it is not so immediately connected, however, with definite parts of its
system as is intellect. Hence, while each one makes a public show of his

intelligence, with which he is in general quite satisfied, and tries to display it at
every opportunity, the moral qualities are seldom brought to light, nay, most
people intentionally conceal them; and long practice makes them acquire great
mastery in hiding them.
Meanwhile, as has been explained above, wicked thoughts and worthless
endeavours gradually leave their traces on the face, and especially the eyes.
Therefore, judging by physiognomy, we can easily guarantee that a man will
never produce an immortal work; but not that he will never commit a great
crime.

ON SUICIDE.
As far as I can see, it is only the followers of monotheistic, that is of
Jewish, religions that regard suicide as a crime. This is the more striking as there
is no forbiddance of it, or even positive disapproval of it, to be found either in
the New Testament or the Old; so that teachers of religion have to base their
disapprobation of suicide on their own philosophical grounds; these, however,
are so bad that they try to compensate for the weakness of their arguments by
strongly expressing their abhorrence of the act--that is to say, by abusing it. We
are told that suicide is an act of the greatest cowardice, that it is only possible to
a madman, and other absurdities of a similar nature; or they make use of the
perfectly senseless expression that it is "wrong," while it is perfectly clear that
no one has such indisputable right over anything in the world as over his own
person and life. Suicide, as has been said, is computed a crime, rendering
inevitable--especially in vulgar, bigoted England--an ignominious burial and the
confiscation of the property; this is why the jury almost always bring in the
verdict of insanity. Let one's own moral feelings decide the matter for one.
Compare the impression made upon one by the news that a friend has committed
a crime, say a murder, an act of cruelty or deception, or theft, with the news that
he has died a voluntary death. Whilst news of the first kind will incite intense
indignation, the greatest displeasure, and a desire for punishment or revenge,
news of the second will move us to sorrow and compassion; moreover, we will
frequently have a feeling of admiration for his courage rather than one of moral
disapproval, which accompanies a wicked act. Who has not had acquaintances,
friends, relatives, who have voluntarily left this world? And are we to think of
them with horror as criminals? Nego ac pernego! I am rather of the opinion that
the clergy should be challenged to state their authority for stamping--from the
pulpit or in their writings--as a crime an act which has been committed by many
people honoured and loved by us, and refusing an honourable burial to those
who have of their own free will left the world. They cannot produce any kind of
Biblical authority, nay, they have no philosophical arguments that are at all
valid; and it is reasons that we want; mere empty phrases or words of abuse we
cannot accept. If the criminal law forbids suicide, that is not a reason that holds
good in the church; moreover, it is extremely ridiculous, for what punishment
can frighten those who seek death? When a man is punished for trying to commit
suicide, it is his clumsy failure that is punished.
The ancients were also very far from looking at the matter in this light.
Pliny says: "Vitam quidem non adeo expetendam censemus, ut quoque modo
trahenda sit. Quisquis es talis, aeque moriere, etiam cum obscoenus vixeris, aut

nefandus. Quapropter hoc primum quisque in remediis animi sui habeat: ex
omnibus bonis, quae homini tribuit natura, nullum melius esse tempestiva morte:
idque in ea optimum, quod illam sibi quisque praestare poterit." He also says:
"Ne Deum quidem posse omnia. Namque nec sibi potest mortem consciscere, si
velit, quod homini dedit optimum in taniis vitae poenis," etc.
In Massilia and on the island of Ceos a hemlock-potion was offered in
public by the magistrate to those who could give valid reasons for quitting this
life. And how many heroes and wise men of ancient times have not ended their
lives by a voluntary death! To be sure, Aristotle says "Suicide is a wrong against
the State, although not against the person;" Stobæus, however, in his treatise on
the Peripatetic ethics uses this sentence: [Greek: pheukton de ton bion gignesthai
tois men agathois en tais agan atychiais tois de kakois kai en tais agan
eutychiais]. (Vitam autem relinquendam esse bonis in nimiis quidem miseriis
pravis vero in nimium quoque secundis) And similarly: [Greek: Dio kai
gamaesein, kai paidopoiaesesthai, kai politeusesthai], etc.; [Greek: kai katholou
taen aretaen aokounta kai menein en to bio, kai palin, ei deoi, pote di anankas
apallagaesesthai, taphaes pronoaesanta] etc. (Ideoque et uxorem ducturum, et
liberos procreaturum, et ad civitatem accessurum, etc.; atque omnino virtutem
colendo tum vitam servaturum, tum iterum, cogente necessitate, relicturum, etc.)
And we find that suicide was actually praised by the Stoics as a noble and heroic
act, this is corroborated by hundreds of passages, and especially in the works of
Seneca. Further, it is well known that the Hindoos often look upon suicide as a
religious act, as, for instance, the self-sacrifice of widows, throwing oneself
under the wheels of the chariot of the god at Juggernaut, or giving oneself to the
crocodiles in the Ganges or casting oneself in the holy tanks in the temples, and
so on. It is the same on the stage--that mirror of life. For instance, in the famous
Chinese play, L'Orphelin de la Chine,[19] almost all the noble characters end by
suicide, without indicating anywhere or it striking the spectator that they were
committing a crime. At bottom it is the same on our own stage; for instance,
Palmira in Mahomet, Mortimer in Maria Stuart, Othello, Countess Terzky. Is
Hamlet's monologue the meditation of a criminal? He merely states that
considering the nature of the world, death would be certainly preferable, if we
were sure that by it we should be annihilated. But there lies the rub! But the
reasons brought to bear against suicide by the priests of monotheistic, that is of
Jewish religions, and by those philosophers who adapt themselves to it, are weak
sophisms easily contradicted.[20] Hume has furnished the most thorough
refutation of them in his Essay on Suicide, which did not appear until after his
death, and was immediately suppressed by the shameful bigotry and gross
ecclesiastical tyranny existing in England. Hence, only a very few copies of it

were sold secretly, and those at a dear price; and for this and another treatise of
that great man we are indebted to a reprint published at Basle. That a purely
philosophical treatise originating from one of the greatest thinkers and writers of
England, which refuted with cold reason the current arguments against suicide,
must steal about in that country as if it were a fraudulent piece of work until it
found protection in a foreign country, is a great disgrace to the English nation.
At the same time it shows what a good conscience the Church has on a question
of this kind. The only valid moral reason against suicide has been explained in
my chief work. It is this: that suicide prevents the attainment of the highest
moral aim, since it substitutes a real release from this world of misery for one
that is merely apparent. But there is a very great difference between a mistake
and a crime, and it is as a crime that the Christian clergy wish to stamp it.
Christianity's inmost truth is that suffering (the Cross) is the real purpose of life;
hence it condemns suicide as thwarting this end, while the ancients, from a lower
point of view, approved of it, nay, honoured it. This argument against suicide is
nevertheless ascetic, and only holds good from a much higher ethical standpoint
than has ever been taken by moral philosophers in Europe. But if we come down
from that very high standpoint, there is no longer a valid moral reason for
condemning suicide. The extraordinarily active zeal with which the clergy of
monotheistic religions attack suicide is not supported either by the Bible or by
any valid reasons; so it looks as if their zeal must be instigated by some secret
motive. May it not be that the voluntary sacrificing of one's life is a poor
compliment to him who said, [Greek: panta kala lian]?[21]
In that case it would be another example of the gross optimism of these
religions denouncing suicide, in order to avoid being denounced by it.
*
As a rule, it will be found that as soon as the terrors of life outweigh the
terrors of death a man will put an end to his life. The resistance of the terrors of
death is, however, considerable; they stand like a sentinel at the gate that leads
out of life. Perhaps there is no one living who would not have already put an end
to his life if this end had been something that was purely negative, a sudden
cessation of existence. But there is something positive about it, namely, the
destruction of the body. And this alarms a man simply because his body is the
manifestation of the will to live.
Meanwhile, the fight as a rule with these sentinels is not so hard as it may
appear to be from a distance; in consequence, it is true, of the antagonism
between mental and physical suffering. For instance, if we suffer very great
bodily pain, or if the pain lasts a long time, we become indifferent to all other
troubles: our recovery is what we desire most dearly. In the same way, great

mental suffering makes us insensible to bodily suffering: we despise it. Nay, if it
outweighs the other, we find it a beneficial distraction, a pause in our mental
suffering. And so it is that suicide becomes easy; for the bodily pain that is
bound up with it loses all importance in the eyes of one who is tormented by
excessive mental suffering. This is particularly obvious in the case of those who
are driven to commit suicide through some purely morbid and discordant feeling.
They have no feelings to overcome; they do not need to rush at it, but as soon as
the keeper who looks after them leaves them for two minutes they quickly put an
end to their life.
*
When in some horrid and frightful dream we reach the highest pitch of
terror, it awakens us, scattering all the monsters of the night. The same thing
happens in the dream of life, when the greatest degree of terror compels us to
break it off.
*
Suicide may also be looked upon as an experiment, as a question which
man puts to Nature and compels her to answer. It asks, what change a man's
existence and knowledge of things experience through death? It is an awkward
experiment to make; for it destroys the very consciousness that awaits the
answer.
FOOTNOTES:
[19] Translated by St. Julien, 1834.
[20] See my treatise on the Foundation of Morals, § 5.
[21] Bd. I. p. 69.

COUNSELS AND MAXIMS.
INTRODUCTION.
If my object in these pages were to present a complete scheme of counsels
and maxims for the guidance of life, I should have to repeat the numerous rules--
some of them excellent--which have been drawn up by thinkers of all ages, from
Theognis and Solomon[1] down to La Rochefoucauld; and, in so doing, I should
inevitably entail upon the reader a vast amount of well-worn commonplace. But
the fact is that in this work I make still less claim to exhaust my subject than in
any other of my writings.
[Footnote 1: I refer to the proverbs and maxims ascribed, in the Old
Testament, to the king of that name.]
An author who makes no claims to completeness must also, in a great
measure, abandon any attempt at systematic arrangement. For his double loss in
this respect, the reader may console himself by reflecting that a complete and
systematic treatment of such a subject as the guidance of life could hardly fail to
be a very wearisome business. I have simply put down those of my thoughts
which appear to be worth communicating--thoughts which, as far as I know,
have not been uttered, or, at any rate, not just in the same form, by any one else;
so that my remarks may be taken as a supplement to what has been already
achieved in the immense field.
However, by way of introducing some sort of order into the great variety of
matters upon which advice will be given in the following pages, I shall distribute
what I have to say under the following heads: (1) general rules; (2) our relation
to ourselves; (3) our relation to others; and finally, (4) rules which concern our
manner of life and our worldly circumstances. I shall conclude with some
remarks on the changes which the various periods of life produce in us.
CHAPTER I.
GENERAL RULES.--SECTION 1.
The first and foremost rule for the wise conduct of life seems to me to be
contained in a view to which Aristotle parenthetically refers in the
Nichomachean Ethics:[1] [Greek: o phronimoz to alupon dioke e ou to aedu] or,
as it may be rendered, not pleasure, but freedom from pain, is what the wise man
will aim at.
[Footnote 1: vii. (12) 12.]
The truth of this remark turns upon the negative character of happiness,--the

fact that pleasure is only the negation of pain, and that pain is the positive
element in life. Though I have given a detailed proof of this proposition in my
chief work,[1] I may supply one more illustration of it here, drawn from a
circumstance of daily occurrence. Suppose that, with the exception of some sore
or painful spot, we are physically in a sound and healthy condition: the sore of
this one spot, will completely absorb our attention, causing us to lose the sense
of general well-being, and destroying all our comfort in life. In the same way,
when all our affairs but one turn out as we wish, the single instance in which our
aims are frustrated is a constant trouble to us, even though it be something quite
trivial. We think a great deal about it, and very little about those other and more
important matters in which we have been successful. In both these cases what
has met with resistance is the will; in the one case, as it is objectified in the
organism, in the other, as it presents itself in the struggle of life; and in both, it is
plain that the satisfaction of the will consists in nothing else than that it meets
with no resistance. It is, therefore, a satisfaction which is not directly felt; at
most, we can become conscious of it only when we reflect upon our condition.
But that which checks or arrests the will is something positive; it proclaims its
own presence. All pleasure consists in merely removing this check--in other
words, in freeing us from its action; and hence pleasure is a state which can
never last very long.
[Footnote 1: Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. Vol. I., p. 58.]
This is the true basis of the above excellent rule quoted from Aristotle,
which bids us direct our aim, not toward securing what is pleasurable and
agreeable in life, but toward avoiding, as far as possible, its innumerable evils. If
this were not the right course to take, that saying of Voltaire's, Happiness is but a
dream and sorrow is real, would be as false as it is, in fact, true. A man who
desires to make up the book of his life and determine where the balance of
happiness lies, must put down in his accounts, not the pleasures which he has
enjoyed, but the evils which he has escaped. That is the true method of
eudaemonology; for all eudaemonology must begin by recognizing that its very
name is a euphemism, and that to live happily only means to live less unhappily-
-to live a tolerable life. There is no doubt that life is given us, not to be enjoyed,
but to be overcome--to be got over. There are numerous expressions illustrating
this--such as degere vitam, vita defungi; or in Italian, si scampa cosi; or in
German, man muss suchen durchzukommen; er wird schon durch die Welt
kommen, and so on. In old age it is indeed a consolation to think that the work of
life is over and done with. The happiest lot is not to have experienced the
keenest delights or the greatest pleasures, but to have brought life to a close
without any very great pain, bodily or mental. To measure the happiness of a life

by its delights or pleasures, is to apply a false standard. For pleasures are and
remain something negative; that they produce happiness is a delusion, cherished
by envy to its own punishment. Pain is felt to be something positive, and hence
its absence is the true standard of happiness. And if, over and above freedom
from pain, there is also an absence of boredom, the essential conditions of
earthly happiness are attained; for all else is chimerical.
It follows from this that a man should never try to purchase pleasure at the
cost of pain, or even at the risk of incurring it; to do so is to pay what is positive
and real, for what is negative and illusory; while there is a net profit in
sacrificing pleasure for the sake of avoiding pain. In either case it is a matter of
indifference whether the pain follows the pleasure or precedes it. While it is a
complete inversion of the natural order to try and turn this scene of misery into a
garden of pleasure, to aim at joy and pleasure rather than at the greatest possible
freedom from pain--and yet how many do it!--there is some wisdom in taking a
gloomy view, in looking upon the world as a kind of Hell, and in confining one's
efforts to securing a little room that shall not be exposed to the fire. The fool
rushes after the pleasures of life and finds himself their dupe; the wise man
avoids its evils; and even if, notwithstanding his precautions, he falls into
misfortunes, that is the fault of fate, not of his own folly. As far as he is
successful in his endeavors, he cannot be said to have lived a life of illusion; for
the evils which he shuns are very real. Even if he goes too far out of his way to
avoid evils, and makes an unnecessary sacrifice of pleasure, he is, in reality, not
the worse off for that; for all pleasures are chimerical, and to mourn for having
lost any of them is a frivolous, and even ridiculous proceeding.
The failure to recognize this truth--a failure promoted by optimistic ideas--
is the source of much unhappiness. In moments free from pain, our restless
wishes present, as it were in a mirror, the image of a happiness that has no
counterpart in reality, seducing us to follow it; in doing so we bring pain upon
ourselves, and that is something undeniably real. Afterwards, we come to look
with regret upon that lost state of painlessness; it is a paradise which we have
gambled away; it is no longer with us, and we long in vain to undo what has
been done.
One might well fancy that these visions of wishes fulfilled were the work of
some evil spirit, conjured up in order to entice us away from that painless state
which forms our highest happiness.
A careless youth may think that the world is meant to be enjoyed, as though
it were the abode of some real or positive happiness, which only those fail to
attain who are not clever enough to overcome the difficulties that lie in the way.
This false notion takes a stronger hold on him when he comes to read poetry and

romance, and to be deceived by outward show--the hypocrisy that characterizes
the world from beginning to end; on which I shall have something to say
presently. The result is that his life is the more or less deliberate pursuit of
positive happiness; and happiness he takes to be equivalent to a series of definite
pleasures. In seeking for these pleasures he encounters danger--a fact which
should not be forgotten. He hunts for game that does not exist; and so he ends by
suffering some very real and positive misfortune--pain, distress, sickness, loss,
care, poverty, shame, and all the thousand ills of life. Too late he discovers the
trick that has been played upon him.
But if the rule I have mentioned is observed, and a plan of life is adopted
which proceeds by avoiding pain--in other words, by taking measures of
precaution against want, sickness, and distress in all its forms, the aim is a real
one, and something may be achieved which will be great in proportion as the
plan is not disturbed by striving after the chimera of positive happiness. This
agrees with the opinion expressed by Goethe in the Elective Affinities, and there
put into the mouth of Mittler--the man who is always trying to make other
people happy: To desire to get rid of an evil is a definite object, but to desire a
better fortune than one has is blind folly. The same truth is contained in that fine
French proverb: le mieux est l'ennemi du bien--leave well alone. And, as I have
remarked in my chief work,[1] this is the leading thought underlying the
philosophical system of the Cynics. For what was it led the Cynics to repudiate
pleasure in every form, if it was not the fact that pain is, in a greater or less
degree, always bound up with pleasure? To go out of the way of pain seemed to
them so much easier than to secure pleasure. Deeply impressed as they were by
the negative nature of pleasure and the positive nature of pain, they consistently
devoted all their efforts to the avoidance of pain. The first step to that end was,
in their opinion, a complete and deliberate repudiation of pleasure, as something
which served only to entrap the victim in order that he might be delivered over
to pain.
[Footnote 1: Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, vol. ii., ch. 16.]
We are all born, as Schiller says, in Arcadia. In other words, we come into
the world full of claims to happiness and pleasure, and we cherish the fond hope
of making them good. But, as a rule, Fate soon teaches us, in a rough and ready
way that we really possess nothing at all, but that everything in the world is at its
command, in virtue of an unassailable right, not only to all we have or acquire,
to wife or child, but even to our very limbs, our arms, legs, eyes and ears, nay,
even to the nose in the middle of our face. And in any case, after some little
time, we learn by experience that happiness and pleasure are a fata morgana,
which, visible from afar, vanish as we approach; that, on the other hand,

suffering and pain are a reality, which makes its presence felt without any
intermediary, and for its effect, stands in no need of illusion or the play of false
hope.
If the teaching of experience bears fruit in us, we soon give up the pursuit
of pleasure and happiness, and think much more about making ourselves secure
against the attacks of pain and suffering. We see that the best the world has to
offer is an existence free from pain--a quiet, tolerable life; and we confine our
claims to this, as to something we can more surely hope to achieve. For the
safest way of not being very miserable is not to expect to be very happy. Merck,
the friend of Goethe's youth, was conscious of this truth when he wrote: It is the
wretched way people have of setting up a claim to happiness--and, that to, in a
measure corresponding with their desires--that ruins everything in this world. A
man will make progress if he can get rid of this claim,[1] and desire nothing but
what he sees before him. Accordingly it is advisable to put very moderate limits
upon our expectations of pleasure, possessions, rank, honor and so on; because it
is just this striving and struggling to be happy, to dazzle the world, to lead a life
full of pleasure, which entail great misfortune. It is prudent and wise, I say, to
reduce one's claims, if only for the reason that it is extremely easy to be very
unhappy; while to be very happy is not indeed difficult, but quite impossible.
With justice sings the poet of life's wisdom:
Auream quisquis mediocritatem Diligit, tutus caret obsoleti Sordibus tecti,
caret invidenda Sobrius aula. Savius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus: et celsae
graviori casu Decidunt turres; feriuntque summos Fulgura monies.[2]
--the golden mean is best--to live free from the squalor of a mean abode,
and yet not be a mark for envy. It is the tall pine which is cruelly shaken by the
wind, the highest summits that are struck in the storm, and the lofty towers that
fall so heavily.
[Footnote 1: Letters to and from Merck.]
[Footnote 2: Horace. Odes II. x.]
He who has taken to heart the teaching of my philosophy--who knows,
therefore, that our whole existence is something which had better not have been,
and that to disown and disclaim it is the highest wisdom--he will have no great
expectations from anything or any condition in life: he will spend passion upon
nothing in the world, nor lament over-much if he fails in any of his undertakings.
He will feel the deep truth of what Plato[1] says: [Greek: oute ti ton anthropinon
haxion on megalaes spondaes]--nothing in human affairs is worth any great
anxiety; or, as the Persian poet has it,
Though from thy grasp all worldly things should flee, Grieve not for them,
for they are nothing worth: And though a world in thy possession be, Joy not, for

worthless are the things of earth. Since to that better world 'tis given to thee To
pass, speed on, for this is nothing worth.[2]
[Footnote 1: Republic, x. 604.]
[Footnote 2: Translator's Note. From the Anvár-i Suhailí--The Lights of
Canopus--being the Persian version of the Table of Bidpai. Translated by E.B.
Eastwick, ch. iii. Story vi., p. 289.]
The chief obstacle to our arriving at these salutary views is that hypocrisy
of the world to which I have already alluded--an hypocrisy which should be
early revealed to the young. Most of the glories of the world are mere outward
show, like the scenes on a stage: there is nothing real about them. Ships
festooned and hung with pennants, firing of cannon, illuminations, beating of
drums and blowing of trumpets, shouting and applauding--these are all the
outward sign, the pretence and suggestion,--as it were the hieroglyphic,--of joy:
but just there, joy is, as a rule, not to be found; it is the only guest who has
declined to be present at the festival. Where this guest may really be found, he
comes generally without invitation; he is not formerly announced, but slips in
quietly by himself sans facon; often making his appearance under the most
unimportant and trivial circumstances, and in the commonest company--
anywhere, in short, but where the society is brilliant and distinguished. Joy is
like the gold in the Australian mines--found only now and then, as it were, by
the caprice of chance, and according to no rule or law; oftenest in very little
grains, and very seldom in heaps. All that outward show which I have described,
is only an attempt to make people believe that it is really joy which has come to
the festival; and to produce this impression upon the spectators is, in fact, the
whole object of it.
With mourning it is just the same. That long funeral procession, moving up
so slowly; how melancholy it looks! what an endless row of carriages! But look
into them--they are all empty; the coachmen of the whole town are the sole
escort the dead man has to his grave. Eloquent picture of the friendship and
esteem of the world! This is the falsehood, the hollowness, the hypocrisy of
human affairs!
Take another example--a roomful of guests in full dress, being received
with great ceremony. You could almost believe that this is a noble and
distinguished company; but, as a matter of fact, it is compulsion, pain and
boredom who are the real guests. For where many are invited, it is a rabble--even
if they all wear stars. Really good society is everywhere of necessity very small.
In brilliant festivals and noisy entertainments, there is always, at bottom, a sense
of emptiness prevalent. A false tone is there: such gatherings are in strange
contrast with the misery and barrenness of our existence. The contrast brings the

true condition into greater relief. Still, these gatherings are effective from the
outside; and that is just their purpose. Chamfort[1] makes the excellent remark
that society--les cercles, les salons, ce qu'on appelle le monde--is like a
miserable play, or a bad opera, without any interest in itself, but supported for a
time by mechanical aid, costumes and scenery.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. Nicholas "Chamfort" (1741-94), a French
miscellaneous writer, whose brilliant conversation, power of sarcasm, and
epigrammic force, coupled with an extraordinary career, render him one of the
most interesting and remarkable men of his time. Schopenhauer undoubtedly
owed much to this writer, to whom he constantly refers.]
And so, too, with academies and chairs of philosophy. You have a kind of
sign-board hung out to show the apparent abode of wisdom: but wisdom is
another guest who declines the invitation; she is to be found elsewhere. The
chiming of bells, ecclesiastical millinery, attitudes of devotion, insane antics--
these are the pretence, the false show of piety. And so on. Everything in the
world is like a hollow nut; there is little kernel anywhere, and when it does exist,
it is still more rare to find it in the shell. You may look for it elsewhere, and find
it, as a rule, only by chance.
SECTION 2. To estimate a man's condition in regard to happiness, it is
necessary to ask, not what things please him, but what things trouble him; and
the more trivial these things are in themselves, the happier the man will be. To
be irritated by trifles, a man must be well off; for in misfortunes trifles are unfelt.
SECTION 3. Care should be taken not to build the happiness of life upon a
broad foundation--not to require a great many things in order to be happy. For
happiness on such a foundation is the most easily undermined; it offers many
more opportunities for accidents; and accidents are always happening. The
architecture of happiness follows a plan in this respect just the opposite of that
adopted in every other case, where the broadest foundation offers the greatest
security. Accordingly, to reduce your claims to the lowest possible degree, in
comparison with your means,--of whatever kind these may be--is the surest way
of avoiding extreme misfortune.
To make extensive preparations for life--no matter what form they may
take--is one of the greatest and commonest of follies. Such preparations
presuppose, in the first place, a long life, the full and complete term of years
appointed to man--and how few reach it! and even if it be reached, it is still too
short for all the plans that have been made; for to carry them out requites more
time than was thought necessary at the beginning. And then how many
mischances and obstacles stand in the way! how seldom the goal is ever reached
in human affairs!

And lastly, even though the goal should be reached, the changes which
Time works in us have been left out of the reckoning: we forget that the capacity
whether for achievement or for enjoyment does not last a whole lifetime. So we
often toil for things which are no longer suited to us when we attain them; and
again, the years we spend in preparing for some work, unconsciously rob us of
the power for carrying it out.
How often it happens that a man is unable to enjoy the wealth which he
acquired at so much trouble and risk, and that the fruits of his labor are reserved
for others; or that he is incapable of filling the position which he has won after
so many years of toil and struggle. Fortune has come too late for him; or,
contrarily, he has come too late for fortune,--when, for instance, he wants to
achieve great things, say, in art or literature: the popular taste has changed, it
may be; a new generation has grown up, which takes no interest in his work;
others have gone a shorter way and got the start of him. These are the facts of
life which Horace must have had in view, when he lamented the uselessness of
all advice:--
quid eternis minorem Consiliis animum fatigas?[1]
[Footnote 1: Odes II. xi.]
The cause of this commonest of all follies is that optical illusion of the mind
from which everyone suffers, making life, at its beginning, seem of long
duration; and at its end, when one looks back over the course of it, how short a
time it seems! There is some advantage in the illusion; but for it, no great work
would ever be done.
Our life is like a journey on which, as we advance, the landscape takes a
different view from that which it presented at first, and changes again, as we
come nearer. This is just what happens--especially with our wishes. We often
find something else, nay, something better than what we are looking for; and
what we look for, we often find on a very different path from that on which we
began a vain search. Instead of finding, as we expected, pleasure, happiness, joy,
we get experience, insight, knowledge--a real and permanent blessing, instead of
a fleeting and illusory one.
This is the thought that runs through Wilkelm Meister, like the bass in a
piece of music. In this work of Goethe's, we have a novel of the intellectual kind,
and, therefore, superior to all others, even to Sir Walter Scott's, which are, one
and all, ethical; in other words, they treat of human nature only from the side of
the will. So, too, in the Zauberflöte--that grotesque, but still significant, and even
hieroglyphic--the same thought is symbolized, but in great, coarse lines, much in
the way in which scenery is painted. Here the symbol would be complete if
Tamino were in the end to be cured of his desire to possess Tainina, and

received, in her stead, initiation into the mysteries of the Temple of Wisdom. It
is quite right for Papageno, his necessary contrast, to succeed in getting his
Papagena.
Men of any worth or value soon come to see that they are in the hands of
Fate, and gratefully submit to be moulded by its teachings. They recognize that
the fruit of life is experience, and not happiness; they become accustomed and
content to exchange hope for insight; and, in the end, they can say, with
Petrarch, that all they care for is to learn:--
Altro diletto che 'mparar, non provo.
It may even be that they to some extent still follow their old wishes and
aims, trifling with them, as it were, for the sake of appearances; all the while
really and seriously looking for nothing but instruction; a process which lends
them an air of genius, a trait of something contemplative and sublime.
In their search for gold, the alchemists discovered other things--gunpowder,
china, medicines, the laws of nature. There is a sense in which we are all
alchemists.
CHAPTER II.
OUR RELATION TO OURSELVES.--SECTION 4.
The mason employed on the building of a house may be quite ignorant of
its general design; or at any rate, he may not keep it constantly in mind. So it is
with man: in working through the days and hours of his life, he takes little
thought of its character as a whole.
If there is any merit or importance attaching to a man's career, if he lays
himself out carefully for some special work, it is all the more necessary and
advisable for him to turn his attention now and then to its plan, that is to say, the
miniature sketch of its general outlines. Of course, to do that, he must have
applied the maxim [Greek: Gnothi seauton]; he must have made some little
progress in the art of understanding himself. He must know what is his real,
chief, and foremost object in life,--what it is that he most wants in order to be
happy; and then, after that, what occupies the second and third place in his
thoughts; he must find out what, on the whole, his vocation really is--the part he
has to play, his general relation to the world. If he maps out important work for
himself on great lines, a glance at this miniature plan of his life will, more than
anything else stimulate, rouse and ennoble him, urge him on to action and keep
him from false paths.
Again, just as the traveler, on reaching a height, gets a connected view over
the road he has taken, with its many turns and windings; so it is only when we

have completed a period in our life, or approach the end of it altogether, that we
recognize the true connection between all our actions,--what it is we have
achieved, what work we have done. It is only then that we see the precise chain
of cause and effect, and the exact value of all our efforts. For as long as we are
actually engaged in the work of life, we always act in accordance with the nature
of our character, under the influence of motive, and within the limits of our
capacity,--in a word, from beginning to end, under a law of necessity; at every
moment we do just what appears to us right and proper. It is only afterwards,
when we come to look back at the whole course of our life and its general result,
that we see the why and wherefore of it all.
When we are actually doing some great deed, or creating some immortal
work, we are not conscious of it as such; we think only of satisfying present
aims, of fulfilling the intentions we happen to have at the time, of doing the right
thing at the moment. It is only when we come to view our life as a connected
whole that our character and capacities show themselves in their true light; that
we see how, in particular instances, some happy inspiration, as it were, led us to
choose the only true path out of a thousand which might have brought us to ruin.
It was our genius that guided us, a force felt in the affairs of the intellectual as in
those of the world; and working by its defect just in the same way in regard to
evil and disaster.
SECTION 5. Another important element in the wise conduct of life is to
preserve a proper proportion between our thought for the present and our thought
for the future; in order not to spoil the one by paying over-great attention to the
other. Many live too long in the present--frivolous people, I mean; others, too
much in the future, ever anxious and full of care. It is seldom that a man holds
the right balance between the two extremes. Those who strive and hope and live
only in the future, always looking ahead and impatiently anticipating what is
coming, as something which will make them happy when they get it, are, in spite
of their very clever airs, exactly like those donkeys one sees in Italy, whose pace
may be hurried by fixing a stick on their heads with a wisp of hay at the end of
it; this is always just in front of them, and they keep on trying to get it. Such
people are in a constant state of illusion as to their whole existence; they go on
living ad interim, until at last they die.
Instead, therefore, of always thinking about our plans and anxiously looking
to the future, or of giving ourselves up to regret for the past, we should never
forget that the present is the only reality, the only certainty; that the future
almost always turns out contrary to our expectations; that the past, too, was very
different from what we suppose it to have been. But the past and the future are,
on the whole, of less consequence than we think. Distance, which makes objects

look small to the outward eye, makes them look big to the eye of thought. The
present alone is true and actual; it is the only time which possesses full reality,
and our existence lies in it exclusively. Therefore we should always be glad of it,
and give it the welcome it deserves, and enjoy every hour that is bearable by its
freedom from pain and annoyance with a full consciousness of its value. We
shall hardly be able to do this if we make a wry face over the failure of our hopes
in the past or over our anxiety for the future. It is the height of folly to refuse the
present hour of happiness, or wantonly to spoil it by vexation at by-gones or
uneasiness about what is to come. There is a time, of course, for forethought,
nay, even for repentance; but when it is over let us think of what is past as of
something to which we have said farewell, of necessity subduing our hearts--
[Greek: alla ta men protuchthai easomen achnumenoi per tumhon eni
staethessi philon damasntes hanankae],[1]
and of the future as of that which lies beyond our power, in the lap of the
gods--
[Greek: all aetoi men tauta theon en gounasi keitai.][2]
[Footnote 1: Iliad, xix, 65.]
[Footnote 2: Ibid, xvii, 514]
But in regard to the present let us remember Seneca's advice, and live each
day as if it were our whole life,--singulas dies singulas vitas puta: let us make it
as agreeable as possible, it is the only real time we have.
Only those evils which are sure to come at a definite date have any right to
disturb us; and how few there are which fulfill this description. For evils are of
two kinds; either they are possible only, at most probable; or they are inevitable.
Even in the case of evils which are sure to happen, the time at which they will
happen is uncertain. A man who is always preparing for either class of evil will
not have a moment of peace left him. So, if we are not to lose all comfort in life
through the fear of evils, some of which are uncertain in themselves, and others,
in the time at which they will occur, we should look upon the one kind as never
likely to happen, and the other as not likely to happen very soon.
Now, the less our peace of mind is disturbed by fear, the more likely it is to
be agitated by desire and expectation. This is the true meaning of that song of
Goethe's which is such a favorite with everyone: Ich hab' mein' Sach' auf nichts
gestellt. It is only after a man has got rid of all pretension, and taken refuge in
mere unembellished existence, that he is able to attain that peace of mind which
is the foundation of human happiness. Peace of mind! that is something essential
to any enjoyment of the present moment; and unless its separate moments are
enjoyed, there is an end of life's happiness as a whole. We should always collect
that To-day comes only once, and never returns. We fancy that it will come

again to-morrow; but To-morrow is another day, which, in its turn, comes once
only. We are apt to forget that every day is an integral, and therefore
irreplaceable portion of life, and to look upon life as though it were a collective
idea or name which does not suffer if one of the individuals it covers is
destroyed.
We should be more likely to appreciate and enjoy the present, if, in those
good days when we are well and strong, we did not fail to reflect how, in
sickness and sorrow, every past hour that was free from pain and privation
seemed in our memory so infinitely to be envied--as it were, a lost paradise, or
some one who was only then seen to have acted as a friend. But we live through
our days of happiness without noticing them; it is only when evil comes upon us
that we wish them back. A thousand gay and pleasant hours are wasted in ill-
humor; we let them slip by unenjoyed, and sigh for them in vain when the sky is
overcast. Those present moments that are bearable, be they never so trite and
common,--passed by in indifference, or, it may be, impatiently pushed away,--
those are the moments we should honor; never failing to remember that the
ebbing tide is even how hurrying them into the past, where memory will store
them transfigured and shining with an imperishable light,--in some after-time,
and above all, when our days are evil, to raise the veil and present them as the
object of our fondest regret.
SECTION 6. Limitations always make for happiness. We are happy in
proportion as our range of vision, our sphere of work, our points of contact with
the world, are restricted and circumscribed. We are more likely to feel worried
and anxious if these limits are wide; for it means that our cares, desires and
terrors are increased and intensified. That is why the blind are not so unhappy as
we might be inclined to suppose; otherwise there would not be that gentle and
almost serene expression of peace in their faces.
Another reason why limitation makes for happiness is that the second half
of life proves even more dreary that the first. As the years wear on, the horizon
of our aims and our points of contact with the world become more extended. In
childhood our horizon is limited to the narrowest sphere about us; in youth there
is already a very considerable widening of our view; in manhood it comprises
the whole range of our activity, often stretching out over a very distant sphere,--
the care, for instance, of a State or a nation; in old age it embraces posterity.
But even in the affairs of the intellect, limitation is necessary if we are to be
happy. For the less the will is excited, the less we suffer. We have seen that
suffering is something positive, and that happiness is only a negative condition.
To limit the sphere of outward activity is to relieve the will of external stimulus:
to limit the sphere of our intellectual efforts is to relieve the will of internal

sources of excitement. This latter kind of limitation is attended by the
disadvantage that it opens the door to boredom, which is a direct source of
countless sufferings; for to banish boredom, a man will have recourse to any
means that may be handy--dissipation, society, extravagance, gaming, and
drinking, and the like, which in their turn bring mischief, ruin and misery in their
train. Difficiles in otio quies--it is difficult to keep quiet if you have nothing to
do. That limitation in the sphere of outward activity is conducive, nay, even
necessary to human happiness, such as it is, may be seen in the fact that the only
kind of poetry which depicts men in a happy state of life--Idyllic poetry, I mean,-
-always aims, as an intrinsic part of its treatment, at representing them in very
simple and restricted circumstances. It is this feeling, too, which is at the bottom
of the pleasure we take in what are called genre pictures.
Simplicity, therefore, as far as it can be attained, and even monotony, in our
manner of life, if it does not mean that we are bored, will contribute to
happiness; just because, under such circumstances, life, and consequently the
burden which is the essential concomitant of life, will be least felt. Our existence
will glide on peacefully like a stream which no waves or whirlpools disturb.
SECTION 7. Whether we are in a pleasant or a painful state depends,
ultimately, upon the kind of matter that pervades and engrosses our
consciousness. In this respect, purely intellectual occupation, for the mind that is
capable of it, will, as a rule, do much more in the way of happiness than any
form of practical life, with its constant alternations of success and failure, and all
the shocks and torments it produces. But it must be confessed that for such
occupation a pre-eminent amount of intellectual capacity is necessary. And in
this connection it may be noted that, just as a life devoted to outward activity
will distract and divert a man from study, and also deprive him of that quiet
concentration of mind which is necessary for such work; so, on the other hand, a
long course of thought will make him more or less unfit for the noisy pursuits of
real life. It is advisable, therefore, to suspend mental work for a while, if
circumstances happen which demand any degree of energy in affairs of a
practical nature.
SECTION 8. To live a life that shall be entirely prudent and discreet, and to
draw from experience all the instruction it contains, it is requisite to be
constantly thinking back,--to make a kind of recapitulation of what we have
done, of our impressions and sensations, to compare our former with our present
judgments--what we set before us and struggle to achieve, with the actual result
and satisfaction we have obtained. To do this is to get a repetition of the private
lessons of experience,--lessons which are given to every one.
Experience of the world may be looked upon as a kind of text, to which

reflection and knowledge form the commentary. Where there is great deal of
reflection and intellectual knowledge, and very little experience, the result is like
those books which have on each page two lines of text to forty lines of
commentary. A great deal of experience with little reflection and scant
knowledge, gives us books like those of the editio Bipontina[1] where there are
no notes and much that is unintelligible.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. A series of Greek, Latin and French classics
published at Zweibräcken in the Palatinate, from and after the year 1779. Cf.
Butter, Ueber die Bipontiner und die editiones Bipontinae.]
The advice here given is on a par with a rule recommended by Pythagoras,-
-to review, every night before going to sleep, what we have done during the day.
To live at random, in the hurly-burly of business or pleasure, without ever
reflecting upon the past,--to go on, as it were, pulling cotton off the reel of life,--
is to have no clear idea of what we are about; and a man who lives in this state
will have chaos in his emotions and certain confusion in his thoughts; as is soon
manifest by the abrupt and fragmentary character of his conversation, which
becomes a kind of mincemeat. A man will be all the more exposed to this fate in
proportion as he lives a restless life in the world, amid a crowd of various
impressions and with a correspondingly small amount of activity on the part of
his own mind.
And in this connection it will be in place to observe that, when events and
circumstances which have influenced us pass away in the course of time, we are
unable to bring back and renew the particular mood or state of feeling which
they aroused in us: but we can remember what we were led to say and do in
regard to them; and thus form, as it were, the result, expression and measure of
those events. We should, therefore, be careful to preserve the memory of our
thoughts at important points in our life; and herein lies the great advantage of
keeping a journal.
SECTION 9. To be self-sufficient, to be all in all to oneself, to want for
nothing, to be able to say omnia mea mecum porto--that is assuredly the chief
qualification for happiness. Hence Aristotle's remark, [Greek: hae eudaimonia
ton autarchon esti][1]--to be happy means to be self-sufficient--cannot be too
often repeated. It is, at bottom, the same thought as is present in the very well-
turned sentence from Chamfort:
Le bonheur n'est pas chose aisée: il est très difficile de le trouver en nous, et
impossible de le trouver ailleurs.
[Footnote 1: Eudem. Eth. VII. ii. 37.]
For while a man cannot reckon with certainty upon anyone but himself, the
burdens and disadvantages, the dangers and annoyances, which arise from

having to do with others, are not only countless but unavoidable.
There is no more mistaken path to happiness than worldliness, revelry, high
life: for the whole object of it is to transform our miserable existence into a
succession of joys, delights and pleasures,--a process which cannot fail to result
in disappointment and delusion; on a par, in this respect, with its obligato
accompaniment, the interchange of lies.[1]
[Footnote 1: As our body is concealed by the clothes we wear, so our mind
is veiled in lies. The veil is always there, and it is only through it that we can
sometimes guess at what a man really thinks; just as from his clothes we arrive
at the general shape of his body.]
All society necessarily involves, as the first condition of its existence,
mutual accommodation and restraint upon the part of its members. This means
that the larger it is, the more insipid will be its tone. A man can be himself only
so long as he is alone; and if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom;
for it is only when he is alone that he is really free. Constraint is always present
in society, like a companion of whom there is no riddance; and in proportion to
the greatness of a man's individuality, it will be hard for him to bear the
sacrifices which all intercourse with others demands, Solitude will be welcomed
or endured or avoided, according as a man's personal value is large or small,--the
wretch feeling, when he is alone, the whole burden of his misery; the great
intellect delighting in its greatness; and everyone, in short, being just what he is.
Further, if a man stands high in Nature's lists, it is natural and inevitable
that he should feel solitary. It will be an advantage to him if his surroundings do
not interfere with this feeling; for if he has to see a great deal of other people
who are not of like character with himself, they will exercise a disturbing
influence upon him, adverse to his peace of mind; they will rob him, in fact, of
himself, and give him nothing to compensate for the loss.
But while Nature sets very wide differences between man and man in
respect both of morality and of intellect, society disregards and effaces them; or,
rather, it sets up artificial differences in their stead,--gradations of rank and
position, which are very often diametrically opposed to those which Nature
establishes. The result of this arrangement is to elevate those whom Nature has
placed low, and to depress the few who stand high. These latter, then, usually
withdraw from society, where, as soon as it is at all numerous, vulgarity reigns
supreme.
What offends a great intellect in society is the equality of rights, leading to
equality of pretensions, which everyone enjoys; while at the same time,
inequality of capacity means a corresponding disparity of social power. So-
called good society recognizes every kind of claim but that of intellect, which is

a contraband article; and people are expected to exhibit an unlimited amount of
patience towards every form of folly and stupidity, perversity and dullness;
whilst personal merit has to beg pardon, as it were, for being present, or else
conceal itself altogether. Intellectual superiority offends by its very existence,
without any desire to do so.
The worst of what is called good society is not only that it offers us the
companionship of people who are unable to win either our praise or our
affection, but that it does not allow of our being that which we naturally are; it
compels us, for the sake of harmony, to shrivel up, or even alter our shape
altogether. Intellectual conversation, whether grave or humorous, is only fit for
intellectual society; it is downright abhorrent to ordinary people, to please whom
it is absolutely necessary to be commonplace and dull. This demands an act of
severe self-denial; we have to forfeit three-fourths of ourselves in order to
become like other people. No doubt their company may be set down against our
loss in this respect; but the more a man is worth, the more he will find that what
he gains does not cover what he loses, and that the balance is on the debit side of
the account; for the people with whom he deals are generally bankrupt,--that is
to say, there is nothing to be got from their society which can compensate either
for its boredom, annoyance and disagreeableness, or for the self-denial which it
renders necessary. Accordingly, most society is so constituted as to offer a good
profit to anyone who will exchange it for solitude.
Nor is this all. By way of providing a substitute for real--I mean
intellectual--superiority, which is seldom to be met with, and intolerable when it
is found, society has capriciously adopted a false kind of superiority,
conventional in its character, and resting upon arbitrary principles,--a tradition,
as it were, handed down in the higher circles, and, like a password, subject to
alteration; I refer to bon-ton fashion. Whenever this kind of superiority comes
into collision with the real kind, its weakness is manifest. Moreover, the
presence of good tone means the absence of good sense.
No man can be in perfect accord with any one but himself--not even with a
friend or the partner of his life; differences of individuality and temperament are
always bringing in some degree of discord, though it may be a very slight one.
That genuine, profound peace of mind, that perfect tranquillity of soul, which,
next to health, is the highest blessing the earth can give, is to be attained only in
solitude, and, as a permanent mood, only in complete retirement; and then, if
there is anything great and rich in the man's own self, his way of life is the
happiest that may be found in this wretched world.
Let me speak plainly. However close the bond of friendship, love,
marriage--a man, ultimately, looks to himself, to his own welfare alone; at most,

to his child's too. The less necessity there is for you to come into contact with
mankind in general, in the relations whether of business or of personal intimacy,
the better off you are. Loneliness and solitude have their evils, it is true; but if
you cannot feel them all at once, you can at least see where they lie; on the other
hand, society is insidious in this respect; as in offering you what appears to be
the pastime of pleasing social intercourse, it works great and often irreparable
mischief. The young should early be trained to bear being left alone; for it is a
source of happiness and peace of mind.
It follows from this that a man is best off if he be thrown upon his own
resources and can be all in all to himself; and Cicero goes so far as to say that a
man who is in this condition cannot fail to be very happy--nemo potest non
beatissimus esse qui est totus aptus ex sese, quique in se uno ponit omnia.[1] The
more a man has in himself, the less others can be to him. The feeling of self-
sufficiency! it is that which restrains those whose personal value is in itself great
riches, from such considerable sacrifices as are demanded by intercourse with
the world, let alone, then, from actually practicing self-denial by going out of
their way to seek it. Ordinary people are sociable and complaisant just from the
very opposite feeling;--to bear others' company is easier for them than to bear
their own. Moreover, respect is not paid in this world to that which has real
merit; it is reserved for that which has none. So retirement is at once a proof and
a result of being distinguished by the possession of meritorious qualities. It will
therefore show real wisdom on the part of any one who is worth anything in
himself, to limit his requirements as may be necessary, in order to preserve or
extend his freedom, and,--since a man must come into some relations with his
fellow-men--to admit them to his intimacy as little as possible.
[Footnote 1: Paradoxa Stoidorum: II.]
I have said that people are rendered sociable by their ability to endure
solitude, that is to say, their own society. They become sick of themselves. It is
this vacuity of soul which drives them to intercourse with others,--to travels in
foreign countries. Their mind is wanting in elasticity; it has no movement of its
own, and so they try to give it some,--by drink, for instance. How much
drunkenness is due to this cause alone! They are always looking for some form
of excitement, of the strongest kind they can bear--the excitement of being with
people of like nature with themselves; and if they fail in this, their mind sinks by
its own weight, and they fall into a grievous lethargy.[1] Such people, it may be
said, possess only a small fraction of humanity in themselves; and it requires a
great many of them put together to make up a fair amount of it,--to attain any
degree of consciousness as men. A man, in the full sense of the word,--a man par
excellence--does not represent a fraction, but a whole number: he is complete in

himself.
[Footnote 1: It is a well-known fact, that we can more easily bear up under
evils which fall upon a great many people besides ourselves. As boredom seems
to be an evil of this kind, people band together to offer it a common resistance.
The love of life is at bottom only the fear of death; and, in the same way, the
social impulse does not rest directly upon the love of society, but upon the fear
of solitude; it is not alone the charm of being in others' company that people
seek, it is the dreary oppression of being alone--the monotony of their own
consciousness--that they would avoid. They will do anything to escape it,--even
tolerate bad companions, and put up with the feeling of constraint which all
society involves, in this case a very burdensome one. But if aversion to such
society conquers the aversion to being alone, they become accustomed to
solitude and hardened to its immediate effects. They no longer find solitude to be
such a very bad thing, and settle down comfortably to it without any hankering
after society;--and this, partly because it is only indirectly that they need others'
company, and partly because they have become accustomed to the benefits of
being alone.]
Ordinary society is, in this respect, very like the kind of music to be
obtained from an orchestra composed of Russian horns. Each horn has only one
note; and the music is produced by each note coming in just at the right moment.
In the monotonous sound of a single horn, you have a precise illustration of the
effect of most people's minds. How often there seems to be only one thought
there! and no room for any other. It is easy to see why people are so bored; and
also why they are sociable, why they like to go about in crowds--why mankind is
so gregarious. It is the monotony of his own nature that makes a man find
solitude intolerable. Omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui: folly is truly its own
burden. Put a great many men together, and you may get some result--some
music from your horns!
A man of intellect is like an artist who gives a concert without any help
from anyone else, playing on a single instrument--a piano, say, which is a little
orchestra in itself. Such a man is a little world in himself; and the effect
produced by various instruments together, he produces single-handed, in the
unity of his own consciousness. Like the piano, he has no place in a symphony:
he is a soloist and performs by himself,--in solitude, it may be; or, if in company
with other instruments, only as principal; or for setting the tone, as in singing.
However, those who are fond of society from time to time may profit by this
simile, and lay it down as a general rule that deficiency of quality in those we
meet may be to some extent compensated by an increase in quantity. One man's
company may be quite enough, if he is clever; but where you have only ordinary

people to deal with, it is advisable to have a great many of them, so that some
advantage may accrue by letting them all work together,--on the analogy of the
horns; and may Heaven grant you patience for your task!
That mental vacuity and barrenness of soul to which I have alluded, is
responsible for another misfortune. When men of the better class form a society
for promoting some noble or ideal aim, the result almost always is that the
innumerable mob of humanity comes crowding in too, as it always does
everywhere, like vermin--their object being to try and get rid of boredom, or
some other defect of their nature; and anything that will effect that, they seize
upon at once, without the slightest discrimination. Some of them will slip into
that society, or push themselves in, and then either soon destroy it altogether, or
alter it so much that in the end it comes to have a purpose the exact opposite of
that which it had at first.
This is not the only point of view from which the social impulse may be
regarded. On cold days people manage to get some warmth by crowding
together; and you can warm your mind in the same way--by bringing it into
contact with others. But a man who has a great deal of intellectual warmth in
himself will stand in no need of such resources. I have written a little fable
illustrating this: it may be found elsewhere.[1] As a general rule, it may be said
that a man's sociability stands very nearly in inverse ratio to his intellectual
value: to say that "so and so" is very unsociable, is almost tantamount to saying
that he is a man of great capacity.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. The passage to which Schopenhauer refers
is Parerga: vol. ii. § 413 (4th edition). The fable is of certain porcupines, who
huddled together for warmth on a cold day; but as they began to prick one
another with their quills, they were obliged to disperse. However the cold drove
them together again, when just the same thing happened. At last, after many
turns of huddling and dispersing, they discovered that they would be best off by
remaining at a little distance from one another. In the same way, the need of
society drives the human porcupines together--only to be mutually repelled by
the many prickly and disagreeable qualities of their nature. The moderate
distance which they at last discover to be the only tolerable condition of
intercourse, is the code of politeness and fine manners; and those who transgress
it are roughly told--in the English phrase--to keep their distance. By this
arrangement the mutual need of warmth is only very moderately satisfied,--but
then people do not get pricked. A man who has some heat in himself prefers to
remain outside, where he will neither prick other people nor get pricked
himself.]
Solitude is doubly advantageous to such a man. Firstly, it allows him to be

with himself, and, secondly, it prevents him being with others--an advantage of
great moment; for how much constraint, annoyance, and even danger there is in
all intercourse with the world. Tout notre mal, says La Bruyère, vient de ne
pouvoir être seul. It is really a very risky, nay, a fatal thing, to be sociable;
because it means contact with natures, the great majority of which are bad
morally, and dull or perverse, intellectually. To be unsociable is not to care about
such people; and to have enough in oneself to dispense with the necessity of
their company is a great piece of good fortune; because almost all our sufferings
spring from having to do with other people; and that destroys the peace of mind,
which, as I have said, comes next after health in the elements of happiness.
Peace of mind is impossible without a considerable amount of solitude. The
Cynics renounced all private property in order to attain the bliss of having
nothing to trouble them; and to renounce society with the same object is the
wisest thing a man can do. Bernardin de Saint Pierre has the very excellent and
pertinent remark that to be sparing in regard to food is a means of health; in
regard to society, a means of tranquillity--la diète des ailmens nous rend la santé
du corps, et celle des hommes la tranquillité de l'âme. To be soon on friendly, or
even affectionate, terms with solitude is like winning a gold mine; but this is not
something which everybody can do. The prime reason for social intercourse is
mutual need; and as soon as that is satisfied, boredom drives people together
once more. If it were not for these two reasons, a man would probably elect to
remain alone; if only because solitude is the sole condition of life which gives
full play to that feeling of exclusive importance which every man has in his own
eyes,--as if he were the only person in the world! a feeling which, in the throng
and press of real life, soon shrivels up to nothing, getting, at every step, a painful
démenti. From this point of view it may be said that solitude is the original and
natural state of man, where, like another Adam, he is as happy as his nature will
allow.
But still, had Adam no father or mother? There is another sense in which
solitude is not the natural state; for, at his entrance into the world, a man finds
himself with parents, brothers, sisters, that is to say, in society, and not alone.
Accordingly it cannot be said that the love of solitude is an original
characteristic of human nature; it is rather the result of experience and reflection,
and these in their turn depend upon the development of intellectual power, and
increase with the years.
Speaking generally, sociability stands in inverse ratio with age. A little
child raises a piteous cry of fright if it is left alone for only a few minutes; and
later on, to be shut up by itself is a great punishment. Young people soon get on
very friendly terms with one another; it is only the few among them of any

nobility of mind who are glad now and then to be alone;--but to spend the whole
day thus would be disagreeable. A grown-up man can easily do it; it is little
trouble to him to be much alone, and it becomes less and less trouble as he
advances in years. An old man who has outlived all his friends, and is either
indifferent or dead to the pleasures of life, is in his proper element in solitude;
and in individual cases the special tendency to retirement and seclusion will
always be in direct proportion to intellectual capacity.
For this tendency is not, as I have said, a purely natural one; it does not
come into existence as a direct need of human nature; it is rather the effect of the
experience we go through, the product of reflection upon what our needs really
are; proceeding, more especially, from the insight we attain into the wretched
stuff of which most people are made, whether you look at their morals or their
intellects. The worst of it all is that, in the individual, moral and intellectual
shortcomings are closely connected and play into each other's hands, so that all
manner of disagreeable results are obtained, which make intercourse with most
people not only unpleasant but intolerable. Hence, though the world contains
many things which are thoroughly bad, the worst thing in it is society. Even
Voltaire, that sociable Frenchman, was obliged to admit that there are
everywhere crowds of people not worth talking to: la terre est couverte de gens
qui ne méritent pas qu'on leur parle. And Petrarch gives a similar reason for
wishing to be alone--that tender spirit! so strong and constant in his love of
seclusion. The streams, the plains and woods know well, he says, how he has
tried to escape the perverse and stupid people who have missed the way to
heaven:--
Cercato ho sempre solitaria vita (Le rive il sanno, e le campagne e i boschi)
Per fuggir quest' ingegni storti e loschi Che la strada del ciel' hanno smarrita.
He pursues the same strain in that delightful book of his, DeVita Solitaria,
which seems to have given Zimmerman the idea of his celebrated work on
Solitude. It is the secondary and indirect character of the love of seclusion to
which Chamfort alludes in the following passage, couched in his sarcastic vein:
On dit quelquefois d'un homme qui vit seul, il n'aime pas la société. C'est
souvent comme si on disait d'un homme qu'il n'aime pas la promenade, sous le
pretexte qu'il ne se promène pas volontiers le soir dans le forêt de Bondy.
You will find a similar sentiment expressed by the Persian poet Sadi, in his
Garden of Roses. Since that time, he says, we have taken leave of society,
preferring the path of seclusion; for there is safety in solitude. Angelus Silesius,
[1] a very gentle and Christian writer, confesses to the same feeling, in his own
mythical language. Herod, he says, is the common enemy; and when, as with
Joseph, God warns us of danger, we fly from the world to solitude, from

Bethlehem to Egypt; or else suffering and death await us!--
Herodes ist ein Feind; der Joseph der Verstand, Dem machte Gott die
Gefahr im Traum (in Geist) bekannt; Die Welt ist Bethlehem, Aegypten
Einsamkeit, Fleuch, meine Seele! fleuch, sonst stirbest du vor Leid.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. Angelus Silesius, pseudonym for Johannes
Scheffler, a physician and mystic poet of the seventeenth century (1624-77).]
Giordano Bruno also declares himself a friend of seclusion. Tanti uomini,
he says, che in terra hanno voluto gustare vita celeste, dissero con una voce,
"ecce elongavi fugiens et mansi in solitudine"--those who in this world have
desired a foretaste of the divine life, have always proclaimed with one voice:
Lo! then would I wander far off; I would lodge in the wilderness.[1]
[Footnote 1: Psalms, lv. 7.]
And in the work from which I have already quoted, Sadi says of himself: In
disgust with my friends at Damascus, I withdrew into the desert about Jerusalem,
to seek the society of the beasts of the field. In short, the same thing has been
said by all whom Prometheus has formed out of better clay. What pleasure could
they find in the company of people with whom their only common ground is just
what is lowest and least noble in their own nature--the part of them that is
commonplace, trivial and vulgar? What do they want with people who cannot
rise to a higher level, and for whom nothing remains but to drag others down to
theirs? for this is what they aim at. It is an aristocratic feeling that is at the
bottom of this propensity to seclusion and solitude.
Rascals are always sociable--more's the pity! and the chief sign that a man
has any nobility in his character is the little pleasure he takes in others' company.
He prefers solitude more and more, and, in course of time, comes to see that,
with few exceptions, the world offers no choice beyond solitude on one side and
vulgarity on the other. This may sound a hard thing to say; but even Angelus
Silesius, with all his Christian feelings of gentleness and love, was obliged to
admit the truth of it. However painful solitude may be, he says, be careful not to
be vulgar; for then you may find a desert everywhere:--
Die Einsamkeit ist noth: doch sei nur nicht gemein, So kannst du überall in
einer Wüste sein.
It is natural for great minds--the true teachers of humanity--to care little
about the constant company of others; just as little as the schoolmaster cares for
joining in the gambols of the noisy crowd of boys which surround him. The
mission of these great minds is to guide mankind over the sea of error to the
haven of truth--to draw it forth from the dark abysses of a barbarous vulgarity up
into the light of culture and refinement. Men of great intellect live in the world
without really belonging to it; and so, from their earliest years, they feel that

there is a perceptible difference between them and other people. But it is only
gradually, with the lapse of years, that they come to a clear understanding of
their position. Their intellectual isolation is then reinforced by actual seclusion in
their manner of life; they let no one approach who is not in some degree
emancipated from the prevailing vulgarity.
From what has been said it is obvious that the love of solitude is not a
direct, original impulse in human nature, but rather something secondary and of
gradual growth. It is the more distinguishing feature of nobler minds, developed
not without some conquest of natural desires, and now and then in actual
opposition to the promptings of Mephistopheles--bidding you exchange a
morose and soul-destroying solitude for life amongst men, for society; even the
worst, he says, will give a sense of human fellowship:--
Hör' auf mit deinem Gram zu spielen, Der, wie ein Geier, dir am Leben
frisst: Die schlechteste Gesellschaft lässt dich fühlen Dass du ein Mensch mit
Menschen bist.[1]
[Footnote 1: Goethe's Faust, Part I., 1281-5.]
To be alone is the fate of all great minds--a fate deplored at times, but still
always chosen as the less grievous of two evils. As the years increase, it always
becomes easier to say, Dare to be wise--sapere aude. And after sixty, the
inclination to be alone grows into a kind of real, natural instinct; for at that age
everything combines in favor of it. The strongest impulse--the love of woman's
society--has little or no effect; it is the sexless condition of old age which lays
the foundation of a certain self-sufficiency, and that gradually absorbs all desire
for others' company. A thousand illusions and follies are overcome; the active
years of life are in most cases gone; a man has no more expectations or plans or
intentions. The generation to which he belonged has passed away, and a new
race has sprung up which looks upon him as essentially outside its sphere of
activity. And then the years pass more quickly as we become older, and we want
to devote our remaining time to the intellectual rather than to the practical side of
life. For, provided that the mind retains its faculties, the amount of knowledge
and experience we have acquired, together with the facility we have gained in
the use of our powers, makes it then more than ever easy and interesting to us to
pursue the study of any subject. A thousand things become clear which were
formerly enveloped in obscurity, and results are obtained which give a feeling of
difficulties overcome. From long experience of men, we cease to expect much
from them; we find that, on the whole, people do not gain by a nearer
acquaintance; and that--apart from a few rare and fortunate exceptions--we have
come across none but defective specimens of human nature which it is advisable
to leave in peace. We are no more subject to the ordinary illusions of life; and as,

in individual instances, we soon see what a man is made of, we seldom feel any
inclination to come into closer relations with him. Finally, isolation--our own
society--has become a habit, as it were a second nature to us, more especially if
we have been on friendly terms with it from our youth up. The love of solitude
which was formerly indulged only at the expense of our desire for society, has
now come to be the simple quality of our natural disposition--the element proper
to our life, as water to a fish. This is why anyone who possesses a unique
individuality--unlike others and therefore necessarily isolated--feels that, as he
becomes older, his position is no longer so burdensome as when he was young.
For, as a matter of fact, this very genuine privilege of old age is one which
can be enjoyed only if a man is possessed of a certain amount of intellect; it will
be appreciated most of all where there is real mental power; but in some degree
by every one. It is only people of very barren and vulgar nature who will be just
as sociable in their old age as they were in their youth. But then they become
troublesome to a society to which they are no longer suited, and, at most,
manage to be tolerated; whereas, they were formerly in great request.
There is another aspect of this inverse proportion between age and
sociability--the way in which it conduces to education. The younger that people
are, the more in every respect they have to learn; and it is just in youth that
Nature provides a system of mutual education, so that mere intercourse with
others, at that time of life, carries instruction with it. Human society, from this
point of view, resembles a huge academy of learning, on the Bell and Lancaster
system, opposed to the system of education by means of books and schools, as
something artificial and contrary to the institutions of Nature. It is therefore a
very suitable arrangement that, in his young days, a man should be a very
diligent student at the place of learning provided by Nature herself.
But there is nothing in life which has not some drawback--nihil est ab omni
parte beatum, as Horace says; or, in the words of an Indian proverb, no lotus
without a stalk. Seclusion, which has so many advantages, has also its little
annoyances and drawbacks, which are small, however, in comparison with those
of society; hence anyone who is worth much in himself will get on better without
other people than with them. But amongst the disadvantages of seclusion there is
one which is not so easy to see as the rest. It is this: when people remain indoors
all day, they become physically very sensitive to atmospheric changes, so that
every little draught is enough to make them ill; so with our temper; a long course
of seclusion makes it so sensitive that the most trivial incidents, words, or even
looks, are sufficient to disturb or to vex and offend us--little things which are
unnoticed by those who live in the turmoil of life.
When you find human society disagreeable and feel yourself justified in

flying to solitude, you can be so constituted as to be unable to bear the
depression of it for any length of time, which will probably be the case if you are
young. Let me advise you, then, to form the habit of taking some of your
solitude with you into society, to learn to be to some extent alone even though
you are in company; not to say at once what you think, and, on the other hand,
not to attach too precise a meaning to what others say; rather, not to expect much
of them, either morally or intellectually, and to strengthen yourself in the feeling
of indifference to their opinion, which is the surest way of always practicing a
praiseworthy toleration. If you do that, you will not live so much with other
people, though you may appear to move amongst them: your relation to them
will be of a purely objective character. This precaution will keep you from too
close contact with society, and therefore secure you against being contaminated
or even outraged by it.[1] Society is in this respect like a fire--the wise man
warming himself at a proper distance from it; not coming too close, like the fool,
who, on getting scorched, runs away and shivers in solitude, loud in his
complaint that the fire burns.
[Footnote 1: This restricted, or, as it were, entrenched kind of sociability
has been dramatically illustrated in a play--well worth reading--of Moratin's,
entitled El Café o sea la Comedia Nuova (The Cafe or the New Comedy),
chiefly by one of the characters, Don Pedro and especially in the second and
third scenes of the first act.]
SECTION 10. Envy is natural to man; and still, it is at once a vice and a
source of misery.[1] We should treat it as the enemy of our happiness, and stifle
it like an evil thought. This is the advice given by Seneca; as he well puts it, we
shall be pleased with what we have, if we avoid the self-torture of comparing our
own lot with some other and happier one--nostra nos sine comparatione
delectent; nunquam erit felix quem torquebit felicior.[2] And again, quum
adspexeris quot te antecedent, cogita quot sequantur[3]--if a great many people
appear to be better off than yourself, think how many there are in a worse
position. It is a fact that if real calamity comes upon us, the most effective
consolation--though it springs from the same source as envy--is just the thought
of greater misfortunes than ours; and the next best is the society of those who are
in the same luck as we--the partners of our sorrows.
[Footnote 1: Envy shows how unhappy people are; and their constant
attention to what others do and leave undone, how much they are bored.]
[Footnote 2: De Ira: iii., 30.]
[Footnote 3: Epist. xv.]
So much for the envy which we may feel towards others. As regards the
envy which we may excite in them, it should always be remembered that no

form of hatred is so implacable as the hatred that comes from envy; and
therefore we should always carefully refrain from doing anything to rouse it;
nay, as with many another form of vice, it is better altogether to renounce any
pleasure there may be in it, because of the serious nature of its consequences.
Aristocracies are of three kinds: (1) of birth and rank; (2) of wealth; and (3)
of intellect. The last is really the most distinguished of the three, and its claim to
occupy the first position comes to be recognized, if it is only allowed time to
work. So eminent a king as Frederick the Great admitted it--les âmes privilegiées
rangent à l'égal des souverains, as he said to his chamberlain, when the latter
expressed his surprise that Voltaire should have a seat at the table reserved for
kings and princes, whilst ministers and generals were relegated to the
chamberlain's.
Every one of these aristocracies is surrounded by a host of envious persons.
If you belong to one of them, they will be secretly embittered against you; and
unless they are restrained by fear, they will always be anxious to let you
understand that you are no better than they. It is by their anxiety to let you know
this, that they betray how greatly they are conscious that the opposite is the truth.
The line of conduct to be pursued if you are exposed to envy, is to keep the
envious persons at a distance, and, as far as possible, avoid all contact with them,
so that there may be a wide gulf fixed between you and them; if this cannot be
done, to bear their attacks with the greatest composure. In the latter case, the
very thing that provokes the attack will also neutralize it. This is what appears to
be generally done.
The members of one of these aristocracies usually get on very well with
those of another, and there is no call for envy between them, because their
several privileges effect an equipoise.
SECTION 11. Give mature and repeated consideration to any plan before
you proceed to carry it out; and even after you have thoroughly turned it over in
your mind, make some concession to the incompetency of human judgment; for
it may always happen that circumstances which cannot be investigated or
foreseen, will come in and upset the whole of your calculation. This is a
reflection that will always influence the negative side of the balance--a kind of
warning to refrain from unnecessary action in matters of importance--quieta non
movere. But having once made up your mind and begun your work, you must let
it run its course and abide the result--not worry yourself by fresh reflections on
what is already accomplished, or by a renewal of your scruples on the score of
possible danger: free your mind from the subject altogether, and refuse to go into
it again, secure in the thought that you gave it mature attention at the proper
time. This is the same advice as is given by an Italian proverb--legala bene e poi

lascia la andare--which Goethe has translated thus: See well to your girths, and
then ride on boldly.[1]
[Footnote 1: It may be observed, in passing, that a great many of the
maxims which Goethe puts under the head of Proverbial, are translations from
the Italian.]
And if, notwithstanding that, you fail, it is because human affairs are the
sport of chance and error. Socrates, the wisest of men, needed the warning voice
of his good genius, or [Greek: daimonion], to enable him to do what was right in
regard to his own personal affairs, or at any rate, to avoid mistakes; which argues
that the human intellect is incompetent for the purpose. There is a saying--which
is reported to have originated with one of the Popes--that when misfortune
happens to us, the blame of it, at least in some degree, attaches to ourselves. If
this is not true absolutely and in every instance, it is certainly true in the great
majority of cases. It even looks as if this truth had a great deal to do with the
effort people make as far as possible to conceal their misfortunes, and to put the
best face they can upon them, for fear lest their misfortunes may show how
much they are to blame.
SECTION 12.
In the case of a misfortune which has already happened and therefore
cannot be altered, you should not allow yourself to think that it might have been
otherwise; still less, that it might have been avoided by such and such means; for
reflections of this kind will only add to your distress and make it intolerable, so
that you will become a tormentor to yourself--[Greek: heautontimoroumeaeos].
It is better to follow the example of King David; who, as long as his son lay on
the bed of sickness, assailed Jehovah with unceasing supplications and entreaties
for his recovery; but when he was dead, snapped his fingers and thought no more
of it. If you are not light-hearted enough for that, you can take refuge in fatalism,
and have the great truth revealed to you that everything which happens is the
result of necessity, and therefore inevitable.
However good this advice may be, it is one-sided and partial. In relieving
and quieting us for the moment, it is no doubt effective enough; but when our
misfortunes have resulted--as is usually the case--from our own carelessness or
folly, or, at any rate, partly by our own fault, it is a good thing to consider how
they might have been avoided, and to consider it often in spite of its being a
tender subject--a salutary form of self-discipline, which will make us wiser and
better men for the future. If we have made obvious mistakes, we should not try,
as we generally do, to gloss them over, or to find something to excuse or
extenuate them; we should admit to ourselves that we have committed faults,
and open our eyes wide to all their enormity, in order that we may firmly resolve

to avoid them in time to come. To be sure, that means a great deal of self-
inflicted pain, in the shape of discontent, but it should be remembered that to
spare the rod is to spoil the child--[Greek: ho mae dareis anthropos ou
paideuetai].[1]
[Footnote 1: Menander. Monost: 422.]
SECTION 13. In all matters affecting our weal or woe, we should be
careful not to let our imagination run away with us, and build no castles in the
air. In the first place, they are expensive to build, because we have to pull them
down again immediately, and that is a source of grief. We should be still more
on our guard against distressing our hearts by depicting possible misfortunes. If
these were misfortunes of a purely imaginary kind, or very remote and unlikely,
we should at once see, on awaking from our dream, that the whole thing was
mere illusion; we should rejoice all the more in a reality better than our dreams,
or at most, be warned against misfortunes which, though very remote, were still
possible. These, however, are not the sort of playthings in which imagination
delights; it is only in idle hours that we build castles in the air, and they are
always of a pleasing description. The matter which goes to form gloomy dreams
are mischances which to some extent really threaten us, though it be from some
distance; imagination makes us look larger and nearer and more terrible than
they are in reality. This is a kind of dream which cannot be so readily shaken off
on awaking as a pleasant one; for a pleasant dream is soon dispelled by reality,
leaving, at most, a feeble hope lying in the lap of possibility. Once we have
abandoned ourselves to a fit of the blues, visions are conjured up which do not
so easily vanish again; for it is always just possible that the visions may be
realized. But we are not always able to estimate the exact degree of possibility:
possibility may easily pass into probability; and thus we deliver ourselves up to
torture. Therefore we should be careful not to be over-anxious on any matter
affecting our weal or our woe, not to carry our anxiety to unreasonable or
injudicious limits; but coolly and dispassionately to deliberate upon the matter,
as though it were an abstract question which did not touch us in particular. We
should give no play to imagination here; for imagination is not judgment--it only
conjures up visions, inducing an unprofitable and often very painful mood.
The rule on which I am here insisting should be most carefully observed
towards evening. For as darkness makes us timid and apt to see terrifying shapes
everywhere, there is something similar in the effect of indistinct thought; and
uncertainty always brings with it a sense of danger. Hence, towards evening,
when our powers of thought and judgment are relaxed,--at the hour, as it were,
of subjective darkness,--the intellect becomes tired, easily confused, and unable
to get at the bottom of things; and if, in that state, we meditate on matters of

personal interest to ourselves, they soon assume a dangerous and terrifying
aspect. This is mostly the case at night, when we are in bed; for then the mind is
fully relaxed, and the power of judgment quite unequal to its duties; but
imagination is still awake. Night gives a black look to everything, whatever it
may be. This is why our thoughts, just before we go to sleep, or as we lie awake
through the hours of the night, are usually such confusions and perversions of
facts as dreams themselves; and when our thoughts at that time are concentrated
upon our own concerns, they are generally as black and monstrous as possible.
In the morning all such nightmares vanish like dreams: as the Spanish proverb
has it, noche tinta, bianco el dia--the night is colored, the day is white. But even
towards nightfall, as soon as the candles are lit, the mind, like the eye, no longer
sees things so clearly as by day: it is a time unsuited to serious meditation,
especially on unpleasant subjects. The morning is the proper time for that--as
indeed for all efforts without exception, whether mental or bodily. For the
morning is the youth of the day, when everything is bright, fresh, and easy of
attainment; we feel strong then, and all our faculties are completely at our
disposal. Do not shorten the morning by getting up late, or waste it in unworthy
occupations or in talk; look upon it as the quintessence of life, as to a certain
extent sacred. Evening is like old age: we are languid, talkative, silly. Each day
is a little life: every waking and rising a little birth, every fresh morning a little
youth, every going to rest and sleep a little death.
But condition of health, sleep, nourishment, temperature, weather,
surroundings, and much else that is purely external, have, in general, an
important influence upon our mood and therefore upon our thoughts. Hence both
our view of any matter and our capacity for any work are very much subject to
time and place. So it is best to profit by a good mood--for how seldom it comes!-
-
Nehmt die gute Stimmung wahr, Denn sie kommt so selten.[1]
[Footnote 1: Goethe.]
We are not always able to form new ideas about; our surroundings, or to
command original thoughts: they come if they will, and when they will. And so,
too, we cannot always succeed in completely considering some personal matter
at the precise time at which we have determined beforehand to consider it, and
just when we set ourselves to do so. For the peculiar train of thought which is
favorable to it may suddenly become active without any special call being made
upon it, and we may then follow it up with keen interest. In this way reflection,
too, chooses its own time.
This reining-in of the imagination which I am recommending, will also
forbid us to summon up the memory of the past misfortune, to paint a dark

picture of the injustice or harm that has been done us, the losses we have
sustained, the insults, slights and annoyances to which we have been exposed:
for to do that is to rouse into fresh life all those hateful passions long laid asleep-
-the anger and resentment which disturb and pollute our nature. In an excellent
parable, Proclus, the Neoplatonist, points out how in every town the mob dwells
side by side with those who are rich and distinguished: so, too, in every man, be
he never so noble and dignified, there is, in the depth of his nature, a mob of low
and vulgar desires which constitute him an animal. It will not do to let this mob
revolt or even so much as peep forth from its hiding-place; it is hideous of mien,
and its rebel leaders are those flights of imagination which I have been
describing. The smallest annoyance, whether it comes from our fellow-men or
from the things around us, may swell up into a monster of dreadful aspect,
putting us at our wits' end--and all because we go on brooding over our troubles
and painting them in the most glaring colors and on the largest scale. It is much
better to take a very calm and prosaic view of what is disagreeable; for that is the
easiest way of bearing it.
If you hold small objects close to your eyes, you limit your field of vision
and shut out the world. And, in the same way, the people or the things which
stand nearest, even though they are of the very smallest consequence, are apt to
claim an amount of attention much beyond their due, occupying us disagreeably,
and leaving no room for serious thoughts and affairs of importance. We ought to
work against this tendency.
SECTION 14. The sight of things which do not belong to us is very apt to
raise the thought: Ah, if that were only mine! making us sensible of our
privation. Instead of that we should do better by more frequently putting to
ourselves the opposite case: Ah, if that were not mine. What I mean is that we
should sometimes try to look upon our possessions in the light in which they
would appear if we had lost them; whatever they may be, property, health,
friends, a wife or child or someone else we love, our horse or our dog--it is
usually only when we have lost them that we begin to find out their value. But if
we come to look at things in the way I recommend, we shall be doubly the
gainers; we shall at once get more pleasure out of them than we did before, and
we shall do everything in our power to prevent the loss of them; for instance, by
not risking our property, or angering our friends, or exposing our wives to
temptation, or being careless about our children's health, and so on.
We often try to banish the gloom and despondency of the present by
speculating upon our chances of success in the future; a process which leads us
to invent a great many chimerical hopes. Every one of them contains the germ of
illusion, and disappointment is inevitable when our hopes are shattered by the

hard facts of life.
It is less hurtful to take the chances of misfortune as a theme for
speculation; because, in doing so, we provide ourselves at once with measures of
precaution against it, and a pleasant surprise when it fails to make its
appearance. Is it not a fact that we always feel a marked improvement in our
spirits when we begin to get over a period of anxiety? I may go further and say
that there is some use in occasionally looking upon terrible misfortunes--such as
might happen to us--as though they had actually happened, for then the trivial
reverses which subsequently come in reality, are much easier to bear. It is a
source of consolation to look back upon those great misfortunes which never
happened. But in following out this rule, care must be taken not to neglect what I
have said in the preceding section.
SECTION 15. The things which engage our attention--whether they are
matters of business or ordinary events--are of such diverse kinds, that, if taken
quite separately and in no fixed order or relation, they present a medley of the
most glaring contrasts, with nothing in common, except that they one and all
affect us in particular. There must be a corresponding abruptness in the thoughts
and anxieties which these various matters arouse in us, if our thoughts are to be
in keeping with their various subjects. Therefore, in setting about anything, the
first step is to withdraw our attention from everything else: this will enable us to
attend to each matter at its own time, and to enjoy or put up with it, quite apart
from any thought of our remaining interests. Our thoughts must be arranged, as
it were, in little drawers, so that we may open one without disturbing any of the
others.
In this way we can keep the heavy burden of anxiety from weighing upon
us so much as to spoil the little pleasures of the present, or from robbing us of
our rest; otherwise the consideration of one matter will interfere with every
other, and attention to some important business may lead us to neglect many
affairs which happen to be of less moment. It is most important for everyone
who is capable of higher and nobler thoughts to keep their mind from being so
completely engrossed with private affairs and vulgar troubles as to let them take
up all his attention and crowd out worthier matter; for that is, in a very real
sense, to lose sight of the true end of life--propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
Of course for this--as for so much else--self-control is necessary; without it,
we cannot manage ourselves in the way I have described. And self-control may
not appear so very difficult, if we consider that every man has to submit to a
great deal of very severe control on the part of his surroundings, and that without
it no form of existence is possible. Further, a little self-control at the right
moment may prevent much subsequent compulsion at the hands of others; just as

a very small section of a circle close to the centre may correspond to a part near
the circumference a hundred times as large. Nothing will protect us from
external compulsion so much as the control of ourselves; and, as Seneca says, to
submit yourself to reason is the way to make everything else submit to you--si
tibi vis omnia subjicere, te subjice rationi. Self-control, too, is something which
we have in our own power; and if the worst comes to the worst, and it touches us
in a very sensitive part, we can always relax its severity. But other people will
pay no regard to our feelings, if they have to use compulsion, and we shall be
treated without pity or mercy. Therefore it will be prudent to anticipate
compulsion by self-control.
SECTION 16. We must set limits to our wishes, curb our desires, moderate
our anger, always remembering that an individual can attain only an
infinitesimal share in anything that is worth having; and that, on the other hand,
everyone must incur many of the ills of life; in a word, we must bear and
forbear--abstinere et sustinere; and if we fail to observe this rule, no position of
wealth or power will prevent us from feeling wretched. This is what Horace
means when he recommends us to study carefully and inquire diligently what
will best promote a tranquil life--not to be always agitated by fruitless desires
and fears and hopes for things, which, after all, are not worth very much:--
Inter cuncta leges et percontabere doctos Qua ratione queas traducere
leniter aevum; Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido, Ne pavor, et rerum
mediocriter utilium spes.[1]
[Footnote 1: Epist. I. xviii. 97.]
SECTION 17. Life consists in movement, says Aristotle; and he is
obviously right. We exist, physically, because our organism is the seat of
constant motion; and if we are to exist intellectually, it can only be by means of
continual occupation--no matter with what so long as it is some form of practical
or mental activity. You may see that this is so by the way in which people who
have no work or nothing to think about, immediately begin to beat the devil's
tattoo with their knuckles or a stick or anything that comes handy. The truth is,
that our nature is essentially restless in its character: we very soon get tired of
having nothing to do; it is intolerable boredom. This impulse to activity should
be regulated, and some sort of method introduced into it, which of itself will
enhance the satisfaction we obtain. Activity!--doing something, if possible
creating something, at any rate learning something--how fortunate it is that men
cannot exist without that! A man wants to use his strength, to see, if he can, what
effect it will produce; and he will get the most complete satisfaction of this
desire if he can make or construct something--be it a book or a basket. There is a
direct pleasure in seeing work grow under one's hands day by day, until at last it

is finished. This is the pleasure attaching to a work of art or a manuscript, or
even mere manual labor; and, of course, the higher the work, the greater pleasure
it will give.
From this point of view, those are happiest of all who are conscious of the
power to produce great works animated by some significant purpose: it gives a
higher kind of interest--a sort of rare flavor--to the whole of their life, which, by
its absence from the life of the ordinary man, makes it, in comparison, something
very insipid. For richly endowed natures, life and the world have a special
interest beyond the mere everyday personal interest which so many others share;
and something higher than that--a formal interest. It is from life and the world
that they get the material for their works; and as soon as they are freed from the
pressure of personal needs, it is to the diligent collection of material that they
devote their whole existence. So with their intellect: it is to some extent of a two-
fold character, and devoted partly to the ordinary affairs of every day--those
matters of will which are common to them and the rest of mankind, and partly to
their peculiar work--the pure and objective contemplation of existence. And
while, on the stage of the world, most men play their little part and then pass
away, the genius lives a double life, at once an actor and a spectator.
Let everyone, then, do something, according to the measure of his
capacities. To have no regular work, no set sphere of activity--what a miserable
thing it is! How often long travels undertaken for pleasure make a man
downright unhappy; because the absence of anything that can be called
occupation forces him, as it were, out of his right element. Effort, struggles with
difficulties! that is as natural to a man as grubbing in the ground is to a mole. To
have all his wants satisfied is something intolerable--the feeling of stagnation
which comes from pleasures that last too long. To overcome difficulties is to
experience the full delight of existence, no matter where the obstacles are
encountered; whether in the affairs of life, in commerce or business; or in mental
effort--the spirit of inquiry that tries to master its subject. There is always
something pleasurable in the struggle and the victory. And if a man has no
opportunity to excite himself, he will do what he can to create one, and
according to his individual bent, he will hunt or play Cup and Ball: or led on by
this unsuspected element in his nature, he will pick a quarrel with some one, or
hatch a plot or intrigue, or take to swindling and rascally courses generally--all
to put an end to a state of repose which is intolerable. As I have remarked,
difficilis in otio quies--it is difficult to keep quiet if you have nothing to do.
SECTION 18. A man should avoid being led on by the phantoms of his
imagination. This is not the same thing as to submit to the guidance of ideas
clearly thought out: and yet these are rules of life which most people pervert. If

you examine closely into the circumstances which, in any deliberation,
ultimately turn the scale in favor of some particular course, you will generally
find that the decision is influenced, not by any clear arrangement of ideas
leading to a formal judgment, but by some fanciful picture which seems to stand
for one of the alternatives in question.
In one of Voltaire's or Diderot's romances,--I forget the precise reference,--
the hero, standing like a young Hercules at the parting of ways, can see no other
representation of Virtue than his old tutor holding a snuff-box in his left hand,
from which he takes a pinch and moralizes; whilst Vice appears in the shape of
his mother's chambermaid. It is in youth, more especially, that the goal of our
efforts comes to be a fanciful picture of happiness, which continues to hover
before our eyes sometimes for half and even for the whole of our life--a sort of
mocking spirit; for when we think our dream is to be realized, the picture fades
away, leaving us the knowledge that nothing of what it promised is actually
accomplished. How often this is so with the visions of domesticity--the detailed
picture of what our home will be like; or, of life among our fellow-citizens or in
society; or, again, of living in the country--the kind of house we shall have, its
surroundings, the marks of honor and respect that will be paid to us, and so on,--
whatever our hobby may be; chaque fou a sa marotte. It is often the same, too,
with our dreams about one we love. And this is all quite natural; for the visions
we conjure up affect us directly, as though they were real objects; and so they
exercise a more immediate influence upon our will than an abstract idea, which
gives merely a vague, general outline, devoid of details; and the details are just
the real part of it. We can be only indirectly affected by an abstract idea, and yet
it is the abstract idea alone which will do as much as it promises; and it is the
function of education to teach us to put our trust in it. Of course the abstract idea
must be occasionally explained--paraphrased, as it were--by the aid of pictures;
but discreetly, cum grano salis.
SECTION 19. The preceding rule may be taken as a special case of the
more general maxim, that a man should never let himself be mastered by the
impressions of the moment, or indeed by outward appearances at all, which are
incomparably more powerful in their effects than the mere play of thought or a
train of ideas; not because these momentary impressions are rich in virtue of the
data they supply,--it is often just the contrary,--but because they are something
palpable to the senses and direct in their working; they forcibly invade our mind,
disturbing our repose and shattering our resolutions.
It is easy to understand that the thing which lies before our very eyes will
produce the whole of its effect at once, but that time and leisure are necessary for
the working of thought and the appreciation of argument, as it is impossible to

think of everything at one and the same moment. This is why we are so allured
by pleasure, in spite of all our determination to resist it; or so much annoyed by a
criticism, even though we know that its author it totally incompetent to judge; or
so irritated by an insult, though it comes from some very contemptible quarter.
In the same way, to mention no other instances, ten reasons for thinking that
there is no danger may be outweighed by one mistaken notion that it is actually
at hand. All this shows the radical unreason of human nature. Women frequently
succumb altogether to this predominating influence of present impressions, and
there are few men so overweighted with reason as to escape suffering from a
similar cause.
If it is impossible to resist the effects of some external influence by the
mere play of thought, the best thing to do is to neutralize it by some contrary
influence; for example, the effect of an insult may be overcome by seeking the
society of those who have a good opinion of us; and the unpleasant sensation of
imminent danger may be avoided by fixing our attention on the means of
warding it off.
Leibnitz[1] tells of an Italian who managed to bear up under the tortures of
the rack by never for a moment ceasing to think of the gallows which would
have awaited him, had he revealed his secret; he kept on crying out: I see it! I see
it!--afterwards explaining that this was part of his plan.
[Footnote 1: Nouveaux Essais. Liv. I. ch. 2. Sec. 11.]
It is from some such reason as this, that we find it so difficult to stand alone
in a matter of opinion,--not to be made irresolute by the fact that everyone else
disagrees with us and acts accordingly, even though we are quite sure that they
are in the wrong. Take the case of a fugitive king who is trying to avoid capture;
how much consolation he must find in the ceremonious and submissive attitude
of a faithful follower, exhibited secretly so as not to betray his master's strict
incognito; it must be almost necessary to prevent him doubting his own
existence.
SECTION 20. In the first part of this work I have insisted upon the great
value of health as the chief and most important element in happiness. Let me
emphasize and confirm what I have there said by giving a few general rules as to
its preservation.
The way to harden the body is to impose a great deal of labor and effort
upon it in the days of good health,--to exercise it, both as a whole and in its
several parts, and to habituate it to withstand all kinds of noxious influences. But
on the appearance of an illness or disorder, either in the body as a whole or in
many of its parts, a contrary course should be taken, and every means used to
nurse the body, or the part of it which is affected, and to spare it any effort; for

what is ailing and debilitated cannot be hardened.
The muscles may be strengthened by a vigorous use of them; but not so the
nerves; they are weakened by it. Therefore, while exercising the muscles in
every way that is suitable, care should be taken to spare the nerves as much as
possible. The eyes, for instance, should be protected from too strong a light,--
especially when it is reflected light,--from any straining of them in the dark, or
from the long-continued examination of minute objects; and the ears from too
loud sounds. Above all, the brain should never be forced, or used too much, or at
the wrong time; let it have a rest during digestion; for then the same vital energy
which forms thoughts in the brain has a great deal of work to do elsewhere,--I
mean in the digestive organs, where it prepares chyme and chyle. For similar
reasons, the brain should never be used during, or immediately after, violent
muscular exercise. For the motor nerves are in this respect on a par with the
sensory nerves; the pain felt when a limb is wounded has its seat in the brain;
and, in the same way, it is not really our legs and arms which work and move,--it
is the brain, or, more strictly, that part of it which, through the medium of the
spine, excites the nerves in the limbs and sets them in motion. Accordingly,
when our arms and legs feel tired, the true seat of this feeling is in the brain. This
is why it is only in connection with those muscles which are set in motion
consciously and voluntarily,--in other words, depend for their action upon the
brain,--that any feeling of fatigue can arise; this is not the case with those
muscles which work involuntarily, like the heart. It is obvious, then, that injury
is done to the brain if violent muscular exercise and intellectual exertion are
forced upon it at the same moment, or at very short intervals.
What I say stands in no contradiction with the fact that at the beginning of a
walk, or at any period of a short stroll, there often comes a feeling of enhanced
intellectual vigor. The parts of the brain that come into play have had no time to
become tired; and besides, slight muscular exercise conduces to activity of the
respiratory organs, and causes a purer and more oxydated supply of arterial
blood to mount to the brain.
It is most important to allow the brain the full measure of sleep which is
required to restore it; for sleep is to a man's whole nature what winding up is to a
clock.[1] This measure will vary directly with the development and activity of
the brain; to overstep the measure is mere waste of time, because if that is done,
sleep gains only so much in length as it loses in depth.[2]
[Footnote 1: Of. Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, 4th Edition. Bk. II. pp.
236-40.]
[Footnote: 2: Cf. loc: cit: p. 275. Sleep is a morsel of death borrowed to
keep up and renew the part of life which is exhausted by the day--le sommeil est

un emprunt fait à la mort. Or it might be said that sleep is the interest we have to
pay on the capital which is called in at death; and the higher the rate of interest
and the more regularly it is paid, the further the date of redemption is
postponed.]
It should be clearly understood that thought is nothing but the organic
function of the brain; and it has to obey the same laws in regard to exertion and
repose as any other organic function. The brain can be ruined by overstrain, just
like the eyes. As the function of the stomach is to digest, so it is that of the brain
to think. The notion of a soul,--as something elementary and immaterial, merely
lodging in the brain and needing nothing at all for the performance of its
essential function, which consists in always and unweariedly thinking--has
undoubtedly driven many people to foolish practices, leading to a deadening of
the intellectual powers; Frederick the Great, even, once tried to form the habit of
doing without sleep altogether. It would be well if professors of philosophy
refrained from giving currency to a notion which is attended by practical results
of a pernicious character; but then this is just what professorial philosophy does,
in its old-womanish endeavor to keep on good terms with the catechism. A man
should accustom himself to view his intellectual capacities in no other light than
that of physiological functions, and to manage them accordingly--nursing or
exercising them as the case may be; remembering that every kind of physical
suffering, malady or disorder, in whatever part of the body it occurs, has its
effect upon the mind. The best advice that I know on this subject is given by
Cabanis in his Rapports du physique et du moral de l'homme.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. The work to which Schopenhauer here
refers is a series of essays by Cabanis, a French philosopher (1757-1808),
treating of mental and moral phenomena on a physiological basis. In his later
days, Cabanis completely abandoned his materialistic standpoint.]
Through neglect of this rule, many men of genius and great scholars have
become weak-minded and childish, or even gone quite mad, as they grew old. To
take no other instances, there can be no doubt that the celebrated English poets
of the early part of this century, Scott, Wordsworth, Southey, became
intellectually dull and incapable towards the end of their days, nay, soon after
passing their sixtieth year; and that their imbecility can be traced to the fact that,
at that period of life, they were all led on? by the promise of high pay, to treat
literature as a trade and to write for money. This seduced them into an unnatural
abuse of their intellectual powers; and a man who puts his Pegasus into harness,
and urges on his Muse with the whip, will have to pay a penalty similar to that
which is exacted by the abuse of other kinds of power.
And even in the case of Kant, I suspect that the second childhood of his last

four years was due to overwork in later life, and after he had succeeded in
becoming a famous man.
Every month of the year has its own peculiar and direct influence upon
health and bodily condition generally; nay, even upon the state of the mind. It is
an influence dependent upon the weather.
CHAPTER III.
OUR RELATION TO OTHERS.--SECTION 21.
In making his way through life, a man will find it useful to be ready and
able to do two things: to look ahead and to overlook: the one will protect him
from loss and injury, the other from disputes and squabbles.
No one who has to live amongst men should absolutely discard any person
who has his due place in the order of nature, even though he is very wicked or
contemptible or ridiculous. He must accept him as an unalterable fact--
unalterable, because the necessary outcome of an eternal, fundamental principle;
and in bad cases he should remember the words of Mephistopheles: es muss
auch solche Käuze geben[1]--there must be fools and rogues in the world. If he
acts otherwise, he will be committing an injustice, and giving a challenge of life
and death to the man he discards. No one can alter his own peculiar
individuality, his moral character, his intellectual capacity, his temperament or
physique; and if we go so far as to condemn a man from every point of view,
there will be nothing left him but to engage us in deadly conflict; for we are
practically allowing him the right to exist only on condition that he becomes
another man--which is impossible; his nature forbids it.
[Footnote 1: Goethe's Faust, Part I.]
So if you have to live amongst men, you must allow everyone the right to
exist in accordance with the character he has, whatever it turns out to be: and all
you should strive to do is to make use of this character in such a way as its kind
and nature permit, rather than to hope for any alteration in it, or to condemn it
off-hand for what it is. This is the true sense of the maxim--Live and let live.
That, however, is a task which is difficult in proportion as it is right; and he is a
happy man who can once for all avoid having to do with a great many of his
fellow creatures.
The art of putting up with people may be learned by practicing patience on
inanimate objects, which, in virtue of some mechanical or general physical
necessity, oppose a stubborn resistance to our freedom of action--a form of
patience which is required every day. The patience thus gained may be applied
to our dealings with men, by accustoming ourselves to regard their opposition,

wherever we encounter it, as the inevitable outcome of their nature, which sets
itself up against us in virtue of the same rigid law of necessity as governs the
resistance of inanimate objects. To become indignant at their conduct is as
foolish as to be angry with a stone because it rolls into your path. And with
many people the wisest thing you can do, is to resolve to make use of those
whom you cannot alter.
SECTION 22. It is astonishing how easily and how quickly similarity, or
difference of mind and disposition, makes itself felt between one man and
another as soon as they begin to talk: every little trifle shows it. When two
people of totally different natures are conversing, almost everything said by the
one will, in a greater or less degree, displease the other, and in many cases
produce positive annoyance; even though the conversation turn upon the most
out-of-the-way subject, or one in which neither of the parties has any real
interest. People of similar nature, on the other hand, immediately come to feel a
kind of general agreement; and if they are cast very much in the same mould,
complete harmony or even unison will flow from their intercourse.
This explain two circumstances. First of all, it shows why it is that
common, ordinary people are so sociable and find good company wherever they
go. Ah! those good, dear, brave people. It is just the contrary with those who are
not of the common run; and the less they are so, the more unsociable they
become; so that if, in their isolation, they chance to come across some one in
whose nature they can find even a single sympathetic chord, be it never so
minute, they show extraordinary pleasure in his society. For one man can be to
another only so much as the other is to him. Great minds are like eagles, and
build their nest in some lofty solitude.
Secondly, we are enabled to understand how it is that people of like
disposition so quickly get on with one another, as though they were drawn
together by magnetic force--kindred souls greeting each other from afar. Of
course the most frequent opportunity of observing this is afforded by people of
vulgar tastes and inferior intellect, but only because their name is legion; while
those who are better off in this respect and of a rarer nature, are not often to be
met with: they are called rare because you can seldom find them.
Take the case of a large number of people who have formed themselves
into a league for the purpose of carrying out some practical object; if there be
two rascals among them, they will recognize each other as readily as if they bore
a similar badge, and will at once conspire for some misfeasance or treachery. In
the same way, if you can imagine--per impossible--a large company of very
intelligent and clever people, amongst whom there are only two blockheads,
these two will be sure to be drawn together by a feeling of sympathy, and each

of them will very soon secretly rejoice at having found at least one intelligent
person in the whole company. It is really quite curious to see how two such men,
especially if they are morally and intellectually of an inferior type, will recognize
each other at first sight; with what zeal they will strive to become intimate; how
affably and cheerily they will run to greet each other, just as though they were
old friends;--it is all so striking that one is tempted to embrace the Buddhist
doctrine of metempsychosis and presume that they were on familiar terms in
some former state of existence.
Still, in spite of all this general agreement, men are kept apart who might
come together; or, in some cases, a passing discord springs up between them.
This is due to diversity of mood. You will hardly ever see two people exactly in
the same frame of mind; for that is something which varies with their condition
of life, occupation, surroundings, health, the train of thought they are in at the
moment, and so on. These differences give rise to discord between persons of
the most harmonious disposition. To correct the balance properly, so as to
remove the disturbance--to introduce, as it were, a uniform temperature,--is a
work demanding a very high degree of culture. The extent to which uniformity
of mood is productive of good-fellowship may be measured by its effects upon a
large company. When, for instance, a great many people are gathered together
and presented with some objective interest which works upon all alike and
influences them in a similar way, no matter what it be--a common danger or
hope, some great news, a spectacle, a play, a piece of music, or anything of that
kind--you will find them roused to a mutual expression of thought, and a display
of sincere interest. There will be a general feeling of pleasure amongst them; for
that which attracts their attention produces a unity of mood by overpowering all
private and personal interests.
And in default of some objective interest of the kind I have mentioned,
recourse is usually had to something subjective. A bottle of wine is not an
uncommon means of introducing a mutual feeling of fellowship; and even tea
and coffee are used for a like end.
The discord which so easily finds its way into all society as an effect of the
different moods in which people happen to be for the moment, also in part
explains why it is that memory always idealizes, and sometimes almost
transfigures, the attitude we have taken up at any period of the past--a change
due to our inability to remember all the fleeting influences which disturbed us on
any given occasion. Memory is in this respect like the lens of a camera obscura:
it contracts everything within its range, and so produces a much finer picture
than the actual landscape affords. And, in the case of a man, absence always
goes some way towards securing this advantageous light; for though the

idealizing tendency of the memory requires times to complete its work, it begins
it at once. Hence it is a prudent thing to see your friends and acquaintances only
at considerable intervals of time; and on meeting them again, you will observe
that memory has been at work.
SECTION 23. No man can see over his own height. Let me explain what I
mean.
You cannot see in another man any more than you have in yourself; and
your own intelligence strictly determines the extent to which he comes within its
grasp. If your intelligence is of a very low order, mental qualities in another,
even though they be of the highest kind, will have no effect at all upon you; you
will see nothing in their possessor except the meanest side of his individuality--
in other words, just those parts of his character and disposition which are weak
and defective. Your whole estimate of the man will be confined to his defects,
and his higher mental qualities will no more exist for you than colors exist for
those who cannot see.
Intellect is invisible to the man who has none. In any attempt to criticise
another's work, the range of knowledge possessed by the critic is as essential a
part of his verdict as the claims of the work itself.
Hence intercourse with others involves a process of leveling down. The
qualities which are present in one man, and absent in another, cannot come into
play when they meet; and the self-sacrifice which this entails upon one of the
parties, calls forth no recognition from the other.
Consider how sordid, how stupid, in a word, how vulgar most men are, and
you will see that it is impossible to talk to them without becoming vulgar
yourself for the time being. Vulgarity is in this respect like electricity; it is easily
distributed. You will then fully appreciate the truth and propriety of the
expression, to make yourself cheap; and you will be glad to avoid the society of
people whose only possible point of contact with you is just that part of your
nature of which you have least reason to be proud. So you will see that, in
dealing with fools and blockheads, there is only one way of showing your
intelligence--by having nothing to do with them. That means, of course, that
when you go into society, you may now and then feel like a good dancer who
gets an invitation to a ball, and on arriving, finds that everyone is lame:--with
whom is he to dance?
SECTION 24. I feel respect for the man--and he is one in a hundred--who,
when he is waiting or sitting unoccupied, refrains from rattling or beating time
with anything that happens to be handy,--his stick, or knife and fork, or whatever
else it may be. The probability is that he is thinking of something.
With a large number of people, it is quite evident that their power of sight

completely dominates over their power of thought; they seem to be conscious of
existence only when they are making a noise; unless indeed they happen to be
smoking, for this serves a similar end. It is for the same reason that they never
fail to be all eyes and ears for what is going on around them.
SECTION 25. La Rochefoucauld makes the striking remark that it is
difficult to feel deep veneration and great affection for one and the same person.
If this is so, we shall have to choose whether it is veneration or love that we want
from our fellow-men.
Their love is always selfish, though in very different ways; and the means
used to gain it are not always of a kind to make us proud. A man is loved by
others mainly in the degree in which he moderates his claim on their good
feeling and intelligence: but he must act genuinely in the matter and without
dissimulation--not merely out of forbearance, which is at bottom a kind of
contempt. This calls to mind a very true observation of Helvetius[1]: the amount
of intellect necessary to please us, is a most accurate measure of the amount of
intellect we have ourselves. With these remarks as premises, it is easy to draw
the conclusion.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. Helvetius, Claude-Adrien (1715-71), a
French philosophical writer much esteemed by Schopenhauer. His chief work,
De l'Esprit, excited great interest and opposition at the time of its publication, on
account of the author's pronounced materialism.]
Now with veneration the case is just the opposite; it is wrung from men
reluctantly, and for that very reason mostly concealed. Hence, as compared with
love, veneration gives more real satisfaction; for it is connected with personal
value, and the same is not directly true of love, which is subjective in its nature,
whilst veneration is objective. To be sure, it is more useful to be loved than to be
venerated.
SECTION 26. Most men are so thoroughly subjective that nothing really
interests them but themselves. They always think of their own case as soon as
ever any remark is made, and their whole attention is engrossed and absorbed by
the merest chance reference to anything which affects them personally, be it
never so remote: with the result that they have no power left for forming an
objective view of things, should the conversation take that turn; neither can they
admit any validity in arguments which tell against their interest or their vanity.
Hence their attention is easily distracted. They are so readily offended, insulted
or annoyed, that in discussing any impersonal matter with them, no care is too
great to avoid letting your remarks bear the slightest possible reference to the
very worthy and sensitive individuals whom you have before you; for anything
you may say will perhaps hurt their feelings. People really care about nothing

that does not affect them personally. True and striking observations, fine, subtle
and witty things are lost upon them: they cannot understand or feel them. But
anything that disturbs their petty vanity in the most remote and indirect way, or
reflects prejudicially upon their exceedingly precious selves--to that, they are
most tenderly sensitive. In this respect they are like the little dog whose toes you
are so apt to tread upon inadvertently--you know it by the shrill bark it sets up:
or, again, they resemble a sick man covered with sores and boils, with whom the
greatest care must be taken to avoid unnecessary handling. And in some people
this feeling reaches such a pass that, if they are talking with anyone, and he
exhibits, or does not sufficiently conceal, his intelligence and discernment, they
look upon it as a downright insult; although for the moment they hide their ill
will, and the unsuspecting author of it afterwards ruminates in vain upon their
conduct, and racks his brain to discover what he could possibly have done to
excite their malice and hatred.
But it is just as easy to flatter and win them over; and this is why their
judgment is usually corrupt, and why their opinions are swayed, not by what is
really true and right, but by the favor of the party or class to which they belong.
And the ultimate reason of it all is, that in such people force of will greatly
predominates over knowledge; and hence their meagre intellect is wholly given
up to the service of the will, and can never free itself from that service for a
moment.
Astrology furnishes a magnificent proof of this miserable subjective
tendency in men, which leads them to see everything only as bearing upon
themselves, and to think of nothing that is not straightway made into a personal
matter. The aim of astrology is to bring the motions of the celestial bodies into
relation with the wretched Ego and to establish a connection between a comet in
the sky and squabbles and rascalities on earth.[1]
[Footnote 1: See, for instance, Stobasus, Eclog. I. xxii. 9.]
SECTION 27. When any wrong statement is made, whether in public or in
society, or in books, and well received--or, at any rate, not refuted--that that is no
reason why you should despair or think there the matter will rest. You should
comfort yourself with the reflection that the question will be afterwards
gradually subjected to examination; light will be thrown upon it; it will be
thought over, considered, discussed, and generally in the end the correct view
will be reached; so that, after a time--the length of which will depend upon the
difficulty of the subject--everyone will come to understand that which a clear
head saw at once.
In the meantime, of course, you must have patience. He who can see truly
in the midst of general infatuation is like a man whose watch keeps good time,

when all clocks in the town in which he lives are wrong. He alone knows the
right time; but what use is that to him? for everyone goes by the clocks which
speak false, not even excepting those who know that his watch is the only one
that is right.
SECTION 28. Men are like children, in that, if you spoil them, they become
naughty.
Therefore it is well not to be too indulgent or charitable with anyone. You
may take it as a general rule that you will not lose a friend by refusing him a
loan, but that you are very likely to do so by granting it; and, for similar reasons,
you will not readily alienate people by being somewhat proud and careless in
your behaviour; but if you are very kind and complaisant towards them, you will
often make them arrogant and intolerable, and so a breach will ensue.
There is one thing that, more than any other, throws people absolutely off
their balance--the thought that you are dependent upon them. This is sure to
produce an insolent and domineering manner towards you. There are some
people, indeed, who become rude if you enter into any kind of relation with
them; for instance, if you have occasion to converse with them frequently upon
confidential matters, they soon come to fancy that they can take liberties with
you, and so they try and transgress the laws of politeness. This is why there are
so few with whom you care to become more intimate, and why you should avoid
familiarity with vulgar people. If a man comes to think that I am more dependent
upon him than he is upon me, he at once feels as though I had stolen something
from him; and his endeavor will be to have his vengeance and get it back. The
only way to attain superiority in dealing with men, is to let it be seen that you are
independent of them.
And in this view it is advisable to let everyone of your acquaintance--
whether man or woman--feel now and then that you could very well dispense
with their company. This will consolidate friendship. Nay, with most people
there will be no harm in occasionally mixing a grain of disdain with your
treatment of them; that will make them value your friendship all the more. Chi
non istima vien stimato, as a subtle Italian proverb has it--to disregard is to win
regard. But if we really think very highly of a person, we should conceal it from
him like a crime. This is not a very gratifying thing to do, but it is right. Why, a
dog will not bear being treated too kindly, let alone a man!
SECTION 29. It is often the case that people of noble character and great
mental gifts betray a strange lack of worldly wisdom and a deficiency in the
knowledge of men, more especially when they are young; with the result that it
is easy to deceive or mislead them; and that, on the other hand, natures of the
commoner sort are more ready and successful in making their way in the world.

The reason of this is that, when a man has little or no experience, he must
judge by his own antecedent notions; and in matters demanding judgment, an
antecedent notion is never on the same level as experience. For, with the
commoner sort of people, an antecedent notion means just their own selfish
point of view. This is not the case with those whose mind and character are
above the ordinary; for it is precisely in this respect--their unselfishness--that
they differ from the rest of mankind; and as they judge other people's thoughts
and actions by their own high standard, the result does not always tally with their
calculation.
But if, in the end, a man of noble character comes to see, as the effect of his
own experience, or by the lessons he learns from others, what it is that may be
expected of men in general,--namely, that five-sixths of them are morally and
intellectually so constituted that, if circumstances do not place you in relation
with them, you had better get out of their way and keep as far as possible from
having anything to do with them,--still, he will scarcely ever attain an adequate
notion of their wretchedly mean and shabby nature: all his life long he will have
to be extending and adding to the inferior estimate he forms of them; and in the
meantime he will commit a great many mistakes and do himself harm.
Then, again, after he has really taken to heart the lessons that have been
taught him, it will occasionally happen that, when he is in the society of people
whom he does not know, he will be surprised to find how thoroughly reasonable
they all appear to be, both in their conversation and in their demeanor--in fact,
quite honest, sincere, virtuous and trustworthy people, and at the same time
shrewd and clever.
But that ought not to perplex him. Nature is not like those bad poets, who,
in setting a fool or a knave before us, do their work so clumsily, and with such
evident design, that you might almost fancy you saw the poet standing behind
each of his characters, and continually disavowing their sentiments, and telling
you in a tone of warning: This is a knave; that is a fool; do not mind what he
says. But Nature goes to work like Shakespeare and Goethe, poets who make
every one of their characters--even if it is the devil himself!--appear to be quite
in the right for the moment that they come before us in their several parts; the
characters are described so objectively that they excite our interest and compel
us to sympathize with their point of view; for, like the works of Nature, every
one of these characters is evolved as the result of some hidden law or principle,
which makes all they say and do appear natural and therefore necessary. And
you will always be the prey or the plaything of the devils and fools in this world,
if you expect to see them going about with horns or jangling their bells.
And it should be borne in mind that, in their intercourse with others, people

are like the moon, or like hunchbacks; they show you only one of their sides.
Every man has an innate talent for mimicry,--for making a mask out of his
physiognomy, so that he can always look as if he really were what he pretends to
be; and since he makes his calculations always within the lines of his individual
nature, the appearance he puts on suits him to a nicety, and its effect is extremely
deceptive. He dons his mask whenever his object is to flatter himself into some
one's good opinion; and you may pay just as much attention to it as if it were
made of wax or cardboard, never forgetting that excellent Italian proverb: non é
si tristo cane che non meni la coda,--there is no dog so bad but that he will wag
his tail.
In any case it is well to take care not to form a highly favorable opinion of a
person whose acquaintance you have only recently made, for otherwise you are
very likely to be disappointed; and then you will be ashamed of yourself and
perhaps even suffer some injury. And while I am on the subject, there is another
fact that deserves mention. It is this. A man shows his character just in the way
in which he deals with trifles,--for then he is off his guard. This will often afford
a good opportunity of observing the boundless egoism of man's nature, and his
total lack of consideration for others; and if these defects show themselves in
small things, or merely in his general demeanor, you will find that they also
underlie his action in matters of importance, although he may disguise the fact.
This is an opportunity which should not be missed. If in the little affairs of every
day,--the trifles of life, those matters to which the rule de minimis non applies,--
a man is inconsiderate and seeks only what is advantageous or convenient to
himself, to the prejudice of others' rights; if he appropriates to himself that which
belongs to all alike, you may be sure there is no justice in his heart, and that he
would be a scoundrel on a wholesale scale, only that law and compulsion bind
his hands. Do not trust him beyond your door. He who is not afraid to break the
laws of his own private circle, will break those of the State when he can do so
with impunity.
If the average man were so constituted that the good in him outweighed the
bad, it would be more advisable to rely upon his sense of justice, fairness,
gratitude, fidelity, love or compassion, than to work upon his fears; but as the
contrary is the case, and it is the bad that outweighs the good, the opposite
course is the more prudent one.
If any person with whom we are associated or have to do, exhibits
unpleasant or annoying qualities, we have only to ask ourselves whether or not
this person is of so much value to us that we can put up with frequent and
repeated exhibitions of the same qualities in a somewhat aggravated form.[1] In
case of an affirmative answer to this question, there will not be much to be said,

because talking is very little use. We must let the matter pass, with or without
some notice; but we should nevertheless remember that we are thereby exposing
ourselves to a repetition of the offence. If the answer is in the negative, we must
break with our worthy friend at once and forever; or in the case of a servant,
dismiss him. For he will inevitably repeat the offence, or do something
tantamount to it, should the occasion return, even though for the moment he is
deep and sincere in his assurances of the contrary. There is nothing, absolutely
nothing, that a man cannot forget,--but not himself, his own character. For
character is incorrigible; because all a man's actions emanate from an inward
principle, in virtue of which he must always do the same thing under like
circumstances; and he cannot do otherwise. Let me refer to my prize essay on
the so-called Freedom of the Will, the perusal of which will dissipate any
delusions the reader may have on this subject.
[Footnote 1: To forgive and forget means to throw away dearly bought
experience.]
To become reconciled to a friend with whom you have broken, is a form of
weakness; and you pay the penalty of it when he takes the first opportunity of
doing precisely the very thing which brought about the breach; nay, he does it
the more boldly, because he is secretly conscious that you cannot get on without
him. This is also applicable to servants whom you have dismissed, and then
taken into your service again.
For the same reason, you should just as little expect people to continue to
act in a similar way under altered circumstances. The truth is that men alter their
demeanor and sentiments just as fast as their interest changes; and their resign in
this respect is a bill drawn for short payment that the man must be still more
short-sighted who accepts the bill without protesting it. Accordingly, suppose
you want to know how a man will behave in an office into which you think of
putting him; you should not build upon expectations, on his promises or
assurances. For, even allowing that he is quite sincere, he is speaking about a
matter of which he has no knowledge. The only way to calculate how he will
behave, is to consider the circumstances in which he will be placed, and the
extent to which they will conflict with his character.
If you wish to get a clear and profound insight--and it is very needful--into
the true but melancholy elements of which most men are made, you will find in a
very instructive thing to take the way they behave in the pages of literature as a
commentary to their doings in practical life, and vice versa. The experience thus
gained will be very useful in avoiding wrong ideas, whether about yourself or
about others. But if you come across any special trait of meanness or stupidity--
in life or in literature,--you must be careful not to let it annoy or distress you, but

to look upon it merely as an addition to your knowledge--a new fact to be
considered in studying the character of humanity. Your attitude towards it will
be that of the mineralogist who stumbles upon a very characteristic specimen of
a mineral.
Of course there are some facts which are very exceptional, and it is difficult
to understand how they arise, and how it is that there come to be such enormous
differences between man and man; but, in general, what was said long ago is
quite true, and the world is in a very bad way. In savage countries they eat one
another, in civilized they deceive one another; and that is what people call the
way of the world! What are States and all the elaborate systems of political
machinery, and the rule of force, whether in home or in foreign affairs,--what are
they but barriers against the boundless iniquity of mankind? Does not all history
show that whenever a king is firmly planted on a throne, and his people reach
some degree of prosperity, he uses it to lead his army, like a band of robbers,
against adjoining countries? Are not almost all wars ultimately undertaken for
purposes of plunder? In the most remote antiquity, and to some extent also in the
Middle Ages, the conquered became slaves,--in other words, they had to work
for those who conquered them; and where is the difference between that and
paying war-taxes, which represent the product of our previous work?
All war, says Voltaire, is a matter of robbery; and the Germans should take
that as a warning.
SECTION 30. No man is so formed that he can be left entirely to himself,
to go his own ways; everyone needs to be guided by a preconceived plan, and to
follow certain general rules. But if this is carried too far, and a man tries to take
on a character which is not natural or innate in him, but it artificially acquired
and evolved merely by a process of reasoning, he will very soon discover that
Nature cannot be forced, and that if you drive it out, it will return despite your
efforts:--
Naturam expelles furca, tamen usque recurret.
To understand a rule governing conduct towards others, even to discover it
for oneself and to express it neatly, is easy enough; and still, very soon
afterwards, the rule may be broken in practice. But that is no reason for despair;
and you need not fancy that as it is impossible to regulate your life in accordance
with abstract ideas and maxims, it is better to live just as you please. Here, as in
all theoretical instruction that aims at a practical result, the first thing to do is to
understand the rule; the second thing is to learn the practice of it. The theory
may be understand at once by an effort of reason, and yet the practice of it
acquired only in course of time.
A pupil may lean the various notes on an instrument of music, or the

different position in fencing; and when he makes a mistake, as he is sure to do,
however hard he tries, he is apt to think it will be impossible to observe the rules,
when he is set to read music at sight or challenged to a furious duel. But for all
that, gradual practice makes him perfect, through a long series of slips, blunders
and fresh efforts. It is just the same in other things; in learning to write and speak
Latin, a man will forget the grammatical rules; it is only by long practice that a
blockhead turns into a courtier, that a passionate man becomes shrewd and
worldly-wise, or a frank person reserved, or a noble person ironical. But though
self-discipline of this kind is the result of long habit, it always works by a sort of
external compulsion, which Nature never ceases to resist and sometimes
unexpectedly overcomes. The difference between action in accordance with
abstract principles, and action as the result of original, innate tendency, is the
same as that between a work of art, say a watch--where form and movement are
impressed upon shapeless and inert matter--and a living organism, where form
and matter are one, and each is inseparable from the other.
There is a maxim attributed to the Emperor Napoleon, which expresses this
relation between acquired and innate character, and confirms what I have said:
everything that is unnatural is imperfect;--a rule of universal application,
whether in the physical or in the moral sphere. The only exception I can think of
to this rule is aventurine,[1] a substance known to mineralogists, which in its
natural state cannot compare with the artificial preparation of it.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. Aventurine is a rare kind of quartz; and the
same name is given to a brownish-colored glass much resembling it, which is
manufactured at Murano. It is so called from the fact that the glass was
discovered by chance (arventura).]
And in this connection let me utter a word of protest against any and every
form of affectation. It always arouses contempt; in the first place, because it
argues deception, and the deception is cowardly, for it is based on fear; and,
secondly, it argues self-condemnation, because it means that a man is trying to
appear what he is not, and therefore something which he things better than he
actually is. To affect a quality, and to plume yourself upon it, is just to confess
that you have not got it. Whether it is courage, or learning, or intellect, or wit, or
success with women, or riches, or social position, or whatever else it may be that
a man boasts of, you may conclude by his boasting about it that that is precisely
the direction in which he is rather weak; for if a man really possesses any faculty
to the full, it will not occur to him to make a great show of affecting it; he is
quite content to know that he has it. That is the application of the Spanish
proverb: herradura que chacolotea clavo le falta--a clattering hoof means a nail
gone. To be sure, as I said at first, no man ought to let the reins go quite loose,

and show himself just as he is; for there are many evil and bestial sides to our
nature which require to be hidden away out of sight; and this justifies the
negative attitude of dissimulation, but it does not justify a positive feigning of
qualities which are not there. It should also be remembered that affectation is
recognized at once, even before it is clear what it is that is being affected. And,
finally, affectation cannot last very long, and one day the mask will fall off.
Nemo potest personam diu ferre fictam, says Seneca;[1] ficta cito in naturam
suam recidunt--no one can persevere long in a fictitious character; for nature will
soon reassert itself.
[Footnote 1: De Clementia, I. 1.]
SECTION 31. A man bears the weight of his own body without knowing it,
but he soon feels the weight of any other, if he tries to move it; in the same way,
a man can see other people's shortcoming's and vices, but he is blind to his own.
This arrangement has one advantage: it turns other people into a kind of mirror,
in which a man can see clearly everything that is vicious, faulty, ill-bred and
loathsome in his own nature; only, it is generally the old story of the dog barking
at is own image; it is himself that he sees and not another dog, as he fancies.
He who criticises others, works at the reformation of himself. Those who
form the secret habit of scrutinizing other people's general behavior, and passing
severe judgment upon what they do and leave undone, thereby improve
themselves, and work out their own perfection: for they will have sufficient
sense of justice, or at any rate enough pride and vanity, to avoid in their own
case that which they condemn so harshly elsewhere. But tolerant people are just
the opposite, and claim for themselves the same indulgence that they extend to
others--hanc veniam damus petimusque vicissim. It is all very well for the Bible
to talk about the mote in another's eye and the beam in one's own. The nature of
the eye is to look not at itself but at other things; and therefore to observe and
blame faults in another is a very suitable way of becoming conscious of one's
own. We require a looking-glass for the due dressing of our morals.
The same rule applies in the case of style and fine writing. If, instead of
condemning, you applaud some new folly in these matters, you will imitate it.
That is just why literary follies have such vogue in Germany. The Germans are a
very tolerant people--everybody can see that! Their maxim is--Hanc veniam
damns petimusque vicissim.
SECTION 32. When he is young, a man of noble character fancies that the
relations prevailing amongst mankind, and the alliances to which these relations
lead, are at bottom and essentially, ideal in their nature; that is to say, that they
rest upon similarity of disposition or sentiment, or taste, or intellectual power,
and so on.

But, later on, he finds out that it is a real foundation which underlies these
alliances; that they are based upon some material interest. This is the true
foundation of almost all alliances: nay, most men have no notion of an alliance
resting upon any other basis. Accordingly we find that a man is always measured
by the office he holds, or by his occupation, nationality, or family relations--in a
word, by the position and character which have been assigned him in the
conventional arrangements of life, where he is ticketed and treated as so much
goods. Reference to what he is in himself, as a man--to the measure of his own
personal qualities--is never made unless for convenience' sake: and so that view
of a man is something exceptional, to be set aside and ignored, the moment that
anyone finds it disagreeable; and this is what usually happens. But the more of
personal worth a man has, the less pleasure he will take in these conventional
arrangements; and he will try to withdraw from the sphere in which they apply.
The reason why these arrangements exist at all, is simply that in this world of
ours misery and need are the chief features: therefore it is everywhere the
essential and paramount business of life to devise the means of alleviating them.
SECTION 33. As paper-money circulates in the world instead of real coin,
so, is the place of true esteem and genuine friendship, you have the outward
appearance of it--a mimic show made to look as much like the real thing as
possible.
On the other hand, it may be asked whether there are any people who really
deserve the true coin. For my own part, I should certainly pay more respect to an
honest dog wagging his tail than to a hundred such demonstrations of human
regard.
True and genuine friendship presupposes a strong sympathy with the weal
and woe of another--purely objective in its character and quite disinterested; and
this in its turn means an absolute identification of self with the object of
friendship. The egoism of human nature is so strongly antagonistic to any such
sympathy, that true friendship belongs to that class of things--the sea-serpent, for
instance,--with regard to which no one knows whether they are fabulous or
really exist somewhere or other.
Still, in many cases, there is a grain of true and genuine friendship in the
relation of man to man, though generally, of course, some secret personal
interest is at the bottom of them--some one among the many forms that
selfishness can take. But in a world where all is imperfect, this grain of true
feeling is such an ennobling influence that it gives some warrant for calling
those relations by the name of friendship, for they stand far above the ordinary
friendships that prevail amongst mankind. The latter are so constituted that, were
you to hear how your dear friends speak of you behind your back, you would

never say another word to them.
Apart from the case where it would be a real help to you if your friend were
to make some great sacrifice to serve you, there is no better means of testing the
genuineness of his feelings than the way in which he receives the news of a
misfortune that has just happened to you. At that moment the expression of his
features will either show that his one thought is that of true and sincere sympathy
for you; or else the absolute composure of his countenance, or the passing trace
of something other than sympathy, will confirm the well-known maxim of La
Rochefoucauld: Dans l'adversite de nos meilleurs amis, nous trouvons toujours
quelque chose qui ne nous deplait pas. Indeed, at such a moment, the ordinary
so-called friend will find it hard to suppress the signs of a slight smile of
pleasure. There are few ways by which you can make more certain of putting
people into a good humor than by telling them of some trouble that has recently
befallen you, or by unreservedly disclosing some personal weakness of yours.
How characteristic this is of humanity!
Distance and long absence are always prejudicial to friendship, however
disinclined a man may be to admit. Our regard for people whom we do not see--
even though they be our dearest friends--gradually dries up in the course of
years, and they become abstract notions; so that our interest in them grows to be
more and more intellectual,--nay, it is kept up only as a kind of tradition; whilst
we retain a lively and deep interest in those who are constantly before our eyes,
even if they be only pet animals. This shows how much men are limited by their
senses, and how true is the remark that Goethe makes in Tasso about the
dominant influence of the present moment:--
Die Gegenwart ist eine mächtige Göttin[1]
[Footnote 1: Act iv., se. 4.]
Friends of the house are very rightly so called; because they are friends of
the house rather than of its master; in other words, they are more like cats than
dogs.
Your friends will tell you that they are sincere; your enemies are really so.
Let your enemies' censure be like a bitter medicine, to be used as a means of
self-knowledge.
A friend in need, as the saying goes, is rare. Nay, it is just the contrary; no
sooner have you made a friend than he is in need, and asks for a loan.
SECTION 34. A man must be still a greenhorn in the ways of the world, if
he imagines that he can make himself popular in society by exhibiting
intelligence and discernment. With the immense majority of people, such
qualities excite hatred and resentment, which are rendered all the harder to bear
by the fact that people are obliged to suppress--even from themselves--the real

reason of their anger.
What actually takes place is this. A man feels and perceives that the person
with whom he is conversing is intellectually very much his superior.[1]
[Footnote 1: Cf. Welt als Wills und Vorstellung, Bk. II. p. 256 (4th Edit.),
where I quote from Dr. Johnson, and from Merck, the friend of Goethe's youth.
The former says: There is nothing by which a man exasperates most people
more, than by displaying a superior ability of brilliancy in conversation. They
seem pleased at the time, but their envy makes them curse him at their hearts.
(Boswells Life of Johnson aetat: 74).]
He thereupon secretly and half unconsciously concludes that his
interlocutor must form a proportionately low and limited estimate of his abilities.
That is a method of reasoning--an enthymeme--which rouses the bitterest
feelings of sullen and rancorous hatred. And so Gracian is quite right in saying
that the only way to win affection from people is to show the most animal-like
simplicity of demeanor--para ser bien quisto, el unico medio vestirse la piel del
mas simple de los brutos.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Balthazar Graeian, Oraculo manual, y arte
de prudencia, 240. Gracian (1584-1658) was a Spanish prose writer and Jesuit,
whose works deal chiefly with the observation of character in the various
phenomena of life. Schopenhauer, among others, had a great admiration for his
worldly philosophy, and translated his Oraculo manual--a system of rules for the
conduct of life--into German. The same book was translated into English
towards the close of the seventeenth century.]
To show your intelligence and discernment is only an indirect way of
reproaching other people for being dull and incapable. And besides, it is natural
for a vulgar man to be violently agitated by the sight of opposition in any form;
and in this case envy comes in as the secret cause of his hostility. For it is a
matter of daily observation that people take the greatest pleasure in that which
satisfies their vanity; and vanity cannot be satisfied without comparison with
others. Now, there is nothing of which a man is prouder than of intellectual
ability, for it is this that gives him his commanding place in the animal world. It
is an exceedingly rash thing to let any one see that you are decidedly superior to
him in this respect, and to let other people see it too; because he will then thirst
for vengeance, and generally look about for an opportunity of taking it by means
of insult, because this is to pass from the sphere of intellect to that of will--and
there, all are on an equal footing as regards the feeling of hostility. Hence, while
rank and riches may always reckon upon deferential treatment in society, that is
something which intellectual ability can never expect; to be ignored is the
greatest favor shown to it; and if people notice it at all, it is because they regard

it as a piece of impertinence, or else as something to which its possessor has no
legitimate right, and upon which he dares to pride himself; and in retaliation and
revenge for his conduct, people secretly try and humiliate him in some other
way; and if they wait to do this, it is only for a fitting opportunity. A man may be
as humble as possible in his demeanor, and yet hardly ever get people to
overlook his crime in standing intellectually above them. In the Garden of Roses,
Sadi makes the remark:--You should know that foolish people are a hundredfold
more averse to meeting the wise than the wise are indisposed for the company of
the foolish.
On the other hand, it is a real recommendation to be stupid. For just as
warmth is agreeable to the body, so it does the mind good to feel its superiority;
and a man will seek company likely to give him this feeling, as instinctively as
he will approach the fireplace or walk in the sun if he wants to get warm. But
this means that he will be disliked on account of his superiority; and if a man is
to be liked, he must really be inferior in point of intellect; and the same thing
holds good of a woman in point of beauty. To give proof of real and unfeigned
inferiority to some of the people you meet--that is a very difficult business
indeed!
Consider how kindly and heartily a girl who is passably pretty will
welcome one who is downright ugly. Physical advantages are not thought so
much of in the case of man, though I suppose you would rather a little man sat
next to you than one who was bigger than yourself. This is why, amongst men, it
is the dull and ignorant, and amongst women, the ugly, who are always popular
and in request.[1] It is likely to be said of such people that they are extremely
good-natured, because every one wants to find a pretext for caring about them--a
pretext which will blind both himself and other people to the real reason why he
likes them. This is also why mental superiority of any sort always tends to
isolate its possessor; people run away from him out of pure hatred, and say all
manner of bad things about him by way of justifying their action. Beauty, in the
case of women, has a similar effect: very pretty girls have no friends of their
own sex, and they even find it hard to get another girl to keep them company. A
handsome woman should always avoid applying for a position as companion,
because the moment she enters the room, her prospective mistress will scowl at
her beauty, as a piece of folly with which, both for her own and for her
daughter's sake, she can very well dispense. But if the girl has advantages of
rank, the case is very different; because rank, unlike personal qualities which
work by the force of mere contrast, produces its effect by a process of reflection;
much in the same way as the particular hue of a person's complexion depends
upon the prevailing tone of his immediate surroundings.

[Footnote 1: If you desire to get on in the world, friends and acquaintances
are by far the best passport to fortune. The possession of a great deal of ability
makes a man proud, and therefore not apt to flatter those who have very little,
and from whom, on that account, the possession of great ability should be
carefully concealed. The consciousness of small intellectual power has just the
opposite effect, and is very compatible with a humble, affable and
companionable nature, and with respect for what is mean and wretched. This is
why an inferior sort of man has so many friends to befriend and encourage him.
These remarks are applicable not only to advancement in political life, but
to all competition for places of honor and dignity, nay, even for reputation in the
world of science, literature and art. In learned societies, for example, mediocrity-
-that very acceptable quality--is always to the fore, whilst merit meets with tardy
recognition, or with none at all. So it is in everything.]
SECTION 35. Our trust in other people often consists in great measure of
pure laziness, selfishness and vanity on our own part: I say laziness, because,
instead of making inquiries ourselves, and exercising an active care, we prefer to
trust others; selfishness, because we are led to confide in people by the pressure
of our own affairs; and vanity, when we ask confidence for a matter on which we
rather pride ourselves. And yet, for all that, we expect people to be true to the
trust we repose in them.
But we ought not to become angry if people put no trust in us: because that
really means that they pay honesty the sincere compliment of regarding it as a
very rare thing,--so rare, indeed, as to leave us in doubt whether its existence is
not merely fabulous.
SECTION 36. Politeness,--which the Chinese hold to be a cardinal virtue,--
is based upon two considerations of policy. I have explained one of these
considerations in my Ethics; the other is as follows:--Politeness is a tacit
agreement that people's miserable defects, whether moral or intellectual, shall on
either side be ignored and not made the subject of reproach; and since these
defects are thus rendered somewhat less obtrusive, the result is mutually
advantageous.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--In the passage referred to (Grundlage der
Moral, collected works, Vol. IV., pp. 187 and 198), Schopenhauer explains
politeness as a conventional and systematic attempt to mask the egoism of
human nature in the small affairs of life,--an egoism so repulsive that some such
device is necessary for the purpose of concealing its ugliness. The relation which
politeness bears to the true love of one's neighbor is analogous to that existing
between justice as an affair of legality, and justice as the real integrity of the
heart.]

It is a wise thing to be polite; consequently, it is a stupid thing to be rude.
To make enemies by unnecessary and willful incivility, is just as insane a
proceeding as to set your house on fire. For politeness is like a counter--an
avowedly false coin, with which it is foolish to be stingy. A sensible man will be
generous in the use of it. It is customary in every country to end a letter with the
words:--your 
most 
obedient 
servant--votre 
très-humble 
serviteur--suo
devotissimo servo. (The Germans are the only people who suppress the word
servant--Diener--because, of course, it is not true!) However, to carry politeness
to such an extent as to damage your prospects, is like giving money where only
counters are expected.
Wax, a substance naturally hard and brittle, can be made soft by the
application of a little warmth, so that it will take any shape you please. In the
same way, by being polite and friendly, you can make people pliable and
obliging, even though they are apt to be crabbed and malevolent. Hence
politeness is to human nature what warmth is to wax.
Of course, it is no easy matter to be polite; in so far, I mean, as it requires
us to show great respect for everybody, whereas most people deserve none at all;
and again in so far as it demands that we should feign the most lively interest in
people, when we must be very glad that we have nothing to do with them. To
combine politeness with pride is a masterpiece of wisdom.
We should be much less ready to lose our temper over an insult,--which, in
the strict sense of the word, means that we have not been treated with respect,--
if, on the one hand, we have not such an exaggerated estimate of our value and
dignity--that is to say, if we were not so immensely proud of ourselves; and, on
the other hand, if we had arrived at any clear notion of the judgment which, in
his heart, one man generally passes upon another. If most people resent the
slightest hint that any blame attaches to them, you may imagine their feelings if
they were to overhear what their acquaintance say about them. You should never
lose sight of the fact that ordinary politeness is only a grinning mask: if it shifts
its place a little, or is removed for a moment, there is no use raising a hue and
cry. When a man is downright rude, it is as though he had taken off all his
clothes, and stood before you in puris naturalibus. Like most men in this
condition, he does not present a very attractive appearance.
SECTION 37. You ought never to take any man as a model for what you
should do or leave undone; because position and circumstances are in no two
cases alike, and difference of character gives a peculiar, individual tone to what
a man does. Hence duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem--two persons may do the
same thing with a different result. A man should act in accordance with his own
character, as soon as he has carefully deliberated on what he is about to do.

The outcome of this is that originality cannot be dispensed with in practical
matters: otherwise, what a man does will not accord with what he is.
SECTION 38. Never combat any man's opinion; for though you reached the
age of Methuselah, you would never have done setting him right upon all the
absurd things that he believes.
It is also well to avoid correcting people's mistakes in conversation,
however good your intentions may be; for it is easy to offend people, and
difficult, if not impossible, to mend them.
If you feel irritated by the absurd remarks of two people whose
conversation you happen to overhear, you should imagine that you are listening
to a dialogue of two fools in a comedy. Probatum est.
The man who comes into the world with the notion that he is really going to
instruct in matters of the highest importance, may thank his stars if he escapes
with a whole skin.
SECTION 39. If you want your judgment to be accepted, express it coolly
and without passion. All violence has its seat in the will; and so, if your
judgment is expressed with vehemence, people will consider it an effort of will,
and not the outcome of knowledge, which is in its nature cold and
unimpassioned. Since the will is the primary and radical element in human
nature, and intellect merely supervenes as something secondary, people are more
likely to believe that the opinion you express with so much vehemence is due to
the excited state of your will, rather than that the excitement of the will comes
only from the ardent nature of your opinion.
SECTION 40. Even when you are fully justified in praising yourself, you
should never be seduced into doing so. For vanity is so very common, and merit
so very uncommon, that even if a man appears to be praising himself, though
very indirectly, people will be ready to lay a hundred to one that he is talking out
of pure vanity, and that he has not sense enough to see what a fool he is making
of himself.
Still, for all that, there may be some truth in Bacon's remark that, as in the
case of calumny, if you throw enough dirt, some of it will stick, so it it also in
regard to self-praise; with the conclusion that self-praise, in small doses, is to be
recommended.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Schopenhauer alludes to the following
passage in Bacon's De Augmentis Scientiarum, Bk. viii., ch. 2: Sicut enim dici
solet de calumnia, audacter calumniare, semper aliquid haeret; sic dici potest de
jactantia, (nisi plane deformis fuerit et ridicula), audacter te vendita, semper
aliquid haeret. Haerebit certe apud populum, licet prudentiores subrideant. Itaque
existimatio parta apud plurimos paucorum fastidium abunde compensabit.]

SECTION 41. If you have reason to suspect that a person is telling you a
lie, look as though you believed every word he said. This will give him courage
to go on; he will become more vehement in his assertions, and in the end betray
himself.
Again, if you perceive that a person is trying to conceal something from
you, but with only partial success, look as though you did not believe him, This
opposition on your part will provoke him into leading out his reserve of truth and
bringing the whole force of it to bear upon your incredulity.
SECTION 42. You should regard all your private affairs as secrets, and, in
respect of them, treat your acquaintances, even though you are on good terms
with them, as perfect strangers, letting them know nothing more than they can
see for themselves. For in course of time, and under altered circumstances, you
may find it a disadvantage that they know even the most harmless things about
you.
And, as a general rule, it is more advisable to show your intelligence by
saying nothing than by speaking out; for silence is a matter of prudence, whilst
speech has something in it of vanity. The opportunities for displaying the one or
the other quality occur equally often; but the fleeting satisfaction afforded by
speech is often preferred to the permanent advantage secured by silence.
The feeling of relief which lively people experience in speaking aloud when
no one is listening, should not be indulged, lest it grow into a habit; for in this
way thought establishes such very friendly terms with speech, that conversation
is apt to become a process of thinking aloud. Prudence exacts that a wide gulf
should be fixed between what we think and what we say.
At times we fancy that people are utterly unable to believe in the truth of
some statement affecting us personally, whereas it never occurs to them to doubt
it; but if we give them the slightest opportunity of doubting it, they find it
absolutely impossible to believe it any more. We often betray ourselves into
revealing something, simply because we suppose that people cannot help
noticing it,--just as a man will throw himself down from a great height because
he loses his head, in other words, because he fancies that he cannot retain a firm
footing any longer; the torment of his position is so great, that he thinks it better
to put an end to it at once. This is the kind of insanity which is called
acrophobia.
But it should not be forgotten how clever people are in regard to affairs
which do not concern them, even though they show no particularly sign of
acuteness in other matters. This is a kind of algebra in which people are very
proficient: give them a single fact to go upon, and they will solve the most
complicated problems. So, if you wish to relate some event that happened long

ago, without mentioning any names, or otherwise indicating the persons to
whom you refer, you should be very careful not to introduce into your narrative
anything that might point, however distantly, to some definite fact, whether it is
a particular locality, or a date, or the name of some one who was only to a small
extent implicated, or anything else that was even remotely connected with the
event; for that at once gives people something positive to go upon, and by the aid
of their talent for this sort of algebra, they will discover all the rest. Their
curiosity in these matters becomes a kind of enthusiasm: their will spurs on their
intellect, and drives it forward to the attainment of the most remote results. For
however unsusceptible and different people may be to general and universal
truths, they are very ardent in the matter of particular details.
In keeping with what I have said, it will be found that all those who profess
to give instructions in the wisdom of life are specially urgent in commending the
practice of silence, and assign manifold reasons why it should be observed; so it
is not necessary for me to enlarge upon the subject any further. However, I may
just add one or two little known Arabian proverbs, which occur to me as
peculiarly appropriate:--
Do not tell a friend anything that you would conceal from an enemy.
A secret is in my custody, if I keep it; but should it escape me, it is I who
am the prisoner.
The tree of silence bears the fruit of peace.
SECTION 43. Money is never spent to so much advantage as when you
have been cheated out of it; for at one stroke you have purchased prudence.
SECTION 44. If possible, no animosity should be felt for anyone. But
carefully observe and remember the manner in which a man conducts himself, so
that you may take the measure of his value,--at any rate in regard to yourself,--
and regulate your bearing towards him accordingly; never losing sight of the fact
that character is unalterable, and that to forget the bad features in a man's
disposition is like throwing away hard-won money. Thus you will protect
yourself against the results of unwise intimacy and foolish friendship.
Give way neither to love nor to hate, is one-half of worldly wisdom: say
nothing and believe nothing, the other half. Truly, a world where there is need of
such rules as this and the following, is one upon which a man may well turn his
back.
SECTION 45. To speak angrily to a person, to show your hatred by what
you say or by the way you look, is an unnecessary proceeding--dangerous,
foolish, ridiculous, and vulgar.
Anger and hatred should never be shown otherwise than in what you do;
and feelings will be all the more effective in action, in so far as you avoid the

exhibition of them in any other way. It is only cold-blooded animals whose bite
is poisonous.
SECTION 46. To speak without emphasizing your words--parler sans
accent--is an old rule with those who are wise in the world's ways. It means that
you should leave other people to discover what it is that you have said; and as
their minds are slow, you can make your escape in time. On the other hand, to
emphasize your meaning--parler avec accent--is to address their feelings; and the
result is always the opposite of what you expect. If you are polite enough in your
manner and courteous in your tone there are many people whom you may abuse
outright, and yet run no immediate risk of offending them.
CHAPTER IV,
WORLDLY FORTUNE.--SECTION 47.
However varied the forms that human destiny may take, the same elements
are always present; and so life is everywhere much of a piece, whether it passed
in the cottage or in the palace, in the barrack or in the cloister. Alter the
circumstance as much as you please! point to strange adventures, successes,
failures! life is like a sweet-shop, where there is a great variety of things, odd in
shape and diverse in color--one and all made from the same paste. And when
men speak of some one's success, the lot of the man who has failed is not so very
different as it seems. The inequalities in the world are like the combinations in a
kaleidoscope; at every turn a fresh picture strikes the eye; and yet, in reality, you
see only the same bits of glass as you saw before.
SECTION 48. An ancient writer says, very truly, that there are three great
powers in the world; Sagacity, Strength, and Luck,--[Greek: sunetos, kratos,
tuchu.] I think the last is the most efficacious.
A man's life is like the voyage of a ship, where luck--secunda aut adversa
fortuna--acts the part of the wind, and speeds the vessel on its way or drives it
far out of its course. All that the man can do for himself is of little avail; like the
rudder, which, if worked hard and continuously, may help in the navigation of
the ship; and yet all may be lost again by a sudden squall. But if the wind is only
in the right quarter, the ship will sail on so as not to need any steering. The
power of luck is nowhere better expressed than in a certain Spanish proverb: Da
Ventura a tu hijo, y echa lo en el mar--give your son luck and throw him into the
sea.
Still, chance, it may be said, is a malignant power, and as little as possible
should be left to its agency. And yet where is there any giver who, in dispensing
gifts, tells us quite clearly that we have no right to them, and that we owe them

not to any merit on our part, but wholly to the goodness and grace of the giver--
at the same time allowing us to cherish the joyful hope of receiving, in all
humility, further undeserved gifts from the same hands--where is there any giver
like that, unless it be Chance? who understands the kingly art of showing the
recipient that all merit is powerless and unavailing against the royal grace and
favor.
On looking back over the course of his life,--that labyrinthine way of error,-
-a man must see many points where luck failed him and misfortune came; and
then it is easy to carry self-reproach to an unjust excess. For the course of a
man's life is in no wise entirely of his own making; it is the product of two
factors--the series of things that happened, and his own resolves in regard to
them, and these two are constantly interacting upon and modifying each other.
And besides these, another influence is at work in the very limited extent of a
man's horizon, whether it is that he cannot see very far ahead in respect of the
plans he will adopt, or that he is still less able to predict the course of future
events: his knowledge is strictly confined to present plans and present events.
Hence, as long as a man's goal is far off, he cannot steer straight for it; he must
be content to make a course that is approximately right; and in following the
direction in which he thinks he ought to go, he will often have occasion to tack.
All that a man can do is to form such resolves as from time to time accord
with the circumstances in which he is placed, in the hope of thus managing to
advance a step nearer towards the final goal. It is usually the case that the
position in which we stand, and the object at which we aim, resemble two
tendencies working with dissimilar strength in different directions; and the
course of our life is represented by their diagonal, or resultant force.
Terence makes the remark that life is like a game at dice, where if the
number that turns up is not precisely the one you want, you can still contrive to
use it equally:--in vita est hominum quasi cum ludas tesseris; si illud quod
maxime opus est jactu non cadit, illud quod cecidit forte, id arte ut corrigas.[1]
Or, to put the matter more shortly, life is a game of cards, when the cards are
shuffled and dealt by fate. But for my present purpose, the most suitable simile
would be that of a game of chess, where the plan we determined to follow is
conditioned by the play of our rival,--in life, by the caprice of fate. We are
compelled to modify our tactics, often to such an extent that, as we carry them
out, hardly a single feature of the original plan can be recognized.
[Footnote 1: He seems to have been referring to a game something like
backgammon.]
But above and beyond all this, there is another influence that makes itself
felt in our lives. It is a trite saying--only too frequently true--that we are often

more foolish than we think. On the other hand, we are often wiser than we fancy
ourselves to be. This, however, is a discovery which only those can make, of
whom it is really true; and it takes them a long time to make it. Our brains are
not the wisest part of us. In the great moments of life, when a man decides upon
an important step, his action is directed not so much by any clear knowledge of
the right thing to do, as by an inner impulse--you may almost call it an instinct--
proceeding from the deepest foundations of his being. If, later on, he attempts to
criticise his action by the light of hard and fast ideas of what is right in the
abstract--those unprofitable ideas which are learnt by rote, or, it may be,
borrowed from other people; if he begins to apply general rules, the principles
which have guided others, to his own case, without sufficiently weighing the
maxim that one man's meat is another's poison, then he will run great risk of
doing himself an injustice. The result will show where the right course lay. It is
only when a man has reached the happy age of wisdom that he is capable of just
judgment in regard either to his own actions or to those of others.
It may be that this impulse or instinct is the unconscious effect of a kind of
prophetic dream which is forgotten when we awake--lending our life a
uniformity of tone, a dramatic unity, such as could never result from the unstable
moments of consciousness, when we are so easily led into error, so liable to
strike a false note. It is in virtue of some such prophetic dream that a man feels
himself called to great achievements in a special sphere, and works in that
direction from his youth up out of an inner and secret feeling that that is his true
path, just as by a similar instinct the bee is led to build up its cells in the comb.
This is the impulse which Balthazar Gracian calls la gran sindéresis[1]--the great
power of moral discernment: it is something that a man instinctively feels to be
his salvation without which he were lost.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--This obscure word appears to be derived
from the Greek sugtaereo (N.T. and Polyb.) meaning "to observe strictly." It
occurs in The Doctor and Student, a series of dialogues between a doctor of
divinity and a student on the laws of England, first published in 1518; and is
there (Dialog. I. ch. 13) explained as "a natural power of the soule, set in the
highest part thereof, moving and stirring it to good, and abhoring evil." This
passage is copied into Milton's Commonplace Book, edit. Horwood, § 79. The
word is also found in the Dictionary of the Spanish Academy (vol. vi. of the year
1739) in the sense of an innate discernment of moral principles, where a
quotation is given from Madre Maria de Jesus, abbess of the convent of the
Conception at Agreda, a mystical writer of the seventeenth century, frequently
consulted by Philip IV.,--and again in the Bolognese Dictionary of 1824, with a
similar meaning, illustrated from the writings of Salvini (1653-1729). For these

references I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Norman Maccoll.]
To act in accordance with abstract principles is a difficult matter, and a
great deal of practice will be required before you can be even occasionally
successful; it of tens happens that the principles do not fit in with your particular
case. But every man has certain innate concrete principles--a part, as it were, of
the very blood that flows in his veins, the sum or result, in fact, of all his
thoughts, feelings and volitions. Usually he has no knowledge of them in any
abstract form; it is only when he looks back upon the course his life has taken,
that he becomes aware of having been always led on by them--as though they
formed an invisible clue which he had followed unawares.
SECTION 49. That Time works great changes, and that all things are in
their nature fleeting--these are truths that should never be forgotten. Hence, in
whatever case you may be, it is well to picture to yourself the opposite: in
prosperity, to be mindful of misfortune; in friendship, of enmity; in good
weather, of days when the sky is overcast; in love, of hatred; in moments of
trust, to imagine the betrayal that will make you regret your confidence; and so,
too, when you are in evil plight, to have a lively sense of happier times--what a
lasting source of true worldly wisdom were there! We should then always
reflect, and not be so very easily deceived; because, in general, we should
anticipate the very changes that the years will bring.
Perhaps in no form of knowledge is personal experience so indispensable as
in learning to see that all things are unstable and transitory in this world. There is
nothing that, in its own place and for the time it lasts, is not a product of
necessity, and therefore capable of being fully justified; and it is this fact that
makes circumstances of every year, every month, even of every day, seem as
though they might maintain their right to last to all eternity. But we know that
this can never be the case, and that in a world where all is fleeting, change alone
endures. He is a prudent man who is not only undeceived by apparent stability,
but is able to forecast the lines upon which movement will take place.[1]
[Footnote 1: Chance plays so great a part in all human affairs that when a
man tries to ward off a remote danger by present sacrifice, the danger often
vanishes under some new and unforeseen development of events; and then the
sacrifice, in addition to being a complete loss, brings about such an altered state
of things as to be in itself a source of positive danger in the face of this new
development. In taking measures of precaution, then, it is well not to look too far
ahead, but to reckon with chance; and often to oppose a courageous front to a
danger, in the hope that, like many a dark thunder-cloud, it may pass away
without breaking.]
But people generally think that present circumstances will last, and that

matters will go on in the future as they have clone in the past. Their mistakes
arises from the fact that they do not understand the cause of the things they see--
causes which, unlike the effects they produce, contain in themselves the germ of
future change. The effects are all that people know, and they hold fast to them on
the supposition that those unknown causes, which were sufficient to bring them
about, will also be able to maintain them as they are. This is a very common
error; and the fact that it is common is not without its advantage, for it means
that people always err in unison; and hence the calamity which results from the
error affects all alike, and is therefore easy to bear; whereas, if a philosopher
makes a mistake, he is alone in his error, and so at a double disadvantage.[1]
[Footnote 1: I may remark, parenthetically, that all this is a confirmation of
the principle laid down in Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung (Bk. I. p. 94: 4th
edit.), that error always consists in making a wrong inference, that is, in
ascribing a given effect to something that did not cause it.]
But in saying that we should anticipate the effects of time, I mean that we
should mentally forecast what they are likely to be; I do not mean that we should
practically forestall them, by demanding the immediate performance of promises
which time alone can fulfill. The man who makes his demand will find out that
there is no worse or more exacting usurer than Time; and that, if you compel
Time to give money in advance, you will have to pay a rate of interest more
ruinous than any Jew would require. It is possible, for instance, to make a tree
burst forth into leaf, blossom, or even bear fruit within a few days, by the
application of unslaked lime and artificial heat; but after that the tree will wither
away. So a young man may abuse his strength--it may be only for a few weeks--
by trying to do at nineteen what he could easily manage at thirty, and Time may
give him the loan for which he asks; but the interest he will have to pay comes
out of the strength of his later years; nay, it is part of his very life itself.
There are some kinds of illness in which entire restoration to health is
possible only by letting the complaint run its natural course; after which it
disappears without leaving any trace of its existence. But if the sufferer is very
impatient, and, while he is still affected, insists that he is completely well, in this
case, too, Time will grant the loan, and the complaint may be shaken off; but
life-long weakness and chronic mischief will be the interest paid upon it.
Again, in time of war or general disturbance, a man may require ready
money at once, and have to sell out his investments in land or consols for a third
or even a still smaller fraction of the sum he would have received from them, if
he could have waited for the market to right itself, which would have happened
in due course; but he compels Time to grant him a loan, and his loss is the
interest he has to pay. Or perhaps he wants to go on a long journey and requires

the money: in one or two years he could lay by a sufficient sum out of his
income, but he cannot afford to wait; and so he either borrows it or deducts it
from his capital; in other words, he gets Time to lend him the money in advance.
The interest he pays is a disordered state of his accounts, and permanent and
increasing deficits, which he can never make good.
Such is Time's usury; and all who cannot wait are its victims. There is no
more thriftless proceeding than to try and mend the measured pace of Time. Be
careful, then, not to become its debtor.
SECTION 50. In the daily affairs of life, you will have very many
opportunities of recognizing a characteristic difference between ordinary people
of prudence and discretion. In estimating the possibility of danger in connection
with any undertaking, an ordinary man will confine his inquiries to the kind of
risk that has already attended such undertakings in the past; whereas a prudent
person will look ahead, and consider everything that might possibly happen in
the future, having regard to a certain Spanish maxim: lo que no acaece en un
ano, acaece en un rato--a thing may not happen in a year, and yet may happen
within two minutes.
The difference in question is, of course, quite natural; for it requires some
amount of discernment to calculate possibilities; but a man need only have his
senses about him to see what has already happened.
Do not omit to sacrifice to evil spirits. What I mean is, that a man should
not hesitate about spending time, trouble, and money, or giving up his comfort,
or restricting his aims and denying himself, if he can thereby shut the door on the
possibility of misfortune. The most terrible misfortunes are also the most
improbable and remote--the least likely to occur. The rule I am giving is best
exemplified in the practice of insurance,--a public sacrifice made on the altar of
anxiety. Therefore take out your policy of insurance!
SECTION 51. Whatever fate befalls you, do not give way to great
rejoicings or great lamentations; partly because all things are full of change, and
your fortune may turn at any moment; partly because men are so apt to be
deceived in their judgment as to what is good or bad for them.
Almost every one in his turn has lamented over something which
afterwards turned out to be the very best thing for him that could have happened-
-or rejoiced at an event which became the source of his greatest sufferings. The
right state of mind has been finely portrayed by Shakespeare:
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief That the first face of neither, on
the start, Can woman me unto't.[1]
[Footnote 1: All's Well that Ends Well, Act. ii. Sc. 2.]
And, in general, it may be said that, if a man takes misfortunes quietly, it is

because he knows that very many dreadful things may happen in the course of
life; and so he looks upon the trouble of the moment as only a very small part of
that which might come. This is the Stoic temper--never to be unmindful of the
sad fate of humanity--condicionis humanoe oblitus; but always to remember that
our existence is full of woe and misery: and that the ills to which we are exposed
are innumerable. Wherever he be, a man need only cast a look around, to revive
the sense of human misery: there before his eyes he can see mankind struggling
and floundering in torment,--all for the sake of a wretched existence, barren and
unprofitable!
If he remembers this, a man will not expect very much from life, but learn
to accommodate himself to a world where all is relative and no perfect state
exists;--always looking misfortune in the face, and if he cannot avoid it, meeting
it with courage.
It should never be forgotten that misfortune, be it great or small, is the
element in which we live. But that is no reason why a man should indulge in
fretful complaints, and, like Beresford,[1] pull a long face over the Miseries of
Human Life,--and not a single hour is free from them; or still less, call upon the
Deity at every flea-bite--in pulicis morsu Deum invocare. Our aim should be to
look well about us, to ward off misfortune by going to meet it, to attain such
perfection and refinement in averting the disagreeable things of life,--whether
they come from our fellow-men or from the physical world,--that, like a clever
fox, we may slip out of the way of every mishap, great or small; remembering
that a mishap is generally only our own awkwardness in disguise.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Rev. James Beresford (1764-1840),
miscellaneous writer. The full title of this, his chief work, is "The Miseries of
Human Life; or the last groans of Timothy Testy and Samuel Sensitive, with a
few supplementary sighs from Mrs. Testy."]
The main reason why misfortune falls less heavily upon us, if we have
looked upon its occurrence as not impossible, and, as the saying is, prepared
ourselves for it, may be this: if, before this misfortune comes, we have quietly
thought over it as something which may or may not happen, the whole of its
extent and range is known to us, and we can, at least, determine how far it will
affect us; so that, if it really arrives, it does not depress us unduly--its weight is
not felt to be greater than it actually is. But if no preparation has been made to
meet it, and it comes unexpectedly, the mind is in a state of terror for the
moment and unable to measure the full extent of the calamity; it seems so far-
reaching in its effects that the victim might well think there was no limit to them;
in any case, its range is exaggerated. In the same way, darkness and uncertainty
always increase the sense of danger. And, of course, if we have thought over the

possibility of misfortune, we have also at the same time considered the sources
to which we shall look for help and consolation; or, at any rate, we have
accustomed ourselves to the idea of it.
There is nothing that better fits us to endure the misfortunes of life with
composure, than to know for certain that everything that happens--from the
smallest up to the greatest facts of existence--happens of necessity.[1] A man
soon accommodates himself to the inevitable--to something that must be; and if
he knows that nothing can happen except of necessity, he will see that things
cannot be other that they are, and that even the strangest chances in the world are
just as much a product of necessity as phenomena which obey well-known rules
and turn out exactly in accordance with expectation. Let me here refer to what I
have said elsewhere on the soothing effect of the knowledge that all things are
inevitable and a product of necessity.[2]
[Footnote 1: This is a truth which I have firmly established in my prize-
essay on the Freedom of the Will, where the reader will find a detailed
explanation of the grounds on which it rests. Cf. especially p. 60.
[Schopenhauer's Works, 4th Edit., vol. iv.--Tr.]]
[Footnote 2: Cf. Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Bk. I. p. 361 (4th edit.).]
If a man is steeped in the knowledge of this truth, he will, first of all, do
what he can, and then readily endure what he must.
We may regard the petty vexations of life that are constantly happening, as
designed to keep us in practice for bearing great misfortunes, so that we may not
become completely enervated by a career of prosperity. A man should be as
Siegfried, armed cap-à-pie, towards the small troubles of every day--those little
differences we have with our fellow-men, insignificant disputes, unbecoming
conduct in other people, petty gossip, and many other similar annoyances of life;
he should not feel them at all, much less take them to heart and brood over them,
but hold them at arm's length and push them out of his way, like stones that lie in
the road, and upon no account think about them and give them a place in his
reflections.
SECTION 52. What people commonly call Fate is, as a general rule,
nothing but their own stupid and foolish conduct. There is a fine passage in
Homer,[1] illustrating the truth of this remark, where the poet praises [GREEK:
maetis]--shrewd council; and his advice is worthy of all attention. For if
wickedness is atoned for only in another world, stupidity gets its reward here--
although, now and then, mercy may be shown to the offender.
[Footnote 1: Iliad, xxiii. 313, sqq.]
It is not ferocity but cunning that strikes fear into the heart and forebodes
danger; so true it is that the human brain is a more terrible weapon than the lion's

paw.
The most finished man of the world would be one who was never irresolute
and never in a hurry.
SECTION 53. Courage comes next to prudence as a quality of mind very
essential to happiness. It is quite true that no one can endow himself with either,
since a man inherits prudence from his mother and courage from his father; still,
if he has these qualities, he can do much to develop them by means of resolute
exercise.
In this world, where the game is played with loaded dice, a man must have
a temper of iron, with armor proof to the blows of fate, and weapons to make his
way against men. Life is one long battle; we have to fight at every step; and
Voltaire very rightly says that if we succeed, it is at the point of the sword, and
that we die with the weapon in our hand--on ne réussit dans ce monde qua la
pointe de l'épee, et on meurt les armes à la main. It is a cowardly soul that
shrinks or grows faint and despondent as soon as the storm begins to gather, or
even when the first cloud appears on the horizon. Our motto should be No
Surrender; and far from yielding to the ills of life, let us take fresh courage from
misfortune:--
Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito.[1]
[Footnote 1: Virgil, Aeneid, vi. 95.]
As long as the issue of any matter fraught with peril is still in doubt, and
there is yet some possibility left that all may come right, no one should ever
tremble or think of anything but resistance,--just as a man should not despair of
the weather if he can see a bit of blue sky anywhere. Let our attitude be such that
we should not quake even if the world fell in ruins about us:--
Si fractus illabatur orbis Impavidum ferient ruinae.[1]
[Footnote 1: Horace, Odes iii. 3.]
Our whole life itself--let alone its blessings--would not be worth such a
cowardly trembling and shrinking of the heart. Therefore, let us face life
courageously and show a firm front to every ill:--
Quocirca vivite fortes Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus.
Still, it is possible for courage to be carried to an excess and to degenerate
into rashness. It may even be said that some amount of fear is necessary, if we
are to exist at all in the world, and cowardice is only the exaggerated form of it.
This truth has been very well expressed by Bacon, in his account of Terror
Panicus; and the etymological account which he gives of its meaning, is very
superior to the ancient explanation preserved for us by Plutarch.[1] He connects
the expression with Pan the personification of Nature;[2] and observes that fear
is innate in every living thing, and, in fact, tends to its preservation, but that it is

apt to come into play without due cause, and that man is especially exposed to it.
The chief feature of this Panie Terror is that there is no clear notion of any
definite danger bound up with it; that it presumes rather than knows that danger
exists; and that, in case of need, it pleads fright itself as the reason for being
afraid.
[Footnote 1: De Iside et Osiride ch. 14.]
[Footnote 2: De Sapientia Veterum, C. 6. Natura enim rerum omnibus
viventibus indidit mentum ac formidinem, vitae atque essentiae suae
conservatricem, ac mala ingruentia vitantem et depellentem. Verumtamen eaden
natura modum tenere nescia est: sed timoribus salutaribus semper vanos et
innanes admiscet; adeo ut omnia (si intus conspici darentur) Panicis terroribus
plenissima sint praesertim humana.]
CHAPTER V.
THE AGES OF LIFE.
There is a very fine saying of Voltaire's to the effect that every age of life
has its own peculiar mental character, and that a man will feel completely
unhappy if his mind is not in accordance with his years:--
Qui n'a pas l'esprit de son âge, De son âge atout le malheur.
It will, therefore, be a fitting close to our speculations upon the nature of
happiness, if we glance at the chances which the various periods of life produce
in us.
Our whole life long it is the present, and the present alone, that we actually
possess: the only difference is that at the beginning of life we look forward to a
long future, and that towards the end we look back upon a long past; also that
our temperament, but not our character, undergoes certain well-known changes,
which make the present wear a different color at each period of life.
I have elsewhere stated that in childhood we are more given to using our
intellect than our will; and I have explained why this is so.[1] It is just for this
reason that the first quarter of life is so happy: as we look back upon it in after
years, it seems a sort of lost paradise. In childhood our relations with others are
limited, our wants are few,--in a word, there is little stimulus for the will; and so
our chief concern is the extension of our knowledge. The intellect--like the brain,
which attains its full size in the seventh year,[2] is developed early, though it
takes time to mature; and it explores the whole world of its surroundings in its
constant search for nutriment: it is then that existence is in itself an ever fresh
delight, and all things sparkle with the charm of novelty.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Schopenhauer refers to Die Welt als Wille

und Vorstellung, Bk. II. c, 31, p. 451 (4th edit.), where he explains that this is
due to the fact that at that period of life the brain and nervous system are much
more developed than any other part of the organism.]
[Footnote 2: Translator's Note.--This statement is not quite correct. The
weight of the brain increases rapidly up to the seventh year, more slowly
between the sixteenth and the twentieth year, still more slowly till between thirty
and forty years of age, when it attains its maximum. At each decennial period
after this, it is supposed to decrease in weight on the average, an ounce for every
ten years.]
This is why the years of childhood are like a long poem. For the function of
poetry, as of all art, is to grasp the Idea--in the Platonic sense; in other words, to
apprehend a particular object in such a way as to perceive its essential nature, the
characteristics it has in common with all other objects of the same kind; so that a
single object appears as the representative of a class, and the results of one
experience hold good for a thousand.
It may be thought that my remarks are opposed to fact, and that the child is
never occupied with anything beyond the individual objects or events which are
presented to it from time to time, and then only in so far as they interest and
excite its will for the moment; but this is not really the case. In those early years,
life--in the full meaning of the word, is something so new and fresh, and its
sensations are so keen and unblunted by repetition, that, in the midst of all its
pursuits and without any clear consciousness of what it is doing, the child is
always silently occupied in grasping the nature of life itself,--in arriving at its
fundamental character and general outline by means of separate scenes and
experiences; or, to use Spinoza's phraseology, the child is learning to see the
things and persons about it sub specie aeternitatis,--as particular manifestations
of universal law.
The younger we are, then, the more does every individual object represent
for us the whole class to which it belongs; but as the years increase, this becomes
less and less the case. That is the reason why youthful impressions are so
different from those of old age. And that it also why the slight knowledge and
experience gained in childhood and youth afterwards come to stand as the
permanent rubric, or heading, for all the knowledge acquired in later life,--those
early forms of knowledge passing into categories, as it were, under which the
results of subsequent experience are classified; though a clear consciousness of
what is being done, does not always attend upon the process.
In this way the earliest years of a man's life lay the foundation of his view
of the world, whether it be shallow or deep; and although this view may be
extended and perfected later on, it is not materially altered. It is an effect of this

purely objective and therefore poetical view of the world,--essential to the period
of childhood and promoted by the as yet undeveloped state of the volitional
energy--that, as children, we are concerned much more with the acquisition of
pure knowledge than with exercising the power of will. Hence that grave, fixed
look observable in so many children, of which Raphael makes such a happy use
in his depiction of cherubs, especially in the picture of the Sistine Madonna. The
years of childhood are thus rendered so full of bliss that the memory of them is
always coupled with longing and regret.
While we thus eagerly apply ourselves to learning the outward aspect of
things, as the primitive method of understanding the objects about us, education
aims at instilling into us ideas. But ideas furnish no information as to the real and
essential nature of objects, which, as the foundation and true content of all
knowledge, can be reached only by the process called intuition. This is a kind of
knowledge which can in no wise be instilled into us from without; we must
arrive at it by and for ourselves.
Hence a man's intellectual as well as his moral qualities proceed from the
depths of his own nature, and are not the result of external influences; and no
educational scheme--of Pestalozzi, or of any one else--can turn a born simpleton
into a man of sense. The thing is impossible! He was born a simpleton, and a
simpleton he will die.
It is the depth and intensity of this early intuitive knowledge of the external
world that explain why the experiences of childhood take such a firm hold on the
memory. When we were young, we were completely absorbed in our immediate
surroundings; there was nothing to distract our attention from them; we looked
upon the objects about us as though they were the only ones of their kind, as
though, indeed, nothing else existed at all. Later on, when we come to find out
how many things there are in the world, this primitive state of mind vanishes,
and with it our patience.
I have said elsewhere[1] that the world, considered as object,--in other
words, as it is presented to us objectively,--wears in general a pleasing aspect;
but that in the world, considered as subject,--that is, in regard to its inner nature,
which is will,--pain and trouble predominate. I may be allowed to express the
matter, briefly, thus: the world is glorious to look at, but dreadful in reality.
[Footnote 1: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Bk. II. c. 31, p. 426-7 (4th
Edit.), to which the reader is referred for a detailed explanation of my meaning.]
Accordingly, we find that, in the years of childhood, the world is much
better known to us on its outer or objective side, namely, as the presentation of
will, than on the side of its inner nature, namely, as the will itself. Since the
objective side wears a pleasing aspect, and the inner or subjective side, with its

tale of horror, remains as yet unknown, the youth, as his intelligence develops,
takes all the forms of beauty that he sees, in nature and in art, for so many
objects of blissful existence; they are so beautiful to the outward eye that, on
their inner side, they must, he thinks, be much more beautiful still. So the world
lies before him like another Eden; and this is the Arcadia in which we are all
born.
A little later, this state of mind gives birth to a thirst for real life--the
impulse to do and suffer--which drives a man forth into the hurly-burly of the
world. There he learns the other side of existence--the inner side, the will, which
is thwarted at every step. Then comes the great period of disillusion, a period of
very gradual growth; but once it has fairly begun, a man will tell you that he has
got over all his false notions--l'âge des illusions est passé; and yet the process is
only beginning, and it goes on extending its sway and applying more and more
to the whole of life.
So it may be said that in childhood, life looks like the scenery in a theatre,
as you view it from a distance; and that in old age it is like the same scenery
when you come up quite close to it.
And, lastly, there is another circumstance that contributes to the happiness
of childhood. As spring commences, the young leaves on the trees are similar in
color and much the same in shape; and in the first years of life we all resemble
one another and harmonize very well. But with puberty divergence begins; and,
like the radii of a circle, we go further and further apart.
The period of youth, which forms the remainder of this earlier half of our
existence--and how many advantages it has over the later half!--is troubled and
made miserable by the pursuit of happiness, as though there were no doubt that it
can be met with somewhere in life,--a hope that always ends in failure and leads
to discontent. An illusory image of some vague future bliss--born of a dream and
shaped by fancy--floats before our eyes; and we search for the reality in vain. So
it is that the young man is generally dissatisfied with the position in which he
finds himself, whatever it may be; he ascribes his disappointment solely to the
state of things that meets him on his first introduction to life, when he had
expected something very different; whereas it is only the vanity and
wretchedness of human life everywhere that he is now for the first time
experiencing.
It would be a great advantage to a young man if his early training could
eradicate the idea that the world has a great deal to offer him. But the usual
result of education is to strengthen this delusion; and our first ideas of life are
generally taken from fiction rather than from fact.
In the bright dawn of our youthful days, the poetry of life spreads out a

gorgeous vision before us, and we torture ourselves by longing to see it realized.
We might as well wish to grasp the rainbow! The youth expects his career to be
like an interesting romance; and there lies the germ of that disappointment which
I have been describing.[1] What lends a charm to all these visions is just the fact
that they are visionary and not real, and that in contemplating them we are in the
sphere of pure knowledge, which is sufficient in itself and free from the noise
and struggle of life. To try and realize those visions is to make them an object of
will--a process which always involves pain.[2]
[Footnote 1: Cf. loc. cit., p. 428.]
[Footnote 2: Let me refer the reader, if he is interested in the subject, to the
volume already cited, chapter 37.]
If the chief feature of the earlier half of life is a never-satisfied longing after
happiness, the later half is characterized by the dread of misfortune. For, as we
advance in years, it becomes in a greater or less degree clear that all happiness is
chimerical in its nature, and that pain alone is real. Accordingly, in later years,
we, or, at least, the more prudent amongst us, are more intent upon eliminating
what is painful from our lives and making our position secure, than on the
pursuit of positive pleasure. I may observe, by the way, that in old age, we are
better able to prevent misfortunes from coming, and in youth better able to bear
them when they come.
In my young days, I was always pleased to hear a ring at my door: ah!
thought I, now for something pleasant. But in later life my feelings on such
occasions were rather akin to dismay than to pleasure: heaven help me! thought
I, what am I to do? A similar revulsion of feeling in regard to the world of men
takes place in all persons of any talent or distinction. For that very reason they
cannot be said properly to belong to the world; in a greater or less degree,
according to the extent of their superiority, they stand alone. In their youth they
have a sense of being abandoned by the world; but later on, they feel as though
they had escaped it. The earlier feeling is an unpleasant one, and rests upon
ignorance; the second is pleasurable--for in the meantime they have come to
know what the world is.
The consequence of this is that, as compared with the earlier, the later half
of life, like the second part of a musical period, has less of passionate longing
and more restfulness about it. And why is this the case Simply because, in youth,
a man fancies that there is a prodigious amount of happiness and pleasure to be
had in the world, only that it is difficult to come by it; whereas, when he
becomes old, he knows that there is nothing of the kind; he makes his mind
completely at ease on the matter, enjoys the present hour as well as he can, and
even takes a pleasure in trifles.

The chief result gained by experience of life is clearness of view. This is
what distinguishes the man of mature age, and makes the world wear such a
different aspect from that which it presented in his youth or boyhood. It is only
then that he sees things quite plain, and takes them for that which they really are:
while in earlier years he saw a phantom-world, put together out of the whims
and crotchets of his own mind, inherited prejudice and strange delusion: the real
world was hidden from him, or the vision of it distorted. The first thing that
experience finds to do is to free us from the phantoms of the brain--those false
notions that have been put into us in youth.
To prevent their entrance at all would, of course, be the best form of
education, even though it were only negative in aim: but it would be a task full
of difficulty. At first the child's horizon would have to be limited as much as
possible, and yet within that limited sphere none but clear and correct notions
would have to be given; only after the child had properly appreciated everything
within it, might the sphere be gradually enlarged; care being always taken that
nothing was left obscure, or half or wrongly understood. The consequence of this
training would be that the child's notions of men and things would always be
limited and simple in their character; but, on the other hand, they would be clear
and correct, and only need to be extended, not to be rectified. The same line
might be pursued on into the period of youth. This method of education would
lay special stress upon the prohibition of novel reading; and the place of novels
would be taken by suitable biographical literature--the life of Franklin, for
instance, or Moritz' Anton Reiser.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Moritz was a miscellaneous writer of the
last century (1757-93). His Anton Reiser, composed in the form of a novel, is
practically an autobiography.]
In our early days we fancy that the leading events in our life, and the
persons who are going to play an important part in it, will make their entrance to
the sound of drums and trumpets; but when, in old age, we look back, we find
that they all came in quite quietly, slipped in, as it were, by the side-door, almost
unnoticed.
From the point of view we have been taking up until now, life may be
compared to a piece of embroidery, of which, during the first half of his time, a
man gets a sight of the right side, and during the second half, of the wrong. The
wrong side is not so pretty as the right, but it is more instructive; it shows the
way in which the threads have been worked together.
Intellectual superiority, even if it is of the highest kind, will not secure for a
man a preponderating place in conversation until after he is forty years of age.
For age and experience, though they can never be a substitute for intellectual

talent, may far outweigh it; and even in a person of the meanest capacity, they
give a certain counterpoise to the power of an extremely intellectual man, so
long as the latter is young. Of course I allude here to personal superiority, not to
the place a man may gain by his works.
And on passing his fortieth year, any man of the slightest power of mind--
any man, that is, who has more than the sorry share of intellect with which
Nature has endowed five-sixths of mankind--will hardly fail to show some trace
of misanthropy. For, as is natural, he has by that time inferred other people's
character from an examination of his own; with the result that he has been
gradually disappointed to find that in the qualities of the head or in those of the
heart--and usually in both--he reaches a level to which they do not attain; so he
gladly avoids having anything more to do with them. For it may be said, in
general, that every man will love or hate solitude--in other Words, his own
society--just in proportion as he is worth anything in himself. Kant has some
remarks upon this kind of misanthropy in his Critique of the Faculty of
Judgment.[1]
[Footnote 1: Kritik der Urtheilskraft, Part I, §29, Note ad fin.]
In a young man, it is a bad sign, as well from an intellectual as from a moral
point of view, if he is precocious in understanding the ways of the world, and in
adapting himself to its pursuits; if he at once knows how to deal with men, and
enters upon life, as it were, fully prepared. It argues a vulgar nature. On the other
hand, to be surprised and astonished at the way people act, and to be clumsy and
cross-grained in having to do with them, indicates a character of the nobler sort.
The cheerfulness and vivacity of youth are partly due to the fact that, when
we are ascending the hill of life, death is not visible: it lies down at the bottom of
the other side. But once we have crossed the top of the hill, death comes in view-
-death--which, until then, was known to us only by hearsay. This makes our
spirits droop, for at the same time we begin to feel that our vital powers are on
the ebb. A grave seriousness now takes the place of that early extravagance of
spirit; and the change is noticeable even in the expression of a man's face. As
long as we are young, people may tell us what they please! we look upon life as
endless and use our time recklessly; but the older we become, the more we
practice economy. For towards the close of life, every day we live gives us the
same kind of sensation as the criminal experiences at every step on his way to be
tried.
From the standpoint of youth, life seems to stretch away into an endless
future; from the standpoint of old age, to go back but a little way into the past; so
that, at the beginning, life presents us with a picture in which the objects appear
a great way off, as though we had reversed our telescope; while in the end

everything seems so close. To see how short life is, a man must have grown old,
that is to say, he must have lived long.
On the other hand, as the years increase, things look smaller, one and all;
and Life, which had so firm and stable a base in the days of our youth, now
seems nothing but a rapid flight of moments, every one of them illusory: we
have come to see that the whole world is vanity!
Time itself seems to go at a much slower pace when we are young; so that
not only is the first quarter of life the happiest, it is also the longest of all; it
leaves more memories behind it. If a man were put to it, he could tell you more
out of the first quarter of his life than out of two of the remaining periods. Nay,
in the spring of life, as in the spring of the year, the days reach a length that is
positively tiresome; but in the autumn, whether of the year or of life, though they
are short, they are more genial and uniform.
But why is it that to an old man his past life appears so short? For this
reason: his memory is short; and so he fancies that his life has been short too. He
no longer remembers the insignificant parts of it, and much that was unpleasant
is now forgotten; how little, then, there is left! For, in general, a man's memory
is as imperfect as his intellect; and he must make a practice of reflecting upon
the lessons he has learned and the events he has experienced, if he does not want
them both to sink gradually into the gulf of oblivion. Now, we are unaccustomed
to reflect upon matters of no importance, or, as a rule, upon things that we have
found disagreeable, and yet that is necessary if the memory of them is to be
preserved. But the class of things that may be called insignificant is continually
receiving fresh additions: much that wears an air of importance at first, gradually
becomes of no consequence at all from the fact of its frequent repetition; so that
in the end we actually lose count of the number of times it happens. Hence we
are better able to remember the events of our early than of our later years. The
longer we live, the fewer are the things that we can call important or significant
enough to deserve further consideration, and by this alone can they be fixed in
the memory; in other words, they are forgotten as soon as they are past. Thus it
is that time runs on, leaving always fewer traces of its passage.
Further, if disagreeable things have happened to us, we do not care to
ruminate upon them, least of all when they touch our vanity, as is usually the
case; for few misfortunes fall upon us for which we can be held entirely
blameless. So people are very ready to forget many things that are disagreeable,
as well as many that are unimportant.
It is from this double cause that our memory is so short; and a man's
recollection of what has happened always becomes proportionately shorter, the
more things that have occupied him in life. The things we did in years gone by,

the events that happened long ago, are like those objects on the coast which, to
the seafarer on his outward voyage, become smaller every minute, more
unrecognizable and harder to distinguish.
Again, it sometimes happens that memory and imagination will call up
some long past scene as vividly as if it had occurred only yesterday; so that the
event in question seems to stand very near to the present time. The reason of this
is that it is impossible to call up all the intervening period in the same vivid way,
as there is no one figure pervading it which can be taken in at a glance; and
besides, most of the things that happened in that period are forgotten, and all that
remains of it is the general knowledge that we have lived through it--a mere
notion of abstract existence, not a direct vision of some particular experience. It
is this that causes some single event of long ago to appear as though it took place
but yesterday: the intervening time vanishes, and the whole of life looks
incredibly short. Nay, there are occasional moments in old age when we can
scarcely believe that we are so advanced in years, or that the long past lying
behind us has had any real existence--a feeling which is mainly due to the
circumstance that the present always seems fixed and immovable as we look at
it. These and similar mental phenomena are ultimately to be traced to the fact
that it is not our nature in itself, but only the outward presentation of it, that lies
in time, and that the present is the point of contact between the world as subject
and the world as object.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--By this remark Schopenhauer means that
will, which, as he argues, forms the inner reality underlying all the phenomena
of life and nature, is not in itself affected by time; but that, on the other hand,
time is necessary for the objectification of the will, for the will as presented in
the passing phenomena of the world. Time is thus definable as the condition of
change, and the present time as the only point of contact between reality and
appearance.]
Again, why is it that in youth we can see no end to the years that seem to lie
before us? Because we are obliged to find room for all the things we hope to
attain in life. We cram the years so full of projects that if we were to try and
carry them all out, death would come prematurely though we reached the age of
Methuselah.
Another reason why life looks so long when we are young, is that we are
apt to measure its length by the few years we have already lived. In those early
years things are new to us, and so they appear important; we dwell upon them
after they have happened and often call them to mind; and thus in youth life
seems replete with incident, and therefore of long duration.
Sometimes we credit ourselves with a longing to be in some distant spot,

whereas, in truth, we are only longing to have the time back again which we
spent there--days when we were younger and fresher than we are now. In those
moments Time mocks us by wearing the mask of space; and if we travel to the
spot, we can see how much we have been deceived.
There are two ways of reaching a great age, both of which presuppose a
sound constitution as a conditio sine quâ non. They may be illustrated by two
lamps, one of which burns a long time with very little oil, because it has a very
thin wick; and the other just as long, though it has a very thick one, because
there is plenty of oil to feed it. Here, the oil is the vital energy, and the difference
in the wick is the manifold way in which the vital energy is used.
Up to our thirty-sixth year, we may be compared, in respect of the way in
which we use our vital energy, to people who live on the interest of their money:
what they spend to-day, they have again to-morrow. But from the age of thirty-
six onwards, our position is like that of the investor who begins to entrench upon
his capital. At first he hardly notices any difference at all, as the greater part of
his expenses is covered by the interest of his securities; and if the deficit is but
slight, he pays no attention to it. But the deficit goes on increasing, until he
awakes to the fact that it is becoming more serious every day: his position
becomes less and less secure, and he feels himself growing poorer and poorer,
while he has no expectation of this drain upon his resources coming to an end.
His fall from wealth to poverty becomes faster every moment--like the fall of a
solid body in space, until at last he has absolutely nothing left. A man is truly in
a woeful plight if both the terms of this comparison--his vital energy and his
wealth--really begin to melt away at one and the same time. It is the dread of this
calamity that makes love of possession increase with age.
On the other hand, at the beginning of life, in the years before we attain
majority, and for some little time afterwards--the state of our vital energy puts us
on a level with those who each year lay by a part of their interest and add it to
their capital: in other words, not only does their interest come in regularly, but
the capital is constantly receiving additions. This happy condition of affairs is
sometimes brought about--with health as with money--under the watchful care of
some honest guardian. O happy youth, and sad old age!
Nevertheless, a man should economize his strength even when he is young.
Aristotle[1] observes that amongst those who were victors at Olympia only two
or three gained a prize at two different periods, once in boyhood and then again
when they came to be men; and the reason of this was that the premature efforts
which the training involved, so completely exhausted their powers that they
failed to last on into manhood. As this is true of muscular, so it is still more true
of nervous energy, of which all intellectual achievements are the manifestation.

Hence, those infant prodigies--ingenia praecoda--the fruit of a hot-house
education, who surprise us by their cleverness as children, afterwards turn out
very ordinary folk. Nay, the manner in which boys are forced into an early
acquaintance with the ancient tongues may, perhaps, be to blame for the dullness
and lack of judgment which distinguish so many learned persons.
[Footnote 1: Politics.]
I have said that almost every man's character seems to be specially suited to
some one period of life, so that on reaching it the man is at his best. Some people
are charming so long as they are young, and afterwards there is nothing
attractive about them; others are vigorous and active in manhood, and then lose
all the value they possess as they advance in years; many appear to best
advantage in old age, when their character assumes a gentler tone, as becomes
men who have seen the world and take life easily. This is often the case with the
French.
This peculiarity must be due to the fact that the man's character has
something in it akin to the qualities of youth or manhood or old age--something
which accords with one or another of these periods of life, or perhaps acts as a
corrective to its special failings.
The mariner observes the progress he makes only by the way in which
objects on the coast fade away into the distance and apparently decrease in size.
In the same way a man becomes conscious that he is advancing in years when he
finds that people older than himself begin to seem young to him.
It has already been remarked that the older a man becomes, the fewer are
the traces left in his mind by all that he sees, does or experiences, and the cause
of this has been explained. There is thus a sense in which it may be said that it is
only in youth that a man lives with a full degree of consciousness, and that he is
only half alive when he is old. As the years advance, his consciousness of what
goes on about him dwindles, and the things of life hurry by without making any
impression upon him, just as none is made by a work of art seen for the
thousandth time. A man does what his hand finds to do, and afterwards he does
not know whether he has done it or not.
As life becomes more and more unconscious, the nearer it approaches the
point at which all consciousness ceases, the course of time itself seems to
increase in rapidity. In childhood all the things and circumstances of life are
novel; and that is sufficient to awake us to the full consciousness of existence:
hence, at that age, the day seems of such immense length. The same thing
happens when we are traveling: one month seems longer then than four spent at
home. Still, though time seems to last longer when we are young or on a journey,
the sense of novelty does not prevent it from now and then in reality hanging

heavily upon our hands under both these circumstances, at any rate more than is
the case when we are old or staying at home. But the intellect gradually becomes
so rubbed down and blunted by long habituation to such impressions that things
have a constant tendency to produce less and less impression upon us as they
pass by; and this makes time seem increasingly less important, and therefore
shorter in duration: the hours of the boy are longer than the days of the old man.
Accordingly, time goes faster and faster the longer we live, like a ball rolling
down a hill. Or, to take another example: as in a revolving disc, the further a
point lies from the centre, the more rapid is its rate of progression, so it is in the
wheel of life; the further you stand from the beginning, the faster time moves for
you. Hence it may be said that as far as concerns the immediate sensation that
time makes upon our minds, the length of any given year is in direct proportion
to the number of times it will divide our whole life: for instance, at the age of
fifty the year appears to us only one-tenth as long as it did at the age of five.
This variation in the rate at which time appears to move, exercises a most
decided influence upon the whole nature of our existence at every period of it.
First of all, it causes childhood--even though it embrace only a span of fifteen
years--to seem the longest period of life, and therefore the richest in
reminiscences. Next, it brings it about that a man is apt to be bored just in
proportion as he is young. Consider, for instance, that constant need of
occupation--whether it is work or play--that is shown by children: if they come
to an end of both work and play, a terrible feeling of boredom ensues. Even in
youth people are by no means free from this tendency, and dread the hours when
they have nothing to do. As manhood approaches, boredom disappears; and old
men find the time too short when their days fly past them like arrows from a
bow. Of course, I must be understood to speak of men, not of decrepit brutes.
With this increased rapidity of time, boredom mostly passes away as we advance
in life; and as the passions with all their attendant pain are then laid asleep, the
burden of life is, on the whole, appreciably lighter in later years than in youth,
provided, of course, that health remains. So it is that the period immediately
preceding the weakness and troubles of old age, receives the name of a man's
best years.
That may be a true appellation, in view of the comfortable feeling which
those years bring; but for all that the years of youth, when our consciousness is
lively and open to every sort of impression, have this privilege--that then the
seeds are sown and the buds come forth; it is the springtime of the mind. Deep
truths may be perceived, but can never be excogitated--that is to say, the first
knowledge of them is immediate, called forth by some momentary impression.
This knowledge is of such a kind as to be attainable only when the impressions

are strong, lively and deep; and if we are to be acquainted with deep truths,
everything depends upon a proper use of our early years. In later life, we may be
better able to work upon other people,--upon the world, because our natures are
then finished and rounded off, and no more a prey to fresh views; but then the
world is less able to work upon us. These are the years of action and
achievement; while youth is the time for forming fundamental conceptions, and
laying down the ground-work of thought.
In youth it is the outward aspect of things that most engages us; while in
age, thought or reflection is the predominating quality of the mind. Hence, youth
is the time for poetry, and age is more inclined to philosophy. In practical affairs
it is the same: a man shapes his resolutions in youth more by the impression that
the outward world makes upon him; whereas, when he is old, it is thought that
determines his actions. This is partly to be explained by the fact that it is only
when a man is old that the results of outward observation are present in
sufficient numbers to allow of their being classified according to the ideas they
represent,--a process which in its turn causes those ideas to be more fully
understood in all their bearings, and the exact value and amount of trust to be
placed in them, fixed and determined; while at the same time he has grown
accustomed to the impressions produced by the various phenomena of life, and
their effects on him are no longer what they were. Contrarily, in youth, the
impressions that things make, that is to say, the outward aspects of life, are so
overpoweringly strong, especially in the case of people of lively and imaginative
disposition, that they view the world like a picture; and their chief concern is the
figure they cut in it, the appearance they present; nay, they are unaware of the
extent to which this is the case. It is a quality of mind that shows itself--if in no
other way--in that personal vanity, and that love of fine clothes, which
distinguish young people.
There can be no doubt that the intellectual powers are most capable of
enduring great and sustained efforts in youth, up to the age of thirty-five at
latest; from which period their strength begins to decline, though very gradually.
Still, the later years of life, and even old age itself, are not without their
intellectual compensation. It is only then that a man can be said to be really rich
in experience or in learning; he has then had time and opportunity enough to
enable him to see and think over life from all its sides; he has been able to
compare one thing with another, and to discover points of contact and
connecting links, so that only then are the true relations of things rightly
understood. Further, in old age there comes an increased depth in the knowledge
that was acquired in youth; a man has now many more illustrations of any ideas
he may have attained; things which he thought he knew when he was young, he

now knows in reality. And besides, his range of knowledge is wider; and in
whatever direction it extends, it is thorough, and therefore formed into a
consistent and connected whole; whereas in youth knowledge is always
defective and fragmentary.
A complete and adequate notion of life can never be attained by any one
who does not reach old age; for it is only the old man who sees life whole and
knows its natural course; it is only he who is acquainted--and this is most
important--not only with its entrance, like the rest of mankind, but with its exit
too; so that he alone has a full sense of its utter vanity; whilst the others never
cease to labor under the false notion that everything will come right in the end.
On the other hand, there is more conceptive power in youth, and at that time
of life a man can make more out of the little that he knows. In age, judgment,
penetration and thoroughness predominate. Youth is the time for amassing the
material for a knowledge of the world that shall be distinctive and peculiar,--for
an original view of life, in other words, the legacy that a man of genius leaves to
his fellow-men; it is, however, only in later years that he becomes master of his
material. Accordingly it will be found that, as a rule, a great writer gives his best
work to the world when he is about fifty years of age. But though the tree of
knowledge must reach its full height before it can bear fruit, the roots of it lie in
youth.
Every generation, no matter how paltry its character, thinks itself much
wiser than the one immediately preceding it, let alone those that are more
remote. It is just the same with the different periods in a man's life; and yet often,
in the one case no less than in the other, it is a mistaken opinion. In the years of
physical growth, when our powers of mind and our stores of knowledge are
receiving daily additions, it becomes a habit for to-day to look down with
contempt upon yesterday. The habit strikes root, and remains even after the
intellectual powers have begun to decline,--when to-day should rather look up
with respect to yesterday. So it is that we often unduly depreciate the
achievements as well as the judgments of our youth. This seems the place for
making the general observation, that, although in its main qualities a man's
intellect or head, as well as his character or heart, is innate, yet the former is by
no means so unalterable in its nature as the latter. The fact is that the intellect is
subject to very many transformations, which, as a rule, do not fail to make their
actual appearance; and this is so, partly because the intellect has a deep
foundation in the physique, and partly because the material with which it deals is
given in experience. And so, from a physical point of view, we find that if a man
has any peculiar power, it first gradually increases in strength until it reaches its
acme, after which it enters upon a path of slow decadence, until it ends in

imbecility. But, on the other hand, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
material which gives employment to a man's powers and keeps them in activity,-
-the subject-matter of thought and knowledge, experience, intellectual
attainments, the practice of seeing to the bottom of things, and so a perfect
mental vision, form in themselves a mass which continues to increase in size,
until the time comes when weakness shows itself, and the man's powers
suddenly fail. The way in which these two distinguishable elements combine in
the same nature,--the one absolutely unalterable, and the other subject to change
in two directions opposed to each other--explains the variety of mental attitude
and the dissimilarity of value which attach to a man at different periods of life.
The same truth may be more broadly expressed by saying that the first forty
years of life furnish the text, while the remaining thirty supply the commentary;
and that without the commentary we are unable to understand aright the true
sense and coherence of the text, together with the moral it contains and all the
subtle application of which it admits.
Towards the close of life, much the same thing happens as at the end of a
bal masqué--the masks are taken off. Then you can see who the people really
are, with whom you have come into contact in your passage through the world.
For by the end of life characters have come out in their true light, actions have
borne fruit, achievements have been rightly appreciated, and all shams have
fallen to pieces. For this, Time was in every case requisite.
But the most curious fact is that it is also only towards the close of life than
a man really recognizes and understands his own true self,--the aims and objects
he has followed in life, more especially the kind of relation in which he has
stood to other people and to the world. It will often happen that as a result of this
knowledge, a man will have to assign himself a lower place than he formerly
thought was his due. But there are exceptions to this rule; and it will
occasionally be the case that he will take a higher position than he had before.
This will be owing to the fact that he had no adequate notion of the baseness of
the world, and that he set up a higher aim for himself than was followed by the
rest of mankind.
The progress of life shows a man the stuff of which he is made.
It is customary to call youth the happy, and age the sad part of life. This
would be true if it were the passions that made a man happy. Youth is swayed to
and fro by them; and they give a great deal of pain and little pleasure. In age the
passions cool and leave a man at rest, and then forthwith his mind takes a
contemplative tone; the intellect is set free and attains the upper hand. And since,
in itself, intellect is beyond the range of pain, and man feels happy just in so far
as his intellect is the predominating part of him.

It need only be remembered that all pleasure is negative, and that pain is
positive in its nature, in order to see that the passions can never be a source of
happiness, and that age is not the less to be envied on the ground that many
pleasures are denied it. For every sort of pleasure is never anything more than
the quietive of some need or longing; and that pleasure should come to an end as
soon as the need ceases, is no more a subject of complaint than that a man
cannot go on eating after he has had his dinner, or fall asleep again after a good
night's rest.
So far from youth being the happiest period of life, there is much more truth
in the remark made by Plato, at the beginning of the Republic, that the prize
should rather be given to old age, because then at last a man is freed from the
animal passion which has hitherto never ceased to disquiet him. Nay, it may
even be said that the countless and manifold humors which have their source in
this passion, and the emotions that spring from it, produce a mild state of
madness; and this lasts as long as the man is subject to the spell of the impulse--
this evil spirit, as it were, of which there is no riddance--so that he never really
becomes a reasonable being until the passion is extinguished.
There is no doubt that, in general, and apart from individual circumstances
and particular dispositions, youth is marked by a certain melancholy and
sadness, while genial sentiments attach to old age; and the reason for this is
nothing but the fact that the young man is still under the service, nay, the forced
labor, imposed by that evil spirit, which scarcely ever leaves him a moment to
himself. To this source may be traced, directly or indirectly, almost all and every
ill that befalls or menaces mankind. The old man is genial and cheerful because,
after long lying in the bonds of passion, he can now move about in freedom.
Still, it should not be forgotten that, when this passion is extinguished, the
true kernel of life is gone, and nothing remains but the hollow shell; or, from
another point of view, life then becomes like a comedy, which, begun by real
actors, is continued and brought to an end by automata dressed in their clothes.
However that may be, youth is the period of unrest, and age of repose; and
from that very circumstance, the relative degree of pleasure belonging to each
may be inferred. The child stretches out its little hands in the eager desire to
seize all the pretty things that meet its sight, charmed by the world because all its
senses are still so young and fresh. Much the same thing happens with the youth,
and he displays greater energy in his quest. He, too, is charmed by all the pretty
things and the many pleasing shapes that surround him; and forthwith his
imagination conjures up pleasures which the world can never realize. So he is
filled with an ardent desire for he knows not what delights--robbing him of all
rest and making happiness impossible. But when old age is reached, all this is

over and done with, partly because the blood runs cooler and the senses are no
longer so easily allured; partly because experience has shown the true value of
things and the futility of pleasure, whereby illusion has been gradually dispelled,
and the strange fancies and prejudices which previously concealed or distorted a
free and true view of the world, have been dissipated and put to flight; with the
result that a man can now get a juster and clearer view, and see things as they
are, and also in a measure attain more or less insight into the nullity of all things
on this earth.
It is this that gives almost every old man, no matter how ordinary his
faculties may be, a certain tincture of wisdom, which distinguishes him from the
young. But the chief result of all this change is the peace of mind that ensues--a
great element in happiness, and, in fact, the condition and essence of it. While
the young man fancies that there is a vast amount of good things in the world, if
he could only come at them, the old man is steeped in the truth of the Preacher's
words, that all things are vanity--knowing that, however gilded the shell, the nut
is hollow.
In these later years, and not before, a man comes to a true appreciation of
Horace's maxim: Nil admirari. He is directly and sincerely convinced of the
vanity of everything and that all the glories of the world are as nothing: his
illusions are gone. He is no more beset with the idea that there is any particular
amount of happiness anywhere, in the palace or in the cottage, any more than he
himself enjoys when he is free from bodily or mental pain. The worldly
distinctions of great and small, high and low, exist for him no longer; and in this
blissful state of mind the old man may look down with a smile upon all false
notions. He is completely undeceived, and knows that whatever may be done to
adorn human life and deck it out in finery, its paltry character will soon show
through the glitter of its surroundings; and that, paint and be jewel it as one may,
it remains everywhere much the same,--an existence which has no true value
except in freedom from pain, and is never to be estimated by the presence of
pleasure, let alone, then, of display.[1]
[Footnote 1: Cf. Horace, Epist. I. 12, I-4.]
Disillusion is the chief characteristic of old age; for by that time the fictions
are gone which gave life its charm and spurred on the mind to activity; the
splendors of the world have been proved null and vain; its pomp, grandeur and
magnificence are faded. A man has then found out that behind most of the things
he wants, and most of the pleasures he longs for, there is very little after all; and
so he comes by degrees to see that our existence is all empty and void. It is only
when he is seventy years old that he quite understands the first words of the
Preacher; and this again explains why it is that old men are sometimes fretful

and morose.
It is often said that the common lot of old age is disease and weariness of
life. Disease is by no means essential to old age; especially where a really long
span of years is to be attained; for as life goes on, the conditions of health and
disorder tend to increase--crescente vita, crescit sanitas et morbus. And as far as
weariness or boredom is concerned, I have stated above why old age is even less
exposed to that form of evil than youth. Nor is boredom by any means to be
taken as a necessary accompaniment of that solitude, which, for reasons that do
not require to be explained, old age certainly cannot escape; it is rather the fate
that awaits those who have never known any other pleasures but the gratification
of the senses and the delights of society--who have left their minds
unenlightened and their faculties unused. It is quite true that the intellectual
faculties decline with the approach of old age; but where they were originally
strong, there will always be enough left to combat the onslaught of boredom.
And then again, as I have said, experience, knowledge, reflection, and skill in
dealing with men, combine to give an old man an increasingly accurate insight
into the ways of the world; his judgment becomes keen and he attains a coherent
view of life: his mental vision embraces a wider range. Constantly finding new
uses for his stores of knowledge and adding to them at every opportunity, he
maintains uninterrupted that inward process of self-education, which gives
employment and satisfaction to the mind, and thus forms the due reward of all its
efforts.
All this serves in some measure as a compensation for decreased
intellectual power. And besides, Time, as I have remarked, seems to go much
more quickly when we are advanced in years; and this is in itself a preventive of
boredom. There is no great harm in the fact that a man's bodily strength
decreases in old age, unless, indeed, he requires it to make a living. To be poor
when one is old, is a great misfortune. If a man is secure from that, and retains
his health, old age may be a very passable time of life. Its chief necessity is to be
comfortable and well off; and, in consequence, money is then prized more than
ever, because it is a substitute for failing strength. Deserted by Venus, the old
man likes to turn to Bacchus to make him merry. In the place of wanting to see
things, to travel and learn, comes the desire to speak and teach. It is a piece of
good fortune if the old man retains some of his love of study or of music or of
the theatre,--if, in general, he is still somewhat susceptible to the things about
him; as is, indeed, the case with some people to a very late age. At that time of
life, what a man has in himself is of greater advantage to him that ever it was
before.
There can be no doubt that most people who have never been anything but

dull and stupid, become more and more of automata as they grow old. They have
always thought, said and done the same things as their neighbors; and nothing
that happens now can change their disposition, or make them act otherwise. To
talk to old people of this kind is like writing on the sand; if you produce any
impression at all, it is gone almost immediately; old age is here nothing but the
caput mortuum of life--all that is essential to manhood is gone. There are cases
in which nature supplies a third set of teeth in old age, thereby apparently
demonstrating the fact that that period of life is a second childhood.
It is certainly a very melancholy thing that all a man's faculties tend to
waste away as he grows old, and at a rate that increases in rapidity: but still, this
is a necessary, nay, a beneficial arrangement, as otherwise death, for which it is a
preparation, would be too hard to bear. So the greatest boon that follows the
attainment of extreme old age is euthanasia,--an easy death, not ushered in by
disease, and free from all pain and struggle.[1] For let a man live as long as he
may, he is never conscious of any moment but the present, one and indivisible;
and in those late years the mind loses more every day by sheer forgetfulness than
ever it gains anew.
[Footnote 1: See Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Bk. II. ch. 41, for a
further description of this happy end to life.]
The main difference between youth and age will always be that youth looks
forward to life, and old age to death; and that while the one has a short past and a
long future before it, the case is just the opposite with the other. It is quite true
that when a man is old, to die is the only thing that awaits him; while if he is
young, he may expect to live; and the question arises which of the two fates is
the more hazardous, and if life is not a matter which, on the whole, it is better to
have behind one than before? Does not the Preacher say: the day of death [is
better] than the day of one's birth.[1] It is certainly a rash thing to wish for long
life;[2] for as the Spanish proverb has it, it means to see much evil,--Quien larga
vida vive mucho mal vide.
[Footnote 1: Ecclesiastes vii. 1.]
[Footnote 2: The life of man cannot, strictly speaking, be called either long
or short, since it is the ultimate standard by which duration of time in regard to
all other things is measured.
In one of the Vedic Upanishads (Oupnekhat, II.) the natural length of
human life is put down at one hundred years. And I believe this to be right. I
have observed, as a matter of fact, that it is only people who exceed the age of
ninety who attain euthanasia,--who die, that is to say, of no disease, apoplexy or
convulsion, and pass away without agony of any sort; nay, who sometimes even
show no pallor, but expire generally in a sitting attitude, and often after a meal,--

or, I may say, simply cease to live rather than die. To come to one's end before
the age of ninety, means to die of disease, in other words, prematurely.
Now the Old Testament (Psalms xc. 10) puts the limit of human life at
seventy, and if it is very long, at eighty years; and what is more noticeable still,
Herodotus (i. 32 and iii. 22) says the same thing. But this is wrong; and the error
is due simply to a rough and superficial estimate of the results of daily
experience. For if the natural length of life were from seventy to eighty years,
people would die, about that time, of mere old age. Now this is certainly not the
case. If they die then, they die, like younger people, of disease; and disease is
something abnormal. Therefore it is not natural to die at that age. It is only when
they are between ninety and a hundred that people die of old age; die, I mean,
without suffering from any disease, or showing any special signs of their
condition, such as a struggle, death-rattle, convulsion, pallor,--the absence of all
which constitutes euthanasia. The natural length of human life is a hundred
years; and in assigning that limit the Upanishads are right once more.]
A man's individual career is not, as Astrology wishes to make out, to be
predicted from observation of the planets; but the course of human life in
general, as far as the various periods of it are concerned, may be likened to the
succession of the planets: so that we may be said to pass under the influence of
each one of them in turn.
At ten, Mercury is in the ascendant; and at that age, a youth, like this planet,
is characterized by extreme mobility within a narrow sphere, where trifles have a
great effect upon him; but under the guidance of so crafty and eloquent a god, he
easily makes great progress. Venus begins her sway during his twentieth year,
and then a man is wholly given up to the love of women. At thirty, Mars comes
to the front, and he is now all energy and strength,--daring, pugnacious and
arrogant.
When a man reaches the age of forty, he is under the rule of the four
Asteroids; that is to say, his life has gained something in extension. He is frugal;
in other words, by the help of Ceres, he favors what is useful; he has his own
hearth, by the influence of Vesta; Pallas has taught him that which is necessary
for him to know; and his wife--his Juno--rules as the mistress of his house.
But at the age of fifty, Jupiter is the dominant influence. At that period a
man has outlived most of his contemporaries, and he can feel himself superior to
the generation about him. He is still in the full enjoyment of his strength, and
rich in experience and knowledge; and if he has any power and position of his
own, he is endowed with authority over all who stand in his immediate
surroundings. He is no more inclined to receive orders from others; he wants to
take command himself. The work most suitable to him now is to guide and rule

within his own sphere. This is the point where Jupiter culminates, and where the
man of fifty years is at his best.
Then comes Saturn, at about the age of sixty, a weight as of lead, dull and
slow:--
But old folks, many feign as they were dead; Unwieldy, slow, heavy and
pale as lead. Last of all, Uranus; or, as the saying is, a man goes to heaven.
I cannot find a place for Neptune, as this planet has been very thoughtlessly
named; because I may not call it as it should be called--Eros. Otherwise I should
point out how Beginning and End meet together, and how closely and intimately
Eros is connected with Death: how Orcus, or Amenthes, as the Egyptians called
him, is not only the receiver but the giver of all things--[Greek: lambanon kai
didous]. Death is the great reservoir of Life. Everything comes from Orcus;
everything that is alive now was once there. Could we but understand the great
trick by which that is done, all would be clear!

HUMAN NATURE.
Truths of the physical order may possess much external significance, but
internal significance they have none. The latter is the privilege of intellectual and
moral truths, which are concerned with the objectivation of the will in its highest
stages, whereas physical truths are concerned with it in its lowest.
For example, if we could establish the truth of what up till now is only a
conjecture, namely, that it is the action of the sun which produces
thermoelectricity at the equator; that this produces terrestrial magnetism; and
that this magnetism, again, is the cause of the aurora borealis, these would be
truths externally of great, but internally of little, significance. On the other hand,
examples of internal significance are furnished by all great and true
philosophical systems; by the catastrophe of every good tragedy; nay, even by
the observation of human conduct in the extreme manifestations of its morality
and immorality, of its good and its evil character. For all these are expressions of
that reality which takes outward shape as the world, and which, in the highest
stages of its objectivation, proclaims its innermost nature.
To say that the world has only a physical and not a moral significance is the
greatest and most pernicious of all errors, the fundamental blunder, the real
perversity of mind and temper; and, at bottom, it is doubtless the tendency which
faith personifies as Anti-Christ. Nevertheless, in spite of all religions--and they
are systems which one and all maintain the opposite, and seek to establish it in
their mythical way--this fundamental error never becomes quite extinct, but
raises its head from time to time afresh, until universal indignation compels it to
hide itself once more.
Yet, however certain we may feel of the moral significance of life and the
world, to explain and illustrate it, and to resolve the contradiction between this
significance and the world as it is, form a task of great difficulty; so great,
indeed, as to make it possible that it has remained for me to exhibit the true and
only genuine and sound basis of morality everywhere and at all times effective,
together with the results to which it leads. The actual facts of morality are too
much on my side for me to fear that my theory can ever be replaced or upset by
any other.
However, so long as even my ethical system continues to be ignored by the
professorial world, it is Kant's moral principle that prevails in the universities.
Among its various forms the one which is most in favour at present is "the
dignity of man." I have already exposed the absurdity of this doctrine in my
treatise on the Foundation of Morality.[1] Therefore I will only say here that if
the question were asked on what the alleged dignity of man rests, it would not be

long before the answer was made that it rests upon his morality. In other words,
his morality rests upon his dignity, and his dignity rests upon his morality.
[Footnote 1: § 8.]
But apart from this circular argument it seems to me that the idea of dignity
can be applied only in an ironical sense to a being whose will is so sinful, whose
intellect is so limited, whose body is so weak and perishable as man's. How shall
a man be proud, when his conception is a crime, his birth a penalty, his life a
labour, and death a necessity!--
Quid superbit homo? cujus conceptio culpa, Nasci poena, labor vita,
necesse mori!
Therefore, in opposition to the above-mentioned form of the Kantian
principle, I should be inclined to lay down the following rule: When you come
into contact with a man, no matter whom, do not attempt an objective
appreciation of him according to his worth and dignity. Do not consider his bad
will, or his narrow understanding and perverse ideas; as the former may easily
lead you to hate and the latter to despise him; but fix your attention only upon
his sufferings, his needs, his anxieties, his pains. Then you will always feel your
kinship with him; you will sympathise with him; and instead of hatred or
contempt you will experience the commiseration that alone is the peace to which
the Gospel calls us. The way to keep down hatred and contempt is certainly not
to look for a man's alleged "dignity," but, on the contrary, to regard him as an
object of pity.
The Buddhists, as the result of the more profound views which they
entertain on ethical and metaphysical subjects, start from the cardinal vices and
not the cardinal virtues; since the virtues make their appearance only as the
contraries or negations of the vices. According to Schmidt's History of the
Eastern Mongolians the cardinal vices in the Buddhist scheme are four: Lust,
Indolence, Anger, and Avarice. But probably instead of Indolence, we should
read Pride; for so it stands in the Lettres édifiantes et curieuses,[1] where Envy,
or Hatred, is added as a fifth. I am confirmed in correcting the statement of the
excellent Schmidt by the fact that my rendering agrees with the doctrine of the
Sufis, who are certainly under the influence of the Brahmins and Buddhists. The
Sufis also maintain that there are four cardinal vices, and they arrange them in
very striking pairs, so that Lust appears in connection with Avarice, and Anger
with Pride. The four cardinal virtues opposed to them would be Chastity and
Generosity, together with Gentleness and Humility.
[Footnote 1: Edit, of 1819, vol. vi., p. 372.]
When we compare these profound ideas of morality, as they are entertained
by oriental nations, with the celebrated cardinal virtues of Plato, which have

been recapitulated again and again--Justice, Valour, Temperance, and Wisdom--
it is plain that the latter are not based on any clear, leading idea, but are chosen
on grounds that are superficial and, in part, obviously false. Virtues must be
qualities of the will, but Wisdom is chiefly an attribute of the Intellect. [Greek:
Sophrosynae], which Cicero translates Temperantia, is a very indefinite and
ambiguous word, and it admits, therefore, of a variety of applications: it may
mean discretion, or abstinence, or keeping a level head. Courage is not a virtue
at all; although sometimes it is a servant or instrument of virtue; but it is just as
ready to become the servant of the greatest villainy. It is really a quality of
temperament. Even Geulinx (in the preface to this Ethics) condemned the
Platonic virtues and put the following in their place: Diligence, Obedience,
Justice and Humility; which are obviously bad. The Chinese distinguish five
cardinal virtues: Sympathy, Justice, Propriety, Wisdom, and Sincerity. The
virtues of Christianity are theological, not cardinal: Faith, Love, and Hope.
Fundamental disposition towards others, assuming the character either of
Envy or of Sympathy, is the point at which the moral virtues and vices of
mankind first diverge. These two diametrically opposite qualities exist in every
man; for they spring from the inevitable comparison which he draws between his
own lot and that of others. According as the result of this comparison affects his
individual character does the one or the other of these qualities become the
source and principle of all his action. Envy builds the wall between Thee and Me
thicker and stronger; Sympathy makes it slight and transparent; nay, sometimes
it pulls down the wall altogether; and then the distinction between self and not-
self vanishes.
Valour, which has been mentioned as a virtue, or rather the Courage on
which it is based (for valour is only courage in war), deserves a closer
examination. The ancients reckoned Courage among the virtues, and cowardice
among the vices; but there is no corresponding idea in the Christian scheme,
which makes for charity and patience, and in its teaching forbids all enmity or
even resistance. The result is that with the moderns Courage is no longer a
virtue. Nevertheless it must be admitted that cowardice does not seem to be very
compatible with any nobility of character--if only for the reason that it betrays an
overgreat apprehension about one's own person.
Courage, however, may also be explained as a readiness to meet ills that
threaten at the moment, in order to avoid greater ills that lie in the future;
whereas cowardice does the contrary. But this readiness is of the same quality as
patience, for patience consists in the clear consciousness that greater evils than
those which are present, and that any violent attempt to flee from or guard
against the ills we have may bring the others upon us. Courage, then, would be a

kind of patience; and since it is patience that enables us to practise forbearance
and self control, Courage is, through the medium of patience, at least akin to
virtue.
But perhaps Courage admits of being considered from a higher point of
view. The fear of death may in every case be traced to a deficiency in that
natural philosophy--natural, and therefore resting on mere feeling--which gives a
man the assurance that he exists in everything outside him just as much as in his
own person; so that the death of his person can do him little harm. But it is just
this very assurance that would give a man heroic Courage; and therefore, as the
reader will recollect from my Ethics, Courage comes from the same source as
the virtues of Justice and Humanity. This is, I admit, to take a very high view of
the matter; but apart from it I cannot well explain why cowardice seems
contemptible, and personal courage a noble and sublime thing; for no lower
point of view enables me to see why a finite individual who is everything to
himself--nay, who is himself even the very fundamental condition of the
existence of the rest of the world--should not put his own preservation above
every other aim. It is, then, an insufficient explanation of Courage to make it rest
only on utility, to give it an empirical and not a transcendental character. It may
have been for some such reason that Calderon once uttered a sceptical but
remarkable opinion in regard to Courage, nay, actually denied its reality; and put
his denial into the mouth of a wise old minister, addressing his young sovereign.
"Although," he observed, "natural fear is operative in all alike, a man may be
brave in not letting it be seen; and it is this that constitutes Courage":
Que aunque el natural temor En todos obra igualmente, No mostrarle es ser
valiente Y esto es lo que hace el valor.[1]
[Footnote 1: La Hija del Aire, ii., 2.]
In regard to the difference which I have mentioned between the ancients
and the moderns in their estimate of Courage as a virtue, it must be remembered
that by Virtue, virtus, [Greek: aretae], the ancients understood every excellence
or quality that was praiseworthy in itself, it might be moral or intellectual, or
possibly only physical. But when Christianity demonstrated that the fundamental
tendency of life was moral, it was moral superiority alone than henceforth
attached to the notion of Virtue. Meanwhile the earlier usage still survived in the
elder Latinists, and also in Italian writers, as is proved by the well-known
meaning of the word virtuoso. The special attention of students should be drawn
to this wider range of the idea of Virtue amongst the ancients, as otherwise it
might easily be a source of secret perplexity. I may recommend two passages
preserved for us by Stobaeus, which will serve this purpose. One of them is
apparently from the Pythagorean philosopher Metopos, in which the fitness of

every bodily member is declared to be a virtue. The other pronounces that the
virtue of a shoemaker is to make good shoes. This may also serve to explain why
it is that in the ancient scheme of ethics virtues and vices are mentioned which
find no place in ours.
As the place of Courage amongst the virtues is a matter of doubt, so is that
of Avarice amongst the vices. It must not, however, be confounded with greed,
which is the most immediate meaning of the Latin word avaritia. Let us then
draw up and examine the arguments pro et contra in regard to Avarice, and leave
the final judgment to be formed by every man for himself.
On the one hand it is argued that it is not Avarice which is a vice, but
extravagance, its opposite. Extravagance springs from a brutish limitation to the
present moment, in comparison with which the future, existing as it does only in
thought, is as nothing. It rests upon the illusion that sensual pleasures possess a
positive or real value. Accordingly, future need and misery is the price at which
the spendthrift purchases pleasures that are empty, fleeting, and often no more
than imaginary; or else feeds his vain, stupid self-conceit on the bows and
scrapes of parasites who laugh at him in secret, or on the gaze of the mob and
those who envy his magnificence. We should, therefore, shun the spendthrift as
though he had the plague, and on discovering his vice break with him betimes, in
order that later on, when the consequences of his extravagance ensue, we may
neither have to help to bear them, nor, on the other hand, have to play the part of
the friends of Timon of Athens.
At the same time it is not to be expected that he who foolishly squanders his
own fortune will leave another man's intact, if it should chance to be committed
to his keeping; nay, sui profusus and alieni appetens are by Sallust very rightly
conjoined. Hence it is that extravagance leads not only to impoverishment but
also to crime; and crime amongst the moneyed classes is almost always the
result of extravagance. It is accordingly with justice that the Koran declares all
spendthrifts to be "brothers of Satan."
But it is superfluity that Avarice brings in its train, and when was
superfluity ever unwelcome? That must be a good vice which has good
consequences. Avarice proceeds upon the principle that all pleasure is only
negative in its operation and that the happiness which consists of a series of
pleasures is a chimaera; that, on the contrary, it is pains which are positive and
extremely real. Accordingly, the avaricious man foregoes the former in order
that he may be the better preserved from the latter, and thus it is that bear and
forbear--sustine et abstine--is his maxim. And because he knows, further, how
inexhaustible are the possibilities of misfortune, and how innumerable the paths
of danger, he increases the means of avoiding them, in order, if possible, to

surround himself with a triple wall of protection. Who, then, can say where
precaution against disaster begins to be exaggerated? He alone who knows
where the malignity of fate reaches its limit. And even if precaution were
exaggerated it is an error which at the most would hurt the man who took it, and
not others. If he will never need the treasures which he lays up for himself, they
will one day benefit others whom nature has made less careful. That until then
he withdraws the money from circulation is no misfortune; for money is not an
article of consumption: it only represents the good things which a man may
actually possess, and is not one itself. Coins are only counters; their value is
what they represent; and what they represent cannot be withdrawn from
circulation. Moreover, by holding back the money, the value of the remainder
which is in circulation is enhanced by precisely the same amount. Even though it
be the case, as is said, that many a miser comes in the end to love money itself
for its own sake, it is equally certain that many a spendthrift, on the other hand,
loves spending and squandering for no better reason. Friendship with a miser is
not only without danger, but it is profitable, because of the great advantages it
can bring. For it is doubtless those who are nearest and dearest to the miser who
on his death will reap the fruits of the self-control which he exercised; but even
in his lifetime, too, something may be expected of him in cases of great need. At
any rate one can always hope for more from him than from the spendthrift, who
has lost his all and is himself helpless and in debt. Mas da el duro que el
desnudo, says a Spanish proverb; the man who has a hard heart will give more
than the man who has an empty purse. The upshot of all this is that Avarice is
not a vice.
On the other side, it may be said that Avarice is the quintessence of all
vices. When physical pleasures seduce a man from the right path, it is his sensual
nature--the animal part of him--which is at fault. He is carried away by its
attractions, and, overcome by the impression of the moment, he acts without
thinking of the consequences. When, on the other hand, he is brought by age or
bodily weakness to the condition in which the vices that he could never abandon
end by abandoning him, and his capacity for physical pleasure dies--if he turns
to Avarice, the intellectual desire survives the sensual. Money, which represents
all the good things of this world, and is these good things in the abstract, now
becomes the dry trunk overgrown with all the dead lusts of the flesh, which are
egoism in the abstract. They come to life again in the love of the Mammon. The
transient pleasure of the senses has become a deliberate and calculated lust of
money, which, like that to which it is directed, is symbolical in its nature, and,
like it, indestructible.
This obstinate love of the pleasures of the world--a love which, as it were,

outlives itself; this utterly incorrigible sin, this refined and sublimated desire of
the flesh, is the abstract form in which all lusts are concentrated, and to which it
stands like a general idea to individual particulars. Accordingly, Avarice is the
vice of age, just as extravagance is the vice of youth.
This disputatio in utramque partem--this debate for and against--is certainly
calculated to drive us into accepting the juste milieu morality of Aristotle; a
conclusion that is also supported by the following consideration.
Every human perfection is allied to a defect into which it threatens to pass;
but it is also true that every defect is allied to a perfection. Hence it is that if, as
often happens, we make a mistake about a man, it is because at the beginning of
our acquaintance with him we confound his defects with the kinds of perfection
to which they are allied. The cautious man seems to us a coward; the economical
man, a miser; the spendthrift seems liberal; the rude fellow, downright and
sincere; the foolhardy person looks as if he were going to work with a noble self-
confidence; and so on in many other cases.
*
No one can live among men without feeling drawn again and again to the
tempting supposition that moral baseness and intellectual incapacity are closely
connected, as though they both sprang direct from one source. That that,
however, is not so, I have shown in detail.[1] That it seems to be so is merely
due to the fact that both are so often found together; and the circumstance is to
be explained by the very frequent occurrence of each of them, so that it may
easily happen for both to be compelled to live under one roof. At the same time
it is not to be denied that they play into each other's hands to their mutual
benefit; and it is this that produces the very unedifying spectacle which only too
many men exhibit, and that makes the world to go as it goes. A man who is
unintelligent is very likely to show his perfidy, villainy and malice; whereas a
clever man understands how to conceal these qualities. And how often, on the
other hand, does a perversity of heart prevent a man from seeing truths which his
intelligence is quite capable of grasping!
[Footnote 1: In my chief work, vol. ii., ch. xix,]
Nevertheless, let no one boast. Just as every man, though he be the greatest
genius, has very definite limitations in some one sphere of knowledge, and thus
attests his common origin with the essentially perverse and stupid mass of
mankind, so also has every man something in his nature which is positively evil.
Even the best, nay the noblest, character will sometimes surprise us by isolated
traits of depravity; as though it were to acknowledge his kinship with the human
race, in which villainy--nay, cruelty--is to be found in that degree. For it was just
in virtue of this evil in him, this bad principle, that of necessity he became a

man. And for the same reason the world in general is what my clear mirror of it
has shown it to be.
But in spite of all this the difference even between one man and another is
incalculably great, and many a one would be horrified to see another as he really
is. Oh, for some Asmodeus of morality, to make not only roofs and walls
transparent to his favourites, but also to lift the veil of dissimulation, fraud,
hypocrisy, pretence, falsehood and deception, which is spread over all things! to
show how little true honesty there is in the world, and how often, even where it
is least to be expected, behind all the exterior outwork of virtue, secretly and in
the innermost recesses, unrighteousness sits at the helm! It is just on this account
that so many men of the better kind have four-footed friends: for, to be sure, how
is a man to get relief from the endless dissimulation, falsity and malice of
mankind, if there were no dogs into whose honest faces he can look without
distrust?
For what is our civilised world but a big masquerade? where you meet
knights, priests, soldiers, men of learning, barristers, clergymen, philosophers,
and I don't know what all! But they are not what they pretend to be; they are
only masks, and, as a rule, behind the masks you will find moneymakers. One
man, I suppose, puts on the mask of law, which he has borrowed for the purpose
from a barrister, only in order to be able to give another man a sound drubbing; a
second has chosen the mask of patriotism and the public welfare with a similar
intent; a third takes religion or purity of doctrine. For all sorts of purposes men
have often put on the mask of philosophy, and even of philanthropy, and I know
not what besides. Women have a smaller choice. As a rule they avail themselves
of the mask of morality, modesty, domesticity, and humility. Then there are
general masks, without any particular character attaching to them like dominoes.
They may be met with everywhere; and of this sort is the strict rectitude, the
courtesy, the sincere sympathy, the smiling friendship, that people profess. The
whole of these masks as a rule are merely, as I have said, a disguise for some
industry, commerce, or speculation. It is merchants alone who in this respect
constitute any honest class. They are the only people who give themselves out to
be what they are; and therefore they go about without any mask at all, and
consequently take a humble rank.
It is very necessary that a man should be apprised early in life that it is a
masquerade in which he finds himself. For otherwise there are many things
which he will fail to understand and put up with, nay, at which he will be
completely puzzled, and that man longest of all whose heart is made of better
clay--
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.[1]

[Footnote 1: Juvenal, Sat. 14, 34]
Such for instance is the favour that villainy finds; the neglect that merit,
even the rarest and the greatest, suffers at the hands of those of the same
profession; the hatred of truth and great capacity; the ignorance of scholars in
their own province; and the fact that true wares are almost always despised and
the merely specious ones in request. Therefore let even the young be instructed
betimes that in this masquerade the apples are of wax, the flowers of silk, the
fish of pasteboard, and that all things--yes, all things--are toys and trifles; and
that of two men whom he may see earnestly engaged in business, one is
supplying spurious goods and the other paying for them in false coin.
But there are more serious reflections to be made, and worse things to be
recorded. Man is at bottom a savage, horrible beast. We know it, if only in the
business of taming and restraining him which we call civilisation. Hence it is
that we are terrified if now and then his nature breaks out. Wherever and
whenever the locks and chains of law and order fall off and give place to
anarchy, he shows himself for what he is. But it is unnecessary to wait for
anarchy in order to gain enlightenment on this subject. A hundred records, old
and new, produce the conviction that in his unrelenting cruelty man is in no way
inferior to the tiger and the hyaena. A forcible example is supplied by a
publication of the year 1841 entitled Slavery and the Internal Slave Trade in the
United States of North America: being replies to questions transmitted by the
British Anti-slavery Society to the American Anti-slavery Society.[1] This book
constitutes one of the heaviest indictments against the human race. No one can
put it down with a feeling of horror, and few without tears. For whatever the
reader may have ever heard, or imagined, or dreamt, of the unhappy condition of
slavery, or indeed of human cruelty in general, it will seem small to him when he
reads of the way in which those devils in human form, those bigoted, church-
going, strictly Sabbatarian rascals--and in particular the Anglican priests among
them--treated their innocent black brothers, who by wrong and violence had got
into their diabolical clutches.
[Footnote 1: Translator's 'Note.--If Schopenhauer were writing to-day, he
would with equal truth point to the miseries of the African trade. I have slightly
abridged this passage, as some of the evils against which he protested no longer
exist.]
Other examples are furnished by Tshudi's Travels in Peru, in the description
which he gives of the treatment of the Peruvian soldiers at the hands of their
officers; and by Macleod's Travels in Eastern Africa, where the author tells of
the cold-blooded and truly devilish cruelty with which the Portuguese in
Mozambique treat their slaves. But we need not go for examples to the New

World, that obverse side of our planet. In the year 1848 it was brought to life that
in England, not in one, but apparently in a hundred cases within a brief period, a
husband had poisoned his wife or vice versâ, or both had joined in poisoning
their children, or in torturing them slowly to death by starving and ill-treating
them, with no other object than to get the money for burying them which they
had insured in the Burial Clubs against their death. For this purpose a child was
often insured in several, even in as many as twenty clubs at once.[1]
[Footnote 1: Cf. The Times, 20th, 22nd and 23rd Sept., 1848, and also 12th
Dec., 1853.]
Details of this character belong, indeed, to the blackest pages in the
criminal records of humanity. But, when all is said, it is the inward and innate
character of man, this god par excellence of the Pantheists, from which they and
everything like them proceed. In every man there dwells, first and foremost, a
colossal egoism, which breaks the bounds of right and justice with the greatest
freedom, as everyday life shows on a small scale, and as history on every page
of it on a large. Does not the recognised need of a balance of power in Europe,
with the anxious way in which it is preserved, demonstrate that man is a beast of
prey, who no sooner sees a weaker man near him than he falls upon him without
fail? and does not the same hold good of the affairs of ordinary life?
But to the boundless egoism of our nature there is joined more or less in
every human breast a fund of hatred, anger, envy, rancour and malice,
accumulated like the venom in a serpent's tooth, and waiting only for an
opportunity of venting itself, and then, like a demon unchained, of storming and
raging. If a man has no great occasion for breaking out, he will end by taking
advantage of the smallest, and by working it up into something great by the aid
of his imagination; for, however small it may be, it is enough to rouse his anger--
Quantulacunque adeo est occasio, sufficit irae[1]--
[Footnote 1: Juvenal, Sat. 13, 183.]
and then he will carry it as far as he can and may. We see this in daily life,
where such outbursts are well known under the name of "venting one's gall on
something." It will also have been observed that if such outbursts meet with no
opposition the subject of them feels decidedly the better for them afterwards.
That anger is not without its pleasure is a truth that was recorded even by
Aristotle;[1] and he quotes a passage from Homer, who declares anger to be
sweeter than honey. But not in anger alone--in hatred too, which stands to anger
like a chronic to an acute disease, a man may indulge with the greatest delight:
[Footnote 1: Rhet., i., 11; ii., 2.]
Now hatred is by far the longest pleasure, Men love in haste, but they detest
at leisure[1]

[Footnote 1: Byron Don Juan, c. xiii, 6.]
Gobineau in his work Les Races Humaines has called man l'animal
méchant par excellence. People take this very ill, because they feel that it hits
them; but he is quite right, for man is the only animal which causes pain to
others without any further purpose than just to cause it. Other animals never do it
except to satisfy their hunger, or in the rage of combat. If it is said against the
tiger that he kills more than eats, he strangles his prey only for the purpose of
eating it; and if he cannot eat it, the only explanation is, as the French phrase has
it, that ses yeux sont plus grands que son estomac. No animal ever torments
another for the mere purpose of tormenting, but man does it, and it is this that
constitutes the diabolical feature in his character which is so much worse than
the merely animal. I have already spoken of the matter in its broad aspect; but it
is manifest even in small things, and every reader has a daily opportunity of
observing it. For instance, if two little dogs are playing together--and what a
genial and charming sight it is--and a child of three or four years joins them, it is
almost inevitable for it to begin hitting them with a whip or stick, and thereby
show itself, even at that age, l'animal méchant par excellence. The love of
teasing and playing tricks, which is common enough, may be traced to the same
source. For instance, if a man has expressed his annoyance at any interruption or
other petty inconvenience, there will be no lack of people who for that very
reason will bring it about: animal méchant par excellence! This is so certain that
a man should be careful not to express any annoyance at small evils. On the
other hand he should also be careful not to express his pleasure at any trifle, for,
if he does so, men will act like the jailer who, when he found that his prisoner
had performed the laborious task of taming a spider, and took a pleasure in
watching it, immediately crushed it under his foot: l'animal méchant par
excellence! This is why all animals are instinctively afraid of the sight, or even
of the track of a man, that animal méchant par excellence! nor does their instinct
them false; for it is man alone who hunts game for which he has no use and
which does him no harm.
It is a fact, then, that in the heart of every man there lies a wild beast which
only waits for an opportunity to storm and rage, in its desire to inflict pain on
others, or, if they stand in his way, to kill them. It is this which is the source of
all the lust of war and battle. In trying to tame and to some extent hold it in
check, the intelligence, its appointed keeper, has always enough to do. People
may, if they please, call it the radical evil of human nature--a name which will at
least serve those with whom a word stands for an explanation. I say, however,
that it is the will to live, which, more and more embittered by the constant
sufferings of existence, seeks to alleviate its own torment by causing torment in

others. But in this way a man gradually develops in himself real cruelty and
malice. The observation may also be added that as, according to Kant, matter
subsists only through the antagonism of the powers of expansion and
contraction, so human society subsists only by the antagonism of hatred, or
anger, and fear. For there is a moment in the life of all of us when the malignity
of our nature might perhaps make us murderers, if it were not accompanied by a
due admixture of fear to keep it within bounds; and this fear, again, would make
a man the sport and laughing stock of every boy, if anger were not lying ready in
him, and keeping watch.
But it is Schadenfreude, a mischievous delight in the misfortunes of others,
which remains the worst trait in human nature. It is a feeling which is closely
akin to cruelty, and differs from it, to say the truth, only as theory from practice.
In general, it may be said of it that it takes the place which pity ought to take--
pity which is its opposite, and the true source of all real justice and charity.
Envy is also opposed to pity, but in another sense; envy, that is to say, is
produced by a cause directly antagonistic to that which produces the delight in
mischief. The opposition between pity and envy on the one hand, and pity and
the delight in mischief on the other, rests, in the main, on the occasions which
call them forth. In the case of envy it is only as a direct effect of the cause which
excites it that we feel it at all. That is just the reason why envy, although it is a
reprehensible feeling, still admits of some excuse, and is, in general, a very
human quality; whereas the delight in mischief is diabolical, and its taunts are
the laughter of hell.
The delight in mischief, as I have said, takes the place which pity ought to
take. Envy, on the contrary, finds a place only where there is no inducement to
pity, or rather an inducement to its opposite; and it is just as this opposite that
envy arises in the human breast; and so far, therefore, it may still be reckoned a
human sentiment. Nay, I am afraid that no one will be found to be entirely free
from it. For that a man should feel his own lack of things more bitterly at the
sight of another's delight in the enjoyment of them, is natural; nay, it is
inevitable; but this should not rouse his hatred of the man who is happier than
himself. It is just this hatred, however, in which true envy consists. Least of all
should a man be envious, when it is a question, not of the gifts of fortune, or
chance, or another's favour, but of the gifts of nature; because everything that is
innate in a man rests on a metaphysical basis, and possesses justification of a
higher kind; it is, so to speak, given him by Divine grace. But, unhappily, it is
just in the case of personal advantages that envy is most irreconcilable. Thus it is
that intelligence, or even genius, cannot get on in the world without begging
pardon for its existence, wherever it is not in a position to be able, proudly and

boldly, to despise the world.
In other words, if envy is aroused only by wealth, rank, or power, it is often
kept down by egoism, which perceives that, on occasion, assistance, enjoyment,
support, protection, advancement, and so on, may be hoped for from the object
of envy or that at least by intercourse with him a man may himself win honour
from the reflected light of his superiority; and here, too, there is the hope of one
day attaining all those advantages himself. On the other hand, in the envy that is
directed to natural gifts and personal advantages, like beauty in women, or
intelligence in men, there is no consolation or hope of one kind or the other; so
that nothing remains but to indulge a bitter and irreconcilable hatred of the
person who possesses these privileges; and hence the only remaining desire is to
take vengeance on him.
But here the envious man finds himself in an unfortunate position; for all
his blows fall powerless as soon as it is known that they come from him.
Accordingly he hides his feelings as carefully as if they were secret sins, and so
becomes an inexhaustible inventor of tricks and artifices and devices for
concealing and masking his procedure, in order that, unperceived, he may wound
the object of his envy. For instance, with an air of the utmost unconcern he will
ignore the advantages which are eating his heart out; he will neither see them,
nor know them, nor have observed or even heard of them, and thus make himself
a master in the art of dissimulation. With great cunning he will completely
overlook the man whose brilliant qualities are gnawing at his heart, and act as
though he were quite an unimportant person; he will take no notice of him, and,
on occasion, will have even quite forgotten his existence. But at the same time
he will before all things endeavour by secret machination carefully to deprive
those advantages of any opportunity of showing themselves and becoming
known. Then out of his dark corner he will attack these qualities with censure,
mockery, ridicule and calumny, like the toad which spurts its poison from a hole.
No less will he enthusiastically praise unimportant people, or even indifferent or
bad performances in the same sphere. In short, he will becomes a Proteas in
stratagem, in order to wound others without showing himself. But what is the
use of it? The trained eye recognises him in spite of it all. He betrays himself, if
by nothing else, by the way in which he timidly avoids and flies from the object
of his envy, who stands the more completely alone, the more brilliant he is; and
this is the reason why pretty girls have no friends of their own sex. He betrays
himself, too, by the causeless hatred which he shows--a hatred which finds vent
in a violent explosion at any circumstance however trivial, though it is often only
the product of his imagination. How many such men there are in the world may
be recognised by the universal praise of modesty, that is, of a virtue invented on

behalf of dull and commonplace people. Nevertheless, it is a virtue which, by
exhibiting the necessity for dealing considerately with the wretched plight of
these people, is just what calls attention to it.
For our self-consciousness and our pride there can be nothing more
flattering than the sight of envy lurking in its retreat and plotting its schemes; but
never let a man forget that where there is envy there is hatred, and let him be
careful not to make a false friend out of any envious person. Therefore it is
important to our safety to lay envy bare; and a man should study to discover its
tricks, as it is everywhere to be found and always goes about incognito; or as I
have said, like a venomous toad it lurks in dark corners. It deserves neither
quarter nor sympathy; but as we can never reconcile it let our rule of conduct be
to scorn it with a good heart, and as our happiness and glory is torture to it we
may rejoice in its sufferings:
Den Neid wirst nimmer du versöhnen; So magst du ihn getrost verhöhnen.
Dein Glück, dein Ruhm ist ihm ein Leiden: Magst drum an seiner Quaal dich
weiden.
We have been taking a look at the depravity of man, and it is a sight which
may well fill us with horror. But now we must cast our eyes on the misery of his
existence; and when we have done so, and are horrified by that too, we must
look back again at his depravity. We shall then find that they hold the balance to
each other. We shall perceive the eternal justice of things; for we shall recognise
that the world is itself the Last Judgment on it, and we shall begin to understand
why it is that everything that lives must pay the penalty of its existence, first in
living and then in dying. Thus the evil of the penalty accords with the evil of the
sin--malum poenae with malum culpae. From the same point of view we lose our
indignation at that intellectual incapacity of the great majority of mankind which
in life so often disgusts us. In this Sansara, as the Buddhists call it, human
misery, human depravity and human folly correspond with one another perfectly,
and they are of like magnitude. But if, on some special inducement, we direct
our gaze to one of them, and survey it in particular, it seems to exceed the other
two. This, however, is an illusion, and merely the effect of their colossal range.
All things proclaim this Sansara; more than all else, the world of mankind;
in which, from a moral point of view, villainy and baseness, and from an
intellectual point of view, incapacity and stupidity, prevail to a horrifying extent.
Nevertheless, there appear in it, although very spasmodically, and always as a
fresh surprise, manifestations of honesty, of goodness, nay, even of nobility; and
also of great intelligence, of the thinking mind of genius. They never quite
vanish, but like single points of light gleam upon us out of the great dark mass.
We must accept them as a pledge that this Sansara contains a good and

redeeming principle, which is capable of breaking through and of filling and
freeing the whole of it.
*
The readers of my Ethics know that with me the ultimate foundation of
morality is the truth which in the Vedas and the Vedanta receives its expression
in the established, mystical formula, Tat twam asi (This is thyself), which is
spoken with reference to every living thing, be it man or beast, and is called the
Mahavakya, the great word.
Actions which proceed in accordance with this principle, such as those of
the philanthropist, may indeed be regarded as the beginning of mysticism. Every
benefit rendered with a pure intention proclaims that the man who exercises it
acts in direct conflict with the world of appearance; for he recognises himself as
identical with another individual, who exists in complete separation from him.
Accordingly, all disinterested kindness is inexplicable; it is a mystery; and hence
in order to explain it a man has to resort to all sorts of fictions. When Kant had
demolished all other arguments for theism, he admitted one only, that it gave the
best interpretation and solution of such mysterious actions, and of all others like
them. He therefore allowed it to stand as a presumption unsusceptible indeed of
theoretical proof, but valid from a practical point of view. I may, however,
express my doubts whether he was quite serious about it. For to make morality
rest on theism is really to reduce morality to egoism; although the English, it is
true, as also the lowest classes of society with us, do not perceive the possibility
of any other foundation for it.
The above-mentioned recognition of a man's own true being in another
individual objectively presented to him, is exhibited in a particularly beautiful
and clear way in the cases in which a man, already destined to death beyond any
hope of rescue, gives himself up to the welfare of others with great solicitude
and zeal, and tries to save them. Of this kind is the well-known story of a servant
who was bitten in a courtyard at night by a mad dog. In the belief that she was
beyond hope, she seized the dog and dragged it into a stable, which she then
locked, so that no one else might be bitten. Then again there is the incident in
Naples, which Tischbein has immortalised in one of his aquarelles. A son,
fleeing from the lava which is rapidly streaming toward the sea, is carrying his
aged father on his back. When there is only a narrow strip of land left between
the devouring elements, the father bids the son put him down, so that the son
may save himself by flight, as otherwise both will be lost. The son obeys, and as
he goes casts a glance of farewell on his father. This is the moment depicted.
The historical circumstance which Scott represents in his masterly way in The
Heart of Midlothian, chap, ii., is of a precisely similar kind; where, of two

delinquents condemned to death, the one who by his awkwardness caused the
capture of the other happily sets him free in the chapel by overpowering the
guard after the execution-sermon, without at the same time making any attempt
on his own behalf. Nay, in the same category must also be placed the scene
which is represented in a common engraving, which may perhaps be
objectionable to western readers--I mean the one in which a soldier, kneeling to
be shot, is trying by waving a cloth to frighten away his dog who wants to come
to him.
In all these cases we see an individual in the face of his own immediate and
certain destruction no longer thinking of saving himself, so that he may direct
the whole of his efforts to saving some one else. How could there be a clearer
expression of the consciousness that what is being destroyed is only a
phenomenon, and that the destruction itself is only a phenomenon; that, on the
other hand, the real being of the man who meets his death is untouched by that
event, and lives on in the other man, in whom even now, as his action betrays, he
so clearly perceives it to exist? For if this were not so, and it was his real being
which was about to be annihilated, how could that being spend its last efforts in
showing such an ardent sympathy in the welfare and continued existence of
another?
There are two different ways in which a man may become conscious of his
own existence. On the one hand, he may have an empirical perception of it, as it
manifests itself externally--something so small that it approaches vanishing
point; set in a world which, as regards time and space, is infinite; one only of the
thousand millions of human creatures who run about on this planet for a very
brief period and are renewed every thirty years. On the other hand, by going
down into the depths of his own nature, a man may become conscious that he is
all in all; that, in fact, he is the only real being; and that, in addition, this real
being perceives itself again in others, who present themselves from without, as
though they formed a mirror of himself.
Of these two ways in which a man may come to know what he is, the first
grasps the phenomenon alone, the mere product of the principle of individuation;
whereas the second makes a man immediately conscious that he is the thing-in-
itself. This is a doctrine in which, as regards the first way, I have Kant, and as
regards both, I have the Vedas, to support me.
There is, it is true, a simple objection to the second method. It may be said
to assume that one and the same being can exist in different places at the same
time, and yet be complete in each of them. Although, from an empirical point of
view, this is the most palpable impossibility--nay, absurdity--it is nevertheless
perfectly true of the thing-in-itself. The impossibility and the absurdity of it,

empirically, are only due to the forms which phenomena assume, in accordance
with the principle of individuation. For the thing-in-itself, the will to live, exists
whole and undivided in every being, even in the smallest, as completely as in the
sum-total of all things that ever were or are or will be. This is why every being,
even the smallest, says to itself, So long as I am safe, let the world perish--dum
ego salvus sim, pereat mundus. And, in truth, even if only one individual were
left in the world, and all the rest were to perish, the one that remained would still
possess the whole self-being of the world, uninjured and undiminished, and
would laugh at the destruction of the world as an illusion. This conclusion per
impossible may be balanced by the counter-conclusion, which is on all fours
with it, that if that last individual were to be annihilated in and with him the
whole world would be destroyed. It was in this sense that the mystic Angelas
Silesius[1] declared that God could not live for a moment without him, and that
if he were to be annihilated God must of necessity give up the ghost:
Ich weiss dass ohne mich Gott nicht ein Nu kann leben; Werd' ich zunicht,
er muss von Noth den Geist aufgeben.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Angelus Silesius, see Counsels and
Maxims, p. 39, note.]
But the empirical point of view also to some extent enables us to perceive
that it is true, or at least possible, that our self can exist in other beings whose
consciousness is separated and different from our own. That this is so is shown
by the experience of somnambulists. Although the identity of their ego is
preserved throughout, they know nothing, when they awake, of all that a
moment before they themselves said, did or suffered. So entirely is the
individual consciousness a phenomenon that even in the same ego two
consciousnesses can arise of which the one knows nothing of the other.
GOVERNMENT.
It is a characteristic failing of the Germans to look in the clouds for what
lies at their feet. An excellent example of this is furnished by the treatment
which the idea of Natural Right has received at the hands of professors of
philosophy. When they are called upon to explain those simple relations of
human life which make up the substance of this right, such as Right and Wrong,
Property, State, Punishment and so on, they have recourse to the most
extravagant, abstract, remote and meaningless conceptions, and out of them
build a Tower of Babel reaching to the clouds, and taking this or that form
according to the special whim of the professor for the time being. The clearest

and simplest relations of life, such as affect us directly, are thus made quite
unintelligible, to the great detriment of the young people who are educated in
such a school. These relations themselves are perfectly simple and easily
understood--as the reader may convince himself if he will turn to the account
which I have given of them in the Foundation of Morality, § 17, and in my chief
work, bk. i., § 62. But at the sound of certain words, like Right, Freedom, the
Good, Being--this nugatory infinitive of the cupola--and many others of the
same sort, the German's head begins to swim, and falling straightway into a kind
of delirium he launches forth into high-flown phrases which have no meaning
whatever. He takes the most remote and empty conceptions, and strings them
together artificially, instead of fixing his eyes on the facts, and looking at things
and relations as they really are. It is these things and relations which supply the
ideas of Right and Freedom, and give them the only true meaning that they
possess.
The man who starts from the preconceived opinion that the conception of
Right must be a positive one, and then attempts to define it, will fail; for he is
trying to grasp a shadow, to pursue a spectre, to search for what does not exist.
The conception of Right is a negative one, like the conception of Freedom; its
content is mere negation. It is the conception of Wrong which is positive; Wrong
has the same significance as injury--laesio--in the widest sense of the term. An
injury may be done either to a man's person or to his property or to his honour;
and accordingly a man's rights are easy to define: every one has a right to do
anything that injures no one else.
To have a right to do or claim a thing means nothing more than to be able to
do or take or vise it without thereby injuring any one else. Simplex sigillum veri.
This definition shows how senseless many questions are; for instance, the
question whether we have the right to take our own life, As far as concerns the
personal claims which others may possibly have upon us, they are subject to the
condition that we are alive, and fall to the ground when we die. To demand of a
man, who does not care to live any longer for himself, that he should live on as a
mere machine for the advantage of others is an extravagant pretension.
Although men's powers differ, their rights are alike. Their rights do not rest
upon their powers, because Right is of a moral complexion; they rest on the fact
that the same will to live shows itself in every man at the same stage of its
manifestation. This, however, only applies to that original and abstract Right,
which a man possesses as a man. The property, and also the honour, which a
man acquires for himself by the exercise of his powers, depend on the measure
and kind of power which he possesses, and so lend his Right a wider sphere of
application. Here, then, equality comes to an end. The man who is better

equipped, or more active, increases by adding to his gains, not his Right, but the
number of the things to which it extends.
In my chief work[1] I have proved that the State in its essence is merely an
institution existing for the purpose of protecting its members against outward
attack or inward dissension. It follows from this that the ultimate ground on
which the State is necessary is the acknowledged lack of Right in the human
race. If Right were there, no one would think of a State; for no one would have
any fear that his rights would be impaired; and a mere union against the attacks
of wild beasts or the elements would have very little analogy with what we mean
by a State. From this point of view it is easy to see how dull and stupid are the
philosophasters who in pompous phrases represent that the State is the supreme
end and flower of human existence. Such a view is the apotheosis of
Philistinism.
[Footnote 1: 1 Bk. ii., ch. xlvii.]
If it were Right that ruled in the world, a man would have done enough in
building his house, and would need no other protection than the right of
possessing it, which would be obvious. But since Wrong is the order of the day,
it is requisite that the man who has built his house should also be able to protect
it. Otherwise his Right is de facto incomplete; the aggressor, that is to say, has
the right of might--Faustrecht; and this is just the conception of Right which
Spinoza entertains. He recognises no other. His words are: unusquisque tantum
juris habet quantum potentia valet;[1] each man has as much right as he has
power. And again: uniuscujusque jus potentia ejus definitur; each man's right is
determined by his power.[2] Hobbes seems to have started this conception of
Right,[3] and he adds the strange comment that the Right of the good Lord to all
things rests on nothing but His omnipotence.
[Footnote 1: Tract. Theol. Pol., ch. ii., § 8.]
[Footnote 2: Ethics, IV., xxxvii., 1.]
[Footnote 3: Particularly in a passage in the De Cive, I, § 14.]
Now this is a conception of Right which, both in theory and in practice, no
longer prevails in the civic world; but in the world in general, though abolished
in theory, it continues to apply in practice. The consequences of neglecting it
may be seen in the case of China. Threatened by rebellion within and foes
without, this great empire is in a defenceless state, and has to pay the penalty of
having cultivated only the arts of peace and ignored the arts of war.
There is a certain analogy between the operations of nature and those of
man which is a peculiar but not fortuitous character, and is based on the identity
of the will in both. When the herbivorous animals had taken their place in the
organic world, beasts of prey made their appearance--necessarily a late

appearance--in each species, and proceeded to live upon them. Just in the same
way, as soon as by honest toil and in the sweat of their faces men have won from
the ground what is needed for the support of their societies, a number of
individuals are sure to arise in some of these societies, who, instead of
cultivating the earth and living on its produce, prefer to take their lives in their
hands and risk health and freedom by falling upon those who are in possession
of what they have honestly earned, and by appropriating the fruits of their
labour. These are the beasts of prey in the human race; they are the conquering
peoples whom we find everywhere in history, from the most ancient to the most
recent times. Their varying fortunes, as at one moment they succeed and at
another fail, make up the general elements of the history of the world. Hence
Voltaire was perfectly right when he said that the aim of all war is robbery. That
those who engage in it are ashamed of their doings is clear by the fact that
governments loudly protest their reluctance to appeal to arms except for
purposes of self-defence. Instead of trying to excuse themselves by telling public
and official lies, which are almost more revolting than war itself, they should
take their stand, as bold as brass, on Macchiavelli's doctrine. The gist of it may
be stated to be this: that whereas between one individual and another, and so far
as concerns the law and morality of their relations, the principle, Don't do to
others what you wouldn't like done to yourself, certainly applies, it is the
converse of this principle which is appropriate in the case of nations and in
politics: What you wouldn't like done to yourself do to others. If you do not want
to be put under a foreign yoke, take time by the forelock, and put your neighbour
under it himself; whenever, that is to say, his weakness offers you the
opportunity. For if you let the opportunity pass, it will desert one day to the
enemy's camp and offer itself there. Then your enemy will put you under his
yoke; and your failure to grasp the opportunity may be paid for, not by the
generation which was guilty of it, but by the next. This Macchiavellian principle
is always a much more decent cloak for the lust of robbery than the rags of very
obvious lies in a speech from the head of the State; lies, too, of a description
which recalls the well-known story of the rabbit attacking the dog. Every State
looks upon its neighbours as at bottom a horde of robbers, who will fall upon it
as soon as they have the opportunity.
*
Between the serf, the farmer, the tenant, and the mortgagee, the difference
is rather one of form than of substance. Whether the peasant belongs to me, or
the land on which he has to get a living; whether the bird is mine, or its food, the
tree or its fruit, is a matter of little moment; for, as Shakespeare makes Shylock
say:

You take my life When you do take the means whereby I live.
The free peasant has, indeed, the advantage that he can go off and seek his
fortune in the wide world; whereas the serf who is attached to the soil, glebae
adscriptus, has an advantage which is perhaps still greater, that when failure of
crops or illness, old age or incapacity, render him helpless, his master must look
after him, and so he sleeps well at night; whereas, if the crops fail, his master
tosses about on his bed trying to think how he is to procure bread for his men. As
long ago as Menander it was said that it is better to be the slave of a good master
than to live miserably as a freeman. Another advantage possessed by the free is
that if they have any talents they can improve their position; but the same
advantage is not wholly withheld from the slave. If he proves himself useful to
his master by the exercise of any skill, he is treated accordingly; just as in
ancient Rome mechanics, foremen of workshops, architects, nay, even doctors,
were generally slaves.
Slavery and poverty, then, are only two forms, I might almost say only two
names, of the same thing, the essence of which is that a man's physical powers
are employed, in the main, not for himself but for others; and this leads partly to
his being over-loaded with work, and partly to his getting a scanty satisfaction
for his needs. For Nature has given a man only as much physical power as will
suffice, if he exerts it in moderation, to gain a sustenance from the earth. No
great superfluity of power is his. If, then, a not inconsiderable number of men
are relieved from the common burden of sustaining the existence of the human
race, the burden of the remainder is augmented, and they suffer. This is the chief
source of the evil which under the name of slavery, or under the name of the
proletariat, has always oppressed the great majority of the human race.
But the more remote cause of it is luxury. In order, it may be said, that
some few persons may have what is unnecessary, superfluous, and the product of
refinement--nay, in order that they may satisfy artificial needs--a great part of the
existing powers of mankind has to be devoted to this object, and therefore
withdrawn from the production of what is necessary and indispensable. Instead
of building cottages for themselves, thousands of men build mansions for a few.
Instead of weaving coarse materials for themselves and their families, they make
fine cloths, silk, or even lace, for the rich, and in general manufacture a thousand
objects of luxury for their pleasure. A great part of the urban population consists
of workmen who make these articles of luxury; and for them and those who give
them work the peasants have to plough and sow and look after the flocks as well
as for themselves, and thus have more labour than Nature originally imposed
upon them. Moreover, the urban population devotes a great deal of physical
strength, and a great deal of land, to such things as wine, silk, tobacco, hops,

asparagus and so on, instead of to corn, potatoes and cattle-breeding. Further, a
number of men are withdrawn from agriculture and employed in ship-building
and seafaring, in order that sugar, coffee, tea and other goods may be imported.
In short, a large part of the powers of the human race is taken away from the
production of what is necessary, in order to bring what is superfluous and
unnecessary within the reach of a few. As long therefore as luxury exists, there
must be a corresponding amount of over-work and misery, whether it takes the
name of poverty or of slavery. The fundamental difference between the two is
that slavery originates in violence, and poverty in craft. The whole unnatural
condition of society--the universal struggle to escape from misery, the sea-trade
attended with so much loss of life, the complicated interests of commerce, and
finally the wars to which it all gives rise--is due, only and alone, to luxury,
which gives no happiness even to those who enjoy it, nay, makes them ill and
bad-tempered. Accordingly it looks as if the most effective way of alleviating
human misery would be to diminish luxury, or even abolish it altogether.
There is unquestionably much truth in this train of thought. But the
conclusion at which it arrives is refuted by an argument possessing this
advantage over it--that it is confirmed by the testimony of experience. A certain
amount of work is devoted to purposes of luxury. What the human race loses in
this way in the muscular power which would otherwise be available for the
necessities of existence is gradually made up to it a thousandfold by the nervous
power, which, in a chemical sense, is thereby released. And since the
intelligence and sensibility which are thus promoted are on a higher level than
the muscular irritability which they supplant, so the achievements of mind
exceed those of the body a thousandfold. One wise counsel is worth the work of
many hands:
[Greek: Hos en sophon bouleuma tas pollon cheiras nika.]
A nation of nothing but peasants would do little in the way of discovery and
invention; but idle hands make active heads. Science and the Arts are themselves
the children of luxury, and they discharge their debt to it. The work which they
do is to perfect technology in all its branches, mechanical, chemical and
physical; an art which in our days has brought machinery to a pitch never dreamt
of before, and in particular has, by steam and electricity, accomplished things the
like of which would, in earlier ages, have been ascribed to the agency of the
devil. In manufactures of all kinds, and to some extent in agriculture, machines
now do a thousand times more than could ever have been done by the hands of
all the well-to-do, educated, and professional classes, and could ever have been
attained if all luxury had been abolished and every one had returned to the life of
a peasant. It is by no means the rich alone, but all classes, who derive benefit

from these industries. Things which in former days hardly any one could afford
are now cheap and abundant, and even the lowest classes are much better off in
point of comfort. In the Middle Ages a King of England once borrowed a pair of
silk stockings from one of his lords, so that he might wear them in giving an
audience to the French ambassador. Even Queen Elizabeth was greatly pleased
and astonished to receive a pair as a New Year's present; to-day every shopman
has them. Fifty years ago ladies wore the kind of calico gowns which servants
wear now. If mechanical science continues to progress at the same rate for any
length of time, it may end by saving human labour almost entirely, just as horses
are even now being largely superseded by machines. For it is possible to
conceive that intellectual culture might in some degree become general in the
human race; and this would be impossible as long as bodily labour was
incumbent on any great part of it. Muscular irritability and nervous sensibility
are always and everywhere, both generally and particularly, in antagonism; for
the simple reason that it is one and the same vital power which underlies both.
Further, since the arts have a softening effect on character, it is possible that
quarrels great and small, wars and duels, will vanish from the world; just as both
have become much rarer occurrences. However, it is not my object here to write
a Utopia.
But apart from all this the arguments used above in favour of the abolition
of luxury and the uniform distribution of all bodily labour are open to the
objection that the great mass of mankind, always and everywhere, cannot do
without leaders, guides and counsellors, in one shape or another, according to
the matter in question; judges, governors, generals, officials, priests, doctors,
men of learning, philosophers, and so on, are all a necessity. Their common task
is to lead the race for the greater part so incapable and perverse, through the
labyrinth of life, of which each of them according to his position and capacity
has obtained a general view, be his range wide or narrow. That these guides of
the race should be permanently relieved of all bodily labour as well as of all
vulgar need and discomfort; nay, that in proportion to their much greater
achievements they should necessarily own and enjoy more than the common
man, is natural and reasonable. Great merchants should also be included in the
same privileged class, whenever they make far-sighted preparations for national
needs.
The question of the sovereignty of the people is at bottom the same as the
question whether any man can have an original right to rule a people against its
will. How that proposition can be reasonably maintained I do not see. The
people, it must be admitted, is sovereign; but it is a sovereign who is always a
minor. It must have permanent guardians, and it can never exercise its rights

itself, without creating dangers of which no one can foresee the end; especially
as like all minors, it is very apt to become the sport of designing sharpers, in the
shape of what are called demagogues.
Voltaire remarks that the first man to become a king was a successful
soldier. It is certainly the case that all princes were originally victorious leaders
of armies, and for a long time it was as such that they bore sway. On the rise of
standing armies princes began to regard their people as a means of sustaining
themselves and their soldiers, and treated them, accordingly, as though they were
a herd of cattle, which had to be tended in order that it might provide wool, milk,
and meat. The why and wherefore of all this, as I shall presently show in detail,
is the fact that originally it was not right, but might, that ruled in the world.
Might has the advantage of having been the first in the field. That is why it is
impossible to do away with it and abolish it altogether; it must always have its
place; and all that a man can wish or ask is that it should be found on the side of
right and associated with it. Accordingly says the prince to his subjects: "I rule
you in virtue of the power which I possess. But, on the other hand, it excludes
that of any one else, and I shall suffer none but my own, whether it comes from
without, or arises within by one of you trying to oppress another. In this way,
then, you are protected." The arrangement was carried out; and just because it
was carried out the old idea of kingship developed with time and progress into
quite a different idea, and put the other one in the background, where it may still
be seen, now and then, flitting about like a spectre. Its place has been taken by
the idea of the king as father of his people, as the firm and unshakable pillar
which alone supports and maintains the whole organisation of law and order, and
consequently the rights of every man.[1] But a king can accomplish this only by
inborn prerogative which reserves authority to him and to him alone--an
authority which is supreme, indubitable, and beyond all attack, nay, to which
every one renders instinctive obedience. Hence the king is rightly said to rule
"by the grace of God." He is always the most useful person in the State, and his
services are never too dearly repaid by any Civil List, however heavy.
[Footnote 1: We read in Stobaeus, Florilegium, ch. xliv., 41, of a Persian
custom, by which, whenever a king died, there was a five days' anarchy, in order
that people might perceive the advantage of having kings and laws.]
But even as late a writer as Macchiavelli was so decidedly imbued with the
earlier or mediaeval conception of the position of a prince that he treats it as a
matter which is self-evident: he never discusses it, but tacitly takes it as the
presupposition and basis of his advice. It may be said generally that his book is
merely the theoretical statement and consistent and systematic exposition of the
practice prevailing in his time. It is the novel statement of it in a complete

theoretical form that lends it such a poignant interest. The same thing, I may
remark in passing, applies to the immortal little work of La Rochefaucauld, who,
however, takes private and not public life for his theme, and offers, not advice,
but observations. The title of this fine little book is open, perhaps, to some
objection: the contents are not, as a rule, either maxims or reflections, but
aperçus; and that is what they should be called. There is much, too, in
Macchiavelli that will be found also to apply to private life.
Right in itself is powerless; in nature it is Might that rules. To enlist might
on the side of right, so that by means of it right may rule, is the problem of
statesmanship. And it is indeed a hard problem, as will be obvious if we
remember that almost every human breast is the seat of an egoism which has no
limits, and is usually associated with an accumulated store of hatred and malice;
so that at the very start feelings of enmity largely prevail over those of
friendship. We have also to bear in mind that it is many millions of individuals
so constituted who have to be kept in the bonds of law and order, peace and
tranquillity; whereas originally every one had a right to say to every one else: I
am just as good as you are! A consideration of all this must fill us with surprise
that on the whole the world pursues its way so peacefully and quietly, and with
so much law and order as we see to exist. It is the machinery of State which
alone accomplishes it. For it is physical power alone which has any direct action
on men; constituted as they generally are, it is for physical power alone that they
have any feeling or respect.
If a man would convince himself by experience that this is the case, he need
do nothing but remove all compulsion from his fellows, and try to govern them
by clearly and forcibly representing to them what is reasonable, right, and fair,
though at the same time it may be contrary to their interests. He would be
laughed to scorn; and as things go that is the only answer he would get. It would
soon be obvious to him that moral force alone is powerless. It is, then, physical
force alone which is capable of securing respect. Now this force ultimately
resides in the masses, where it is associated with ignorance, stupidity and
injustice. Accordingly the main aim of statesmanship in these difficult
circumstances is to put physical force in subjection to mental force--to
intellectual superiority, and thus to make it serviceable. But if this aim is not
itself accompanied by justice and good intentions the result of the business, if it
succeeds, is that the State so erected consists of knaves and fools, the deceivers
and the deceived. That this is the case is made gradually evident by the progress
of intelligence amongst the masses, however much it may be repressed; and it
leads to revolution. But if, contrarily, intelligence is accompanied by justice and
good intentions, there arises a State as perfect as the character of human affairs

will allow. It is very much to the purpose if justice and good intentions not only
exist, but are also demonstrable and openly exhibited, and can be called to
account publicly, and be subject to control. Care must be taken, however, lest the
resulting participation of many persons in the work of government should affect
the unity of the State, and inflict a loss of strength and concentration on the
power by which its home and foreign affairs have to be administered. This is
what almost always happens in republics. To produce a constitution which
should satisfy all these demands would accordingly be the highest aim of
statesmanship. But, as a matter of fact, statesmanship has to consider other
things as well. It has to reckon with the people as they exist, and their national
peculiarities. This is the raw material on which it has to work, and the
ingredients of that material will always exercise a great effect on the completed
scheme.
Statesmanship will have achieved a good deal if it so far attains its object as
to reduce wrong and injustice in the community to a minimum. To banish them
altogether, and to leave no trace of them, is merely the ideal to be aimed at; and
it is only approximately that it can be reached. If they disappear in one direction,
they creep in again in another; for wrong and injustice lie deeply rooted in
human nature. Attempts have been made to attain the desired aim by artificial
constitutions and systematic codes of law; but they are not in complete touch
with the facts--they remain an asymptote, for the simple reason that hard and fast
conceptions never embrace all possible cases, and cannot be made to meet
individual instances. Such conceptions resemble the stones of a mosaic rather
than the delicate shading in a picture. Nay, more: all experiments in this matter
are attended with danger; because the material in question, namely, the human
race, is the most difficult of all material to handle. It is almost as dangerous as an
explosive.
No doubt it is true that in the machinery of the State the freedom of the
press performs the same function as a safety-valve in other machinery; for it
enables all discontent to find a voice; nay, in doing so, the discontent exhausts
itself if it has not much substance; and if it has, there is an advantage in
recognising it betimes and applying the remedy. This is much better than to
repress the discontent, and let it simmer and ferment, and go on increasing until
it ends in an explosion. On the other hand, the freedom of the press may be
regarded as a permission to sell poison--poison for the heart and the mind. There
is no idea so foolish but that it cannot be put into the heads of the ignorant and
incapable multitude, especially if the idea holds out some prospect of any gain or
advantage. And when a man has got hold of any such idea what is there that he
will not do? I am, therefore, very much afraid that the danger of a free press

outweighs its utility, particularly where the law offers a way of redressing
wrongs. In any case, however, the freedom of the press should be governed by a
very strict prohibition of all and every anonymity.
Generally, indeed, it may be maintained that right is of a nature analogous
to that of certain chemical substances, which cannot be exhibited in a pure and
isolated condition, but at the most only with a small admixture of some other
substance, which serves as a vehicle for them, or gives them the necessary
consistency; such as fluorine, or even alcohol, or prussic acid. Pursuing the
analogy we may say that right, if it is to gain a footing in the world and really
prevail, must of necessity be supplemented by a small amount of arbitrary force,
in order that, notwithstanding its merely ideal and therefore ethereal nature, it
may be able to work and subsist in the real and material world, and not evaporate
and vanish into the clouds, as it does in Hesoid. Birth-right of every description,
all heritable privileges, every form of national religion, and so on, may be
regarded as the necessary chemical base or alloy; inasmuch as it is only when
right has some such firm and actual foundation that it can be enforced and
consistently vindicated. They form for right a sort of [Greek: os moi pou sto]--a
fulcrum for supporting its lever.
Linnaeus adopted a vegetable system of an artificial and arbitrary character.
It cannot be replaced by a natural one, no matter how reasonable the change
might be, or how often it has been attempted to make it, because no other system
could ever yield the same certainty and stability of definition. Just in the same
way the artificial and arbitrary basis on which, as has been shown, the
constitution of a State rests, can never be replaced by a purely natural basis. A
natural basis would aim at doing away with the conditions that have been
mentioned: in the place of the privileges of birth it would put those of personal
merit; in the place of the national religion, the results of rationalistic inquiry, and
so on. However agreeable to reason this might all prove, the change could not be
made; because a natural basis would lack that certainty and fixity of definition
which alone secures the stability of the commonwealth. A constitution which
embodied abstract right alone would be an excellent thing for natures other than
human, but since the great majority of men are extremely egoistic, unjust,
inconsiderate, deceitful, and sometimes even malicious; since in addition they
are endowed with very scanty intelligence there arises the necessity for a power
that shall be concentrated in one man, a power that shall be above all law and
right, and be completely irresponsible, nay, to which everything shall yield as to
something that is regarded as a creature of a higher kind, a ruler by the grace of
God. It is only thus that men can be permanently held in check and governed.
The United States of North America exhibit the attempt to proceed without

any such arbitrary basis; that is to say, to allow abstract right to prevail pure and
unalloyed. But the result is not attractive. For with all the material prosperity of
the country what do we find? The prevailing sentiment is a base Utilitarianism
with its inevitable companion, ignorance; and it is this that has paved the way for
a union of stupid Anglican bigotry, foolish prejudice, coarse brutality, and a
childish veneration of women. Even worse things are the order of the day: most
iniquitous oppression of the black freemen, lynch law, frequent assassination
often committed with entire impunity, duels of a savagery elsewhere unknown,
now and then open scorn of all law and justice, repudiation of public debts,
abominable political rascality towards a neighbouring State, followed by a
mercenary raid on its rich territory,--afterwards sought to be excused, on the part
of the chief authority of the State, by lies which every one in the country knew to
be such and laughed at--an ever-increasing ochlocracy, and finally all the
disastrous influence which this abnegation of justice in high quarters must have
exercised on private morals. This specimen of a pure constitution on the obverse
side of the planet says very little for republics in general, but still less for the
imitations of it in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia and Peru.
A peculiar disadvantage attaching to republics--and one that might not be
looked for--is that in this form of government it must be more difficult for men
of ability to attain high position and exercise direct political influence than in the
case of monarchies. For always and everywhere and under all circumstances
there is a conspiracy, or instinctive alliance, against such men on the part of all
the stupid, the weak, and the commonplace; they look upon such men as their
natural enemies, and they are firmly held together by a common fear of them.
There is always a numerous host of the stupid and the weak, and in a republican
constitution it is easy for them to suppress and exclude the men of ability, so that
they may not be outflanked by them. They are fifty to one; and here all have
equal rights at the start.
In a monarchy, on the other hand, this natural and universal league of the
stupid against those who are possessed of intellectual advantages is a one-sided
affair; it exists only from below, for in a monarchy talent and intelligence
receive a natural advocacy and support from above. In the first place, the
position of the monarch himself is much too high and too firm for him to stand
in fear of any sort of competition. In the next place, he serves the State more by
his will than by his intelligence; for no intelligence could ever be equal to all the
demands that would in his case be made upon it. He is therefore compelled to be
always availing himself of other men's intelligence. Seeing that his own interests
are securely bound up with those of his country; that they are inseparable from
them and one with them, he will naturally give the preference to the best men,

because they are his most serviceable instruments, and he will bestow his favour
upon them--as soon, that is, as he can find them; which is not so difficult, if only
an honest search be made. Just in the same way even ministers of State have too
much advantage over rising politicians to need to regard them with jealousy; and
accordingly for analogous reasons they are glad to single out distinguished men
and set them to work, in order to make use of their powers for themselves. It is
in this way that intelligence has always under a monarchical government a much
better chance against its irreconcilable and ever-present foe, stupidity; and the
advantage which it gains is very great.
In general, the monarchical form of government is that which is natural to
man; just as it is natural to bees and ants, to a flight of cranes, a herd of
wandering elephants, a pack of wolves seeking prey in common, and many other
animals, all of which place one of their number at the head of the business in
hand. Every business in which men engage, if it is attended with danger--every
campaign, every ship at sea--must also be subject to the authority of one
commander; everywhere it is one will that must lead. Even the animal organism
is constructed on a monarchical principle: it is the brain alone which guides and
governs, and exercises the hegemony. Although heart, lungs, and stomach
contribute much more to the continued existence of the whole body, these
philistines cannot on that account be allowed to guide and lead. That is a
business which belongs solely to the brain; government must proceed from one
central point. Even the solar system is monarchical. On the other hand, a
republic is as unnatural as it is unfavourable to the higher intellectual life and the
arts and sciences. Accordingly we find that everywhere in the world, and at all
times, nations, whether civilised or savage, or occupying a position between the
two, are always under monarchical government. The rule of many as Homer
said, is not a good thing: let there be one ruler, one king;
[Greek: Ouk agathon polykoiraniae-eis koiranos esto Eis basoleus.] [1]
[Footnote 1: Iliad, ii., 204.]
How would it be possible that, everywhere and at all times, we should see
many millions of people, nay, even hundreds of millions, become the willing and
obedient subjects of one man, sometimes even one woman, and provisionally,
even, of a child, unless there were a monarchical instinct in men which drove
them to it as the form of government best suited to them? This arrangement is
not the product of reflection. Everywhere one man is king, and for the most part
his dignity is hereditary. He is, as it were, the personification, the monogram, of
the whole people, which attains an individuality in him. In this sense he can
rightly say: l'etat c'est moi. It is precisely for this reason that in Shakespeare's
historical plays the kings of England and France mutually address each other as

France and England, and the Duke of Austria goes by the name of his country. It
is as though the kings regarded themselves as the incarnation of their
nationalities. It is all in accordance with human nature; and for this very reason
the hereditary monarch cannot separate his own welfare and that of his family
from the welfare of his country; as, on the other hand, mostly happens when the
monarch is elected, as, for instance, in the States of the Church.[1] The Chinese
can conceive of a monarchical government only; what a republic is they utterly
fail to understand. When a Dutch legation was in China in the year 1658, it was
obliged to represent that the Prince of Orange was their king, as otherwise the
Chinese would have been inclined to take Holland for a nest of pirates living
without any lord or master.[2] Stobaeus, in a chapter in his Florilegium, at the
head of which he wrote That monarchy is best, collected the best of the passages
in which the ancients explained the advantages of that form of government. In a
word, republics are unnatural and artificial; they are the product of reflection.
Hence it is that they occur only as rare exceptions in the whole history of the
world. There were the small Greek republics, the Roman and the Carthaginian;
but they were all rendered possible by the fact that five-sixths, perhaps even
seven-eighths, of the population consisted of slaves. In the year 1840, even in the
United States, there were three million slaves to a population of sixteen millions.
Then, again, the duration of the republics of antiquity, compared with that of
monarchies, was very short. Republics are very easy to found, and very difficult
to maintain, while with monarchies it is exactly the reverse. If it is Utopian
schemes that are wanted, I say this: the only solution of the problem would be a
despotism of the wise and the noble, of the true aristocracy and the genuine
nobility, brought about by the method of generation--that is, by the marriage of
the noblest men with the cleverest and most intellectual women. This is my
Utopia, my Republic of Plato.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--The reader will recollect that Schopenhauer
was writing long before the Papal territories were absorbed into the kingdom of
Italy.]
[Footnote 2: See Jean Nieuhoff, L'Ambassade de la Compagnie Orientale
des Provinces Unies vers L'Empereur de la Chine, traduit par Jean le Charpentier
à Leyde, 1665; ch. 45.]
Constitutional kings are undoubtedly in much the same position as the gods
of Epicurus, who sit upon high in undisturbed bliss and tranquillity, and do not
meddle with human affairs. Just now they are the fashion. In every German
duodecimo-principality a parody of the English constitution is set up, quite
complete, from Upper and Lower Houses down to the Habeas Corpus Act and
trial by jury. These institutions, which proceed from English character and

English circumstances, and presuppose both, are natural and suitable to the
English people. It is just as natural to the German people to be split up into a
number of different stocks, under a similar number of ruling Princes, with an
Emperor over them all, who maintains peace at home, and represents the unity of
the State board. It is an arrangement which has proceeded from German
character and German circumstances. I am of opinion that if Germany is not to
meet with the same fate as Italy, it must restore the imperial crown, which was
done away with by its arch-enemy, the first Napoleon; and it must restore it as
effectively as possible. [1] For German unity depends on it, and without the
imperial crown it will always be merely nominal, or precarious. But as we no
longer live in the days of Günther of Schwarzburg, when the choice of Emperor
was a serious business, the imperial crown ought to go alternately to Prussia and
to Austria, for the life of the wearer. In any case, the absolute sovereignty of the
small States is illusory. Napoleon I. did for Germany what Otto the Great did for
Italy: he divided it into small, independent States, on the principle, divide et
impera.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Here, again, it is hardly necessary to say
that Schopenhauer, who died in 1860, and wrote this passage at least some years
previously, cannot be referring to any of the events which culminated in 1870.
The whole passage forms a striking illustration of his political sagacity.]
The English show their great intelligence, amongst other ways, by clinging
to their ancient institutions, customs and usages, and by holding them sacred,
even at the risk of carrying this tenacity too far, and making it ridiculous. They
hold them sacred for the simple reason that those institutions and customs are
not the invention of an idle head, but have grown up gradually by the force of
circumstance and the wisdom of life itself, and are therefore suited to them as a
nation. On the other hand, the German Michel[1] allows himself to be persuaded
by his schoolmaster that he must go about in an English dress-coat, and that
nothing else will do. Accordingly he has bullied his father into giving it to him;
and with his awkward manners this ungainly creature presents in it a sufficiently
ridiculous figure. But the dress-coat will some day be too tight for him and
incommode him. It will not be very long before he feels it in trial by jury. This
institution arose in the most barbarous period of the Middle Ages--the times of
Alfred the Great, when the ability to read and write exempted a man from the
penalty of death. It is the worst of all criminal procedures. Instead of judges,
well versed in law and of great experience, who have grown grey in daily
unravelling the tricks and wiles of thieves, murderers and rascals of all sorts, and
so are well able to get at the bottom of things, it is gossiping tailors and tanners
who sit in judgment; it is their coarse, crude, unpractised, and awkward

intelligence, incapable of any sustained attention, that is called upon to find out
the truth from a tissue of lies and deceit. All the time, moreover, they are
thinking of their cloth and their leather, and longing to be at home; and they have
absolutely no clear notion at all of the distinction between probability and
certainty. It is with this sort of a calculus of probabilities in their stupid heads
that they confidently undertake to seal a man's doom.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--It may be well to explain that "Michel" is
sometimes used by the Germans as a nickname of their nation, corresponding to
"John Bull" as a nickname of the English. Flügel in his German-English
Dictionary declares that der deutsche Michel represents the German nation as an
honest, blunt, unsuspicious fellow, who easily allows himself to be imposed
upon, even, he adds, with a touch of patriotism, "by those who are greatly his
inferiors in point of strength and real worth."]
The same remark is applicable to them which Dr. Johnson made of a court-
martial in which he had little confidence, summoned to decide a very important
case. He said that perhaps there was not a member of it who, in the whole course
of his life, had ever spent an hour by himself in balancing probabilities.[1] Can
any one imagine that the tailor and the tanner would be impartial judges? What!
the vicious multitude impartial! as if partiality were not ten times more to be
feared from men of the same class as the accused than from judges who knew
nothing of him personally, lived in another sphere altogether, were irremovable,
and conscious of the dignity of their office. But to let a jury decide on crimes
against the State and its head, or on misdemeanours of the press, is in a very real
sense to set the fox to keep the geese.
[Footnote 1: Boswell's Johnson, 1780, set. 71.]
Everywhere and at all times there has been much discontent with
governments, laws and public regulations; for the most part, however, because
men are always ready to make institutions responsible for the misery inseparable
from human existence itself; which is, to speak mythically, the curse that was
laid on Adam, and through him on the whole race. But never has that delusion
been proclaimed in a more mendacious and impudent manner than by the
demagogues of the Jetstzeit--of the day we live in. As enemies of Christianity,
they are, of course, optimists: to them the world is its own end and object, and
accordingly in itself, that is to say, in its own natural constitution, it is arranged
on the most excellent principles, and forms a regular habitation of bliss. The
enormous and glaring evils of the world they attribute wholly to governments: if
governments, they think, were to do their duty, there would be a heaven upon
earth; in other words, all men could eat, drink, propagate and die, free from
trouble and want. This is what they mean when they talk of the world being "its

own end and object"; this is the goal of that "perpetual progress of the human
race," and the other fine things which they are never tired of proclaiming.
Formerly it was faith which was the chief support of the throne; nowadays
it is credit. The Pope himself is scarcely more concerned to retain the confidence
of the faithful than to make his creditors believe in his own good faith. If in
times past it was the guilty debt of the world which was lamented, now it is the
financial debts of the world which arouse dismay. Formerly it was the Last Day
which was prophesied; now it is the [Greek: seisachtheia] the great repudiation,
the universal bankruptcy of the nations, which will one day happen; although the
prophet, in this as in the other case, entertains a firm hope that he will not live to
see it himself.
From an ethical and a rational point of view, the right of possession rests
upon an incomparably better foundation than the right of birth; nevertheless, the
right of possession is allied with the right of birth and has come to be part and
parcel of it, so that it would hardly be possible to abolish the right of birth
without endangering the right of possession. The reason of this is that most of
what a man possesses he inherited, and therefore holds by a kind of right of
birth; just as the old nobility bear the names only of their hereditary estates, and
by the use of those names do no more than give expression to the fact that they
own the estates. Accordingly all owners of property, if instead of being envious
they were wise, ought also to support the maintenance of the rights of birth.
The existence of a nobility has, then, a double advantage: it helps to
maintain on the one hand the rights of possession, and on the other the right of
birth belonging to the king. For the king is the first nobleman in the country, and,
as a general rule, he treats the nobility as his humble relations, and regards them
quite otherwise than the commoners, however trusty and well-beloved. It is quite
natural, too, that he should have more confidence in those whose ancestors were
mostly the first ministers, and always the immediate associates, of his own. A
nobleman, therefore, appeals with reason to the name he bears, when on the
occurrence of anything to rouse distrust he repeats his assurance of fidelity and
service to the king. A man's character, as my readers are aware, assuredly comes
to him from his father. It is a narrow-minded and ridiculous thing not to consider
whose son a man is.

FREE-WILL AND FATALISM.
No thoughtful man can have any doubt, after the conclusions reached in my
prize-essay on Moral Freedom, that such freedom is to be sought, not anywhere
in nature, but outside of it. The only freedom that exists is of a metaphysical
character. In the physical world freedom is an impossibility. Accordingly, while
our several actions are in no wise free, every man's individual character is to be
regarded as a free act. He is such and such a man, because once for all it is his
will to be that man. For the will itself, and in itself, and also in so far as it is
manifest in an individual, and accordingly constitutes the original and
fundamental desires of that individual, is independent of all knowledge, because
it is antecedent to such knowledge. All that it receives from knowledge is the
series of motives by which it successively develops its nature and makes itself
cognisable or visible; but the will itself, as something that lies beyond time, and
so long as it exists at all, never changes. Therefore every man, being what he is
and placed in the circumstances which for the moment obtain, but which on their
part also arise by strict necessity, can absolutely never do anything else than just
what at that moment he does do. Accordingly, the whole course of a man's life,
in all its incidents great and small, is as necessarily predetermined as the course
of a clock.
The main reason of this is that the kind of metaphysical free act which I
have described tends to become a knowing consciousness--a perceptive intuition,
which is subject to the forms of space and time. By means of those forms the
unity and indivisibility of the act are represented as drawn asunder into a series
of states and events, which are subject to the Principle of Sufficient Reason in its
four forms--and it is this that is meant by necessity. But the result of it all
assumes a moral complexion. It amounts to this, that by what we do we know
what we are, and by what we suffer we know what we deserve.
Further, it follows from this that a man's individuality does not rest upon the
principle of individuation alone, and therefore is not altogether phenomenal in its
nature. On the contrary, it has its roots in the thing-in-itself, in the will which is
the essence of each individual. The character of this individual is itself
individual. But how deep the roots of individuality extend is one of the questions
which I do not undertake to answer.
In this connection it deserves to be mentioned that even Plato, in his own
way, represented the individuality of a man as a free act.[1] He represented him
as coming into the world with a given tendency, which was the result of the
feelings and character already attaching to him in accordance with the doctrine
of metempsychosis. The Brahmin philosophers also express the unalterable

fixity of innate character in a mystical fashion. They say that Brahma, when a
man is produced, engraves his doings and sufferings in written characters on his
skull, and that his life must take shape in accordance therewith. They point to the
jagged edges in the sutures of the skull-bones as evidence of this writing; and the
purport of it, they say, depends on his previous life and actions. The same view
appears to underlie the Christian, or rather, the Pauline, dogma of Predestination.
[Footnote 1: Phaedrus and Laws, bk. x.]
But this truth, which is universally confirmed by experience, is attended
with another result. All genuine merit, moral as well as intellectual, is not merely
physical or empirical in its origin, but metaphysical; that is to say, it is given a
priori and not a posteriori; in other words, it lies innate and is not acquired, and
therefore its source is not a mere phenomenon, but the thing-in-itself. Hence it is
that every man achieves only that which is irrevocably established in his nature,
or is born with him. Intellectual capacity needs, it is true, to be developed just as
many natural products need to be cultivated in order that we may enjoy or use
them; but just as in the case of a natural product no cultivation can take the place
of original material, neither can it do so in the case of intellect. That is the reason
why qualities which are merely acquired, or learned, or enforced--that is,
qualities a posteriori, whether moral or intellectual--are not real or genuine, but
superficial only, and possessed of no value. This is a conclusion of true
metaphysics, and experience teaches the same lesson to all who can look below
the surface. Nay, it is proved by the great importance which we all attach to such
innate characteristics as physiognomy and external appearance, in the case of a
man who is at all distinguished; and that is why we are so curious to see him.
Superficial people, to be sure,--and, for very good reasons, commonplace people
too,--will be of the opposite opinion; for if anything fails them they will thus be
enabled to console themselves by thinking that it is still to come.
The world, then, is not merely a battlefield where victory and defeat receive
their due recompense in a future state. No! the world is itself the Last Judgment
on it. Every man carries with him the reward and the disgrace that he deserves;
and this is no other than the doctrine of the Brahmins and Buddhists as it is
taught in the theory of metempsychosis.
The question has been raised, What two men would do, who lived a solitary
life in the wilds and met each other for the first time. Hobbes, Pufendorf, and
Rousseau have given different answers. Pufendorf believed that they would
approach each other as friends; Hobbes, on the contrary, as enemies; Rousseau,
that they would pass each other by In silence. All three are both right and wrong.
This is just a case in which the incalculable difference that there is in innate
moral disposition between one individual and another would make its

appearance. The difference is so strong that the question here raised might be
regarded as the standard and measure of it. For there are men in whom the sight
of another man at once rouses a feeling of enmity, since their inmost nature
exclaims at once: That is not me! There are, others in whom the sight awakens
immediate sympathy; their inmost nature says: That is me over again! Between
the two there are countless degrees. That in this most important matter we are so
totally different is a great problem, nay, a mystery.
In regard to this a priori nature of moral character there is matter for varied
reflection in a work by Bastholm, a Danish writer, entitled Historical
Contributions to the Knowledge of Man in the Savage State. He is struck by the
fact that intellectual culture and moral excellence are shown to be entirely
independent of each other, inasmuch as one is often found without the other. The
reason of this, as we shall find, is simply that moral excellence in no wise
springs from reflection, which is developed by intellectual culture, but from the
will itself, the constitution of which is innate and not susceptible in itself of any
improvement by means of education. Bastholm represents most nations as very
vicious and immoral; and on the other hand he reports that excellent traits of
character are found amongst some savage peoples; as, for instance, amongst the
Orotchyses, the inhabitants of the island Savu, the Tunguses, and the Pelew
islanders. He thus attempts to solve the problem, How it is that some tribes are
so remarkably good, when their neighbours are all bad,
It seems to me that the difficulty may be explained as follows: Moral
qualities, as we know, are heritable, and an isolated tribe, such as is described,
might take its rise in some one family, and ultimately in a single ancestor who
happened to be a good man, and then maintain its purity. Is it not the case, for
instance, that on many unpleasant occasions, such as repudiation of public debts,
filibustering raids and so on, the English have often reminded the North
Americans of their descent from English penal colonists? It is a reproach,
however, which can apply only to a small part of the population.
It is marvellous how every man's individuality (that is to say, the union of a
definite character with a definite intellect) accurately determines all his actions
and thoughts down to the most unimportant details, as though it were a dye
which pervaded them; and how, in consequence, one man's whole course of life,
in other words, his inner and outer history, turns out so absolutely different from
another's. As a botanist knows a plant in its entirety from a single leaf; as Cuvier
from a single bone constructed the whole animal, so an accurate knowledge of a
man's whole character may be attained from a single characteristic act; that is to
say, he himself may to some extent be constructed from it, even though the act in
question is of very trifling consequence. Nay, that is the most perfect test of all,

for in a matter of importance people are on their guard; in trifles they follow
their natural bent without much reflection. That is why Seneca's remark, that
even the smallest things may be taken as evidence of character, is so true:
argumenta morum ex minimis quoque licet capere.[1] If a man shows by his
absolutely unscrupulous and selfish behaviour in small things that a sentiment of
justice is foreign to his disposition, he should not be trusted with a penny unless
on due security. For who will believe that the man who every day shows that he
is unjust in all matters other than those which concern property, and whose
boundless selfishness everywhere protrudes through the small affairs of ordinary
life which are subject to no scrutiny, like a dirty shirt through the holes of a
ragged jacket--who, I ask, will believe that such a man will act honourably in
matters of meum and tuum without any other incentive but that of justice? The
man who has no conscience in small things will be a scoundrel in big things. If
we neglect small traits of character, we have only ourselves to blame if we
afterwards learn to our disadvantage what this character is in the great affairs of
life. On the same principle, we ought to break with so-called friends even in
matters of trifling moment, if they show a character that is malicious or bad or
vulgar, so that we may avoid the bad turn which only waits for an opportunity of
being done us. The same thing applies to servants. Let it always be our maxim:
Better alone than amongst traitors.
[Footnote 1: Ep., 52.]
Of a truth the first and foremost step in all knowledge of mankind is the
conviction that a man's conduct, taken as a whole, and in all its essential
particulars, is not governed by his reason or by any of the resolutions which he
may make in virtue of it. No man becomes this or that by wishing to be it,
however earnestly. His acts proceed from his innate and unalterable character,
and they are more immediately and particularly determined by motives. A man's
conduct, therefore, is the necessary product of both character and motive. It may
be illustrated by the course of a planet, which is the result of the combined effect
of the tangential energy with which it is endowed, and the centripetal energy
which operates from the sun. In this simile the former energy represents
character, and the latter the influence of motive. It is almost more than a mere
simile. The tangential energy which properly speaking is the source of the
planet's motion, whilst on the other hand the motion is kept in check by
gravitation, is, from a metaphysical point of view, the will manifesting itself in
that body.
To grasp this fact is to see that we really never form anything more than a
conjecture of what we shall do under circumstances which are still to happen;
although we often take our conjecture for a resolve. When, for instance, in

pursuance of a proposal, a man with the greatest sincerity, and even eagerness,
accepts an engagement to do this or that on the occurrence of a certain future
event, it is by no means certain that he will fulfil the engagement; unless he is so
constituted that the promise which he gives, in itself and as such, is always and
everywhere a motive sufficient for him, by acting upon him, through
considerations of honour, like some external compulsion. But above and beyond
this, what he will do on the occurrence of that event may be foretold from true
and accurate knowledge of his character and the external circumstances under
the influence of which he will fall; and it may with complete certainty be
foretold from this alone. Nay, it is a very easy prophecy if he has been already
seen in a like position; for he will inevitably do the same thing a second time,
provided that on the first occasion he had a true and complete knowledge of the
facts of the case. For, as I have often remarked, a final cause does not impel a
man by being real, but by being known; causa finalis non movet secundum suum
esse reale, sed secundum esse cognitum.[1] Whatever he failed to recognise or
understand the first time could have no influence upon his will; just as an electric
current stops when some isolating body hinders the action of the conductor. This
unalterable nature of character, and the consequent necessity of our actions, are
made very clear to a man who has not, on any given occasion, behaved as he
ought to have done, by showing a lack either of resolution or endurance or
courage, or some other quality demanded at the moment. Afterwards he
recognises what it is that he ought to have done; and, sincerely repenting of his
incorrect behaviour, he thinks to himself, If the opportunity were offered to me
again, I should act differently. It is offered once more; the same occasion recurs;
and to his great astonishment he does precisely the same thing over again.[2]
[Footnote 1: Suarez, Disp. Metaph., xxiii.; §§7 and 8.]
[Footnote 2: Cf. World as Will, ii., pp. 251 ff. sqq. (third edition).]
The best examples of the truth in question are in every way furnished by
Shakespeare's plays. It is a truth with which he was thoroughly imbued, and his
intuitive wisdom expressed it in a concrete shape on every page. I shall here,
however, give an instance of it in a case in which he makes it remarkably clear,
without exhibiting any design or affectation in the matter; for he was a real artist
and never set out from general ideas. His method was obviously to work up to
the psychological truth which he grasped directly and intuitively, regardless of
the fact that few would notice or understand it, and without the smallest idea that
some dull and shallow fellows in Germany would one day proclaim far and wide
that he wrote his works to illustrate moral commonplaces. I allude to the
character of the Earl of Northumberland, whom we find in three plays in
succession, although he does not take a leading part in any one of them; nay, he

appears only in a few scenes distributed over fifteen acts. Consequently, if the
reader is not very attentive, a character exhibited at such great intervals, and its
moral identity, may easily escape his notice, even though it has by no means
escaped the poet's. He makes the earl appear everywhere with a noble and
knightly grace, and talk in language suitable to it; nay, he sometimes puts very
beautiful and even elevated passages, into his mouth. At the same time he is very
far from writing after the manner of Schiller, who was fond of painting the devil
black, and whose moral approval or disapproval of the characters which he
presented could be heard in their own words. With Shakespeare, and also with
Goethe, every character, as long as he is on the stage and speaking, seems to be
absolutely in the right, even though it were the devil himself. In this respect let
the reader compare Duke Alba as he appears in Goethe with the same character
in Schiller.
We make the acquaintance of the Earl of Northumberland in the play of
Richard II., where he is the first to hatch a plot against the King in favour of
Bolingbroke, afterwards Henry IV., to whom he even offers some personal
flattery (Act II., Sc. 3). In the following act he suffers a reprimand because, in
speaking of the King he talks of him as "Richard," without more ado, but
protests that he did it only for brevity's sake. A little later his insidious words
induce the King to surrender. In the following act, when the King renounces the
crown, Northumberland treats him with such harshness and contempt that the
unlucky monarch is quite broken, and losing all patience once more exclaims to
him: Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell! At the close, Northumberland
announces to the new King that he has sent the heads of the former King's
adherents to London.
In the following tragedy, Henry IV., he hatches a plot against the new King
in just the same way. In the fourth act we see the rebels united, making
preparations for the decisive battle on the morrow, and only waiting impatiently
for Northumberland and his division. At last there arrives a letter from him,
saying that he is ill, and that he cannot entrust his force to any one else; but that
nevertheless the others should go forward with courage and make a brave fight.
They do so, but, greatly weakened by his absence, they are completely defeated;
most of their leaders are captured, and his own son, the valorous Hotspur, falls
by the hand of the Prince of Wales.
Again, in the following play, the Second Part of Henry IV., we see him
reduced to a state of the fiercest wrath by the death of his son, and maddened by
the thirst for revenge. Accordingly he kindles another rebellion, and the heads of
it assemble once more. In the fourth act, just as they are about to give battle, and
are only waiting for him to join them, there comes a letter saying that he cannot

collect a proper force, and will therefore seek safety for the present in Scotland;
that, nevertheless, he heartily wishes their heroic undertaking the best success.
Thereupon they surrender to the King under a treaty which is not kept, and so
perish.
So far is character from being the work of reasoned choice and
consideration that in any action the intellect has nothing to do but to present
motives to the will. Thereafter it looks on as a mere spectator and witness at the
course which life takes, in accordance with the influence of motive on the given
character. All the incidents of life occur, strictly speaking, with the same
necessity as the movement of a clock. On this point let me refer to my prize-
essay on The Freedom of the Will. I have there explained the true meaning and
origin of the persistent illusion that the will is entirely free in every single action;
and I have indicated the cause to which it is due. I will only add here the
following teleological explanation of this natural illusion.
Since every single action of a man's life seems to possess the freedom and
originality which in truth only belong to his character as he apprehends it, and
the mere apprehension of it by his intellect is what constitutes his career; and
since what is original in every single action seems to the empirical consciousness
to be always being performed anew, a man thus receives in the course of his
career the strongest possible moral lesson. Then, and not before, he becomes
thoroughly conscious of all the bad sides of his character. Conscience
accompanies every act with the comment: You should act differently, although
its true sense is: You could be other than you are. As the result of this
immutability of character on the one hand, and, on the other, of the strict
necessity which attends all the circumstances in which character is successively
placed, every man's course of life is precisely determined from Alpha right
through to Omega. But, nevertheless, one man's course of life turns out
immeasurably happier, nobler and more worthy than another's, whether it be
regarded from a subjective or an objective point of view, and unless we are to
exclude all ideas of justice, we are led to the doctrine which is well accepted in
Brahmanism and Buddhism, that the subjective conditions in which, as well as
the objective conditions under which, every man is born, are the moral
consequences of a previous existence.
Macchiavelli, who seems to have taken no interest whatever in
philosophical speculations, is drawn by the keen subtlety of his very unique
understanding into the following observation, which possesses a really deep
meaning. It shows that he had an intuitive knowledge of the entire necessity with
which, characters and motives being given, all actions take place. He makes it at
the beginning of the prologue to his comedy Clitia. If, he says, the same men

were to recur in the world in the way that the same circumstances recur, a
hundred years would never elapse without our finding ourselves together once
more, and doing the same things as we are doing now--Se nel mondo tornassino
i medesimi uomini, como tornano i medesimi casi, non passarebbono mai cento
anni che noi non ci trovassimo un altra volta insieme, a fare le medesime cose
che hora. He seems however to have been drawn into the remark by a
reminiscence of what Augustine says in his De Civitate Dei, bk. xii., ch. xiii.
Again, Fate, or the [Greek: eimarmenae] of the ancients, is nothing but the
conscious certainty that all that happens is fast bound by a chain of causes, and
therefore takes place with a strict necessity; that the future is already ordained
with absolute certainty and can undergo as little alteration as the past. In the
fatalistic myths of the ancients all that can be regarded as fabulous is the
prediction of the future; that is, if we refuse to consider the possibility of
magnetic clairvoyance and second sight. Instead of trying to explain away the
fundamental truth of Fatalism by superficial twaddle and foolish evasion, a man
should attempt to get a clear knowledge and comprehension of it; for it is
demonstrably true, and it helps us in a very important way to an understanding
of the mysterious riddle of our life. Predestination and Fatalism do not differ in
the main. They differ only in this, that with Predestination the given character
and external determination of human action proceed from a rational Being, and
with Fatalism from an irrational one. But in either case the result is the same:
that happens which must happen.
On the other hand the conception of Moral Freedom is inseparable from
that of Originality. A man may be said, but he cannot be conceived, to be the
work of another, and at the same time be free in respect of his desires and acts.
He who called him into existence out of nothing in the same process created and
determined his nature--in other words, the whole of his qualities. For no one can
create without creating a something, that is to say, a being determined
throughout and in all its qualities. But all that a man says and does necessarily
proceeds from the qualities so determined; for it is only the qualities themselves
set in motion. It is only some external impulse that they require to make their
appearance. As a man is, so must he act; and praise or blame attaches, not to his
separate acts, but to his nature and being.
That is the reason why Theism and the moral responsibility of man are
incompatible; because responsibility always reverts to the creator of man and it
is there that it has its centre. Vain attempts have been made to make a bridge
from one of these incompatibles to the other by means of the conception of
moral freedom; but it always breaks down again. What is free must also be
original. If our will is free, our will is also the original element, and conversely.

Pre-Kantian dogmatism tried to separate these two predicaments. It was thereby
compelled to assume two kinds of freedom, one cosmological, of the first cause,
and the other moral and theological, of human will. These are represented in
Kant by the third as well as the fourth antimony of freedom.
On the other hand, in my philosophy the plain recognition of the strictly
necessary character of all action is in accordance with the doctrine that what
manifests itself even in the organic and irrational world is will. If this were not
so, the necessity under which irrational beings obviously act would place their
action in conflict with will; if, I mean, there were really such a thing as the
freedom of individual action, and this were not as strictly necessitated as every
other kind of action. But, as I have just shown, it is this same doctrine of the
necessary character of all acts of will which makes it needful to regard a man's
existence and being as itself the work of his freedom, and consequently of his
will. The will, therefore, must be self-existent; it must possess so-called a-se-ity.
Under the opposite supposition all responsibility, as I have shown, would be at
an end, and the moral like the physical world would be a mere machine, set in
motion for the amusement of its manufacturer placed somewhere outside of it.
So it is that truths hang together, and mutually advance and complete one
another; whereas error gets jostled at every corner.
What kind of influence it is that moral instruction may exercise on conduct,
and what are the limits of that influence, are questions which I have sufficiently
examined in the twentieth section of my treatise on the Foundation of Morality.
In all essential particulars an analogous influence is exercised by example,
which, however, has a more powerful effect than doctrine, and therefore it
deserves a brief analysis.
In the main, example works either by restraining a man or by encouraging
him. It has the former effect when it determines him to leave undone what he
wanted to do. He sees, I mean, that other people do not do it; and from this he
judges, in general, that it is not expedient; that it may endanger his person, or his
property, or his honour.
He rests content, and gladly finds himself relieved from examining into the
matter for himself. Or he may see that another man, who has not refrained, has
incurred evil consequences from doing it; this is example of the deterrent kind.
The example which encourages a man works in a twofold manner. It either
induces him to do what he would be glad to leave undone, if he were not afraid
lest the omission might in some way endanger him, or injure him in others'
opinion; or else it encourages him to do what he is glad to do, but has hitherto
refrained from doing from fear of danger or shame; this is example of the
seductive kind. Finally, example may bring a man to do what he would have

otherwise never thought of doing. It is obvious that in this last case example
works in the main only on the intellect; its effect on the will is secondary, and if
it has any such effect, it is by the interposition of the man's own judgment, or by
reliance on the person who presented the example.
The whole influence of example--and it is very strong--rests on the fact that
a man has, as a rule, too little judgment of his own, and often too little
knowledge, o explore his own way for himself, and that he is glad, therefore, to
tread in the footsteps of some one else. Accordingly, the more deficient he is in
either of these qualities, the more is he open to the influence of example; and we
find, in fact, that most men's guiding star is the example of others; that their
whole course of life, in great things and in small, comes in the end to be mere
imitation; and that not even in the pettiest matters do they act according to their
own judgment. Imitation and custom are the spring of almost all human action.
The cause of it is that men fight shy of all and any sort of reflection, and very
properly mistrust their own discernment. At the same time this remarkably
strong imitative instinct in man is a proof of his kinship with apes.
But the kind of effect which example exercises depends upon a man's
character, and thus it is that the same example may possibly seduce one man and
deter another. An easy opportunity of observing this is afforded in the case of
certain social impertinences which come into vogue and gradually spread. The
first time that a man notices anything of the kind, he may say to himself: For
shame! how can he do it! how selfish and inconsiderate of him! really, I shall
take care never to do anything like that. But twenty others will think: Aha! if he
does that, I may do it too.
As regards morality, example, like doctrine, may, it is true, promote civil or
legal amelioration, but not that inward amendment which is, strictly speaking,
the only kind of moral amelioration. For example always works as a personal
motive alone, and assumes, therefore, that a man is susceptible to this sort of
motive. But it is just the predominating sensitiveness of a character to this or that
sort of motive that determines whether its morality is true and real; though, of
whatever kind it is, it is always innate. In general it may be said that example
operates as a means of promoting the good and the bad qualities of a character,
but it does not create them; and so it is that Seneca's maxim, velle non discitur--
will cannot be learned--also holds good here. But the innateness of all truly
moral qualities, of the good as of the bad, is a doctrine that consorts better with
the metempsychosis of the Brahmins and Buddhists, according to which a man's
good and bad deeds follow him from one existence to another like his shadow,
than with Judaism. For Judaism requires a man to come into the world as a moral
blank, so that, in virtue of an inconceivable free will, directed to objects which

are neither to be sought nor avoided--liberum arbitrium indifferentiae--and
consequently as the result of reasoned consideration, he may choose whether he
is to be an angel or a devil, or anything else that may lie between the two.
Though I am well aware what the Jewish scheme is, I pay no attention to it; for
my standard is truth. I am no professor of philosophy, and therefore I do not find
my vocation in establishing the fundamental ideas of Judaism at any cost, even
though they for ever bar the way to all and every kind of philosophical
knowledge. Liberum arbitrium indifferentiae under the name of moral freedom
is a charming doll for professors of philosophy to dandle; and we must leave it to
those intelligent, honourable and upright gentlemen.
CHARACTER.
Men who aspire to a happy, a brilliant and a long life, instead of to a
virtuous one, are like foolish actors who want to be always having the great
parts,--the parts that are marked by splendour and triumph. They fail to see that
the important thing is not what or how much, but how they act.
Since a man does not alter, and his moral character remains absolutely the
same all through his life; since he must play out the part which he has received,
without the least deviation from the character; since neither experience, nor
philosophy, nor religion can effect any improvement in him, the question arises,
What is the meaning of life at all? To what purpose is it played, this farce in
which everything that is essential is irrevocably fixed and determined?
It is played that a man may come to understand himself, that he may see
what it is that he seeks and has sought to be; what he wants, and what, therefore,
he is. This is a knowledge which must be imparted to him from without. Life is
to man, in other words, to will, what chemical re-agents are to the body: it is
only by life that a man reveals what he is, and it is only in so far as he reveals
himself that he exists at all. Life is the manifestation of character, of the
something that we understand by that word; and it is not in life, but outside of it,
and outside time, that character undergoes alteration, as a result of the self-
knowledge which life gives. Life is only the mirror into which a man gazes not
in order that he may get a reflection of himself, but that he may come to
understand himself by that reflection; that he may see what it is that the mirror
shows. Life is the proof sheet, in which the compositors' errors are brought to
light. How they become visible, and whether the type is large or small, are
matters of no consequence. Neither in the externals of life nor in the course of
history is there any significance; for as it is all one whether an error occurs in the

large type or in the small, so it is all one, as regards the essence of the matter,
whether an evil disposition is mirrored as a conqueror of the world or a common
swindler or ill-natured egoist. In one case he is seen of all men; in the other,
perhaps only of himself; but that he should see himself is what signifies.
Therefore if egoism has a firm hold of a man and masters him, whether it be
in the form of joy, or triumph, or lust, or hope, or frantic grief, or annoyance, or
anger, or fear, or suspicion, or passion of any kind--he is in the devil's clutches
and how he got into them does not matter. What is needful is that he should
make haste to get out of them; and here, again, it does not matter how.
I have described character as theoretically an act of will lying beyond time,
of which life in time, or character in action, is the development. For matters of
practical life we all possess the one as well as the other; for we are constituted of
them both. Character modifies our life more than we think, and it is to a certain
extent true that every man is the architect of his own fortune. No doubt it seems
as if our lot were assigned to us almost entirely from without, and imparted to us
in something of the same way in which a melody outside us reaches the ear. But
on looking back over our past, we see at once that our life consists of mere
variations on one and the same theme, namely, our character, and that the same
fundamental bass sounds through it all. This is an experience which a man can
and must make in and by himself.
Not only a man's life, but his intellect too, may be possessed of a clear and
definite character, so far as his intellect is applied to matters of theory. It is not
every man, however, who has an intellect of this kind; for any such definite
individuality as I mean is genius--an original view of the world, which
presupposes an absolutely exceptional individuality, which is the essence of
genius. A man's intellectual character is the theme on which all his works are
variations. In an essay which I wrote in Weimar I called it the knack by which
every genius produces his works, however various. This intellectual character
determines the physiognomy of men of genius--what I might call the theoretical
physiognomy--and gives it that distinguished expression which is chiefly seen in
the eyes and the forehead. In the case of ordinary men the physiognomy presents
no more than a weak analogy with the physiognomy of genius. On the other
hand, all men possess the practical physiognomy, the stamp of will, of practical
character, of moral disposition; and it shows itself chiefly in the mouth.
Since character, so far as we understand its nature, is above and beyond
time, it cannot undergo any change under the influence of life. But although it
must necessarily remain the same always, it requires time to unfold itself and
show the very diverse aspects which it may possess. For character consists of
two factors: one, the will-to-live itself, blind impulse, so-called impetuosity; the

other, the restraint which the will acquires when it comes to understand the
world; and the world, again, is itself will. A man may begin by following the
craving of desire, until he comes to see how hollow and unreal a thing is life,
how deceitful are its pleasures, what horrible aspects it possesses; and this it is
that makes people hermits, penitents, Magdalenes. Nevertheless it is to be
observed that no such change from a life of great indulgence in pleasure to one
of resignation is possible, except to the man who of his own accord renounces
pleasure. A really bad life cannot be changed into a virtuous one. The most
beautiful soul, before it comes to know life from its horrible side, may eagerly
drink the sweets of life and remain innocent. But it cannot commit a bad action;
it cannot cause others suffering to do a pleasure to itself, for in that case it would
see clearly what it would be doing; and whatever be its youth and inexperience it
perceives the sufferings of others as clearly as its own pleasures. That is why one
bad action is a guarantee that numberless others will be committed as soon as
circumstances give occasion for them. Somebody once remarked to me, with
entire justice, that every man had something very good and humane in his
disposition, and also something very bad and malignant; and that according as he
was moved one or the other of them made its appearance. The sight of others'
suffering arouses, not only in different men, but in one and the same man, at one
moment an inexhaustible sympathy, at another a certain satisfaction; and this
satisfaction may increase until it becomes the cruellest delight in pain. I observe
in myself that at one moment I regard all mankind with heartfelt pity, at another
with the greatest indifference, on occasion with hatred, nay, with a positive
enjoyment of their pain.
All this shows very clearly that we are possessed of two different, nay,
absolutely contradictory, ways of regarding the world: one according to the
principle of individuation, which exhibits all creatures as entire strangers to us,
as definitely not ourselves. We can have no feelings for them but those of
indifference, envy, hatred, and delight that they suffer. The other way of
regarding the world is in accordance with what I may call the Tat-twam-asi--
this-is-thyself principle. All creatures are exhibited as identical with ourselves;
and so it is pity and love which the sight of them arouses.
The one method separates individuals by impassable barriers; the other
removes the barrier and brings the individuals together. The one makes us feel,
in regard to every man, that is what I am; the other, that is not what I am. But it
is remarkable that while the sight of another's suffering makes us feel our
identity with him, and arouses our pity, this is not so with the sight of another's
happiness. Then we almost always feel some envy; and even though we may
have no such feeling in certain cases,--as, for instance, when our friends are

happy,--yet the interest which we take in their happiness is of a weak
description, and cannot compare with the sympathy which we feel with their
suffering. Is this because we recognise all happiness to be a delusion, or an
impediment to true welfare? No! I am inclined to think that it is because the
sight of the pleasure, or the possessions, which are denied to us, arouses envy;
that is to say, the wish that we, and not the other, had that pleasure or those
possessions.
It is only the first way of looking at the world which is founded on any
demonstrable reason. The other is, as it were, the gate out of this world; it has no
attestation beyond itself, unless it be the very abstract and difficult proof which
my doctrine supplies. Why the first way predominates in one man, and the
second in another--though perhaps it does not exclusively predominate in any
man; why the one or the other emerges according as the will is moved--these are
deep problems. The paths of night and day are close together:
[Greek: Engus gar nuktos de kai aematos eisi keleuthoi.]
It is a fact that there is a great and original difference between one empirical
character and another; and it is a difference which, at bottom, rests upon the
relation of the individual's will to his intellectual faculty. This relation is finally
determined by the degree of will in his father and of intellect in his mother; and
the union of father and mother is for the most part an affair of chance. This
would all mean a revolting injustice in the nature of the world, if it were not that
the difference between parents and son is phenomenal only and all chance is, at
bottom, necessity.
As regards the freedom of the will, if it were the case that the will
manifested itself in a single act alone, it would be a free act. But the will
manifests itself in a course of life, that is to say, in a series of acts. Every one of
these acts, therefore, is determined as a part of a complete whole, and cannot
happen otherwise than it does happen. On the other hand, the whole series is
free; it is simply the manifestation of an individualised will.
If a man feels inclined to commit a bad action and refrains, he is kept back
either (1) by fear of punishment or vengeance; or (2) by superstition in other
words, fear of punishment in a future life; or (3) by the feeling of sympathy,
including general charity; or (4) by the feeling of honour, in other words, the fear
of shame; or (5) by the feeling of justice, that is, an objective attachment to
fidelity and good-faith, coupled with a resolve to hold them sacred, because they
are the foundation of all free intercourse between man and man, and therefore
often of advantage to himself as well. This last thought, not indeed as a thought,
but as a mere feeling, influences people very frequently. It is this that often
compels a man of honour, when some great but unjust advantage is offered him,

to reject it with contempt and proudly exclaim: I am an honourable man! For
otherwise how should a poor man, confronted with the property which chance or
even some worse agency has bestowed on the rich, whose very existence it is
that makes him poor, feel so much sincere respect for this property, that he
refuses to touch it even in his need; and although he has a prospect of escaping
punishment, what other thought is it that can be at the bottom of such a man's
honesty? He is resolved not to separate himself from the great community of
honourable people who have the earth in possession, and whose laws are
recognised everywhere. He knows that a single dishonest act will ostracise and
proscribe him from that society for ever. No! a man will spend money on any
soil that yields him good fruit, and he will make sacrifices for it.
With a good action,--that, every action in which a man's own advantage is
ostensibly subordinated to another's,--the motive is either (1) self-interest, kept
in the background; or (2) superstition, in other words, self-interest in the form of
reward in another life; or (3) sympathy; or (4) the desire to lend a helping hand,
in other words, attachment to the maxim that we should assist one another in
need, and the wish to maintain this maxim, in view of the presumption that some
day we ourselves may find it serve our turn. For what Kant calls a good action
done from motives of duty and for the sake of duty, there is, as will be seen, no
room at all. Kant himself declares it to be doubtful whether an action was ever
determined by pure motives of duty alone. I affirm most certainly that no action
was ever so done; it is mere babble; there is nothing in it that could really act as
a motive to any man. When he shelters himself behind verbiage of that sort, he is
always actuated by one of the four motives which I have described. Among these
it is obviously sympathy alone which is quite genuine and sincere.
Good and bad apply to character only à potiori; that is to say, we prefer the
good to the bad; but, absolutely, there is no such distinction. The difference
arises at the point which lies between subordinating one's own advantage to that
of another, and not subordinating it. If a man keeps to the exact middle, he is
just. But most men go an inch in their regard for others' welfare to twenty yards
in regard for their own.
The source of good and of bad character, so far as we have any real
knowledge of it, lies in this, that with the bad character the thought of the
external world, and especially of the living creatures in it, is accompanied--all
the more, the greater the resemblance between them and the individual self--by a
constant feeling of not I, not I, not I.
Contrarily, with the good character (both being assumed to exist in a high
degree) the same thought has for its accompaniment, like a fundamental bass, a
constant feeling of I, I, I. From this spring benevolence and a disposition to help

all men, and at the same time a cheerful, confident and tranquil frame of mind,
the opposite of that which accompanies the bad character.
The difference, however, is only phenomenal, although it is a difference
which is radical. But now we come to the hardest of all problems: How is it that,
while the will, as the thing-in-itself, is identical, and from a metaphysical point
of view one and the same in all its manifestations, there is nevertheless such an
enormous difference between one character and another?--the malicious,
diabolical wickedness of the one, and set off against it, the goodness of the other,
showing all the more conspicuously. How is it that we get a Tiberius, a Caligula,
a Carcalla, a Domitian, a Nero; and on the other hand, the Antonines, Titus,
Hadrian, Nerva? How is it that among the animals, nay, in a higher species, in
individual animals, there is a like difference?--the malignity of the cat most
strongly developed in the tiger; the spite of the monkey; on the other hand,
goodness, fidelity and love in the dog and the elephant. It is obvious that the
principle of wickedness in the brute is the same as in man.
We may to some extent modify the difficulty of the problem by observing
that the whole difference is in the end only one of degree. In every living
creature, the fundamental propensities and instincts all exist, but they exist in
very different degrees and proportions. This, however, is not enough to explain
the facts.
We must fall back upon the intellect and its relation to the will; it is the only
explanation that remains. A man's intellect, however, by no means stands in any
direct and obvious relation with the goodness of his character. We may, it is true,
discriminate between two kinds of intellect: between understanding, as the
apprehension of relation in accordance with the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
and cognition, a faculty akin to genius, which acts more directly, is independent
of this law, and passes beyond the Principle of Individuation. The latter is the
faculty which apprehends Ideas, and it is the faculty which has to do with
morality. But even this explanation leaves much to be desired. Fine minds are
seldom fine souls was the correct observation of Jean Paul; although they are
never the contrary. Lord Bacon, who, to be sure, was less a fine soul than a fine
mind, was a scoundrel.
I have declared space and time to be part of the Principle of Individuation,
as it is only space and time that make the multiplicity of similar objects a
possibility. But multiplicity itself also admits of variety; multiplicity and
diversity are not only quantitative, but also qualitative. How is it that there is
such a thing as qualitative diversity, especially in ethical matters? Or have I
fallen into an error the opposite of that in which Leibnitz fell with his identitas
indiscernibilium?

The chief cause of intellectual diversity is to be found in the brain and
nervous system. This is a fact which somewhat lessens the obscurity of the
subject. With the brutes the intellect and the brain are strictly adapted to their
aims and needs. With man alone there is now and then, by way of exception, a
superfluity, which, if it is abundant, may yield genius. But ethical diversity, it
seems, proceeds immediately from the will. Otherwise ethical character would
not be above and beyond time, as it is only in the individual that intellect and
will are united. The will is above and beyond time, and eternal; and character is
innate; that is to say, it is sprung from the same eternity, and therefore it does not
admit of any but a transcendental explanation.
Perhaps some one will come after me who will throw light into this dark
abyss.
MORAL INSTINCT.
An act done by instinct differs from every other kind of act in that an
understanding of its object does not precede it but follows upon it. Instinct is
therefore a rule of action given à priori. We may be unaware of the object to
which it is directed, as no understanding of it is necessary to its attainment. On
the other hand, if an act is done by an exercise of reason or intelligence, it
proceeds according to a rule which the understanding has itself devised for the
purpose of carrying out a preconceived aim. Hence it is that action according to
rule may miss its aim, while instinct is infallible.
On the à priori character of instinct we may compare what Plato says in the
Philebus. With Plato instinct is a reminiscence of something which a man has
never actually experienced in his lifetime; in the same way as, in the Phaedo and
elsewhere, everything that a man learns is regarded as a reminiscence. He has no
other word to express the à priori element in all experience.
There are, then, three things that are à priori:
(1) Theoretical Reason, in other words, the conditions which make all
experience possible.
(2) Instinct, or the rule by which an object promoting the life of the senses
may, though unknown, be attained.
(3) The Moral Law, or the rule by which an action takes place without any
object.
Accordingly rational or intelligent action proceeds by a rule laid down in
accordance with the object as it is understood. Instinctive action proceeds by a
rule without an understanding of the object of it. Moral action proceeds by a rule

without any object at all.
Theoretical Reason is the aggregate of rules in accordance with which all
my knowledge--that is to say, the whole world of experience--necessarily
proceeds. In the same manner Instinct is the aggregate of rules in accordance
with which all my action necessarily proceeds if it meets with no obstruction.
Hence it seems to me that Instinct may most appropriately be called practical
reason, for like theoretical reason it determines the must of all experience.
The so-called moral law, on the other hand, is only one aspect of the better
consciousness, the aspect which it presents from the point of view of instinct.
This better consciousness is something lying beyond all experience, that is,
beyond all reason, whether of the theoretical or the practical kind, and has
nothing to do with it; whilst it is in virtue of the mysterious union of it and
reason in the same individual that the better consciousness comes into conflict
with reason, leaving the individual to choose between the two.
In any conflict between the better consciousness and reason, if the
individual decides for reason, should it be theoretical reason, he becomes a
narrow, pedantic philistine; should it be practical, a rascal.
If he decides for the better consciousness, we can make no further positive
affirmation about him, for if we were to do so, we should find ourselves in the
realm of reason; and as it is only what takes place within this realm that we can
speak of at all it follows that we cannot speak of the better consciousness except
in negative terms.
This shows us how it is that reason is hindered and obstructed; that
theoretical reason is suppressed in favour of genius, and practical reason in
favour of virtue. Now the better consciousness is neither theoretical nor
practical; for these are distinctions that only apply to reason. But if the individual
is in the act of choosing, the better consciousness appears to him in the aspect
which it assumes in vanquishing and overcoming the practical reason (or
instinct, to use the common word). It appears to him as an imperative command,
an ought. It so appears to him, I say; in other words, that is the shape which it
takes for the theoretical reason which renders all things into objects and ideas.
But in so far as the better consciousness desires to vanquish and overcome the
theoretical reason, it takes no shape at all; on the simple ground that, as it comes
into play, the theoretical reason is suppressed and becomes the mere servant of
the better consciousness. That is why genius can never give any account of its
own works.
In the morality of action, the legal principle that both sides are to be heard
must not be allowed to apply; in other words, the claims of self and the senses
must not be urged. Nay, on the contrary, as soon as the pure will has found

expression, the case is closed; nec audienda altera pars.
The lower animals are not endowed with moral freedom. Probably this is
not because they show no trace of the better consciousness which in us is
manifested as morality, or nothing analogous to it; for, if that were so, the lower
animals, which are in so many respects like ourselves in outward appearance that
we regard man as a species of animal, would possess some raison d'être entirely
different from our own, and actually be, in their essential and inmost nature,
something quite other than ourselves. This is a contention which is obviously
refuted by the thoroughly malignant and inherently vicious character of certain
animals, such as the crocodile, the hyaena, the scorpion, the snake, and the
gentle, affectionate and contented character of others, such as the dog. Here, as
in the case of men, the character, as it is manifested, must rest upon something
that is above and beyond time. For, as Jacob Böhme says,[1] there is a power in
every animal which is indestructible, and the spirit of the world draws it into
itself, against the final separation at the Last Judgment. Therefore we cannot call
the lower animals free, and the reason why we cannot do so is that they are
wanting in a faculty which is profoundly subordinate to the better consciousness
in its highest phase, I mean reason. Reason is the faculty of supreme
comprehension, the idea of totality. How reason manifests itself in the
theoretical sphere Kant has shown, and it does the same in the practical: it makes
us capable of observing and surveying the whole of our life, thought, and action,
in continual connection, and therefore of acting according to general maxims,
whether those maxims originate in the understanding as prudential rules, or in
the better consciousness as moral laws.
[Footnote 1: Epistles, 56.]
If any desire or passion is aroused in us, we, and in the same way the lower
animals, are for the moment filled with this desire; we are all anger, all lust, all
fear; and in such moments neither the better consciousness can speak, nor the
understanding consider the consequences. But in our case reason allows us even
at that moment to see our actions and our life as an unbroken chain,--a chain
which connects our earlier resolutions, or, it may be, the future consequences of
our action, with the moment of passion which now fills our whole
consciousness. It shows us the identity of our person, even when that person is
exposed to influences of the most varied kind, and thereby we are enabled to act
according to maxims. The lower animal is wanting in this faculty; the passion
which seizes it completely dominates it, and can be checked only by another
passion--anger, for instance, or lust, by fear; even though the vision that terrifies
does not appeal to the senses, but is present in the animal only as a dim memory
and imagination. Men, therefore, may be called irrational, if, like the lower

animals, they allow themselves to be determined by the moment.
So far, however, is reason from being the source of morality that it is reason
alone which makes us capable of being rascals, which the lower animals cannot
be. It is reason which enables us to form an evil resolution and to keep it when
the provocation to evil is removed; it enables us, for example, to nurse
vengeance. Although at the moment that we have an opportunity of fulfilling our
resolution the better consciousness may manifest itself as love or charity, it is by
force of reason, in pursuance of some evil maxim, that we act against it. Thus
Goethe says that a man may use his reason only for the purpose of being more
bestial than any beast:
Er hat Vernunft, doch braucht er sie allein Um theirischer als jedes Thier zu
sein.
For not only do we, like the beasts, satisfy the desires of the moment, but
we refine upon them and stimulate them in order to prepare the desire for the
satisfaction.
Whenever we think that we perceive a trace of reason in the lower animals,
it fills us with surprise. Now our surprise is not excited by the good and
affectionate disposition which some of them exhibit--we recognise that as
something other than reason--but by some action in them which seems to be
determined not by the impression of the moment, but by a resolution previously
made and kept. Elephants, for instance, are reported to have taken premeditated
revenge for insults long after they were suffered; lions, to have requited benefits
on an opportunity tardily offered. The truth of such stories has, however, no
bearing at all on the question, What do we mean by reason? But they enable us
to decide whether in the lower animals there is any trace of anything that we can
call reason.
Kant not only declares that all our moral sentiments originate in reason, but
he lays down that reason, in my sense of the word, is a condition of moral action;
as he holds that for an action to be virtuous and meritorious it must be done in
accordance with maxims, and not spring from a resolve taken under some
momentary impression. But in both contentions he is wrong. If I resolve to take
vengeance on some one, and when an opportunity offers, the better
consciousness in the form of love and humanity speaks its word, and I am
influenced by it rather than by my evil resolution, this is a virtuous act, for it is a
manifestation of the better consciousness. It is possible to conceive of a very
virtuous man in whom the better consciousness is so continuously active that it
is never silent, and never allows his passions to get a complete hold of him. By
such consciousness he is subject to a direct control, instead of being guided
indirectly, through the medium of reason, by means of maxims and moral

principles. That is why a man may have weak reasoning powers and a weak
understanding and yet have a high sense of morality and be eminently good; for
the most important element in a man depends as little on intellectual as it does
on physical strength. Jesus says, Blessed are the poor in spirit. And Jacob Böhme
has the excellent and noble observation: Whoso lies quietly in his own will, like
a child in the womb, and lets himself be led and guided by that inner principle
from which he is sprung, is the noblest and richest on earth.[1]
[Footnote 1: Epistles, 37.]
ETHICAL REFLECTIONS.
The philosophers of the ancient world united in a single conception a great
many things that had no connection with one another. Of this every dialogue of
Plato's furnishes abundant examples. The greatest and worst confusion of this
kind is that between ethics and politics. The State and the Kingdom of God, or
the Moral Law, are so entirely different in their character that the former is a
parody of the latter, a bitter mockery at the absence of it. Compared with the
Moral Law the State is a crutch instead of a limb, an automaton instead of a man.
*
The principle of honour stands in close connection with human freedom. It
is, as it were, an abuse of that freedom. Instead of using his freedom to fulfil the
moral law, a man employs his power of voluntarily undergoing any feeling of
pain, of overcoming any momentary impression, in order that he may assert his
self-will, whatever be the object to which he directs it. As he thereby shows that,
unlike the lower animals, he has thoughts which go beyond the welfare of his
body and whatever makes for that welfare, it has come about that the principle of
honour is often confused with virtue. They are regarded as if they were twins.
But wrongly; for although the principle of honour is something which
distinguishes man from the lower animals, it is not, in itself, anything that raises
him above them. Taken as an end and aim, it is as dark a delusion as any other
aim that springs from self. Used as a means, or casually, it may be productive of
good; but even that is good which is vain and frivolous. It is the misuse of
freedom, the employment of it as a weapon for overcoming the world of feeling,
that makes man so infinitely more terrible than the lower animals; for they do
only what momentary instinct bids them; while man acts by ideas, and his ideas
may entail universal ruin before they are satisfied.
There is another circumstance which helps to promote the notion that
honour and virtue are connected. A man who can do what he wants to do shows

that he can also do it if what he wants to do is a virtuous act. But that those of
our actions which we are ourselves obliged to regard with contempt are also
regarded with contempt by other people serves more than anything that I have
here mentioned to establish the connection. Thus it often happens that a man
who is not afraid of the one kind of contempt is unwilling to undergo the other.
But when we are called upon to choose between our own approval and the
world's censure, as may occur in complicated and mistaken circumstances, what
becomes of the principle of honour then?
Two characteristic examples of the principle of honour are to be found in
Shakespeare's Henry VI., Part II., Act IV., Sc. 1. A pirate is anxious to murder
his captive instead of accepting, like others, a ransom for him; because in taking
his captive he lost an eye, and his own honour and that of his forefathers would
in his opinion be stained, if he were to allow his revenge to be bought off as
though he were a mere trader. The prisoner, on the other hand, who is the Duke
of Suffolk, prefers to have his head grace a pole than to uncover it to such a low
fellow as a pirate, by approaching him to ask for mercy.
Just as civic honour--in other words, the opinion that we deserve to be
trusted--is the palladium of those whose endeavour it is to make their way in the
world on the path of honourable business, so knightly honour--in other words,
the opinion that we are men to be feared--is the palladium of those who aim at
going through life on the path of violence; and so it was that knightly honour
arose among the robber-knights and other knights of the Middle Ages.
*
A theoretical philosopher is one who can supply in the shape of ideas for
the reason, a copy of the presentations of experience; just as what the painter
sees he can reproduce on canvas; the sculptor, in marble; the poet, in pictures for
the imagination, though they are pictures which he supplies only in sowing the
ideas from which they sprang.
A so-called practical philosopher, on the other hand, is one who, contrarily,
deduces his action from ideas. The theoretical philosopher transforms life into
ideas. The practical philosopher transforms ideas into life; he acts, therefore, in a
thoroughly reasonable manner; he is consistent, regular, deliberate; he is never
hasty or passionate; he never allows himself to be influenced by the impression
of the moment.
And indeed, when we find ourselves among those full presentations of
experience, or real objects, to which the body belongs--since the body is only an
objectified will, the shape which the will assumes in the material world--it is
difficult to let our bodies be guided, not by those presentations, but by a mere
image of them, by cold, colourless ideas, which are related to experience as the

shadow of Orcus to life; and yet this is the only way in which we can avoid
doing things of which we may have to repent.
The theoretical philosopher enriches the domain of reason by adding to it;
the practical philosopher draws upon it, and makes it serve him.
*
According to Kant the truth of experience is only a hypothetical truth. If the
suppositions which underlie all the intimations of experience--subject, object,
time, space and causality--were removed, none of those intimations would
contain a word of truth. In other words, experience is only a phenomenon; it is
not knowledge of the thing-in-itself.
If we find something in our own conduct at which we are secretly pleased,
although we cannot reconcile it with experience, seeing that if we were to follow
the guidance of experience we should have to do precisely the opposite, we must
not allow this to put us out; otherwise we should be ascribing an authority to
experience which it does not deserve, for all that it teaches rests upon a mere
supposition. This is the general tendency of the Kantian Ethics.
*
Innocence is in its very nature stupid. It is stupid because the aim of life (I
use the expression only figuratively, and I could just as well speak of the essence
of life, or of the world) is to gain a knowledge of our own bad will, so that our
will may become an object for us, and that we may undergo an inward
conversion. Our body is itself our will objectified; it is one of the first and
foremost of objects, and the deeds that we accomplish for the sake of the body
show us the evil inherent in our will. In the state of innocence, where there is no
evil because there is no experience, man is, as it were, only an apparatus for
living, and the object for which the apparatus exists is not yet disclosed. An
empty form of life like this, a stage untenanted, is in itself, like the so-called real
world, null and void; and as it can attain a meaning only by action, by error, by
knowledge, by the convulsions of the will, it wears a character of insipid
stupidity. A golden age of innocence, a fools' paradise, is a notion that is stupid
and unmeaning, and for that very reason in no way worthy of any respect. The
first criminal and murderer, Cain, who acquired a knowledge of guilt, and
through guilt acquired a knowledge of virtue by repentance, and so came to
understand the meaning of life, is a tragical figure more significant, and almost
more respectable, than all the innocent fools in the world put together.
*
If I had to write about modesty I should say: I know the esteemed public for
which I have the honour to write far too well to dare to give utterance to my
opinion about this virtue. Personally I am quite content to be modest and to

apply myself to this virtue with the utmost possible circumspection. But one
thing I shall never admit--that I have ever required modesty of any man, and any
statement to that effect I repel as a slander.
The paltry character of most men compels the few who have any merit or
genius to behave as though they did not know their own value, and consequently
did not know other people's want of value; for it is only on this condition that the
mob acquiesces in tolerating merit. A virtue has been made out of this necessity,
and it is called modesty. It is a piece of hypocrisy, to be excused only because
other people are so paltry that they must be treated with indulgence.
*
Human misery may affect us in two ways, and we may be in one of two
opposite moods in regard to it.
In one of them, this misery is immediately present to us. We feel it in our
own person, in our own will which, imbued with violent desires, is everywhere
broken, and this is the process which constitutes suffering. The result is that the
will increases in violence, as is shown in all cases of passion and emotion; and
this increasing violence comes to a stop only when the will turns and gives way
to complete resignation, in other words, is redeemed. The man who is entirely
dominated by this mood will regard any prosperity which he may see in others
with envy, and any suffering with no sympathy.
In the opposite mood human misery is present to us only as a fact of
knowledge, that is to say, indirectly. We are mainly engaged in looking at the
sufferings of others, and our attention is withdrawn from our own. It is in their
person that we become aware of human misery; we are filled with sympathy;
and the result of this mood is general benevolence, philanthropy. All envy
vanishes, and instead of feeling it, we are rejoiced when we see one of our
tormented fellow-creatures experience any pleasure or relief.
After the same fashion we may be in one of two opposite moods in regard
to human baseness and depravity. In the one we perceive this baseness
indirectly, in others. Out of this mood arise indignation, hatred, and contempt of
mankind. In the other we perceive it directly, in ourselves. Out of it there arises
humiliation, nay, contrition.
In order to judge the moral value of a man, it is very important to observe
which of these four moods predominate in him. They go in pairs, one out of each
division. In very excellent characters the second mood of each division will
predominate.
*
The categorical imperative, or absolute command, is a contradiction. Every
command is conditional. What is unconditional and necessary is a must, such as

is presented by the laws of nature.
It is quite true that the moral law is entirely conditional. There is a world
and a view of life in which it has neither validity nor significance. That world is,
properly speaking, the real world in which, as individuals, we live; for every
regard paid to morality is a denial of that world and of our individual life in it. It
is a view of the world, however, which does not go beyond the principle of
sufficient reason; and the opposite view proceeds by the intuition of Ideas.
*
If a man is under the influence of two opposite but very strong motives, A
and B, and I am greatly concerned that he should choose A, but still more that he
should never be untrue to his choice, and by changing his mind betray me, or the
like, it will not do for me to say anything that might hinder the motive B from
having its full effect upon him, and only emphasise A; for then I should never be
able to reckon on his decision. What I have to do is, rather, to put both motives
before him at the same time, in as vivid and clear a way as possible, so that they
may work upon him with their whole force. The choice that he then makes is the
decision of his inmost nature, and stands firm to all eternity. In saying I will do
this, he has said I must do this. I have got at his will, and I can rely upon its
working as steadily as one of the forces of nature. It is as certain as fire kindles
and water wets that he will act according to the motive which has proved to be
stronger for him. Insight and knowledge may be attained and lost again; they
may be changed, or improved, or destroyed; but will cannot be changed. That is
why I apprehend, I perceive, I see, is subject to alteration and uncertainty; I will,
pronounced on a right apprehension of motive, is as firm as nature itself. The
difficulty, however, lies in getting at a right apprehension. A man's apprehension
of motive may change, or be corrected or perverted; and on the other hand, his
circumstances may undergo an alteration.
*
A man should exercise an almost boundless toleration and placability,
because if he is capricious enough to refuse to forgive a single individual for the
meanness or evil that lies at his door, it is doing the rest of the world a quite
unmerited honour.
But at the same time the man who is every one's friend is no one's friend. It
is quite obvious what sort of friendship it is which we hold out to the human
race, and to which it is open to almost every man to return, no matter what he
may have done.
*
With the ancients friendship was one of the chief elements in morality. But
friendship is only limitation and partiality; it is the restriction to one individual

of what is the due of all mankind, namely, the recognition that a man's own
nature and that of mankind are identical. At most it is a compromise between
this recognition and selfishness.
*
A lie always has its origin in the desire to extend the dominion of one's own
will over other individuals, and to deny their will in order the better to affirm
one's own. Consequently a lie is in its very nature the product of injustice,
malevolence and villainy. That is why truth, sincerity, candour and rectitude are
at once recognised and valued as praiseworthy and noble qualities; because we
presume that the man who exhibits them entertains no sentiments of injustice or
malice, and therefore stands in no need of concealing such sentiments. He who is
open cherishes nothing that is bad.
*
There is a certain kind of courage which springs from the same source as
good-nature. What I mean is that the good-natured man is almost as clearly
conscious that he exists in other individuals as in himself. I have often shown
how this feeling gives rise to good-nature. It also gives rise to courage, for the
simple reason that the man who possesses this feeling cares less for his own
individual existence, as he lives almost as much in the general existence of all
creatures. Accordingly he is little concerned for his own life and its belongings.
This is by no means the sole source of courage for it is a phenomenon due to
various causes. But it is the noblest kind of courage, as is shown by the fact that
in its origin it is associated with great gentleness and patience. Men of this kind
are usually irresistible to women.
*
All general rules and precepts fail, because they proceed from the false
assumption that men are constituted wholly, or almost wholly, alike; an
assumption which the philosophy of Helvetius expressly makes. Whereas the
truth is that the original difference between individuals in intellect and morality
is immeasurable.
*
The question as to whether morality is something real is the question
whether a well-grounded counter-principle to egoism actually exists.
As egoism restricts concern for welfare to a single individual, viz., the
man's own self, the counter-principle would have to extend it to all other
individuals.
*
It is only because the will is above and beyond time that the stings of
conscience are ineradicable, and do not, like other pains, gradually wear away.

No! an evil deed weighs on the conscience years afterwards as heavily as if it
had been freshly committed.
*
Character is innate, and conduct is merely its manifestation; the occasion
for great misdeeds comes seldom; strong counter-motives keep us back; our
disposition is revealed to ourselves by our desires, thoughts, emotions, when it
remains unknown to others. Reflecting on all this, we might suppose it possible
for a man to possess, in some sort, an innate evil conscience, without ever
having done anything very bad.
*
Don't do to others what you wouldn't like done to yourself. This is, perhaps,
one of those arguments that prove, or rather ask, too much. For a prisoner might
address it to a judge.
*
Stupid people are generally malicious, for the very same reason as the ugly
and the deformed.
Similarly, genius and sanctity are akin. However simple-minded a saint
may be, he will nevertheless have a dash of genius in him; and however many
errors of temperament, or of actual character, a genius may possess, he will still
exhibit a certain nobility of disposition by which he shows his kinship with the
saint.
*
The great difference between Law without and Law within, between the
State and the Kingdom of God, is very clear. It is the State's business to see that
every one should have justice done to him; it regards men as passive beings, and
therefore takes no account of anything but their actions. The Moral Law, on the
other hand, is concerned that every one should do justice; it regards men as
active, and looks to the will rather than the deed. To prove that this is the true
distinction let the reader consider what would happen if he were to say,
conversely, that it is the State's business that every one should do justice, and the
business of the Moral Law that every one should have justice done to him. The
absurdity is obvious.
As an example of the distinction, let me take the case of a debtor and a
creditor disputing about a debt which the former denies. A lawyer and a moralist
are present, and show a lively interest in the matter. Both desire that the dispute
should end in the same way, although what they want is by no means the same.
The lawyer says, I want this man to get back what belongs to him; and the
moralist, I want that man to do his duty.
It is with the will alone that morality is concerned. Whether external force

hinders or fails to hinder the will from working does not in the least matter. For
morality the external world is real only in so far as it is able or unable to lead and
influence the will. As soon as the will is determined, that is, as soon as a resolve
is taken, the external world and its events are of no further moment and practical
do not exist. For if the events of the world had any such reality--that is to say, if
they possessed a significance in themselves, or any other than that derived from
the will which is affected by them--what a grievance it would be that all these
events lie in the realm of chance and error! It is, however, just this which proves
that the important thing is not what happens, but what is willed. Accordingly, let
the incidents of life be left to the play of chance and error, to demonstrate to man
that he is as chaff before the wind.
The State concerns itself only with the incidents--with what happens;
nothing else has any reality for it. I may dwell upon thoughts of murder and
poison as much as I please: the State does not forbid me, so long as the axe and
rope control my will, and prevent it from becoming action.
Ethics asks: What are the duties towards others which justice imposes upon
us? in other words, What must I render? The Law of Nature asks: What need I
not submit to from others? that is, What must I suffer? The question is put, not
that I may do no injustice, but that I may not do more than every man must do if
he is to safeguard his existence, and than every man will approve being done, in
order that he may be treated in the same way himself; and, further, that I may not
do more than society will permit me to do. The same answer will serve for both
questions, just as the same straight line can be drawn from either of two opposite
directions, namely, by opposing forces; or, again, as the angle can give the sine,
or the sine the angle.
It has been said that the historian is an inverted prophet. In the same way it
may be said that a teacher of law is an inverted moralist (viz., a teacher of the
duties of justice), or that politics are inverted ethics, if we exclude the thought
that ethics also teaches the duty of benevolence, magnanimity, love, and so on.
The State is the Gordian knot that is cut instead of being untied; it is Columbus'
egg which is made to stand by being broken instead of balanced, as though the
business in question were to make it stand rather than to balance it. In this
respect the State is like the man who thinks that he can produce fine weather by
making the barometer go up.
*
The pseudo-philosophers of our age tell us that it is the object of the State
to promote the moral aims of mankind. This is not true; it is rather the contrary
which is true. The aim for which mankind exists--the expression is parabolic--is
not that a man should act in such and such a manner; for all opera operata, things

that have actually been done, are in themselves matters of indifference. No! the
aim is that the Will, of which every man is a complete specimen--nay, is the very
Will itself--should turn whither it needs to turn; that the man himself (the union
of Thought and Will) should perceive what this will is, and what horrors it
contains; that he should show the reflection of himself in his own deeds, in the
abomination of them. The State, which is wholly concerned with the general
welfare, checks the manifestation of the bad will, but in no wise checks the will
itself; the attempt would be impossible. It is because the State checks the
manifestation of his will that a man very seldom sees the whole abomination of
his nature in the mirror of his deeds. Or does the reader actually suppose there
are no people in the world as bad as Robespierre, Napoleon, or other murderers?
Does he fail to see that there are many who would act like them if only they
could?
Many a criminal dies more quietly on the scaffold than many a non-
criminal in the arms of his family. The one has perceived what his will is and has
discarded it. The other has not been able to discard it, because he has never been
able to perceive what it is. The aim of the State is to produce a fool's paradise,
and this is in direct conflict with the true aim of life, namely, to attain a
knowledge of what the will, in its horrible nature, really is.
*
Napoleon was not really worse than many, not to say most, men. He was
possessed of the very ordinary egoism that seeks its welfare at the expense of
others. What distinguished him was merely the greater power he had of
satisfying his will, and greater intelligence, reason and courage; added to which,
chance gave him a favourable scope for his operations. By means of all this he
did for his egoism what a thousand other men would like to do for theirs, but
cannot. Every feeble lad who by little acts of villainy gains a small advantage for
himself by putting others to some disadvantage, although it may be equally
small, is just as bad as Napoleon.
Those who fancy that retribution comes after death would demand that
Napoleon should by unutterable torments pay the penalty for all the numberless
calamities that he caused. But he is no more culpable than all those who possess
the same will, unaccompanied by the same power.
The circumstance that in his case this extraordinary power was added
allowed him to reveal the whole wickedness of the human will; and the
sufferings of his age, as the necessary obverse of the medal, reveal the misery
which is inextricably bound up with this bad will. It is the general manipulation
of this will that constitutes the world. But it is precisely that it should be
understood how inextricably the will to live is bound up with, and is really one

and the same as, this unspeakable misery, that is the world's aim and purpose;
and it is an aim and purpose which the appearance of Napoleon did much to
assist. Not to be an unmeaning fools' paradise but a tragedy, in which the will to
live understands itself and yields--that is the object for which the world exists.
Napoleon is only an enormous mirror of the will to live.
The difference between the man who causes suffering and the man who
suffers it, is only phenomenal. It is all a will to live, identical with great
suffering; and it is only by understanding this that the will can mend and end.
*
What chiefly distinguishes ancient from modern times is that in ancient
times, to use Napoleon's expression, it was affairs that reigned: les paroles aux
choses. In modern times this is not so. What I mean is that in ancient times the
character of public life, of the State, and of Religion, as well as of private life,
was a strenuous affirmation of the will to live. In modern times it is a denial of
this will, for such is the character of Christianity. But now while on the one hand
that denial has suffered some abatement even in public opinion, because it is too
repugnant to human character, on the other what is publicly denied is secretly
affirmed. Hence it is that we see half measures and falsehood everywhere; and
that is why modern times look so small beside antiquity.
*
The structure of human society is like a pendulum swinging between two
impulses, two evils in polar opposition, despotism and anarchy. The further it
gets from the one, the nearer it approaches the other. From this the reader might
hit on the thought that if it were exactly midway between the two, it would be
right. Far from it. For these two evils are by no means equally bad and
dangerous. The former is incomparably less to be feared; its ills exist in the main
only as possibilities, and if they come at all it is only one among millions that
they touch. But, with anarchy, possibility and actuality are inseparable; its blows
fall on every man every day. Therefore every constitution should be a nearer
approach to a despotism than to anarchy; nay, it must contain a small possibility
of despotism.

THE ART OF CONTROVERSY.
PRELIMINARY: LOGIC AND DIALECTIC.
By the ancients, Logic and Dialectic were used as synonymous terms;
although [Greek: logizesthai], "to think over, to consider, to calculate," and
[Greek: dialegesthai], "to converse," are two very different things.
The name Dialectic was, as we are informed by Diogenes Laertius, first
used by Plato; and in the Phaedrus, Sophist, Republic, bk. vii., and elsewhere,
we find that by Dialectic he means the regular employment of the reason, and
skill in the practice of it. Aristotle also uses the word in this sense; but,
according to Laurentius Valla, he was the first to use Logic too in a similar way.
[1] Dialectic, therefore, seems to be an older word than Logic. Cicero and
Quintilian use the words in the same general signification.[2]
[Footnote 1: He speaks of [Greek: dyscherelai logicai], that is, "difficult
points," [Greek: protasis logicae aporia logicae]]
[Footnote 2: Cic. in Lucullo: Dialecticam inventam esse, veri et falsi quasi
disceptatricem. Topica, c. 2: Stoici enim judicandi vias diligenter persecuti sunt,
ea scientia, quam Dialecticen appellant. Quint., lib. ii., 12: Itaque haec pars
dialecticae, sive illam disputatricem dicere malimus; and with him this latter
word appears to be the Latin equivalent for Dialectic. (So far according to "Petri
Rami dialectica, Audomari Talaei praelectionibus illustrata." 1569.)]
This use of the words and synonymous terms lasted through the Middle
Ages into modern times; in fact, until the present day. But more recently, and in
particular by Kant, Dialectic has often been employed in a bad sense, as meaning
"the art of sophistical controversy"; and hence Logic has been preferred, as of
the two the more innocent designation. Nevertheless, both originally meant the
same thing; and in the last few years they have again been recognised as
synonymous.
It is a pity that the words have thus been used from of old, and that I am not
quite at liberty to distinguish their meanings. Otherwise, I should have preferred
to define Logic (from [Greek: logos], "word" and "reason," which are
inseparable) as "the science of the laws of thought, that is, of the method of
reason"; and Dialectic (from [Greek: dialegesthai], "to converse"--and every
conversation communicates either facts or opinions, that is to say, it is historical
or deliberative) as "the art of disputation," in the modern sense of the word. It it
clear, then, that Logic deals with a subject of a purely à priori character,
separable in definition from experience, namely, the laws of thought, the process
of reason or the [Greek: logos], the laws, that is, which reason follows when it is
left to itself and not hindered, as in the case of solitary thought on the part of a

rational being who is in no way misled. Dialectic, on the other hand, would treat
of the intercourse between two rational beings who, because they are rational,
ought to think in common, but who, as soon as they cease to agree like two
clocks keeping exactly the same time, create a disputation, or intellectual
contest. Regarded as purely rational beings, the individuals would, I say,
necessarily be in agreement, and their variation springs from the difference
essential to individuality; in other words, it is drawn from experience.
Logic, therefore, as the science of thought, or the science of the process of
pure reason, should be capable of being constructed à priori. Dialectic, for the
most part, can be constructed only à posteriori; that is to say, we may learn its
rules by an experiential knowledge of the disturbance which pure thought suffers
through the difference of individuality manifested in the intercourse between two
rational beings, and also by acquaintance with the means which disputants adopt
in order to make good against one another their own individual thought, and to
show that it is pure and objective. For human nature is such that if A. and B. are
engaged in thinking in common, and are communicating their opinions to one
another on any subject, so long as it is not a mere fact of history, and A.
perceives that B.'s thoughts on one and the same subject are not the same as his
own, he does not begin by revising his own process of thinking, so as to discover
any mistake which he may have made, but he assumes that the mistake has
occurred in B.'s. In other words, man is naturally obstinate; and this quality in
him is attended with certain results, treated of in the branch of knowledge which
I should like to call Dialectic, but which, in order to avoid misunderstanding, I
shall call Controversial or Eristical Dialectic. Accordingly, it is the branch of
knowledge which treats of the obstinacy natural to man. Eristic is only a harsher
name for the same thing.
Controversial Dialectic is the art of disputing, and of disputing in such a
way as to hold one's own, whether one is in the right or the wrong--per fas et
nefas.[1] A man may be objectively in the right, and nevertheless in the eyes of
bystanders, and sometimes in his own, he may come off worst. For example, I
may advance a proof of some assertion, and my adversary may refute the proof,
and thus appear to have refuted the assertion, for which there may, nevertheless,
be other proofs. In this case, of course, my adversary and I change places: he
comes off best, although, as a matter of fact, he is in the wrong.
[Footnote 1: According to Diogenes Laertius, v., 28, Aristotle put Rhetoric
and Dialectic together, as aiming at persuasion, [Greek: to pithanon]; and
Analytic and Philosophy as aiming at truth. Aristotle does, indeed, distinguish
between (1) Logic, or Analytic, as the theory or method of arriving at true or
apodeictic conclusions; and (2) Dialectic as the method of arriving at

conclusions that are accepted or pass current as true, [Greek: endoxa] probabilia;
conclusions in regard to which it is not taken for granted that they are false, and
also not taken for granted that they are true in themselves, since that is not the
point. What is this but the art of being in the right, whether one has any reason
for being so or not, in other words, the art of attaining the appearance of truth,
regardless of its substance? That is, then, as I put it above.
Aristotle divides all conclusions into logical and dialectical, in the manner
described, and then into eristical. (3) Eristic is the method by which the form of
the conclusion is correct, but the premisses, the materials from which it is drawn,
are not true, but only appear to be true. Finally (4) Sophistic is the method in
which the form of the conclusion is false, although it seems correct. These three
last properly belong to the art of Controversial Dialectic, as they have no
objective truth in view, but only the appearance of it, and pay no regard to truth
itself; that is to say, they aim at victory. Aristotle's book on Sophistic
Conclusions was edited apart from the others, and at a later date. It was the last
book of his Dialectic.]
If the reader asks how this is, I reply that it is simply the natural baseness of
human nature. If human nature were not base, but thoroughly honourable, we
should in every debate have no other aim than the discovery of truth; we should
not in the least care whether the truth proved to be in favour of the opinion
which we had begun by expressing, or of the opinion of our adversary. That we
should regard as a matter of no moment, or, at any rate, of very secondary
consequence; but, as things are, it is the main concern. Our innate vanity, which
is particularly sensitive in reference to our intellectual powers, will not suffer us
to allow that our first position was wrong and our adversary's right. The way out
of this difficulty would be simply to take the trouble always to form a correct
judgment. For this a man would have to think before he spoke. But, with most
men, innate vanity is accompanied by loquacity and innate dishonesty. They
speak before they think; and even though they may afterwards perceive that they
are wrong, and that what they assert is false, they want it to seem the contrary.
The interest in truth, which may be presumed to have been their only motive
when they stated the proposition alleged to be true, now gives way to the
interests of vanity: and so, for the sake of vanity, what is true must seem false,
and what is false must seem true.
However, this very dishonesty, this persistence in a proposition which
seems false even to ourselves, has something to be said for it. It often happens
that we begin with the firm conviction of the truth of our statement; but our
opponent's argument appears to refute it. Should we abandon our position at
once, we may discover later on that we were right after all; the proof we offered

was false, but nevertheless there was a proof for our statement which was true.
The argument which would have been our salvation did not occur to us at the
moment. Hence we make it a rule to attack a counter-argument, even though to
all appearances it is true and forcible, in the belief that its truth is only
superficial, and that in the course of the dispute another argument will occur to
us by which we may upset it, or succeed in confirming the truth of our statement.
In this way we are almost compelled to become dishonest; or, at any rate, the
temptation to do so is very great. Thus it is that the weakness of our intellect and
the perversity of our will lend each other mutual support; and that, generally, a
disputant fights not for truth, but for his proposition, as though it were a battle
pro aris et focis. He sets to work per fas et nefas; nay, as we have seen, he cannot
easily do otherwise. As a rule, then, every man will insist on maintaining
whatever he has said, even though for the moment he may consider it false or
doubtful.[1]
[Footnote 1: Machiavelli recommends his Prince to make use of every
moment that his neighbour is weak, in order to attack him; as otherwise his
neighbour may do the same. If honour and fidelity prevailed in the world, it
would be a different matter; but as these are qualities not to be expected, a man
must not practise them himself, because he will meet with a bad return. It is just
the same in a dispute: if I allow that my opponent is right as soon as he seems to
be so, it is scarcely probable that he will do the same when the position is
reversed; and as he acts wrongly, I am compelled to act wrongly too. It is easy to
say that we must yield to truth, without any prepossession in favour of our own
statements; but we cannot assume that our opponent will do it, and therefore we
cannot do it either. Nay, if I were to abandon the position on which I had
previously bestowed much thought, as soon as it appeared that he was right, it
might easily happen that I might be misled by a momentary impression, and give
up the truth in order to accept an error.]
To some extent every man is armed against such a procedure by his own
cunning and villainy. He learns by daily experience, and thus comes to have his
own natural Dialectic, just as he has his own natural Logic. But his Dialectic is
by no means as safe a guide as his Logic. It is not so easy for any one to think or
draw an inference contrary to the laws of Logic; false judgments are frequent,
false conclusions very rare. A man cannot easily be deficient in natural Logic,
but he may very easily be deficient in natural Dialectic, which is a gift
apportioned in unequal measure. In so far natural Dialectic resembles the faculty
of judgment, which differs in degree with every man; while reason, strictly
speaking, is the same. For it often happens that in a matter in which a man is
really in the right, he is confounded or refuted by merely superficial arguments;

and if he emerges victorious from a contest, he owes it very often not so much to
the correctness of his judgment in stating his proposition, as to the cunning and
address with which he defended it.
Here, as in all other cases, the best gifts are born with a man; nevertheless,
much may be done to make him a master of this art by practice, and also by a
consideration of the tactics which may be used to defeat an opponent, or which
he uses himself for a similar purpose. Therefore, even though Logic may be of
no very real, practical use, Dialectic may certainly be so; and Aristotle, too,
seems to me to have drawn up his Logic proper, or Analytic, as a foundation and
preparation for his Dialectic, and to have made this his chief business. Logic is
concerned with the mere form of propositions; Dialectic, with their contents or
matter--in a word, with their substance. It was proper, therefore, to consider the
general form of all propositions before proceeding to particulars.
Aristotle does not define the object of Dialectic as exactly as I have done it
here; for while he allows that its principal object is disputation, he declares at the
same time that it is also the discovery of truth.[1] Again, he says, later on, that if,
from the philosophical point of view, propositions are dealt with according to
their truth, Dialectic regards them according to their plausibility, or the measure
in which they will win the approval and assent of others.[2] He is aware that the
objective truth of a proposition must be distinguished and separated from the
way in which it is pressed home, and approbation won for it; but he fails to draw
a sufficiently sharp distinction between these two aspects of the matter, so as to
reserve Dialectic for the latter alone.[3] The rules which he often gives for
Dialectic contain some of those which properly belong to Logic; and hence it
appears to me that he has not provided a clear solution of the problem.
[Footnote 1: Topica, bk. i., 2.]
[Footnote 2: Ib., 12.]
[Footnote 3: On the other hand, in his book De Sophisticis Elenchis, he
takes too much trouble to separate Dialectic from Sophistic and Eristic, where
the distinction is said to consist in this, that dialectical conclusions are true in
their form and their contents, while sophistical and eristical conclusions are
false.
Eristic so far differs from Sophistic that, while the master of Eristic aims at
mere victory, the Sophist looks to the reputation, and with it, the monetary
rewards which he will gain. But whether a proposition is true in respect of its
contents is far too uncertain a matter to form the foundation of the distinction in
question; and it is a matter on which the disputant least of all can arrive at
certainty; nor is it disclosed in any very sure form even by the result of the
disputation. Therefore, when Aristotle speaks of Dialectic, we must include in it

Sophistic, Eristic, and Peirastic, and define it as "the art of getting the best of it
in a dispute," in which, unquestionably, the safest plan is to be in the right to
begin with; but this in itself is not enough in the existing disposition of mankind,
and, on the other hand, with the weakness of the human intellect, it is not
altogether necessary. Other expedients are required, which, just because they are
unnecessary to the attainment of objective truth, may also be used when a man is
objectively in the wrong; and whether or not this is the case, is hardly ever a
matter of complete certainty.
I am of opinion, therefore, that a sharper distinction should be drawn
between Dialectic and Logic than Aristotle has given us; that to Logic we should
assign objective truth as far as it is merely formal, and that Dialectic should be
confined to the art of gaining one's point, and contrarily, that Sophistic and
Eristic should not be distinguished from Dialectic in Aristotle's fashion, since the
difference which he draws rests on objective and material truth; and in regard to
what this is, we cannot attain any clear certainty before discussion; but we are
compelled, with Pilate, to ask, What is truth? For truth is in the depths, [Greek:
en butho hae halaetheia] (a saying of Democritus, Diog. Laert., ix., 72). Two
men often engage in a warm dispute, and then return to their homes each of the
other's opinion, which he has exchanged for his own. It is easy to say that in
every dispute we should have no other aim than the advancement of truth; but
before dispute no one knows where it is, and through his opponent's arguments
and his own a man is misled.]
We must always keep the subject of one branch of knowledge quite distinct
from that of any other. To form a clear idea of the province of Dialectic, we must
pay no attention to objective truth, which is an affair of Logic; we must regard it
simply as the art of getting the best of it in a dispute, which, as we have seen, is
all the easier if we are actually in the right. In itself Dialectic has nothing to do
but to show how a man may defend himself against attacks of every kind, and
especially against dishonest attacks; and, in the same fashion, how he may attack
another man's statement without contradicting himself, or generally without
being defeated. The discovery of objective truth must be separated from the art
of winning acceptance for propositions; for objective truth is an entirely different
matter: it is the business of sound judgment, reflection and experience, for which
there is no special art.
Such, then, is the aim of Dialectic. It has been defined as the Logic of
appearance; but the definition is a wrong one, as in that case it could only be
used to repel false propositions. But even when a man has the right on his side,
he needs Dialectic in order to defend and maintain it; he must know what the
dishonest tricks are, in order to meet them; nay, he must often make use of them

himself, so as to beat the enemy with his own weapons.
Accordingly, in a dialectical contest we must put objective truth aside, or,
rather, we must regard it as an accidental circumstance, and look only to the
defence of our own position and the refutation of our opponent's.
In following out the rules to this end, no respect should be paid to objective
truth, because we usually do not know where the truth lies. As I have said, a man
often does not himself know whether he is in the right or not; he often believes
it, and is mistaken: both sides often believe it. Truth is in the depths. At the
beginning of a contest each man believes, as a rule, that right is on his side; in
the course of it, both become doubtful, and the truth is not determined or
confirmed until the close.
Dialectic, then, need have nothing to do with truth, as little as the fencing
master considers who is in the right when a dispute leads to a duel. Thrust and
parry is the whole business. Dialectic is the art of intellectual fencing; and it is
only when we so regard it that we can erect it into a branch of knowledge. For if
we take purely objective truth as our aim, we are reduced to mere Logic; if we
take the maintenance of false propositions, it is mere Sophistic; and in either
case it would have to be assumed that we were aware of what was true and what
was false; and it is seldom that we have any clear idea of the truth beforehand.
The true conception of Dialectic is, then, that which we have formed: it is the art
of intellectual fencing used for the purpose of getting the best of it in a dispute;
and, although the name Eristic would be more suitable, it is more correct to call
it controversial Dialectic, Dialectica eristica.
Dialectic in this sense of the word has no other aim but to reduce to a
regular system and collect and exhibit the arts which most men employ when
they observe, in a dispute, that truth is not on their side, and still attempt to gain
the day. Hence, it would be very inexpedient to pay any regard to objective truth
or its advancement in a science of Dialectic; since this is not done in that original
and natural Dialectic innate in men, where they strive for nothing but victory.
The science of Dialectic, in one sense of the word, is mainly concerned to
tabulate and analyse dishonest stratagems, in order that in a real debate they may
be at once recognised and defeated. It is for this very reason that Dialectic must
admittedly take victory, and not objective truth, for its aim and purpose.
I am not aware that anything has been done in this direction, although I
have made inquiries far and wide.[1] It is, therefore, an uncultivated soil. To
accomplish our purpose, we must draw from our experience; we must observe
how in the debates which often arise in our intercourse with our fellow-men this
or that stratagem is employed by one side or the other. By finding out the
common elements in tricks repeated in different forms, we shall be enabled to

exhibit certain general stratagems which may be advantageous, as well for our
own use, as for frustrating others if they use them.
[Footnote 1: Diogenes Laertes tells us that among the numerous writings on
Rhetoric by Theophrastus, all of which have been lost, there was one entitled
[Greek: Agonistikon taes peri tous eristikous gogous theorias.] That would have
been just what we want.]
What follows is to be regarded as a first attempt.
THE BASIS OF ALL DIALECTIC.
First of all, we must consider the essential nature of every dispute: what it is
that really takes place in it.
Our opponent has stated a thesis, or we ourselves,--it is all one. There are
two modes of refuting it, and two courses that we may pursue.
I. The modes are (1) ad rem, (2) ad hominem or ex concessis. That is to say:
We may show either that the proposition is not in accordance with the nature of
things, i.e., with absolute, objective truth; or that it is inconsistent with other
statements or admissions of our opponent, i.e., with truth as it appears to him.
The latter mode of arguing a question produces only a relative conviction, and
makes no difference whatever to the objective truth of the matter.
II. The two courses that we may pursue are (1) the direct, and (2) the
indirect refutation. The direct attacks the reason for the thesis; the indirect, its
results. The direct refutation shows that the thesis is not true; the indirect, that it
cannot be true.
The direct course admits of a twofold procedure. Either we may show that
the reasons for the statement are false (nego majorem, minorem); or we may
admit the reasons or premisses, but show that the statement does not follow from
them (nego consequentiam); that is, we attack the conclusion or form of the
syllogism.
The direct refutation makes use either of the diversion or of the instance.
(a) The diversion.--We accept our opponent's proposition as true, and then
show what follows from it when we bring it into connection with some other
proposition acknowledged to be true. We use the two propositions as the
premisses of a syllogism giving a conclusion which is manifestly false, as
contradicting either the nature of things,[1] or other statements of our opponent
himself; that is to say, the conclusion is false either ad rem or ad hominem.[2]
Consequently, our opponent's proposition must have been false; for, while true
premisses can give only a true conclusion, false premisses need not always give
a false one.
[Footnote 1: If it is in direct contradiction with a perfectly undoubted, truth,
we have reduced our opponent's position ad absurdum.]

[Footnote 2: Socrates, in Hippia Maj. et alias.]
(b) The instance, or the example to the contrary.--This consists in refuting
the general proposition by direct reference to particular cases which are included
in it in the way in which it is stated, but to which it does not apply, and by which
it is therefore shown to be necessarily false.
Such is the framework or skeleton of all forms of disputation; for to this
every kind of controversy may be ultimately reduced. The whole of a
controversy may, however, actually proceed in the manner described, or only
appear to do so; and it may be supported by genuine or spurious arguments. It is
just because it is not easy to make out the truth in regard to this matter, that
debates are so long and so obstinate.
Nor can we, in ordering the argument, separate actual from apparent truth,
since even the disputants are not certain about it beforehand. Therefore I shall
describe the various tricks or stratagems without regard to questions of objective
truth or falsity; for that is a matter on which we have no assurance, and which
cannot be determined previously. Moreover, in every disputation or argument on
any subject we must agree about something; and by this, as a principle, we must
be willing to judge the matter in question. We cannot argue with those who deny
principles: Contra negantem principia non est disputandum.
STRATAGEMS.
I.
The Extension.--This consists in carrying your opponent's proposition
beyond its natural limits; in giving it as general a signification and as wide a
sense as possible, so as to exaggerate it; and, on the other hand, in giving your
own proposition as restricted a sense and as narrow limits as you can, because
the more general a statement becomes, the more numerous are the objections to
which it is open. The defence consists in an accurate statement of the point or
essential question at issue.
Example 1.--I asserted that the English were supreme in drama. My
opponent attempted to give an instance to the contrary, and replied that it was a
well-known fact that in music, and consequently in opera, they could do nothing
at all. I repelled the attack by reminding him that music was not included in
dramatic art, which covered tragedy and comedy alone. This he knew very well.
What he had done was to try to generalise my proposition, so that it would apply
to all theatrical representations, and, consequently, to opera and then to music, in
order to make certain of defeating me. Contrarily, we may save our proposition
by reducing it within narrower limits than we had first intended, if our way of
expressing it favours this expedient.
Example 2.--A. declares that the Peace of 1814 gave back their

independence to all the German towns of the Hanseatic League. B. gives an
instance to the contrary by reciting the fact that Dantzig, which received its
independence from Buonaparte, lost it by that Peace. A. saves himself thus: "I
said 'all German towns,' and Dantzig was in Poland."
This trick was mentioned by Aristotle in the Topica (bk. viii., cc. 11, 12).
Example 3.--Lamarck, in his Philosophic Zoologique (vol. i., p. 208), states
that the polype has no feeling, because it has no nerves. It is certain, however,
that it has some sort of perception; for it advances towards light by moving in an
ingenious fashion from branch to branch, and it seizes its prey. Hence it has been
assumed that its nervous system is spread over the whole of its body in equal
measure, as though it were blended with it; for it is obvious that the polype
possesses some faculty of perception without having any separate organs of
sense. Since this assumption refutes Lamarck's position, he argues thus: "In that
case all parts of its body must be capable of every kind of feeling, and also of
motion, of will, of thought. The polype would have all the organs of the most
perfect animal in every point of its body; every point could see, smell, taste,
hear, and so on; nay, it could think, judge, and draw conclusions; every particle
of its body would be a perfect animal and it would stand higher than man, as
every part of it would possess all the faculties which man possesses only in the
whole of him. Further, there would be no reason for not extending what is true of
the polype to all monads, the most imperfect of all creatures, and ultimately to
the plants, which are also alive, etc., etc." By using dialectical tricks of this kind
a writer betrays that he is secretly conscious of being in the wrong. Because it
was said that the creature's whole body is sensitive to light, and is therefore
possessed of nerves, he makes out that its whole body is capable of thought.
II.
The Homonymy.--This trick is to extend a proposition to something which
has little or nothing in common with the matter in question but the similarity of
the word; then to refute it triumphantly, and so claim credit for having refuted
the original statement.
It may be noted here that synonyms are two words for the same conception;
homonyms, two conceptions which are covered by the same word. (See
Aristotle, Topica, bk. i., c. 13.) "Deep," "cutting," "high," used at one moment of
bodies at another of tones, are homonyms; "honourable" and "honest" are
synonyms.
This is a trick which may be regarded as identical with the sophism ex
homonymia; although, if the sophism is obvious, it will deceive no one.
Every light can be extinguished. The intellect is a light. Therefore it can be
extinguished.

Here it is at once clear that there are four terms in the syllogism, "light"
being used both in a real and in a metaphorical sense. But if the sophism takes a
subtle form, it is, of course, apt to mislead, especially where the conceptions
which are covered by the same word are related, and inclined to be
interchangeable. It is never subtle enough to deceive, if it is used intentionally;
and therefore cases of it must be collected from actual and individual experience.
It would be a very good thing if every trick could receive some short and
obviously appropriate name, so that when a man used this or that particular trick,
he could be at once reproached for it.
I will give two examples of the homonymy.
Example 1.--A.: "You are not yet initiated into the mysteries of the Kantian
philosophy."
B.: "Oh, if it's mysteries you're talking of, I'll have nothing to do with
them."
Example 2.--I condemned the principle involved in the word honour as a
foolish one; for, according to it, a man loses his honour by receiving an insult,
which he cannot wipe out unless he replies with a still greater insult, or by
shedding his adversary's blood or his own. I contended that a man's true honour
cannot be outraged by what he suffers, but only and alone by what he does; for
there is no saying what may befall any one of us. My opponent immediately
attacked the reason I had given, and triumphantly proved to me that when a
tradesman was falsely accused of misrepresentation, dishonesty, or neglect in his
business, it was an attack upon his honour, which in this case was outraged
solely by what he suffered, and that he could only retrieve it by punishing his
aggressor and making him retract.
Here, by a homonymy, he was foisting civic honour, which is otherwise
called good name, and which may be outraged by libel and slander, on to the
conception of knightly honour, also called point d'honneur, which may be
outraged by insult. And since an attack on the former cannot be disregarded, but
must be repelled by public disproof, so, with the same justification, an attack on
the latter must not be disregarded either, but it must be defeated by still greater
insult and a duel. Here we have a confusion of two essentially different things
through the homonymy in the word honour, and a consequent alteration of the
point in dispute.
III.
Another trick is to take a proposition which is laid down relatively, and in
reference to some particular matter, as though it were uttered with a general or
absolute application; or, at least, to take it in some quite different sense, and then
refute it. Aristotle's example is as follows:

A Moor is black; but in regard to his teeth he is white; therefore, he is black
and not black at the same moment. This is an obvious sophism, which will
deceive no one. Let us contrast it with one drawn from actual experience.
In talking of philosophy, I admitted that my system upheld the Quietists,
and commended them. Shortly afterwards the conversation turned upon Hegel,
and I maintained that his writings were mostly nonsense; or, at any rate, that
there were many passages in them where the author wrote the words, and it was
left to the reader to find a meaning for them. My opponent did not attempt to
refute this assertion ad rem, but contented himself by advancing the argumentum
ad hominem, and telling me that I had just been praising the Quietists, and that
they had written a good deal of nonsense too.
This I admitted; but, by way of correcting him, I said that I had praised the
Quietists, not as philosophers and writers, that is to say, for their achievements in
the sphere of theory, but only as men, and for their conduct in mere matters of
practice; and that in Hegel's case we were talking of theories. In this way I
parried the attack.
The first three tricks are of a kindred character. They have this in common,
that something different is attacked from that which was asserted. It would
therefore be an ignoratio elenchi to allow oneself to be disposed of in such a
manner.
For in all the examples that I have given, what the opponent says is true, but
it stands in apparent and not in real contradiction with the thesis. All that the
man whom he is attacking has to do is to deny the validity of his syllogism; to
deny, namely, the conclusion which he draws, that because his proposition is
true, ours is false. In this way his refutation is itself directly refuted by a denial
of his conclusion, per negationem consequentiae. Another trick is to refuse to
admit true premisses because of a foreseen conclusion. There are two ways of
defeating it, incorporated in the next two sections.
IV.
If you want to draw a conclusion, you must not let it be foreseen, but you
must get the premisses admitted one by one, unobserved, mingling them here
and there in your talk; otherwise, your opponent will attempt all sorts of
chicanery. Or, if it is doubtful whether your opponent will admit them, you must
advance the premisses of these premisses; that is to say, you must draw up pro-
syllogisms, and get the premisses of several of them admitted in no definite
order. In this way you conceal your game until you have obtained all the
admissions that are necessary, and so reach your goal by making a circuit. These
rules are given by Aristotle in his Topica, bk. viii., c. 1. It is a trick which needs
no illustration.

V.
To prove the truth of a proposition, you may also employ previous
propositions that are not true, should your opponent refuse to admit the true
ones, either because he fails to perceive their truth, or because he sees that the
thesis immediately follows from them. In that case the plan is to take
propositions which are false in themselves but true for your opponent, and argue
from the way in which he thinks, that is to say, ex concessis. For a true
conclusion may follow from false premisses, but not vice versâ. In the same
fashion your opponent's false propositions may be refuted by other false
propositions, which he, however, takes to be true; for it is with him that you have
to do, and you must use the thoughts that he uses. For instance, if he is a member
of some sect to which you do not belong, you may employ the declared, opinions
of this sect against him, as principles.[1]
[Footnote 1: Aristotle, Topica bk. viii., chap. 2.]
VI.
Another plan is to beg the question in disguise by postulating what has to be
proved, either (1) under another name; for instance, "good repute" instead of
"honour"; "virtue" instead of "virginity," etc.; or by using such convertible terms
as "red-blooded animals" and "vertebrates"; or (2) by making a general
assumption covering the particular point in dispute; for instance, maintaining the
uncertainty of medicine by postulating the uncertainty of all human knowledge.
(3) If, vice versâ, two things follow one from the other, and one is to be proved,
you may postulate the other. (4) If a general proposition is to be proved, you
may get your opponent to admit every one of the particulars. This is the converse
of the second.[1]
[Footnote 1: Idem, chap. 11. The last chapter of this work contains some
good rules for the practice of Dialectics.]
VII.
Should the disputation be conducted on somewhat strict and formal lines,
and there be a desire to arrive at a very clear understanding, he who states the
proposition and wants to prove it may proceed against his opponent by question,
in order to show the truth of the statement from his admissions. The erotematic,
or Socratic, method was especially in use among the ancients; and this and some
of the tricks following later on are akin to it.[1]
[Footnote 1: They are all a free version of chap. 15 of Aristotle's De
Sophistici Elenchis.]
The plan is to ask a great many wide-reaching questions at once, so as to
hide what you want to get admitted, and, on the other hand, quickly propound
the argument resulting from the admissions; for those who are slow of

understanding cannot follow accurately, and do not notice any mistakes or gaps
there may be in the demonstration.
VIII.
This trick consists in making your opponent angry; for when he is angry he
is incapable of judging aright, and perceiving where his advantage lies. You can
make him angry by doing him repeated injustice, or practising some kind of
chicanery, and being generally insolent.
IX.
Or you may put questions in an order different from that which the
conclusion to be drawn from them requires, and transpose them, so as not to let
him know at what you are aiming. He can then take no precautions. You may
also use his answers for different or even opposite conclusions, according to
their character. This is akin to the trick of masking your procedure.
X.
If you observe that your opponent designedly returns a negative answer to
the questions which, for the sake of your proposition, you want him to answer in
the affirmative, you must ask the converse of the proposition, as though it were
that which you were anxious to see affirmed; or, at any rate, you may give him
his choice of both, so that he may not perceive which of them you are asking
him to affirm.
XL.
If you make an induction, and your opponent grants you the particular cases
by which it is to be supported, you must refrain from asking him if he also
admits the general truth which issues from the particulars, but introduce it
afterwards as a settled and admitted fact; for, in the meanwhile, he will himself
come to believe that he has admitted it, and the same impression will be received
by the audience, because they will remember the many questions as to the
particulars, and suppose that they must, of course, have attained their end.
XII.
If the conversation turns upon some general conception which has no
particular name, but requires some figurative or metaphorical designation, you
must begin by choosing a metaphor that is favourable to your proposition. For
instance, the names used to denote the two political parties in Spain, Serviles and
Liberates, are obviously chosen by the latter. The name Protestants is chosen by
themselves, and also the name Evangelicals; but the Catholics call them heretics.
Similarly, in regard to the names of things which admit of a more exact and
definite meaning: for example, if your opponent proposes an alteration, you can
call it an innovation, as this is an invidious word. If you yourself make the
proposal, it will be the converse. In the first case, you can call the antagonistic

principle "the existing order," in the second, "antiquated prejudice." What an
impartial man with no further purpose to serve would call "public worship" or a
"system of religion," is described by an adherent as "piety," "godliness": and by
an opponent as "bigotry," "superstition." This is, at bottom, a subtle petitio
principii. What is sought to be proved is, first of all, inserted in the definition,
whence it is then taken by mere analysis. What one man calls "placing in safe
custody," another calls "throwing into prison." A speaker often betrays his
purpose beforehand by the names which he gives to things. One man talks of
"the clergy"; another, of "the priests."
Of all the tricks of controversy, this is the most frequent, and it is used
instinctively. You hear of "religious zeal," or "fanaticism"; a "faux pas" a "piece
of gallantry," or "adultery"; an "equivocal," or a "bawdy" story;
"embarrassment," or "bankruptcy"; "through influence and connection," or by
"bribery and nepotism"; "sincere gratitude," or "good pay."
XIII.
To make your opponent accept a proposition, you must give him the
counter-proposition as well, leaving him his choice of the two; and you must
render the contrast as glaring as you can, so that to avoid being paradoxical he
will accept the proposition, which is thus made to look quite probable. For
instance, if you want to make him admit that a boy must do everything that his
father tells him to do, ask him "whether in all things we must obey or disobey
our parents." Or, if a thing is said to occur "often," ask whether by "often" you
are to understand few or many cases; and he will say "many." It is as though you
were to put grey next black, and call it white; or next white, and call it black.
XIV.
This, which is an impudent trick, is played as follows: When your opponent
has answered several of your questions without the answers turning out
favourable to the conclusion at which you are aiming, advance the desired
conclusion,--although it does not in the least follow,--as though it had been
proved, and proclaim it in a tone of triumph. If your opponent is shy or stupid,
and you yourself possess a great deal of impudence and a good voice, the trick
may easily succeed. It is akin to the fallacy non causae ut causae.
XV.
If you have advanced a paradoxical proposition and find a difficulty in
proving it, you may submit for your opponent's acceptance or rejection some
true proposition, the truth of which, however, is not quite palpable, as though
you wished to draw your proof from it. Should he reject it because he suspects a
trick, you can obtain your triumph by showing how absurd he is; should he
accept it> you have got reason on your side for the moment, and must now look

about you; or else you can employ the previous trick as well, and maintain that
your paradox is proved by the proposition which he has accepted. For this an
extreme degree of impudence is required; but experience shows cases of it, and
there are people who practise it by instinct.
XVI.
Another trick is to use arguments ad hominem, or ex concessis[1] When
your opponent makes a proposition, you must try to see whether it is not in some
way--if needs be, only apparently--inconsistent with some other proposition
which he has made or admitted, or with the principles of a school or sect which
he has commended and approved, or with the actions of those who support the
sect, or else of those who give it only an apparent and spurious support, or with
his own actions or want of action. For example, should he defend suicide, you
may at once exclaim, "Why don't you hang yourself?" Should he maintain that
Berlin is an unpleasant place to live in, you may say, "Why don't you leave by
the first train?" Some such claptrap is always possible.
[Footnote 1: The truth from which I draw my proof may he either (1) of an
objective and universally valid character; in that case my proof is veracious,
secundum veritatem; and it is such proof alone that has any genuine validity. Or
(2) it may be valid only for the person to whom I wish to prove my proposition,
and with whom I am disputing. He has, that is to say, either taken up some
position once for all as a prejudice, or hastily admitted it in the course of the
dispute; and on this I ground my proof. In that case, it is a proof valid only for
this particular man, ad kominem. I compel my opponent to grant my proposition,
but I fail to establish it as a truth of universal validity. My proof avails for my
opponent alone, but for no one else. For example, if my opponent is a devotee of
Kant's, and I ground my proof on some utterance of that philosopher, it is a proof
which in itself is only ad hominem. If he is a Mohammedan, I may prove my
point by reference to a passage in the Koran, and that is sufficient for him; but
here it is only a proof ad hominem,]
XVII.
If your opponent presses you with a counter-proof, you will often be able to
save yourself by advancing some subtle distinction, which, it is true, had not
previously occurred to you; that is, if the matter admits of a double application,
or of being taken in any ambiguous sense.
XVIII.
If you observe that your opponent has taken up a line of argument which
will end in your defeat, you must not allow him to carry it to its conclusion, but
interrupt the course of the dispute in time, or break it off altogether, or lead him
away from the subject, and bring him to others. In short, you must effect the

trick which will be noticed later on, the mutatio controversiae. (See § xxix.)
XIX.
Should your opponent expressly challenge you to produce any objection to
some definite point in his argument, and you have nothing much to say, you
must try to give the matter a general turn, and then talk against that. If you are
called upon to say why a particular physical hypothesis cannot be accepted, you
may speak of the fallibility of human knowledge, and give various illustrations
of it.
XX.
When you have elicited all your premisses, and your opponent has admitted
them, you must refrain from asking him for the conclusion, but draw it at once
for yourself; nay, even though one or other of the premisses should be lacking,
you may take it as though it too had been admitted, and draw the conclusion.
This trick is an application of the fallacy non causae ut causae.
XXI.
When your opponent uses a merely superficial or sophistical argument and
you see through it, you can, it is true, refute it by setting forth its captious and
superficial character; but it is better to meet him with a counter-argument which
is just as superficial and sophistical, and so dispose of him; for it is with victory
that you are concerned, and not with truth. If, for example, he adopts an
argumentum ad hominem, it is sufficient to take the force out of it by a counter
argumentum ad hominem or argumentum ex concessis; and, in general, instead
of setting forth the true state of the case at equal length, it is shorter to take this
course if it lies open to you.
XXII.
If your opponent requires you to admit something from which the point in
dispute will immediately follow, you must refuse to do so, declaring that it is a
petitio principii For he and the audience will regard a proposition which is near
akin to the point in dispute as identical with it, and in this way you deprive him
of his best argument.
XXIII.
Contradiction and contention irritate a man into exaggerating his statement.
By contradicting your opponent you may drive him into extending beyond its
proper limits a statement which, at all events within those limits and in itself, is
true; and when you refute this exaggerated form of it, you look as though you
had also refuted his original statement. Contrarily, you must take care not to
allow yourself to be misled by contradictions into exaggerating or extending a
statement of your own. It will often happen that your opponent will himself
directly try to extend your statement further than you meant it; here you must at

once stop him, and bring him back to the limits which you set up; "That's what I
said, and no more."
XXIV.
This trick consists in stating a false syllogism. Your opponent makes a
proposition, and by false inference and distortion of his ideas you force from it
other propositions which it does not contain and he does not in the least mean;
nay, which are absurd or dangerous. It then looks as if his proposition gave rise
to others which are inconsistent either with themselves or with some
acknowledged truth, and so it appears to be indirectly refuted. This is the
diversion, and it is another application of the fallacy non causae ut causae.
XXV.
This is a case of the diversion by means of an instance to the contrary. With
an induction ([Greek: epagogae]), a great number of particular instances are
required in order to establish it as a universal proposition; but with the diversion
([Greek: apagogae]) a single instance, to which the proposition does not apply, is
all that is necessary to overthrow it. This is a controversial method known as the
instance--instantia, [Greek: enstasis]. For example, "all ruminants are horned" is
a proposition which may be upset by the single instance of the camel. The
instance is a case in which a universal truth is sought to be applied, and
something is inserted in the fundamental definition of it which is not universally
true, and by which it is upset. But there is room for mistake; and when this trick
is employed by your opponent, you must observe (1) whether the example which
he gives is really true; for there are problems of which the only true solution is
that the case in point is not true--for example, many miracles, ghost stories, and
so on; and (2) whether it really comes under the conception of the truth thus
stated; for it may only appear to do so, and the matter is one to be settled by
precise distinctions; and (3) whether it is really inconsistent with this conception;
for this again may be only an apparent inconsistency.
XXVI.
A brilliant move is the retorsio argumenti, or turning of the tables, by which
your opponent's argument is turned against himself. He declares, for instance,
"So-and-so is a child, you must make allowance for him." You retort, "Just
because he is a child, I must correct him; otherwise he will persist in his bad
habits."
XXVII.
Should your opponent surprise you by becoming particularly angry at an
argument, you must urge it with all the more zeal; not only because it is a good
thing to make him angry, but because it may be presumed that you have here put
your finger on the weak side of his case, and that just here he is more open to

attack than even for the moment you perceive.
XXVIII.
This is chiefly practicable in a dispute between scholars in the presence of
the unlearned. If you have no argument ad rem, and none either ad hominem,
you can make one ad auditores; that is to say, you can start some invalid
objection, which, however, only an expert sees to be invalid. Now your opponent
is an expert, but those who form your audience are not, and accordingly in their
eyes he is defeated; particularly if the objection which you make places him in
any ridiculous light. People are ready to laugh, and you have the laughers on
your side. To show that your objection is an idle one, would require a long
explanation on the part of your opponent, and a reference to the principles of the
branch of knowledge in question, or to the elements of the matter which you are
discussing; and people are not disposed to listen to it.
For example, your opponent states that in the original formation of a
mountain-range the granite and other elements in its composition were, by
reason of their high temperature, in a fluid or molten state; that the temperature
must have amounted to some 480° Fahrenheit; and that when the mass took
shape it was covered by the sea. You reply, by an argument ad auditores, that at
that temperature--nay, indeed, long before it had been reached, namely, at 212°
Fahrenheit--the sea would have been boiled away, and spread through the air in
the form of steam. At this the audience laughs. To refute the objection, your
opponent would have to show that the boiling-point depends not only on the
degree of warmth, but also on the atmospheric pressure; and that as soon as
about half the sea-water had gone off in the shape of steam, this pressure would
be so greatly increased that the rest of it would fail to boil even at a temperature
of 480°. He is debarred from giving this explanation, as it would require a
treatise to demonstrate the matter to those who had no acquaintance with
physics.
XXIX.[1]
[Footnote 1: See § xviii.]
If you find that you are being worsted, you can make a diversion--that is,
you can suddenly begin to talk of something else, as though it had a bearing on
the matter in dispute, and afforded an argument against your opponent. This may
be done without presumption if the diversion has, in fact, some general bearing
on the matter; but it is a piece of impudence if it has nothing to do with the case,
and is only brought in by way of attacking your opponent.
For example, I praised the system prevailing in China, where there is no
such thing as hereditary nobility, and offices are bestowed only on those who
succeed in competitive examinations. My opponent maintained that learning, as

little as the privilege of birth (of which he had a high opinion) fits a man for
office. We argued, and he got the worst of it. Then he made a diversion, and
declared that in China all ranks were punished with the bastinado, which he
connected with the immoderate indulgence in tea, and proceeded to make both
of them a subject of reproach to the Chinese. To follow him into all this would
have been to allow oneself to be drawn into a surrender of the victory which had
already been won.
The diversion is mere impudence if it completely abandons the point in
dispute, and raises, for instance, some such objection as "Yes, and you also said
just now," and so on. For then the argument becomes to some extent personal; of
the kind which will be treated of in the last section. Strictly speaking, it is half-
way between the argumentum ad personam, which will there be discussed, and
the argumentum ad hominem.
How very innate this trick is, may be seen in every quarrel between
common people. If one of the parties makes some personal reproach against the
other, the latter, instead of answering it by refuting it, allows it to stand,--as it
were, admits it; and replies by reproaching his antagonist on some other ground.
This is a stratagem like that pursued by Scipio when he attacked the
Carthaginians, not in Italy, but in Africa. In war, diversions of this kind may be
profitable; but in a quarrel they are poor expedients, because the reproaches
remain, and those who look on hear the worst that can be said of both parties. It
is a trick that should be used only faute de mieux.
XXX.
This is the argumentum ad verecundiam. It consists in making an appeal to
authority rather than reason, and in using such an authority as may suit the
degree of knowledge possessed by your opponent.
Every man prefers belief to the exercise of judgment, says Seneca; and it is
therefore an easy matter if you have an authority on your side which your
opponent respects. The more limited his capacity and knowledge, the greater is
the number of the authorities who weigh with him. But if his capacity and
knowledge are of a high order, there are very few; indeed, hardly any at all. He
may, perhaps, admit the authority of professional men versed in a science or an
art or a handicraft of which he knows little or nothing; but even so he will regard
it with suspicion. Contrarily, ordinary folk have a deep respect for professional
men of every kind. They are unaware that a man who makes a profession of a
thing loves it not for the thing itself, but for the money he makes by it; or that it
is rare for a man who teaches to know his subject thoroughly; for if he studies it
as he ought, he has in most cases no time left in which to teach it.
But there are very many authorities who find respect with the mob, and if

you have none that is quite suitable, you can take one that appears to be so; you
may quote what some said in another sense or in other circumstances.
Authorities which your opponent fails to understand are those of which he
generally thinks the most. The unlearned entertain a peculiar respect for a Greek
or a Latin flourish. You may also, should it be necessary, not only twist your
authorities, but actually falsify them, or quote something which you have
invented entirely yourself. As a rule, your opponent has no books at hand, and
could not use them if he had. The finest illustration of this is furnished by the
French curé, who, to avoid being compelled, like other citizens, to pave the
street in front of his house, quoted a saying which he described as biblical:
paveant illi, ego non pavebo. That was quite enough for the municipal officers.
A universal prejudice may also be used as an authority; for most people think
with Aristotle that that may be said to exist which many believe. There is no
opinion, however absurd, which men will not readily embrace as soon as they
can be brought to the conviction that it is generally adopted. Example affects
their thought just as it affects their action. They are like sheep following the bell-
wether just as he leads them. They would sooner die than think. It is very curious
that the universality of an opinion should have so much weight with people, as
their own experience might tell them that its acceptance is an entirely
thoughtless and merely imitative process. But it tells them nothing of the kind,
because they possess no self-knowledge whatever. It is only the elect Who Say
with Plato: [Greek: tois pollois polla dokei] which means that the public has a
good many bees in its bonnet, and that it would be a long business to get at them.
But to speak seriously, the universality of an opinion is no proof, nay, it is
not even a probability, that the opinion is right. Those who maintain that it is so
must assume (1) that length of time deprives a universal opinion of its
demonstrative force, as otherwise all the old errors which were once universally
held to be true would have to be recalled; for instance, the Ptolemaic system
would have to be restored, or Catholicism re-established in all Protestant
countries. They must assume (2) that distance of space has the same effect;
otherwise the respective universality of opinion among the adherents of
Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam will put them in a difficulty.
When we come to look into the matter, so-called universal opinion is the
opinion of two or three persons; and we should be persuaded of this if we could
see the way in which it really arises.
We should find that it is two or three persons who, in the first instance,
accepted it, or advanced and maintained it; and of whom people were so good as
to believe that they had thoroughly tested it. Then a few other persons,
persuaded beforehand that the first were men of the requisite capacity, also

accepted the opinion. These, again, were trusted by many others, whose laziness
suggested to them that it was better to believe at once, than to go through the
troublesome task of testing the matter for themselves. Thus the number of these
lazy and credulous adherents grew from day to day; for the opinion had no
sooner obtained a fair measure of support than its further supporters attributed
this to the fact that the opinion could only have obtained it by the cogency of its
arguments. The remainder were then compelled to grant what was universally
granted, so as not to pass for unruly persons who resisted opinions which every
one accepted, or pert fellows who thought themselves cleverer than any one else.
When opinion reaches this stage, adhesion becomes a duty; and
henceforward the few who are capable of forming a judgment hold their peace.
Those who venture to speak are such as are entirely incapable of forming any
opinions or any judgment of their own, being merely the echo of others'
opinions; and, nevertheless, they defend them with all the greater zeal and
intolerance. For what they hate in people who think differently is not so much
the different opinions which they profess, as the presumption of wanting to form
their own judgment; a presumption of which they themselves are never guilty, as
they are very well aware. In short, there are very few who can think, but every
man wants to have an opinion; and what remains but to take it ready-made from
others, instead of forming opinions for himself?
Since this is what happens, where is the value of the opinion even of a
hundred millions? It is no more established than an historical fact reported by a
hundred chroniclers who can be proved to have plagiarised it from one another;
the opinion in the end being traceable to a single individual.[1] It is all what I
say, what you say, and, finally, what he says; and the whole of it is nothing but a
series of assertions:
[Footnote 1: See Bayle's Pensées sur les Comètes, i., p. 10.]
Dico ego, tu dicis, sed denique dixit et ille; Dictaque post toties, nil nisi
dicta vides.
Nevertheless, in a dispute with ordinary people, we may employ universal
opinion as an authority. For it will generally be found that when two of them are
fighting, that is the weapon which both of them choose as a means of attack. If a
man of the better sort has to deal with them, it is most advisable for him to
condescend to the use of this weapon too, and to select such authorities as will
make an impression on his opponent's weak side. For, ex hypoihesi, he is as
insensible to all rational argument as a horny-hided Siegfried, dipped in the
flood of incapacity, and unable to think or judge. Before a tribunal the dispute is
one between authorities alone,--such authoritative statements, I mean, as are laid
down by legal experts; and here the exercise of judgment consists in discovering

what law or authority applies to the case in question. There is, however, plenty
of room for Dialectic; for should the case in question and the law not really fit
each other, they can, if necessary, be twisted until they appear to do so, or vice
versa.
XXXI.
If you know that you have no reply to the arguments which your opponent
advances, you may, by a fine stroke of irony, declare yourself to be an
incompetent judge: "What you now say passes my poor powers of
comprehension; it may be all very true, but I can't understand it, and I refrain
from any expression of opinion on it." In this way you insinuate to the
bystanders, with whom you are in good repute, that what your opponent says is
nonsense. Thus, when Kant's Kritik appeared, or, rather, when it began to make a
noise in the world, many professors of the old ecclectic school declared that they
failed to understand it, in the belief that their failure settled the business. But
when the adherents of the new school proved to them that they were quite right,
and had really failed to understand it, they were in a very bad humour.
This is a trick which may be used only when you are quite sure that the
audience thinks much better of you that of your opponent. A professor, for
instance may try it on a student.
Strictly, it is a case of the preceding trick: it is a particularly malicious
assertion of one's own authority, instead of giving reasons. The counter-trick is
to say: "I beg your pardon; but, with your penetrating intellect, it must be very
easy for you to understand anything; and it can only be my poor statement of the
matter that is at fault"; and then go on to rub it into him until he understands it
nolens volens, and sees for himself that it was really his own fault alone. In this
way you parry his attack. With the greatest politeness he wanted to insinuate that
you were talking nonsense; and you, with equal courtesy, prove to him that he is
a fool.
XXXII.
If you are confronted with an assertion, there is a short way of getting rid of
it, or, at any rate, of throwing suspicion on it, by putting it into some odious
category; even though the connection is only apparent, or else of a loose
character. You can say, for instance, "That is Manichasism," or "It is Arianism,"
or "Pelagianism," or "Idealism," or "Spinozism," or "Pantheism," or
"Brownianism," 
or 
"Naturalism," 
or 
"Atheism," 
or 
"Rationalism,"
"Spiritualism," "Mysticism," and so on. In making an objection of this kind, you
take it for granted (1) that the assertion in question is identical with, or is at least
contained in, the category cited--that is to say, you cry out, "Oh, I have heard
that before"; and (2) that the system referred to has been entirely refuted, and

does not contain a word of truth.
XXXIII.
"That's all very well in theory, but it won't do in practice." In this sophism
you admit the premisses but deny the conclusion, in contradiction with a well-
known rule of logic. The assertion is based upon an impossibility: what is right
in theory must work in practice; and if it does not, there is a mistake in the
theory; something has been overlooked and not allowed for; and, consequently,
what is wrong in practice is wrong in theory too.
XXXIV.
When you state a question or an argument, and your opponent gives you no
direct answer or reply, but evades it by a counter-question or an indirect answer,
or some assertion which has no bearing on the matter, and, generally, tries to
turn the subject, it is a sure sign that you have touched a weak spot, sometimes
without knowing it. You have, as it were, reduced him to silence. You must,
therefore, urge the point all the more, and not let your opponent evade it, even
when you do not know where the weakness which you have hit upon really lies.
XXXV.
There is another trick which, as soon as it is practicable, makes all others
unnecessary. Instead of working on your opponent's intellect by argument, work
on his will by motive; and he, and also the audience if they have similar
interests, will at once be won over to your opinion, even though you got it out of
a lunatic asylum; for, as a general rule, half an ounce of will is more effective
than a hundredweight of insight and intelligence. This, it is true, can be done
only under peculiar circumstances. If you succeed in making your opponent feel
that his opinion, should it prove true, will be distinctly prejudicial to his interest,
he will let it drop like a hot potato, and feel that it was very imprudent to take it
up.
A clergyman, for instance, is defending some philosophical dogma; you
make him sensible of the fact that it is in immediate contradiction with one of
the fundamental doctrines of his Church, and he abandons it.
A landed proprietor maintains that the use of machinery in agricultural
operations, as practised in England, is an excellent institution, since an engine
does the work of many men. You give him to understand that it will not be very
long before carriages are also worked by steam, and that the value of his large
stud will be greatly depreciated; and you will see what he will say.
In such cases every man feels how thoughtless it is to sanction a law unjust
to himself--quam temere in nosmet legem sancimus iniquam! Nor is it otherwise
if the bystanders, but not your opponent, belong to the same sect, guild, industry,
club, etc., as yourself. Let his thesis be never so true, as soon as you hint that it is

prejudicial to the common interests of the said society, all the bystanders will
find that your opponent's arguments, however excellent they be, are weak and
contemptible; and that yours, on the other hand, though they were random
conjecture, are correct and to the point; you will have a chorus of loud approval
on your side, and your opponent will be driven out of the field with ignominy.
Nay, the bystanders will believe, as a rule, that they have agreed with you out of
pure conviction. For what is not to our interest mostly seems absurd to us; our
intellect being no siccum lumen. This trick might be called "taking the tree by its
root"; its usual name is the argumentum ab utili.
XXXVI.
You may also puzzle and bewilder your opponent by mere bombast; and the
trick is possible, because a man generally supposes that there must be some
meaning in words:
Gewöhnlich glaubt der Mensch, wenn er nur Worte hört, Es müsse sich
dabei doch auch was denken lassen.
If he is secretly conscious of his own weakness, and accustomed to hear
much that he does not understand, and to make as though he did, you can easily
impose upon him by some serious fooling that sounds very deep or learned, and
deprives him of hearing, sight, and thought; and by giving out that it is the most
indisputable proof of what you assert. It is a well-known fact that in recent times
some philosophers have practised this trick on the whole of the public with the
most brilliant success. But since present examples are odious, we may refer to
The Vicar of Wakefield for an old one.
XXXVII.
Should your opponent be in the right, but, luckily for your contention,
choose a faulty proof, you can easily manage to refute it, and then claim that you
have thus refuted his whole position. This is a trick which ought to be one of the
first; it is, at bottom, an expedient by which an argumentum ad hominem is put
forward as an argumentum ad rem. If no accurate proof occurs to him or to the
bystanders, you have won the day. For example, if a man advances the
ontological argument by way of proving God's existence, you can get the best of
him, for the ontological argument may easily be refuted. This is the way in
which bad advocates lose a good case, by trying to justify it by an authority
which does not fit it, when no fitting one occurs to them.
XXXVIII.
A last trick is to become personal, insulting, rude, as soon as you perceive
that your opponent has the upper hand, and that you are going to come off worst.
It consists in passing from the subject of dispute, as from a lost game, to the
disputant himself, and in some way attacking his person. It may be called the

argumentum ad personam, to distinguish it from the argumentum ad hominem,
which passes from the objective discussion of the subject pure and simple to the
statements or admissions which your opponent has made in regard to it. But in
becoming personal you leave the subject altogether, and turn your attack to his
person, by remarks of an offensive and spiteful character. It is an appeal from the
virtues of the intellect to the virtues of the body, or to mere animalism. This is a
very popular trick, because every one is able to carry it into effect; and so it is of
frequent application. Now the question is, What counter-trick avails for the other
party? for if he has recourse to the same rule, there will be blows, or a duel, or an
action for slander.
It would be a great mistake to suppose that it is sufficient not to become
personal yourself. For by showing a man quite quietly that he is wrong, and that
what he says and thinks is incorrect--a process which occurs in every dialectical
victory--you embitter him more than if you used some rude or insulting
expression. Why is this? Because, as Hobbes observes,[1] all mental pleasure
consists in being able to compare oneself with others to one's own advantage.
Nothing is of greater moment to a man than the gratification of his vanity, and
no wound is more painful than that which is inflicted on it. Hence such phrases
as "Death before dishonour," and so on. The gratification of vanity arises mainly
by comparison of oneself with others, in every respect, but chiefly in respect of
one's intellectual powers; and so the most effective and the strongest
gratification of it is to be found in controversy. Hence the embitterment of
defeat, apart from any question of injustice; and hence recourse to that last
weapon, that last trick, which you cannot evade by mere politeness. A cool
demeanour may, however, help you here, if, as soon as your opponent becomes
personal, you quietly reply, "That has no bearing on the point in dispute," and
immediately bring the conversation back to it, and continue to show him that he
is wrong, without taking any notice of his insults. Say, as Themistocles said to
Eurybiades--Strike, but hear me. But such demeanour is not given to every one.
[Footnote 1: Elementa philosophica de Cive.]
As a sharpening of wits, controversy is often, indeed, of mutual advantage,
in order to correct one's thoughts and awaken new views. But in learning and in
mental power both disputants must be tolerably equal. If one of them lacks
learning, he will fail to understand the other, as he is not on the same level with
his antagonist. If he lacks mental power, he will be embittered, and led into
dishonest tricks, and end by being rude.
The only safe rule, therefore, is that which Aristotle mentions in the last
chapter of his Topica: not to dispute with the first person you meet, but only with
those of your acquaintance of whom you know that they possess sufficient

intelligence and self-respect not to advance absurdities; to appeal to reason and
not to authority, and to listen to reason and yield to it; and, finally, to cherish
truth, to be willing to accept reason even from an opponent, and to be just
enough to bear being proved to be in the wrong, should truth lie with him. From
this it follows that scarcely one man in a hundred is worth your disputing with
him. You may let the remainder say what they please, for every one is at liberty
to be a fool--desipere est jus gentium. Remember what Voltaire says: La paix
vaut encore mieux que la vérité. Remember also an Arabian proverb which tells
us that on the tree of silence there hangs its fruit, which is peace.
ON THE COMPARATIVE PLACE OF INTEREST AND BEAUTY IN
WORKS OF ART.
In the productions of poetic genius, especially of the epic and dramatic
kind, there is, apart from Beauty, another quality which is attractive: I mean
Interest.
The beauty of a work of art consists in the fact that it holds up a clear
mirror to certain ideas inherent in the world in general; the beauty of a work of
poetic art in particular is that it renders the ideas inherent in mankind, and
thereby leads it to a knowledge of these ideas. The means which poetry uses for
this end are the exhibition of significant characters and the invention of
circumstances which will bring about significant situations, giving occasion to
the characters to unfold their peculiarities and show what is in them; so that by
some such representation a clearer and fuller knowledge of the many-sided idea
of humanity may be attained. Beauty, however, in its general aspect, is the
inseparable characteristic of the idea when it has become known. In other words,
everything is beautiful in which an idea is revealed; for to be beautiful means no
more than clearly to express an idea.
Thus we perceive that beauty is always an affair of knowledge, and that it
appeals to the knowing subject, and not to the will; nay, it is a fact that the
apprehension of beauty on the part of the subject involves a complete
suppression of the will.
On the other hand, we call drama or descriptive poetry interesting when it
represents events and actions of a kind which necessarily arouse concern or
sympathy, like that which we feel in real events involving our own person. The
fate of the person represented in them is felt in just the same fashion as our own:
we await the development of events with anxiety; we eagerly follow their
course; our hearts quicken when the hero is threatened; our pulse falters as the
danger reaches its acme, and throbs again when he is suddenly rescued. Until we

reach the end of the story we cannot put the book aside; we lie away far into the
night sympathising with our hero's troubles as though they were our own. Nay,
instead of finding pleasure and recreation in such representations, we should feel
all the pain which real life often inflicts upon us, or at least the kind which
pursues us in our uneasy dreams, if in the act of reading or looking at the stage
we had not the firm ground of reality always beneath our feet. As it is, in the
stress of a too violent feeling, we can find relief from the illusion of the moment,
and then give way to it again at will. Moreover, we can gain this relief without
any such violent transition as occurs in a dream, when we rid ourselves of its
terrors only by the act of awaking.
It is obvious that what is affected by poetry of this character is our will, and
not merely our intellectual powers pure and simple. The word interest means,
therefore, that which arouses the concern of the individual will, quod nostrâ
interest; and here it is that beauty is clearly distinguished from interest. The one
is an affair of the intellect, and that, too, of the purest and simplest kind. The
other works upon the will. Beauty, then, consists in an apprehension of ideas;
and knowledge of this character is beyond the range of the principle that nothing
happens without a cause. Interest, on the other hand, has its origin nowhere but
in the course of events; that is to say, in the complexities which are possible only
through the action of this principle in its different forms.
We have now obtained a clear conception of the essential difference
between the beauty and the interest of a work of art. We have recognised that
beauty is the true end of every art, and therefore, also, of the poetic art. It now
remains to raise the question whether the interest of a work of art is a second
end, or a means to the exhibition of its beauty; or whether the interest of it is
produced by its beauty as an essential concomitant, and comes of itself as soon
as it is beautiful; or whether interest is at any rate compatible with the main end
of art; or, finally, whether it is a hindrance to it.
In the first place, it is to be observed that the interest of a work of art is
confined to works of poetic art. It does not exist in the case of fine art, or of
music or architecture. Nay, with these forms of art it is not even conceivable,
unless, indeed, the interest be of an entirely personal character, and confined to
one or two spectators; as, for example, where a picture is a portrait of some one
whom we love or hate; the building, my house or my prison; the music, my
wedding dance, or the tune to which I marched to the war. Interest of this kind is
clearly quite foreign to the essence and purpose of art; it disturbs our judgment
in so far as it makes the purely artistic attitude impossible. It may be, indeed, that
to a smaller extent this is true of all interest.
Now, since the interest of a work of art lies in the fact that we have the

same kind of sympathy with a poetic representation as with reality, it is obvious
that the representation must deceive us for the moment; and this it can do only
by its truth. But truth is an element in perfect art. A picture, a poem, should be as
true as nature itself; but at the same time it should lay stress on whatever forms
the unique character of its subject by drawing out all its essential manifestations,
and by rejecting everything that is unessential and accidental. The picture or the
poem will thus emphasize its idea, and give us that ideal truth which is superior
to nature.
Truth, then, forms the point that is common both to interest and beauty in a
work of art, as it is its truth which produces the illusion. The fact that the truth of
which I speak is ideal truth might, indeed, be detrimental to the illusion, since it
is just here that we have the general difference between poetry and reality, art
and nature. But since it is possible for reality to coincide with the ideal, it is not
actually necessary that this difference should destroy the illusion. In the case of
fine arts there is, in the range of the means which art adopts, a certain limit, and
beyond it illusion is impossible. Sculpture, that is to say, gives us mere
colourless form; its figures are without eyes and without movement; and
painting provides us with no more than a single view, enclosed within strict
limits, which separate the picture from the adjacent reality. Here, then, there is
no room for illusion, and consequently none for that interest or sympathy which
resembles the interest we have in reality; the will is at once excluded, and the
object alone is presented to us in a manner that frees it from any personal
concern.
It is a highly remarkable fact that a spurious kind of fine art oversteps these
limits, produces an illusion of reality, and arouses our interest; but at the same
time it destroys the effect which fine art produces, and serves as nothing but a
mere means of exhibiting the beautiful, that is, of communicating a knowledge
of the ideas which it embodies. I refer to waxwork. Here, we might say, is the
dividing line which separates it from the province of fine art. When waxwork is
properly executed, it produces a perfect illusion; but for that very reason we
approach a wax figure as we approach a real man, who, as such, is for the
moment an object presented to our will. That is to say, he is an object of interest;
he arouses the will, and consequently stills the intellect. We come up to a wax
figure with the same reserve and caution as a real man would inspire in us: our
will is excited; it waits to see whether he is going to be friendly to us, or the
reverse, fly from us, or attack us; in a word, it expects some action of him. But
as the figure, nevertheless, shows no sign of life, it produces the impression
which is so very disagreeable, namely, of a corpse. This is a case where the
interest is of the most complete kind, and yet where there is no work of art at all.

In other words, interest is not in itself a real end of art.
The same truth is illustrated by the fact that even in poetry it is only the
dramatic and descriptive kind to which interest attaches; for if interest were, with
beauty, the aim of art, poetry of the lyrical kind would, for that very reason, not
take half so great a position as the other two.
In the second place, if interest were a means in the production of beauty,
every interesting work would also be beautiful. That, however, is by no means
the case. A drama or a novel may often attract us by its interest, and yet be so
utterly deficient in any kind of beauty that we are afterwards ashamed of having
wasted our time on it. This applies to many a drama which gives no true picture
of the real life of man; which contains characters very superficially drawn, or so
distorted as to be actual monstrosities, such as are not to be found in nature; but
the course of events and the play of the action are so intricate, and we feel so
much for the hero in the situation in which he is placed, that we are not content
until we see the knot untangled and the hero rescued. The action is so cleverly
governed and guided in its course that we remain in a state of constant curiosity
as to what is going to happen, and we are utterly unable to form a guess; so that
between eagerness and surprise our interest is kept active; and as we are
pleasantly entertained, we do not notice the lapse of time. Most of Kotzebue's
plays are of this character. For the mob this is the right thing: it looks for
amusement, something to pass the time, not for intellectual perception. Beauty is
an affair of such perception; hence sensibility to beauty varies as much as the
intellectual faculties themselves. For the inner truth of a representation, and its
correspondence with the real nature of humanity, the mob has no sense at all.
What is flat and superficial it can grasp, but the depths of human nature are
opened to it in vain.
It is also to be observed that dramatic representations which depend for
their value on their interest lose by repetition, because they are no longer able to
arouse curiosity as to their course, since it is already known. To see them often,
makes them stale and tedious. On the other hand, works of which the value lies
in their beauty gain by repetition, as they are then more and more understood.
Most novels are on the same footing as dramatic representations of this
character. They are creatures of the same sort of imagination as we see in the
story-teller of Venice and Naples, who lays a hat on the ground and waits until
an audience is assembled. Then he spins a tale which so captivates his hearers
that, when he gets to the catastrophe, he makes a round of the crowd, hat in
hand, for contributions, without the least fear that his hearers will slip away.
Similar story-tellers ply their trade in this country, though in a less direct
fashion. They do it through the agency of publishers and circulating libraries.

Thus they can avoid going about in rags, like their colleagues elsewhere; they
can offer the children of their imagination to the public under the title of novels,
short stories, romantic poems, fairy tales, and so on; and the public, in a
dressing-gown by the fireside, sits down more at its ease, but also with a greater
amount of patience, to the enjoyment of the interest which they provide.
How very little aesthetic value there generally is in productions of this sort
is well known; and yet it cannot be denied that many of them are interesting; or
else how could they be so popular?
We see, then, in reply to our second question, that interest does not
necessarily involve beauty; and, conversely, it is true that beauty does not
necessarily involve interest. Significant characters may be represented, that open
up the depths of human nature, and it may all be expressed in actions and
sufferings of an exceptional kind, so that the real nature of humanity and the
world may stand forth in the picture in the clearest and most forcible lines; and
yet no high degree of interest may be excited in the course of events by the
continued progress of the action, or by the complexity and unexpected solution
of the plot. The immortal masterpieces of Shakespeare contain little that excites
interest; the action does not go forward in one straight line, but falters, as in
Hamlet, all through the play; or else it spreads out in breadth, as in The
Merchant of Venice, whereas length is the proper dimension of interest; or the
scenes hang loosely together, as in Henry IV. Thus it is that Shakespeare's
dramas produce no appreciable effect on the mob.
The dramatic requirement stated by Aristotle, and more particularly the
unity of action, have in view the interest of the piece rather than its artistic
beauty. It may be said, generally, that these requirements are drawn up in
accordance with the principle of sufficient reason to which I have referred
above. We know, however, that the idea, and, consequently, the beauty of a
work of art, exist only for the perceptive intelligence which has freed itself from
the domination of that principle. It is just here that we find the distinction
between interest and beauty; as it is obvious that interest is part and parcel of the
mental attitude which is governed by the principle, whereas beauty is always
beyond its range. The best and most striking refutation of the Aristotelian unities
is Manzoni's. It may be found in the preface to his dramas.
What is true of Shakespeare's dramatic works is true also of Goethe's. Even
Egmont makes little effect on the public, because it contains scarcely any
complication or development; and if Egmont fails, what are we to say of Tasso
or Iphigenia? That the Greek tragedians did not look to interest as a means of
working upon the public, is clear from the fact that the material of their
masterpieces was almost always known to every one: they selected events which

had often been treated dramatically before. This shows us how sensitive was the
Greek public to the beautiful, as it did not require the interest of unexpected
events and new stories to season its enjoyment.
Neither does the quality of interest often attach to masterpieces of
descriptive poetry. Father Homer lays the world and humanity before us in its
true nature, but he takes no trouble to attract our sympathy by a complexity of
circumstance, or to surprise us by unexpected entanglements. His pace is
lingering; he stops at every scene; he puts one picture after another tranquilly
before us, elaborating it with care. We experience no passionate emotion in
reading him; our demeanour is one of pure perceptive intelligence; he does not
arouse our will, but sings it to rest; and it costs us no effort to break off in our
reading, for we are not in condition of eager curiosity. This is all still more true
of Dante, whose work is not, in the proper sense of the word, an epic, but a
descriptive poem. The same thing may be said of the four immortal romances:
Don Quixote, Tristram Shandy, La Nouvelle Heloïse, and Wilhelm Meister. To
arouse our interest is by no means the chief aim of these works; in Tristram
Shandy the hero, even at the end of the book, is only eight years of age.
On the other hand, we must not venture to assert that the quality of interest
is not to be found in masterpieces of literature. We have it in Schiller's dramas in
an appreciable degree, and consequently they are popular; also in the Oedipus
Rex of Sophocles. Amongst masterpieces of description, we find it in Ariosto's
Orlando Furioso; nay, an example of a high degree of interest, bound up with the
beautiful, is afforded in an excellent novel by Walter Scott--The Heart of
Midlothian. This is the most interesting work of fiction that I know, where all the
effects due to interest, as I have given them generally in the preceding remarks,
may be most clearly observed. At the same time it is a very beautiful romance
throughout; it shows the most varied pictures of life, drawn with striking truth;
and it exhibits highly different characters with great justice and fidelity.
Interest, then, is certainly compatible with beauty. That was our third
question. Nevertheless, a comparatively small admixture of the element of
interest may well be found to be most advantageous as far as beauty is
concerned; for beauty is and remains the end of art. Beauty is in twofold
opposition with interest; firstly, because it lies in the perception of the idea, and
such perception takes its object entirely out of the range of the forms enunciated
by the principle of sufficient reason; whereas interest has its sphere mainly in
circumstance, and it is out of this principle that the complexity of circumstance
arises. Secondly, interest works by exciting the will; whereas beauty exists only
for the pure perceptive intelligence, which has no will. However, with dramatic
and descriptive literature an admixture of interest is necessary, just as a volatile

and gaseous substance requires a material basis if it is to be preserved and
transferred. The admixture is necessary, partly, indeed, because interest is itself
created by the events which have to be devised in order to set the characters in
motion; partly because our minds would be weary of watching scene after scene
if they had no concern for us, or of passing from one significant picture to
another if we were not drawn on by some secret thread. It is this that we call
interest; it is the sympathy which the event in itself forces us to feel, and which,
by riveting our attention, makes the mind obedient to the poet, and able to follow
him into all the parts of his story.
If the interest of a work of art is sufficient to achieve this result, it does all
that can be required of it; for its only service is to connect the pictures by which
the poet desires to communicate a knowledge of the idea, as if they were pearls,
and interest were the thread that holds them together, and makes an ornament out
of the whole. But interest is prejudicial to beauty as soon as it oversteps this
limit; and this is the case if we are so led away by the interest of a work that
whenever we come to any detailed description in a novel, or any lengthy
reflection on the part of a character in a drama, we grow impatient and want to
put spurs to our author, so that we may follow the development of events with
greater speed. Epic and dramatic writings, where beauty and interest are both
present in a high degree, may be compared to the working of a watch, where
interest is the spring which keeps all the wheels in motion. If it worked
unhindered, the watch would run down in a few minutes. Beauty, holding us in
the spell of description and reflection, is like the barrel which checks its
movement.
Or we may say that interest is the body of a poetic work, and beauty the
soul. In the epic and the drama, interest, as a necessary quality of the action, is
the matter; and beauty, the form that requires the matter in order to be visible.
PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.
In the moment when a great affliction overtakes us, we are hurt to find that
the world about us is unconcerned and goes its own way. As Goethe says in
Tasso, how easily it leaves us helpless and alone, and continues its course like
the sun and the moon and the other gods:
... die Welt, wie sie so leicht, Uns hülflos, einsam lässt, und ihren Weg, Wie
Sonn' und Mond und andre Götter geht.
Nay more! it is something intolerable that even we ourselves have to go on
with the mechanical round of our daily business, and that thousands of our own
actions are and must be unaffected by the pain that throbs within us. And so, to

restore the harmony between our outward doings and our inward feelings, we
storm and shout, and tear our hair, and stamp with pain or rage.
Our temperament is so despotic that we are not satisfied unless we draw
everything into our own life, and force all the world to sympathise with us. The
only way of achieving this would be to win the love of others, so that the
afflictions which oppress our own hearts might oppress theirs as well. Since that
is attended with some difficulty, we often choose the shorter way, and blab out
our burden of woe to people who do not care, and listen with curiosity, but
without sympathy, and much oftener with satisfaction.
Speech and the communication of thought, which, in their mutual relations,
are always attended by a slight impulse on the part of the will, are almost a
physical necessity. Sometimes, however, the lower animals entertain me much
more than the average man. For, in the first place, what can such a man say? It is
only conceptions, that is, the driest of ideas, that can be communicated by means
of words; and what sort of conceptions has the average man to communicate, if
he does not merely tell a story or give a report, neither of which makes
conversation? The greatest charm of conversation is the mimetic part of it,--the
character that is manifested, be it never so little. Take the best of men; how little
he can say of what goes on within him, since it is only conceptions that are
communicable; and yet a conversation with a clever man is one of the greatest of
pleasures.
It is not only that ordinary men have little to say, but what intellect they
have puts them in the way of concealing and distorting it; and it is the necessity
of practising this concealment that gives them such a pitiable character; so that
what they exhibit is not even the little that they have, but a mask and disguise.
The lower animals, which have no reason, can conceal nothing; they are
altogether naïve, and therefore very entertaining, if we have only an eye for the
kind of communications which they make. They speak not with words, but with
shape and structure, and manner of life, and the things they set about; they
express themselves, to an intelligent observer, in a very pleasing and entertaining
fashion. It is a varied life that is presented to him, and one that in its
manifestation is very different from his own; and yet essentially it is the same.
He sees it in its simple form, when reflection is excluded; for with the lower
animals life is lived wholly in and for the present moment: it is the present that
the animal grasps; it has no care, or at least no conscious care, for the morrow,
and no fear of death; and so it is wholly taken up with life and living.
*
The conversation among ordinary people, when it does not relate to any
special matter of fact, but takes a more general character, mostly consists in

hackneyed commonplaces, which they alternately repeat to each other with the
utmost complacency.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--This observation is in Schopenhauer's own
English.]
*
Some men can despise any blessing as soon as they cease to possess it;
others only when they have obtained it. The latter are the more unhappy, and the
nobler, of the two.
*
When the aching heart grieves no more over any particular object, but is
oppressed by life as a whole, it withdraws, as it were, into itself. There is here a
retreat and gradual extinction of the will, whereby the body, which is the
manifestation of the will, is slowly but surely undermined; and the individual
experiences a steady dissolution of his bonds,--a quiet presentiment of death.
Hence the heart which aches has a secret joy of its own; and it is this, I fancy,
which the English call "the joy of grief."
The pain that extends to life as a whole, and loosens our hold on it, is the
only pain that is really tragic. That which attaches to particular objects is a will
that is broken, but not resigned; it exhibits the struggle and inner contradiction of
the will and of life itself; and it is comic, be it never so violent. It is like the pain
of the miser at the loss of his hoard. Even though pain of the tragic kind
proceeds from a single definite object, it does not remain there; it takes the
separate affliction only as a symbol of life as a whole, and transfers it thither.
*
Vexation is the attitude of the individual as intelligence towards the check
imposed upon a strong manifestation of the individual as will. There are two
ways of avoiding it: either by repressing the violence of the will--in other words,
by virtue; or by keeping the intelligence from dwelling upon the check--in other
words, by Stoicism.
*
To win the favour of a very beautiful woman by one's personality alone is
perhaps a greater satisfaction to one's vanity than to anything else; for it is an
assurance that one's personality is an equivalent for the person that is treasured
and desired and defied above all others. Hence it is that despised love is so great
a pang, especially when it is associated with well-founded jealousy.
With this joy and this pain, it is probable that vanity is more largely
concerned than the senses, because it is only the things of the mind, and not
mere sensuality, that produce such violent convulsions. The lower animals are
familiar with lust, but not with the passionate pleasures and pains of love.

*
To be suddenly placed in a strange town or country where the manner of
life, possibly even the language, is very different from our own, is, at the first
moment, like stepping into cold water. We are brought into sudden contact with
a new temperature, and we feel a powerful and superior influence from without
which affects us uncomfortably. We find ourselves in a strange element, where
we cannot move with ease; and, over and above that, we have the feeling that
while everything strikes us as strange, we ourselves strike others in the same
way. But as soon as we are a little composed and reconciled to our surroundings,
as soon as we have appropriated some of its temperature, we feel an
extraordinary sense of satisfaction, as in bathing in cool water; we assimilate
ourselves to the new element, and cease to have any necessary pre-occupation
with our person. We devote our attention undisturbed to our environment, to
which we now feel ourselves superior by being able to view it in an objective
and disinterested fashion, instead of being oppressed by it, as before.
*
When we are on a journey, and all kinds of remarkable objects press
themselves on our attention, the intellectual food which we receive is often so
large in amount that we have no time for digestion; and we regret that the
impressions which succeed one another so quickly leave no permanent trace. But
at bottom it is the same with travelling as with reading. How often do we
complain that we cannot remember one thousandth part of what we read! In both
cases, however, we may console ourselves with the reflection that the things we
see and read make an impression on the mind before they are forgotten, and so
contribute to its formation and nurture; while that which we only remember does
no more than stuff it and puff it out, filling up its hollows with matter that will
always be strange to it, and leaving it in itself a blank.
*
It is the very many and varied forms in which human life is presented to us
on our travels that make them entertaining. But we never see more than its
outside, such as is everywhere open to public view and accessible to strangers.
On the other hand, human life on its inside, the heart and centre, where it lives
and moves and shows its character, and in particular that part of the inner side
which could be seen at home amongst our relatives, is not seen; we have
exchanged it for the outer side. This is why on our travels we see the world like a
painted landscape, with a very wide horizon, but no foreground; and why, in
time, we get tired of it.
*
One man is more concerned with the impression which he makes upon the

rest of mankind; another, with the impression which the rest of mankind makes
upon him. The disposition of the one is subjective; of the other, objective; the
one is, in the whole of his existence, more in the nature of an idea which is
merely presented; the other, more of the being who presents it.
*
A woman (with certain exceptions which need not be mentioned) will not
take the first step with a man; for in spite of all the beauty she may have, she
risks a refusal. A man may be ill in mind or body, or busy, or gloomy, and so not
care for advances; and a refusal would be a blow to her vanity. But as soon as he
takes the first step, and helps her over this danger, he stands on a footing of
equality with her, and will generally find her quite tractable.
*
The praise with which many men speak of their wives is really given to
their own judgment in selecting them. This arises, perhaps, from a feeling of the
truth of the saying, that a man shows what he is by the way in which he dies, and
by the choice of his wife.
*
If education or warning were of any avail, how could Seneca's pupil be a
Nero?
*
The Pythagorean[1] principle that like is known only by like is in many
respects a true one. It explains how it is that every man understands his fellow
only in so far as he resembles him, or, at least, is of a similar character. What
one man is quite sure of perceiving in another is that which is common to all,
namely, the vulgar, petty or mean elements of our nature; here every man has a
perfect understanding of his fellows; but the advantage which one man has over
another does not exist for the other, who, be the talents in question as
extraordinary as they may, will never see anything beyond what he possesses
himself, for the very good reason that this is all he wants to see. If there is
anything on which he is in doubt, it will give him a vague sense of fear, mixed
with pique; because it passes his comprehension, and therefore is uncongenial to
him.
[Footnote 1: See Porphyry, de Vita Pythagorae.]
This is why it is mind alone that understands mind; why works of genius
are wholly understood and valued only by a man of genius, and why it must
necessarily be a long time before they indirectly attract attention at the hands of
the crowd, for whom they will never, in any true sense, exist. This, too, is why
one man will look another in the face, with the impudent assurance that he will
never see anything but a miserable resemblance of himself; and this is just what

he will see, as he cannot grasp anything beyond it. Hence the bold way in which
one man will contradict another. Finally, it is for the same reason that great
superiority of mind isolates a man, and that those of high gifts keep themselves
aloof from the vulgar (and that means every one); for if they mingle with the
crowd, they can communicate only such parts of them as they share with the
crowd, and so make themselves common. Nay, even though they possess some
well-founded and authoritative reputation amongst the crowd, they are not long
in losing it, together with any personal weight it may give them, since all are
blind to the qualities on which it is based, but have their eyes open to anything
that is vulgar and common to themselves. They soon discover the truth of the
Arabian proverb: Joke with a slave, and he'll show you his heels.
It also follows that a man of high gifts, in his intercourse with others, must
always reflect that the best part of him is out of sight in the clouds; so that if he
desires to know accurately how much he can be to any one else, he has only to
consider how much the man in question is to him. This, as a rule, is precious
little; and therefore he is as uncongenial to the other, as the other to him.
*
Goethe says somewhere that man is not without a vein of veneration. To
satisfy this impulse to venerate, even in those who have no sense for what is
really worthy, substitutes are provided in the shape of princes and princely
families, nobles, titles, orders, and money-bags.
*
Vague longing and boredom are close akin.
*
When a man is dead, we envy him no more; and we only half envy him
when he is old.
*
Misanthropy and love of solitude are convertible ideas.
*
In chess, the object of the game, namely, to checkmate one's opponent, is of
arbitrary adoption; of the possible means of attaining it, there is a great number;
and according as we make a prudent use of them, we arrive at our goal. We enter
on the game of our own choice.
Nor is it otherwise with human life, only that here the entrance is not of our
choosing, but is forced on us; and the object, which is to live and exist, seems,
indeed, at times as though it were of arbitrary adoption, and that we could, if
necessary, relinquish it. Nevertheless it is, in the strict sense of the word, a
natural object; that is to say, we cannot relinquish it without giving up existence
itself. If we regard our existence as the work of some arbitrary power outside us,

we must, indeed, admire the cunning by which that creative mind has succeeded
in making us place so much value on an object which is only momentary and
must of necessity be laid aside very soon, and which we see, moreover, on
reflection, to be altogether vanity--in making, I say, this object so dear to us that
we eagerly exert all our strength in working at it; although we knew that as soon
as the game is over, the object will exist for us no longer, and that, on the whole,
we cannot say what it is that makes it so attractive. Nay, it seems to be an object
as arbitrarily adopted as that of checkmating our opponent's king; and,
nevertheless, we are always intent on the means of attaining it, and think and
brood over nothing else. It is clear that the reason of it is that our intellect is only
capable of looking outside, and has no power at all of looking within; and, since
this is so, we have come to the conclusion that we must make the best of it.
ON THE WISDOM OF LIFE: APHORISMS.
The simple Philistine believes that life is something infinite and
unconditioned, and tries to look upon it and live it as though it left nothing to be
desired. By method and principle the learned Philistine does the same: he
believes that his methods and his principles are unconditionally perfect and
objectively valid; so that as soon as he has found them, he has nothing to do but
apply them to circumstances, and then approve or condemn. But happiness and
truth are not to be seized in this fashion. It is phantoms of them alone that are
sent to us here, to stir us to action; the average man pursues the shadow of
happiness with unwearied labour; and the thinker, the shadow of truth; and both,
though phantoms are all they have, possess in them as much as they can grasp.
Life is a language in which certain truths are conveyed to us; could we learn
them in some other way, we should not live. Thus it is that wise sayings and
prudential maxims will never make up for the lack of experience, or be a
substitute for life itself. Still they are not to be despised; for they, too, are a part
of life; nay, they should be highly esteemed and regarded as the loose pages
which others have copied from the book of truth as it is imparted by the spirit of
the world. But they are pages which must needs be imperfect, and can never
replace the real living voice. Still less can this be so when we reflect that life, or
the book of truth, speaks differently to us all; like the apostles who preached at
Pentecost, and instructed the multitude, appearing to each man to speak in his
own tongue.
*
Recognise the truth in yourself, recognise yourself in the truth; and in the
same moment you will find, to your astonishment, that the home which you have

long been looking for in vain, which has filled your most ardent dreams, is there
in its entirety, with every detail of it true, in the very place where you stand. It is
there that your heaven touches your earth.
*
What makes us almost inevitably ridiculous is our serious way of treating
the passing moment, as though it necessarily had all the importance which it
seems to have. It is only a few great minds that are above this weakness, and,
instead of being laughed at, have come to laugh themselves.
*
The bright and good moments of our life ought to teach us how to act aright
when we are melancholy and dull and stupid, by preserving the memory of their
results; and the melancholy, dull, and stupid moments should teach us to be
modest when we are bright. For we generally value ourselves according to our
best and brightest moments; and those in which we are weak and dull and
miserable, we regard as no proper part of us. To remember them will teach us to
be modest, humble, and tolerant.
Mark my words once for all, my dear friend, and be clever. Men are
entirely self-centred, and incapable of looking at things objectively. If you had a
dog and wanted to make him fond of you, and fancied that of your hundred rare
and excellent characteristics the mongrel would be sure to perceive one, and that
that would be sufficient to make him devoted to you body and soul--if, I say, you
fancied that, you would be a fool. Pat him, give him something to eat; and for
the rest, be what you please: he will not in the least care, but will be your faithful
and devoted dog. Now, believe me, it is just the same with men--exactly the
same. As Goethe says, man or dog, it is a miserable wretch:
Denn ein erbärmlicher Schuft, so wie der Mensch, ist der hund.
If you ask why these contemptible fellows are so lucky, it is just because, in
themselves and for themselves and to themselves, they are nothing at all. The
value which they possess is merely comparative; they exist only for others; they
are never more than means; they are never an end and object in themselves; they
are mere bait, set to catch others.[1] I do not admit that this rule is susceptible of
any exception, that is to say, complete exceptions. There are, it is true, men--
though they are sufficiently rare--who enjoy some subjective moments; nay,
there are perhaps some who for every hundred subjective moments enjoy a few
that are objective; but a higher state of perfection scarcely ever occurs. But do
not take yourself for an exception: examine your love, your friendship, and
consider if your objective judgments are not mostly subjective judgments in
disguise; consider if you duly recognise the good qualities of a man who is not
fond of you. Then be tolerant: confound it! it's your duty. As you are all so self-

centred, recognise your own weakness. You know that you cannot like a man
who does not show himself friendly to you; you know that he cannot do so for
any length of time unless he likes you, and that he cannot like you unless you
show that you are friendly to him; then do it: your false friendliness will
gradually become a true one. Your own weakness and subjectivity must have
some illusion.
[Footnote 1: All this is very euphemistically expressed in the Sophoclean
verse:
(Greek: charis charin gar estin ha tiktous aei)]
This is really an à priori justification of politeness; but I could give a still
deeper reason for it.
*
Consider that chance, which, with error, its brother, and folly, its aunt, and
malice, its grandmother, rules in this world; which every year and every day, by
blows great and small, embitters the life of every son of earth, and yours too;
consider, I say, that it is to this wicked power that you owe your prosperity and
independence; for it gave you what it refused to many thousands, just to be able
to give it to individuals like you. Remembering all this, you will not behave as
though you had a right to the possession of its gifts; but you will perceive what a
capricious mistress it is that gives you her favours; and therefore when she takes
it into her head to deprive you of some or all of them, you will not make a great
fuss about her injustice; but you will recognise that what chance gave, chance
has taken away; if needs be, you will observe that this power is not quite so
favourable to you as she seemed to be hitherto. Why, she might have disposed
not only of what she gave you, but also of your honest and hard-earned gains.
But if chance still remains so favourable to you as to give you more than
almost all others whose path in life you may care to examine, oh! be happy; do
not struggle for the possession of her presents; employ them properly; look upon
them as property held from a capricious lord; use them wisely and well.
*
The Aristotelian principle of keeping the mean in all things is ill suited to
the moral law for which it was intended; but it may easily be the best general
rule of worldly wisdom, the best precept for a happy life. For life is so full of
uncertainty; there are on all sides so many discomforts, burdens, sufferings,
dangers, that a safe and happy voyage can be accomplished only by steering
carefully through the rocks. As a rule, the fear of the ills we know drive us into
the contrary ills; the pain of solitude, for example, drives us into society, and the
first society that comes; the discomforts of society drive us into solitude; we
exchange a forbidding demeanour for incautious confidence and so on. It is ever

the mark of folly to avoid one vice by rushing into its contrary:
Stulti dum vitant vitia in contraria currunt.
Or else we think that we shall find satisfaction in something, and spend all
our efforts on it; and thereby we omit to provide for the satisfaction of a hundred
other wishes which make themselves felt at their own time. One loss and
omission follows another, and there is no end to the misery.
[Greek: Maeden agan] and nil admirari are, therefore, excellent rules of
worldly wisdom.
*
We often find that people of great experience are the most frank and cordial
in their intercourse with complete strangers, in whom they have no interest
whatever. The reason of this is that men of experience know that it is almost
impossible for people who stand in any sort of mutual relation to be sincere and
open with one another; but that there is always more or less of a strain between
them, due to the fact that they are looking after their own interests, whether
immediate or remote. They regret the fact, but they know that it is so; hence they
leave their own people, rush into the arms of a complete stranger, and in happy
confidence open their hearts to him. Thus it is that monks and the like, who have
given up the world and are strangers to it, are such good people to turn to for
advice.
*
It is only by practising mutual restraint and self-denial that we can act and
talk with other people; and, therefore, if we have to converse at all, it can only be
with a feeling of resignation. For if we seek society, it is because we want fresh
impressions: these come from without, and are therefore foreign to ourselves. If
a man fails to perceive this, and, when he seeks the society of others, is
unwilling to practise resignation, and absolutely refuses to deny himself, nay,
demands that others, who are altogether different from himself, shall
nevertheless be just what he wants them to be for the moment, according to the
degree of education which he has reached, or according to his intellectual
powers or his mood--the man, I say, who does this, is in contradiction with
himself. For while he wants some one who shall be different from himself, and
wants him just because he is different, for the sake of society and fresh
influence, he nevertheless demands that this other individual shall precisely
resemble the imaginary creature who accords with his mood, and have no
thoughts but those which he has himself.
Women are very liable to subjectivity of this kind; but men are not free
from it either.
I observed once to Goethe, in complaining of the illusion and vanity of life,

that when a friend is with us we do not think the same of him as when he is
away. He replied: "Yes! because the absent friend is yourself, and he exists only
in your head; whereas the friend who is present has an individuality of his own,
and moves according to laws of his own, which cannot always be in accordance
with those which you form for yourself."
*
A good supply of resignation is of the first importance in providing for the
journey of life. It is a supply which we shall have to extract from disappointed
hopes; and the sooner we do it, the better for the rest of the journey.
*
How should a man be content so long as he fails to obtain complete unity in
his inmost being? For as long as two voices alternately speak in him, what is
right for one must be wrong for the other. Thus he is always complaining. But
has any man ever been completely at one with himself? Nay, is not the very
thought a contradiction?
That a man shall attain this inner unity is the impossible and inconsistent
pretension put forward by almost all philosophers.[1] For as a man it is natural to
him to be at war with himself as long as he lives. While he can be only one thing
thoroughly, he has the disposition to be everything else, and the inalienable
possibility of being it. If he has made his choice of one thing, all the other
possibilities are always open to him, and are constantly claiming to be realised;
and he has therefore to be continuously keeping them back, and to be
overpowering and killing them as long as he wants to be that one thing. For
example, if he wants to think only, and not act and do business, the disposition to
the latter is not thereby destroyed all at once; but as long as the thinker lives, he
has every hour to keep on killing the acting and pushing man that is within him;
always battling with himself, as though he were a monster whose head is no
sooner struck off than it grows again. In the same way, if he is resolved to be a
saint, he must kill himself so far as he is a being that enjoys and is given over to
pleasure; for such he remains as long as he lives. It is not once for all that he
must kill himself: he must keep on doing it all his life. If he has resolved upon
pleasure, whatever be the way in which it is to be obtained, his lifelong struggle
is with a being that desires to be pure and free and holy; for the disposition
remains, and he has to kill it every hour. And so on in everything, with infinite
modifications; it is now one side of him, and now the other, that conquers; he
himself is the battlefield. If one side of him is continually conquering, the other
is continually struggling; for its life is bound up with his own, and, as a man, he
is the possibility of many contradictions.
[Footnote 1: Audacter licet profitearis, summum bonum esse anímí

concordian.--Seneca.]
How is inner unity even possible under such circumstances? It exists
neither in the saint nor in the sinner; or rather, the truth is that no man is wholly
one or the other. For it is men they have to be; that is, luckless beings, fighters
and gladiators in the arena of life.
To be sure, the best thing he can do is to recognise which part of him smarts
the most under defeat, and let it always gain the victory. This he will always be
able to do by the use of his reason, which is an ever-present fund of ideas. Let
him resolve of his own free will to undergo the pain which the defeat of the other
part involves. This is character. For the battle of life cannot be waged free from
all pain; it cannot come to an end without bloodshed; and in any case a man must
suffer pain, for he is the conquered as well as the conqueror. Haec est vivendi
conditio.
*
The clever man, when he converses, will think less of what he is saying that
of the person with whom he is speaking; for then he is sure to say nothing which
he will afterwards regret; he is sure not to lay himself open, nor to commit an
indiscretion. But his conversation will never be particularly interesting.
An intellectual man readily does the opposite, and with him the person with
whom he converses is often no more than the mere occasion of a monologue;
and it often happens that the other then makes up for his subordinate rôle by
lying in wait for the man of intellect, and drawing his secrets out of him.
*
Nothing betrays less knowledge of humanity than to suppose that, if a man
has a great many friends, it is a proof of merit and intrinsic value: as though men
gave their friendship according to value and merit! as though they were not,
rather, just like dogs, which love the person that pats them and gives them bits of
meat, and never trouble themselves about anything else! The man who
understands how to pat his fellows best, though they be the nastiest brutes,--
that's the man who has many friends.
It is the converse that is true. Men of great intellectual worth, or, still more,
men of genius, can have only very few friends; for their clear eye soon discovers
all defects, and their sense of rectitude is always being outraged afresh by the
extent and the horror of them. It is only extreme necessity that can compel such
men not to betray their feelings, or even to stroke the defects as if they were
beautiful additions. Personal love (for we are not speaking of the reverence
which is gained by authority) cannot be won by a man of genius, unless the gods
have endowed him with an indestructible cheerfulness of temper, a glance that
makes the world look beautiful, or unless he has succeeded by degrees in taking

men exactly as they are; that is to say, in making a fool of the fools, as is right
and proper. On the heights we must expect to be solitary.
*
Our constant discontent is for the most part rooted in the impulse of self-
preservation. This passes into a kind of selfishness, and makes a duty out of the
maxim that we should always fix our minds upon what we lack, so that we may
endeavour to procure it. Thus it is that we are always intent on finding out what
we want, and on thinking of it; but that maxim allows us to overlook undisturbed
the things which we already possess; and so, as soon as we have obtained
anything, we give it much less attention than before. We seldom think of what
we have, but always of what we lack.
This maxim of egoism, which has, indeed, its advantages in procuring the
means to the end in view, itself concurrently destroys the ultimate end, namely,
contentment; like the bear in the fable that throws a stone at the hermit to kill the
fly on his nose. We ought to wait until need and privation announce themselves,
instead of looking for them. Minds that are naturally content do this, while
hypochondrists do the reverse.
*
A man's nature is in harmony with itself when he desires to be nothing but
what he is; that is to say, when he has attained by experience a knowledge of his
strength and of his weakness, and makes use of the one and conceals the other,
instead of playing with false coin, and trying to show a strength which he does
not possess. It is a harmony which produces an agreeable and rational character;
and for the simple reason that everything which makes the man and gives him
his mental and physical qualities is nothing but the manifestation of his will; is,
in fact, what he wills. Therefore it is the greatest of all inconsistencies to wish to
be other than we are.
*
People of a strange and curious temperament can be happy only under
strange circumstances, such as suit their nature, in the same way as ordinary
circumstances suit the ordinary man; and such circumstances can arise only if, in
some extraordinary way, they happen to meet with strange people of a character
different indeed, but still exactly suited to their own. That is why men of rare or
strange qualities are seldom happy.
*
All this pleasure is derived from the use and consciousness of power; and
the greatest of pains that a man can feel is to perceive that his powers fail just
when he wants to use them. Therefore it will be advantageous for every man to
discover what powers he possesses, and what powers he lacks. Let him, then,

develop the powers in which he is pre-eminent, and make a strong use of them;
let him pursue the path where they will avail him; and even though he has to
conquer his inclinations, let him avoid the path where such powers are requisite
as he possesses only in a low degree. In this way he will often have a pleasant
consciousness of strength, and seldom a painful consciousness of weakness; and
it will go well with him. But if he lets himself be drawn into efforts demanding a
kind of strength quite different from that in which he is pre-eminent, he will
experience humiliation; and this is perhaps the most painful feeling with which a
man can be afflicted.
Yet there are two sides to everything. The man who has insufficient self-
confidence in a sphere where he has little power, and is never ready to make a
venture, will on the one hand not even learn how to use the little power that he
has; and on the other, in a sphere in which he would at least be able to achieve
something, there will be a complete absence of effort, and consequently of
pleasure. This is always hard to bear; for a man can never draw a complete blank
in any department of human welfare without feeling some pain.
*
As a child, one has no conception of the inexorable character of the laws of
nature, and of the stubborn way in which everything persists in remaining what it
is. The child believes that even lifeless things are disposed to yield to it; perhaps
because it feels itself one with nature, or, from mere unacquaintance with the
world, believes that nature is disposed to be friendly. Thus it was that when I
was a child, and had thrown my shoe into a large vessel full of milk, I was
discovered entreating the shoe to jump out. Nor is a child on its guard against
animals until it learns that they are ill-natured and spiteful. But not before we
have gained mature experience do we recognise that human character is
unalterable; that no entreaty, or representation, or example, or benefit, will bring
a man to give up his ways; but that, on the contrary, every man is compelled to
follow his own mode of acting and thinking, with the necessity of a law of
nature; and that, however we take him, he always remains the same. It is only
after we have obtained a clear and profound knowledge of this fact that we give
up trying to persuade people, or to alter them and bring them round to our way
of thinking. We try to accommodate ourselves to theirs instead, so far as they are
indispensable to us, and to keep away from them so far as we cannot possibly
agree.
Ultimately we come to perceive that even in matters of mere intellect--
although its laws are the same for all, and the subject as opposed to the object of
thought does not really enter into individuality--there is, nevertheless, no
certainty that the whole truth of any matter can be communicated to any one, or

that any one can be persuaded or compelled to assent to it; because, as Bacon
says, intellectus humanus luminis sicci non est: the light of the human intellect is
coloured by interest and passion.
*
It is just because all happiness is of a negative character that, when we
succeed in being perfectly at our ease, we are not properly conscious of it.
Everything seems to pass us softly and gently, and hardly to touch us until the
moment is over; and then it is the positive feeling of something lacking that tells
us of the happiness which has vanished; it is then that we observe that we have
failed to hold it fast, and we suffer the pangs of self-reproach as well as of
privation.
*
Every happiness that a man enjoys, and almost every friendship that he
cherishes, rest upon illusion; for, as a rule, with increase of knowledge they are
bound to vanish. Nevertheless, here as elsewhere, a man should courageously
pursue truth, and never weary of striving to settle accounts with himself and the
world. No matter what happens to the right or to the left of him,--be it a
chimaera or fancy that makes him happy, let him take heart and go on, with no
fear of the desert which widens to his view. Of one thing only must he be quite
certain: that under no circumstances will he discover any lack of worth in
himself when the veil is raised; the sight of it would be the Gorgon that would
kill him. Therefore, if he wants to remain undeceived, let him in his inmost
being feel his own worth. For to feel the lack of it is not merely the greatest, but
also the only true affliction; all other sufferings of the mind may not only be
healed, but may be immediately relieved, by the secure consciousness of worth.
The man who is assured of it can sit down quietly under sufferings that would
otherwise bring him to despair; and though he has no pleasures, no joys and no
friends, he can rest in and on himself; so powerful is the comfort to be derived
from a vivid consciousness of this advantage; a comfort to be preferred to every
other earthly blessing. Contrarily, nothing in the world can relieve a man who
knows his own worthlessness; all that he can do is to conceal it by deceiving
people or deafening them with his noise; but neither expedient will serve him
very long.
*
We must always try to preserve large views. If we are arrested by details we
shall get confused, and see things awry. The success or the failure of the
moment, and the impression that they make, should count for nothing.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Schopenhauer, for some reason that is not
apparent, wrote this remark in French.]

*
How difficult it is to learn to understand oneself, and clearly to recognise
what it is that one wants before anything else; what it is, therefore, that is most
immediately necessary to our happiness; then what comes next; and what takes
the third and the fourth place, and so on.
Yet, without this knowledge, our life is planless, like a captain without a
compass.
*
The sublime melancholy which leads us to cherish a lively conviction of the
worthlessness of everything of all pleasures and of all mankind, and therefore to
long for nothing, but to feel that life is merely a burden which must be borne to
an end that cannot be very distant, is a much happier state of mind than any
condition of desire, which, be it never so cheerful, would have us place a value
on the illusions of the world, and strive to attain them.
This is a fact which we learn from experience; and it is clear, à priori, that
one of these is a condition of illusion, and the other of knowledge.
Whether it is better to marry or not to marry is a question which in very
many cases amounts to this: Are the cares of love more endurable than the
anxieties of a livelihood?
*
Marriage is a trap which nature sets for us. [1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Also in French.]
*
Poets and philosophers who are married men incur by that very fact the
suspicion that they are looking to their own welfare, and not to the interests of
science and art.
*
Habit is everything. Hence to be calm and unruffled is merely to anticipate
a habit; and it is a great advantage not to need to form it.
*
"Personality is the element of the greatest happiness." Since pain and
boredom are the two chief enemies of human happiness, nature has provided our
personality with a protection against both. We can ward off pain, which is more
often of the mind than of the body, by cheerfulness; and boredom by
intelligence. But neither of these is akin to the other; nay, in any high degree
they are perhaps incompatible. As Aristotle remarks, genius is allied to
melancholy; and people of very cheerful disposition are only intelligent on the
surface. The better, therefore, anyone is by nature armed against one of these
evils, the worse, as a rule, is he armed against the other.

There is no human life that is free from pain and boredom; and it is a
special favour on the part of fate if a man is chiefly exposed to the evil against
which nature has armed him the better; if fate, that is, sends a great deal of pain
where there is a very cheerful temper in which to bear it, and much leisure where
there is much intelligence, but not vice versâ. For if a man is intelligent, he feels
pain doubly or trebly; and a cheerful but unintellectual temper finds solitude and
unoccupied leisure altogether unendurable.
*
In the sphere of thought, absurdity and perversity remain the masters of this
world, and their dominion is suspended only for brief periods. Nor is it otherwise
in art; for there genuine work, seldom found and still more seldom appreciated,
is again and again driven out by dullness, insipidity, and affectation.
It is just the same in the sphere of action. Most men, says Bias, are bad.
Virtue is a stranger in this world; and boundless egoism, cunning and malice, are
always the order of the day. It is wrong to deceive the young on this point, for it
will only make them feel later on that their teachers were the first to deceive
them. If the object is to render the pupil a better man by telling him that others
are excellent, it fails; and it would be more to the purpose to say: Most men are
bad, it is for you to be better. In this way he would, at least, be sent out into the
world armed with a shrewd foresight, instead of having to be convinced by bitter
experience that his teachers were wrong.
All ignorance is dangerous, and most errors must be dearly paid. And good
luck must he have that carries unchastised an error in his head unto his death.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--This, again, is Schopenhauer's own
English.]
*
Every piece of success has a doubly beneficial effect upon us when, apart
from the special and material advantage which it brings it is accompanied by the
enlivening assurance that the world, fate, or the daemon within, does not mean
so badly with us, nor is so opposed to our prosperity as we had fancied; when, in
fine, it restores our courage to live.
Similarly, every misfortune or defeat has, in the contrary sense, an effect
that is doubly depressing.
*
If we were not all of us exaggeratedly interested in ourselves, life would be
so uninteresting that no one could endure it.
*
Everywhere in the world, and under all circumstances, it is only by force
that anything can be done; but power is mostly in bad hands, because baseness is

everywhere in a fearful majority.
*
Why should it be folly to be always intent on getting the greatest possible
enjoyment out of the moment, which is our only sure possession? Our whole life
is no more than a magnified present, and in itself as fleeting.
*
As a consequence of his individuality and the position in which he is
placed, everyone without exception lives in a certain state of limitation, both as
regards his ideas and the opinions which he forms. Another man is also limited,
though not in the same way; but should he succeed in comprehending the other's
limitation he can confuse and abash him, and put him to shame, by making him
feel what his limitation is, even though the other be far and away his superior.
Shrewd people often employ this circumstance to obtain a false and momentary
advantage.
*
The only genuine superiority is that of the mind and character; all other
kinds are fictitious, affected, false; and it is good to make them feel that it is so
when they try to show off before the superiority that is true.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--In the original this also is in French.]
*
All the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players.
Exactly! Independently of what a man really is in himself, he has a part to
play, which fate has imposed upon him from without, by determining his rank,
education, and circumstances. The most immediate application of this truth
appears to me to be that in life, as on the stage, we must distinguish between the
actor and his part; distinguish, that is, the man in himself from his position and
reputation--- from the part which rank and circumstances have imposed upon
him. How often it is that the worst actor plays the king, and the best the beggar!
This may happen in life, too; and a man must be very crude to confuse the actor
with his part.
*
Our life is so poor that none of the treasures of the world can make it rich;
for the sources of enjoyment are soon found to be all very scanty, and it is in
vain that we look for one that will always flow. Therefore, as regards our own
welfare, there are only two ways in which we can use wealth. We can either
spend it in ostentatious pomp, and feed on the cheap respect which our
imaginary glory will bring us from the infatuated crowd; or, by avoiding all
expenditure that will do us no good, we can let our wealth grow, so that we may
have a bulwark against misfortune and want that shall be stronger and better

every day; in view of the fact that life, though it has few delights, is rich in evils.
*
It is just because our real and inmost being is will that it is only by its
exercise that we can attain a vivid consciousness of existence, although this is
almost always attended by pain. Hence it is that existence is essentially painful,
and that many persons for whose wants full provision is made arrange their day
in accordance with extremely regular, monotonous, and definite habits. By this
means they avoid all the pain which the movement of the will produces; but, on
the other hand, their whole existence becomes a series of scenes and pictures that
mean nothing. They are hardly aware that they exist. Nevertheless, it is the best
way of settling accounts with life, so long as there is sufficient change to prevent
an excessive feeling of boredom. It is much better still if the Muses give a man
some worthy occupation, so that the pictures which fill his consciousness have
some meaning, and yet not a meaning that can be brought into any relation with
his will.
*
A man is wise only on condition of living in a world full of fools.
GENIUS AND VIRTUE.
When I think, it is the spirit of the world which is striving to express its
thought; it is nature which is trying to know and fathom itself. It is not the
thoughts of some other mind, which I am endeavouring to trace; but it is I who
transform that which exists into something which is known and thought, and
would otherwise neither come into being nor continue in it.
In the realm of physics it was held for thousands of years to be a fact
beyond question that water was a simple and consequently an original element.
In the same way in the realm of metaphysics it was held for a still longer period
that the ego was a simple and consequently an indestructible entity. I have
shown, however, that it is composed of two heterogeneous parts, namely, the
Will, which is metaphysical in its character, a thing in itself, and the knowing
subject, which is physical and a mere phenomenon.
Let me illustrate what I mean. Take any large, massive, heavy building: this
hard, ponderous body that fills so much space exists, I tell you, only in the soft
pulp of the brain. There alone, in the human brain, has it any being. Unless you
understand this, you can go no further.
Truly it is the world itself that is a miracle; the world of material bodies. I
looked at two of them. Both were heavy, symmetrical, and beautiful. One was a
jasper vase with golden rim and golden handles; the other was an organism, an

animal, a man. When I had sufficiently admired their exterior, I asked my
attendant genius to allow me to examine the inside of them; and I did so. In the
vase I found nothing but the force of gravity and a certain obscure desire, which
took the form of chemical affinity. But when I entered into the other--how shall I
express my astonishment at what I saw? It is more incredible than all the fairy
tales and fables that were ever conceived. Nevertheless, I shall try to describe it,
even at the risk of finding no credence for my tale.
In this second thing, or rather in the upper end of it, called the head, which
on its exterior side looks like anything else--a body in space, heavy, and so on--I
found no less an object than the whole world itself, together with the whole of
the space in which all of it exists, and the whole of the time in which all of it
moves, and finally everything that fills both time and space in all its variegated
and infinite character; nay, strangest sight of all, I found myself walking about in
it! It was no picture that I saw; it was no peep-show, but reality itself. This it is
that is really and truly to be found in a thing which is no bigger than a cabbage,
and which, on occasion, an executioner might strike off at a blow, and suddenly
smother that world in darkness and night. The world, I say, would vanish, did
not heads grow like mushrooms, and were there not always plenty of them ready
to snatch it up as it is sinking down into nothing, and keep it going like a ball.
This world is an idea which they all have in common, and they express the
community of their thought by the word "objectivity."
In the face of this vision I felt as if I were Ardschuna when Krishna
appeared to him in his true majesty, with his hundred thousand arms and eyes
and mouths.
When I see a wide landscape, and realise that it arises by the operation of
the functions of my brain, that is to say, of time, space, and casuality, on certain
spots which have gathered on my retina, I feel that I carry it within me. I have an
extraordinarily clear consciousness of the identity of my own being with that of
the external world.
Nothing provides so vivid an illustration of this identity as a dream. For in a
dream other people appear to be totally distinct from us, and to possess the most
perfect objectivity, and a nature which is quite different from ours, and which
often puzzles, surprises, astonishes, or terrifies us; and yet it is all our own self.
It is even so with the will, which sustains the whole of the external world and
gives it life; it is the same will that is in ourselves, and it is there alone that we
are immediately conscious of it. But it is the intellect, in ourselves and in others,
which makes all these miracles possible; for it is the intellect which everywhere
divides actual being into subject and object; it is a hall of phantasmagorical
mystery, inexpressibly marvellous, incomparably magical.

The difference in degree of mental power which sets so wide a gulf
between the genius and the ordinary mortal rests, it is true, upon nothing else
than a more or less perfect development of the cerebral system. But it is this very
difference which is so important, because the whole of the real world in which
we live and move possesses an existence only in relation to this cerebral system.
Accordingly, the difference between a genius and an ordinary man is a total
diversity of world and existence. The difference between man and the lower
animals may be similarly explained.
When Momus was said to ask for a window in the breast, it was an
allegorical joke, and we cannot even imagine such a contrivance to be a
possibility; but it would be quite possible to imagine that the skull and its
integuments were transparent, and then, good heavens! what differences should
we see in the size, the form, the quality, the movement of the brain! what
degrees of value! A great mind would inspire as much respect at first sight as
three stars on a man's breast, and what a miserable figure would be cut by many
a one who wore them!
Men of genius and intellect, and all those whose mental and theoretical
qualities are far more developed than their moral and practical qualities--men, in
a word, who have more mind than character--are often not only awkward and
ridiculous in matters of daily life, as has been observed by Plato in the seventh
book of the Republic, and portrayed by Goethe in his Tasso; but they are often,
from a moral point of view, weak and contemptible creatures as well; nay, they
might almost be called bad men. Of this Rousseau has given us genuine
examples. Nevertheless, that better consciousness which is the source of all
virtue is often stronger in them than in many of those whose actions are nobler
than their thoughts; nay, it may be said that those who think nobly have a better
acquaintance with virtue, while the others make a better practice of it. Full of
zeal for the good and for the beautiful, they would fain fly up to heaven in a
straight line; but the grosser elements of this earth oppose their flight, and they
sink back again. They are like born artists, who have no knowledge of technique,
or find that the marble is too hard for their fingers. Many a man who has much
less enthusiasm for the good, and a far shallower acquaintance with its depths,
makes a better thing of it in practice; he looks down upon the noble thinkers with
contempt, and he has a right to do it; nevertheless, he does not understand them,
and they despise him in their turn, and not unjustly. They are to blame; for every
living man has, by the fact of his living, signed the conditions of life; but they
are still more to be pitied. They achieve their redemption, not on the way of
virtue, but on a path of their own; and they are saved, not by works, but by faith.
Men of no genius whatever cannot bear solitude: they take no pleasure in

the contemplation of nature and the world. This arises from the fact that they
never lose sight of their own will, and therefore they see nothing of the objects
of the world but the bearing of such objects upon their will and person. With
objects which have no such bearing there sounds within them a constant note: It
is nothing to me, which is the fundamental base in all their music. Thus all
things seem to them to wear a bleak, gloomy, strange, hostile aspect. It is only
for their will that they seem to have any perceptive faculties at all; and it is, in
fact, only a moral and not a theoretical tendency, only a moral and not an
intellectual value, that their life possesses. The lower animals bend their heads to
the ground, because all that they want to see is what touches their welfare, and
they can never come to contemplate things from a really objective point of view.
It is very seldom that unintellectual men make a true use of their erect position,
and then it is only when they are moved by some intellectual influence outside
them.
The man of intellect or genius, on the other hand, has more of the character
of the eternal subject that knows, than of the finite subject that wills; his
knowledge is not quite engrossed and captivated by his will, but passes beyond
it; he is the son, not of the bondwoman, but of the free. It is not only a moral but
also a theoretical tendency that is evinced in his life; nay, it might perhaps be
said that to a certain extent he is beyond morality. Of great villainy he is totally
incapable; and his conscience is less oppressed by ordinary sin than the
conscience of the ordinary man, because life, as it were, is a game, and he sees
through it.
The relation between genius and virtue is determined by the following
considerations. Vice is an impulse of the will so violent in its demands that it
affirms its own life by denying the life of others. The only kind of knowledge
that is useful to the will is the knowledge that a given effect is produced by a
certain cause. Genius itself is a kind of knowledge, namely, of ideas; and it is a
knowledge which is unconcerned with any principle of causation. The man who
is devoted to knowledge of this character is not employed in the business of the
will. Nay, every man who is devoted to the purely objective contemplation of the
world (and it is this that is meant by the knowledge of ideas) completely loses
sight of his will and its objects, and pays no further regard to the interests of his
own person, but becomes a pure intelligence free of any admixture of will.
Where, then, devotion to the intellect predominates over concern for the
will and its objects, it shows that the man's will is not the principal element in his
being, but that in proportion to his intelligence it is weak. Violent desire, which
is the root of all vice, never allows a man to arrive at the pure and disinterested
contemplation of the world, free from any relation to the will, such as constitutes

the quality of genius; but here the intelligence remains the constant slave of the
will.
Since genius consists in the perception of ideas, and men of genius
contemplate their object, it may be said that it is only the eye which is any real
evidence of genius. For the contemplative gaze has something steady and vivid
about it; and with the eye of genius it is often the case, as with Goethe, that the
white membrane over the pupil is visible. With violent, passionate men the same
thing may also happen, but it arises from a different cause, and may be easily
distinguished by the fact that the eyes roll. Men of no genius at all have no
interest in the idea expressed by an object, but only in the relations in which that
object stands to others, and finally to their own person. Thus it is that they never
indulge in contemplation, or are soon done with it, and rarely fix their eyes long
upon any object; and so their eyes do not wear the mark of genius which I have
described. Nay, the regular Philistine does the direct opposite of contemplating--
he spies. If he looks at anything it is to pry into it; as may be specially observed
when he screws up his eyes, which he frequently does, in order to see the clearer.
Certainly, no real man of genius ever does this, at least habitually, even though
he is short-sighted.
What I have said will sufficiently illustrate the conflict between genius and
vice. It may be, however, nay, it is often the case, that genius is attended by a
strong will; and as little as men of genius were ever consummate rascals, were
they ever perhaps perfect saints either.
Let me explain. Virtue is not exactly a positive weakness of the will; it is,
rather, an intentional restraint imposed upon its violence through a knowledge of
it in its inmost being as manifested in the world. This knowledge of the world,
the inmost being of which is communicable only in ideas, is common both to the
genius and to the saint. The distinction between the two is that the genius reveals
his knowledge by rendering it in some form of his own choice, and the product is
Art. For this the saint, as such, possesses no direct faculty; he makes an
immediate application of his knowledge to his own will, which is thus led into a
denial of the world. With the saint knowledge is only a means to an end, whereas
the genius remains at the stage of knowledge, and has his pleasure in it, and
reveals it by rendering what he knows in his art.
In the hierarchy of physical organisation, strength of will is attended by a
corresponding growth in the intelligent faculties. A high degree of knowledge,
such as exists in the genius, presupposes a powerful will, though, at the same
time, a will that is subordinate to the intellect. In other words, both the intellect
and the will are strong, but the intellect is the stronger of the two. Unless, as
happens in the case of the saint, the intellect is at once applied to the will, or, as

in the case of the artist, it finds its pleasures in a reproduction of itself, the will
remains untamed. Any strength that it may lose is due to the predominance of
pure objective intelligence which is concerned with the contemplation of ideas,
and is not, as in the case of the common or the bad man, wholly occupied with
the objects of the will. In the interval, when the genius is no longer engaged in
the contemplation of ideas, and his intelligence is again applied to the will and
its objects, the will is re-awakened in all its strength. Thus it is that men of
genius often have very violent desires, and are addicted to sensual pleasure and
to anger. Great crimes, however, they do not commit; because, when the
opportunity of them offers, they recognise their idea, and see it very vividly and
clearly. Their intelligence is thus directed to the idea, and so gains the
predominance over the will, and turns its course, as with the saint; and the crime
is uncommitted.
The genius, then, always participates to some degree in the characteristics
of the saint, as he is a man of the same qualification; and, contrarily, the saint
always participates to some degree in the characteristics of the genius.
The good-natured character, which is common, is to be distinguished from
the saintly by the fact that it consists in a weakness of will, with a somewhat less
marked weakness of intellect. A lower degree of the knowledge of the world as
revealed in ideas here suffices to check and control a will that is weak in itself.
Genius and sanctity are far removed from good-nature, which is essentially weak
in all its manifestations.
Apart from all that I have said, so much at least is clear. What appears
under the forms of time, space, and casuality, and vanishes again, and in reality
is nothing, and reveals its nothingness by death--this vicious and fatal
appearance is the will. But what does not appear, and is no phenomenon, but
rather the noumenon; what makes appearance possible; what is not subject to the
principle of causation, and therefore has no vain or vanishing existence, but
abides for ever unchanged in the midst of a world full of suffering, like a ray of
light in a storm,--free, therefore, from all pain and fatality,--this, I say, is the
intelligence. The man who is more intelligence than will, is thereby delivered, in
respect of the greatest part of him, from nothingness and death; and such a man
is in his nature a genius.
By the very fact that he lives and works, the man who is endowed with
genius makes an entire sacrifice of himself in the interests of everyone.
Accordingly, he is free from the obligation to make a particular sacrifice for
individuals; and thus he can refuse many demands which others are rightly
required to meet. He suffers and achieves more than all the others.
The spring which moves the genius to elaborate his works is not fame, for

that is too uncertain a quality, and when it is seen at close quarters, of little
worth. No amount of fame will make up for the labour of attaining it:
Nulla est fama tuum par oequiparare laborem.
Nor is it the delight that a man has in his work; for that too is outweighed
by the effort which he has to make. It is, rather, an instinct sui generis; in virtue
of which the genius is driven to express what he sees and feels in some
permanent shape, without being conscious of any further motive.
It is manifest that in so far as it leads an individual to sacrifice himself for
his species, and to live more in the species than in himself, this impulse is
possessed of a certain resemblance with such modifications of the sexual
impulse as are peculiar to man. The modifications to which I refer are those that
confine this impulse to certain individuals of the other sex, whereby the interests
of the species are attained. The individuals who are actively affected by this
impulse may be said to sacrifice themselves for the species, by their passion for
each other, and the disadvantageous conditions thereby imposed upon them,--in
a word, by the institution of marriage. They may be said to be serving the
interests of the species rather than the interests of the individual.
The instinct of the genius does, in a higher fashion, for the idea, what
passionate love does for the will. In both cases there are peculiar pleasures and
peculiar pains reserved for the individuals who in this way serve the interests of
the species; and they live in a state of enhanced power.
The genius who decides once for all to live for the interests of the species in
the way which he chooses is neither fitted nor called upon to do it in the other. It
is a curious fact that the perpetuation of a man's name is effected in both ways.
In music the finest compositions are the most difficult to understand. They
are only for the trained intelligence. They consist of long movements, where it is
only after a labyrinthine maze that the fundamental note is recovered. It is just so
with genius; it is only after a course of struggle, and doubt, and error, and much
reflection and vacillation, that great minds attain their equilibrium. It is the
longest pendulum that makes the greatest swing. Little minds soon come to
terms with themselves and the world, and then fossilise; but the others flourish,
and are always alive and in motion.
The essence of genius is a measure of intellectual power far beyond that
which is required to serve the individual's will. But it is a measure of a merely
relative character, and it may be reached by lowering the degree of the will, as
well as by raising that of the intellect. There are men whose intellect
predominates over their will, and are yet not possessed of genius in any proper
sense. Their intellectual powers do, indeed, exceed the ordinary, though not to
any great extent, but their will is weak. They have no violent desires; and

therefore they are more concerned with mere knowledge than with the
satisfaction of any aims. Such men possess talent; they are intelligent, and at the
same time very contented and cheerful.
A clear, cheerful and reasonable mind, such as brings a man happiness, is
dependent on the relation established between his intellect and his will--a
relation in which the intellect is predominant. But genius and a great mind
depend on the relation between a man's intellect and that of other people--a
relation in which his intellect must exceed theirs, and at the same time his will
may also be proportionately stronger. That is the reason why genius and
happiness need not necessarily exist together.
When the individual is distraught by cares or pleasantry, or tortured by the
violence of his wishes and desires, the genius in him is enchained and cannot
move. It is only when care and desire are silent that the air is free enough for
genius to live in it. It is then that the bonds of matter are cast aside, and the pure
spirit--the pure, knowing subject--remains. Hence, if a man has any genius, let
him guard himself from pain, keep care at a distance, and limit his desires; but
those of them which he cannot suppress let him satisfy to the full. This is the
only way in which he will make the best use of his rare existence, to his own
pleasure and the world's profit.
To fight with need and care or desires, the satisfaction of which is refused
and forbidden, is good enough work for those who, were they free of would have
to fight with boredom, and so take to bad practices; but not for the man whose
time, if well used, will bear fruit for centuries to come. As Diderot says, he is not
merely a moral being.
Mechanical laws do not apply in the sphere of chemistry, nor do chemical
laws in the sphere in which organic life is kindled. In the same way, the rules
which avail for ordinary men will not do for the exceptions, nor will their
pleasures either.
It is a persistent, uninterrupted activity that constitutes the superior mind.
The object to which this activity is directed is a matter of subordinate
importance; it has no essential bearing on the superiority in question, but only on
the individual who possesses it. All that education can do is to determine the
direction which this activity shall take; and that is the reason why a man's nature
is so much more important than his education. For education is to natural faculty
what a wax nose is to a real one; or what the moon and the planets are to the sun.
In virtue of his education a man says, not what he thinks himself, but what others
have thought and he has learned as a matter of training; and what he does is not
what he wants, but what he has been accustomed to do.
The lower animals perform many intelligent functions much better than

man; for instance, the finding of their way back to the place from which they
came, the recognition of individuals, and so on. In the same way, there are many
occasions in real life to which the genius is incomparably less equal and fitted
than the ordinary man. Nay more: just as animals never commit a folly in the
strict sense of the word, so the average man is not exposed to folly in the same
degree as the genius.
The average man is wholly relegated to the sphere of being; the genius, on
the other hand, lives and moves chiefly in the sphere of knowledge. This gives
rise to a twofold distinction. In the first place, a man can be one thing only, but
he may know countless things, and thereby, to some extent, identify himself with
them, by participating in what Spinoza calls their esse objectivum. In the second
place, the world, as I have elsewhere observed, is fine enough in appearance, but
in reality dreadful; for torment is the condition of all life.
It follows from the first of these distinctions that the life of the average man
is essentially one of the greatest boredom; and thus we see the rich warring
against boredom with as much effort and as little respite as fall to the poor in
their struggle with need and adversity. And from the second of them it follows
that the life of the average man is overspread with a dull, turbid, uniform gravity;
whilst the brow of genius glows with mirth of a unique character, which,
although he has sorrows of his own more poignant than those of the average
man, nevertheless breaks out afresh, like the sun through clouds. It is when the
genius is overtaken by an affliction which affects others as well as himself, that
this quality in him is most in evidence; for then he is seen to be like man, who
alone can laugh, in comparison with the beast of the field, which lives out its life
grave and dull.
It is the curse of the genius that in the same measure in which others think
him great and worthy of admiration, he thinks them small and miserable
creatures. His whole life long he has to suppress this opinion; and, as a rule, they
suppress theirs as well. Meanwhile, he is condemned to live in a bleak world,
where he meets no equal, as it were an island where there are no inhabitants but
monkeys and parrots. Moreover, he is always troubled by the illusion that from a
distance a monkey looks like a man.
Vulgar people take a huge delight in the faults and follies of great men; and
great men are equally annoyed at being thus reminded of their kinship with
them.
The real dignity of a man of genius or great intellect, the trait which raises
him over others and makes him worthy of respect, is at bottom the fact, that the
only unsullied and innocent part of human nature, namely, the intellect, has the
upper hand in him? and prevails; whereas, in the other there is nothing but sinful

will, and just as much intellect as is requisite for guiding his steps,--- rarely any
more, very often somewhat less,--and of what use is it?
It seems to me that genius might have its root in a certain perfection and
vividness of the memory as it stretches back over the events of past life. For it is
only by dint of memory, which makes our life in the strict sense a complete
whole, that we attain a more profound and comprehensive understanding of it.
ON THE STUDY OF LATIN.
The abolition of Latin as the universal language of learned men, together
with the rise of that provincialism which attaches to national literatures, has been
a real misfortune for the cause of knowledge in Europe. For it was chiefly
through the medium of the Latin language that a learned public existed in
Europe at all--a public to which every book as it came out directly appealed. The
number of minds in the whole of Europe that are capable of thinking and judging
is small, as it is; but when the audience is broken up and severed by differences
of language, the good these minds can do is very much weakened. This is a great
disadvantage; but a second and worse one will follow, namely, that the ancient
languages will cease to be taught at all. The neglect of them is rapidly gaining
ground both in France and Germany.
If it should really come to this, then farewell, humanity! farewell, noble
taste and high thinking! The age of barbarism will return, in spite of railways,
telegraphs and balloons. We shall thus in the end lose one more advantage
possessed by all our ancestors. For Latin is not only a key to the knowledge of
Roman antiquity; its also directly opens up to us the Middle Age in every
country in Europe, and modern times as well, down to about the year 1750.
Erigena, for example, in the ninth century, John of Salisbury in the twelfth,
Raimond Lully in the thirteenth, with a hundred others, speak straight to us in
the very language that they naturally adopted in thinking of learned matters.
They thus come quite close to us even at this distance of time: we are in
direct contact with them, and really come to know them. How would it have
been if every one of them spoke in the language that was peculiar to his time and
country? We should not understand even the half of what they said. A real
intellectual contact with them would be impossible. We should see them like
shadows on the farthest horizon, or, may be, through the translator's telescope.
It was with an eye to the advantage of writing in Latin that Bacon, as he
himself expressly states, proceeded to translate his Essays into that language,
under the title Sermones fideles; at which work Hobbes assisted him.[1]

[Footnote 1: Cf. Thomae Hobbes vita: Carolopoli apud Eleutherium
Anglicum, 1681, p. 22.]
Here let me observe, by way of parenthesis, that when patriotism tries to
urge its claims in the domain of knowledge, it commits an offence which should
not be tolerated. For in those purely human questions which interest all men
alike, where truth, insight, beauty, should be of sole account, what can be more
impertinent than to let preference for the nation to which a man's precious self
happens to belong, affect the balance of judgment, and thus supply a reason for
doing violence to truth and being unjust to the great minds of a foreign country
in order to make much of the smaller minds of one's own! Still, there are writers
in every nation in Europe, who afford examples of this vulgar feeling. It is this
which led Yriarte to caricature them in the thirty-third of his charming Literary
Fables.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Tomas de Yriarte (1750-91), a Spanish
poet, and keeper of archives in the War Office at Madrid. His two best known
works are a didactic poem, entitled La Musica, and the Fables here quoted,
which satirize the peculiar foibles of literary men. They have been translated into
many languages; into English by Rockliffe (3rd edition, 1866). The fable in
question describes how, at a picnic of the animals, a discussion arose as to which
of them carried off the palm for superiority of talent. The praises of the ant, the
dog, the bee, and the parrot were sung in turn; but at last the ostrich stood up and
declared for the dromedary. Whereupon the dromedary stood up and declared for
the ostrich. No one could discover the reason for this mutual compliment. Was it
because both were such uncouth beasts, or had such long necks, or were neither
of them particularly clever or beautiful? or was it because each had a hump? No!
said the fox, you are all wrong. Don't you see they are both foreigners? Cannot
the same be said of many men of learning?]
In learning a language, the chief difficulty consists in making acquaintance
with every idea which it expresses, even though it should use words for which
there is no exact equivalent in the mother tongue; and this often happens. In
learning a new language a man has, as it were, to mark out in his mind the
boundaries of quite new spheres of ideas, with the result that spheres of ideas
arise where none were before. Thus he not only learns words, he gains ideas too.
This is nowhere so much the case as in learning ancient languages, for the
differences they present in their mode of expression as compared with modern
languages is greater than can be found amongst modern languages as compared
with one another. This is shown by the fact that in translating into Latin,
recourse must be had to quite other turns of phrase than are used in the original.
The thought that is to be translated has to be melted down and recast; in other

words, it must be analyzed and then recomposed. It is just this process which
makes the study of the ancient languages contribute so much to the education of
the mind.
It follows from this that a man's thought varies according to the language in
which he speaks. His ideas undergo a fresh modification, a different shading, as
it were, in the study of every new language. Hence an acquaintance with many
languages is not only of much indirect advantage, but it is also a direct means of
mental culture, in that it corrects and matures ideas by giving prominence to
their many-sided nature and their different varieties of meaning, as also that it
increases dexterity of thought; for in the process of learning many languages,
ideas become more and more independent of words. The ancient languages
effect this to a greater degree than the modern, in virtue of the difference to
which I have alluded.
From what I have said, it is obvious that to imitate the style of the ancients
in their own language, which is so very much superior to ours in point of
grammatical perfection, is the best way of preparing for a skillful and finished
expression of thought in the mother-tongue. Nay, if a man wants to be a great
writer, he must not omit to do this: just as, in the case of sculpture or painting,
the student must educate himself by copying the great masterpieces of the past,
before proceeding to original work. It is only by learning to write Latin that a
man comes to treat diction as an art. The material in this art is language, which
must therefore be handled with the greatest care and delicacy.
The result of such study is that a writer will pay keen attention to the
meaning and value of words, their order and connection, their grammatical
forms. He will learn how to weigh them with precision, and so become an expert
in the use of that precious instrument which is meant not only to express
valuable thought, but to preserve it as well. Further, he will learn to feel respect
for the language in which he writes and thus be saved from any attempt to
remodel it by arbitrary and capricious treatment. Without this schooling, a man's
writing may easily degenerate into mere chatter.
To be entirely ignorant of the Latin language is like being in a fine country
on a misty day. The horizon is extremely limited. Nothing can be seen clearly
except that which is quite close; a few steps beyond, everything is buried in
obscurity. But the Latinist has a wide view, embracing modern times, the Middle
Age and Antiquity; and his mental horizon is still further enlarged if he studies
Greek or even Sanscrit.
If a man knows no Latin, he belongs to the vulgar, even though he be a
great virtuoso on the electrical machine and have the base of hydrofluoric acid in
his crucible.

There is no better recreation for the mind than the study of the ancient
classics. Take any one of them into your hand, be it only for half an hour, and
you will feel yourself refreshed, relieved, purified, ennobled, strengthened; just
as though you had quenched your thirst at some pure spring. Is this the effect of
the old language and its perfect expression, or is it the greatness of the minds
whose works remain unharmed and unweakened by the lapse of a thousand
years? Perhaps both together. But this I know. If the threatened calamity should
ever come, and the ancient languages cease to be taught, a new literature will
arise, of such barbarous, shallow and worthless stuff as never was seen before.
ON MEN OF LEARNING.
When one sees the number and variety of institutions which exist for the
purposes of education, and the vast throng of scholars and masters, one might
fancy the human race to be very much concerned about truth and wisdom. But
here, too, appearances are deceptive. The masters teach in order to gain money,
and strive, not after wisdom, but the outward show and reputation of it; and the
scholars learn, not for the sake of knowledge and insight, but to be able to
chatter and give themselves airs. Every thirty years a new race comes into the
world--a youngster that knows nothing about anything, and after summarily
devouring in all haste the results of human knowledge as they have been
accumulated for thousands of years, aspires to be thought cleverer than the
whole of the past. For this purpose he goes to the University, and takes to
reading books--new books, as being of his own age and standing. Everything he
reads must be briefly put, must be new! he is new himself. Then he falls to and
criticises. And here I am not taking the slightest account of studies pursued for
the sole object of making a living.
Students, and learned persons of all sorts and every age, aim as a rule at
acquiring information rather than insight. They pique themselves upon knowing
about everything--stones, plants, battles, experiments, and all the books in
existence. It never occurs to them that information is only a means of insight,
and in itself of little or no value; that it is his way of thinking that makes a man a
philosopher. When I hear of these portents of learning and their imposing
erudition, I sometimes say to myself: Ah, how little they must have had to think
about, to have been able to read so much! And when I actually find it reported of
the elder Pliny that he was continually reading or being read to, at table, on a
journey, or in his bath, the question forces itself upon my mind, whether the man
was so very lacking in thought of his own that he had to have alien thought

incessantly instilled into him; as though he were a consumptive patient taking
jellies to keep himself alive. And neither his undiscerning credulity nor his
inexpressibly repulsive and barely intelligible style--which seems like of a man
taking notes, and very economical of paper--is of a kind to give me a high
opinion of his power of independent thought.
We have seen that much reading and learning is prejudicial to thinking for
oneself; and, in the same way, through much writing and teaching, a man loses
the habit of being quite clear, and therefore thorough, in regard to the things he
knows and understands; simply because he has left himself no time to acquire
clearness or thoroughness. And so, when clear knowledge fails him in his
utterances, he is forced to fill out the gaps with words and phrases. It is this, and
not the dryness of the subject-matter, that makes most books such tedious
reading. There is a saying that a good cook can make a palatable dish even out of
an old shoe; and a good writer can make the dryest things interesting.
With by far the largest number of learned men, knowledge is a means, not
an end. That is why they will never achieve any great work; because, to do that,
he who pursues knowledge must pursue it as an end, and treat everything else,
even existence itself, as only a means. For everything which a man fails to
pursue for its own sake is but half-pursued; and true excellence, no matter in
what sphere, can be attained only where the work has been produced for its own
sake alone, and not as a means to further ends.
And so, too, no one will ever succeed in doing anything really great and
original in the way of thought, who does not seek to acquire knowledge for
himself, and, making this the immediate object of his studies, decline to trouble
himself about the knowledge of others. But the average man of learning studies
for the purpose of being able to teach and write. His head is like a stomach and
intestines which let the food pass through them undigested. That is just why his
teaching and writing is of so little use. For it is not upon undigested refuse that
people can be nourished, but solely upon the milk which secretes from the very
blood itself.
The wig is the appropriate symbol of the man of learning, pure and simple.
It adorns the head with a copious quantity of false hair, in lack of one's own: just
as erudition means endowing it with a great mass of alien thought. This, to be
sure, does not clothe the head so well and naturally, nor is it so generally useful,
nor so suited for all purposes, nor so firmly rooted; nor when alien thought is
used up, can it be immediately replaced by more from the same source, as is the
case with that which springs from soil of one's own. So we find Sterne, in his
Tristram Shandy, boldly asserting that an ounce of a man's own wit is worth a
ton of other people's.

And in fact the most profound erudition is no more akin to genius than a
collection of dried plants in like Nature, with its constant flow of new life, ever
fresh, ever young, ever changing. There are no two things more opposed than the
childish naïveté of an ancient author and the learning of his commentator.
Dilettanti, dilettanti! This is the slighting way in which those who pursue
any branch of art or learning for the love and enjoyment of the thing,--per il loro
diletto, are spoken of by those who have taken it up for the sake of gain,
attracted solely by the prospect of money. This contempt of theirs comes from
the base belief that no man will seriously devote himself to a subject, unless he is
spurred on to it by want, hunger, or else some form of greed. The public is of the
same way of thinking; and hence its general respect for professionals and its
distrust of dilettanti. But the truth is that the dilettante treats his subject as an
end, whereas the professional, pure and simple, treats it merely as a means. He
alone will be really in earnest about a matter, who has a direct interest therein,
takes to it because he likes it, and pursues it con amore. It is these, and not
hirelings, that have always done the greatest work.
In the republic of letters it is as in other republics; favor is shown to the
plain man--he who goes his way in silence and does not set up to be cleverer
than others. But the abnormal man is looked upon as threatening danger; people
band together against him, and have, oh! such a majority on their side.
The condition of this republic is much like that of a small State in America,
where every man is intent only upon his own advantage, and seeks reputation
and power for himself, quite heedless of the general weal, which then goes to
ruin. So it is in the republic of letters; it is himself, and himself alone, that a man
puts forward, because he wants to gain fame. The only thing in which all agree is
in trying to keep down a really eminent man, if he should chance to show
himself, as one who would be a common peril. From this it is easy to see how it
fares with knowledge as a whole.
Between professors and independent men of learning there has always been
from of old a certain antagonism, which may perhaps be likened to that existing
been dogs and wolves. In virtue of their position, professors enjoy great facilities
for becoming known to their contemporaries. Contrarily, independent men of
learning enjoy, by their position, great facilities for becoming known to
posterity; to which it is necessary that, amongst other and much rarer gifts, a
man should have a certain leisure and freedom. As mankind takes a long time in
finding out on whom to bestow its attention, they may both work together side
by side.
He who holds a professorship may be said to receive his food in the stall;
and this is the best way with ruminant animals. But he who finds his food for

himself at the hands of Nature is better off in the open field.
Of human knowledge as a whole and in every branch of it, by far the largest
part exists nowhere but on paper,--I mean, in books, that paper memory of
mankind. Only a small part of it is at any given period really active in the minds
of particular persons. This is due, in the main, to the brevity and uncertainty of
life; but it also comes from the fact that men are lazy and bent on pleasure.
Every generation attains, on its hasty passage through existence, just so much of
human knowledge as it needs, and then soon disappears. Most men of learning
are very superficial. Then follows a new generation, full of hope, but ignorant,
and with everything to learn from the beginning. It seizes, in its turn, just so
much as it can grasp or find useful on its brief journey and then too goes its way.
How badly it would fare with human knowledge if it were not for the art of
writing and printing! This it is that makes libraries the only sure and lasting
memory of the human race, for its individual members have all of them but a
very limited and imperfect one. Hence most men of learning as are loth to have
their knowledge examined as merchants to lay bare their books.
Human knowledge extends on all sides farther than the eye can reach; and
of that which would be generally worth knowing, no one man can possess even
the thousandth part.
All branches of learning have thus been so much enlarged that he who
would "do something" has to pursue no more than one subject and disregard all
others. In his own subject he will then, it is true, be superior to the vulgar; but in
all else he will belong to it. If we add to this that neglect of the ancient
languages, which is now-a-days on the increase and is doing away with all
general education in the humanities--for a mere smattering of Latin and Greek is
of no use--we shall come to have men of learning who outside their own subject
display an ignorance truly bovine.
An exclusive specialist of this kind stands on a par with a workman in a
factory, whose whole life is spent in making one particular kind of screw, or
catch, or handle, for some particular instrument or machine, in which, indeed, he
attains incredible dexterity. The specialist may also be likened to a man who
lives in his own house and never leaves it. There he is perfectly familiar with
everything, every little step, corner, or board; much as Quasimodo in Victor
Hugo's Nôtre Dame knows the cathedral; but outside it, all is strange and
unknown.
For true culture in the humanities it is absolutely necessary that a man
should be many-sided and take large views; and for a man of learning in the
higher sense of the word, an extensive acquaintance with history is needful. He,
however, who wishes to be a complete philosopher, must gather into his head the

remotest ends of human knowledge: for where else could they ever come
together?
It is precisely minds of the first order that will never be specialists. For their
very nature is to make the whole of existence their problem; and this is a subject
upon which they will every one of them in some form provide mankind with a
new revelation. For he alone can deserve the name of genius who takes the All,
the Essential, the Universal, for the theme of his achievements; not he who
spends his life in explaining some special relation of things one to another.
ON CRITICISM.
The following brief remarks on the critical faculty are chiefly intended to
show that, for the most part, there is no such thing. It is a rara avis; almost as
rare, indeed, as the phoenix, which appears only once in five hundred years.
When we speak of taste--an expression not chosen with any regard for it--
we mean the discovery, or, it may be only the recognition, of what is right
aesthetically, apart from the guidance of any rule; and this, either because no
rule has as yet been extended to the matter in question, or else because, if
existing, it is unknown to the artist, or the critic, as the case may be. Instead of
taste, we might use the expression aesthetic sense, if this were not tautological.
The perceptive critical taste is, so to speak, the female analogue to the male
quality of productive talent or genius. Not capable of begetting great work itself,
it consists in a capacity of reception, that is to say, of recognizing as such what is
right, fit, beautiful, or the reverse; in other words, of discriminating the good
from the bad, of discovering and appreciating the one and condemning the other.
In appreciating a genius, criticism should not deal with the errors in his
productions or with the poorer of his works, and then proceed to rate him low; it
should attend only to the qualities in which he most excels. For in the sphere of
intellect, as in other spheres, weakness and perversity cleave so firmly to human
nature that even the most brilliant mind is not wholly and at all times free from
them. Hence the great errors to be found even in the works of the greatest men;
or as Horace puts it, quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.
That which distinguishes genius, and should be the standard for judging it,
is the height to which it is able to soar when it is in the proper mood and finds a
fitting occasion--a height always out of the reach of ordinary talent. And, in like
manner, it is a very dangerous thing to compare two great men of the same class;
for instance, two great poets, or musicians, or philosophers, or artists; because
injustice to the one or the other, at least for the moment, can hardly be avoided.

For in making a comparison of the kind the critic looks to some particular merit
of the one and at once discovers that it is absent in the other, who is thereby
disparaged. And then if the process is reversed, and the critic begins with the
latter and discovers his peculiar merit, which is quite of a different order from
that presented by the former, with whom it may be looked for in vain, the result
is that both of them suffer undue depreciation.
There are critics who severally think that it rests with each one of them
what shall be accounted good, and what bad. They all mistake their own toy-
trumpets for the trombones of fame.
A drug does not effect its purpose if the dose is too large; and it is the same
with censure and adverse criticism when it exceeds the measure of justice.
The disastrous thing for intellectual merit is that it must wait for those to
praise the good who have themselves produced nothing but what is bad; nay, it is
a primary misfortune that it has to receive its crown at the hands of the critical
power of mankind--a quality of which most men possess only the weak and
impotent semblance, so that the reality may be numbered amongst the rarest gifts
of nature. Hence La Bruyère's remark is, unhappily, as true as it is neat. Après
l'esprit de discernement, he says, ce qu'il y a au monde de plus rare, ce sont les
diamans et les perles. The spirit of discernment! the critical faculty! it is these
that are lacking. Men do not know how to distinguish the genuine from the false,
the corn from the chaff, gold from copper; or to perceive the wide gulf that
separates a genius from an ordinary man. Thus we have that bad state of things
described in an old-fashioned verse, which gives it as the lot of the great ones
here on earth to be recognized only when they are gone:
Es ist nun das Geschick der Grossen fiier auf Erden, Erst wann sie nicht
mehr sind; von uns erkannt zu werden.
When any genuine and excellent work makes its appearance, the chief
difficulty in its way is the amount of bad work it finds already in possession of
the field, and accepted as though it were good. And then if, after a long time, the
new comer really succeeds, by a hard struggle, in vindicating his place for
himself and winning reputation, he will soon encounter fresh difficulty from
some affected, dull, awkward imitator, whom people drag in, with the object of
calmly setting him up on the altar beside the genius; not seeing the difference
and really thinking that here they have to do with another great man. This is
what Yriarte means by the first lines of his twenty-eighth Fable, where he
declares that the ignorant rabble always sets equal value on the good and the
bad:
Siempre acostumbra hacer el vulgo necio De lo bueno y lo malo igual
aprecio.

So even Shakespeare's dramas had, immediately after his death, to give
place to those of Ben Jonson, Massinger, Beaumont and Fletcher, and to yield
the supremacy for a hundred years. So Kant's serious philosophy was crowded
out by the nonsense of Fichte, Schelling, Jacobi, Hegel. And even in a sphere
accessible to all, we have seen unworthy imitators quickly diverting public
attention from the incomparable Walter Scott. For, say what you will, the public
has no sense for excellence, and therefore no notion how very rare it is to find
men really capable of doing anything great in poetry, philosophy, or art, or that
their works are alone worthy of exclusive attention. The dabblers, whether in
verse or in any other high sphere, should be every day unsparingly reminded that
neither gods, nor men, nor booksellers have pardoned their mediocrity:
mediocribus esse poetis Non homines, non Dî, non concessere columnae.[1]
[Footnote 1: Horace, Ars Poetica, 372.]
Are they not the weeds that prevent the corn coming up, so that they may
cover all the ground themselves? And then there happens that which has been
well and freshly described by the lamented Feuchtersleben,[1] who died so
young: how people cry out in their haste that nothing is being done, while all the
while great work is quietly growing to maturity; and then, when it appears, it is
not seen or heard in the clamor, but goes its way silently, in modest grief:
"Ist doch"--rufen sie vermessen-- Nichts im Werke, nichts gethan!" Und das
Grosse, reift indessen Still heran.
Es ersheint nun: niemand sieht es, Niemand hört es im Geschrei Mit
bescheid'ner Trauer zieht es Still vorbei.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Ernst Freiherr von Feuchtersleben (1806-
49), an Austrian physician, philosopher, and poet, and a specialist in medical
psychology. The best known of his songs is that beginning "Es ist bestimmt in
Gottes Rath" to which Mendelssohn composed one of his finest melodies.]
This lamentable death of the critical faculty is not less obvious in the case
of science, as is shown by the tenacious life of false and disproved theories. If
they are once accepted, they may go on bidding defiance to truth for fifty or even
a hundred years and more, as stable as an iron pier in the midst of the waves.
The Ptolemaic system was still held a century after Copernicus had promulgated
his theory. Bacon, Descartes and Locke made their way extremely slowly and
only after a long time; as the reader may see by d'Alembert's celebrated Preface
to the Encyclopedia. Newton was not more successful; and this is sufficiently
proved by the bitterness and contempt with which Leibnitz attacked his theory of
gravitation in the controversy with Clarke.[1] Although Newton lived for almost
forty years after the appearance of the Principia, his teaching was, when he died,
only to some extent accepted in his own country, whilst outside England he

counted scarcely twenty adherents; if we may believe the introductory note to
Voltaire's exposition of his theory. It was, indeed, chiefly owing to this treatise
of Voltaire's that the system became known in France nearly twenty years after
Newton's death. Until then a firm, resolute, and patriotic stand was made by the
Cartesian Vortices; whilst only forty years previously, this same Cartesian
philosophy had been forbidden in the French schools; and now in turn
d'Agnesseau, the Chancellor, refused Voltaire the Imprimatur for his treatise on
the Newtonian doctrine. On the other hand, in our day Newton's absurd theory of
color still completely holds the field, forty years after the publication of
Goethe's. Hume, too, was disregarded up to his fiftieth year, though he began
very early and wrote in a thoroughly popular style. And Kant, in spite of having
written and talked all his life long, did not become a famous man until he was
sixty.
[Footnote 1: See especially §§ 35, 113, 118, 120, 122, 128.]
Artists and poets have, to be sure, more chance than thinkers, because their
public is at least a hundred times as large. Still, what was thought of Beethoven
and Mozart during their lives? what of Dante? what even of Shakespeare? If the
latter's contemporaries had in any way recognized his worth, at least one good
and accredited portrait of him would have come down to us from an age when
the art of painting flourished; whereas we possess only some very doubtful
pictures, a bad copperplate, and a still worse bust on his tomb.[1] And in like
manner, if he had been duly honored, specimens of his handwriting would have
been preserved to us by the hundred, instead of being confined, as is the case, to
the signatures to a few legal documents. The Portuguese are still proud of their
only poet Camoëns. He lived, however, on alms collected every evening in the
street by a black slave whom he had brought with him from the Indies. In time,
no doubt, justice will be done everyone; tempo è galant uomo; but it is as late
and slow in arriving as in a court of law, and the secret condition of it is that the
recipient shall be no longer alive. The precept of Jesus the son of Sirach is
faithfully followed: Judge none blessed before his death.[2] He, then, who has
produced immortal works, must find comfort by applying to them the words of
the Indian myth, that the minutes of life amongst the immortals seem like years
of earthly existence; and so, too, that years upon earth are only as the minutes of
the immortals.
[Footnote 1: A. Wivell: An Inquiry into the History, Authenticity, and
Characteristics of Shakespeare's Portraits; with 21 engravings. London, 1836.]
[Footnote 2: Ecclesiasticus, xi. 28.]
This lack of critical insight is also shown by the fact that, while in every
century the excellent work of earlier time is held in honor, that of its own is

misunderstood, and the attention which is its due is given to bad work, such as
every decade carries with it only to be the sport of the next. That men are slow to
recognize genuine merit when it appears in their own age, also proves that they
do not understand or enjoy or really value the long-acknowledged works of
genius, which they honor only on the score of authority. The crucial test is the
fact that bad work--Fichte's philosophy, for example--if it wins any reputation,
also maintains it for one or two generations; and only when its public is very
large does its fall follow sooner.
Now, just as the sun cannot shed its light but to the eye that sees it, nor
music sound but to the hearing ear, so the value of all masterly work in art and
science is conditioned by the kinship and capacity of the mind to which it
speaks. It is only such a mind as this that possesses the magic word to stir and
call forth the spirits that lie hidden in great work. To the ordinary mind a
masterpiece is a sealed cabinet of mystery,--an unfamiliar musical instrument
from which the player, however much he may flatter himself, can draw none but
confused tones. How different a painting looks when seen in a good light, as
compared with some dark corner! Just in the same way, the impression made by
a masterpiece varies with the capacity of the mind to understand it.
A fine work, then, requires a mind sensitive to its beauty; a thoughtful
work, a mind that can really think, if it is to exist and live at all. But alas! it may
happen only too often that he who gives a fine work to the world afterwards
feels like a maker of fireworks, who displays with enthusiasm the wonders that
have taken him so much time and trouble to prepare, and then learns that he has
come to the wrong place, and that the fancied spectators were one and all
inmates of an asylum for the blind. Still even that is better than if his public had
consisted entirely of men who made fireworks themselves; as in this case, if his
display had been extraordinarily good, it might possibly have cost him his head.
The source of all pleasure and delight is the feeling of kinship. Even with
the sense of beauty it is unquestionably our own species in the animal world, and
then again our own race, that appears to us the fairest. So, too, in intercourse
with others, every man shows a decided preference for those who resemble him;
and a blockhead will find the society of another blockhead incomparably more
pleasant than that of any number of great minds put together. Every man must
necessarily take his chief pleasure in his own work, because it is the mirror of his
own mind, the echo of his own thought; and next in order will come the work of
people like him; that is to say, a dull, shallow and perverse man, a dealer in mere
words, will give his sincere and hearty applause only to that which is dull,
shallow, perverse or merely verbose. On the other hand, he will allow merit to
the work of great minds only on the score of authority, in other words, because

he is ashamed to speak his opinion; for in reality they give him no pleasure at all.
They do not appeal to him; nay, they repel him; and he will not confess this even
to himself. The works of genius cannot be fully enjoyed except by those who are
themselves of the privileged order. The first recognition of them, however, when
they exist without authority to support them, demands considerable superiority
of mind.
When the reader takes all this into consideration, he should be surprised,
not that great work is so late in winning reputation, but that it wins it at all. And
as a matter of fact, fame comes only by a slow and complex process. The stupid
person is by degrees forced, and as it were, tamed, into recognizing the
superiority of one who stands immediately above him; this one in his turn bows
before some one else; and so it goes on until the weight of the votes gradually
prevail over their number; and this is just the condition of all genuine, in other
words, deserved fame. But until then, the greatest genius, even after he has
passed his time of trial, stands like a king amidst a crowd of his own subjects,
who do not know him by sight and therefore will not do his behests; unless,
indeed, his chief ministers of state are in his train. For no subordinate official can
be the direct recipient of the royal commands, as he knows only the signature of
his immediate superior; and this is repeated all the way up into the highest ranks,
where the under-secretary attests the minister's signature, and the minister that of
the king. There are analogous stages to be passed before a genius can attain
widespread fame. This is why his reputation most easily comes to a standstill at
the very outset; because the highest authorities, of whom there can be but few,
are most frequently not to be found; but the further down he goes in the scale the
more numerous are those who take the word from above, so that his fame is no
more arrested.
We must console ourselves for this state of things by reflecting that it is
really fortunate that the greater number of men do not form a judgment on their
own responsibility, but merely take it on authority. For what sort of criticism
should we have on Plato and Kant, Homer, Shakespeare and Goethe, if every
man were to form his opinion by what he really has and enjoys of these writers,
instead of being forced by authority to speak of them in a fit and proper way,
however little he may really feel what he says. Unless something of this kind
took place, it would be impossible for true merit, in any high sphere, to attain
fame at all. At the same time it is also fortunate that every man has just so much
critical power of his own as is necessary for recognizing the superiority of those
who are placed immediately over him, and for following their lead. This means
that the many come in the end to submit to the authority of the few; and there
results that hierarchy of critical judgments on which is based the possibility of a

steady, and eventually wide-reaching, fame.
The lowest class in the community is quite impervious to the merits of a
great genius; and for these people there is nothing left but the monument raised
to him, which, by the impression it produces on their senses, awakes in them a
dim idea of the man's greatness.
Literary journals should be a dam against the unconscionable scribbling of
the age, and the ever-increasing deluge of bad and useless books. Their
judgments should be uncorrupted, just and rigorous; and every piece of bad work
done by an incapable person; every device by which the empty head tries to
come to the assistance of the empty purse, that is to say, about nine-tenths of all
existing books, should be mercilessly scourged. Literary journals would then
perform their duty, which is to keep down the craving for writing and put a
check upon the deception of the public, instead of furthering these evils by a
miserable toleration, which plays into the hands of author and publisher, and
robs the reader of his time and his money.
If there were such a paper as I mean, every bad writer, every brainless
compiler, every plagiarist from other's books, every hollow and incapable place-
hunter, every sham-philosopher, every vain and languishing poetaster, would
shudder at the prospect of the pillory in which his bad work would inevitably
have to stand soon after publication. This would paralyze his twitching fingers,
to the true welfare of literature, in which what is bad is not only useless but
positively pernicious. Now, most books are bad and ought to have remained
unwritten. Consequently praise should be as rare as is now the case with blame,
which is withheld under the influence of personal considerations, coupled with
the maxim accedas socius, laudes lauderis ut absens.
It is quite wrong to try to introduce into literature the same toleration as
must necessarily prevail in society towards those stupid, brainless people who
everywhere swarm in it. In literature such people are impudent intruders; and to
disparage the bad is here duty towards the good; for he who thinks nothing bad
will think nothing good either. Politeness, which has its source in social
relations, is in literature an alien, and often injurious, element; because it exacts
that bad work shall be called good. In this way the very aim of science and art is
directly frustrated.
The ideal journal could, to be sure, be written only by people who joined
incorruptible honesty with rare knowledge and still rarer power of judgment; so
that perhaps there could, at the very most, be one, and even hardly one, in the
whole country; but there it would stand, like a just Aeropagus, every member of
which would have to be elected by all the others. Under the system that prevails
at present, literary journals are carried on by a clique, and secretly perhaps also

by booksellers for the good of the trade; and they are often nothing but coalitions
of bad heads to prevent the good ones succeeding. As Goethe once remarked to
me, nowhere is there so much dishonesty as in literature.
But, above all, anonymity, that shield of all literary rascality, would have to
disappear. It was introduced under the pretext of protecting the honest critic,
who warned the public, against the resentment of the author and his friends. But
where there is one case of this sort, there will be a hundred where it merely
serves to take all responsibility from the man who cannot stand by what he has
said, or possibly to conceal the shame of one who has been cowardly and base
enough to recommend a book to the public for the purpose of putting money into
his own pocket. Often enough it is only a cloak for covering the obscurity,
incompetence and insignificance of the critic. It is incredible what impudence
these fellows will show, and what literary trickery they will venture to commit,
as soon as they know they are safe under the shadow of anonymity. Let me
recommend a general Anti-criticism, a universal medicine or panacea, to put a
stop to all anonymous reviewing, whether it praises the bad or blames the good:
Rascal! your name! For a man to wrap himself up and draw his hat over his face,
and then fall upon people who are walking about without any disguise--this is
not the part of a gentleman, it is the part of a scoundrel and a knave.
An anonymous review has no more authority than an anonymous letter; and
one should be received with the same mistrust as the other. Or shall we take the
name of the man who consents to preside over what is, in the strict sense of the
word, une société anonyme as a guarantee for the veracity of his colleagues?
Even Rousseau, in the preface to the Nouvelle Heloïse, declares tout
honnête homme doit avouer les livres qu'il public; which in plain language
means that every honorable man ought to sign his articles, and that no one is
honorable who does not do so. How much truer this is of polemical writing,
which is the general character of reviews! Riemer was quite right in the opinion
he gives in his Reminiscences of Goethe:[1] An overt enemy, he says, an enemy
who meets you face to face, is an honorable man, who will treat you fairly, and
with whom you can come to terms and be reconciled: but an enemy who
conceals himself is a base, cowardly scoundrel, who has not courage enough to
avow his own judgment; it is not his opinion that he cares about, but only the
secret pleasures of wreaking his anger without being found out or punished. This
will also have been Goethe's opinion, as he was generally the source from which
Riemer drew his observations. And, indeed, Rousseau's maxim applies to every
line that is printed. Would a man in a mask ever be allowed to harangue a mob,
or speak in any assembly; and that, too, when he was going to attack others and
overwhelm them with abuse?

[Footnote 1: Preface, p. xxix.]
Anonymity is the refuge for all literary and journalistic rascality. It is a
practice which must be completely stopped. Every article, even in a newspaper,
should be accompanied by the name of its author; and the editor should be made
strictly responsible for the accuracy of the signature. The freedom of the press
should be thus far restricted; so that when a man publicly proclaims through the
far-sounding trumpet of the newspaper, he should be answerable for it, at any
rate with his honor, if he has any; and if he has none, let his name neutralize the
effect of his words. And since even the most insignificant person is known in his
own circle, the result of such a measure would be to put an end to two-thirds of
the newspaper lies, and to restrain the audacity of many a poisonous tongue.

ON REPUTATION.
Writers may be classified as meteors, planets and fixed stars. A meteor
makes a striking effect for a moment. You look up and cry There! and it is gone
for ever. Planets and wandering stars last a much longer time. They often
outshine the fixed stars and are confounded with them by the inexperienced; but
this only because they are near. It is not long before they must yield their place;
nay, the light they give is reflected only, and the sphere of their influence is
confined to their own orbit--their contemporaries. Their path is one of change
and movement, and with the circuit of a few years their tale is told. Fixed stars
are the only ones that are constant; their position in the firmament is secure; they
shine with a light of their own; their effect to-day is the same as it was yesterday,
because, having no parallax, their appearance does not alter with a difference in
our standpoint. They belong not to one system, one nation only, but to the
universe. And just because they are so very far away, it is usually many years
before their light is visible to the inhabitants of this earth.
We have seen in the previous chapter that where a man's merits are of a
high order, it is difficult for him to win reputation, because the public is
uncritical and lacks discernment. But another and no less serious hindrance to
fame comes from the envy it has to encounter. For even in the lowest kinds of
work, envy balks even the beginnings of a reputation, and never ceases to cleave
to it up to the last. How great a part is played by envy in the wicked ways of the
world! Ariosto is right in saying that the dark side of our mortal life
predominates, so full it is of this evil:
questa assai più oscura che serena Vita mortal, tutta d'invidia piena.
For envy is the moving spirit of that secret and informal, though
flourishing, alliance everywhere made by mediocrity against individual
eminence, no matter of what kind. In his own sphere of work no one will allow
another to be distinguished: he is an intruder who cannot be tolerated. Si
quelq'un excelle parmi nous, qu'il aille exceller ailleurs! this is the universal
password of the second-rate. In addition, then, to the rarity of true merit and the
difficulty it has in being understood and recognized, there is the envy of
thousands to be reckoned with, all of them bent on suppressing, nay, on
smothering it altogether. No one is taken for what he is, but for what others
make of him; and this is the handle used by mediocrity to keep down distinction,
by not letting it come up as long as that can possibly be prevented.
There are two ways of behaving in regard to merit: either to have some of
one's own, or to refuse any to others. The latter method is more convenient, and
so it is generally adopted. As envy is a mere sign of deficiency, so to envy merit

argues the lack of it. My excellent Balthazar Gracian has given a very fine
account of this relation between envy and merit in a lengthy fable, which may be
found in his Discreto under the heading Hombre de ostentacion. He describes all
the birds as meeting together and conspiring against the peacock, because of his
magnificent feathers. If, said the magpie, we could only manage to put a stop to
the cursed parading of his tail, there would soon be an end of his beauty; for
what is not seen is as good as what does not exist.
This explains how modesty came to be a virtue. It was invented only as a
protection against envy. That there have always been rascals to urge this virtue,
and to rejoice heartily over the bashfulness of a man of merit, has been shown at
length in my chief work.[1] In Lichtenberg's Miscellaneous Writings I find this
sentence quoted: Modesty should be the virtue of those who possess no other.
Goethe has a well-known saying, which offends many people: It is only knaves
who are modest!--Nur die Lumpen sind bescheiden! but it has its prototype in
Cervantes, who includes in his Journey up Parnassus certain rules of conduct for
poets, and amongst them the following: Everyone whose verse shows him to be
a poet should have a high opinion of himself, relying on the proverb that he is a
knave who thinks himself one. And Shakespeare, in many of his Sonnets, which
gave him the only opportunity he had of speaking of himself, declares, with a
confidence equal to his ingenuousness, that what he writes is immortal.[2]
[Footnote 1: Welt als Wille, Vol. II. c. 37.]
[Footnote 2: Collier, one of his critical editors, in his Introduction to the
Sonettes, remarks upon this point: "In many of them are to be found most
remarkable indications of self-confidence and of assurance in the immortality of
his verses, and in this respect the author's opinion was constant and uniform. He
never scruples to express it,... and perhaps there is no writer of ancient or
modern times who, for the quantity of such writings left behind him, has so
frequently or so strongly declared that what he had produced in this department
of poetry 'the world would not willingly let die.'"]
A method of underrating good work often used by envy--in reality,
however, only the obverse side of it--consists in the dishonorable and
unscrupulous laudation of the bad; for no sooner does bad work gain currency
than it draws attention from the good. But however effective this method may be
for a while, especially if it is applied on a large scale, the day of reckoning
comes at last, and the fleeting credit given to bad work is paid off by the lasting
discredit which overtakes those who abjectly praised it. Hence these critics
prefer to remain anonymous.
A like fate threatens, though more remotely, those who depreciate and
censure good work; and consequently many are too prudent to attempt it. But

there is another way; and when a man of eminent merit appears, the first effect
he produces is often only to pique all his rivals, just as the peacock's tail
offended the birds. This reduces them to a deep silence; and their silence is so
unanimous that it savors of preconcertion. Their tongues are all paralyzed. It is
the silentium livoris described by Seneca. This malicious silence, which is
technically known as ignoring, may for a long time interfere with the growth of
reputation; if, as happens in the higher walks of learning, where a man's
immediate audience is wholly composed of rival workers and professed students,
who then form the channel of his fame, the greater public is obliged to use its
suffrage without being able to examine the matter for itself. And if, in the end,
that malicious silence is broken in upon by the voice of praise, it will be but
seldom that this happens entirely apart from some ulterior aim, pursued by those
who thus manipulate justice. For, as Goethe says in the West-östlicher Divan, a
man can get no recognition, either from many persons or from only one, unless it
is to publish abroad the critic's own discernment:
Denn es ist kein Anerkenen, Weder Vieler, noch des Einen, Wenn es nicht
am Tage fördert, Wo man selbst was möchte scheinen.
The credit you allow to another man engaged in work similar to your own
or akin to it, must at bottom be withdrawn from yourself; and you can praise him
only at the expense of your own claims.
Accordingly, mankind is in itself not at all inclined to award praise and
reputation; it is more disposed to blame and find fault, whereby it indirectly
praises itself. If, notwithstanding this, praise is won from mankind, some
extraneous motive must prevail. I am not here referring to the disgraceful way in
which mutual friends will puff one another into a reputation; outside of that, an
effectual motive is supplied by the feeling that next to the merit of doing
something oneself, comes that of correctly appreciating and recognizing what
others have done. This accords with the threefold division of heads drawn up by
Hesiod[1] and afterwards by Machiavelli[2] There are, says the latter, in the
capacities of mankind, three varieties: one man will understand a thing by
himself; another so far as it is explained to him; a third, neither of himself nor
when it is put clearly before him. He, then, who abandons hope of making good
his claims to the first class, will be glad to seize the opportunity of taking a place
in the second. It is almost wholly owing to this state of things that merit may
always rest assured of ultimately meeting with recognition.
[Footnote 1: Works and Days, 293.]
[Footnote 2: The Prince, ch. 22.]
To this also is due the fact that when the value of a work has once been
recognized and may no longer be concealed or denied, all men vie in praising

and honoring it; simply because they are conscious of thereby doing themselves
an honor. They act in the spirit of Xenophon's remark: he must be a wise man
who knows what is wise. So when they see that the prize of original merit is for
ever out of their reach, they hasten to possess themselves of that which comes
second best--the correct appreciation of it. Here it happens as with an army
which has been forced to yield; when, just as previously every man wanted to be
foremost in the fight, so now every man tries to be foremost in running away.
They all hurry forward to offer their applause to one who is now recognized to
be worthy of praise, in virtue of a recognition, as a rule unconscious, of that law
of homogeneity which I mentioned in the last chapter; so that it may seem as
though their way of thinking and looking at things were homogeneous with that
of the celebrated man, and that they may at least save the honor of their literary
taste, since nothing else is left them.
From this it is plain that, whereas it is very difficult to win fame, it is not
hard to keep it when once attained; and also that a reputation which comes
quickly does not last very long; for here too, quod cito fit, cito perit. It is obvious
that if the ordinary average man can easily recognize, and the rival workers
willingly acknowledge, the value of any performance, it will not stand very
much above the capacity of either of them to achieve it for themselves. Tantum
quisque laudat, quantum se posse sperat imitari--a man will praise a thing only
so far as he hopes to be able to imitate it himself. Further, it is a suspicious sign
if a reputation comes quickly; for an application of the laws of homogeneity will
show that such a reputation is nothing but the direct applause of the multitude.
What this means may be seen by a remark once made by Phocion, when he was
interrupted in a speech by the loud cheers of the mob. Turning to his friends who
were standing close by, he asked: Have I made a mistake and said something
stupid?[1]
[Footnote 1: Plutarch, Apophthegms.]
Contrarily, a reputation that is to last a long time must be slow in maturing,
and the centuries of its duration have generally to be bought at the cost of
contemporary praise. For that which is to keep its position so long, must be of a
perfection difficult to attain; and even to recognize this perfection requires men
who are not always to be found, and never in numbers sufficiently great to make
themselves heard; whereas envy is always on the watch and doing its best to
smother their voice. But with moderate talent, which soon meets with
recognition, there is the danger that those who possess it will outlive both it and
themselves; so that a youth of fame may be followed by an old age of obscurity.
In the case of great merit, on the other hand, a man may remain unknown for
many years, but make up for it later on by attaining a brilliant reputation. And if

it should be that this comes only after he is no more, well! he is to be reckoned
amongst those of whom Jean Paul says that extreme unction is their baptism. He
may console himself by thinking of the Saints, who also are canonized only after
they are dead.
Thus what Mahlmann[1] has said so well in Herodes holds good; in this
world truly great work never pleases at once, and the god set up by the multitude
keeps his place on the altar but a short time:
Ich denke, das wahre Grosse in der Welt Ist immer nur Das was nicht gleich
gefällt Und wen der Pöbel zum Gotte weiht, Der steht auf dem Altar nur kurze
Zeit.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--August Mahlmann (1771-1826), journalist,
poet and story-writer. His Herodes vor Bethlehem is a parody of Kotzebue's
Hussiten vor Naumburg.]
It is worth mention that this rule is most directly confirmed in the case of
pictures, where, as connoisseurs well know, the greatest masterpieces are not the
first to attract attention. If they make a deep impression, it is not after one, but
only after repeated, inspection; but then they excite more and more admiration
every time they are seen.
Moreover, the chances that any given work will be quickly and rightly
appreciated, depend upon two conditions: firstly, the character of the work,
whether high or low, in other words, easy or difficult to understand; and,
secondly, the kind of public it attracts, whether large or small. This latter
condition is, no doubt, in most instances a, corollary of the former; but it also
partly depends upon whether the work in question admits, like books and
musical compositions, of being produced in great numbers. By the compound
action of these two conditions, achievements which serve no materially useful
end--and these alone are under consideration here--will vary in regard to the
chances they have of meeting with timely recognition and due appreciation; and
the order of precedence, beginning with those who have the greatest chance, will
be somewhat as follows: acrobats, circus riders, ballet-dancers, jugglers, actors,
singers, musicians, composers, poets (both the last on account of the
multiplication of their works), architects, painters, sculptors, philosophers.
The last place of all is unquestionably taken by philosophers because their
works are meant not for entertainment, but for instruction, and because they
presume some knowledge on the part of the reader, and require him to make an
effort of his own to understand them. This makes their public extremely small,
and causes their fame to be more remarkable for its length than for its breadth.
And, in general, it may be said that the possibility of a man's fame lasting a long
time, stands in almost inverse ratio with the chance that it will be early in

making its appearance; so that, as regards length of fame, the above order of
precedence may be reversed. But, then, the poet and the composer will come in
the end to stand on the same level as the philosopher; since, when once a work is
committed to writing, it is possible to preserve it to all time. However, the first
place still belongs by right to the philosopher, because of the much greater
scarcity of good work in this sphere, and the high importance of it; and also
because of the possibility it offers of an almost perfect translation into any
language. Sometimes, indeed, it happens that a philosopher's fame outlives even
his works themselves; as has happened with Thales, Empedocles, Heraclitus,
Democritus, Parmenides, Epicurus and many others.
My remarks are, as I have said, confined to achievements that are not of any
material use. Work that serves some practical end, or ministers directly to some
pleasure of the senses, will never have any difficulty in being duly appreciated.
No first-rate pastry-cook could long remain obscure in any town, to say nothing
of having to appeal to posterity.
Under fame of rapid growth is also to be reckoned fame of a false and
artificial kind; where, for instance, a book is worked into a reputation by means
of unjust praise, the help of friends, corrupt criticism, prompting from above and
collusion from below. All this tells upon the multitude, which is rightly
presumed to have no power of judging for itself. This sort of fame is like a
swimming bladder, by its aid a heavy body may keep afloat. It bears up for a
certain time, long or short according as the bladder is well sewed up and blown;
but still the air comes out gradually, and the body sinks. This is the inevitable
fate of all works which are famous by reason of something outside of
themselves. False praise dies away; collusion comes to an end; critics declare the
reputation ungrounded; it vanishes, and is replaced by so much the greater
contempt. Contrarily, a genuine work, which, having the source of its fame in
itself, can kindle admiration afresh in every age, resembles a body of low
specific gravity, which always keeps up of its own accord, and so goes floating
down the stream of time.
Men of great genius, whether their work be in poetry, philosophy or art,
stand in all ages like isolated heroes, keeping up single-handed a desperate
struggling against the onslaught of an army of opponents.[1] Is not this
characteristic of the miserable nature of mankind? The dullness, grossness,
perversity, silliness and brutality of by far the greater part of the race, are always
an obstacle to the efforts of the genius, whatever be the method of his art; they
so form that hostile army to which at last he has to succumb. Let the isolated
champion achieve what he may: it is slow to be acknowledged; it is late in being
appreciated, and then only on the score of authority; it may easily fall into

neglect again, at any rate for a while. Ever afresh it finds itself opposed by false,
shallow, and insipid ideas, which are better suited to that large majority, that so
generally hold the field. Though the critic may step forth and say, like Hamlet
when he held up the two portraits to his wretched mother, Have you eyes? Have
you eyes? alas! they have none. When I watch the behavior of a crowd of people
in the presence of some great master's work, and mark the manner of their
applause, they often remind me of trained monkeys in a show. The monkey's
gestures are, no doubt, much like those of men; but now and again they betray
that the real inward spirit of these gestures is not in them. Their irrational nature
peeps out.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--At this point Schopenhauer interrupts the
thread of his discourse to speak at length upon an example of false fame. Those
who are at all acquainted with the philosopher's views will not be surprised to
find that the writer thus held up to scorn is Hegel; and readers of the other
volumes in this series will, with the translator, have had by now quite enough of
the subject. The passage is therefore omitted.]
It is often said of a man that he is in advance of his age; and it follows from
the above remarks that this must be taken to mean that he is in advance of
humanity in general. Just because of this fact, a genius makes no direct appeal
except to those who are too rare to allow of their ever forming a numerous body
at any one period. If he is in this respect not particularly favored by fortune, he
will be misunderstood by his own age; in other words, he will remain unaccepted
until time gradually brings together the voices of those few persons who are
capable of judging a work of such high character. Then posterity will say: This
man was in advance of his age, instead of in advance of humanity; because
humanity will be glad to lay the burden of its own faults upon a single epoch.
Hence, if a man has been superior to his own age, he would also have been
superior to any other; provided that, in that age, by some rare and happy chance,
a few just men, capable of judging in the sphere of his achievements, had been
born at the same time with him; just as when, according to a beautiful Indian
myth, Vischnu becomes incarnate as a hero, so, too, Brahma at the same time
appears as the singer of his deeds; and hence Valmiki, Vyasa and Kalidasa are
incarnations of Brahma.
In this sense, then, it may be said that every immortal work puts its age to
the proof, whether or no it will be able to recognize the merit of it. As a rule, the
men of any age stand such a test no better than the neighbors of Philemon and
Baucis, who expelled the deities they failed to recognize. Accordingly, the right
standard for judging the intellectual worth of any generation is supplied, not by
the great minds that make their appearance in it--for their capacities are the work

of Nature, and the possibility of cultivating them a matter of chance
circumstance--but by the way in which contemporaries receive their works;
whether, I mean, they give their applause soon and with a will, or late and in
niggardly fashion, or leave it to be bestowed altogether by posterity.
This last fate will be especially reserved for works of a high character. For
the happy chance mentioned above will be all the more certain not to come, in
proportion as there are few to appreciate the kind of work done by great minds.
Herein lies the immeasurable advantage possessed by poets in respect of
reputation; because their work is accessible to almost everyone. If it had been
possible for Sir Walter Scott to be read and criticised by only some hundred
persons, perhaps in his lifetime any common scribbler would have been
preferred to him; and afterwards, when he had taken his proper place, it would
also have been said in his honor that he was in advance of his age. But if envy,
dishonesty and the pursuit of personal aims are added to the incapacity of those
hundred persons who, in the name of their generation, are called upon to pass
judgment on a work, then indeed it meets with the same sad fate as attends a
suitor who pleads before a tribunal of judges one and all corrupt.
In corroboration of this, we find that the history of literature generally
shows all those who made knowledge and insight their goal to have remained
unrecognized and neglected, whilst those who paraded with the vain show of it
received the admiration of their contemporaries, together with the emoluments.
The effectiveness of an author turns chiefly upon his getting the reputation
that he should be read. But by practicing various arts, by the operation of chance,
and by certain natural affinities, this reputation is quickly won by a hundred
worthless people: while a worthy writer may come by it very slowly and tardily.
The former possess friends to help them; for the rabble is always a numerous
body which holds well together. The latter has nothing but enemies; because
intellectual superiority is everywhere and under all circumstances the most
hateful thing in the world, and especially to bunglers in the same line of work,
who want to pass for something themselves.[1]
[Footnote 1: If the professors of philosophy should chance to think that I
am here hinting at them and the tactics they have for more than thirty years
pursued toward my works, they have hit the nail upon the head.]
This being so, it is a prime condition for doing any great work--any work
which is to outlive its own age, that a man pay no heed to his contemporaries,
their views and opinions, and the praise or blame which they bestow. This
condition is, however, fulfilled of itself when a man really does anything great,
and it is fortunate that it is so. For if, in producing such a work, he were to look
to the general opinion or the judgment of his colleagues, they would lead him

astray at every step. Hence, if a man wants to go down to posterity, he must
withdraw from the influence of his own age. This will, of course, generally mean
that he must also renounce any influence upon it, and be ready to buy centuries
of fame by foregoing the applause of his contemporaries.
For when any new and wide-reaching truth comes into the world--and if it
is new, it must be paradoxical--an obstinate stand will be made against it as long
as possible; nay, people will continue to deny it even after they slacken their
opposition and are almost convinced of its truth. Meanwhile it goes on quietly
working its way, and, like an acid, undermining everything around it. From time
to time a crash is heard; the old error comes tottering to the ground, and
suddenly the new fabric of thought stands revealed, as though it were a
monument just uncovered. Everyone recognizes and admires it. To be sure, this
all comes to pass for the most part very slowly. As a rule, people discover a man
to be worth listening to only after he is gone; their hear, hear, resounds when the
orator has left the platform.
Works of the ordinary type meet with a better fate. Arising as they do in the
course of, and in connection with, the general advance in contemporary culture,
they are in close alliance with the spirit of their age--in other words, just those
opinions which happen to be prevalent at the time. They aim at suiting the needs
of the moment. If they have any merit, it is soon recognized; and they gain
currency as books which reflect the latest ideas. Justice, nay, more than justice,
is done to them. They afford little scope for envy; since, as was said above, a
man will praise a thing only so far as he hopes to be able to imitate it himself.
But those rare works which are destined to become the property of all
mankind and to live for centuries, are, at their origin, too far in advance of the
point at which culture happens to stand, and on that very account foreign to it
and the spirit of their own time. They neither belong to it nor are they in any
connection with it, and hence they excite no interest in those who are dominated
by it. They belong to another, a higher stage of culture, and a time that is still far
off. Their course is related to that of ordinary works as the orbit of Uranus to the
orbit of Mercury. For the moment they get no justice done to them. People are at
a loss how to treat them; so they leave them alone, and go their own snail's pace
for themselves. Does the worm see the eagle as it soars aloft?
Of the number of books written in any language about one in 100,000 forms
a part of its real and permanent literature. What a fate this one book has to
endure before it outstrips those 100,000 and gains its due place of honor! Such a
book is the work of an extraordinary and eminent mind, and therefore it is
specifically different from the others; a fact which sooner or later becomes
manifest.

Let no one fancy that things will ever improve in this respect. No! the
miserable constitution of humanity never changes, though it may, to be sure,
take somewhat varying forms with every generation. A distinguished mind
seldom has its full effect in the lifetime of its possessor; because, at bottom, it is
completely and properly understood only by minds already akin to it.
As it is a rare thing for even one man out of many millions to tread the path
that leads to immortality, he must of necessity be very lonely. The journey to
posterity lies through a horribly dreary region, like the Lybian desert, of which,
as is well known, no one has any idea who has not seen it for himself.
Meanwhile let me before all things recommend the traveler to take light baggage
with him; otherwise he will have to throw away too much on the road. Let him
never forget the words of Balthazar Gracian: lo bueno si breve, dos vezes bueno-
-good work is doubly good if it is short. This advice is specially applicable to my
own countrymen.
Compared with the short span of time they live, men of great intellect are
like huge buildings, standing on a small plot of ground. The size of the building
cannot be seen by anyone, just in front of it; nor, for an analogous reason, can
the greatness of a genius be estimated while he lives. But when a century has
passed, the world recognizes it and wishes him back again.
If the perishable son of time has produced an imperishable work, how short
his own life seems compared with that of his child! He is like Semela or Maia--a
mortal mother who gave birth to an immortal son; or, contrarily, he is like
Achilles in regard to Thetis. What a contrast there is between what is fleeting
and what is permanent! The short span of a man's life, his necessitous, afflicted,
unstable existence, will seldom allow of his seeing even the beginning of his
immortal child's brilliant career; nor will the father himself be taken for that
which he really is. It may be said, indeed, that a man whose fame comes after
him is the reverse of a nobleman, who is preceded by it.
However, the only difference that it ultimately makes to a man to receive
his fame at the hands of contemporaries rather than from posterity is that, in the
former case, his admirers are separated from him by space, and in the latter by
time. For even in the case of contemporary fame, a man does not, as a rule, see
his admirers actually before him. Reverence cannot endure close proximity; it
almost always dwells at some distance from its object; and in the presence of the
person revered it melts like butter in the sun. Accordingly, if a man is celebrated
with his contemporaries, nine-tenths of those amongst whom he lives will let
their esteem be guided by his rank and fortune; and the remaining tenth may
perhaps have a dull consciousness of his high qualities, because they have heard
about him from remote quarters. There is a fine Latin letter of Petrarch's on this

incompatibility between reverence and the presence of the person, and between
fame and life. It comes second in his Epistolae familiares?[1] and it is addressed
to Thomas Messanensis. He there observes, amongst other things, that the
learned men of his age all made it a rule to think little of a man's writings if they
had even once seen him.
[Footnote 1: In the Venetian edition of 1492.]
Since distance, then, is essential if a famous man is to be recognized and
revered, it does not matter whether it is distance of space or of time. It is true
that he may sometimes hear of his fame in the one case, but never in the other;
but still, genuine and great merit may make up for this by confidently
anticipating its posthumous fame. Nay, he who produces some really great
thought is conscious of his connection with coming generations at the very
moment he conceives it; so that he feels the extension of his existence through
centuries and thus lives with posterity as well as for it. And when, after enjoying
a great man's work, we are seized with admiration for him, and wish him back,
so that we might see and speak with him, and have him in our possession, this
desire of ours is not unrequited; for he, too, has had his longing for that posterity
which will grant the recognition, honor, gratitude and love denied by envious
contemporaries.
If intellectual works of the highest order are not allowed their due until they
come before the tribunal of posterity, a contrary fate is prepared for certain
brilliant errors which proceed from men of talent, and appear with an air of
being well grounded. These errors are defended with so much acumen and
learning that they actually become famous with their own age, and maintain their
position at least during their author's lifetime. Of this sort are many false theories
and wrong criticisms; also poems and works of art, which exhibit some false
taste or mannerism favored by contemporary prejudice. They gain reputation and
currency simply because no one is yet forthcoming who knows how to refute
them or otherwise prove their falsity; and when he appears, as he usually does, in
the next generation, the glory of these works is brought to an end. Posthumous
judges, be their decision favorable to the appellant or not, form the proper court
for quashing the verdict of contemporaries. That is why it is so difficult and so
rare to be victorious alike in both tribunals.
The unfailing tendency of time to correct knowledge and judgment should
always be kept in view as a means of allaying anxiety, whenever any grievous
error appears, whether in art, or science, or practical life, and gains ground; or
when some false and thoroughly perverse policy of movement is undertaken and
receives applause at the hands of men. No one should be angry, or, still less,
despondent; but simply imagine that the world has already abandoned the error

in question, and now only requires time and experience to recognize of its own
accord that which a clear vision detected at the first glance.
When the facts themselves are eloquent of a truth, there is no need to rush
to its aid with words: for time will give it a thousand tongues. How long it may
be before they speak, will of course depend upon the difficulty of the subject and
the plausibility of the error; but come they will, and often it would be of no avail
to try to anticipate them. In the worst cases it will happen with theories as it
happens with affairs in practical life; where sham and deception, emboldened by
success, advance to greater and greater lengths, until discovery is made almost
inevitable. It is just so with theories; through the blind confidence of the
blockheads who broach them, their absurdity reaches such a pitch that at last it is
obvious even to the dullest eye. We may thus say to such people: the wilder your
statements, the better.
There is also some comfort to be found in reflecting upon all the whims and
crotchets which had their day and have now utterly vanished. In style, in
grammar, in spelling, there are false notions of this sort which last only three or
four years. But when the errors are on a large scale, while we lament the brevity
of human life, we shall in any case, do well to lag behind our own age when we
see it on a downward path. For there are two ways of not keeping on a level with
the times. A man may be below it; or he may be above it.
ON GENIUS.
No difference of rank, position, or birth, is so great as the gulf that separates
the countless millions who use their head only in the service of their belly, in
other words, look upon it as an instrument of the will, and those very few and
rare persons who have the courage to say: No! it is too good for that; my head
shall be active only in its own service; it shall try to comprehend the wondrous
and varied spectacle of this world, and then reproduce it in some form, whether
as art or as literature, that may answer to my character as an individual. These
are the truly noble, the real noblesse of the world. The others are serfs and go
with the soil--glebae adscripti. Of course, I am here referring to those who have
not only the courage, but also the call, and therefore the right, to order the head
to quit the service of the will; with a result that proves the sacrifice to have been
worth the making. In the case of those to whom all this can only partially apply,
the gulf is not so wide; but even though their talent be small, so long as it is real,
there will always be a sharp line of demarcation between them and the millions.
[1]

[Footnote 1: The correct scale for adjusting the hierarchy of intelligences is
furnished by the degree in which the mind takes merely individual or approaches
universal views of things. The brute recognizes only the individual as such: its
comprehension does not extend beyond the limits of the individual. But man
reduces the individual to the general; herein lies the exercise of his reason; and
the higher his intelligence reaches, the nearer do his general ideas approach the
point at which they become universal.]
The works of fine art, poetry and philosophy produced by a nation are the
outcome of the superfluous intellect existing in it.
For him who can understand aright--cum grano salis--the relation between
the genius and the normal man may, perhaps, be best expressed as follows: A
genius has a double intellect, one for himself and the service of his will; the
other for the world, of which he becomes the mirror, in virtue of his purely
objective attitude towards it. The work of art or poetry or philosophy produced
by the genius is simply the result, or quintessence, of this contemplative attitude,
elaborated according to certain technical rules.
The normal man, on the other hand, has only a single intellect, which may
be called subjective by contrast with the objective intellect of genius. However
acute this subjective intellect may be--and it exists in very various degrees of
perfection--it is never on the same level with the double intellect of genius; just
as the open chest notes of the human voice, however high, are essentially
different from the falsetto notes. These, like the two upper octaves of the flute
and the harmonics of the violin, are produced by the column of air dividing itself
into two vibrating halves, with a node between them; while the open chest notes
of the human voice and the lower octave of the flute are produced by the
undivided column of air vibrating as a whole. This illustration may help the
reader to understand that specific peculiarity of genius which is unmistakably
stamped on the works, and even on the physiognomy, of him who is gifted with
it. At the same time it is obvious that a double intellect like this must, as a rule,
obstruct the service of the will; and this explains the poor capacity often shown
by genius in the conduct of life. And what specially characterizes genius is that it
has none of that sobriety of temper which is always to be found in the ordinary
simple intellect, be it acute or dull.
The brain may be likened to a parasite which is nourished as a part of the
human frame without contributing directly to its inner economy; it is securely
housed in the topmost story, and there leads a self-sufficient and independent
life. In the same way it may be said that a man endowed with great mental gifts
leads, apart from the individual life common to all, a second life, purely of the
intellect. He devotes himself to the constant increase, rectification and extension,

not of mere learning, but of real systematic knowledge and insight; and remains
untouched by the fate that overtakes him personally, so long as it does not
disturb him in his work. It is thus a life which raises a man and sets him above
fate and its changes. Always thinking, learning, experimenting, practicing his
knowledge, the man soon comes to look upon this second life as the chief mode
of existence, and his merely personal life as something subordinate, serving only
to advance ends higher than itself.
An example of this independent, separate existence is furnished by Goethe.
During the war in the Champagne, and amid all the bustle of the camp, he made
observations for his theory of color; and as soon as the numberless calamities of
that war allowed of his retiring for a short time to the fortress of Luxembourg, he
took up the manuscript of his Farbenlehre. This is an example which we, the salt
of the earth, should endeavor to follow, by never letting anything disturb us in
the pursuit of our intellectual life, however much the storm of the world may
invade and agitate our personal environment; always remembering that we are
the sons, not of the bondwoman, but of the free. As our emblem and coat of
arms, I propose a tree mightily shaken by the wind, but still bearing its ruddy
fruit on every branch; with the motto Dum convellor mitescunt, or Conquassata
sed ferax.
That purely intellectual life of the individual has its counterpart in humanity
as a whole. For there, too, the real life is the life of the will, both in the empirical
and in the transcendental meaning of the word. The purely intellectual life of
humanity lies in its effort to increase knowledge by means of the sciences, and
its desire to perfect the arts. Both science and art thus advance slowly from one
generation to another, and grow with the centuries, every race as it hurries by
furnishing its contribution. This intellectual life, like some gift from heaven,
hovers over the stir and movement of the world; or it is, as it were, a sweet-
scented air developed out of the ferment itself--the real life of mankind,
dominated by will; and side by side with the history of nations, the history of
philosophy, science and art takes its innocent and bloodless way.
The difference between the genius and the ordinary man is, no doubt, a
quantitative one, in so far as it is a difference of degree; but I am tempted to
regard it also as qualitative, in view of the fact that ordinary minds,
notwithstanding individual variation, have a certain tendency to think alike. Thus
on similar occasions their thoughts at once all take a similar direction, and run
on the same lines; and this explains why their judgments constantly agree--not,
however, because they are based on truth. To such lengths does this go that
certain fundamental views obtain amongst mankind at all times, and are always
being repeated and brought forward anew, whilst the great minds of all ages are

in open or secret opposition to them.
A genius is a man in whose mind the world is presented as an object is
presented in a mirror, but with a degree more of clearness and a greater
distinction of outline than is attained by ordinary people. It is from him that
humanity may look for most instruction; for the deepest insight into the most
important matters is to be acquired, not by an observant attention to detail, but
by a close study of things as a whole. And if his mind reaches maturity, the
instruction he gives will be conveyed now in one form, now in another. Thus
genius may be defined as an eminently clear consciousness of things in general,
and therefore, also of that which is opposed to them, namely, one's own self.
The world looks up to a man thus endowed, and expects to learn something
about life and its real nature. But several highly favorable circumstances must
combine to produce genius, and this is a very rare event. It happens only now
and then, let us say once in a century, that a man is born whose intellect so
perceptibly surpasses the normal measure as to amount to that second faculty
which seems to be accidental, as it is out of all relation to the will. He may
remain a long time without being recognized or appreciated, stupidity preventing
the one and envy the other. But should this once come to pass, mankind will
crowd round him and his works, in the hope that he may be able to enlighten
some of the darkness of their existence or inform them about it. His message is,
to some extent, a revelation, and he himself a higher being, even though he may
be but little above the ordinary standard.
Like the ordinary man, the genius is what he is chiefly for himself. This is
essential to his nature: a fact which can neither be avoided nor altered, he may be
for others remains a matter of chance and of secondary importance. In no case
can people receive from his mind more than a reflection, and then only when he
joins with them in the attempt to get his thought into their heads; where,
however, it is never anything but an exotic plant, stunted and frail.
In order to have original, uncommon, and perhaps even immortal thoughts,
it is enough to estrange oneself so fully from the world of things for a few
moments, that the most ordinary objects and events appear quite new and
unfamiliar. In this way their true nature is disclosed. What is here demanded
cannot, perhaps, be said to be difficult; it is not in our power at all, but is just the
province of genius.
By itself, genius can produce original thoughts just as little as a woman by
herself can bear children. Outward circumstances must come to fructify genius,
and be, as it were, a father to its progeny.
The mind of genius is among other minds what the carbuncle is among
precious stones: it sends forth light of its own, while the others reflect only that

which they have received. The relation of the genius to the ordinary mind may
also be described as that of an idio-electrical body to one which merely is a
conductor of electricity.
The mere man of learning, who spends his life in teaching what he has
learned, is not strictly to be called a man of genius; just as idio-electrical bodies
are not conductors. Nay, genius stands to mere learning as the words to the
music in a song. A man of learning is a man who has learned a great deal; a man
of genius, one from whom we learn something which the genius has learned
from nobody. Great minds, of which there is scarcely one in a hundred millions,
are thus the lighthouses of humanity; and without them mankind would lose
itself in the boundless sea of monstrous error and bewilderment.
And so the simple man of learning, in the strict sense of the word--the
ordinary professor, for instance--looks upon the genius much as we look upon a
hare, which is good to eat after it has been killed and dressed up. So long as it is
alive, it is only good to shoot at.
He who wishes to experience gratitude from his contemporaries, must
adjust his pace to theirs. But great things are never produced in this way. And he
who wants to do great things must direct his gaze to posterity, and in firm
confidence elaborate his work for coming generations. No doubt, the result may
be that he will remain quite unknown to his contemporaries, and comparable to a
man who, compelled to spend his life upon a lonely island, with great effort sets
up a monument there, to transmit to future sea-farers the knowledge of his
existence. If he thinks it a hard fate, let him console himself with the reflection
that the ordinary man who lives for practical aims only, often suffers a like fate,
without having any compensation to hope for; inasmuch as he may, under
favorable conditions, spend a life of material production, earning, buying,
building, fertilizing, laying out, founding, establishing, beautifying with daily
effort and unflagging zeal, and all the time think that he is working for himself;
and yet in the end it is his descendants who reap the benefit of it all, and
sometimes not even his descendants. It is the same with the man of genius; he,
too, hopes for his reward and for honor at least; and at last finds that he has
worked for posterity alone. Both, to be sure, have inherited a great deal from
their ancestors.
The compensation I have mentioned as the privilege of genius lies, not in
what it is to others, but in what it is to itself. What man has in any real sense
lived more than he whose moments of thought make their echoes heard through
the tumult of centuries? Perhaps, after all, it would be the best thing for a genius
to attain undisturbed possession of himself, by spending his life in enjoying the
pleasure of his own thoughts, his own works, and by admitting the world only as

the heir of his ample existence. Then the world would find the mark of his
existence only after his death, as it finds that of the Ichnolith.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--For an illustration of this feeling in poetry,
Schopenhauer refers the reader to Byron's Prophecy of Dante: introd. to C. 4.]
It is not only in the activity of his highest powers that the genius surpasses
ordinary people. A man who is unusually well-knit, supple and agile, will
perform all his movements with exceptional ease, even with comfort, because he
takes a direct pleasure in an activity for which he is particularly well-equipped,
and therefore often exercises it without any object. Further, if he is an acrobat or
a dancer, not only does he take leaps which other people cannot execute, but he
also betrays rare elasticity and agility in those easier steps which others can also
perform, and even in ordinary walking. In the same way a man of superior mind
will not only produce thoughts and works which could never have come from
another; it will not be here alone that he will show his greatness; but as
knowledge and thought form a mode of activity natural and easy to him, he will
also delight himself in them at all times, and so apprehend small matters which
are within the range of other minds, more easily, quickly and correctly than they.
Thus he will take a direct and lively pleasure in every increase of Knowledge,
every problem solved, every witty thought, whether of his own or another's; and
so his mind will have no further aim than to be constantly active. This will be an
inexhaustible spring of delight; and boredom, that spectre which haunts the
ordinary man, can never come near him.
Then, too, the masterpieces of past and contemporary men of genius exist in
their fullness for him alone. If a great product of genius is recommended to the
ordinary, simple mind, it will take as much pleasure in it as the victim of gout
receives in being invited to a ball. The one goes for the sake of formality, and the
other reads the book so as not to be in arrear. For La Bruyère was quite right
when he said: All the wit in the world is lost upon him who has none. The whole
range of thought of a man of talent, or of a genius, compared with the thoughts
of the common man, is, even when directed to objects essentially the same, like
a brilliant oil-painting, full of life, compared with a mere outline or a weak
sketch in water-color.
All this is part of the reward of genius, and compensates him for a lonely
existence in a world with which he has nothing in common and no sympathies.
But since size is relative, it comes to the same thing whether I say, Caius was a
great man, or Caius has to live amongst wretchedly small people: for
Brobdingnack and Lilliput vary only in the point from which they start. However
great, then, however admirable or instructive, a long posterity may think the
author of immortal works, during his lifetime he will appear to his

contemporaries small, wretched, and insipid in proportion. This is what I mean
by saying that as there are three hundred degrees from the base of a tower to the
summit, so there are exactly three hundred from the summit to the base. Great
minds thus owe little ones some indulgence; for it is only in virtue of these little
minds that they themselves are great.
Let us, then, not be surprised if we find men of genius generally unsociable
and repellent. It is not their want of sociability that is to blame. Their path
through the world is like that of a man who goes for a walk on a bright summer
morning. He gazes with delight on the beauty and freshness of nature, but he has
to rely wholly on that for entertainment; for he can find no society but the
peasants as they bend over the earth and cultivate the soil. It is often the case that
a great mind prefers soliloquy to the dialogue he may have in this world. If he
condescends to it now and then, the hollowness of it may possibly drive him
back to his soliloquy; for in forgetfulness of his interlocutor, or caring little
whether he understands or not, he talks to him as a child talks to a doll.
Modesty in a great mind would, no doubt, be pleasing to the world; but,
unluckily, it is a contradictio in adjecto. It would compel a genius to give the
thoughts and opinions, nay, even the method and style, of the million preference
over his own; to set a higher value upon them; and, wide apart as they are, to
bring his views into harmony with theirs, or even suppress them altogether, so as
to let the others hold the field. In that case, however, he would either produce
nothing at all, or else his achievements would be just upon a level with theirs.
Great, genuine and extraordinary work can be done only in so far as its author
disregards the method, the thoughts, the opinions of his contemporaries, and
quietly works on, in spite of their criticism, on his side despising what they
praise. No one becomes great without arrogance of this sort. Should his life and
work fall upon a time which cannot recognize and appreciate him, he is at any
rate true to himself; like some noble traveler forced to pass the night in a
miserable inn; when morning comes, he contentedly goes his way.
A poet or philosopher should have no fault to find with his age if it only
permits him to do his work undisturbed in his own corner; nor with his fate if the
corner granted him allows of his following his vocation without having to think
about other people.
For the brain to be a mere laborer in the service of the belly, is indeed the
common lot of almost all those who do not live on the work of their hands; and
they are far from being discontented with their lot. But it strikes despair into a
man of great mind, whose brain-power goes beyond the measure necessary for
the service of the will; and he prefers, if need be, to live in the narrowest
circumstances, so long as they afford him the free use of his time for the

development and application of his faculties; in other words, if they give him the
leisure which is invaluable to him.
It is otherwise with ordinary people: for them leisure has no value in itself,
nor is it, indeed, without its dangers, as these people seem to know. The
technical work of our time, which is done to an unprecedented perfection, has,
by increasing and multiplying objects of luxury, given the favorites of fortune a
choice between more leisure and culture upon the one side, and additional luxury
and good living, but with increased activity, upon the other; and, true to their
character, they choose the latter, and prefer champagne to freedom. And they are
consistent in their choice; for, to them, every exertion of the mind which does
not serve the aims of the will is folly. Intellectual effort for its own sake, they
call eccentricity. Therefore, persistence in the aims of the will and the belly will
be concentricity; and, to be sure, the will is the centre, the kernel of the world.
But in general it is very seldom that any such alternative is presented. For
as with money, most men have no superfluity, but only just enough for their
needs, so with intelligence; they possess just what will suffice for the service of
the will, that is, for the carrying on of their business. Having made their fortune,
they are content to gape or to indulge in sensual pleasures or childish
amusements, cards or dice; or they will talk in the dullest way, or dress up and
make obeisance to one another. And how few are those who have even a little
superfluity of intellectual power! Like the others they too make themselves a
pleasure; but it is a pleasure of the intellect. Either they will pursue some liberal
study which brings them in nothing, or they will practice some art; and in
general, they will be capable of taking an objective interest in things, so that it
will be possible to converse with them. But with the others it is better not to
enter into any relations at all; for, except when they tell the results of their own
experience or give an account of their special vocation, or at any rate impart
what they have learned from some one else, their conversation will not be worth
listening to; and if anything is said to them, they will rarely grasp or understand
it aright, and it will in most cases be opposed to their own opinions. Balthazar
Gracian describes them very strikingly as men who are not men--hombres che
non lo son. And Giordano Bruno says the same thing: What a difference there is
in having to do with men compared with those who are only made in their image
and likeness![1] And how wonderfully this passage agrees with that remark in
the Kurral: The common people look like men but I have never seen anything
quite like them. If the reader will consider the extent to which these ideas agree
in thought and even in expression, and in the wide difference between them in
point of date and nationality, he cannot doubt but that they are at one with the
facts of life. It was certainly not under the influence of those passages that, about

twenty years ago, I tried to get a snuff-box made, the lid of which should have
two fine chestnuts represented upon it, if possible in mosaic; together with a leaf
which was to show that they were horse-chestnuts. This symbol was meant to
keep the thought constantly before my mind. If anyone wishes for entertainment,
such as will prevent him feeling solitary even when he is alone, let me
recommend the company of dogs, whose moral and intellectual qualities may
almost afford delight and gratification.
[Footnote 1: Opera: ed. Wagner, 1. 224.]
Still, we should always be careful to avoid being unjust. I am often
surprised by the cleverness, and now and again by the stupidity of my dog; and I
have similar experiences with mankind. Countless times, in indignation at their
incapacity, their total lack of discernment, their bestiality, I have been forced to
echo the old complaint that folly is the mother and the nurse of the human race:
Humani generis mater nutrixque profecto Stultitia est.
But at other times I have been astounded that from such a race there could
have gone forth so many arts and sciences, abounding in so much use and
beauty, even though it has always been the few that produce them. Yet these arts
and sciences have struck root, established and perfected themselves: and the race
has with persistent fidelity preserved Homer, Plato, Horace and others for
thousands of years, by copying and treasuring their writings, thus saving them
from oblivion, in spite of all the evils and atrocities that have happened in the
world. Thus the race has proved that it appreciates the value of these things, and
at the same time it can form a correct view of special achievements or estimate
signs of judgment and intelligence. When this takes place amongst those who
belong to the great multitude, it is by a kind of inspiration. Sometimes a correct
opinion will be formed by the multitude itself; but this is only when the chorus
of praise has grown full and complete. It is then like the sound of untrained
voices; where there are enough of them, it is always harmonious.
Those who emerge from the multitude, those who are called men of genius,
are merely the lucida intervalla of the whole human race. They achieve that
which others could not possibly achieve. Their originality is so great that not
only is their divergence from others obvious, but their individuality is expressed
with such force, that all the men of genius who have ever existed show, every
one of them, peculiarities of character and mind; so that the gift of his works is
one which he alone of all men could ever have presented to the world. This is
what makes that simile of Ariosto's so true and so justly celebrated: Natura lo
fece e poi ruppe lo stampo. After Nature stamps a man of genius, she breaks the
die.
But there is always a limit to human capacity; and no one can be a great

genius without having some decidedly weak side, it may even be, some
intellectual narrowness. In other words, there will foe some faculty in which he
is now and then inferior to men of moderate endowments. It will be a faculty
which, if strong, might have been an obstacle to the exercise of the qualities in
which he excels. What this weak point is, it will always be hard to define with
any accuracy even in a given case. It may be better expressed indirectly; thus
Plato's weak point is exactly that in which Aristotle is strong, and vice versa; and
so, too, Kant is deficient just where Goethe is great.
Now, mankind is fond of venerating something; but its veneration is
generally directed to the wrong object, and it remains so directed until posterity
comes to set it right. But the educated public is no sooner set right in this, than
the honor which is due to genius degenerates; just as the honor which the faithful
pay to their saints easily passes into a frivolous worship of relics. Thousands of
Christians adore the relics of a saint whose life and doctrine are unknown to
them; and the religion of thousands of Buddhists lies more in veneration of the
Holy Tooth or some such object, or the vessel that contains it, or the Holy Bowl,
or the fossil footstep, or the Holy Tree which Buddha planted, than in the
thorough knowledge and faithful practice of his high teaching. Petrarch's house
in Arqua; Tasso's supposed prison in Ferrara; Shakespeare's house in Stratford,
with his chair; Goethe's house in Weimar, with its furniture; Kant's old hat; the
autographs of great men; these things are gaped at with interest and awe by
many who have never read their works. They cannot do anything more than just
gape.
The intelligent amongst them are moved by the wish to see the objects
which the great man habitually had before his eyes; and by a strange illusion,
these produce the mistaken notion that with the objects they are bringing back
the man himself, or that something of him must cling to them. Akin to such
people are those who earnestly strive to acquaint themselves with the subject-
matter of a poet's works, or to unravel the personal circumstances and events in
his life which have suggested particular passages. This is as though the audience
in a theatre were to admire a fine scene and then rush upon the stage to look at
the scaffolding that supports it. There are in our day enough instances of these
critical investigators, and they prove the truth of the saying that mankind is
interested, not in the form of a work, that is, in its manner of treatment, but in its
actual matter. All it cares for is the theme. To read a philosopher's biography,
instead of studying his thoughts, is like neglecting a picture and attending only to
the style of its frame, debating whether it is carved well or ill, and how much it
cost to gild it.
This is all very well. However, there is another class of persons whose

interest is also directed to material and personal considerations, but they go
much further and carry it to a point where it becomes absolutely futile. Because
a great man has opened up to them the treasures of his inmost being, and, by a
supreme effort of his faculties, produced works which not only redound to their
elevation and enlightenment, but will also benefit their posterity to the tenth and
twentieth generation; because he has presented mankind with a matchless gift,
these varlets think themselves justified in sitting in judgment upon his personal
morality, and trying if they cannot discover here or there some spot in him which
will soothe the pain they feel at the sight of so great a mind, compared with the
overwhelming feeling of their own nothingness.
This is the real source of all those prolix discussions, carried on in countless
books and reviews, on the moral aspect of Goethe's life, and whether he ought
not to have married one or other of the girls with whom he fell in love in his
young days; whether, again, instead of honestly devoting himself to the service
of his master, he should not have been a man of the people, a German patriot,
worthy of a seat in the Paulskirche, and so on. Such crying ingratitude and
malicious detraction prove that these self-constituted judges are as great knaves
morally as they are intellectually, which is saying a great deal.
A man of talent will strive for money and reputation; but the spring that
moves genius to the production of its works is not as easy to name. Wealth is
seldom its reward. Nor is it reputation or glory; only a Frenchman could mean
that. Glory is such an uncertain thing, and, if you look at it closely, of so little
value. Besides it never corresponds to the effort you have made:
Responsura tuo nunquam est par fama labori.
Nor, again, is it exactly the pleasure it gives you; for this is almost
outweighed by the greatness of the effort. It is rather a peculiar kind of instinct,
which drives the man of genius to give permanent form to what he sees and
feels, without being conscious of any further motive. It works, in the main, by a
necessity similar to that which makes a tree bear its fruit; and no external
condition is needed but the ground upon which it is to thrive.
On a closer examination, it seems as though, in the case of a genius, the will
to live, which is the spirit of the human species, were conscious of having, by
some rare chance, and for a brief period, attained a greater clearness of vision,
and were now trying to secure it, or at least the outcome of it, for the whole
species, to which the individual genius in his inmost being belongs; so that the
light which he sheds about him may pierce the darkness and dullness of ordinary
human consciousness and there produce some good effect.
Arising in some such way, this instinct drives the genius to carry his work
to completion, without thinking of reward or applause or sympathy; to leave all

care for his own personal welfare; to make his life one of industrious solitude,
and to strain his faculties to the utmost. He thus comes to think more about
posterity than about contemporaries; because, while the latter can only lead him
astray, posterity forms the majority of the species, and time will gradually bring
the discerning few who can appreciate him. Meanwhile it is with him as with the
artist described by Goethe; he has no princely patron to prize his talents, no
friend to rejoice with him:
Ein Fürst der die Talente schätzt, Ein Freund, der sich mit mir ergötzt, Die
haben leider mir gefehlt.
His work is, as it were, a sacred object and the true fruit of his life, and his
aim in storing it away for a more discerning posterity will be to make it the
property of mankind. An aim like this far surpasses all others, and for it he wears
the crown of thorns which is one day to bloom into a wreath of laurel. All his
powers are concentrated in the effort to complete and secure his work; just as the
insect, in the last stage of its development, uses its whole strength on behalf of a
brood it will never live to see; it puts its eggs in some place of safety, where, as
it well knows, the young will one day find life and nourishment, and then dies in
confidence.
THE WISDOM OF LIFE
INTRODUCTION.
In these pages I shall speak of The Wisdom of Life in the common meaning
of the term, as the art, namely, of ordering our lives so as to obtain the greatest
possible amount of pleasure and success; an art the theory of which may be
called Eudaemonology, for it teaches us how to lead a happy existence. Such an
existence might perhaps be defined as one which, looked at from a purely
objective point of view, or, rather, after cool and mature reflection--for the
question necessarily involves subjective considerations,--would be decidedly
preferable to non-existence; implying that we should cling to it for its own sake,
and not merely from the fear of death; and further, that we should never like it to
come to an end.
Now whether human life corresponds, or could possibly correspond, to this
conception of existence, is a question to which, as is well-known, my
philosophical system returns a negative answer. On the eudaemonistic
hypothesis, however, the question must be answered in the affirmative; and I
have shown, in the second volume of my chief work (ch. 49), that this
hypothesis is based upon a fundamental mistake. Accordingly, in elaborating the

scheme of a happy existence, I have had to make a complete surrender of the
higher metaphysical and ethical standpoint to which my own theories lead; and
everything I shall say here will to some extent rest upon a compromise; in so far,
that is, as I take the common standpoint of every day, and embrace the error
which is at the bottom of it. My remarks, therefore, will possess only a qualified
value, for the very word eudaemonology is a euphemism. Further, I make no
claims to completeness; partly because the subject is inexhaustible, and partly
because I should otherwise have to say over again what has been already said by
others.
The only book composed, as far as I remember, with a like purpose to that
which animates this collection of aphorisms, is Cardan's De utilitate ex adversis
capienda, which is well worth reading, and may be used to supplement the
present work. Aristotle, it is true, has a few words on eudaemonology in the fifth
chapter of the first book of his Rhetoric; but what he says does not come to very
much. As compilation is not my business, I have made no use of these
predecessors; more especially because in the process of compiling, individuality
of view is lost, and individuality of view is the kernel of works of this kind. In
general, indeed, the wise in all ages have always said the same thing, and the
fools, who at all times form the immense majority, have in their way too acted
alike, and done just the opposite; and so it will continue. For, as Voltaire says,
we shall leave this world as foolish and as wicked as we found it on our arrival.

THE WISDOM OF LIFE.
CHAPTER I.
DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT.
Aristotle[1] divides the blessings of life into three classes--those which
come to us from without, those of the soul, and those of the body. Keeping
nothing of this division but the number, I observe that the fundamental
differences in human lot may be reduced to three distinct classes:
[Footnote 1: Eth. Nichom., I. 8.]
(1) What a man is: that is to say, personality, in the widest sense of the
word; under which are included health, strength, beauty, temperament, moral
character, intelligence, and education.
(2) What a man has: that is, property and possessions of every kind.
(3) How a man stands in the estimation of others: by which is to be
understood, as everybody knows, what a man is in the eyes of his fellowmen, or,
more strictly, the light in which they regard him. This is shown by their opinion
of him; and their opinion is in its turn manifested by the honor in which he is
held, and by his rank and reputation.
The differences which come under the first head are those which Nature
herself has set between man and man; and from this fact alone we may at once
infer that they influence the happiness or unhappiness of mankind in a much
more vital and radical way than those contained under the two following heads,
which are merely the effect of human arrangements. Compared with genuine
personal advantages, such as a great mind or a great heart, all the privileges of
rank or birth, even of royal birth, are but as kings on the stage, to kings in real
life. The same thing was said long ago by Metrodorus, the earliest disciple of
Epicurus, who wrote as the title of one of his chapters, The happiness we receive
from ourselves is greater than that which we obtain from our surroundings[1]
And it is an obvious fact, which cannot be called in question, that the principal
element in a man's well-being,--indeed, in the whole tenor of his existence,--is
what he is made of, his inner constitution. For this is the immediate source of
that inward satisfaction or dissatisfaction resulting from the sum total of his
sensations, desires and thoughts; whilst his surroundings, on the other hand,
exert only a mediate or indirect influence upon him. This is why the same
external events or circumstances affect no two people alike; even with perfectly
similar surroundings every one lives in a world of his own. For a man has
immediate apprehension only of his own ideas, feelings and volitions; the outer

world can influence him only in so far as it brings these to life. The world in
which a man lives shapes itself chiefly by the way in which he looks at it, and so
it proves different to different men; to one it is barren, dull, and superficial; to
another rich, interesting, and full of meaning. On hearing of the interesting
events which have happened in the course of a man's experience, many people
will wish that similar things had happened in their lives too, completely
forgetting that they should be envious rather of the mental aptitude which lent
those events the significance they possess when he describes them; to a man of
genius they were interesting adventures; but to the dull perceptions of an
ordinary individual they would have been stale, everyday occurrences. This is in
the highest degree the case with many of Goethe's and Byron's poems, which are
obviously founded upon actual facts; where it is open to a foolish reader to envy
the poet because so many delightful things happened to him, instead of envying
that mighty power of phantasy which was capable of turning a fairly common
experience into something so great and beautiful.
[Footnote 1: Cf. Clemens Alex. Strom. II., 21.]
In the same way, a person of melancholy temperament will make a scene in
a tragedy out of what appears to the sanguine man only in the light of an
interesting conflict, and to a phlegmatic soul as something without any
meaning;--all of which rests upon the fact that every event, in order to be
realized and appreciated, requires the co-operation of two factors, namely, a
subject and an object, although these are as closely and necessarily connected as
oxygen and hydrogen in water. When therefore the objective or external factor in
an experience is actually the same, but the subjective or personal appreciation of
it varies, the event is just as much a different one in the eyes of different persons
as if the objective factors had not been alike; for to a blunt intelligence the fairest
and best object in the world presents only a poor reality, and is therefore only
poorly appreciated,--like a fine landscape in dull weather, or in the reflection of
a bad camera obscura. In plain language, every man is pent up within the limits
of his own consciousness, and cannot directly get beyond those limits any more
than he can get beyond his own skin; so external aid is not of much use to him.
On the stage, one man is a prince, another a minister, a third a servant or a
soldier or a general, and so on,--mere external differences: the inner reality, the
kernel of all these appearances is the same--a poor player, with all the anxieties
of his lot. In life it is just the same. Differences of rank and wealth give every
man his part to play, but this by no means implies a difference of inward
happiness and pleasure; here, too, there is the same being in all--a poor mortal,
with his hardships and troubles. Though these may, indeed, in every case
proceed from dissimilar causes, they are in their essential nature much the same

in all their forms, with degrees of intensity which vary, no doubt, but in no wise
correspond to the part a man has to play, to the presence or absence of position
and wealth. Since everything which exists or happens for a man exists only in
his consciousness and happens for it alone, the most essential thing for a man is
the constitution of this consciousness, which is in most cases far more important
than the circumstances which go to form its contents. All the pride and pleasure
of the world, mirrored in the dull consciousness of a fool, are poor indeed
compared with the imagination of Cervantes writing his Don Quixote in a
miserable prison. The objective half of life and reality is in the hand of fate, and
accordingly takes various forms in different cases: the subjective half is ourself,
and in essentials is always remains the same.
Hence the life of every man is stamped with the same character throughout,
however much his external circumstances may alter; it is like a series of
variations on a single theme. No one can get beyond his own individuality. An
animal, under whatever circumstances it is placed, remains within the narrow
limits to which nature has irrevocably consigned it; so that our endeavors to
make a pet happy must always keep within the compass of its nature, and be
restricted to what it can feel. So it is with man; the measure of the happiness he
can attain is determined beforehand by his individuality. More especially is this
the case with the mental powers, which fix once for all his capacity for the
higher kinds of pleasure. If these powers are small, no efforts from without,
nothing that his fellowmen or that fortune can do for him, will suffice to raise
him above the ordinary degree of human happiness and pleasure, half animal
though it be; his only resources are his sensual appetite,--a cozy and cheerful
family life at the most,--low company and vulgar pastime; even education, on
the whole, can avail little, if anything, for the enlargement of his horizon. For the
highest, most varied and lasting pleasures are those of the mind, however much
our youth may deceive us on this point; and the pleasures of the mind turn
chiefly on the powers of the mind. It is clear, then, that our happiness depends in
a great degree upon what we are, upon our individuality, whilst lot or destiny is
generally taken to mean only what we have, or our reputation. Our lot, in this
sense, may improve; but we do not ask much of it if we are inwardly rich: on the
other hand, a fool remains a fool, a dull blockhead, to his last hour, even though
he were surrounded by houris in paradise. This is why Goethe, in the West-
östliclien Divan, says that every man, whether he occupies a low position in life,
or emerges as its victor, testifies to personality as the greatest factor in
happiness:--
Volk und Knecht und Uberwinder Sie gestehen, zu jeder Zeit, Höchtes
Glück der Erdenkinder Sei nur die Persönlichkeit.

Everything confirms the fact that the subjective element in life is
incomparably more important for our happiness and pleasure than the objective,
from such sayings as Hunger is the best sauce, and Youth and Age cannot live
together, up to the life of the Genius and the Saint. Health outweighs all other
blessings so much that one may really say that a healthy beggar is happier than
an ailing king. A quiet and cheerful temperament, happy in the enjoyment of a
perfectly sound physique, an intellect clear, lively, penetrating and seeing things
as they are, a moderate and gentle will, and therefore a good conscience--these
are privileges which no rank or wealth can make up for or replace. For what a
man is in himself, what accompanies him when he is alone, what no one can
give or take away, is obviously more essential to him than everything he has in
the way of possessions, or even what he may be in the eyes of the world. An
intellectual man in complete solitude has excellent entertainment in his own
thoughts and fancies, while no amount of diversity or social pleasure, theatres,
excursions and amusements, can ward off boredom from a dullard. A good,
temperate, gentle character can be happy in needy circumstances, whilst a
covetous, envious and malicious man, even if he be the richest in the world, goes
miserable. Nay more; to one who has the constant delight of a special
individuality, with a high degree of intellect, most of the pleasures which are run
after by mankind are simply superfluous; they are even a trouble and a burden.
And so Horace says of himself, that, however many are deprived of the fancy-
goods of life, there is one at least who can live without them:--
Gemmas, marmor, ebur, Tyrrhena sigilla, tabellas, Argentum, vestes,
Gaetulo murice tinctas Sunt qui non habeant, est qui non curat habere;
and when Socrates saw various articles of luxury spread out for sale, he
exclaimed: How much there is in the world I do not want.
So the first and most essential element in our life's happiness is what we
are,--our personality, if for no other reason than that it is a constant factor
coming into play under all circumstances: besides, unlike the blessings which are
described under the other two heads, it is not the sport of destiny and cannot be
wrested from us;--and, so far, it is endowed with an absolute value in contrast to
the merely relative worth of the other two. The consequence of this is that it is
much more difficult than people commonly suppose to get a hold on a man from
without. But here the all-powerful agent, Time, comes in and claims its rights,
and before its influence physical and mental advantages gradually waste away.
Moral character alone remains inaccessible to it. In view of the destructive effect
of time, it seems, indeed, as if the blessings named under the other two heads, of
which time cannot directly rob us, were superior to those of the first. Another
advantage might be claimed for them, namely, that being in their very nature

objective and external, they are attainable, and every one is presented with the
possibility, at least, of coming into possession of them; whilst what is subjective
is not open to us to acquire, but making its entry by a kind of divine right, it
remains for life, immutable, inalienable, an inexorable doom. Let me quote those
lines in which Goethe describes how an unalterable destiny is assigned to every
man at the hour of his birth, so that he can develop only in the lines laid down
for him, as it were, by the conjunctions of the stars: and how the Sybil and the
prophets declare that himself a man can never escape, nor any power of time
avail to change the path on which his life is cast:--
Wie an dem Tag, der dich der Welt verliehen, Dïe Sonne stand zum Grusse
der Planeten, Bist alsobald und fort und fort gediehen, Nach dem Gesetz,
wonach du angetreten. So musst du sein, dir kannst du nicht entfliehen, So tagten
schon Sybillen und Propheten; Und keine Zeit, und keine Macht zerstückelt
Geprägte Form, die lebend sich entwickelt.
The only thing that stands in our power to achieve, is to make the most
advantageous use possible of the personal qualities we possess, and accordingly
to follow such pursuits only as will call them into play, to strive after the kind of
perfection of which they admit and to avoid every other; consequently, to choose
the position, occupation and manner of life which are most suitable for their
development.
Imagine a man endowed with herculean strength who is compelled by
circumstances to follow a sedentary occupation, some minute exquisite work of
the hands, for example, or to engage in study and mental labor demanding quite
other powers, and just those which he has not got,--compelled, that is, to leave
unused the powers in which he is pre-eminently strong; a man placed like this
will never feel happy all his life through. Even more miserable will be the lot of
the man with intellectual powers of a very high order, who has to leave them
undeveloped and unemployed, in the pursuit of a calling which does not require
them, some bodily labor, perhaps, for which his strength is insufficient. Still, in a
case of this kind, it should be our care, especially in youth, to avoid the precipice
of presumption, and not ascribe to ourselves a superfluity of power which is not
there.
Since the blessings described under the first head decidedly outweigh those
contained under the other two, it is manifestly a wiser course to aim at the
maintenance of our health and the cultivation of our faculties, than at the
amassing of wealth; but this must not be mistaken as meaning that we should
neglect to acquire an adequate supply of the necessaries of life. Wealth, in the
strict sense of the word, that is, great superfluity, can do little for our happiness;
and many rich people feel unhappy just because they are without any true mental

culture or knowledge, and consequently have no objective interests which would
qualify them for intellectual occupations. For beyond the satisfaction of some
real and natural necessities, all that the possession of wealth can achieve has a
very small influence upon our happiness, in the proper sense of the word;
indeed, wealth rather disturbs it, because the preservation of property entails a
great many unavoidable anxieties. And still men are a thousand times more
intent on becoming rich than on acquiring culture, though it is quite certain that
what a man is contributes much more to his happiness than what he has. So you
may see many a man, as industrious as an ant, ceaselessly occupied from
morning to night in the endeavor to increase his heap of gold. Beyond the
narrow horizon of means to this end, he knows nothing; his mind is a blank, and
consequently unsusceptible to any other influence. The highest pleasures, those
of the intellect, are to him inaccessible, and he tries in vain to replace them by
the fleeting pleasures of sense in which he indulges, lasting but a brief hour and
at tremendous cost. And if he is lucky, his struggles result in his having a really
great pile of gold, which he leaves to his heir, either to make it still larger, or to
squander it in extravagance. A life like this, though pursued with a sense of
earnestness and an air of importance, is just as silly as many another which has a
fool's cap for its symbol.
What a man has in himself is, then, the chief element in his happiness.
Because this is, as a rule, so very little, most of those who are placed beyond the
struggle with penury feel at bottom quite as unhappy as those who are still
engaged in it. Their minds are vacant, their imagination dull, their spirits poor,
and so they are driven to the company of those like them--for similis simili
gaudet--where they make common pursuit of pastime and entertainment,
consisting for the most part in sensual pleasure, amusement of every kind, and
finally, in excess and libertinism. A young man of rich family enters upon life
with a large patrimony, and often runs through it in an incredibly short space of
time, in vicious extravagance; and why? Simply because, here too, the mind is
empty and void, and so the man is bored with existence. He was sent forth into
the world outwardly rich but inwardly poor, and his vain endeavor was to make
his external wealth compensate for his inner poverty, by trying to obtain
everything from without, like an old man who seeks to strengthen himself as
King David or Maréchal de Rex tried to do. And so in the end one who is
inwardly poor comes to be also poor outwardly.
I need not insist upon the importance of the other two kinds of blessings
which make up the happiness of human life; now-a-days the value of possessing
them is too well known to require advertisement. The third class, it is true, may
seem, compared with the second, of a very ethereal character, as it consists only

of other people's opinions. Still every one has to strive for reputation, that is to
say, a good name. Rank, on the other hand, should be aspired to only by those
who serve the state, and fame by very few indeed. In any case, reputation is
looked upon as a priceless treasure, and fame as the most precious of all the
blessings a man can attain,--the Golden Fleece, as it were, of the elect: whilst
only fools will prefer rank to property. The second and third classes, moreover,
are reciprocally cause and effect; so far, that is, as Petronius' maxim, habes
habeberis, is true; and conversely, the favor of others, in all its forms, often puts
us in the way of getting what we want.
CHAPTER II.
PERSONALITY, OR WHAT A MAN IS.
We have already seen, in general, that what a man is contributes much more
to his happiness than what he has, or how he is regarded by others. What a man
is, and so what he has in his own person, is always the chief thing to consider;
for his individuality accompanies him always and everywhere, and gives its
color to all his experiences. In every kind of enjoyment, for instance, the
pleasure depends principally upon the man himself. Every one admits this in
regard to physical, and how much truer it is of intellectual, pleasure. When we
use that English expression, "to enjoy one's self," we are employing a very
striking and appropriate phrase; for observe--one says, not "he enjoys Paris," but
"he enjoys himself in Paris." To a man possessed of an ill-conditioned
individuality, all pleasure is like delicate wine in a mouth made bitter with gall.
Therefore, in the blessings as well as in the ills of life, less depends upon what
befalls us than upon the way in which it is met, that is, upon the kind and degree
of our general susceptibility. What a man is and has in himself,--in a word
personality, with all it entails, is the only immediate and direct factor in his
happiness and welfare. All else is mediate and indirect, and its influence can be
neutralized and frustrated; but the influence of personality never. This is why the
envy which personal qualities excite is the most implacable of all,--as it is also
the most carefully dissembled.
Further, the constitution of our consciousness is the ever present and lasting
element in all we do or suffer; our individuality is persistently at work, more or
less, at every moment of our life: all other influences are temporal, incidental,
fleeting, and subject to every kind of chance and change. This is why Aristotle
says: It is not wealth but character that lasts.[1]
[Greek: --hae gar phusis bebion ou ta chraemata]
[Footnote 1: Eth. Eud., vii. 2. 37:]

And just for the same reason we can more easily bear a misfortune which
comes to us entirely from without, than one which we have drawn upon
ourselves; for fortune may always change, but not character. Therefore,
subjective blessings,--a noble nature, a capable head, a joyful temperament,
bright spirits, a well-constituted, perfectly sound physique, in a word, mens sana
in corpore sano, are the first and most important elements in happiness; so that
we should be more intent on promoting and preserving such qualities than on the
possession of external wealth and external honor.
And of all these, the one which makes us the most directly happy is a genial
flow of good spirits; for this excellent quality is its own immediate reward. The
man who is cheerful and merry has always a good reason for being so,--the fact,
namely, that he is so. There is nothing which, like this quality, can so completely
replace the loss of every other blessing. If you know anyone who is young,
handsome, rich and esteemed, and you want to know, further, if he is happy, ask,
Is he cheerful and genial?--and if he is, what does it matter whether he is young
or old, straight or humpbacked, poor or rich?--he is happy. In my early days I
once opened an old book and found these words: If you laugh a great deal, you
are happy; if you cry a great deal, you are unhappy;--a very simple remark, no
doubt; but just because it is so simple I have never been able to forget it, even
though it is in the last degree a truism. So if cheerfulness knocks at our door, we
should throw it wide open, for it never comes inopportunely; instead of that, we
often make scruples about letting it in. We want to be quite sure that we have
every reason to be contented; then we are afraid that cheerfulness of spirits may
interfere with serious reflections or weighty cares. Cheerfulness is a direct and
immediate gain,--the very coin, as it were, of happiness, and not, like all else,
merely a cheque upon the bank; for it alone makes us immediately happy in the
present moment, and that is the highest blessing for beings like us, whose
existence is but an infinitesimal moment between two eternities. To secure and
promote this feeling of cheerfulness should be the supreme aim of all our
endeavors after happiness.
Now it is certain that nothing contributes so little to cheerfulness as riches,
or so much, as health. Is it not in the lower classes, the so-called working
classes, more especially those of them who live in the country, that we see
cheerful and contented faces? and is it not amongst the rich, the upper classes,
that we find faces full of ill-humor and vexation? Consequently we should try as
much as possible to maintain a high degree of health; for cheerfulness is the very
flower of it. I need hardly say what one must do to be healthy--avoid every kind
of excess, all violent and unpleasant emotion, all mental overstrain, take daily
exercise in the open air, cold baths and such like hygienic measures. For without

a proper amount of daily exercise no one can remain healthy; all the processes of
life demand exercise for the due performance of their functions, exercise not
only of the parts more immediately concerned, but also of the whole body. For,
as Aristotle rightly says, Life is movement; it is its very essence. Ceaseless and
rapid motion goes on in every part of the organism. The heart, with its
complicated double systole and diastole, beats strongly and untiringly; with
twenty-eight beats it has to drive the whole of the blood through arteries, veins
and capillaries; the lungs pump like a steam-engine, without intermission; the
intestines are always in peristaltic action; the glands are all constantly absorbing
and secreting; even the brain has a double motion of its own, with every beat of
the pulse and every breath we draw. When people can get no exercise at all, as is
the case with the countless numbers who are condemned to a sedentary life,
there is a glaring and fatal disproportion between outward inactivity and inner
tumult. For this ceaseless internal motion requires some external counterpart,
and the want of it produces effects like those of emotion which we are obliged to
suppress. Even trees must be shaken by the wind, if they are to thrive. The rule
which finds its application here may be most briefly expressed in Latin: omnis
motus, quo celerior, eo magis motus.
How much our happiness depends upon our spirits, and these again upon
our state of health, may be seen by comparing the influence which the same
external circumstances or events have upon us when we are well and strong with
the effects which they have when we are depressed and troubled with ill-health.
It is not what things are objectively and in themselves, but what they are for us,
in our way of looking at them, that makes us happy or the reverse. As Epictetus
says, Men are not influenced by things, but by their thoughts about things. And,
in general, nine-tenths of our happiness depends upon health alone. With health,
everything is a source of pleasure; without it, nothing else, whatever it may be, is
enjoyable; even the other personal blessings,--a great mind, a happy
temperament--are degraded and dwarfed for want of it. So it is really with good
reason that, when two people meet, the first thing they do is to inquire after each
other's health, and to express the hope that it is good; for good health is by far
the most important element in human happiness. It follows from all this that the
greatest of follies is to sacrifice health for any other kind of happiness, whatever
it may be, for gain, advancement, learning or fame, let alone, then, for fleeting
sensual pleasures. Everything else should rather be postponed to it.
But however much health may contribute to that flow of good spirits which
is so essential to our happiness, good spirits do not entirely depend upon health;
for a man may be perfectly sound in his physique and still possess a melancholy
temperament and be generally given up to sad thoughts. The ultimate cause of

this is undoubtedly to be found in innate, and therefore unalterable, physical
constitution, especially in the more or less normal relation of a man's
sensitiveness to his muscular and vital energy. Abnormal sensitiveness produces
inequality of spirits, a predominating melancholy, with periodical fits of
unrestrained liveliness. A genius is one whose nervous power or sensitiveness is
largely in excess; as Aristotle[1] has very correctly observed, Men distinguished
in philosophy, politics, poetry or art appear to be all of a melancholy
temperament. This is doubtless the passage which Cicero has in his mind when
he says, as he often does, Aristoteles ait omnes ingeniosos melancholicos esse.
[2] Shakespeare has very neatly expressed this radical and innate diversity of
temperament in those lines in The Merchant of Venice:
[Footnote 1: Probl. xxx., ep. 1]
[Footnote 2: Tusc. i., 33.]
Nature has framed strange fellows in her time; Some that will evermore
peep through their eyes, And laugh, like parrots at a bag-piper; And others of
such vinegar aspect, That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile, Though
Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
This is the difference which Plato draws between [Greek: eukolos] and
[Greek: dyskolos]--the man of easy, and the man of difficult disposition--in
proof of which he refers to the varying degrees of susceptibility which different
people show to pleasurable and painful impressions; so that one man will laugh
at what makes another despair. As a rule, the stronger the susceptibility to
unpleasant impressions, the weaker is the susceptibility to pleasant ones, and
vice versa. If it is equally possible for an event to turn out well or ill, the [Greek:
dyskolos] will be annoyed or grieved if the issue is unfavorable, and will not
rejoice, should it be happy. On the other hand, the [Greek: eukolos] will neither
worry nor fret over an unfavorable issue, but rejoice if it turns out well. If the
one is successful in nine out of ten undertakings, he will not be pleased, but
rather annoyed that one has miscarried; whilst the other, if only a single one
succeeds, will manage to find consolation in the fact and remain cheerful. But
here is another instance of the truth, that hardly any evil is entirely without its
compensation; for the misfortunes and sufferings which the [Greek: auskoloi],
that is, people of gloomy and anxious character, have to overcome, are, on the
whole, more imaginary and therefore less real than those which befall the gay
and careless; for a man who paints everything black, who constantly fears the
worst and takes measures accordingly, will not be disappointed so often in this
world, as one who always looks upon the bright side of things. And when a
morbid affection of the nerves, or a derangement of the digestive organs, plays
into the hands of an innate tendency to gloom, this tendency may reach such a

height that permanent discomfort produces a weariness of life. So arises an
inclination to suicide, which even the most trivial unpleasantness may actually
bring about; nay, when the tendency attains its worst form, it may be occasioned
by nothing in particular, but a man may resolve to put an end to his existence,
simply because he is permanently unhappy, and then coolly and firmly carry out
his determination; as may be seen by the way in which the sufferer, when placed
under supervision, as he usually is, eagerly waits to seize the first unguarded
moment, when, without a shudder, without a struggle or recoil, he may use the
now natural and welcome means of effecting his release.[1] Even the healthiest,
perhaps even the most cheerful man, may resolve upon death under certain
circumstances; when, for instance, his sufferings, or his fears of some inevitable
misfortune, reach such a pitch as to outweigh the terrors of death. The only
difference lies in the degree of suffering necessary to bring about the fatal act, a
degree which will be high in the case of a cheerful, and low in that of a gloomy
man. The greater the melancholy, the lower need the degree be; in the end, it
may even sink to zero. But if a man is cheerful, and his spirits are supported by
good health, it requires a high degree of suffering to make him lay hands upon
himself. There are countless steps in the scale between the two extremes of
suicide, the suicide which springs merely from a morbid intensification of innate
gloom, and the suicide of the healthy and cheerful man, who has entirely
objective grounds for putting an end to his existence.
[Footnote 1: For a detailed description of this condition of mind Cf
Esquirol, Des maladies mentales.]
Beauty is partly an affair of health. It may be reckoned as a personal
advantage; though it does not, properly speaking, contribute directly to our
happiness. It does so indirectly, by impressing other people; and it is no
unimportant advantage, even in man. Beauty is an open letter of
recommendation, predisposing the heart to favor the person who presents it. As
is well said in these lines of Homer, the gift of beauty is not lightly to be thrown
away, that glorious gift which none can bestow save the gods alone--
[Greek: outoi hapoblaet erti theon erikuoea dora, ossa ken autoi dosin, ekon
douk an tis eloito].[1]
[Footnote 1: Iliad 3, 65.]
The most general survey shows us that the two foes of human happiness are
pain and boredom. We may go further, and say that in the degree in which we
are fortunate enough to get away from the one, we approach the other. Life
presents, in fact, a more or less violent oscillation between the two. The reason
of this is that each of these two poles stands in a double antagonism to the other,
external or objective, and inner or subjective. Needy surroundings and poverty

produce pain; while, if a man is more than well off, he is bored. Accordingly,
while the lower classes are engaged in a ceaseless struggle with need, in other
words, with pain, the upper carry on a constant and often desperate battle with
boredom.[1] The inner or subjective antagonism arises from the fact that, in the
individual, susceptibility to pain varies inversely with susceptibility to boredom,
because susceptibility is directly proportionate to mental power. Let me explain.
A dull mind is, as a rule, associated with dull sensibilities, nerves which no
stimulus can affect, a temperament, in short, which does not feel pain or anxiety
very much, however great or terrible it may be. Now, intellectual dullness is at
the bottom of that vacuity of soul which is stamped on so many faces, a state of
mind which betrays itself by a constant and lively attention to all the trivial
circumstances in the external world. This is the true source of boredom--a
continual panting after excitement, in order to have a pretext for giving the mind
and spirits something to occupy them. The kind of things people choose for this
purpose shows that they are not very particular, as witness the miserable
pastimes they have recourse to, and their ideas of social pleasure and
conversation: or again, the number of people who gossip on the doorstep or gape
out of the window. It is mainly because of this inner vacuity of soul that people
go in quest of society, diversion, amusement, luxury of every sort, which lead
many to extravagance and misery. Nothing is so good a protection against such
misery as inward wealth, the wealth of the mind, because the greater it grows,
the less room it leaves for boredom. The inexhaustible activity of thought!
Finding ever new material to work upon in the multifarious phenomena of self
and nature, and able and ready to form new combinations of them,--there you
have something that invigorates the mind, and apart from moments of relaxation,
sets it far above the reach of boredom.
[Footnote 1: And the extremes meet; for the lowest state of civilization, a
nomad or wandering life, finds its counterpart in the highest, where everyone is
at times a tourist. The earlier stage was a case of necessity; the latter is a remedy
for boredom.]
But, on the other hand, this high degree of intelligence is rooted in a high
degree of susceptibility, greater strength of will, greater passionateness; and
from the union of these qualities comes an increased capacity for emotion, an
enhanced sensibility to all mental and even bodily pain, greater impatience of
obstacles, greater resentment of interruption;--all of which tendencies are
augmented by the power of the imagination, the vivid character of the whole
range of thought, including what is disagreeable. This applies, in various
degrees, to every step in the long scale of mental power, from the veriest dunce
to the greatest genius that ever lived. Therefore the nearer anyone is, either from

a subjective or from an objective point of view, to one of those sources of
suffering in human life, the farther he is from the other. And so a man's natural
bent will lead him to make his objective world conform to his subjective as
much as possible; that is to say, he will take the greatest measures against that
form of suffering to which he is most liable. The wise man will, above all, strive
after freedom from pain and annoyance, quiet and leisure, consequently a
tranquil, modest life, with as few encounters as may be; and so, after a little
experience of his so-called fellowmen, he will elect to live in retirement, or even,
if he is a man of great intellect, in solitude. For the more a man has in himself,
the less he will want from other people,--the less, indeed, other people can be to
him. This is why a high degree of intellect tends to make a man unsocial. True, if
quality of intellect could be made up for by quantity, it might be worth while to
live even in the great world; but unfortunately, a hundred fools together will not
make one wise man.
But the individual who stands at the other end of the scale is no sooner free
from the pangs of need than he endeavors to get pastime and society at any cost,
taking up with the first person he meets, and avoiding nothing so much as
himself. For in solitude, where every one is thrown upon his own resources,
what a man has in himself comes to light; the fool in fine raiment groans under
the burden of his miserable personality, a burden which he can never throw off,
whilst the man of talent peoples the waste places with his animating thoughts.
Seneca declares that folly is its own burden,--omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui,-
-a very true saying, with which may be compared the words of Jesus, the son of
Sirach, The life of a fool is worse than death[1]. And, as a rule, it will be found
that a man is sociable just in the degree in which he is intellectually poor and
generally vulgar. For one's choice in this world does not go much beyond
solitude on one side and vulgarity on the other. It is said that the most sociable of
all people are the negroes; and they are at the bottom of the scale in intellect. I
remember reading once in a French paper[2] that the blacks in North America,
whether free or enslaved, are fond of shutting themselves up in large numbers in
the smallest space, because they cannot have too much of one another's snub-
nosed company.
[Footnote 1: Ecclesiasticus, xxii. 11.]
[Footnote 2: Le Commerce, Oct. 19th, 1837.]
The brain may be regarded as a kind of parasite of the organism, a
pensioner, as it were, who dwells with the body: and leisure, that is, the time one
has for the free enjoyment of one's consciousness or individuality, is the fruit or
produce of the rest of existence, which is in general only labor and effort. But
what does most people's leisure yield?--boredom and dullness; except, of course,

when it is occupied with sensual pleasure or folly. How little such leisure is
worth may be seen in the way in which it is spent: and, as Ariosto observes, how
miserable are the idle hours of ignorant men!--ozio lungo d'uomini ignoranti.
Ordinary people think merely how they shall spend their time; a man of any
talent tries to use it. The reason why people of limited intellect are apt to be
bored is that their intellect is absolutely nothing more than the means by which
the motive power of the will is put into force: and whenever there is nothing
particular to set the will in motion, it rests, and their intellect takes a holiday,
because, equally with the will, it requires something external to bring it into
play. The result is an awful stagnation of whatever power a man has--in a word,
boredom. To counteract this miserable feeling, men run to trivialities which
please for the moment they are taken up, hoping thus to engage the will in order
to rouse it to action, and so set the intellect in motion; for it is the latter which
has to give effect to these motives of the will. Compared with real and natural
motives, these are but as paper money to coin; for their value is only arbitrary--
card games and the like, which have been invented for this very purpose. And if
there is nothing else to be done, a man will twirl his thumbs or beat the devil's
tattoo; or a cigar may be a welcome substitute for exercising his brains. Hence,
in all countries the chief occupation of society is card-playing,[1] and it is the
gauge of its value, and an outward sign that it is bankrupt in thought. Because
people have no thoughts to deal in, they deal cards, and try and win one another's
money. Idiots! But I do not wish to be unjust; so let me remark that it may
certainly be said in defence of card-playing that it is a preparation for the world
and for business life, because one learns thereby how to make a clever use of
fortuitous but unalterable circumstances (cards, in this case), and to get as much
out of them as one can: and to do this a man must learn a little dissimulation, and
how to put a good face upon a bad business. But, on the other hand, it is exactly
for this reason that card-playing is so demoralizing, since the whole object of it
is to employ every kind of trick and machination in order to win what belongs to
another. And a habit of this sort, learnt at the card-table, strikes root and pushes
its way into practical life; and in the affairs of every day a man gradually comes
to regard meum and tuum in much the same light as cards, and to consider that
he may use to the utmost whatever advantages he possesses, so long as he does
not come within the arm of the law. Examples of what I mean are of daily
occurrence in mercantile life. Since, then, leisure is the flower, or rather the fruit,
of existence, as it puts a man into possession of himself, those are happy indeed
who possess something real in themselves. But what do you get from most
people's leisure?--only a good-for-nothing fellow, who is terribly bored and a
burden to himself. Let us, therefore, rejoice, dear brethren, for we are not

children of the bondwoman, but of the free.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Card-playing to this extent is now, no
doubt, a thing of the past, at any rate amongst the nations of northern Europe.
The present fashion is rather in favor of a dilettante interest in art or literature.]
Further, as no land is so well off as that which requires few imports, or
none at all, so the happiest man is one who has enough in his own inner wealth,
and requires little or nothing from outside for his maintenance, for imports are
expensive things, reveal dependence, entail danger, occasion trouble, and when
all is said and done, are a poor substitute for home produce. No man ought to
expect much from others, or, in general, from the external world. What one
human being can be to another is not a very great deal: in the end every one
stands alone, and the important thing is who it is that stands alone. Here, then, is
another application of the general truth which Goethe recognizes in Dichtung
und Wahrheit (Bk. III.), that in everything a man has ultimately to appeal to
himself; or, as Goldsmith puts it in The Traveller:
Still to ourselves in every place consign'd Our own felicity we make or find.
Himself is the source of the best and most a man can be or achieve. The
more this is so--the more a man finds his sources of pleasure in himself--the
happier he will be. Therefore, it is with great truth that Aristotle[1] says, To be
happy means to be self-sufficient. For all other sources of happiness are in their
nature most uncertain, precarious, fleeting, the sport of chance; and so even
under the most favorable circumstances they can easily be exhausted; nay, this is
unavoidable, because they are not always within reach. And in old age these
sources of happiness must necessarily dry up:--love leaves us then, and wit,
desire to travel, delight in horses, aptitude for social intercourse; friends and
relations, too, are taken from us by death. Then more than ever, it depends upon
what a man has in himself; for this will stick to him longest; and at any period of
life it is the only genuine and lasting source of happiness. There is not much to
be got anywhere in the world. It is filled with misery and pain; and if a man
escapes these, boredom lies in wait for him at every corner. Nay more; it is evil
which generally has the upper hand, and folly makes the most noise. Fate is
cruel, and mankind is pitiable. In such a world as this, a man who is rich in
himself is like a bright, warm, happy room at Christmastide, while without are
the frost and snow of a December night. Therefore, without doubt, the happiest
destiny on earth is to have the rare gift of a rich individuality, and, more
especially to be possessed of a good endowment of intellect; this is the happiest
destiny, though it may not be, after all, a very brilliant one.
[Footnote 1: Eth. Eud, vii 2]
There was a great wisdom in that remark which Queen Christina of Sweden

made, in her nineteenth year, about Descartes, who had then lived for twenty
years in the deepest solitude in Holland, and, apart from report, was known to
her only by a single essay: M. Descartes, she said, is the happiest of men, and his
condition seems to me much to be envied.[1] Of course, as was the case with
Descartes, external circumstances must be favorable enough to allow a man to
be master of his life and happiness; or, as we read in Ecclesiastes[2]--Wisdom is
good together with an inheritance, and profitable unto them that see the sun. The
man to whom nature and fate have granted the blessing of wisdom, will be most
anxious and careful to keep open the fountains of happiness which he has in
himself; and for this, independence and leisure are necessary. To obtain them, he
will be willing to moderate his desires and harbor his resources, all the more
because he is not, like others, restricted to the external world for his pleasures.
So he will not be misled by expectations of office, or money, or the favor and
applause of his fellowmen, into surrendering himself in order to conform to low
desires and vulgar tastes; nay, in such a case he will follow the advice that
Horace gives in his epistle to Maecenas.[3]
[Footnote 1: Vie de Descartes, par Baillet. Liv. vii., ch. 10.]
[Footnote 2: vii. 12.]
[Footnote 3: Lib. 1., ep. 7.]
Nec somnum plebis laudo, satur altilium, nec Otia divitiis Arabum
liberrima muto.
It is a great piece of folly to sacrifice the inner for the outer man, to give the
whole or the greater part of one's quiet, leisure and independence for splendor,
rank, pomp, titles and honor. This is what Goethe did. My good luck drew me
quite in the other direction.
The truth which I am insisting upon here, the truth, namely, that the chief
source of human happiness is internal, is confirmed by that most accurate
observation of Aristotle in the Nichomachean Ethics[1] that every pleasure
presupposes some sort of activity, the application of some sort of power, without
which it cannot exist. The doctrine of Aristotle's, that a man's happiness consists
in the free exercise of his highest faculties, is also enunciated by Stobaeus in his
exposition of the Peripatetic philosophy[2]: happiness, he says, means vigorous
and successful activity in all your undertakings; and he explains that by vigor
[Greek: aretae] he means mastery in any thing, whatever it be. Now, the original
purpose of those forces with which nature has endowed man is to enable him to
struggle against the difficulties which beset him on all sides. But if this struggle
comes to an end, his unemployed forces become a burden to him; and he has to
set to work and play with them,--to use them, I mean, for no purpose at all,
beyond avoiding the other source of human suffering, boredom, to which he is at

once exposed. It is the upper classes, people of wealth, who are the greatest
victims of boredom. Lucretius long ago described their miserable state, and the
truth of his description may be still recognized to-day, in the life of every great
capital--where the rich man is seldom in his own halls, because it bores him to
be there, and still he returns thither, because he is no better off outside;--or else
he is away in post-haste to his house in the country, as if it were on fire; and he
is no sooner arrived there, than he is bored again, and seeks to forget everything
in sleep, or else hurries back to town once more.
[Footnote 1: i. 7 and vii. 13, 14.]
[Footnote 2: Ecl. eth. ii., ch 7.]
Exit saepe foras magnis ex aedibus ille, Esse domi quem pertaesum est,
subitoque reventat, Quippe foris nihilo melius qui sentiat esse. Currit, agens
mannos, ad villam precipitanter, Auxilium tectis quasi ferre ardentibus instans:
Oscitat extemplo, tetigit quum limina villae; Aut abit in somnum gravis, atque
oblivia quaerit; Aut etiam properans urbem petit atque revisit.[1]
[Footnote 1: III 1073.]
In their youth, such people must have had a superfluity of muscular and
vital energy,--powers which, unlike those of the mind, cannot maintain their full
degree of vigor very long; and in later years they either have no mental powers
at all, or cannot develop any for want of employment which would bring them
into play; so that they are in a wretched plight. Will, however, they still possess,
for this is the only power that is inexhaustible; and they try to stimulate their will
by passionate excitement, such as games of chance for high stakes--undoubtedly
a most degrading form of vice. And one may say generally that if a man finds
himself with nothing to do, he is sure to choose some amusement suited to the
kind of power in which he excels,--bowls, it may be, or chess; hunting or
painting; horse-racing or music; cards, or poetry, heraldry, philosophy, or some
other dilettante interest. We might classify these interests methodically, by
reducing them to expressions of the three fundamental powers, the factors, that is
to say, which go to make up the physiological constitution of man; and further,
by considering these powers by themselves, and apart from any of the definite
aims which they may subserve, and simply as affording three sources of possible
pleasure, out of which every man will choose what suits him, according as he
excels in one direction or another.
First of all come the pleasures of vital energy, of food, drink, digestion, rest
and sleep; and there are parts of the world where it can be said that these are
characteristic and national pleasures. Secondly, there are the pleasures of
muscular energy, such as walking, running, wrestling, dancing, fencing, riding
and similar athletic pursuits, which sometimes take the form of sport, and

sometimes of a military life and real warfare. Thirdly, there are the pleasures of
sensibility, such as observation, thought, feeling, or a taste for poetry or culture,
music, learning, reading, meditation, invention, philosophy and the like. As
regards the value, relative worth and duration of each of these kinds of pleasure,
a great deal might be said, which, however, I leave the reader to supply. But
every one will see that the nobler the power which is brought into play, the
greater will be the pleasure which it gives; for pleasure always involves the use
of one's own powers, and happiness consists in a frequent repetition of pleasure.
No one will deny that in this respect the pleasures of sensibility occupy a higher
place than either of the other two fundamental kinds; which exist in an equal,
nay, in a greater degree in brutes; it is this preponderating amount of sensibility
which distinguishes man from other animals. Now, our mental powers are forms
of sensibility, and therefore a preponderating amount of it makes us capable of
that kind of pleasure which has to do with mind, so-called intellectual pleasure;
and the more sensibility predominates, the greater the pleasure will be.[1]
[Footnote 1: Nature exhibits a continual progress, starting from the
mechanical and chemical activity of the inorganic world, proceeding to the
vegetable, with its dull enjoyment of self, from that to the animal world, where
intelligence and consciousness begin, at first very weak, and only after many
intermediate stages attaining its last great development in man, whose intellect is
Nature's crowning point, the goal of all her efforts, the most perfect and difficult
of all her works. And even within the range of the human intellect, there are a
great many observable differences of degree, and it is very seldom that intellect
reaches its highest point, intelligence properly so-called, which in this narrow
and strict sense of the word, is Nature's most consummate product, and so the
rarest and most precious thing of which the world can boast. The highest product
of Nature is the clearest degree of consciousness, in which the world mirrors
itself more plainly and completely than anywhere else. A man endowed with this
form of intelligence is in possession of what is noblest and best on earth; and
accordingly, he has a source of pleasure in comparison with which all others are
small. From his surroundings he asks nothing but leisure for the free enjoyment
of what he has got, time, as it were, to polish his diamond. All other pleasures
that are not of the intellect are of a lower kind; for they are, one and all,
movements of will--desires, hopes, fears and ambitions, no matter to what
directed: they are always satisfied at the cost of pain, and in the case of ambition,
generally with more or less of illusion. With intellectual pleasure, on the other
hand, truth becomes clearer and clearer. In the realm of intelligence pain has no
power. Knowledge is all in all. Further, intellectual pleasures are accessible
entirely and only through the medium of the intelligence, and are limited by its

capacity. For all the wit there is in the world is useless to him who has none. Still
this advantage is accompanied by a substantial disadvantage; for the whole of
Nature shows that with the growth of intelligence comes increased capacity for
pain, and it is only with the highest degree of intelligence that suffering reaches
its supreme point.]
The normal, ordinary man takes a vivid interest in anything only in so far as
it excites his will, that is to say, is a matter of personal interest to him. But
constant excitement of the will is never an unmixed good, to say the least; in
other words, it involves pain. Card-playing, that universal occupation of "good
society" everywhere, is a device for providing this kind of excitement, and that,
too, by means of interests so small as to produce slight and momentary, instead
of real and permanent, pain. Card-playing is, in fact, a mere tickling of the will.
[1]
[Footnote 1: Vulgarity is, at bottom, the kind of consciousness in which the
will completely predominates over the intellect, where the latter does nothing
more than perform the service of its master, the will. Therefore, when the will
makes no demands, supplies no motives, strong or weak, the intellect entirely
loses its power, and the result is complete vacancy of mind. Now will without
intellect is the most vulgar and common thing in the world, possessed by every
blockhead, who, in the gratification of his passions, shows the stuff of which he
is made. This is the condition of mind called vulgarity, in which the only active
elements are the organs of sense, and that small amount of intellect which is
necessary for apprehending the data of sense. Accordingly, the vulgar man is
constantly open to all sorts of impressions, and immediately perceives all the
little trifling things that go on in his environment: the lightest whisper, the most
trivial circumstance, is sufficient to rouse his attention; he is just like an animal.
Such a man's mental condition reveals itself in his face, in his whole exterior;
and hence that vulgar, repulsive appearance, which is all the more offensive, if,
as is usually the case, his will--the only factor in his consciousness--is a base,
selfish and altogether bad one.]
On the other hand, a man of powerful intellect is capable of taking a vivid
interest in things in the way of mere knowledge, with no admixture of will; nay,
such an interest is a necessity to him. It places him in a sphere where pain is an
alien,--a diviner air, where the gods live serene.
[Greek: phusis bebion ou ta chraematatheoi reia xoontes][1]
[Footnote 1: Odyssey IV., 805.]
Look on these two pictures--the life of the masses, one long, dull record of
struggle and effort entirely devoted to the petty interests of personal welfare, to
misery in all its forms, a life beset by intolerable boredom as soon as ever those

aims are satisfied and the man is thrown back upon himself, whence he can be
roused again to some sort of movement only by the wild fire of passion. On the
other side you have a man endowed with a high degree of mental power, leading
an existence rich in thought and full of life and meaning, occupied by worthy
and interesting objects as soon as ever he is free to give himself to them, bearing
in himself a source of the noblest pleasure. What external promptings he wants
come from the works of nature, and from the contemplation of human affairs and
the achievements of the great of all ages and countries, which are thoroughly
appreciated by a man of this type alone, as being the only one who can quite
understand and feel with them. And so it is for him alone that those great ones
have really lived; it is to him that they make their appeal; the rest are but casual
hearers who only half understand either them or their followers. Of course, this
characteristic of the intellectual man implies that he has one more need than the
others, the need of reading, observing, studying, meditating, practising, the need,
in short, of undisturbed leisure. For, as Voltaire has very rightly said, there are
no real pleasures without real needs; and the need of them is why to such a man
pleasures are accessible which are denied to others,--the varied beauties of
nature and art and literature. To heap these pleasures round people who do not
want them and cannot appreciate them, is like expecting gray hairs to fall in
love. A man who is privileged in this respect leads two lives, a personal and an
intellectual life; and the latter gradually comes to be looked upon as the true one,
and the former as merely a means to it. Other people make this shallow, empty
and troubled existence an end in itself. To the life of the intellect such a man will
give the preference over all his other occupations: by the constant growth of
insight and knowledge, this intellectual life, like a slowly-forming work of art,
will acquire a consistency, a permanent intensity, a unity which becomes ever
more and more complete; compared with which, a life devoted to the attainment
of personal comfort, a life that may broaden indeed, but can never be deepened,
makes but a poor show: and yet, as I have said, people make this baser sort of
existence an end in itself.
The ordinary life of every day, so far as it is not moved by passion, is
tedious and insipid; and if it is so moved, it soon becomes painful. Those alone
are happy whom nature has favored with some superfluity of intellect, something
beyond what is just necessary to carry out the behests of their will; for it enables
them to lead an intellectual life as well, a life unattended by pain and full of
vivid interests. Mere leisure, that is to say, intellect unoccupied in the service of
the will, is not of itself sufficient: there must be a real superfluity of power, set
free from the service of the will and devoted to that of the intellect; for, as
Seneca says, otium sine litteris mors est et vivi hominis sepultura--illiterate

leisure is a form of death, a living tomb. Varying with the amount of the
superfluity, there will be countless developments in this second life, the life of
the mind; it may be the mere collection and labelling of insects, birds, minerals,
coins, or the highest achievements of poetry and philosophy. The life of the
mind is not only a protection against boredom; it also wards off the pernicious
effects of boredom; it keeps us from bad company, from the many dangers,
misfortunes, losses and extravagances which the man who places his happiness
entirely in the objective world is sure to encounter, My philosophy, for instance,
has never brought me in a six-pence; but it has spared me many an expense.
The ordinary man places his life's happiness in things external to him, in
property, rank, wife and children, friends, society, and the like, so that when he
loses them or finds them disappointing, the foundation of his happiness is
destroyed. In other words, his centre of gravity is not in himself; it is constantly
changing its place, with every wish and whim. If he is a man of means, one day
it will be his house in the country, another buying horses, or entertaining friends,
or traveling,--a life, in short, of general luxury, the reason being that he seeks his
pleasure in things outside him. Like one whose health and strength are gone, he
tries to regain by the use of jellies and drugs, instead of by developing his own
vital power, the true source of what he has lost. Before proceeding to the
opposite, let us compare with this common type the man who comes midway
between the two, endowed, it may be, not exactly with distinguished powers of
mind, but with somewhat more than the ordinary amount of intellect. He will
take a dilettante interest in art, or devote his attention to some branch of science-
-botany, for example, or physics, astronomy, history, and find a great deal of
pleasure in such studies, and amuse himself with them when external forces of
happiness are exhausted or fail to satisfy him any more. Of a man like this it may
be said that his centre of gravity is partly in himself. But a dilettante interest in
art is a very different thing from creative activity; and an amateur pursuit of
science is apt to be superficial and not to penetrate to the heart of the matter. A
man cannot entirely identify himself with such pursuits, or have his whole
existence so completely filled and permeated with them that he loses all interest
in everything else. It is only the highest intellectual power, what we call genius,
that attains to this degree of intensity, making all time and existence its theme,
and striving to express its peculiar conception of the world, whether it
contemplates life as the subject of poetry or of philosophy. Hence, undisturbed
occupation with himself, his own thoughts and works, is a matter of urgent
necessity to such a man; solitude is welcome, leisure is the highest good, and
everything else is unnecessary, nay, even burdensome.
This is the only type of man of whom it can be said that his centre of

gravity is entirely in himself; which explains why it is that people of this sort--
and they are very rare--no matter how excellent their character may be, do not
show that warm and unlimited interest in friends, family, and the community in
general, of which others are so often capable; for if they have only themselves
they are not inconsolable for the loss of everything else. This gives an isolation
to their character, which is all the more effective since other people never really
quite satisfy them, as being, on the whole, of a different nature: nay more, since
this difference is constantly forcing itself upon their notice they get accustomed
to move about amongst mankind as alien beings, and in thinking of humanity in
general, to say they instead of we.
So the conclusion we come to is that the man whom nature has endowed
with intellectual wealth is the happiest; so true it is that the subjective concerns
us more than the objective; for whatever the latter may be, it can work only
indirectly, secondly, and through the medium of the former--a truth finely
expressed by Lucian:--
[Greek: Aeloutos ho taes psychaes ploutus monos estin alaethaes Talla
dechei ataen pleiona ton kteanon--][1]
[Footnote 1: Epigrammata, 12.]
the wealth of the soul is the only true wealth, for with all other riches comes
a bane even greater than they. The man of inner wealth wants nothing from
outside but the negative gift of undisturbed leisure, to develop and mature his
intellectual faculties, that is, to enjoy his wealth; in short, he wants permission to
be himself, his whole life long, every day and every hour. If he is destined to
impress the character of his mind upon a whole race, he has only one measure of
happiness or unhappiness--to succeed or fail in perfecting his powers and
completing his work. All else is of small consequence. Accordingly, the greatest
minds of all ages have set the highest value upon undisturbed leisure, as worth
exactly as much as the man himself. Happiness appears to consist in leisure, says
Aristotle;[1] and Diogenes Laertius reports that Socrates praised leisure as the
fairest of all possessions. So, in the Nichomachean Ethics, Aristotle concludes
that a life devoted to philosophy is the happiest; or, as he says in the Politics,[2]
the free exercise of any power, whatever it may be, is happiness. This again,
tallies with what Goethe says in Wilhelm Meister: The man who is born with a
talent which he is meant to use, finds his greatest happiness in using it.
[Footnote 1: Eth. Nichom. x. 7.]
[Footnote 2: iv. 11.]
But to be in possession of undisturbed leisure, is far from being the
common lot; nay, it is something alien to human nature, for the ordinary man's
destiny is to spend life in procuring what is necessary for the subsistence of

himself and his family; he is a son of struggle and need, not a free intelligence.
So people as a rule soon get tired of undisturbed leisure, and it becomes
burdensome if there are no fictitious and forced aims to occupy it, play, pastime
and hobbies of every kind. For this very reason it is full of possible danger, and
difficilis in otio quies is a true saying,--it is difficult to keep quiet if you have
nothing to do. On the other hand, a measure of intellect far surpassing the
ordinary, is as unnatural as it is abnormal. But if it exists, and the man endowed
with it is to be happy, he will want precisely that undisturbed leisure which the
others find burdensome or pernicious; for without it he is a Pegasus in harness,
and consequently unhappy. If these two unnatural circumstances, external, and
internal, undisturbed leisure and great intellect, happen to coincide in the same
person, it is a great piece of fortune; and if the fate is so far favorable, a man can
lead the higher life, the life protected from the two opposite sources of human
suffering, pain and boredom, from the painful struggle for existence, and the
incapacity for enduring leisure (which is free existence itself)--evils which may
be escaped only by being mutually neutralized.
But there is something to be said in opposition to this view. Great
intellectual gifts mean an activity pre-eminently nervous in its character, and
consequently a very high degree of susceptibility to pain in every form. Further,
such gifts imply an intense temperament, larger and more vivid ideas, which, as
the inseparable accompaniment of great intellectual power, entail on its
possessor a corresponding intensity of the emotions, making them incomparably
more violent than those to which the ordinary man is a prey. Now, there are
more things in the world productive of pain than of pleasure. Again, a large
endowment of intellect tends to estrange the man who has it from other people
and their doings; for the more a man has in himself, the less he will be able to
find in them; and the hundred things in which they take delight, he will think
shallow and insipid. Here, then, perhaps, is another instance of that law of
compensation which makes itself felt everywhere. How often one hears it said,
and said, too, with some plausibility, that the narrow-minded man is at bottom
the happiest, even though his fortune is unenviable. I shall make no attempt to
forestall the reader's own judgment on this point; more especially as Sophocles
himself has given utterance to two diametrically opposite opinions:--
[Greek: Pollo to phronein eudaimonias proton uparchei.][1]
he says in one place--wisdom is the greatest part of happiness; and again, in
another passage, he declares that the life of the thoughtless is the most pleasant
of all--
[Greek: En ta phronein gar maeden aedistos bios.][2]
The philosophers of the Old Testament find themselves in a like

contradiction.
The life of a fool is worse than death[3]
and--
In much wisdom is much grief; and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth
sorrow.[4]
[Footnote 1: Antigone, 1347-8.]
[Footnote 2: Ajax, 554.]
[Footnote 3: Ecclesiasticus, xxii. 11.]
[Footnote 4: Ecclesiastes, i. 18.]
I may remark, however, that a man who has no mental needs, because his
intellect is of the narrow and normal amount, is, in the strict sense of the word,
what is called a philistine--an expression at first peculiar to the German
language, a kind of slang term at the Universities, afterwards used, by analogy,
in a higher sense, though still in its original meaning, as denoting one who is not
a Son of the Muses. A philistine is and remains [Greek: amousos anaer]. I should
prefer to take a higher point of view, and apply the term philistine to people who
are always seriously occupied with realities which are no realities; but as such a
definition would be a transcendental one, and therefore not generally intelligible,
it would hardly be in place in the present treatise, which aims at being popular.
The other definition can be more easily elucidated, indicating, as it does,
satisfactorily enough, the essential nature of all those qualities which distinguish
the philistine. He is defined to be a man without mental needs. From this is
follows, firstly, in relation to himself, that he has no intellectual pleasures; for, as
was remarked before, there are no real pleasures without real needs. The
philistine's life is animated by no desire to gain knowledge and insight for their
own sake, or to experience that true aeesthetic pleasure which is so nearly akin
to them. If pleasures of this kind are fashionable, and the philistine finds himself
compelled to pay attention to them, he will force himself to do so, but he will
take as little interest in them as possible. His only real pleasures are of a sensual
kind, and he thinks that these indemnify him for the loss of the others. To him
oysters and champagne are the height of existence; the aim of his life is to
procure what will contribute to his bodily welfare, and he is indeed in a happy
way if this causes him some trouble. If the luxuries of life are heaped upon him,
he will inevitably be bored, and against boredom he has a great many fancied
remedies, balls, theatres, parties, cards, gambling, horses, women, drinking,
traveling and so on; all of which can not protect a man from being bored, for
where there are no intellectual needs, no intellectual pleasures are possible. The
peculiar characteristic of the philistine is a dull, dry kind of gravity, akin to that
of animals. Nothing really pleases, or excites, or interests him, for sensual

pleasure is quickly exhausted, and the society of philistines soon becomes
burdensome, and one may even get tired of playing cards. True, the pleasures of
vanity are left, pleasures which he enjoys in his own way, either by feeling
himself superior in point of wealth, or rank, or influence and power to other
people, who thereupon pay him honor; or, at any rate, by going about with those
who have a superfluity of these blessings, sunning himself in the reflection of
their splendor--what the English call a snob.
From the essential nature of the philistine it follows, secondly, in regard to
others, that, as he possesses no intellectual, but only physical need, he will seek
the society of those who can satisfy the latter, but not the former. The last thing
he will expect from his friends is the possession of any sort of intellectual
capacity; nay, if he chances to meet with it, it will rouse his antipathy and even
hatred; simply because in addition to an unpleasant sense of inferiority, he
experiences, in his heart, a dull kind of envy, which has to be carefully
concealed even from himself. Nevertheless, it sometimes grows into a secret
feeling of rancor. But for all that, it will never occur to him to make his own
ideas of worth or value conform to the standard of such qualities; he will
continue to give the preference to rank and riches, power and influence, which in
his eyes seem to be the only genuine advantages in the world; and his wish will
be to excel in them himself. All this is the consequence of his being a man
without intellectual needs. The great affliction of all philistines is that they have
no interest in ideas, and that, to escape being bored, they are in constant need of
realities. But realities are either unsatisfactory or dangerous; when they lose their
interest, they become fatiguing. But the ideal world is illimitable and calm,
something afar From the sphere of our sorrow.
NOTE.--In these remarks on the personal qualities which go to make
happiness, I have been mainly concerned with the physical and intellectual
nature of man. For an account of the direct and immediate influence of morality
upon happiness, let me refer to my prize essay on The Foundation of Morals
(Sec. 22.)
CHAPTER III.
PROPERTY, OR WHAT A MAN HAS.
Epicurus divides the needs of mankind into three classes, and the division
made by this great professor of happiness is a true and a fine one. First come
natural and necessary needs, such as, when not satisfied, produce pain,--food and
clothing, victus et amictus, needs which can easily be satisfied. Secondly, there
are those needs which, though natural, are not necessary, such as the

gratification of certain of the senses. I may add, however, that in the report given
by Diogenes Laertius, Epicurus does not mention which of the senses he means;
so that on this point my account of his doctrine is somewhat more definite and
exact than the original. These are needs rather more difficult to satisfy. The third
class consists of needs which are neither natural nor necessary, the need of
luxury and prodigality, show and splendor, which never come to an end, and are
very hard to satisfy.[1]
[Footnote 1: Cf. Diogenes Laertius, Bk. x., ch. xxvii., pp. 127 and 149; also
Cicero de finibus, i., 13.]
It is difficult, if not impossible, to define the limits which reason should
impose on the desire for wealth; for there is no absolute or definite amount of
wealth which will satisfy a man. The amount is always relative, that is to say,
just so much as will maintain the proportion between what he wants and what he
gets; for to measure a man's happiness only by what he gets, and not also by
what he expects to get, is as futile as to try and express a fraction which shall
have a numerator but no denominator. A man never feels the loss of things
which it never occurs to him to ask for; he is just as happy without them; whilst
another, who may have a hundred times as much, feels miserable because he has
not got the one thing he wants. In fact, here too, every man has an horizon of his
own, and he will expect as much as he thinks it is possible for him to get. If an
object within his horizon looks as though he could confidently reckon on getting
it, he is happy; but if difficulties come in the way, he is miserable. What lies
beyond his horizon has no effect at all upon him. So it is that the vast
possessions of the rich do not agitate the poor, and conversely, that a wealthy
man is not consoled by all his wealth for the failure of his hopes. Riches, one
may say, are like sea-water; the more you drink the thirstier you become; and the
same is true of fame. The loss of wealth and prosperity leaves a man, as soon as
the first pangs of grief are over, in very much the same habitual temper as
before; and the reason of this is, that as soon as fate diminishes the amount of his
possessions, he himself immediately reduces the amount of his claims. But when
misfortune comes upon us, to reduce the amount of our claims is just what is
most painful; once that we have done so, the pain becomes less and less, and is
felt no more; like an old wound which has healed. Conversely, when a piece of
good fortune befalls us, our claims mount higher and higher, as there is nothing
to regulate them; it is in this feeling of expansion that the delight of it lies. But it
lasts no longer than the process itself, and when the expansion is complete, the
delight ceases; we have become accustomed to the increase in our claims, and
consequently indifferent to the amount of wealth which satisfies them. There is a
passage in the Odyssey[1] illustrating this truth, of which I may quote the last

two lines:
[Greek: Toios gar noos estin epichthonion anthropon Oion eth aemar agei
pataer andron te theou te]
--the thoughts of man that dwells on the earth are as the day granted him by
the father of gods and men. Discontent springs from a constant endeavor to
increase the amount of our claims, when we are powerless to increase the
amount which will satisfy them.
[Footnote 1: xviii., 130-7.]
When we consider how full of needs the human race is, how its whole
existence is based upon them, it is not a matter for surprise that wealth is held in
more sincere esteem, nay, in greater honor, than anything else in the world; nor
ought we to wonder that gain is made the only good of life, and everything that
does not lead to it pushed aside or thrown overboard--philosophy, for instance,
by those who profess it. People are often reproached for wishing for money
above all things, and for loving it more than anything else; but it is natural and
even inevitable for people to love that which, like an unwearied Proteus, is
always ready to turn itself into whatever object their wandering wishes or
manifold desires may for the moment fix upon. Everything else can satisfy only
one wish, one need: food is good only if you are hungry; wine, if you are able to
enjoy it; drugs, if you are sick; fur for the winter; love for youth, and so on.
These are all only relatively good, [Greek: agatha pros ti]. Money alone is
absolutely good, because it is not only a concrete satisfaction of one need in
particular; it is an abstract satisfaction of all.
If a man has an independent fortune, he should regard it as a bulwark
against the many evils and misfortunes which he may encounter; he should not
look upon it as giving him leave to get what pleasure he can out of the world, or
as rendering it incumbent upon him to spend it in this way. People who are not
born with a fortune, but end by making a large one through the exercise of
whatever talents they possess, almost always come to think that their talents are
their capital, and that the money they have gained is merely the interest upon it;
they do not lay by a part of their earnings to form a permanent capital, but spend
their money much as they have earned it. Accordingly, they often fall into
poverty; their earnings decreased, or come to an end altogether, either because
their talent is exhausted by becoming antiquated,--as, for instance, very often
happens in the case of fine art; or else it was valid only under a special
conjunction of circumstances which has now passed away. There is nothing to
prevent those who live on the common labor of their hands from treating their
earnings in that way if they like; because their kind of skill is not likely to
disappear, or, if it does, it can be replaced by that of their fellow-workmen;

morever, the kind of work they do is always in demand; so that what the proverb
says is quite true, a useful trade is a mine of gold. But with artists and
professionals of every kind the case is quite different, and that is the reason why
they are well paid. They ought to build up a capital out of their earnings; but
they recklessly look upon them as merely interest, and end in ruin. On the other
hand, people who inherit money know, at least, how to distinguish between
capital and interest, and most of them try to make their capital secure and not
encroach upon it; nay, if they can, they put by at least an eighth of their interests
in order to meet future contingencies. So most of them maintain their position.
These few remarks about capital and interest are not applicable to commercial
life, for merchants look upon money only as a means of further gain, just as a
workman regards his tools; so even if their capital has been entirely the result of
their own efforts, they try to preserve and increase it by using it. Accordingly,
wealth is nowhere so much at home as in the merchant class.
It will generally be found that those who know what it is to have been in
need and destitution are very much less afraid of it, and consequently more
inclined to extravagance, than those who know poverty only by hearsay. People
who have been born and bred in good circumstances are as a rule much more
careful about the future, more economical, in fact, than those who, by a piece of
good luck, have suddenly passed from poverty to wealth. This looks as if
poverty were not really such a very wretched thing as it appears from a distance.
The true reason, however, is rather the fact that the man who has been born into
a position of wealth comes to look upon it as something without which he could
no more live than he could live without air; he guards it as he does his very life;
and so he is generally a lover of order, prudent and economical. But the man
who has been born into a poor position looks upon it as the natural one, and if by
any chance he comes in for a fortune, he regards it as a superfluity, something to
be enjoyed or wasted, because, if it comes to an end, he can get on just as well as
before, with one anxiety the less; or, as Shakespeare says in Henry VI.,[1]
.... the adage must be verified That beggars mounted run their horse to
death.
[Footnote 1: Part III., Act 1., Sc. 4.]
But it should be said that people of this kind have a firm and excessive
trust, partly in fate, partly in the peculiar means which have already raised them
out of need and poverty,--a trust not only of the head, but of the heart also; and
so they do not, like the man born rich, look upon the shallows of poverty as
bottomless, but console themselves with the thought that once they have touched
ground again, they can take another upward flight. It is this trait in human
character which explains the fact that women who were poor before their

marriage often make greater claims, and are more extravagant, than those who
have brought their husbands a rich dowry; because, as a rule, rich girls bring
with them, not only a fortune, but also more eagerness, nay, more of the
inherited instinct, to preserve it, than poor girls do. If anyone doubts the truth of
this, and thinks that it is just the opposite, he will find authority for his view in
Ariosto's first Satire; but, on the other hand, Dr. Johnson agrees with my
opinion. A woman of fortune, he says, being used to the handling of money,
spends it judiciously; but a woman who gets the command of money for the first
time upon her marriage, has such a gusto in spending it, that she throws it away
with great profusion.[1] And in any case let me advise anyone who marries a
poor girl not to leave her the capital but only the interest, and to take especial
care that she has not the management of the children's fortune.
[Footnote 1: Boswell's Life of Johnson: ann: 1776, aetat: 67.]
I do not by any means think that I am touching upon a subject which is not
worth my while to mention when I recommend people to be careful to preserve
what they have earned or inherited. For to start life with just as much as will
make one independent, that is, allow one to live comfortably without having to
work--even if one has only just enough for oneself, not to speak of a family--is
an advantage which cannot be overestimated; for it means exemption and
immunity from that chronic disease of penury, which fastens on the life of man
like a plague; it is emancipation from that forced labor which is the natural lot of
every mortal. Only under a favorable fate like this can a man be said to be born
free, to be, in the proper sense of the word, sui juris, master of his own time and
powers, and able to say every morning, This day is my own. And just for the
same reason the difference between the man who has a hundred a year and the
man who has a thousand, is infinitely smaller than the difference between the
former and a man who has nothing at all. But inherited wealth reaches its utmost
value when it falls to the individual endowed with mental powers of a high
order, who is resolved to pursue a line of life not compatible with the making of
money; for he is then doubly endowed by fate and can live for his genius; and he
will pay his debt to mankind a hundred times, by achieving what no other could
achieve, by producing some work which contributes to the general good, and
redounds to the honor of humanity at large. Another, again, may use his wealth
to further philanthropic schemes, and make himself well-deserving of his
fellowmen. But a man who does none of these things, who does not even try to
do them, who never attempts to learn the rudiments of any branch of knowledge
so that he may at least do what he can towards promoting it--such a one, born as
he is into riches, is a mere idler and thief of time, a contemptible fellow. He will
not even be happy, because, in his case, exemption from need delivers him up to

the other extreme of human suffering, boredom, which is such martyrdom to
him, that he would have been better off if poverty had given him something to
do. And as he is bored he is apt to be extravagant, and so lose the advantage of
which he showed himself unworthy. Countless numbers of people find
themselves in want, simply because, when they had money, they spent it only to
get momentary relief from the feeling of boredom which oppressed them.
It is quite another matter if one's object is success in political life, where
favor, friends and connections are all-important, in order to mount by their aid
step by step on the ladder of promotion, and perhaps gain the topmost rung. In
this kind of life, it is much better to be cast upon the world without a penny; and
if the aspirant is not of noble family, but is a man of some talent, it will redound
to his advantage to be an absolute pauper. For what every one most aims at in
ordinary contact with his fellows is to prove them inferior to himself; and how
much more is this the case in politics. Now, it is only an absolute pauper who
has such a thorough conviction of his own complete, profound and positive
inferiority from every point of view, of his own utter insignificance and
worthlessness, that he can take his place quietly in the political machine.[1] He
is the only one who can keep on bowing low enough, and even go right down
upon his face if necessary; he alone can submit to everything and laugh at it; he
alone knows the entire worthlessness of merit; he alone uses his loudest voice
and his boldest type whenever he has to speak or write of those who are placed
over his head, or occupy any position of influence; and if they do a little
scribbling, he is ready to applaud it as a masterwork. He alone understands how
to beg, and so betimes, when he is hardly out of his boyhood, he becomes a high
priest of that hidden mystery which Goethe brings to light.
Uber's Niederträchtige Niemand sich beklage: Denn es ist das Machtige
Was man dir auch sage:
--it is no use to complain of low aims; for, whatever people may say, they
rule the world.
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--Schopenhauer is probably here making one
of his most virulent attacks upon Hegel; in this case on account of what he
thought to be the philosopher's abject servility to the government of his day.
Though the Hegelian system has been the fruitful mother of many liberal ideas,
there can be no doubt that Hegel's influence, in his own lifetime, was an
effective support of Prussian bureaucracy.]
On the other hand, the man who is born with enough to live upon is
generally of a somewhat independent turn of mind; he is accustomed to keep his
head up; he has not learned all the arts of the beggar; perhaps he even presumes
a little upon the possession of talents which, as he ought to know, can never

compete with cringing mediocrity; in the long run he comes to recognize the
inferiority of those who are placed over his head, and when they try to put insults
upon him, he becomes refractory and shy. This is not the way to get on in the
world. Nay, such a man may at least incline to the opinion freely expressed by
Voltaire: We have only two days to live; it is not worth our while to spend them
in cringing to contemptible rascals. But alas! let me observe by the way, that
contemptible rascal is an attribute which may be predicated of an abominable
number of people. What Juvenal says--it is difficult to rise if your poverty is
greater than your talent--
Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi--
is more applicable to a career of art and literature than to a political and
social ambition.
Wife and children I have not reckoned amongst a man's possessions: he is
rather in their possession. It would be easier to include friends under that head;
but a man's friends belong to him not a whit more than he belongs to them.
CHAPTER IV.
POSITION, OR A MAN'S PLACE IN THE ESTIMATION OF OTHERS.
Section 1.--Reputation.
By a peculiar weakness of human nature, people generally think too much
about the opinion which others form of them; although the slightest reflection
will show that this opinion, whatever it may be, is not in itself essential to
happiness. Therefore it is hard to understand why everybody feels so very
pleased when he sees that other people have a good opinion of him, or say
anything flattering to his vanity. If you stroke a cat, it will purr; and, as
inevitably, if you praise a man, a sweet expression of delight will appear on his
face; and even though the praise is a palpable lie, it will be welcome, if the
matter is one on which he prides himself. If only other people will applaud him,
a man may console himself for downright misfortune or for the pittance he gets
from the two sources of human happiness already discussed: and conversely, it is
astonishing how infallibly a man will be annoyed, and in some cases deeply
pained, by any wrong done to his feeling of self-importance, whatever be the
nature, degree, or circumstances of the injury, or by any depreciation, slight, or
disregard.
If the feeling of honor rests upon this peculiarity of human nature, it may
have a very salutary effect upon the welfare of a great many people, as a
substitute for morality; but upon their happiness, more especially upon that
peace of mind and independence which are so essential to happiness, its effect

will be disturbing and prejudicial rather than salutary. Therefore it is advisable,
from our point of view, to set limits to this weakness, and duly to consider and
rightly to estimate the relative value of advantages, and thus temper, as far as
possible, this great susceptibility to other people's opinion, whether the opinion
be one flattering to our vanity, or whether it causes us pain; for in either case it is
the same feeling which is touched. Otherwise, a man is the slave of what other
people are pleased to think,--and how little it requires to disconcert or soothe the
mind that is greedy of praise:
Sic leve, sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum Subruit ac reficit.[1]
[Footnote 1: Horace, Epist: II., 1, 180.]
Therefore it will very much conduce to our happiness if we duly compare
the value of what a man is in and for himself with what he is in the eyes of
others. Under the former conies everything that fills up the span of our existence
and makes it what it is, in short, all the advantages already considered and
summed up under the heads of personality and property; and the sphere in which
all this takes place is the man's own consciousness. On the other hand, the sphere
of what we are for other people is their consciousness, not ours; it is the kind of
figure we make in their eyes, together with the thoughts which this arouses.[1]
But this is something which has no direct and immediate existence for us, but
can affect us only mediately and indirectly, so far, that is, as other people's
behavior towards us is directed by it; and even then it ought to affect us only in
so far as it can move us to modify what we are in and for ourselves. Apart from
this, what goes on in other people's consciousness is, as such, a matter of
indifference to us; and in time we get really indifferent to it, when we come to
see how superficial and futile are most people's thoughts, how narrow their
ideas, how mean their sentiments, how perverse their opinions, and how much of
error there is in most of them; when we learn by experience with what
depreciation a man will speak of his fellow, when he is not obliged to fear him,
or thinks that what he says will not come to his ears. And if ever we have had an
opportunity of seeing how the greatest of men will meet with nothing but slight
from half-a-dozen blockheads, we shall understand that to lay great value upon
what other people say is to pay them too much honor.
[Footnote 1: Let me remark that people in the highest positions in life, with
all their brilliance, pomp, display, magnificence and general show, may well
say:--Our happiness lies entirely outside us; for it exists only in the heads of
others.]
At all events, a man is in a very bad way, who finds no source of happiness
in the first two classes of blessings already treated of, but has to seek it in the
third, in other words, not in what he is in himself, but in what he is in the opinion

of others. For, after all, the foundation of our whole nature, and, therefore, of our
happiness, is our physique, and the most essential factor in happiness is health,
and, next in importance after health, the ability to maintain ourselves in
independence and freedom from care. There can be no competition or
compensation between these essential factors on the one side, and honor, pomp,
rank and reputation on the other, however much value we may set upon the
latter. No one would hesitate to sacrifice the latter for the former, if it were
necessary. We should add very much to our happiness by a timely recognition of
the simple truth that every man's chief and real existence is in his own skin, and
not in other people's opinions; and, consequently, that the actual conditions of
our personal life,--health, temperament, capacity, income, wife, children, friends,
home, are a hundred times more important for our happiness than what other
people are pleased to think of us: otherwise we shall be miserable. And if people
insist that honor is dearer than life itself, what they really mean is that existence
and well-being are as nothing compared with other people's opinions. Of course,
this may be only an exaggerated way of stating the prosaic truth that reputation,
that is, the opinion others have of us, is indispensable if we are to make any
progress in the world; but I shall come back to that presently. When we see that
almost everything men devote their lives to attain, sparing no effort and
encountering a thousand toils and dangers in the process, has, in the end, no
further object than to raise themselves in the estimation of others; when we see
that not only offices, titles, decorations, but also wealth, nay, even knowledge[1]
and art, are striven for only to obtain, as the ultimate goal of all effort, greater
respect from one's fellowmen,--is not this a lamentable proof of the extent to
which human folly can go? To set much too high a value on other people's
opinion is a common error everywhere; an error, it may be, rooted in human
nature itself, or the result of civilization, and social arrangements generally; but,
whatever its source, it exercises a very immoderate influence on all we do, and is
very prejudicial to our happiness. We can trace it from a timorous and slavish
regard for what other people will say, up to the feeling which made Virginius
plunge the dagger into his daughter's heart, or induces many a man to sacrifice
quiet, riches, health and even life itself, for posthumous glory. Undoubtedly this
feeling is a very convenient instrument in the hands of those who have the
control or direction of their fellowmen; and accordingly we find that in every
scheme for training up humanity in the way it should go, the maintenance and
strengthening of the feeling of honor occupies an important place. But it is quite
a different matter in its effect on human happiness, of which it is here our object
to treat; and we should rather be careful to dissuade people from setting too
much store by what others think of them. Daily experience shows us, however,

that this is just the mistake people persist in making; most men set the utmost
value precisely on what other people think, and are more concerned about it than
about what goes on in their own consciousness, which is the thing most
immediately and directly present to them. They reverse the natural order,--
regarding the opinions of others as real existence and their own consciousness as
something shadowy; making the derivative and secondary into the principal, and
considering the picture they present to the world of more importance than their
own selves. By thus trying to get a direct and immediate result out of what has
no really direct or immediate existence, they fall into the kind of folly which is
called vanity--the appropriate term for that which has no solid or instrinsic value.
Like a miser, such people forget the end in their eagerness to obtain the means.
[Footnote 1: Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter, (Persins i, 27)--
knowledge is no use unless others know that you have it.]
The truth is that the value we set upon the opinion of others, and our
constant endeavor in respect of it, are each quite out of proportion to any result
we may reasonably hope to attain; so that this attention to other people's attitude
may be regarded as a kind of universal mania which every one inherits. In all we
do, almost the first thing we think about is, what will people say; and nearly half
the troubles and bothers of life may be traced to our anxiety on this score; it is
the anxiety which is at the bottom of all that feeling of self-importance, which is
so often mortified because it is so very morbidly sensitive. It is solicitude about
what others will say that underlies all our vanity and pretension, yes, and all our
show and swagger too. Without it, there would not be a tenth part of the luxury
which exists. Pride in every form, point d'honneur and punctilio, however varied
their kind or sphere, are at bottom nothing but this--anxiety about what others
will say--and what sacrifices it costs! One can see it even in a child; and though
it exists at every period of life, it is strongest in age; because, when the capacity
for sensual pleasure fails, vanity and pride have only avarice to share their
dominion. Frenchmen, perhaps, afford the best example of this feeling, and
amongst them it is a regular epidemic, appearing sometimes in the most absurd
ambition, or in a ridiculous kind of national vanity and the most shameless
boasting. However, they frustrate their own gains, for other people make fun of
them and call them la grande nation.
By way of specially illustrating this perverse and exuberant respect for
other people's opinion, let me take passage from the Times of March 31st, 1846,
giving a detailed account of the execution of one Thomas Wix, an apprentice
who, from motives of vengeance, had murdered his master. Here we have very
unusual circumstances and an extraordinary character, though one very suitable
for our purpose; and these combine to give a striking picture of this folly, which

is so deeply rooted in human nature, and allow us to form an accurate notion of
the extent to which it will go. On the morning of the execution, says the report,
the rev. ordinary was early in attendance upon him, but Wix, beyond a quiet
demeanor, betrayed no interest in his ministrations, appearing to feel anxious
only to acquit himself "bravely" before the spectators of his ignomininous end....
In the procession Wix fell into his proper place with alacrity, and, as he entered
the Chapel-yard, remarked, sufficiently loud to be heard by several persons near
him, "Now, then, as Dr. Dodd said, I shall soon know the grand secret." On
reaching the scaffold, the miserable wretch mounted the drop without the
slightest assistance, and when he got to the centre, he bowed to the spectators
twice, a proceeding which called forth a tremendous cheer from the degraded
crowd beneath.
This is an admirable example of the way in which a man, with death in the
most dreadful form before his very eyes, and eternity beyond it, will care for
nothing but the impression he makes upon a crowd of gapers, and the opinion he
leaves behind him in their heads. There was much the same kind of thing in the
case of Lecompte, who was executed at Frankfurt, also in 1846, for an attempt
on the king's life. At the trial he was very much annoyed that he was not allowed
to appear, in decent attire, before the Upper House; and on the day of the
execution it was a special grief to him that he was not permitted to shave. It is
not only in recent times that this kind of thing has been known to happen. Mateo
Aleman tells us, in the Introduction to his celebrated romance, Juzman de
Alfarache, that many infatuated criminals, instead of devoting their last hours to
the welfare of their souls, as they ought to have done, neglect this duty for the
purpose of preparing and committing to memory a speech to be made from the
scaffold.
I take these extreme cases as being the best illustrations to what I mean; for
they give us a magnified reflection of our own nature. The anxieties of all of us,
our worries, vexations, bothers, troubles, uneasy apprehensions and strenuous
efforts are due, in perhaps the large majority of instances, to what other people
will say; and we are just as foolish in this respect as those miserable criminals.
Envy and hatred are very often traceable to a similar source.
Now, it is obvious that happiness, which consists for the most part in peace
of mind and contentment, would be served by nothing so much as by reducing
this impulse of human nature within reasonable limits,--which would perhaps
make it one fiftieth part of what it is now. By doing so, we should get rid of a
thorn in the flesh which is always causing us pain. But it is a very difficult task,
because the impulse in question is a natural and innate perversity of human
nature. Tacitus says, The lust of fame is the last that a wise man shakes off[1]

The only way of putting an end to this universal folly is to see clearly that it is a
folly; and this may be done by recognizing the fact that most of the opinions in
men's heads are apt to be false, perverse, erroneous and absurd, and so in
themselves unworthy of attention; further, that other people's opinions can have
very little real and positive influence upon us in most of the circumstances and
affairs of life. Again, this opinion is generally of such an unfavorable character
that it would worry a man to death to hear everything that was said of him, or the
tone in which he was spoken of. And finally, among other things, we should be
clear about the fact that honor itself has no really direct, but only an indirect,
value. If people were generally converted from this universal folly, the result
would be such an addition to our piece of mind and cheerfulness as at present
seems inconceivable; people would present a firmer and more confident front to
the world, and generally behave with less embarrassment and restraint. It is
observable that a retired mode of life has an exceedingly beneficial influence on
our peace of mind, and this is mainly because we thus escape having to live
constantly in the sight of others, and pay everlasting regard to their casual
opinions; in a word, we are able to return upon ourselves. At the same time a
good deal of positive misfortune might be avoided, which we are now drawn
into by striving after shadows, or, to speak more correctly, by indulging a
mischievous piece of folly; and we should consequently have more attention to
give to solid realities and enjoy them with less interruption that at present. But
[Greek: chalepa ga kala]--what is worth doing is hard to do.
[Footnote 1: Hist., iv., 6.]
Section 2.--Pride.
The folly of our nature which we are discussing puts forth three shoots,
ambition, vanity and pride. The difference between the last two is this: pride is
an established conviction of one's own paramount worth in some particular
respect; while vanity is the desire of rousing such a conviction in others, and it is
generally accompanied by the secret hope of ultimately coming to the same
conviction oneself. Pride works from within; it is the direct appreciation of
oneself. Vanity is the desire to arrive at this appreciation indirectly, from
without. So we find that vain people are talkative, proud, and taciturn. But the
vain person ought to be aware that the good opinion of others, which he strives
for, may be obtained much more easily and certainly by persistent silence than
by speech, even though he has very good things to say. Anyone who wishes to
affect pride is not therefore a proud man; but he will soon have to drop this, as
every other, assumed character.
It is only a firm, unshakeable conviction of pre-eminent worth and special
value which makes a man proud in the true sense of the word,--a conviction

which may, no doubt, be a mistaken one or rest on advantages which are of an
adventitious and conventional character: still pride is not the less pride for all
that, so long as it be present in real earnest. And since pride is thus rooted in
conviction, it resembles every other form of knowledge in not being within our
own arbitrament. Pride's worst foe,--I mean its greatest obstacle,--is vanity,
which courts the applause of the world in order to gain the necessary foundation
for a high opinion of one's own worth, whilst pride is based upon a pre-existing
conviction of it.
It is quite true that pride is something which is generally found fault with,
and cried down; but usually, I imagine, by those who have nothing upon which
they can pride themselves. In view of the impudence and foolhardiness of most
people, anyone who possesses any kind of superiority or merit will do well to
keep his eyes fixed on it, if he does not want it to be entirely forgotten; for if a
man is good-natured enough to ignore his own privileges, and hob-nob with the
generality of other people, as if he were quite on their level, they will be sure to
treat him, frankly and candidly, as one of themselves. This is a piece of advice I
would specially offer to those whose superiority is of the highest kind--real
superiority, I mean, of a purely personal nature--which cannot, like orders and
titles, appeal to the eye or ear at every moment; as, otherwise, they will find that
familiarity breeds contempt, or, as the Romans used to say, sus Minervam. Joke
with a slave, and he'll soon show his heels, is an excellent Arabian proverb; nor
ought we to despise what Horace says,
Sume superbiam Quaesitam meritis.
--usurp the fame you have deserved. No doubt, when modesty was made a
virtue, it was a very advantageous thing for the fools; for everybody is expected
to speak of himself as if he were one. This is leveling down indeed; for it comes
to look as if there were nothing but fools in the world.
The cheapest sort of pride is national pride; for if a man is proud of his own
nation, it argues that he has no qualities of his own of which he can be proud;
otherwise he would not have recourse to those which he shares with so many
millions of his fellowmen. The man who is endowed with important personal
qualities will be only too ready to see clearly in what respects his own nation
falls short, since their failings will be constantly before his eyes. But every
miserable fool who has nothing at all of which he can be proud adopts, as a last
resource, pride in the nation to which he belongs; he is ready and glad to defend
all its faults and follies tooth and nail, thus reimbursing himself for his own
inferiority. For example, if you speak of the stupid and degrading bigotry of the
English nation with the contempt it deserves, you will hardly find one
Englishman in fifty to agree with you; but if there should be one, he will

generally happen to be an intelligent man.
The Germans have no national pride, which shows how honest they are, as
everybody knows! and how dishonest are those who, by a piece of ridiculous
affectation, pretend that they are proud of their country--the Deutsche Bruder
and the demagogues who flatter the mob in order to mislead it. I have heard it
said that gunpowder was invented by a German. I doubt it. Lichtenberg asks,
Why is it that a man who is not a German does not care about pretending that he
is one; and that if he makes any pretence at all, it is to be a Frenchman or an
Englishman?[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note.--It should be remembered that these remarks
were written in the earlier part of the present century, and that a German
philosopher now-a-days, even though he were as apt to say bitter things as
Schopenhauer, could hardly write in a similar strain.]
However that may be, individuality is a far more important thing than
nationality, and in any given man deserves a thousand-fold more consideration.
And since you cannot speak of national character without referring to large
masses of people, it is impossible to be loud in your praises and at the same time
honest. National character is only another name for the particular form which the
littleness, perversity and baseness of mankind take in every country. If we
become disgusted with one, we praise another, until we get disgusted with this
too. Every nation mocks at other nations, and all are right.
The contents of this chapter, which treats, as I have said, of what we
represent in the world, or what we are in the eyes of others, may be further
distributed under three heads: honor rank and fame.
Section 3.--Rank.
Let us take rank first, as it may be dismissed in a few words, although it
plays an important part in the eyes of the masses and of the philistines, and is a
most useful wheel in the machinery of the State.
It has a purely conventional value. Strictly speaking, it is a sham; its
method is to exact an artificial respect, and, as a matter of fact, the whole thing is
a mere farce.
Orders, it may be said, are bills of exchange drawn on public opinion, and
the measure of their value is the credit of the drawer. Of course, as a substitute
for pensions, they save the State a good deal of money; and, besides, they serve a
very useful purpose, if they are distributed with discrimination and judgment.
For people in general have eyes and ears, it is true; but not much else, very little
judgment indeed, or even memory. There are many services of the State quite
beyond the range of their understanding; others, again, are appreciated and made
much of for a time, and then soon forgotten. It seems to me, therefore, very

proper, that a cross or a star should proclaim to the mass of people always and
everywhere, This man is not like you; he has done something. But orders lose
their value when they are distributed unjustly, or without due selection, or in too
great numbers: a prince should be as careful in conferring them as a man of
business is in signing a bill. It is a pleonasm to inscribe on any order for
distinguished service; for every order ought to be for distinguished service. That
stands to reason.
Section 4.--Honor.
Honor is a much larger question than rank, and more difficult to discuss.
Let us begin by trying to define it.
If I were to say Honor is external conscience, and conscience is inward
honor, no doubt a good many people would assent; but there would be more
show than reality about such a definition, and it would hardly go to the root of
the matter. I prefer to say, Honor is, on its objective side, other people's opinion
of what we are worth; on its subjective side, it is the respect we pay to this
opinion. From the latter point of view, to be a man of honor is to exercise what is
often a very wholesome, but by no means a purely moral, influence.
The feelings of honor and shame exist in every man who is not utterly
depraved, and honor is everywhere recognized as something particularly
valuable. The reason of this is as follows. By and in himself a man can
accomplish very little; he is like Robinson Crusoe on a desert island. It is only in
society that a man's powers can be called into full activity. He very soon finds
this out when his consciousness begins to develop, and there arises in him the
desire to be looked upon as a useful member of society, as one, that is, who is
capable of playing his part as a man--pro parte virili--thereby acquiring a right to
the benefits of social life. Now, to be a useful member of society, one must do
two things: firstly, what everyone is expected to do everywhere; and, secondly,
what one's own particular position in the world demands and requires.
But a man soon discovers that everything depends upon his being useful,
not in his own opinion, but in the opinion of others; and so he tries his best to
make that favorable impression upon the world, to which he attaches such a high
value. Hence, this primitive and innate characteristic of human nature, which is
called the feeling of honor, or, under another aspect, the feeling of shame--
verecundia. It is this which brings a blush to his cheeks at the thought of having
suddenly to fall in the estimation of others, even when he knows that he is
innocent, nay, even if his remissness extends to no absolute obligation, but only
to one which he has taken upon himself of his own free will. Conversely,
nothing in life gives a man so much courage as the attainment or renewal of the
conviction that other people regard him with favor; because it means that

everyone joins to give him help and protection, which is an infinitely stronger
bulwark against the ills of life than anything he can do himself.
The variety of relations in which a man can stand to other people so as to
obtain their confidence, that is, their good opinion, gives rise to a distinction
between several kinds of honor, resting chiefly on the different bearings that
meum may take to tuum; or, again, on the performance of various pledges; or
finally, on the relation of the sexes. Hence, there are three main kinds of honor,
each of which takes various forms--civic honor, official honor, and sexual honor.
Civic honor has the widest sphere of all. It consists in the assumption that
we shall pay unconditional respect to the rights of others, and, therefore, never
use any unjust or unlawful means of getting what we want. It is the condition of
all peaceable intercourse between man and man; and it is destroyed by anything
that openly and manifestly militates against this peaceable intercourse, anything,
accordingly, which entails punishment at the hands of the law, always supposing
that the punishment is a just one.
The ultimate foundation of honor is the conviction that moral character is
unalterable: a single bad action implies that future actions of the same kind will,
under similar circumstances, also be bad. This is well expressed by the English
use of the word character as meaning credit, reputation, honor. Hence honor,
once lost, can never be recovered; unless the loss rested on some mistake, such
as may occur if a man is slandered or his actions viewed in a false light. So the
law provides remedies against slander, libel, and even insult; for insult though it
amounts to no more than mere abuse, is a kind of summary slander with a
suppression of the reasons. What I mean may be well put in the Greek phrase--
not quoted from any author--[Greek: estin hae loidoria diabolae]. It is true that if
a man abuses another, he is simply showing that he has no real or true causes of
complaint against him; as, otherwise, he would bring these forward as the
premises, and rely upon his hearers to draw the conclusion themselves: instead
of which, he gives the conclusion and leaves out the premises, trusting that
people will suppose that he has done so only for the sake of being brief.
Civic honor draws its existence and name from the middle classes; but it
applies equally to all, not excepting the highest. No man can disregard it, and it
is a very serious thing, of which every one should be careful not to make light.
The man who breaks confidence has for ever forfeited confidence, whatever he
may do, and whoever he may be; and the bitter consequences of the loss of
confidence can never be averted.
There is a sense in which honor may be said to have a negative character in
opposition to the positive character of fame. For honor is not the opinion people
have of particular qualities which a man may happen to possess exclusively: it is

rather the opinion they have of the qualities which a man may be expected to
exhibit, and to which he should not prove false. Honor, therefore, means that a
man is not exceptional; fame, that he is. Fame is something which must be won;
honor, only something which must not be lost. The absence of fame is obscurity,
which is only a negative; but loss of honor is shame, which is a positive quality.
This negative character of honor must not be confused with anything passive; for
honor is above all things active in its working. It is the only quality which
proceeds directly from the man who exhibits it; it is concerned entirely with
what he does and leaves undone, and has nothing to do with the actions of others
or the obstacles they place in his way. It is something entirely in our own power-
-[Greek: ton ephaemon]. This distinction, as we shall see presently, marks off
true honor from the sham honor of chivalry.
Slander is the only weapon by which honor can be attacked from without;
and the only way to repel the attack is to confute the slander with the proper
amount of publicity, and a due unmasking of him who utters it.
The reason why respect is paid to age is that old people have necessarily
shown in the course of their lives whether or not they have been able to maintain
their honor unblemished; while that of young people has not been put to the
proof, though they are credited with the possession of it. For neither length of
years,--equalled, as it is, and even excelled, in the case of the lower animals,--
nor, again, experience, which is only a closer knowledge of the world's ways,
can be any sufficient reason for the respect which the young are everywhere
required to show towards the old: for if it were merely a matter of years, the
weakness which attends on age would call rather for consideration than for
respect. It is, however, a remarkable fact that white hair always commands
reverence--a reverence really innate and instinctive. Wrinkles--a much surer sign
of old age--command no reverence at all; you never hear any one speak of
venerable wrinkles; but venerable white hair is a common expression.
Honor has only an indirect value. For, as I explained at the beginning of this
chapter, what other people think of us, if it affects us at all, can affect us only in
so far as it governs their behavior towards us, and only just so long as we live
with, or have to do with, them. But it is to society alone that we owe that safety
which we and our possessions enjoy in a state of civilization; in all we do we
need the help of others, and they, in their turn, must have confidence in us before
they can have anything to do with us. Accordingly, their opinion of us is,
indirectly, a matter of great importance; though I cannot see how it can have a
direct or immediate value. This is an opinion also held by Cicero. I quite agree,
he writes, with what Chrysippus and Diogenes used to say, that a good
reputation is not worth raising a finger to obtain, if it were not that it is so useful.

[1] This truth has been insisted upon at great length by Helvetius in his chief
work De l'Esprit,[2] the conclusion of which is that we love esteem not for its
own sake, but solely for the advantages which it brings. And as the means can
never be more than the end, that saying, of which so much is made, Honor is
dearer than life itself, is, as I have remarked, a very exaggerated statement. So
much then, for civic honor.
[Footnote 1: De finilus iii., 17.]
[Footnote 2: Disc: iii. 17.]
Official honor is the general opinion of other people that a man who fills
any office really has the necessary qualities for the proper discharge of all the
duties which appertain to it. The greater and more important the duties a man has
to discharge in the State, and the higher and more influential the office which he
fills, the stronger must be the opinion which people have of the moral and
intellectual qualities which render him fit for his post. Therefore, the higher his
position, the greater must be the degree of honor paid to him, expressed, as it is,
in titles, orders and the generally subservient behavior of others towards him. As
a rule, a man's official rank implies the particular degree of honor which ought to
be paid to him, however much this degree may be modified by the capacity of
the masses to form any notion of its importance. Still, as a matter of fact, greater
honor is paid to a man who fulfills special duties than to the common citizen,
whose honor mainly consists in keeping clear of dishonor.
Official honor demands, further, that the man who occupies an office must
maintain respect for it, for the sake both of his colleagues and of those who will
come after him. This respect an official can maintain by a proper observance of
his duties, and by repelling any attack that may be made upon the office itself or
upon its occupant: he must not, for instance, pass over unheeded any statement
to the effect that the duties of the office are not properly discharged, or that the
office itself does not conduce to the public welfare. He must prove the
unwarrantable nature of such attacks by enforcing the legal penalty for them.
Subordinate to the honor of official personages comes that of those who
serve the State in any other capacity, as doctors, lawyers, teachers, anyone, in
short, who, by graduating in any subject, or by any other public declaration that
he is qualified to exercise some special skill, claims to practice it; in a word, the
honor of all those who take any public pledges whatever. Under this head comes
military honor, in the true sense of the word, the opinion that people who have
bound themselves to defend their country really possess the requisite qualities
which will enable them to do so, especially courage, personal bravery and
strength, and that they are perfectly ready to defend their country to the death,
and never and under any circumstances desert the flag to which they have once

sworn allegiance. I have here taken official honor in a wider sense than that in
which it is generally used, namely, the respect due by citizens to an office itself.
In treating of sexual honor and the principles on which it rests, a little more
attention and analysis are necessary; and what I shall say will support my
contention that all honor really rests upon a utilitarian basis. There are two
natural divisions of the subject--the honor of women and the honor of men, in
either side issuing in a well-understood esprit de corps. The former is by far the
more important of the two, because the most essential feature in woman's life is
her relation to man.
Female honor is the general opinion in regard to a girl that she is pure, and
in regard to a wife that she is faithful. The importance of this opinion rests upon
the following considerations. Women depend upon men in all the relations of
life; men upon women, it might be said, in one only. So an arrangement is made
for mutual interdependence--man undertaking responsibility for all woman's
needs and also for the children that spring from their union--an arrangement on
which is based the welfare of the whole female race. To carry out this plan,
women have to band together with a show of esprit de corps, and present one
undivided front to their common enemy, man,--who possesses all the good
things of the earth, in virtue of his superior physical and intellectual power,--in
order to lay siege to and conquer him, and so get possession of him and a share
of those good things. To this end the honor of all women depends upon the
enforcement of the rule that no woman should give herself to a man except in
marriage, in order that every man may be forced, as it were, to surrender and ally
himself with a woman; by this arrangement provision is made for the whole of
the female race. This is a result, however, which can be obtained only by a strict
observance of the rule; and, accordingly, women everywhere show true esprit de
corps in carefully insisting upon its maintenance. Any girl who commits a
breach of the rule betrays the whole female race, because its welfare would be
destroyed if every woman were to do likewise; so she is cast out with shame as
one who has lost her honor. No woman will have anything more to do with her;
she is avoided like the plague. The same doom is awarded to a woman who
breaks the marriage tie; for in so doing she is false to the terms upon which the
man capitulated; and as her conduct is such as to frighten other men from
making a similar surrender, it imperils the welfare of all her sisters. Nay, more;
this deception and coarse breach of troth is a crime punishable by the loss, not
only of personal, but also of civic honor. This is why we minimize the shame of
a girl, but not of a wife; because, in the former case, marriage can restore honor,
while in the latter, no atonement can be made for the breach of contract.
Once this esprit de corps is acknowledged to be the foundation of female

honor, and is seen to be a wholesome, nay, a necessary arrangement, as at
bottom a matter of prudence and interest, its extreme importance for the welfare
of women will be recognized. But it does not possess anything more than a
relative value. It is no absolute end, lying beyond all other aims of existence and
valued above life itself. In this view, there will be nothing to applaud in the
forced and extravagant conduct of a Lucretia or a Virginius--conduct which can
easily degenerate into tragic farce, and produce a terrible feeling of revulsion.
The conclusion of Emilia Galotti, for instance, makes one leave the theatre
completely ill at ease; and, on the other hand, all the rules of female honor
cannot prevent a certain sympathy with Clara in Egmont. To carry this principle
of female honor too far is to forget the end in thinking of the means--and this is
just what people often do; for such exaggeration suggests that the value of sexual
honor is absolute; while the truth is that it is more relative than any other kind.
One might go so far as to say that its value is purely conventional, when one sees
from Thomasius how in all ages and countries, up to the time of the
Reformation, irregularities were permitted and recognized by law, with no
derogation to female honor,--not to speak of the temple of Mylitta at Babylon.[1]
[Footnote 1: Heroditus, i. 199.]
There are also of course certain circumstances in civil life which make
external forms of marriage impossible, especially in Catholic countries, where
there is no such thing as divorce. Ruling princes everywhere, would, in my
opinion, do much better, from a moral point of view, to dispense with forms
altogether rather than contract a morganatic marriage, the descendants of which
might raise claims to the throne if the legitimate stock happened to die out; so
that there is a possibility, though, perhaps, a remote one, that a morganatic
marriage might produce a civil war. And, besides, such a marriage, concluded in
defiance of all outward ceremony, is a concession made to women and priests--
two classes of persons to whom one should be most careful to give as little tether
as possible. It is further to be remarked that every man in a country can marry
the woman of his choice, except one poor individual, namely, the prince. His
hand belongs to his country, and can be given in marriage only for reasons of
State, that is, for the good of the country. Still, for all that, he is a man; and, as a
man, he likes to follow whither his heart leads. It is an unjust, ungrateful and
priggish thing to forbid, or to desire to forbid, a prince from following his
inclinations in this matter; of course, as long as the lady has no influence upon
the Government of the country. From her point of view she occupies an
exceptional position, and does not come under the ordinary rules of sexual
honor; for she has merely given herself to a man who loves her, and whom she
loves but cannot marry. And in general, the fact that the principle of female

honor has no origin in nature, is shown by the many bloody sacrifices which
have been offered to it,--the murder of children and the mother's suicide. No
doubt a girl who contravenes the code commits a breach of faith against her
whole sex; but this faith is one which is only secretly taken for granted, and not
sworn to. And since, in most cases, her own prospects suffer most immediately,
her folly is infinitely greater than her crime.
The corresponding virtue in men is a product of the one I have been
discussing. It is their esprit de corps, which demands that, once a man has made
that surrender of himself in marriage which is so advantageous to his conqueror,
he shall take care that the terms of the treaty are maintained; both in order that
the agreement itself may lose none of its force by the permission of any laxity in
its observance, and that men, having given up everything, may, at least, be
assured of their bargain, namely, exclusive possession. Accordingly, it is part of
a man's honor to resent a breach of the marriage tie on the part of his wife, and to
punish it, at the very least by separating from her. If he condones the offence, his
fellowmen cry shame upon him; but the shame in this case is not nearly so foul
as that of the woman who has lost her honor; the stain is by no means of so deep
a dye--levioris notae macula;--because a man's relation to woman is subordinate
to many other and more important affairs in his life. The two great dramatic
poets of modern times have each taken man's honor as the theme of two plays;
Shakespeare in Othello and The Winter's Tale, and Calderon in El medico de su
honra, (The Physician of his Honor), and A secreto agravio secreta venganza,
(for Secret Insult Secret Vengeance). It should be said, however, that honor
demands the punishment of the wife only; to punish her paramour too, is a work
of supererogation. This confirms the view I have taken, that a man's honor
originates in esprit de corps.
The kind of honor which I have been discussing hitherto has always existed
in its various forms and principles amongst all nations and at all times; although
the history of female honor shows that its principles have undergone certain
local modifications at different periods. But there is another species of honor
which differs from this entirely, a species of honor of which the Greeks and
Romans had no conception, and up to this day it is perfectly unknown amongst
Chinese, Hindoos or Mohammedans. It is a kind of honor which arose only in
the Middle Age, and is indigenous only to Christian Europe, nay, only to an
extremely small portion of the population, that is to say, the higher classes of
society and those who ape them. It is knightly honor, or point d'honneur. Its
principles are quite different from those which underlie the kind of honor I have
been treating until now, and in some respects are even opposed to them. The sort
I am referring to produces the cavalier; while the other kind creates the man of

honor. As this is so, I shall proceed to give an explanation of its principles, as a
kind of code or mirror of knightly courtesy.
(1.) To begin with, honor of this sort consists, not in other people's opinion
of what we are worth, but wholly and entirely in whether they express it or not,
no matter whether they really have any opinion at all, let alone whether they
know of reasons for having one. Other people may entertain the worst opinion of
us in consequence of what we do, and may despise us as much as they like; so
long as no one dares to give expression to his opinion, our honor remains
untarnished. So if our actions and qualities compel the highest respect from other
people, and they have no option but to give this respect,--as soon as anyone, no
matter how wicked or foolish he may be, utters something depreciatory of us,
our honor is offended, nay, gone for ever, unless we can manage to restore it. A
superfluous proof of what I say, namely, that knightly honor depends, not upon
what people think, but upon what they say, is furnished by the fact that insults
can be withdrawn, or, if necessary, form the subject of an apology, which makes
them as though they had never been uttered. Whether the opinion which
underlays the expression has also been rectified, and why the expression should
ever have been used, are questions which are perfectly unimportant: so long as
the statement is withdrawn, all is well. The truth is that conduct of this kind
aims, not at earning respect, but at extorting it.
(2.) In the second place, this sort of honor rests, not on what a man does,
but on what he suffers, the obstacles he encounters; differing from the honor
which prevails in all else, in consisting, not in what he says or does himself, but
in what another man says or does. His honor is thus at the mercy of every man
who can talk it away on the tip of his tongue; and if he attacks it, in a moment it
is gone for ever,--unless the man who is attacked manages to wrest it back again
by a process which I shall mention presently, a process which involves danger to
his life, health, freedom, property and peace of mind. A man's whole conduct
may be in accordance with the most righteous and noble principles, his spirit
may be the purest that ever breathed, his intellect of the very highest order; and
yet his honor may disappear the moment that anyone is pleased to insult him,
anyone at all who has not offended against this code of honor himself, let him be
the most worthless rascal or the most stupid beast, an idler, gambler, debtor, a
man, in short, of no account at all. It is usually this sort of fellow who likes to
insult people; for, as Seneca[1] rightly remarks, ut quisque contemtissimus et
ludibrio est, ita solutissimae est, the more contemptible and ridiculous a man is,-
-the readier he is with his tongue. His insults are most likely to be directed
against the very kind of man I have described, because people of different tastes
can never be friends, and the sight of pre-eminent merit is apt to raise the secret

ire of a ne'er-do-well. What Goethe says in the Westöstlicher Divan is quite true,
that it is useless to complain against your enemies; for they can never become
your friends, if your whole being is a standing reproach to them:--
Was klagst du über Feinde? Sollten Solche je warden Freunde Denen das
Wesen, wie du bist, Im stillen ein ewiger Vorwurf ist?
[Footnote 1: De Constantia, 11.]
It is obvious that people of this worthless description have good cause to be
thankful to the principle of honor, because it puts them on a level with people
who in every other respect stand far above them. If a fellow likes to insult any
one, attribute to him, for example, some bad quality, this is taken prima facie as
a well-founded opinion, true in fact; a decree, as it were, with all the force of
law; nay, if it is not at once wiped out in blood, it is a judgment which holds
good and valid to all time. In other words, the man who is insulted remains--in
the eyes of all honorable people--what the man who uttered the insult--even
though he were the greatest wretch on earth--was pleased to call him; for he has
put up with the insult--the technical term, I believe. Accordingly, all honorable
people will have nothing more to do with him, and treat him like a leper, and, it
may be, refuse to go into any company where he may be found, and so on.
This wise proceeding may, I think, be traced back to the fact that in the
Middle Age, up to the fifteenth century, it was not the accuser in any criminal
process who had to prove the guilt of the accused, but the accused who had to
prove his innocence.[1] This he could do by swearing he was not guilty; and his
backers--consacramentales--had to come and swear that in their opinion he was
incapable of perjury. If he could find no one to help him in this way, or the
accuser took objection to his backers, recourse was had to trial by the Judgment
of God, which generally meant a duel. For the accused was now in disgrace,[2]
and had to clear himself. Here, then, is the origin of the notion of disgrace, and
of that whole system which prevails now-a-days amongst honorable people--
only that the oath is omitted. This is also the explanation of that deep feeling of
indignation which honorable people are called upon to show if they are given the
lie; it is a reproach which they say must be wiped out in blood. It seldom comes
to this pass, however, though lies are of common occurrence; but in England,
more than elsewhere, it is a superstition which has taken very deep root. As a
matter of order, a man who threatens to kill another for telling a lie should never
have told one himself. The fact is, that the criminal trial of the Middle Age also
admitted of a shorter form. In reply to the charge, the accused answered: That is
a lie; whereupon it was left to be decided by the Judgment of God. Hence, the
code of knightly honor prescribes that, when the lie is given, an appeal to arms
follows as a matter of course. So much, then, for the theory of insult.

[Footnote 1: See C.G. von Waehter's Beiträge zur deutschen Geschichte,
especially the chapter on criminal law.]
[Footnote 2: Translator's Note.--It is true that this expression has another
special meaning in the technical terminology of Chivalry, but it is the nearest
English equivalent which I can find for the German--ein Bescholtener]
But there is something even worse than insult, something so dreadful that I
must beg pardon of all honorable people for so much as mentioning it in this
code of knightly honor; for I know they will shiver, and their hair will stand on
end, at the very thought of it--the summum malum, the greatest evil on earth,
worse than death and damnation. A man may give another--horrible dictu!--a
slap or a blow. This is such an awful thing, and so utterly fatal to all honor, that,
while any other species of insult may be healed by blood-letting, this can be
cured only by the coup-de-grace.
(3.) In the third place, this kind of honor has absolutely nothing to do with
what a man may be in and for himself; or, again, with the question whether his
moral character can ever become better or worse, and all such pedantic inquiries.
If your honor happens to be attacked, or to all appearances gone, it can very soon
be restored in its entirety if you are only quick enough in having recourse to the
one universal remedy--a duel. But if the aggressor does not belong to the classes
which recognize the code of knightly honor, or has himself once offended
against it, there is a safer way of meeting any attack upon your honor, whether it
consists in blows, or merely in words. If you are armed, you can strike down
your opponent on the spot, or perhaps an hour later. This will restore your honor.
But if you wish to avoid such an extreme step, from fear of any unpleasant
consequences arising therefrom, or from uncertainty as to whether the aggressor
is subject to the laws of knightly honor or not, there is another means of making
your position good, namely, the Avantage. This consists in returning rudeness
with still greater rudeness; and if insults are no use, you can try a blow, which
forms a sort of climax in the redemption of your honor; for instance, a box on
the ear may be cured by a blow with a stick, and a blow with a stick by a
thrashing with a horsewhip; and, as the approved remedy for this last, some
people recommend you to spit at your opponent.[1] If all these means are of no
avail, you must not shrink from drawing blood. And the reason for these
methods of wiping out insult is, in this code, as follows:
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. It must be remembered that Schopenhauer is
here describing, or perhaps caricaturing the manners and customs of the German
aristocracy of half a century ago. Now, of course, nous avons change tout cela!]
(4.) To receive an insult is disgraceful; to give one, honorable. Let me take
an example. My opponent has truth, right and reason on his side. Very well. I

insult him. Thereupon right and honor leave him and come to me, and, for the
time being, he has lost them--until he gets them back, not by the exercise of right
or reason, but by shooting and sticking me. Accordingly, rudeness is a quality
which, in point of honor, is a substitute for any other and outweighs them all.
The rudest is always right. What more do you want? However stupid, bad or
wicked a man may have been, if he is only rude into the bargain, he condones
and legitimizes all his faults. If in any discussion or conversation, another man
shows more knowledge, greater love of truth, a sounder judgment, better
understanding than we, or generally exhibits intellectual qualities which cast
ours into the shade, we can at once annul his superiority and our own
shallowness, and in our turn be superior to him, by being insulting and offensive.
For rudeness is better than any argument; it totally eclipses intellect. If our
opponent does not care for our mode of attack, and will not answer still more
rudely, so as to plunge us into the ignoble rivalry of the Avantage, we are the
victors and honor is on our side. Truth, knowledge, understanding, intellect, wit,
must beat a retreat and leave the field to this almighty insolence.
Honorable people immediately make a show of mounting their war-horse, if
anyone utters an opinion adverse to theirs, or shows more intelligence than they
can muster; and if in any controversy they are at a loss for a reply, they look
about for some weapon of rudeness, which will serve as well and come readier
to hand; so they retire masters of the position. It must now be obvious that
people are quite right in applauding this principle of honor as having ennobled
the tone of society. This principle springs from another, which forms the heart
and soul of the entire code.
(5.) Fifthly, the code implies that the highest court to which a man can
appeal in any differences he may have with another on a point of honor is the
court of physical force, that is, of brutality. Every piece of rudeness is, strictly
speaking, an appeal to brutality; for it is a declaration that intellectual strength
and moral insight are incompetent to decide, and that the battle must be fought
out by physical force--a struggle which, in the case of man, whom Franklin
defines as a tool-making animal, is decided by the weapons peculiar to the
species; and the decision is irrevocable. This is the well-known principle of right
of might--irony, of course, like the wit of a fool, a parallel phrase. The honor of a
knight may be called the glory of might.
(6.) Lastly, if, as we saw above, civic honor is very scrupulous in the matter
of meum and tuum, paying great respect to obligations and a promise once
made, the code we are here discussing displays, on the other hand, the noblest
liberality. There is only one word which may not be broken, the word of honor--
upon my honor, as people say--the presumption being, of course, that every

other form of promise may be broken. Nay, if the worst comes to the worst, it is
easy to break even one's word of honor, and still remain honorable--again by
adopting that universal remedy, the duel, and fighting with those who maintain
that we pledged our word. Further, there is one debt, and one alone, that under
no circumstances must be left unpaid--a gambling debt, which has accordingly
been called a debt of honor. In all other kinds of debt you may cheat Jews and
Christians as much as you like; and your knightly honor remains without a stain.
The unprejudiced reader will see at once that such a strange, savage and
ridiculous code of honor as this has no foundation in human nature, nor any
warrant in a healthy view of human affairs. The extremely narrow sphere of its
operation serves only to intensify the feeling, which is exclusively confined to
Europe since the Middle Age, and then only to the upper classes, officers and
soldiers, and people who imitate them. Neither Greeks nor Romans knew
anything of this code of honor or of its principles; nor the highly civilized
nations of Asia, ancient or modern. Amongst them no other kind of honor is
recognized but that which I discussed first, in virtue of which a man is what he
shows himself to be by his actions, not what any wagging tongue is pleased to
say of him. They thought that what a man said or did might perhaps affect his
own honor, but not any other man's. To them, a blow was but a blow--and any
horse or donkey could give a harder one--a blow which under certain
circumstances might make a man angry and demand immediate vengeance; but
it had nothing to do with honor. No one kept account of blows or insulting
words, or of the satisfaction which was demanded or omitted to be demanded.
Yet in personal bravery and contempt of death, the ancients were certainly not
inferior to the nations of Christian Europe. The Greeks and Romans were
thorough heroes, if you like; but they knew nothing about point d'honneur. If
they had any idea of a duel, it was totally unconnected with the life of the
nobles; it was merely the exhibition of mercenary gladiators, slaves devoted to
slaughter, condemned criminals, who, alternately with wild beasts, were set to
butcher one another to make a Roman holiday. When Christianity was
introduced, gladiatorial shows were done away with, and their place taken, in
Christian times, by the duel, which was a way of settling difficulties by the
Judgment of God.
If the gladiatorial fight was a cruel sacrifice to the prevailing desire for
great spectacles, dueling is a cruel sacrifice to existing prejudices--a sacrifice,
not of criminals, slaves and prisoners, but of the noble and the free.[1]
[Footnote 1: Translator's Note. These and other remarks on dueling will no
doubt wear a belated look to English readers; but they are hardly yet antiquated
for most parts of the Continent.]

There are a great many traits in the character of the ancients which show
that they were entirely free from these prejudices. When, for instance, Marius
was summoned to a duel by a Teutonic chief, he returned answer to the effect
that, if the chief were tired of his life, he might go and hang himself; at the same
time he offered him a veteran gladiator for a round or two. Plutarch relates in his
life of Themistocles that Eurybiades, who was in command of the fleet, once
raised his stick to strike him; whereupon Themistocles, instead of drawing his
sword, simply said: Strike, but hear me. How sorry the reader must be, if he is an
honorable man, to find that we have no information that the Athenian officers
refused in a body to serve any longer under Themistocles, if he acted like that!
There is a modern French writer who declares that if anyone considers
Demosthenes a man of honor, his ignorance will excite a smile of pity; and that
Cicero was not a man of honor either![1] In a certain passage in Plato's Laws[2]
the philosopher speaks at length of [Greek: aikia] or assault, showing us clearly
enough that the ancients had no notion of any feeling of honor in connection
with such matters. Socrates' frequent discussions were often followed by his
being severely handled, and he bore it all mildly. Once, for instance, when
somebody kicked him, the patience with which he took the insult surprised one
of his friends. Do you think, said Socrates, that if an ass happened to kick me, I
should resent it?[3] On another occasion, when he was asked, Has not that
fellow abused and insulted you? No, was his answer, what he says is not
addressed to me[4] Stobaeus has preserved a long passage from Musonius, from
which we can see how the ancients treated insults. They knew no other form of
satisfaction than that which the law provided, and wise people despised even
this. If a Greek received a box on the ear, he could get satisfaction by the aid of
the law; as is evident from Plato's Gorgias, where Socrates' opinion may be
found. The same thing may be seen in the account given by Gellius of one
Lucius Veratius, who had the audacity to give some Roman citizens whom he
met on the road a box on the ear, without any provocation whatever; but to avoid
any ulterior consequences, he told a slave to bring a bag of small money, and on
the spot paid the trivial legal penalty to the men whom he had astonished by his
conduct.
[Footnote 1:litteraires: par C. Durand. Rouen, 1828.]
[Footnote 2: Bk. IX.].
[Footnote 3: Diogenes Laertius, ii., 21.]
[Footnote 4: Ibid 36.]
Crates, the celebrated Cynic philosopher, got such a box on the ear from
Nicodromus, the musician, that his face swelled up and became black and blue;
whereupon he put a label on his forehead, with the inscription, Nicodromus fecit,

which brought much disgrace to the fluteplayer who had committed such a piece
of brutality upon the man whom all Athens honored as a household god.[1] And
in a letter to Melesippus, Diogenes of Sinope tells us that he got a beating from
the drunken sons of the Athenians; but he adds that it was a matter of no
importance.[2] And Seneca devotes the last few chapters of his De Constantia to
a lengthy discussion on insult--contumelia; in order to show that a wise man will
take no notice of it. In Chapter XIV, he says, What shall a wise man do, if he is
given a blow? What Cato did, when some one struck him on the mouth;--not fire
up or avenge the insult, or even return the blow, but simply ignore it.
[Footnote 1: Diogenes Laertius, vi. 87, and Apul: Flor: p. 126.]
[Footnote 2: Cf. Casaubon's Note, Diog. Laert., vi. 33.]
Yes, you say, but these men were philosophers.--And you are fools, eh?
Precisely.
It is clear that the whole code of knightly honor was utterly unknown to the
ancients; for the simple reason that they always took a natural and unprejudiced
view of human affairs, and did not allow themselves to be influenced by any
such vicious and abominable folly. A blow in the face was to them a blow and
nothing more, a trivial physical injury; whereas the moderns make a catastrophe
out of it, a theme for a tragedy; as, for instance, in the Cid of Corneille, or in a
recent German comedy of middle-class life, called The Power of Circumstance,
which should have been entitled The Power of Prejudice. If a member of the
National Assembly at Paris got a blow on the ear, it would resound from one end
of Europe to the other. The examples which I have given of the way in which
such an occurrence would have been treated in classic times may not suit the
ideas of honorable people; so let me recommend to their notice, as a kind of
antidote, the story of Monsieur Desglands in Diderot's masterpiece, Jacques le
fataliste. It is an excellent specimen of modern knightly honor, which, no doubt,
they will find enjoyable and edifying.[1]
[Footnote: 1: Translator's Note. The story to which Schopenhauer here
refers is briefly as follows: Two gentlemen, one of whom was named Desglands,
were paying court to the same lady. As they sat at table side by side, with the
lady opposite, Desglands did his best to charm her with his conversation; but she
pretended not to hear him, and kept looking at his rival. In the agony of jealousy,
Desglands, as he was holding a fresh egg in his hand, involuntarily crushed it;
the shell broke, and its contents bespattered his rival's face. Seeing him raise his
hand, Desglands seized it and whispered: Sir, I take it as given. The next day
Desglands appeared with a large piece of black sticking-plaster upon his right
cheek. In the duel which followed, Desglands severely wounded his rival; upon
which he reduced the size of the plaster. When his rival recovered, they had

another duel; Desglands drew blood again, and again made his plaster a little
smaller; and so on for five or six times. After every duel Desglands' plaster grew
less and less, until at last his rival.]
From what I have said it must be quite evident that the principle of knightly
honor has no essential and spontaneous origin in human nature. It is an artificial
product, and its source is not hard to find. Its existence obviously dates from the
time when people used their fists more than their heads, when priestcraft had
enchained the human intellect, the much bepraised Middle Age, with its system
of chivalry. That was the time when people let the Almighty not only care for
them but judge for them too; when difficult cases were decided by an ordeal, a
Judgment of God; which, with few exceptions, meant a duel, not only where
nobles were concerned, but in the case of ordinary citizens as well. There is a
neat illustration of this in Shakespeare's Henry VI.[1] Every judicial sentence
was subject to an appeal to arms--a court, as it were, of higher instance, namely,
the Judgment of God: and this really meant that physical strength and activity,
that is, our animal nature, usurped the place of reason on the judgment seat,
deciding in matters of right and wrong, not by what a man had done, but by the
force with which he was opposed, the same system, in fact, as prevails to-day
under the principles of knightly honor. If any one doubts that such is really the
origin of our modern duel, let him read an excellent work by J.B. Millingen, The
History of Dueling.[2] Nay, you may still find amongst the supporters of the
system,--who, by the way are not usually the most educated or thoughtful of
men,--some who look upon the result of a duel as really constituting a divine
judgment in the matter in dispute; no doubt in consequence of the traditional
feeling on the subject.
But leaving aside the question of origin, it must now be clear to us that the
main tendency of the principle is to use physical menace for the purpose of
extorting an appearance of respect which is deemed too difficult or superfluous
to acquire in reality; a proceeding which comes to much the same thing as if you
were to prove the warmth of your room by holding your hand on the
thermometer and so make it rise. In fact, the kernel of the matter is this: whereas
civic honor aims at peaceable intercourse, and consists in the opinion of other
people that we deserve full confidence, because we pay unconditional respect to
their rights; knightly honor, on the other hand, lays down that we are to be
feared, as being determined at all costs to maintain our own.
As not much reliance can be placed upon human integrity, the principle that
it is more essential to arouse fear than to invite confidence would not, perhaps,
be a false one, if we were living in a state of nature, where every man would
have to protect himself and directly maintain his own rights. But in civilized life,

where the State undertakes the protection of our person and property, the
principle is no longer applicable: it stands, like the castles and watch-towers of
the age when might was right, a useless and forlorn object, amidst well-tilled
fields and frequented roads, or even railways.
Accordingly, the application of knightly honor, which still recognizes this
principle, is confined to those small cases of personal assault which meet with
but slight punishment at the hands of the law, or even none at all, for de minimis
non,--mere trivial wrongs, committed sometimes only in jest. The consequence
of this limited application of the principle is that it has forced itself into an
exaggerated respect for the value of the person,--a respect utterly alien to the
nature, constitution or destiny of man--which it has elated into a species of
sanctity: and as it considers that the State has imposed a very insufficient penalty
on the commission of such trivial injuries, it takes upon itself to punish them by
attacking the aggressor in life or limb. The whole thing manifestly rests upon an
excessive degree of arrogant pride, which, completely forgetting what man really
is, claims that he shall be absolutely free from all attack or even censure. Those
who determine to carry out this principle by main force, and announce, as their
rule of action, whoever insults or strikes me shall die! ought for their pains to be
banished the country.[1]
[Footnote 1: Knightly honor is the child of pride and folly, and it is needy
not pride, which is the heritage of the human race. It is a very remarkable fact
that this extreme form of pride should be found exclusively amongst the
adherents of the religion which teaches the deepest humility. Still, this pride
must not be put down to religion, but, rather, to the feudal system, which made
every nobleman a petty sovereign who recognized no human judge, and learned
to regard his person as sacred and inviolable, and any attack upon it, or any blow
or insulting word, as an offence punishable with death. The principle of knightly
honor and of the duel were at first confined to the nobles, and, later on, also to
officers in the army, who, enjoying a kind of off-and-on relationship with the
upper classes, though they were never incorporated with them, were anxious not
to be behind them. It is true that duels were the product of the old ordeals; but
the latter are not the foundation, but rather the consequence and application of
the principle of honor: the man who recognized no human judge appealed to the
divine. Ordeals, however, are not peculiar to Christendom: they may be found in
great force among the Hindoos, especially of ancient times; and there are traces
of them even now.]
As a palliative to this rash arrogance, people are in the habit of giving way
on everything. If two intrepid persons meet, and neither will give way, the
slightest difference may cause a shower of abuse, then fisticuffs, and, finally, a

fatal blow: so that it would really be a more decorous proceeding to omit the
intermediate steps and appeal to arms at once. An appeal to arms has its own
special formalities; and these have developed into a rigid and precise system of
laws and regulations, together forming the most solemn farce there is--a regular
temple of honor dedicated to folly! For if two intrepid persons dispute over some
trivial matter, (more important affairs are dealt with by law), one of them, the
cleverer of the two, will of course yield; and they will agree to differ. That this is
so is proved by the fact that common people,--or, rather, the numerous classes of
the community who do not acknowledge the principle of knightly honor, let any
dispute run its natural course. Amongst these classes homicide is a hundredfold
rarer than amongst those--and they amount, perhaps, in all, to hardly one in a
thousand,--who pay homage to the principle: and even blows are of no very
frequent occurrence.
Then it has been said that the manners and tone of good society are
ultimately based upon this principle of honor, which, with its system of duels, is
made out to be a bulwark against the assaults of savagery and rudeness. But
Athens, Corinth and Rome could assuredly boast of good, nay, excellent society,
and manners and tone of a high order, without any support from the bogey of
knightly honor. It is true that women did not occupy that prominent place in
ancient society which they hold now, when conversation has taken on a frivolous
and trifling character, to the exclusion of that weighty discourse which
distinguished the ancients.
This change has certainly contributed a great deal to bring about the
tendency, which is observable in good society now-a-days, to prefer personal
courage to the possession of any other quality. The fact is that personal courage
is really a very subordinate virtue,--merely the distinguishing mark of a
subaltern,--a virtue, indeed, in which we are surpassed by the lower animals; or
else you would not hear people say, as brave as a lion. Far from being the pillar
of society, knightly honor affords a sure asylum, in general for dishonesty and
wickedness, and also for small incivilities, want of consideration and
unmannerliness. Rude behavior is often passed over in silence because no one
cares to risk his neck in correcting it.
After what I have said, it will not appear strange that the dueling system is
carried to the highest pitch of sanguinary zeal precisely in that nation whose
political and financial records show that they are not too honorable. What that
nation is like in its private and domestic life, is a question which may be best put
to those who are experienced in the matter. Their urbanity and social culture
have long been conspicuous by their absence.
There is no truth, then, in such pretexts. It can be urged with more justice

that as, when you snarl at a dog, he snarls in return, and when you pet him, he
fawns; so it lies in the nature of men to return hostility by hostility, and to be
embittered and irritated at any signs of depreciatory treatment or hatred: and, as
Cicero says, there is something so penetrating in the shaft of envy that even men
of wisdom and worth find its wound a painful one; and nowhere in the world,
except, perhaps, in a few religious sects, is an insult or a blow taken with
equanimity. And yet a natural view of either would in no case demand anything
more than a requital proportionate to the offence, and would never go to the
length of assigning death as the proper penalty for anyone who accuses another
of lying or stupidity or cowardice. The old German theory of blood for a blow is
a revolting superstition of the age of chivalry. And in any case the return or
requital of an insult is dictated by anger, and not by any such obligation of honor
and duty as the advocates of chivalry seek to attach to it. The fact is that, the
greater the truth, the greater the slander; and it is clear that the slightest hint of
some real delinquency will give much greater offence than a most terrible
accusation which is perfectly baseless: so that a man who is quite sure that he
has done nothing to deserve a reproach may treat it with contempt, and will be
safe in doing so. The theory of honor demands that he shall show a susceptibility
which he does not possess, and take bloody vengeance for insults which he
cannot feel. A man must himself have but a poor opinion of his own worth who
hastens to prevent the utterance of an unfavorable opinion by giving his enemy a
black eye.
True appreciation of his own value will make a man really indifferent to
insult; but if he cannot help resenting it, a little shrewdness and culture will
enable him to save appearances and dissemble his anger. If he could only get rid
of this superstition about honor--the idea, I mean, that it disappears when you are
insulted, and can be restored by returning the insult; if we could only stop people
from thinking that wrong, brutality and insolence can be legalized by expressing
readiness to give satisfaction, that is, to fight in defence of it, we should all soon
come to the general opinion that insult and depreciation are like a battle in which
the loser wins; and that, as Vincenzo Monti says, abuse resembles a church-
procession, because it always returns to the point from which it set out. If we
could only get people to look upon insult in this light, we should no longer have
to say something rude in order to prove that we are in the right. Now,
unfortunately, if we want to take a serious view of any question, we have first of
all to consider whether it will not give offence in some way or other to the
dullard, who generally shows alarm and resentment at the merest sign of
intelligence; and it may easily happen that the head which contains the
intelligent view has to be pitted against the noodle which is empty of everything

but narrowness and stupidity. If all this were done away with, intellectual
superiority could take the leading place in society which is its due--a place now
occupied, though people do not like to confess it, by excellence of physique,
mere fighting pluck, in fact; and the natural effect of such a change would be
that the best kind of people would have one reason the less for withdrawing from
society. This would pave the way for the introduction of real courtesy and
genuinely good society, such as undoubtedly existed in Athens, Corinth and
Rome. If anyone wants to see a good example of what I mean, I should like him
to read Xenophon's Banquet.
The last argument in defence of knightly honor no doubt is, that, but for its
existence, the world--awful thought!--would be a regular bear-garden. To which
I may briefly reply that nine hundred and ninety-nine people out of a thousand
who do not recognize the code, have often given and received a blow without
any fatal consequences: whereas amongst the adherents of the code a blow
usually means death to one of the parties. But let me examine this argument
more closely.
I have often tried to find some tenable, or at any rate, plausible basis--other
than a merely conventional one--some positive reasons, that is to say, for the
rooted conviction which a portion of mankind entertains, that a blow is a very
dreadful thing; but I have looked for it in vain, either in the animal or in the
rational side of human nature. A blow is, and always will be, a trivial physical
injury which one man can do to another; proving, thereby, nothing more than his
superiority in strength or skill, or that his enemy was off his guard. Analysis will
carry us no further. The same knight who regards a blow from the human hand
as the greatest of evils, if he gets a ten times harder blow from his horse, will
give you the assurance, as he limps away in suppressed pain, that it is a matter of
no consequence whatever. So I have come to think that it is the human hand
which is at the bottom of the mischief. And yet in a battle the knight may get
cuts and thrusts from the same hand, and still assure you that his wounds are not
worth mentioning. Now, I hear that a blow from the flat of a sword is not by any
means so bad as a blow from a stick; and that, a short time ago, cadets were
liable to be punished by the one but not the other, and that the very greatest
honor of all is the accolade. This is all the psychological or moral basis that I can
find; and so there is nothing left me but to pronounce the whole thing an
antiquated superstition that has taken deep root, and one more of the many
examples which show the force of tradition. My view is confirmed by the well-
known fact that in China a beating with a bamboo is a very frequent punishment
for the common people, and even for officials of every class; which shows that
human nature, even in a highly civilized state, does not run in the same groove

here and in China.
On the contrary, an unprejudiced view of human nature shows that it is just
as natural for a man to beat as it is for savage animals to bite and rend in pieces,
or for horned beasts to butt or push. Man may be said to be the animal that beats.
Hence it is revolting to our sense of the fitness of things to hear, as we
sometimes do, that one man bitten another; on the other hand, it is a natural and
everyday occurrence for him to get blows or give them. It is intelligible enough
that, as we become educated, we are glad to dispense with blows by a system of
mutual restraint. But it is a cruel thing to compel a nation or a single class to
regard a blow as an awful misfortune which must have death and murder for its
consequences. There are too many genuine evils in the world to allow of our
increasing them by imaginary misfortunes, which brings real ones in their train:
and yet this is the precise effect of the superstition, which thus proves itself at
once stupid and malign.
It does not seem to me wise of governments and legislative bodies to
promote any such folly by attempting to do away with flogging as a punishment
in civil or military life. Their idea is that they are acting in the interests of
humanity; but, in point of fact, they are doing just the opposite; for the abolition
of flogging will serve only to strengthen this inhuman and abominable
superstition, to which so many sacrifices have already been made. For all
offences, except the worst, a beating is the obvious, and therefore the natural
penalty; and a man who will not listen to reason will yield to blows. It seems to
me right and proper to administer corporal punishment to the man who possesses
nothing and therefore cannot be fined, or cannot be put in prison because his
master's interests would suffer by the loss of his service. There are really no
arguments against it: only mere talk about the dignity of man--talk which
proceeds, not from any clear notions on the subject, but from the pernicious
superstition I have been describing. That it is a superstition which lies at the
bottom of the whole business is proved by an almost laughable example. Not
long ago, in the military discipline of many countries, the cat was replaced by
the stick. In either case the object was to produce physical pain; but the latter
method involved no disgrace, and was not derogatory to honor.
By promoting this superstition, the State is playing into the hands of the
principle of knightly honor, and therefore of the duel; while at the same time it is
trying, or at any rate it pretends it is trying, to abolish the duel by legislative
enactment. As a natural consequence we find that this fragment of the theory that
might is right, which has come down to us from the most savage days of the
Middle Age, has still in this nineteenth century a good deal of life left in it--more
shame to us! It is high time for the principle to be driven out bag and baggage.

Now-a-days no one is allowed to set dogs or cocks to fight each other,--at any
rate, in England it is a penal offence,--but men are plunged into deadly strife,
against their will, by the operation of this ridiculous, superstitious and absurd
principle, which imposes upon us the obligation, as its narrow-minded
supporters and advocates declare, of fighting with one another like gladiators,
for any little trifle. Let me recommend our purists to adopt the expression
baiting[1] instead of duel, which probably comes to us, not from the Latin
duellum, but from the Spanish duelo,--meaning suffering, nuisance, annoyance.
[Footnote 1: Ritterhetze]
In any case, we may well laugh at the pedantic excess to which this foolish
system has been carried. It is really revolting that this principle, with its absurd
code, can form a power within the State--imperium in imperio--a power too
easily put in motion, which, recognizing no right but might, tyrannizes over the
classes which come within its range, by keeping up a sort of inquisition, before
which any one may be haled on the most flimsy pretext, and there and then be
tried on an issue of life and death between himself and his opponent. This is the
lurking place from which every rascal, if he only belongs to the classes in
question, may menace and even exterminate the noblest and best of men, who, as
such, must of course be an object of hatred to him. Our system of justice and
police-protection has made it impossible in these days for any scoundrel in the
street to attack us with--Your money or your life! An end should be put to the
burden which weighs upon the higher classes--the burden, I mean, of having to
be ready every moment to expose life and limb to the mercy of anyone who
takes it into his rascally head to be coarse, rude, foolish or malicious. It is
perfectly atrocious that a pair of silly, passionate boys should be wounded,
maimed or even killed, simply because they have had a few words.
The strength of this tyrannical power within the State, and the force of the
superstition, may be measured by the fact that people who are prevented from
restoring their knightly honor by the superior or inferior rank of their aggressor,
or anything else that puts the persons on a different level, often come to a tragic-
comic end by committing suicide in sheer despair. You may generally know a
thing to be false and ridiculous by finding that, if it is carried to its logical
conclusion, it results in a contradiction; and here, too, we have a very glaring
absurdity. For an officer is forbidden to take part in a duel; but if he is
challenged and declines to come out, he is punished by being dismissed the
service.
As I am on the matter, let me be more frank still. The important distinction,
which is often insisted upon, between killing your enemy in a fair fight with
equal weapons, and lying in ambush for him, is entirely a corollary of the fact

that the power within the State, of which I have spoken, recognizes no other
right than might, that is, the right of the stronger, and appeals to a Judgment of
God as the basis of the whole code. For to kill a man in a fair fight, is to prove
that you are superior to him in strength or skill; and to justify the deed, you must
assume that the right of the stronger is really a right.
But the truth is that, if my opponent is unable to defend himself, it gives me
the possibility, but not by any means the right, of killing him. The right, the
moral justification, must depend entirely upon the motives which I have for
taking his life. Even supposing that I have sufficient motive for taking a man's
life, there is no reason why I should make his death depend upon whether I can
shoot or fence better than he. In such a case, it is immaterial in what way I kill
him, whether I attack him from the front or the rear. From a moral point of view,
the right of the stronger is no more convincing than the right of the more skillful;
and it is skill which is employed if you murder a a man treacherously. Might and
skill are in this case equally right; in a duel, for instance, both the one and the
other come into play; for a feint is only another name for treachery. If I consider
myself morally justified in taking a man's life, it is stupid of me to try first of all
whether he can shoot or fence better than I; as, if he can, he will not only have
wronged me, but have taken my life into the bargain.
It is Rousseau's opinion that the proper way to avenge an insult is, not to
fight a duel with your aggressor, but to assassinate him,--an opinion, however,
which he is cautious enough only to barely indicate in a mysterious note to one
of the books of his Emile. This shows the philosopher so completely under the
influence of the mediaeval superstition of knightly honor that he considers it
justifiable to murder a man who accuses you of lying: whilst he must have
known that every man, and himself especially, has deserved to have the lie given
him times without number.
The prejudice which justifies the killing of your adversary, so long as it is
done in an open contest and with equal weapons, obviously looks upon might as
really right, and a duel as the interference of God. The Italian who, in a fit of
rage, falls upon his aggressor wherever he finds him, and despatches him
without any ceremony, acts, at any rate, consistently and naturally: he may be
cleverer, but he is not worse, than the duelist. If you say, I am justified in killing
my adversary in a duel, because he is at the moment doing his best to kill me; I
can reply that it is your challenge which has placed him under the necessity of
defending himself; and that by mutually putting it on the ground of self-defence,
the combatants are seeking a plausible pretext for committing murder. I should
rather justify the deed by the legal maxim Volenti non fit injuria; because the
parties mutually agree to set their life upon the issue.

This argument may, however, be rebutted by showing that the injured party
is not injured volens; because it is this tyrannical principle of knightly honor,
with its absurd code, which forcibly drags one at least of the combatants before a
bloody inquisition.
I have been rather prolix on the subject of knightly honor, but I had good
reason for being so, because the Augean stable of moral and intellectual
enormity in this world can be cleaned out only with the besom of philosophy.
There are two things which more than all else serve to make the social
arrangements of modern life compare unfavorably with those of antiquity, by
giving our age a gloomy, dark and sinister aspect, from which antiquity, fresh,
natural and, as it were, in the morning of life, is completely free; I mean modern
honor and modern disease,--par nobile fratrum!--which have combined to poison
all the relations of life, whether public or private. The second of this noble pair
extends its influence much farther than at first appears to be the case, as being
not merely a physical, but also a moral disease. From the time that poisoned
arrows have been found in Cupid's quiver, an estranging, hostile, nay, devilish
element has entered into the relations of men and women, like a sinister thread
of fear and mistrust in the warp and woof of their intercourse; indirectly shaking
the foundations of human fellowship, and so more or less affecting the whole
tenor of existence. But it would be beside my present purpose to pursue the
subject further.
An influence analogous to this, though working on other lines, is exerted by
the principle of knightly honor,--that solemn farce, unknown to the ancient
world, which makes modern society stiff, gloomy and timid, forcing us to keep
the strictest watch on every word that falls. Nor is this all. The principle is a
universal Minotaur; and the goodly company of the sons of noble houses which
it demands in yearly tribute, comes, not from one country alone, as of old, but
from every land in Europe. It is high time to make a regular attack upon this
foolish system; and this is what I am trying to do now. Would that these two
monsters of the modern world might disappear before the end of the century!
Let us hope that medicine may be able to find some means of preventing
the one, and that, by clearing our ideals, philosophy may put an end to the other:
for it is only by clearing our ideas that the evil can be eradicated. Governments
have tried to do so by legislation, and failed.
Still, if they are really concerned to stop the dueling system; and if the
small success that has attended their efforts is really due only to their inability to
cope with the evil, I do not mind proposing a law the success of which I am
prepared to guarantee. It will involve no sanguinary measures, and can be put
into operation without recourse either to the scaffold or the gallows, or to

imprisonment for life. It is a small homeopathic pilule, with no serious after
effects. If any man send or accept a challenge, let the corporal take him before
the guard house, and there give him, in broad daylight, twelve strokes with a
stick a la Chinoise; a non-commissioned officer or a private to receive six. If a
duel has actually taken place, the usual criminal proceedings should be
instituted.
A person with knightly notions might, perhaps, object that, if such a
punishment were carried out, a man of honor would possibly shoot himself; to
which I should answer that it is better for a fool like that to shoot himself rather
than other people. However, I know very well that governments are not really in
earnest about putting down dueling. Civil officials, and much more so, officers
in the army, (except those in the highest positions), are paid most inadequately
for the services they perform; and the deficiency is made up by honor, which is
represented by titles and orders, and, in general, by the system of rank and
distinction. The duel is, so to speak, a very serviceable extra-horse for people of
rank: so they are trained in the knowledge of it at the universities. The accidents
which happen to those who use it make up in blood for the deficiency of the pay.
Just to complete the discussion, let me here mention the subject of national
honor. It is the honor of a nation as a unit in the aggregate of nations. And as
there is no court to appeal to but the court of force; and as every nation must be
prepared to defend its own interests, the honor of a nation consists in
establishing the opinion, not only that it may be trusted (its credit), but also that
it is to be feared. An attack upon its rights must never be allowed to pass
unheeded. It is a combination of civic and knightly honor.
Section 5.--Fame.
Under the heading of place in the estimation of the world we have put
Fame; and this we must now proceed to consider.
Fame and honor are twins; and twins, too, like Castor and Pollux, of whom
the one was mortal and the other was not. Fame is the undying brother of
ephemeral honor. I speak, of course, of the highest kind of fame, that is, of fame
in the true and genuine sense of the word; for, to be sure, there are many sorts of
fame, some of which last but a day. Honor is concerned merely with such
qualities as everyone may be expected to show under similar circumstances;
fame only of those which cannot be required of any man. Honor is of qualities
which everyone has a right to attribute to himself; fame only of those which
should be left to others to attribute. Whilst our honor extends as far as people
have knowledge of us; fame runs in advance, and makes us known wherever it
finds its way. Everyone can make a claim to honor; very few to fame, as being
attainable only in virtue of extraordinary achievements.

These achievements may be of two kinds, either actions or works; and so to
fame there are two paths open. On the path of actions, a great heart is the chief
recommendation; on that of works, a great head. Each of the two paths has its
own peculiar advantages and detriments; and the chief difference between them
is that actions are fleeting, while works remain. The influence of an action, be it
never so noble, can last but a short time; but a work of genius is a living
influence, beneficial and ennobling throughout the ages. All that can remain of
actions is a memory, and that becomes weak and disfigured by time--a matter of
indifference to us, until at last it is extinguished altogether; unless, indeed,
history takes it up, and presents it, fossilized, to posterity. Works are immortal in
themselves, and once committed to writing, may live for ever. Of Alexander the
Great we have but the name and the record; but Plato and Aristotle, Homer and
Horace are alive, and as directly at work to-day as they were in their own
lifetime. The Vedas, and their Upanishads, are still with us: but of all
contemporaneous actions not a trace has come down to us.[1]
[Footnote 1: Accordingly it is a poor compliment, though sometimes a
fashionable one, to try to pay honor to a work by calling it an action. For a work
is something essentially higher in its nature. An action is always something
based on motive, and, therefore, fragmentary and fleeting--a part, in fact, of that
Will which is the universal and original element in the constitution of the world.
But a great and beautiful work has a permanent character, as being of universal
significance, and sprung from the Intellect, which rises, like a perfume, above
the faults and follies of the world of Will.
The fame of a great action has this advantage, that it generally starts with a
loud explosion; so loud, indeed, as to be heard all over Europe: whereas the fame
of a great work is slow and gradual in its beginnings; the noise it makes is at first
slight, but it goes on growing greater, until at last, after a hundred years perhaps,
it attains its full force; but then it remains, because the works remain, for
thousands of years. But in the other case, when the first explosion is over, the
noise it makes grows less and less, and is heard by fewer and fewer persons;
until it ends by the action having only a shadowy existence in the pages of
history.]
Another disadvantage under which actions labor is that they depend upon
chance for the possibility of coming into existence; and hence, the fame they win
does not flow entirely from their intrinsic value, but also from the circumstances
which happened to lend them importance and lustre. Again, the fame of actions,
if, as in war, they are purely personal, depends upon the testimony of fewer
witnesses; and these are not always present, and even if present, are not always
just or unbiased observers. This disadvantage, however, is counterbalanced by

the fact that actions have the advantage of being of a practical character, and,
therefore, within the range of general human intelligence; so that once the facts
have been correctly reported, justice is immediately done; unless, indeed, the
motive underlying the action is not at first properly understood or appreciated.
No action can be really understood apart from the motive which prompted it.
It is just the contrary with works. Their inception does not depend upon
chance, but wholly and entirely upon their author; and whoever they are in and
for themselves, that they remain as long as they live. Further, there is a difficulty
in properly judging them, which becomes all the harder, the higher their
character; often there are no persons competent to understand the work, and
often no unbiased or honest critics. Their fame, however, does not depend upon
one judge only; they can enter an appeal to another. In the case of actions, as I
have said, it is only their memory which comes down to posterity, and then only
in the traditional form; but works are handed down themselves, and, except
when parts of them have been lost, in the form in which they first appeared. In
this case there is no room for any disfigurement of the facts; and any
circumstance which may have prejudiced them in their origin, fall away with the
lapse of time. Nay, it is often only after the lapse of time that the persons really
competent to judge them appear--exceptional critics sitting in judgment on
exceptional works, and giving their weighty verdicts in succession. These
collectively form a perfectly just appreciation; and though there are cases where
it has taken some hundreds of years to form it, no further lapse of time is able to
reverse the verdict;--so secure and inevitable is the fame of a great work.
Whether authors ever live to see the dawn of their fame depends upon the
chance of circumstance; and the higher and more important their works are, the
less likelihood there is of their doing so. That was an incomparable fine saying
of Seneca's, that fame follows merit as surely as the body casts a shadow;
sometimes falling in front, and sometimes behind. And he goes on to remark that
though the envy of contemporaries be shown by universal silence, there will
come those who will judge without enmity or favor. From this remark it is
manifest that even in Seneca's age there were rascals who understood the art of
suppressing merit by maliciously ignoring its existence, and of concealing good
work from the public in order to favor the bad: it is an art well understood in our
day, too, manifesting itself, both then and now, in an envious conspiracy of
silence.
As a general rule, the longer a man's fame is likely to last, the later it will be
in coming; for all excellent products require time for their development. The
fame which lasts to posterity is like an oak, of very slow growth; and that which
endures but a little while, like plants which spring up in a year and then die;

whilst false fame is like a fungus, shooting up in a night and perishing as soon.
And why? For this reason; the more a man belongs to posterity, in other
words, to humanity in general, the more of an alien he is to his contemporaries;
since his work is not meant for them as such, but only for them in so far as they
form part of mankind at large; there is none of that familiar local color about his
productions which would appeal to them; and so what he does, fails of
recognition because it is strange.
People are more likely to appreciate the man who serves the circumstances
of his own brief hour, or the temper of the moment,--belonging to it, living and
dying with it.
The general history of art and literature shows that the highest
achievements of the human mind are, as a rule, not favorably received at first;
but remain in obscurity until they win notice from intelligence of a high order,
by whose influence they are brought into a position which they then maintain, in
virtue of the authority thus given them.
If the reason of this should be asked, it will be found that ultimately, a man
can really understand and appreciate those things only which are of like nature
with himself. The dull person will like what is dull, and the common person
what is common; a man whose ideas are mixed will be attracted by confusion of
thought; and folly will appeal to him who has no brains at all; but best of all, a
man will like his own works, as being of a character thoroughly at one with
himself. This is a truth as old as Epicharmus of fabulous memory--
[Greek: Thaumaston ouden esti me tauth outo legein Kal andanein autoisin
autous kal dokein Kalos pethukenai kal gar ho kuon kuni Kalloton eimen
phainetai koi bous boi Onos dono kalliston [estin], us dut.]
The sense of this passage--for it should not be lost--is that we should not be
surprised if people are pleased with themselves, and fancy that they are in good
case; for to a dog the best thing in the world is a dog; to an ox, an ox; to an ass,
an ass; and to a sow, a sow.
The strongest arm is unavailing to give impetus to a featherweight; for,
instead of speeding on its way and hitting its mark with effect, it will soon fall to
the ground, having expended what little energy was given to it, and possessing
no mass of its own to be the vehicle of momentum. So it is with great and noble
thoughts, nay, with the very masterpieces of genius, when there are none but
little, weak, and perverse minds to appreciate them,--a fact which has been
deplored by a chorus of the wise in all ages. Jesus, the son of Sirach, for
instance, declares that He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in slumber:
when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the matter?[1] And Hamlet says,
A knavish speech sleeps in a fool's ear.[2] And Goethe is of the same opinion,

that a dull ear mocks at the wisest word,
Das glücktichste Wort es wird verhöhnt, Wenn der Hörer ein Schiefohr ist:
and again, that we should not be discouraged if people are stupid, for you
can make no rings if you throw your stone into a marsh.
Du iwirkest nicht, Alles bleibt so stumpf: Sei guter Dinge! Der Stein in
Sumpf Macht keine Ringe.
[Footnote 1: Ecclesiasticus, xxii., 8.]
[Footnote 2: Act iv., Sc. 2.]
Lichtenberg asks: When a head and a book come into collision, and one
sounds hollow, is it always the book? And in another place: Works like this are
as a mirror; if an ass looks in, you cannot expect an apostle to look out. We
should do well to remember old Gellert's fine and touching lament, that the best
gifts of all find the fewest admirers, and that most men mistake the bad for the
good,--a daily evil that nothing can prevent, like a plague which no remedy can
cure. There is but one thing to be done, though how difficult!--the foolish must
become wise,--and that they can never be. The value of life they never know;
they see with the outer eye but never with the mind, and praise the trivial
because the good is strange to them:--
Nie kennen sie den Werth der Dinge, Ihr Auge schliesst, nicht ihr Verstand;
Sie loben ewig das Geringe Weil sie das Gute nie gekannt.
To the intellectual incapacity which, as Goethe says, fails to recognize and
appreciate the good which exists, must be added something which comes into
play everywhere, the moral baseness of mankind, here taking the form of envy.
The new fame that a man wins raises him afresh over the heads of his fellows,
who are thus degraded in proportion. All conspicuous merit is obtained at the
cost of those who possess none; or, as Goethe has it in the Westöstlicher Divan,
another's praise is one's own depreciation--
Wenn wir Andern Ehre geben Müssen wir uns selbst entadeln.
We see, then, how it is that, whatever be the form which excellence takes,
mediocrity, the common lot of by far the greatest number, is leagued against it in
a conspiracy to resist, and if possible, to suppress it. The pass-word of this
league is à bas le mérite. Nay more; those who have done something themselves,
and enjoy a certain amount of fame, do not care about the appearance of a new
reputation, because its success is apt to throw theirs into the shade. Hence,
Goethe declares that if we had to depend for our life upon the favor of others, we
should never have lived at all; from their desire to appear important themselves,
people gladly ignore our very existence:--
Hätte ich gezaudert zu werden, Bis man mir's Leben geögnut, Ich wäre
noch nicht auf Erden, Wie ihr begreifen könnt, Wenn ihr seht, wie sie sich

geberden, Die, um etwas zu scheinen, Mich gerne mochten verneinen.
Honor, on the contrary, generally meets with fair appreciation, and is not
exposed to the onslaught of envy; nay, every man is credited with the possession
of it until the contrary is proved. But fame has to be won in despite of envy, and
the tribunal which awards the laurel is composed of judges biased against the
applicant from the very first. Honor is something which we are able and ready to
share with everyone; fame suffers encroachment and is rendered more
unattainable in proportion as more people come by it. Further, the difficulty of
winning fame by any given work stands in reverse ratio to the number of people
who are likely to read it; and hence it is so much harder to become famous as the
author of a learned work than as a writer who aspires only to amuse. It is hardest
of all in the case of philosophical works, because the result at which they aim is
rather vague, and, at the same time, useless from a material point of view; they
appeal chiefly to readers who are working on the same lines themselves.
It is clear, then, from what I have said as to the difficulty of winning fame,
that those who labor, not out of love for their subject, nor from pleasure in
pursuing it, but under the stimulus of ambition, rarely or never leave mankind a
legacy of immortal works. The man who seeks to do what is good and genuine,
must avoid what is bad, and be ready to defy the opinions of the mob, nay, even
to despise it and its misleaders. Hence the truth of the remark, (especially
insisted upon by Osorius de Gloria), that fame shuns those who seek it, and
seeks those who shun it; for the one adapt themselves to the taste of their
contemporaries, and the others work in defiance of it.
But, difficult though it be to acquire fame, it is an easy thing to keep when
once acquired. Here, again, fame is in direct opposition to honor, with which
everyone is presumably to be accredited. Honor has not to be won; it must only
not be lost. But there lies the difficulty! For by a single unworthy action, it is
gone irretrievably. But fame, in the proper sense of the word, can never
disappear; for the action or work by which it was acquired can never be undone;
and fame attaches to its author, even though he does nothing to deserve it anew.
The fame which vanishes, or is outlived, proves itself thereby to be spurious, in
other words, unmerited, and due to a momentary overestimate of a man's work;
not to speak of the kind of fame which Hegel enjoyed, and which Lichtenberg
describes as trumpeted forth by a clique of admiring undergraduates--the
resounding echo of empty heads;--such a fame as will make posterity smile
when it lights upon a grotesque architecture of words, a fine nest with the birds
long ago flown; it will knock at the door of this decayed structure of
conventionalities and find it utterly empty!--not even a trace of thought there to
invite the passer-by.

The truth is that fame means nothing but what a man is in comparison with
others. It is essentially relative in character, and therefore only indirectly
valuable; for it vanishes the moment other people become what the famous man
is. Absolute value can be predicated only of what a man possesses under any and
all circumstances,--here, what a man is directly and in himself. It is the
possession of a great heart or a great head, and not the mere fame of it, which is
worth having, and conducive to happiness. Not fame, but that which deserves to
be famous, is what a man should hold in esteem. This is, as it were, the true
underlying substance, and fame is only an accident, affecting its subject chiefly
as a kind of external symptom, which serves to confirm his own opinion of
himself. Light is not visible unless it meets with something to reflect it; and
talent is sure of itself only when its fame is noised abroad. But fame is not a
certain symptom of merit; because you can have the one without the other; or, as
Lessing nicely puts it, Some people obtain fame, and others deserve it.
It would be a miserable existence which should make its value or want of
value depend upon what other people think; but such would be the life of a hero
or a genius if its worth consisted in fame, that is, in the applause of the world.
Every man lives and exists on his own account, and, therefore, mainly in and for
himself; and what he is and the whole manner of his being concern himself more
than anyone else; so if he is not worth much in this respect, he cannot be worth
much otherwise. The idea which other people form of his existence is something
secondary, derivative, exposed to all the chances of fate, and in the end affecting
him but very indirectly. Besides, other people's heads are a wretched place to be
the home of a man's true happiness--a fanciful happiness perhaps, but not a real
one.
And what a mixed company inhabits the Temple of Universal Fame!--
generals, ministers, charlatans, jugglers, dancers, singers, millionaires and Jews!
It is a temple in which more sincere recognition, more genuine esteem, is given
to the several excellencies of such folk, than to superiority of mind, even of a
high order, which obtains from the great majority only a verbal
acknowledgment.
From the point of view of human happiness, fame is, surely, nothing but a
very rare and delicate morsel for the appetite that feeds on pride and vanity--an
appetite which, however carefully concealed, exists to an immoderate degree in
every man, and is, perhaps strongest of all in those who set their hearts on
becoming famous at any cost. Such people generally have to wait some time in
uncertainty as to their own value, before the opportunity comes which will put it
to the proof and let other people see what they are made of; but until then, they
feel as if they were suffering secret injustice.[1]

[Footnote 1: Our greatest pleasure consists in being admired; but those who
admire us, even if they have every reason to do so, are slow to express their
sentiments. Hence he is the happiest man who, no matter how, manages
sincerely to admire himself--so long as other people leave him alone.]
But, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter, an unreasonable value is
set upon other people's opinion, and one quite disproportionate to its real worth.
Hobbes has some strong remarks on this subject; and no doubt he is quite right.
Mental pleasure, he writes, and ecstacy of any kind, arise when, on comparing
ourselves with others, we come to the conclusion that we may think well of
ourselves. So we can easily understand the great value which is always attached
to fame, as worth any sacrifices if there is the slightest hope of attaining it.
Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise (That hath infirmity of noble
mind) To scorn delights and live laborious days[1]
And again:
How hard it is to climb The heights where Fame's proud temple shines afar!
[Footnote 1: Milton. Lycidas.]
We can thus understand how it is that the vainest people in the world are
always talking about la gloire, with the most implicit faith in it as a stimulus to
great actions and great works. But there can he no doubt that fame is something
secondary in its character, a mere echo or reflection--as it were, a shadow or
symptom--of merit: and, in any case, what excites admiration must be of more
value than the admiration itself. The truth is that a man is made happy, not by
fame, but by that which brings him fame, by his merits, or to speak more
correctly, by the disposition and capacity from which his merits proceed,
whether they be moral or intellectual. The best side of a man's nature must of
necessity be more important for him than for anyone else: the reflection of it, the
opinion which exists in the heads of others, is a matter that can affect him only
in a very subordinate degree. He who deserves fame without getting it possesses
by far the more important element of happiness, which should console him for
the loss of the other. It is not that a man is thought to be great by masses of
incompetent and often infatuated people, but that he really is great, which should
move us to envy his position; and his happiness lies, not in the fact that posterity
will hear of him, but that he is the creator of thoughts worthy to be treasured up
and studied for hundreds of years.
Besides, if a man has done this, he possesses something which cannot be
wrested from him; and, unlike fame, it is a possession dependent entirely upon
himself. If admiration were his chief aim, there would be nothing in him to
admire. This is just what happens in the case of false, that is, unmerited, fame;
for its recipient lives upon it without actually possessing the solid substratum of

which fame is the outward and visible sign. False fame must often put its
possessor out of conceit with himself; for the time may come when, in spite of
the illusions borne of self-love, he will feel giddy on the heights which he was
never meant to climb, or look upon himself as spurious coin; and in the anguish
of threatened discovery and well-merited degradation, he will read the sentence
of posterity on the foreheads of the wise--like a man who owes his property to a
forged will.
The truest fame, the fame that comes after death, is never heard of by its
recipient; and yet he is called a happy man.
His happiness lay both in the possession of those great qualities which won
him fame, and in the opportunity that was granted him of developing them--the
leisure he had to act as he pleased, to dedicate himself to his favorite pursuits. It
is only work done from the heart that ever gains the laurel.
Greatness of soul, or wealth of intellect, is what makes a man happy--
intellect, such as, when stamped on its productions, will receive the admiration
of centuries to come,--thoughts which make him happy at the time, and will in
their turn be a source of study and delight to the noblest minds of the most
remote posterity. The value of posthumous fame lies in deserving it; and this is
its own reward. Whether works destined to fame attain it in the lifetime of their
author is a chance affair, of no very great importance. For the average man has
no critical power of his own, and is absolutely incapable of appreciating the
difficulty of a great work. People are always swayed by authority; and where
fame is widespread, it means that ninety-nine out of a hundred take it on faith
alone. If a man is famed far and wide in his own lifetime, he will, if he is wise,
not set too much value upon it, because it is no more than the echo of a few
voices, which the chance of a day has touched in his favor.
Would a musician feel flattered by the loud applause of an audience if he
knew that they were nearly all deaf, and that, to conceal their infirmity, they set
to work to clap vigorously as soon as ever they saw one or two persons
applauding? And what would he say if he got to know that those one or two
persons had often taken bribes to secure the loudest applause for the poorest
player!
It is easy to see why contemporary praise so seldom develops into
posthumous fame. D'Alembert, in an extremely fine description of the temple of
literary fame, remarks that the sanctuary of the temple is inhabited by the great
dead, who during their life had no place there, and by a very few living persons,
who are nearly all ejected on their death. Let me remark, in passing, that to erect
a monument to a man in his lifetime is as much as declaring that posterity is not
to be trusted in its judgment of him. If a man does happen to see his own true

fame, it can very rarely be before he is old, though there have been artists and
musicians who have been exceptions to this rule, but very few philosophers. This
is confirmed by the portraits of people celebrated by their works; for most of
them are taken only after their subjects have attained celebrity, generally
depicting them as old and grey; more especially if philosophy has been the work
of their lives. From the eudaemonistic standpoint, this is a very proper
arrangement; as fame and youth are too much for a mortal at one and the same
time. Life is such a poor business that the strictest economy must be exercised in
its good things. Youth has enough and to spare in itself, and must rest content
with what it has. But when the delights and joys of life fall away in old age, as
the leaves from a tree in autumn, fame buds forth opportunely, like a plant that is
green in winter. Fame is, as it were, the fruit that must grow all the summer
before it can be enjoyed at Yule. There is no greater consolation in age than the
feeling of having put the whole force of one's youth into works which still
remain young.
Finally, let us examine a little more closely the kinds of fame which attach
to various intellectual pursuits; for it is with fame of this sort that my remarks
are more immediately concerned.
I think it may be said broadly that the intellectual superiority it denotes
consists in forming theories, that is, new combinations of certain facts. These
facts may be of very different kinds; but the better they are known, and the more
they come within everyday experience, the greater and wider will be the fame
which is to be won by theorizing about them.
For instance, if the facts in question are numbers or lines or special
branches of science, such as physics, zoology, botany, anatomy, or corrupt
passages in ancient authors, or undecipherable inscriptions, written, it may be, in
some unknown alphabet, or obscure points in history; the kind of fame that may
be obtained by correctly manipulating such facts will not extend much beyond
those who make a study of them--a small number of persons, most of whom live
retired lives and are envious of others who become famous in their special
branch of knowledge.
But if the facts be such as are known to everyone, for example, the
fundamental characteristics of the human mind or the human heart, which are
shared by all alike; or the great physical agencies which are constantly in
operation before our eyes, or the general course of natural laws; the kind of fame
which is to be won by spreading the light of a new and manifestly true theory in
regard to them, is such as in time will extend almost all over the civilized world:
for if the facts be such as everyone can grasp, the theory also will be generally
intelligible. But the extent of the fame will depend upon the difficulties

overcome; and the more generally known the facts are, the harder it will be to
form a theory that shall be both new and true: because a great many heads will
have been occupied with them, and there will be little or no possibility of saying
anything that has not been said before.
On the other hand, facts which are not accessible to everybody, and can be
got at only after much difficulty and labor, nearly always admit of new
combinations and theories; so that, if sound understanding and judgment are
brought to bear upon them--qualities which do not involve very high intellectual
power--a man may easily be so fortunate as to light upon some new theory in
regard to them which shall be also true. But fame won on such paths does not
extend much beyond those who possess a knowledge of the facts in question. To
solve problems of this sort requires, no doubt, a great ideal of study and labor, if
only to get at the facts; whilst on the path where the greatest and most
widespread fame is to be won, the facts may be grasped without any labor at all.
But just in proportion as less labor is necessary, more talent or genius is
required; and between such qualities and the drudgery of research no comparison
is possible, in respect either of their intrinsic value, or of the estimation in which
they are held.
And so people who feel that they possess solid intellectual capacity and a
sound judgment, and yet cannot claim the highest mental powers, should not be
afraid of laborious study; for by its aid they may work themselves above the
great mob of humanity who have the facts constantly before their eyes, and reach
those secluded spots which are accessible to learned toil.
For this is a sphere where there are infinitely fewer rivals, and a man of
only moderate capacity may soon find an opportunity of proclaiming a theory
which shall be both new and true; nay, the merit of his discovery will partly rest
upon the difficulty of coming at the facts. But applause from one's fellow-
students, who are the only persons with a knowledge of the subject, sounds very
faint to the far-off multitude. And if we follow up this sort of fame far enough,
we shall at last come to a point where facts very difficult to get at are in
themselves sufficient to lay a foundation of fame, without any necessity for
forming a theory;--travels, for instance, in remote and little-known countries,
which make a man famous by what he has seen, not by what he has thought. The
great advantage of this kind of fame is that to relate what one has seen, is much
easier than to impart one's thoughts, and people are apt to understand
descriptions better than ideas, reading the one more readily than the other: for, as
Asmus says,
When one goes forth a-voyaging He has a tale to tell.
And yet for all that, a personal acquaintance with celebrated travelers often

remind us of a line from Horace--new scenes do not always mean new ideas--
Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.[1]
[Footnote 1: Epist. I. II.]
But if a man finds himself in possession of great mental faculties, such as
alone should venture on the solution of the hardest of all problems--those which
concern nature as a whole and humanity in its widest range, he will do well to
extend his view equally in all directions, without ever straying too far amid the
intricacies of various by-paths, or invading regions little known; in other words,
without occupying himself with special branches of knowledge, to say nothing
of their petty details. There is no necessity for him to seek out subjects difficult
of access, in order to escape a crowd of rivals; the common objects of life will
give him material for new theories at once serious and true; and the service he
renders will be appreciated by all those--and they form a great part of mankind--
who know the facts of which he treats. What a vast distinction there is between
students of physics, chemistry, anatomy, mineralogy, zoology, philology,
history, and the men who deal with the great facts of human life, the poet and the
philosopher!

Table of Contents
Preliminary Note
Biographical Note
On Authorship And Style
On Noise
On Reading And Books
The Emptiness Of Existence
On Women
Thinking For Oneself
Short Dialogue On The Indestructibility Of Our True Being By Death
Religion--A Dialogue
A Few Words On Pantheism
The Christian System
Psychological Observations
Metaphysics Of Love
Physiognomy
On Suicide
Counsels and Maxims
Human Nature
Government
Free-Will And Fatalism
Character
Moral Instinct
Ethical Reflections
The Art of Controversy
On The Study Of Latin
On Men Of Learning
On Criticism
On Reputation
On Genius
On the Wisdom of Life

