
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 7

 
Journal Articles: 1931-1937
Birth Order & Early Memories Social Interest &
Education Technique of Treatment 
Alfred Adler
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by Henry T.
Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2005 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 2565 Mayflower Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226.
Tel (360) 647-5670 or email to HTStein@att.net .
Published 2005 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-8-2
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Editor’s 
Preface
2005.............................................................................................. ii About the
Translator .............................................................................................. ii Chapter
I: 
Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter IV: Chapter V: Chapter VI: Chapter VII:
Chapter VIII: Chapter IX: Chapter X: Chapter XI: Chapter XII:
Chapter XIII: Chapter XIV: Chapter XV: Chapter XVI: Chapter XVII: The
Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology [1935] ......125 Chapter XVIII:
What is Neurosis? [1935] .........................................................132 Chapter XIX:
Chapter XX: Chapter XXI: Chapter XXII: The Neurotic’s Picture of the World
[1936] .............................170 Chapter XXIII: How the Child Selects His
Symptoms [1936] ..........................179 Chapter XXIV: Love is a Recent

Invention [1936] ...........................................189 Chapter XXV: Position in
Family Constellation
Influences LifeStyle [1937] .....................................................195 
Chapter 
XXVI: 
Significance 
of 
Early 
Recollections 
[1937]
..............................209 
Chapter 
XXVII: 
Progress 
of 
Mankind 
[1937]
....................................................213 
Chapter 
XXVIII:How 
I 
Chose 
My 
Career 
[1937]
..............................................217 
The Neurotic Character [1931]......................................................1 
The Child’s Symptom Selection [1931] .....................................10 
Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis [1931] ....................21 
Compulsion Neurosis [1931] ......................................................25 
Pampered Children [1931] .........................................................43 
The Fear of Women [1932] ........................................................48 
Narcotic Abuse and Alcoholism [1932] .....................................50 
Personality as a SelfConsistent Unity [1932].............................60 
Structure and Methods of Individual Psychology [1932]............72 
Individual Psychology and Education [1932] ............................75 
The Technique of Treatment [1932] ...........................................80 
Origin of the Striving for Superiority 
and Social Interest [1933] ...........................................................95 
Physique and Psyche [1933] .....................................................101 
The Structures of Psychic Activity [1934] ...............................109 
Psychosomatic Disturbances [1934] .........................................114 
Mass Psychology [1935] ..........................................................120
The Structure and Prevention of Delinquency [1935] ..............140 
Prevention of Neurosis [1935] ..................................................149 
On the Interpretation of Dreams [1936] ...................................157
Index 
.........................................................................................220
Appendix: “Basic Principles of 
Classical Adlerian Psychology” ...............................................237
i
Editor’s Preface - 2005
Editor’s Preface - 2005
Adler’s journal articles, written between 1931 and 1937, encapsulate the
most mature expression of his ideas on theory and practice. Of the twenty-eight
articles included in this volume, five are devoted to child development: selection
of symptoms, consequences of pampering, prevention of delinquency, and

education. Another five cover theoretical issues: selfconsistent unity of
personality, structures of psychic activity, striving for superiority, and social
interest. In three articles about psychopathology, he addresses the neurotic’s
character, symptoms, and picture of the world, as well as the prevention of
neurosis; five more articles contain his ideas on compulsion neurosis, fear of
women, alcohol and drug abuse, the mind-body connection, and psychosomatic
disturbances. He offers practical diagnostic guidance in two articles about family
constellation and earliest recollections. Finally, he provides a dramatic
comparison to psychoanalysis, and then a rare insight into the technique of
psychotherapy. This volume is an essential resource for anyone wishing to gain
an in-depth understanding of Adler’s remarkable, timeless insights into human
nature and their yet-to-be-realized potential.
Sophia de Vries contributed five translations of Adler’s later work to this
volume. It was her initial efforts, more than fifteen years ago, that inspired the
Classical Adlerian Translation Project. A number of articles, originally
published in English, have also been included. My wife, Laurie J. Stein, edited
the material to improve style and readability.
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. Other
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler. A deeper appreciation of the
development of Adler’s theory can be achieved by studying Volumes 1-7.
About the Translator - Gerald L. Liebenau
Gerald L. Liebenau was born in Berlin, Germany. During World War II, he
served with the Office of Strategic Services as an interpreter and translator. After
graduating from Yale University, he embarked on a career with the Central
Intelligence Agency. He is the translator of Nicholas Gonner's Luxemburgers in
the New World, and Janusz Piekalkiewicz's World History of Espionage. He
currently resides in Arlington, Virginia.
ii
Chapter I
The Neurotic Character1 2
[1931]
Individual Psychology is indebted to William Stern for his significant
contribution of a philosophical foundation for finalism and for the deeper
understanding of its differences and variations, as well as for the enrichment of
child psychology. The following is dedicated to him with admiration and
particular recognition of his research on children.

We experience time and again that one or another motive, one or another
cause for a particular development is overemphasized, that blame is cast on this
or on that person without recognizing the wonderful connectivity of the inner
life. Were I to assert that character is the foundation of the entire inner life, I
would be mistaken, as are those who believe that drives are the basic, most
important aspect of the inner life. And, if one presumes to have discovered the
essence here, what we have actually found is the melody of the whole “I,” the
personality with its thousandfold ramifications that we naturally overlook when
we believe we have found the basis for everything in character in drives and in
reflexes. Naturally, all researchers who place a particular emphasis on one part
of the whole will attribute to this one part all capabilities and attributes of the
individual. From that perspective, they will prove the individual's foresight,
determination, volition, and creative power without knowing that they are
actually describing the “I” and certainly not drives, character, or reflexes. This
approach leads to grasping for models that inevitably spring from a mechanical
perception and which, naturally, present nothing new to us as a picture of what
we had already understood, but merely express through another image what we
already know or presume to know.
Therefore, a description of character does not at all mean a description of
the total inner life, and that we err when we think that a part of that living stream
of psychological activity is a solid part of the whole, something fixed and
immutable. Character, however, is not immutable. Modern psychology describes
it in highly exaggerated terms. We can find contrary characteristics in the same
personality and at the same time forget that contrary characteristics reflect the
same individuality. For example, the fact that a person can be cruel with
subordinates and loving, gentle, and calm with superiors represents his
integrated individuality for which we have no term. Such contrary character
traits should not be seen as a blunder on nature's part, or a flaw torn out of the
psychological context. We have no grounds for believing that some kind of
nervous or psychological illness can be based on such opposites. Since I wish to
speak on the nervous character, I must also say something about nervousness,
about neurosis. Here I am again in the midst of constructions and precepts of the
most varied kind. In psychology and psychiatry we differentiate among a
number of typical nervous illnesses such as neurasthenia, psychasthenia, phobia,
anxiety, hypochondriasis, and obsessive neurosis. They present various aspects
of direct experiences. However, they become a science only when we succeed in
relating our experiences to some deeper lying commonality that can no longer be
perceived directly, but that exists only as an idea, or as a unifying principle.
Thus, we can understand that if properly applied, psychology and psychiatry

satisfy all requirements of a science because they are compelled to radiate a
transcendental idea into the realm of metaphysics.
1 Originally published as “Der nervöse Charakter” in the Zeitschrift für
angewandte Psychologie., Supplement 59, pages 1-14, Leipzig, 1931. Reprinted
in Alfred Adler: Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band II:
1930-1932, p. 159-172. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing
assistance by Kurt A. Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
A condition found by Individual Psychology, such as a neurosis, cannot, of
course, not be described in one concept. We Individual Psychologists have
complained in particular that language is too sparse to describe succinctly
whatever we wish to express. Therefore, we are forced to use descriptions while
not trusting any one expression. We know when we say “nervous,” that this term
encompasses a thousand variations so that the listener hardly understands what
the speaker means. How can it then be described? These are sick people who
suffer emotionally, feel tired, complain about pressure in the head and in their
whole body, endure pain, especially in their back, are irritable and morose, and
live under constant tension. These symptoms are similar to those we list under
neurasthenia and psychasthenia. In cases of anxiety, we deal with a wholly
different set of symptoms found in the realm of feelings and emotions. These
symptoms are extraordinarily important, but if we wish to be able to understand
and communicate, we must bring out what makes them unique in language that
is intellectually comprehendible. Then we suddenly become aware again that it
is a mistake to segregate one part out of the whole psychological structure and to
believe that under those constrictions it is possible to describe or understand
anything. For example, I can make anxiety comprehendible only when I relate
thoughts to the emotions and affects of fear that go with them, when I analyze
how a person's thinking led to such emotions. Expressed differently, what are the
thoughts we can presume of a person who suffers from anxiety situations, such
as when he has to cross a street, leave his home, or when he is to be left alone,
etc.? Much lies behind these manifestations which are understood quite
differently by those who fail to take into account connections and their
significance, or overlook the fact that we can understand single psychological
events only in light of the total interrelationship. Otherwise, we arrive at
hypotheses such as “repression,” contrasting the “conscious and unconscious,”
basic emotional drives in the inner life, etc. First, we must understand the
individual, then we can understand the various parts of his inner life. Thus, when
describing neurasthenia, the anxiety neurosis in a person, we search for the
individual’s mental process and find in it his attitude toward himself and life.

Not only thoughts and feelings are interconnected in the totality of the inner life,
but also the execution and the consequences that the person imagines. For
example, he never leaves his home, he takes precautions against being alone, he
orders someone to stay with him (sic), he excludes what could be expected of
him. We see here the total interconnectedness of thoughts, feelings, emotions
and affects, and that consequences result from them.
These perceptions of Individual Psychology, which keep it from being an
individualistic philosophy, are also confirmed from another standpoint. For
example, another neurosis exists where only the results stemming from this
interconnectedness become apparent: hysteria that runs its course with cramps,
paralysis, vomiting, etc. Here again, we must take into consideration the almost
invisible emotions and passions as well as the mental process that pertains to
them, so that we confront the individuality, the life style of the person, his “I.”
For example, in obsessive neurosis, the individual constantly washes his hands
to cleanse himself over and over again, showing, without knowing it, that he
believes everything is dirty and only he is clean. Thus, we find the emphasis on
the thought process, whatever the patient derives emotionally from it, and the
consequences resulting from it.
Therefore, I believe I am justified in speaking of that great connection in
which every part of our inner life is to be understood and examined. This
connection also applies to character. When I began to understand
neuropsychology and to present my knowledge to a wider audience, I started
with a description of the nervous character. However, I was well aware that it
represents merely one aspect of the totality. I had the perception, which I can
present much more clearly and lucidly today, that in the case of character, we are
speaking of a metaphorically expressed compliant guideline of an individual, the
guideline of a lifestyle that we can follow from the beginning to the end. The
concept of character, previously regarded as innate, was at first unclear and
untenable for me; only later did I realize that it was totally wrong.
In reality, character means a social attitude. No character trait exists that
does not reflect on the outside world and fellow human beings. For example,
when we consider commonplace character traits such as good and bad, they have
meaning solely in a social context. To that extent, we are justified in assuming
that a character trait such as good or bad can never be inborn because in the
period before the child has social contacts, he has no opportunity for such
developments and for finding expressions. If someone wanted to extract some
kind of good or bad potential out of the “I,” in order to transfer it into the child
prior to his birth, then the argument would be that we can never know anything
about innate capabilities or strengths. This is because the first expressions of a

child are not uninhibited achievements of innate traits, or expressions that are
solely his, but already social statements. In such social expressions, the mother's
experience or lack of it plays a major role so that in all that this small child does,
we already perceive the influence of the mother, the influence of the
environment. Thus it is very difficult to differentiate between them, since
naturally, all mothers and environmental influences are different. If we consider
the extraordinary differences in the various ways that mothers treat their
children, then we also understand the various ways that children appear in their
earliest years. We know that an experienced mother immediately recognizes the
mistakes of an inexperienced mother and is able to correct them, so that she
naturally also influences the “characteristics” of a child either for good or for
bad. I say this so that we can clearly recognize: every character trait:
querulousness, hostility, artistic qualities, etc. is always a social statement.
Courage and cowardliness naturally do not exist before the child is born. Thus, I
have tried to show here the extent to which the young child is already influenced
by the outside world.
We are able to establish very easily the reasons why a child develops one or
another character trait. The discoveries of Individual Psychology with regard to
child rearing, the pampering of children, or making them dependent, clearly
show that all mistakes we observe in pampered children are produced artificially.
We can put our finger directly on that spot where the emotional life was
stimulated or mutilated, the point at which the child became dependent and
began to see nothing in life other than opportunities to exploit the contributions
of others for himself. When we have reached that stage of understanding then we
become aware, of course, of the striking resemblance of the neurotic person to
the life style of the pampered child. Neuroticism does not exist without
pampering! When we examine the character traits of a neurotic person and listen
to his views on life, we see an egotistical interest, how he thinks solely of
himself and little or not at all of others. Then, we find that his capacity to
cooperate stopped developing because he expects others to give to him, because
he constantly displays an attitude of expectation when in contact with others
while he himself shows no inclination to contribute. As long as he can abide in
situations where others take care of him, we will not observe any neurotic
symptoms. Only when he is subjected to a test, when for example, he must live
in a community, when he has to be socially active, does he respond poorly. And
we understand why he fails. After all, it is the result of his whole style of life; he
lacks the capacity to contribute, to connect. Thus, we understand the character
traits of the neurotic person, how he thinks of himself and gives little or no
thought to others. Obviously, this is a reflection of his behavior and not always

his thoughts, as I explained earlier. He looks only to where his attitude promises
him security, whether intellectual, or emotional, or for carrying out his
conception of life. He focuses sharply on one side of the whole, not seeing the
connection. In particular, fundamental to Individual Psychology, he is unaware
of his lack of social feeling, or social interest, of his inability to connect. We thus
find certain character traits clearly pronounced, among which egotistical traits
play the major role. We find these also in the pampered child. Therefore, we
assume a close connection between pampering, egotism, and neurosis. Perhaps
the most apparent character trait in all neurotics is excessive sensitivity. After
all, this means that someone feels that he could fall apart if he encounters even
the slightest harm, so he must defend himself with every means. Clearly, this
does not reflect a feeling of power and strength, but a feeling of inferiority. The
strong sense of inferiority imbues all neurotics and pampered children. Fearful,
they feel themselves too weak to participate in a group of children without
playing the leading role. This sensitivity actually characterizes the neurotic. It
stems from the feeling of an unknown, wrong, perception that he lives in a
hostile world, that life does not offer enough, and that it is incomprehensible that
he should love another since the other does not love him.
A further trait characterizing the neurotic person is impatience. The
impatient person unknowingly expresses the opinion that all, or at least much, is
lost when he cannot attain something immediately. He wants success without
delay. In this regard, the neurotic person is not unlike the pampered child,
becoming emotional as soon as he cannot get what he wants, and throwing
himself on the ground.
These character traits are shared by other groups of people who are also
failures. It is curious and noticeable that, for example, in criminals whom we
Individual Psychologists have examined, this character trait of impatience was
found to the greatest extent, just as we also found among criminals a large
number of once pampered children. The tendency to fits of rage and strong
outbursts obviously characterizes the neurotic, producing in the pampered person
the feeling of being threatened from all sides, and requiring his greatest efforts to
assert himself. This again indicates of the feeling of inferiority felt and expressed
by such a person in various ways. However, we must not forget that behind all of
this behavior there is an opinion about oneself and life, originating in earliest
childhood. We know this from an enormous number of observations of children
to which the Sterns contributed so much. We have gratefully taken advantage of
their compilation in our efforts to construct those Individual Psychological
theories concerned with the total concept. We were able to find this total concept
because all these observations consist of components of a child's attitude toward

life. Also, it takes four to five years before the child has a firm attitude toward
life that is apparent to us. However, five years are more than enough to train that
attitude and mechanize it; the child then has become a complete individual who
behaves not unlike a particular species in the animal world. It is not a simple
task, particularly for young children, to gain a halfway correct attitude toward
life. We Individual Psychologists are fortunate to have found at least part of this
correct attitude, expressed as contributing one's share. Perhaps this is no
different from what is expressed in the Bible as: “Giving is more blessed than
taking,” without it being correctly understood or made into a living reality.
However, brought to the level of a science, it might be possible to spread more
widely the conviction that without cooperating, participating, and contributing,
some kind of failure will ensue because the child will have nothing with which
he can eventually pay his way.
Certain major problems which no person can escape are significant to
everyone. These three social problems are the relationship to others, work, and
love. These three major problems require for their solution an active social
feeling. Any attempt at solving them without a social feeling must naturally fail.
Such people are not to blame, although they created their own style of life. They
failed to comprehend, had not surmised, did not know what life had hidden in its
shadows from their slowly burgeoning understanding. They are not to blame, but
will fail later because they did not learn early on to connect, to regard
themselves as a part of the whole. It obviously means a great deal that a child
regards himself as belonging, as being a part of the whole. It means that he feels
himself at home on the earth, and that he has courage. We have found that all
neurotics lack courage. This is shown clearly in anxiety neurosis, where the
patient always fails. We find the hesitating attitude in all forms of neurosis.
However, these are the same images we saw in pampered children. They are all
hesitant, always want someone to protect them, fear to be in a dark room, fear
ghosts, strangers, etc. All this results from their attitude about life: someone
must be there who takes care of them, who gives them everything, while they
themselves are not required to give anything.
Unfortunately, this type of person is exceedingly common and we should,
therefore, not be surprised to find so many people who complain about life and
what it has to offer, and so few who do something to improve their condition.
So much for the neurotic character to which I want to add the character
traits of excessive carefulness and suspicion. We thus actually see the various
aspects of the same mistaken opinion. Whoever lacks courage must always be
careful. Whoever is sensitive must be extra careful. These are other words for
the same basic reality. However, at the bottom is a particular life style with a

million differences and variations. Obviously, we can understand these
individual traits in their significance, their meaning for life, and for their
consequences only after we have gained an understanding of the individual as a
whole and have derived from that an image of his style of life. In this
configuration of character traits, the most conspicuous has always been the
feeling of weakness, of inferiority.
However, the psyche is not capable of dwelling on this feeling of
inferiority. It always strives upward, to adjust, to overcome, and to gain
superiority. It is easy to realize the immense value the neurotic ascribes to
himself for being able to demand that others do everything for him. Totally
convinced of his worth, he will make every sacrifice not to be deprived of it.
Thus, in every case, of course to different degrees, we see this feeling of
inferiority, an expression of striving for superiority. In this upward striving, the
lifestyle of the nervous person leans on the common lifestyle. The only great
difference is that the neurotic strives for a personal superiority and also expects a
contribution from the community in which he lives, while the normal person
strives for a fulfillment beneficial to all.
Clearly, all character traits have a social content. Naturally, it was possible
to believe that these traits can be inborn. Today especially, as often before, the
question has been raised in psychology and psychiatry whether all failings in life
could be inborn: criminal tendencies, sexual perversions, alcoholism, drug
addiction, etc. We find that these failing result from the special lifestyle of a
person who does not adapt socially and follows different paths trying
nevertheless somehow to regain his balance. As long as we speak of “adapting”
we are still in the dark. The only correct way of adapting in life is cooperation,
or social feeling. Consequently, all manifestations we observe are failures; they
are, first of all, neuroses. Furthermore, without consideration for social feeling,
psychology foes not exist. The basis of psychology is social feeling. Therefore,
all other aspects of psychology are merely a physiology of the inner life. The
mechanics of the inner life can be given shape (as drives, inhibitions, reflexes,
and instincts, etc.) only after we have understood its interconnectivity, grasped
the meaning of a form of expression, and determined the direction in which it is
aimed. If psychology has any value then it must be: understanding the human
inner life, which can not happen without an observation of social feeling. I have
discussed earlier that the lifestyle of a person is fixed and does not change after
the fourth or fifth year, except when the person recognizes his faults and strives
to change, when he expands, increases, and improves his social feeling. Then the
most important question arises: How did these many failings come about? The
answer is actually simple. Adapting socially in these complex times has become

extraordinarily difficult. For that reason it was probably not necessary earlier to
develop Individual Psychology. However, it has become our task to advance the
significance of social feeling in the education of all humanity.
With that, we arrive at an extremely important point. As we have seen, we
are justified in denying that character and inherited psychological failings are
inborn. What about the environment and its influences? Once we have shattered
the opposition of hereditarianism, its supporters will swoop with great
vehemence on the influences of the environment. However, no certainty exists
regarding those influences either. We often see children from a very good
environment fail, or children from a very bad environment turn into exemplary
people. We also see, for example, in the same family, one child will become an
outstanding person and another a rogue. Posing these questions already raises
doubts about the environmental theory. However, we must add something else:
Are we really able to grasp and correctly interpret the influences of the
environment? We understand that every child at least until the fourth or fifth
year of his life lives in the realm of a free spirit and can do whatever he wishes
with the impressions he receives. True, there is only a certain probability in that,
but not much more than just a probability. For that reason, as educators of
children we must also look to the results of impressions and influences. If we
find these to be bad, we can intercede and help the child understand that he is on
a wrong path and he must change. Obviously, this cannot be achieved with
harshness, strictness, or torture. In that regard, we advocate the elimination all
measures for rearing with the aim of improving the individual through harshness,
strictness, and fear, particularly in the field of criminology. Everywhere, we
struggle to find better measures because those applied thus far have produced
exceptionally bad results.
Clearly, the predominant aspect in upbringing is a watchful eye that follows
closely how the child develops his ability to adjust, his social feeling, and his
tendency to contribute so that someone can intercede with every means to rectify
any mistakes. In effect, Individual Psychology reinstates education, overlooked
for the last few decades, to its rightful sovereign place.
The question then arises: Who is actually capable of educating? Naturally,
we are ready to teach parents specific facts, as well as how to educate a child.
But despite being notorious optimists, we know we could not counsel all parents.
In particular, we doubt we could serve those parents who have the greatest
needs. They lack of interest in such matters and find ways to console themselves
when faults arise: “The child will grow out of it; children must get it out of their
system!” Yet, we could take an immense step that is necessary now as it was
when Individual Psychology first developed. We could place the entire task of

educating the nation into the hands of experienced, well-instructed teachers. This
step would be particularly effective if we were able to train elementary school
teachers, in charge of children during their first school years, to understand the
interconnection, and give them the pedagogical skills to advise children of their
faults in a kindly manner in order to bring them closer to society. If we could
accomplish this objective, then would have taken the greatest step in the
conscious development of the human race that we have experienced to date.
We find all children in school. We would have to find teachers who can
educate them with warmth and interest. I have no doubt that this is possible. We
have worked on this task for the past fifteen years. We note with great
admiration the influence of teachers on parents and children that will be so
strong that they no longer have any problems. This influence pertains not only to
the performance of children in school, but also in their homes and families. The
accomplishments of children in individual subjects will also increase. If we
remember that all these children with deficiencies suffer from a feeling of
inferiority, lack selfconfidence, expect nothing from themselves but expect
someone to promote them, and progress only when they are the center of
attention and given support, then it is easy to understand that children with social
feeling, who are willing to cooperate, have more success in school.
Although it naturally takes time for such an idea to take hold, I have been
very pleased to see counseling centers developed in schools in Germany as well
as in Vienna. In such centers, a competent Individual Psychologist discusses
problems of this type with teachers with whom he develops a plan they then
follow. In America, where I have had the opportunity to work for several years,
this idea is also increasingly making progress. Beginning next year, the largest
city in America, New York, will institute this type of school counseling. I should
like to recommend this system in every place that I have the opportunity to speak
on psychology. I am convinced that it is the best, most reasonable way to
implement what Individual Psychology requires because it addresses the basic
problems in life: expanding and solidifying social feeling.
Chapter II
The Child's Symptom Selection1 2
[1931]
The subject that I wish to discuss today is the most difficult in
neuropsychology as well as in psychology in general. To approach this subject,
we must successfully master the difficulties constantly encountered in the
psychology of neuroses and in psychiatry. Above all, when we approach the
selection of symptoms in order to understand them, we must renounce guessing.
Here, everything must be firmly nailed down and proven from every aspect. No

stone in this structure can be left loose. We must come so far that we are able to
say: if I were in the same situation, if I had the same mistaken attitude toward
life, if I had trained in the same way as this person, then I would suffer from
about the same symptoms. Only then, after such an identification, could we
claim to truly understand a person, and comprehend his selection of symptoms.
Clearly, more must be added. Foremost, when I speak of symptom selection
today, you must permit me to speak of symptom selection not only in neurosis,
because--as Individual Psychology has established--that which we call neurosis
is also only symptoms, symptoms of an erroneous lifestyle, manifestations that
appear when someone is unable to cope with questions of life in a manner
normally expected by us. That is the one aspect that we wish to take into
consideration. When you see in the end that our examinations actually apply not
only to neurosis, but also to problem children, criminals, etc., you will then
forgive me for having drawn out my subject so extensively.
We shall be able to understand the selection of symptoms only when we
regard it as an art form. We must divest ourselves of our judgmental view and
observe with awe how every person is an artist in his life, forced into this role
presumably as a result of errors he made, unfortunate influences to which he
probably did not respond correctly. When we thus want to make a determination
starting with any one symptom, then we must perceive it as a part of the whole.
That means that in each symptom we shall find something else, other than what
is observable externally, other than its content, other than, for example, that
someone suffers from headaches, anxiety, obsessive ideas of having become a
thief, or having been idle in school. Also, something unique pertains to each
individual. A judgment cannot be based on a formula. The closer we examine
such a symptom and the better we understand the structure of the psyche, the
more we understand that symptoms meaning the same thing do not exist. We can
describe differences up to a point. However, this creative act of the concerned
patient, a trend strives after a kind of fulfillment, a becoming, never a being.
Whether they know it or not, whoever speaks of a choice of symptoms must also
consider that here is something that strives toward a goal, something that can be
perceived and understood only in light of the final point of view.
1 
Originally 
published 
as 
“Symptomwahl 
beim 
Kinde” 
in
Kinderärztl.Praxisol., Vol. 2, pages 398-409, 1931. Reprinted in Alfred Adler:
Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band II: 1930-1932, p.
173-191. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.

First of all, to what extent does heredity play a role since we often observe
how among certain members of a family tree similar manifestations appear. As I
said previously, we can never draw conclusions from external similarities of
symptoms and what applies here is: when two persons do the same thing, it is
not the same. We endeavor in Individual Psychology to establish all factors that
lead to erroneous ways. The first factor we encounter is how the child
experiences his body. After some time, we also discover the child's behavior and
attitude clearly expressed in the sense that one child will display greater
selfconfidence than another, one will be more active than another, one child will
be fearful and constantly concerned with himself while another is ready to
connect, cooperate, play along and not place the full burden on others, etc. Of
course, here I have drawn only on types that will not provide us a solution for a
specific case since we constantly have to deal with thousandfold variations.
Nevertheless, we can soon observe the influence of the body, the effectiveness of
the organs, how the child experiences these, and how he applies and employs
them. Of course, the child can make mistakes. The child has some kind of
attitude toward the demands of life. However small, these demands affect
breathing, movement, eating, cleanliness, etc. All these functions also relate to
the effectiveness of the organs. Therefore, Individual Psychology has clearly
established that children with weaker organs somehow have an imprint, which
we perceive as weakness, insecurity, and inferiority. When such a condition of
insecurity and inferiority persists for some time, the child with this perception
will develop his lifestyle accordingly, so that training promotes the groundwork
for cementing an attitude toward the tasks of life. This training produces a child
cares much more about himself, with character traits that seem plausible to us,
but which appear to the child as necessary and a matter of course. We then find,
for example, character traits of exaggerated carefulness, which already explains
that we are dealing here with a person who has little selfconfidence and who
suspects himself surrounded by dangers. We find traits of particular sensitivity
which makes it understandable that such a child fears losing his grip whenever
he is attacked. We find traits of impatience, showing us an individual with little
selfconfidence, who cannot stand waiting and believes that all his wishes must
be fulfilled immediately, else he feels defeated.
Some physical symptoms persist or emerge repeatedly without having any
organic cause even when they frequently disclose the “locus minoris
resistentiae.” We find that with such inferior organs often pronounced
manifestations of organic damage subsequently arise in life, so that the child,
without finding it conspicuous, shows a particular interest in protecting and
attaining greater creative achievement of the “locus minoris resistentiae.” We

find children with a vision impediment observe with particular interest
perspectives, colors, lines, shadows, and accuracy in order to comprehend
everything better. Certainly, they are under greater strain which can occasionally
lead to greater advantages, a stress which might eventually allow them to grasp
better the things they see while others, again under different influences, will
soon quit striving, will not make the effort to see better because they experienced
their inability to succeed. We find the same with different organs, such as
inferiorities of the digestive system causing children to suffer and go hungry, or
to swallow distasteful things, and give great care to food so that their interest is
artificially directed toward food, as Czerny has shown many years ago.
Frequently, we find such people not only have a delicate digestive system and
are prone to occasional illness, as is occasionally true for the family tree, but also
they invariably are interested in eating, like to talk about food, and can gain
certain advantages here, but in one major aspect they are not in harmony with
life. All experience confirms that whatever is overemphasized in the
composition, the structure of the inner life, disturbs the harmony of coexistence.
We need only think of cleanliness, for example. When any child is forced to
overdo cleanliness and see it as the foundation of life, when he grows up with a
perception that cleanliness under any condition is the most important thing for
which all others must be neglected, we can then suspect that he will soon
develop a neurosis of obsessively washing himself. He will hold up his
cleanliness against everyone else, maintaining that they are not clean enough for
him, yet he will fail in life. Only one achievement of the psyche cannot be
harmful when overdone to the benefit of one individual and that is social
interest. Here a way opens toward understanding a large number of symptoms,
not only neurotic symptoms. For example, in problems with the digestive
system, a child with a pronounced interest in eating and an increased appetite
and desire for food will soon relate that to money problems, extending his
interest to money, so that we find such people burden themselves not only with
eating problems, but also with a terrible greed for money. At this point, I offer
two prominent examples of a type I had described some time ago as a “little
Napoleon.” The first concerns Rockefeller who at times in his life was said to
have suffered from stomach disorders. The other is Ford, one of the most
successful businessmen, who wrote a textbook on “correct nutrition.” Other
examples exist, and once in a while cases of such interest arise, so I recommend
that you keep these ideas in mind. Long ago Czerny pointed out the significance
of the frailty of the digestive system in terms of psychological development and
also neurotic problems. More can be said on individual cases; I can merely
sketch the basic line here. Of course, this topic becomes clearer as well as more

complex and is not solely a matter of inferior organs influencing the lifestyle, but
concerns all children who artfully and erroneously approach the problems of life
and for that reason are not prepared to meet the demands of our culture.
Furthermore, we must also consider the influences that impact very early on a
child because of the way he is treated. These include not only economic
demands, not only the skill of the caregiver or the expertness and experience of
the mother, but also the total family situation. The waves of social existence
flood from the outside into the nursery and influence the child incessantly.
Here again, the child must take a position in order not to fall apart
psychologically. He must find a direction that points to the possibility of coping
with the problems of life and to discovering a final form, a solution to difficult
problems, etc. However, out of the family situation naturally comes a great
influx of movement and emotions that can lead toward a choice of symptoms.
We must keep in mind the psychological influences. The child must prepare for
a constant, in his demanding, fairly unvarying life. The caregiver, the mother,
must help with this task. Since we are concerned with human achievements, we
understand well that an ideal solution of this task can hardly be expected and a
thousand variations in the upbringing of the child ensue to bring his primitive
ability to cope in harmony with the prevailing culture. Innumerable mistakes can
occur, steering the lifestyle to follow a certain direction so that the expected
problems of life the child faces will find him lacking in preparation. We can
perceive the problems of life--of course, this is not meant to be taken literally--
like a problem in mathematics. Only someone with the proper mathematical
preparation can find the correct solution. We must bring up the child so that he
becomes a proper fellow man as required by our culture, so that he will be
prepared to solve the problems that cannot be solved without social interest.
Problems concerning “I” to “thou,” problems of occupation, and problems of
love which depend on a sufficient interest in one's partner cannot be resolved
without a preparation in social feeling.
After the third, fourth or fifth year, the child has an established lifestyle that
cannot be changed without an understanding of the mistakes hidden within it.
This lifestyle has the shape and dimensions that could be attained up to that time.
The question now arises: how will this uniquely formed lifestyle, influenced by
the mother, the environment, and furthermore by the creative power of the child,
respond to a question for which it was not prepared? Very soon, the extent to
which the outside world was mistakenly perceived will make itself felt in the
execution of the lifestyle. It will become apparent in the way a child makes
himself dependent on another person, thereby making the other person
dependent, as found in pampered children. Actually, very few children are not

pampered. Perhaps every child must experience a certain amount of pampering
at the beginning of his life. The correct upbringing would be to make the child
into an independent, cooperative, fellow human being. This is undoubtedly the
goal of education. We would hardly speak of symptoms, failures, and erroneous
psychic lifestyles, if we were certain that the people who have failed are erring,
fellow human beings, who live, work, and love alongside us. However, this is
precisely what we lack and for that reason mankind tries to create order, to
improve, etc. Because the ideal form of upbringing is exceedingly unusual, we
must naturally expect errors in the development of a child. However, the most
significant task of upbringing is to discover these errors early and provide help. I
frequently hear objections such as: I have done everything that I could; I have
tried to make the child independent and it did not work; for example, he fusses
when eating, does not want to go to sleep, has bowel movement problems, is
jealous of his younger sister, wets his bed, cries at night, etc. We can only
respond: the effort has not succeeded. Perhaps we are not ready yet to bring up a
child so that his movement in a direction of becoming a fellow human being has
been assured from the outset. Surely, we can do much more than what is being
done today and then, of course, we would not experience a child refusing to
accept standards set by our culture. A child rejects those standards only when the
mother failed to adapt him to those guidelines. Difficulties may arise, but we can
succeed in this endeavor. If someone were to doubt this, I would restate the
question as follows: “If you have no confidence in yourself to bring up a child in
consonance with our culture, do you not at least have the confidence to ensure
that a child does not soil himself, refuse to eat, refuse to sleep, or hate his father
and mother?” That would probably be easy to attain. Primarily, pampered
children are the ones who are not equal to the problems of life, because they are
used to having all of their wishes fulfilled, so they naturally develop a striving to
get everything immediately hate those who stand in their way. These children
connect with one person and would like to exclude everyone else. Either sooner
or later, we can consider them, admittedly in a highly exaggerated way, as being
afflicted with an Oedipus complex. They struggle with their culture and reject it
because no one was able to train them to adapt to its ways. These children are
filled with selflove and insist that “I come first; I do whatever I want and have
nothing to do with the others.” Soon we can see the refusal to cooperate. This
process already begins on the first day. I don't need to tell pediatricians the
importance of not pampering a child during the earliest period, and of
immediately instituting a certain order in his lifestyle, in order to prevent him
from coming into conflict with behavior demanded by our culture.
Frequently, such mistakes can be avoided. We cannot claim that such

children possess a tendency toward bad habits by nature. No one has actually
seen the cherished “Kotstange,” and it is more likely that in cases of
constipation, the entire course of the bowel movement stops. One aspect pertains
primarily to pampered children. They are in a situation which extraordinarily
deepens their feeling of inferiority. The feeling of inferiority in pampered
children derives from their perceiving every changed situation as a danger, as
diminishing the range of their powers, so that they live in a world in which they
constantly fear uncertainties, danger, and failures. At least in pampered
situations, they wish to be master. As we know very well, pampered children
excel at being tyrants at home. The mother is the first victim because she
presents herself first to the child, so that her pampering plays a major role in
leading him child down the wrong paths he will follow during the first years.
Innumerable families make this mistake who are insecure, who grew up in
pampered situations, and were burdened with wrong traditions they now pass on,
such as exaggerating the value of eating so that the child finds opportunities to
revolt against it. If the child learns that this is how he can gain greater attention
and more pampering, he will revolt more strongly. Such a child who refuses to
eat has a far greater feeling of power and gains much greater satisfaction from
his striving after power than do other children. These pampered children after
some tries hit the right mark. They are practiced tacticians; they attack at the
weakest point. When a family places great value on the cleanliness of the bed,
and the child needs and hopes to draw the mother closer to him even at night, he
will wet his bed.
In this, I do not overlook organic functions that also play a part, various
anomalies, etc. However, when such a child with any minor problems, or even
without these problems, is constantly being harped on, for example, to speak
properly, eat correctly, sleep, move his bowels or urinate, etc. in a way that he
soon realizes he can thereby hold on to someone, then the pampered child will
surely begin to stutter, refuse to eat and sleep, and become enuretic. The same
applies to problems with moving one's bowels. For many families, the bowel
movement is the center of their lives. A child soon notices this, then forces his
family to concern themselves constantly with his bowel movements. Later, I will
try to answer the question of how he manages this task. This process probably
instinctively follows the line of a feverish evolution and increases automatically
the motivation of the child to become the center of pampering, or to attain that
position forcefully.
Acknowledging that I must skip over various points of view, I would like to
show how the selection of symptoms arises as a result of a deficient upbringing.
Later, under conditions where they no longer have any value for the individual,

symptoms may disappear. As that person grows up, he will face a situation for
which he feels unprepared because of his inability to cooperate and be a fellow
human being. Then all those physical tensions arise that in accordance with
vegetative systems affect inferior organs or at a minimum produce reactions in
them, or the child behaves in the way that he has known to be successful. Here
again, just as with neurosis, it is a matter of getting someone to serve him and to
exploit another person's social contribution.
I purposely select uncomplimentary cases because it is important to show
how we can begin to understand a choice of symptoms. In continuing, children
who lack interest in anyone else lack something that really establishes the worth
of a person and his performance. Now, in our culture, even in childhood, failure
to act is difficult. However, we find this failure in neurosis. Enlisting someone
who does perform, and demanding that person’s service without oneself actually
making any contribution, can in our culture, arrange an exemption from personal
responsibility, a responsibility expected from everyone living under a social
contract. This avoidance of responsibility occurs when someone faces failure,
when he has a more or less bleak impression of himself as being too weak or
being inferior. The dark secret might then be revealed that such a person is
actually worthless. In their vanity, these people think only of themselves and not
of others, cannot stop thinking of themselves, cannot put all their strength into
their work, and think: How do I look; what kind of an impression do I make;
what do others think of me; what do I get? In these people we find strong
antagonistic feelings, defiance, envy, jealousy, and other signs that the social
relationship has turned into enmity. We can trace this result back to the
beginning of their life when the effort to shape the child into a fellow human
being failed. In every case, we can verify this process when we look ahead.
Now, when someone in society openly refuses to act, then what we call
neurosis is impossible. It is possible, for example, in suicide and in crime. It is
not possible in neurosis because the neurotic is psychologically so structured that
he seems to say: I should like to cooperate but I cannot. Naturally, he constantly
eyes his poorly prepared and now matured internal inhibitions, and sees
obstacles that he ties to his demand to be relieved from cooperating. We can see
clearly in his expressions of fear that he considers himself inferior, acting as if
he stood at the edge of an abyss. Now, we Individual Psychologists, imbued with
an incorrigible optimism, maintain that every sensible person can achieve
anything. However, if someone has not yet acquired social feeling, he has no
other choice but to acquire it. In fact, social interest, the most important dowry
of a child for avoiding neurosis and all failures, must be learned in childhood or
the person must make up that lesson later in life. The individual must repeat that

assignment. Since the neurotic has a “yes--but” attitude, the rationale for his
excuses must be developed very well. Clearly, he acknowledges the necessity for
cooperation. As all neurotic patients express it, his will is certainly always
present. What is not present is the deed. He avoids acting, defers doing
something to some future time supported by arguments that serve as excuses but
are the result of pure psychological tension. Neuropsychology focuses on
determining how the patient produces his excuses. If someone wants to
accomplish something, when he gives thought to it, whatever occurs in his life,
he can make use of nothing else but what he derives from his (earlier)
experience. It is impossible to proceed other than by applying earlier experience.
Therefore, he must reach back to an earlier situation in which he was able, in the
best possible light, to refuse to act. If by doing so he also trained his neurotic
attitude, then so much the better. If inferior organs can be considered for support,
they will certainly be exploited because they begin to resonate on their own as
soon as psychological tension is created. In cases of psychological tension, the
entire body begins to vibrate. However, we will observe this tension only when
it is more clearly manifested, mostly by inferior organs, or by some organ
activity as a result of training that began in early childhood for reasons that I
have already indicated. It is not enough merely to reach back, but a goal already
exists here, a substitute goal, providing a feeling of superiority, although if
described in simple words it means: “How do I manage to be relieved so I don't
have to do something that I fear?” Admitting cowardice is not pleasant;
therefore, the process must be recast. The individual will never say: I am
emotionally upset because I believe myself to be worthless and unable to act.
Instead, he will somehow cover up and pay attention merely to the outcome of
his excitement which provides him security against any failure or debasement of
his personality. This tension will have different results with different people.
Interestingly, it also radiates into the mind. For example, in obsessive
compulsive neurosis, someone fills himself with ideas which engender a feeling
of freedom from an encumbering sense of importance, and prevent him from
doing any more than what he already is doing “only” because of his obsessive
manifestations. On the one hand, it is like a balm for wounded ambition; on the
other hand, it means suffering, the cost he pays for his escaping.
The suffering of the neurotic is certainly disagreeable, not the fulfillment of
wishes, not the fulfillment of sexual lust, but the sad cost that he must pay to be
relieved so that he can avoid failure. However, the feelings and thoughts he
creates, feelings such as in anxiety neurosis, thoughts as in compulsive neurosis,
motile manifestations as in hysteria, etc. allow us to surmise where he has set his
goal in order to avoid having to act, how during childhood he compensated for

his feeling of inferiority, and what he thought, felt, and how he moved. Here
again we see something tricky in the nature of the neurotic and all failures.
Certain character traits appear repeatedly that do not apply to the strong and
selfconfident, but to the person who judges himself as weak, who tries with all
his might to avoid revealing his feeling of weakness, and who by doing so places
blame on what he created himself. Acute sensitivity, impatience, yearning for
anything sweet, fearfulness, craving for unseemly ways to find relief, and strong
emotionality are his constant companions.
We are now left to explain how the individual's creative force in producing
a symptom is manifested. One example: When I aim at avoiding to act, and I
was trained through fear from childhood on to let another serve, accompany, and
protect me, to rob him of his freedom, to make him servile, etc. when I am on
that path, then I must pave and reinforce that way to the best of my ability so that
I can reach my goal successfully. Now, how do I create a fear that will allow me
to eliminate any necessary actions and force another to assuage my fear? Patients
state the answer very clearly. They don't understand what they say to us, have no
clue that they provide us with a glimpse into the workshop of neurosis when they
say, for example: “I feel the ground shaking;” “I think of the death of my
husband, of my own death;” or “I fear that I shall faint, that I shall have a heart
attack,” etc. The thought of dying plays an unimaginable role with pampered
people because their support would be missing if one of their court attendants
were to disappear. The patient is constantly preoccupied with the thought of his
misery were he to lose his support. However, with that thought in mind, which
touches on an essential part of his life, through empathy he creates a fear as if
the concerned individual had already died; that is, he identifies with a situation
that could possibly occur in the future. We observe this process best in the case
of depression where the person lives as if a disaster had already struck.
Of course, this presentation gives merely the fundamentals. We have an
extraordinarily fruitful field here for an understanding of the choice of
symptoms. In two cases selected for their simplicity and striking transparency, I
will show how early the choice of symptoms is established and how difficult it is
to uncover correctly or surmise.
One case concerns a thirteen year old boy in his fifth year at elementary
school because he already had to repeat classes twice, who was considered the
worst student in his school. In addition, he had committed several thefts, and had
run away for several days at a time until the police found him and returned him
home. The teacher tried punishment and exhortation, but neither that nor
kindness helped, so the boy was sent to an institution. He arrived there with a
certification that declared him mentally retarded. In this institution, one of the

instructors was my student. Not satisfied with merely observing symptoms, he
wanted to understand the lifestyle and the choice of symptoms. He was
convinced that no one theft was like any other. Since he knew these
transgressions had to be expressions of the total personality, he endeavored to
press forward until he reached the core of the personality in order to find what
has been called the “psychological constitution.” Developed in the third, fourth,
and fifth year of life, it will always be present and as such perceives, responds,
and assimilates. The instructor also knew that he could start at any point because
every symptom contains the whole, great melody of the individual. Therefore, he
began with an examination of report cards. He found that the boy had received
good marks in the first three grades and poor marks only in the fourth year. He
concluded from this that for some reason the boy did not have the proper
preparation for the fourth grade. He then guessed that the boy had a change of
teachers in the fourth grade. This turned out to be true. Furthermore, he surmised
that the boy had a friendly teacher in his first three years of school, so that his
lifestyle, consequently, was not prepared for the unfriendly one.
The instructor concluded that this was a case of a pampered child who in
accordance with his lifestyle was able to make progress under the condition of
being treated with kindness. Given his psychological make-up and his exposure
to a functional test, in this case a teacher who was a disciplinarian, this boy had
to display his failure by means of a symptom. The instructor was able to reach
these conclusions based on his examination of the boy's report cards. The boy
confirmed these findings. The instructor then asked him: “What did you do with
the money and the things you stole?” The boy answered: “I gave them to my
classmates so they would become my friends because I have no friends and since
I am poor, and also the worst student in class, the others avoid me.” We see here
again the great underlying melody in the choice of theft as a symptom. We see
the boy’s hunger for kindness, and how he attempts to buy it with bribes. We can
conclude that the mother obviously had pampered the boy, but we must be able
to prove that. The instructor asked him: “How did it come about that you ran
away?” The boy answered: “I hid out in the forest or in a barn. However, at night
I always gathered wood and brought it to my mother's kitchen door so that she
would have wood for cooking.” Again, he stole something in order to bribe his
mother and to win her love, just as he tried to win the love of his comrades. He
knows no other ways to be pampered, which for him is the high point of his life.
But, can you tell me another way? A poor student, flogged by the teacher, unable
to make progress, how else could he have made friends? I know of no better
means than those the boy had discovered. We can also conclude from the
description of his experience at school that he is intelligent; he did something

that any other intelligent person would have done.
Here we see the choice of symptoms: He hits the right mark in order to
attain his goal. In school he expected only to be scolded. Had I the same
expectations, I also would not have attended school. This choice of symptoms is
intelligent, understandable, and cogent. He ran away from home because his
father was strict with him. When the boy brought home bad report cards, he was
beaten, and the mother cried and was unfriendly. Therefore, he ran away in order
to stir his mother's heart. We can see how every symptom reaches beyond itself
and carries the basic melody: the theft in order to bribe others; the running away
to scare the mother, to extort kindness; the failure in school to protest against the
unkind teacher. Everything was done in order to win warmth and be pampered. I
would like to show how far back this psychological constitution reaches.
Individual Psychology places immense importance on the earliest childhood
memories because these show how, out of thousands of influences, he selects
one which made a particular impression on him. He related the following:
“When I was four years old, my father sent me to buy a newspaper, but”-
when you hear this “but” you already see a move on the part of the boy to avoid
the task his father had given him. He does not care for his father, just as he does
not warm up to the severe teacher. He continues the recollection: “I went to my
uncle who gave me cake, which I brought to my mother.” In his line of
movement, this child knows only his mother, and is fond of another--whether
man or woman--only when that person pampers him equally. Without being
pampered, he does not progress.
Regarding treatment for such a boy it follows that we cannot influence him
without first pampering him. Of course, in order to understand this process, we
must discern his whole lifestyle. Nothing has been gained by pampering him.
That would repeat the same situation he has known from previous experiences.
However, without initial pampering and warmth, he will not be ready for
treatment. This is also how the instructor started. Another of the boy's
recollections: “Once, at the railroad station, a train car caught on fire. Inside the
car were children's balls. The workers tried to save the balls from the fire and
threw them out of the railroad car. Several adults and children who had been
standing around took those balls for themselves.” At age three, stealing already
appeared to him as something usual, or possible. It is an easy way of gaining
without contributing, without work, without having to accomplish anything, by
letting others do the work, by assuring oneself of their cooperation, and by
profiting from their actions.
In another case, the choice of symptoms can also easily be easily grasped.
Cowardly and fearful because they are used to being given support, pampered

children show fear whenever they face a situation where they envision failure.
At five years old, a particular boy was one of the most unruly children. He
made demands on his mother to the point where she was always exhausted. He
climbed on the table with his shoes on, put his hands into a pot of soup, removed
all the screws from his bed, destroyed all his toys, etc. If his mother wanted to
read, he turned off all the lights; when she played the piano, he held his hands
over his ears and began to yell and scream, etc. Obviously, the boy was a great
burden and the parents tried everything to lead him on the right path. His
willfulness resulted from a test he had not passed. The parents were given
various suggestions on what to do. They were advised to bring the boy in contact
with other boys, which they did. The boy brought back many unflattering
expressions and always returned home dirty.
The father took the boy to the zoo to divert him. As pampered children
often do, the boy had gained the attention of his parents with troubled sleep,
crying out at night, and occasionally sleepwalking. After his visit to the zoo, he
continued to cry out at night and complained that he could not close his eyes
when trying to sleep because as soon as he did so, he saw the snakes that his
father had shown him in the zoo. No matter where we send the boy, he will
select whatever suits his lifestyle. However, he did not pass the test because his
mother had another son, a younger brother. This brother diminished the boy’s
reign of power, so in order to regain the center of attention, he tried to expand
his authority with all his might.
He selected fear as a symptom. Why does he not wet his bed? Why does he
create no problems with his bowel movements? Perhaps innately he has a
different orientation, has other erogenous zones? I could make him incontinent
and train him to have problems with his bowels. We prefer to draw the
conclusion that the mother paid no attention to his bowel and urinary functions,
so he did not become aware that these are vulnerable areas he could attack.
Understanding the selection of symptoms is not a matter of mathematics
that can be solved by formulas. Every formula is to be avoided. The crux here is:
knowing how to bring evidence to support that which, on the strength of greater
experience, we surmise. We must apply the general diagnosis of Individual
Psychology, but cannot allow ourselves to be satisfied with that. We must follow
with the specific diagnosis until we uncover the totality of the personality, the
individuality. Therefore, “Individual Psychology.”
Chapter III
Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis
[1931]
I. Individual Psychology1 2

Individual Psychology is based on the empirical fact that the first stage of
the germ cell is a person's “I”, a totality, a personality, given all the potentialities
for human development. Neither an “it,” nor “drives” of any kind exist outside
of this “I” of the germ cell. The human capacity for development entails a
million varieties of drives, feelings, movements, intellectual capacity, and
abilities in their minimal beginnings. Here lies the field for the science of
heredity, which should never overlook the creative force of the “I”, in particular
not the individual’s eternal task of striving for perfection.
This “I,” the germinal possibilities of the primitive cell, encounters barriers
in the reality of the community, in the nature of the cosmos, and in the existence
of the two sexes. A variety of experiences provides the power to adapt and
overcome. The task for the individual, therefore, is to be embedded in everything
that humans become and in all that they do; this task underlies every human
being, each of whom demonstrates through his behavior and with his life his
greater or lesser aptitude and adaptability. In this process, the uniqueness of
every human lifestyle is formed neither by heredity nor by the influences of the
environment, but by the goal-striving and fulfillment-urging of the individual.
In this fashion the ultimate process that underlies all mental and physical
growth is revealed. Despite all psychological pronouncements, we need to
understand the psychological processes involved, as opposed to the purely causal
ones.
The assumption of goal-orientation in observing psychological processes
thrusts itself with such force into the examination of drives, thought processes,
and emotional life that even those who oppose Individual Psychology with very
little knowledge and skill cannot escape awareness of this goal-striving. Indeed,
even the metamorphic language of other psychologies is structured unknowingly
as a striving after some kind of fulfillment, of seeking superiority, of escaping a
feeling of inferiority. (Oedipus complex, narcissism, censorship, superego,
idealism, feeling of guilt, etc. domination by one's physical urges). Beyond the
scientific bias, no one can doubt that the Individual Psychological conception
lies much deeper and cannot be disregarded.
1 Originally published as “Individualpsychologie und Psychoanalyse. I.
Individulapsychologie” in Schweizer Erziehungs-Rundschau, Volume 4, No. 4,
pages 
59-61, 1931. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
I can also eliminate the widespread skepticism of some critics who question
Individual Psychology on the following points:

1. Calling itself Individual Psychology. Since we examine the totality of the
individual in his relationship to the essential questions of life, this doubt can
easily be suspended. 
2. Calling itself a science. This mistake rests fully on a misunderstanding of
what science actually is. Most of the time these critics think of science as the
sum of empirical facts derived in a laboratory or by direct observation. In that
case, many a laboratory assistant would then be the actual scientist. Science
means much more. It means to have discovered a clarifying principle for the
connection and relationship of actual experiences that allows for the
classification of all direct experiences without raising contradictions. In that
regard, “common sense” is of significant value. 
3. That it allows no consideration for metaphysics. Since the principle of
Individual Psychology described above lies beyond direct experience, and since
it justifies itself by the--until now--lack of any contradiction arising from direct
experience, this opinion is also laid to rest.
More serious to me is the objection that Individual Psychology is an ethical,
judgmental viewpoint. This unfair censure actually entails, aside from the
undeniable previously mentioned ethical value of all scientific truths, a strong,
unqualified compliment, attributing a “practical rationale” to the apparent
personal and social usefulness of Individual Psychology. The “ought to be,” the
“fiat,” that is entailed in every realization is not the realization itself. (Please
pardon my excursion into this psychological nursery school.)
To a certain degree, the creative force of the child in constructing his
lifestyle is free and unfettered. Only after many trials and opinions does he
concretely formulate his goal to master everyone else, cooperate in essential
activities, avoid all decisions, and even more specifically, be rich, strong,
courageous, careful, shrewd, and truthful. Only when all this has manifested
itself in his fantasies, choice of occupation, and choice of symptoms does it
become a determinant, established not by causes but by his goal, which is
synonymous with his lifestyle. This unity, personality, and unconscious life plan
concurrently integrate his reasoning, feelings, actions, and desires as well as all
character traits, conscious and unconscious. When this “conscious” is taken
literally, he who has not understood that a conscious event can mean “its actual
opposite,” or that modesty can also signify arrogance (Socrates), will believe he
has discovered contrasts between the conscious and the unconscious. Whoever
has not understood that conflicts in the conscious and the unconscious reflect
conflicting doubts as part of the “hesitating attitude” will miss the synchronism.
The attention of Individual Psychology was directed very early toward
those influences that in our keen perception of the uniqueness of the individual

could affect the totality “as anticipated,” not “causally.” Thus, we came to
understand the meaning of the differences in values of organs for experiencing
and for the attitude of the child toward his role in life. The uniqueness of organ
inferiority also corresponds to the uniqueness of the imprint made on
psychological growth. Being ensnared by “typifying” would cause an individual
to be surprised by the many thousand ways in which psychological success is
achieved, in particular when no credit is ascribed to the “free” creative power of
the child. When we apply the basic principle of Individual Psychology, not to
use any formula, but to draw conclusions in accordance with common sense, and
not to allow our own judgment to be the determinant, but instead, to follow clues
left by the child, then we can do justice to the childhood construction of the
“psychological constitution.” Between the strength and weakness that can ensue
from the course of organ inferiority are variations that can occur in a thousand
ways. However, these variations will become a matter of trying to adapt, trying
for a goal toward fulfillment. Psychology and pedagogy have gained the most
exact knowledge about the choice of lifestyle from Individual Psychological
research into pampering, into the dependency of the child on another person. The
phenomenon of “needing support,” of “expectation” (noted already by Kräpelin),
and the inadequate development of social feeling, occurs in the simplest to the
most complex cases. After many years of searching, I can state that almost all
human failures, problem children, neuroses, psychoses, suicides, criminality,
alcoholism, drug abuse, and most errant views of life can be traced back to the
feeling of insecurity which can clearly be discerned in once-pampered children.
In this context, we can also find those who by overcoming resulting harm have
made great accomplishments, while others escaped with a black eye if they were
not subjected to a strict test of their abilities.
Obviously, it is not easy to determine whether this pampered lifestyle
applies to a particular person. After my experience, I would not want that
judgment to be left to just any critic. Also, such factors as lack of affection in
upbringing, sibling rivalry, unhappily married parents, family traditions, the
social environment, and economic conditions leave their traces behind.
However, given the manifoldness of these experiences, we must pay attention to
what the child has made of them.
Our strong emphasis on the totality, which since has almost become
common property in psychology, led us very early in our research to that period
during which we can determine how the lifestyle was constructed, not that we
had any doubt of its existence before we discovered it. This lifestyle is the actual
psychological constitution of the individual and can be changed only after
revealing the mistakes in it, and then only after we have fully convinced that

person that those mistakes were real. Our “convincing” of that person, however,
cannot be seen as intellectualism since in our observation of the totality of the
individual we indisputably keep in mind the influence of the total personality.
We are assisted in this respect, among others, by remembrances, dreams,
fantasies, in short, by all forms of expression that help us understand the
individual's lifestyle, especially in impressing this point on the patient. Only
after we have established in all these phenomena the same basic melody, the
same psychological sound pattern, the totality that is woven through the entire
psychological fabric, can we be sure of our stand.
Extensive examinations have taught us that under all conditions the degree
to which social feeling has been attained, the interest in others and in the
community, determines the lifestyle more than all other factors. This social
feeling serves so much as the basic principle of Individual Psychology that we
expect an improvement of the artistic structure of the totality only when we
succeed in improving the adaptiveness of the individual in the sense of becoming
a cooperative, loving, fellow human being. This task calls for an intensive
understanding of Individual Psychology. We would not think of applying a
formula to the examination of an individual. However, we are guided by our
basic principles without forgetting the uniqueness and its manifold variations.
The importance of an awareness of common sense and the training required in
observing connectivity probably is known merely to the few who devoted many
years of work to Individual Psychology.3
3 For a continuation of these ideas, see “The Differences Between
Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis” in Superiority and Social Interest,
edited by Heinz and Rowena Ansbacher, pages 205-218.
Chapter IV
Compulsion Neurosis1
[1931]
In the last several decades, the medical profession has shown a special
interest in psychological studies. This interest stems from the physician finding
that psychology provides him with a means of observing and understanding
certain developments that commonly occur in life, but which generally pass
undetected. Early preparatory descriptive steps were taken in France and Vienna
by Krafft-Ebing. They represented a great advance toward clarification when
later, Westphal decided to include under the term “compulsion neurosis” a
certain group of neurotic disturbances. Since then, the literature on the subject
has grown to vast proportions. In this article, I will discuss the contribution that
Individual Psychology has made to the understanding of compulsion neurosis,

but to do this, I must begin far back.
The efforts of Individual Psychology have always been mainly directed
toward grasping the “Why?” of phenomena--why (toward what end) a human
being behaves in a manner which seems to us extraordinary and pathological.
Other psychologists have been more inclined to study the “How?”--how certain
particular symptoms come into being. Each group takes both questions--the
Why? (the Whither) and the How? (the Whence)--into consideration, but stresses
one or the other approach.
In view of our comprehensive, general outlook, it is understandable that we
would emphasize the question of why a human being behaves in such a way,
rather than solving his life-problems in the manner generally expected in his
culture. Accordingly, in 1908, shortly after the completion of my Studie über
Minderwertigkeit von Organen,2 I began to develop the definitive viewpoint of
Individual Psychology, and came concluded that we must look at psychic life as
movement, directed toward the solution of certain almost immutable problems of
existence. This activity coexists with a tendency on the part of each individual to
arrange factors of the external world so that, from his standpoint, they best
enable him to attain his ideal, his goal. To a degree, the best way of dealing with
these inescapable life problems is a matter of arbitrary judgment; it can be
considered from different points of view, and solutions can be attempted in
many ways. This variety explains the diversity in cultural forms.
1 
Originally 
published 
as 
“Zwangsneurose” 
in 
Arch. 
Psychiat.
Nervenkrankh., Vol. 93, pages 262-274, 1931. Translated into English and
published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 2, No. 4, pages 3-22, 1936. 
2 In this work I tried to show that a child born with weak organs experiences the
weakness and unreliability of his organs; and that, as he builds up his
individuality, he has a sense of insecurity, a feeling of being overburdened and
under strain, and attempts in a thousand different ways to relieve himself of this
strain, adapt himself to his environment, and achieve a feeling of personal
significance and value. See “A Study of Organ Inferiority” in The Collected
Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 2.
In 1908 I hit upon the idea that every individual really exists in a state of
permanent aggression, and I was imprudent enough to call this attitude the
“aggression instinct.”3 However, I soon realized that I was not dealing with an
instinct, but with a partly conscious, partly irrational attitude toward the tasks
which life imposes, and I gradually arrived at an understanding of the social
element in personality, determined by the individual's opinion of the facts and
the difficulties of life. The individual's attitude reflects, not the actual facts, not

the thing-in-itself as a permanent “principle of reality,” but what he “thinks” of
the demands which the external world makes on him, and what he “thinks” of
his ability to fulfill them. Individual Psychology thinks of the individual as
living within a closed circle of social relations, but does so with the
understanding that each person follows his own particular route toward what he
regards as successful adaptation to the social scheme. Individual Psychology was
concerned with determining the social import of lifestyles and of actually
measuring, in every psychic movement, the capacity for social cooperation and
its ratio to a striving for security and superiority.
As a transition to my special topic, let me refer to my 1918 address on
compulsion neurosis before the Medical Association in Zurich.4 In this paper,
published in full in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology, I
expressed a view which I believe is discernable today, albeit in modified form,
in the theory of every school of psychiatry. I asserted that, under all
circumstances, a neurotic symptom is produced whenever a person attempts to
evade the problems of life because he feels fundamentally unable to solve them
in a manner compatible with his striving for superiority. 
The compulsion-neurotic regularly displays signs of anxiety if he fails to
develop other symptoms in a given difficult situation. He feels compelled to do
something, to perform a compulsive action which he himself feels is absurd--and
which he recognizes as being out of joint with social living. Yet he must yield to
the compulsion, or fall victim to anxiety. The compulsion-neurotic has a feeling
of insecurity and inadequacy, a feeling of “not being able.” This feeling of
insecurity and inadequacy is traceable to a deeply rooted biological basis and is
not to be thought of as something having purely psychological significance.
Anxiety is one of the most distinct manifestations of the sense of inferiority.
It serves a definite purpose: the purpose of protection. For example: a woman
patient under treatment for anxiety-neurosis had progressed so well that she
could go out by herself. One night, when she came home she found a stranger
standing by the door. She screamed out, “Why don't you go away? Can't you see
I'm afraid?” The use of anxiety as a means to power is very important from a
social viewpoint.
3 See “The Aggression Drive in Life and in the Neurosis,” Chapter XI in
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 2. The term “aggression
instinct” was changed to “aggression drive” in the 1922 re-printing of the
German original in Heilen und Bilden. 4 See “Compulsion Neurosis,” Chapter
XVI in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 4.
In the paper published in 1918, I also pointed out that the compulsion

neurotic apparently retires to a secondary field of action on which he expends all
his energies instead of devoting them, as we would expect, to solving his
primary problem. He impresses us as a veritable Don Quixote, fighting
windmills-concerning himself with matters that have no proper place in our
social world, but which serve merely to dally away time. For time seems to him
his most dangerous foe, constantly making some demand on him, and
importuning him to solve problems which he feels are beyond his powers.
We can corroborate that the patient is inadequately prepared to meet the
problems of life (always social in nature): and this inadequacy of preparation-
whether real or imaginary--prevents him from moving forward. He lapses into a
hesitating attitude and in this state of vacillation, the compulsion-neurotic turns
to his secondary field of action. Such an evasion does not occur unless he is fears
failure. As long as the compulsion-neurotic is sure of himself, he gets on well
enough, is impeded by no compulsions, and surmounts his difficulties. Only in
certain phases of his existence--either in his business and professional affairs, or
frequently in his lovelife--do we find an extreme development of his tendency to
ward off failures by retreating to a secondary field of action and eliminating the
compelling 
duties 
of 
life 
by 
means 
of 
countercompulsion. 
The
countercompulsion gives him a feeling of success--according to his style.
In trying to understand some given behavior, we must turn back to the past
life of the patient. For a person's behavior is always based upon the materials of
his life-experience, and these naturally lie in the past. After his fourth or fifth
year, every individual possesses an established lifestyle, and according to his
lifestyle, he assimilates, applies and digests the data of all later experiences. He
draws from them conclusions that fit into his already established apperception
scheme, attaching importance solely to those aspects of any experience which
correspond with the picture of the world he has already formed and with the
particular lifestyle he has developed for coping with that world.
I further mentioned that rarely is the striving for superiority so clearly
defined as it is in a compulsion neurosis--a statement which many writers on the
subject had already made, but lacking the criteria used in Individual Psychology,
one which they apparently did not fully understand. The belief in the magical
efficacy and omnipotence of words and ideas, and the recourse to “primitive,
archaic thought,”5 is not an atavism stemming from the “collective
unconscious,” but a feasible, childish device for achieving a sense of power. It
arises from the striving for a unique superiority which I have described as
godlikeness. The compulsion neurotic strives after the clearest expression of his
godlike quality, but naturally cannot achieve this end in his social life since he
lacks the first requisite of success in that realm: an interest in others.

5 Remember the “Polonius Complex.”
We may ignore the opinion that the compulsion neurotic is distinguished
from other individuals by a morbid objectivity. On the contrary, the sufferer
from compulsion neurosis needs others; he clearly reveals his feeling of
inferiority in the manifestations of his uncertainty and anxiety, drawing another
person into his sphere, and advancing to an overt inferiority complex. The
compulsion neurotic endeavors to overcome this anxiety, trying to represent
himself in the form to which he originally aspired--as a demi-god, who exalts
himself above humankind and devalues everyone else. He covers his inferiority
complex with a superiority complex and thus appears magnificent enough in his
own eyes--for only his compulsive idea, so he feels, prevents him from fulfilling
his triumphant mission. His fantastic notion of superiority is fully and wholly
revealed in his compulsion.
I mentioned further that what some writers on the subject have described as
ambivalence, ambiguity, contradictoriness in mental dispositions, feelings, and
split personality are simply contrasting means to the same end, not a change in
the end itself.
Of the greatest importance to the whole theory of neurosis, Individual
Psychology, since it so strongly emphasizes the unity of the individual's life and
endeavors, had to address the idea of ambivalence. The movement of a person
who wishes to evade reality--in order to raise himself to godlikeness in his
imagination and emotions--must naturally show a point of beginning and an end
point. Individual Psychology regards psychic life as movement, considering
form, expression, and function as a kind of frozen movement. Hence, if an
individual wants to raise himself from a lower level to a higher one, we would
expect to find two seemingly contrasting points in the movement, namely, the
point away from which the movement goes and the point toward which it is
directed. From these points, we learn the direction of the movement.
Furthermore, the multiplicity and variety of life styles show no one ideal
movement upward. Many paths to significance and superiority may be followed.
Inaccurately considered, the disparities between reality and the ideals of courage,
truthfulness, activity, etc., can be viewed as contrasts, when indeed they
represent merely varieties and degrees. Unfortunately, we do not have uniform
terms and concepts for the variants of psychic movement. If we did, this error
would certainly not have insinuated itself into our thought. Of course, we also
observe the so-called “pleasure in suffering''' which finally gives the neurotic the
feeling that he is unique and godlike, but which really is nothing more than the
pleasure a person feels when he has paid the forfeit that exempts him from a
greater evil. Such a life style constitutes a palpable failure.

The compulsion neurotic learns early to employ and trains an absurd
process of reasoning in order to allow himself a sense of great personal
importance and worth without achieving anything objectively tangible. A
properly conducted inquiry into his past history will reveal certain characteristic
traits; pedantic striving for faultlessness and perfect accuracy; a tendency to
sidestep difficult tasks by confusing them with unrelated simple ones; the
practice of formalized religious exercises and rituals with the idea of “tempting
God”; the habit of stressing the difficulty of situations in order to make a greater
triumph of their solution; a desire to elude rivalries; and pride in a grotesquely
exaggerated family tradition. The compulsion neurotic reveals the disposition
which I attempted to describe, in 1912, in my book Uber den nervosen
Charakter.6 He feels set apart from other individuals, thinks only of himself, is
imbued with selflove, and has no interest in the general welfare. Because he
believes he is incapable of realizing his great potentialities in the social stream of
the world, he sets a high personal goal above the aspirations of other mortals.
Further, I noted a trait especially prominent in compulsion neurosis which I
called “the neurotic tendency to create safeguards.” More than a protective
device, this tendency certainly cannot be considered a defense against
suppressed sexual desires. A system of psychic forms of expression, it results
from careful training, and is skillfully contrived to permit the individual to attain,
in the neurotic manner, his goal of personal superiority. The patient who feels
compelled to jump out of windows builds up this compulsion into a safeguard:
he acquires a sense of superiority by successfully overcoming the urge, and
employs the whole situation as an excuse for his ill-success in life. We cannot
properly speak of “conflict” in these cases, since the patient never deviates from
the road of evasion which he paves with good intentions or feelings of guilt.
“Conflict” means a standstill. These good intentions, which may appear as
feelings of guilt, are absolutely dead: they signify nothing as to any real change
in the life of the patient. As far as altered behavior in the patient is concerned, a
great display of his feelings of guilt means nothing; by acknowledging his guilt
and raising trivialities to rank to the of importance and dignity, he can appear to
be more genteel and honest than his fellows. Evidently, these much bewailed
trivialities have no “deeper” significance, because in compulsion neurosis as in
melancholia, the patient contents himself with merely expressing a sense of guilt
and would never think of exercising “active contrition” in the form of improved
behavior.
Other writers on this topic consider the compulsion as if it resided in
“obsessions” or “compulsive ideas.” They regard obsession or obsessional action
as it if were wholly divorced from the normal processes of thought; as if thinking

were “charged” with compulsion which rises up from time to time, like a demon
from a pit, to overpower and take possession of its victim, as if the “compulsion”
had an individuality of its own. With incomparable grace and ease, Freud invests
each of his postulated “instincts” with human attributes. The compulsion does
not reside in the compulsive idea or action; it originates outside--in the sphere of
our normal social life. This sphere of activity is the source of the patient's
neurotic compulsion or urge. He must evade the realities of life, since he feels
incompetent to face them, and since his high-flown ambition must elude any sort
of palpable failure. He retreats farther and farther before the bayonets of life
which he feels are closing in on him from outside--until he finds a secluded
cranny where he is put to no real test and can use the notions that give him a
feeling of complete superiority. By exerting all his force, he acquires a sense of
omnipotence in overcoming some variety of self-created, imaginary fears.
Herein lies the significance of the “safeguarding tendency” that I have described.
The compulsion, therefore, does not reside in the obsessive symptoms, but in the
actualities of life which seem terrifying to the individual concerned.
Furthermore, the compulsion neurotic is characterized from childhood on (as we
can see from his earliest experience) by sudden successful efforts to pull himself
together.
6 See “The Neurotic Character” in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler,
Volume 1.
A short case history will clarify this point. The patient is a man of fortyfive,
in good circumstances. Understandably, persons who strive for superiority may
occasionally achieve quite estimable results in life. In fact, it is surprisingly
common for the compulsion neurotic to occupy a prominent social position. He
accomplishes something, but he is never satisfied with it. Such is the case of our
45-year-old patient, who complains of a continual obsession with wanting to
jump out of a window. The obsession is most pronounced when he is in an upper
story of a high building. For twenty-five years, he has felt this compulsion. Yet
now he stands before me in the flesh. He has never jumped out; he has always
conquered his obsession. He has triumphed over himself. He feels heroic.
To the untrained mind, this explanation may at first seem far-fetched or
artificial. But we often take a particular pride in mastering our inclinations and
overcoming one of our desires. This same sort of pride gives our patient a sense
of omnipotence. He feels heroic when he can say to himself: “I have been able to
bear up under a whole mountain of woe--wretched Atlas that I am!” Like every
neurotic, he does not fix his attention on the really important point, but on a
secondary issue. He has an eye to his anxiety, since he needs it as something to
overcome, and does not understand his fantastic struggle for omnipotence or his

sense of inferiority, which compel him, he feels, to travel on easy byways. He is
a fighter of windmills: a hero in his own mind, if not to the outside world.
Now let us glance back at the patient's childhood. Individual Psychology
has succeeded in making a new science of interpreting childhood recollections;
these old memories have begun to talk and tell their tale. The youngest child, our
patient was his mother's favorite. Like many pampered children, he was timid,
and his anxiety increased when he entered school. On one occasion, a bullying
schoolmate singled him out for abuse. But in the emergency, he mustered up all
his energies, attacked the other boy, and knocked him down. Anyone capable of
finding the dynamics in childhood recollections cannot help seeing that the
patient has followed the same tactics throughout his life. First he is afraid; then
he overcomes his fear. This method helps him acquire a sense of superiority.
Furthermore, I have found that a personality like that of the compulsion
neurotic never comes about as a result of a mechanistic process. According to
Freud, instincts have the power of choice. They can think; they have a
consciousness, and know their direction; they have a purposive, creative energy,
etc. In short, everything that he finds in the psychic life of the individual is
attributed to instincts. However, we cannot find the explanation of the origin of
compulsion neurosis in instincts or “drives,” for a “drive,” as we understand it, is
without direction. We are equally unable to lay the blame on heredity, since all
the factors entering into the neurosis--character, passions, emotions--are shaped
within the framework of human society.
If we hope to understand neurotic symptoms, then we must consider the
great potentialities for mistaken interpretation residing in the human mind. These
errors are wholly devoid of causality. No one is forced into neurosis, either by
heredity or by instincts, but only enticed, within certain latitudes of probability.
The pampered child--and almost all neurotics are pampered children--does not
act according to the law of cause and effect when he picks one experience out of
thousands for the basis of his subsequent life. We cure the neurotic by freeing
him from a false, self-created causality and adapting him to real life.
Furthermore, the life style of the compulsion neurotic--this most patent and
futile form of striving for godlikeness--naturally accepts everything that suits its
purposes, and rejects everything that runs counter to them. I will illustrate this
fact with an example--which probably needs further inquiry and better
foundation, but will serve to clarify a great deal which, even today, is
uncritically referred to as the province of the unconscious.
From childhood on, a medical student despaired of his ability to catch up
with his brother. This brother had taken life at a canter. The oldest child in the
family, and a stepson, he was less coddled and possessed the courage to make

good headway. As a result, the patient continually lived in the obscuring shadow
of his overpowering older brother. At present he is studying medicine, and easily
masters the theoretical branches. But now, faced with the necessity of deciding
whether to continue his studies and still looking up to his brother, he suddenly
discovers that he is unable to enter the dissecting-room, that it is impossible for
him to attend an operation, etc.
If we bear in mind the connection between these symptoms and the patient's
over-estimation of his brother, we can understand his fear, his unwillingness to
make a final decision. The patient's dread of attending an operation fits in with
his diffident attitude toward his medical studies. He looks into the future, senses
a possible defeat, and prepares a means of rescuing his sense of personal
integrity. At some later date, he will be able to say: If I hadn't felt this mysterious
dread, I would have surpassed my brother. He postpones the test which will
decide his defeat or victory, arming himself against an encroachment on his
personal ambition. But his is the understandable aim of emulating his brother,
not one that expressly strives for godlikeness. His goal is merely a superiority
over his brother, not the absolute superiority to which the compulsion neurotic
aspires.
Perhaps Individual Psychology alone fully recognizes that compulsion
neurosis can develop only in cases of considerable estrangement from the spirit
of community. In any event, however, we can clearly observe in this patient an
automatism peculiar to the human psyche, found in individuals who approximate
the normal as well as in those considered abnormal. This instinctive tendency
singles out and stresses those experiences which fit the individual’s lifestyle. The
sense of degradation and humility so common among the mentally sick is simply
another device for wasting time. The so-called “sadistic” bent in compulsion
neurosis is merely one of the thousand subtle variations on the theme of seeking
ascendancy over others; it is only a manifestation of the desire to dominate, to
exalt oneself, by degrading others. In compulsion neurosis, if it is manifest, it is
expressed so that the clear, direct, sadistic interest is covered by the patient's
horror of it and his consequent feeling of guilt. But perhaps the absurd struggle
of the compulsion neurotic contains an element of cruelty, since he (like the user
of violent profanity) approaches practical activity with the purpose of
disparaging other individuals.
One other point has already been made clear in Individual Psychology, but
often leads to mistaken notions. This phenomenon of indecision or doubt often
seems to constitute a special entity of psychology and is frequently so
considered. But if we observe this state of mind in its general context and ask
ourselves the question, “What part does doubt play in relation to specific

achievement in social life?” we will discover that its purpose is to maintain the
status quo, to prevent change. This is the hesitating attitude of which I have often
spoken. Excessive doubt and long-continued indecision represent nothing more
than attempts to kill time in order to gain time.
I have spoken plainly enough on the subject of causality and its slight
importance in relation to the understanding of the psychic life, since it governs at
best, only the physiological processes, not the psychological. And I have
described the structure of compulsion neurosis. With all this in mind, we should
be able to discover why one particular compulsive symptom and not another
appears in a given set of circumstances. A brief account of a few cases will
illustrate the nature of compulsion neurosis, and show that applying our
principles advances the understanding of it.
1. A common form of compulsion is the impulse to jump out of windows. A
young singer, confident that he had a fine voice but feeling thrust into the
background by his father and his older brother, engaged in an incessant struggle
against such an obsession. He believed that only his puzzling obsession
prevented him from becoming “the greatest tenor.” He was free of it as long as
someone was at his side, which was, of course, impossible in a theater or on the
concert platform where he would have to appear in order to go on with his
profession of concert singer. So we can see that this compulsive idea served as a
means of putting at a distance the test of his greatness. He was not really sure
that the test would result in his favor. He felt that he must surpass his father and
brother in some way. Now if he prevents himself from submitting to the test he
can always save his vanity from being hurt. And he can maintain his personal
prestige in his own eyes by arranging a situation in which he can say and
believe, “I would have been greater than they if I had not been burdened with
this fear. But I was.”
By the arrangement of the compulsive idea, his real capacity for
achievement was prevented from being put to the test. Thus, he was safeguarded
from any possibility of failure. At the same time, he successfully fought the
compulsion; he had never jumped. So he assured himself time and again of the
feeling of victory, the sense of heroic triumph.
2. We see a rarer type of compulsion in the case of a girl who could not go
out into society because of her impulse to imitate a cock’s crow. Here we have
the “masculine protest”--an important concept in Individual Psychology-
expressed in such a way that the young woman is spared the necessity of proving
her superiority in a more difficult way--by useful achievement. She felt that as a
girl, she played a subordinate, inferior part in society. Her feeling certainly has
no causal foundation. A great many girls, as well as men, still believe the old

superstition that women are inferior beings; so it is not surprising that an
ambitious girl who wants to occupy a leading place feels that the social system
itself compels her to eschew her role as a woman in society where she believes
women are valued less than men. She feels that being a woman means falling
into a low position of no value. She wants a high position of value, and sees it
only in the masculine role.
It seems unlikely that this case involves sadistic tendencies. A much more
probable explanation is this: The girl sees a kind of godlike superiority in the
role of man as compared to the role of woman, in the “masculine principle,” and
goes tilting against windmills. She “usurps” the role of the male in an easy but
useless way, and so spares herself the pains of proving with objectively valuable
achievements her capacity to fill that male role. This is a common characteristic
of the compulsion-neurotic; he has a sense of absolute superiority, and at the
same time rules all social ties out of his life.
3. Another case concerns a girl whose symptoms were established in a time
when she had suffered a defeat in her struggle for superiority. (The neurosis and
all its special disturbances appear whenever the patient feels challenged to prove
his superiority.) She was the younger of two sisters and felt overshadowed by the
older; but she was keenly intelligent, and brilliantly endowed for her studies and
chosen work. For a long time, she showed no sign of obsessions, but like all
compulsion-neurotics, she was engaged in a frantic struggle for absolute
superiority. The obsessive symptoms did not appear until she had lost her
position through an unfortunate speculation, and a man in whom she was
interested clearly preferred her sister. Now the patient developed an obsession.
Whenever she met a woman carrying a market basket, she was tormented by the
thought that a rusty coin might jump out of her purse into the basket and poison
the woman's family. She, too, was a fighter against windmills; she strove futilely
to become a “god” and save mankind. Her obsession also took other forms. She
declared that all books, especially Bibles, were sacrosanct, and if a book or a
Bible chanced to fall on the floor, she discarded it and bought a new one. In this
harmless way she plainly showed that she was superior to her sister in her
esteem for religion and erudition. She was more pious and more ethical, more
considerate of others' welfare, and also more respectful toward learning and
religion. Thus, she found a cheap means of triumphing over her sister, not by
way of useful achievement in real life. Her philosophy of life remained the same.
She asked herself only one question: How can I exalt myself above my sister and
everyone else?
4. In a case from an insane asylum, a man suffered since childhood from an
inclination to represent himself in petty matters as ethical, noble-minded, and

superior to others. His earliest recollections extend back to his first days in
kindergarten. He recalls that at one time he made a mistake that escaped the
notice of his teacher. For two years he suffered from pangs of conscience, and
then at his father's advice, he went to the teacher and confessed his secret
shortcoming. Brought up in a family with a cultural tradition of truthfulness, he
felt that his best chances for success lay in the direction of proving himself more
noble than others. His life was not without achievement. But every time he faced
a real test of his powers, compulsive symptoms appeared and he was unable to
meet the test. For this reason, he frequently changed his occupation. One day,
when he was confronted by such an emergency, he went to church and threw
himself on the floor before the altar in the crowded church, loudly proclaiming
that he was “the greatest sinner on earth.” After this he was committed to an
asylum, thus evading the test of his worth that goes with living productively. The
desire for a godlike superiority, so plainly revealed in this episode, evinced itself
on other occasions as well. One day he appeared stark naked in the dining hall of
the asylum. By this expedient he postponed his dismissal from the asylum and
put off another imminent test of his powers in a field where he felt uncertain and
sensed a possible defeat. He was really a very handsome man, with a fine
physique; in that regard, he felt superior to others. And so his compulsion--the
product of the emergency--revealed itself again as an effort, on the useless side
of life, to maintain his exaggerated sense of personal importance by flaunting his
superiority over other people.
5. Another patient, suffering for many years from a variety of compulsive
symptoms, improved notably under treatment. He was the oldest child of a
family in which the father occupied a dominant position. The father hoped that
his son would turn out to be a genius. Extremely devoted to his father, the boy
took these high expectations as a matter of course until, when he was five years
old, a sister was born. Then the father's affection was diverted to the sister, and
the boy suddenly began to feel an overpowering urge to climb up on his father's
shoulders, stand over his head, and break open his skull. Later on, he also
developed very pedantic traits, and was troubled by gruesome, sometimes filthy
thoughts whenever he felt himself slighted. Under such circumstances, someone
else might have expressed his resentment in a stream of threats and curses.
Compulsive thoughts mean a kind of attack, more than an outburst of
profanity, and less than a physical assault. Up to the time of his treatment and
improvement, the patient was firmly convinced that, even though he failed to
meet his father's great expectations, he would certainly have outstripped his
father if it had not been for his terrible obsessions. Here we can see how a kind
of superiority grows out of the obsession, or out of the aggressive tendency that

manifests itself in the obsession. Behind his symptoms the patient sees a star of
hope--the hope of quieting his fear of defeat. He looks into a Promised Land,
where he sees the possibility of consoling himself with the thought that he could
have been superior to his father if only he had not been so unfortunately
handicapped by a mysterious ailment which no doctor ever succeeded in
controlling. In this manner, he saves his self-esteem and guards his vanity from
hurt. The difficulties in the treatment of a compulsion neurotic are indicated. The
therapeutic method of Individual Psychology is not only a science, but an art--
the art of invalidating the patient's hollow alibi and teaching him to develop and
rely on his actual capacities.
6. Very often the obsession takes the form of an impulse to inflict an injury
on someone whenever the patient sees a knife. For example, a woman who had
grown up as an only child and had always been the center of attention discovered
that she was being deceived and slighted by her husband. She then developed the
urge to take up a knife and attack either him or her child. The urge reveals about
the same frame of mind that moves people of certain groups to blurt out threats
such as, “I'd like to kill that man!” Here the mood is expressed in a kind of
pantomime, but the feeling is not translated into overt action. Each time it arises,
the impulse is overcome; thus, she experiences a sense of triumph. At the same
time, she depreciates him by showing her lack of regard for him. She takes a
cheap, easy short cut to establish a kind of superiority whenever she feels her
value threatened.
7. A much-pampered young woman began to feel this impulse to “do
something” with a knife because her husband--a very kindly, well-intentioned
man--had the inclination to pick up a book and read instead of amusing himself
with her. This behavior was sufficient cause for her to feel the urge to attack him
whenever she happened to see a knife. Here again a sense of superiority is
plainly revealed--but in such a form that the girl was content to make a harmless
show of the mere scabbard of her resentment and anger. He was forced by her
obsession to concern himself with her.
At this point I should like to address a fundamental issue. Although
compulsion neurosis may be considered primarily intellectual, we know that the
element of thought cannot be detached from the whole psychic structure which
includes feeling as well. Whenever an individual conceives an idea, he also
arouses in himself a series of corresponding feelings and emotions, not only
because he realizes that the idea should connote these emotions, but because he
actually transports himself into a sphere of thought which is affected and altered
by the idea. The different psychic functions, thought and feeling, cannot be
divorced from one another. For instance, if I think of being in a beautiful city,

my mental picture leads to feelings and emotions I might have if I were actually
approaching the city, or were already there. This process is especially important
as an essential factor in our dream dynamics. When we dream, we awaken
feelings and emotions. We do this by conjuring up images with which certain
feelings are associated which strongly affect us and move us in a certain definite
direction. The same process is at work in a compulsion neurosis. In the thought
of absolute superiority, we can plainly detect the feeling or emotion of absolute
superiority.
8. It is only natural that the “runaway” tendency, always evident in
neurosis, should clearly reveal itself in individuals who feel too weak to meet the
problems of life. In many cases of neurosis, when the problem of sex seems
overly difficult, it takes the form of homosexuality. Understandably, we often
find evidence of compulsion in such cases. As an example, let us take the case of
a man who deliberately trained himself from childhood on to enchant everyone
with his physical attractiveness. Of course in our culture a girl can do this more
easily than a boy; so early in life the patient began to practice playing the part of
a girl. In a school entertainment, he once filled the role of a girl so convincingly
that a man in the audience fell in love with him on the spot. The desire to
achieve further successes of this kind brought him within the province of
homosexuality. Now the time came for this man to prepare for a profession and
to pass the necessary examinations; that is, he was expected to take the normal
means--by useful achievement--of acquiring prestige and securing the place of
glory that he had always anticipated. But he felt it was much more likely that he
would fail to accomplish an objectively useful task than to merely “enchant”
someone and try to be charming. Now whenever he attended a lecture, he
suffered from a sleep compulsion. Of course, this served as a perfect precaution.
It protected him against having to take the coming examination. And, in case he
did take it, it supplied a perfect alibi for failure. “If I can't help falling asleep,” he
could say, “no one can expect me to pass the examination.” And he really did
fail, but with an easier conscience than if he had paid attention in class and failed
anyway.
9. Another patient is a married woman who incessantly busied herself with
putting her linen in order and in so doing aroused herself to a high pitch of
excitement. This ordeal took up the greater part of the day, clearly indicating a
compulsion element in her striving for a godlike superiority. A servant girl did
the actual work, but under the patient's constant supervision. This woman grew
up in a family atmosphere of continual bickering, where she had had her full
share of slaps and aspersions. She recollected that at one time she said to herself:
“Just wait till I grow up and I'll boss other people the way they boss me now.”

Here we have a clear illustration of what I mean by “life style.” This motive
force, this desire to rule, so common in neurotically disposed children, is one we
see time and again in both the greatest and the least of our fellow men. It reduces
itself to the thought, “Someday I'll be the boss.” It proved that this patient's
compulsive symptom served the end of keeping her out of society where she
never felt sure of maintaining a dominant position. She never failed to produce
friction and illfeeling wherever she went, so consistently offending people that
they frankly avoided her. She found herself left alone. By way of compensation,
she played God Almighty in her own household, praising or punishing her
children as the spirit moved her, and keeping her husband completely under her
thumb. Her parents and sisters might take a special pride in their linen, but she
outdid them. No one could set a linen closet to rights as well as she. To have a
slave at one's beck and call, to give orders, and to see them carried out in an
artistic fashion-this she felt to be the very apogee of power. She made herself the
reigning queen of the little spot that she had set off for herself, and within her
narrow realm no one could make any demands upon her.
10. An especially common form of compulsion is the washing mania--the
urge to be continually cleaning and scouring. In this compulsion we see an
inclination to depreciate others by implying that everyone but the patient is dirty.
No one but the patient is allowed to touch anything, and he alone is crowned
with an aura of purity and superiority. This, too, is merely another means of
wasting time, thus deferring the solution of some vital problem and evading the
necessity of proving one's importance through actual achievements and
contributions. One case of this type concerned a girl who was the younger of two
daughters. The older girl had felt neglected after the birth of her younger sister
and revolted against the situation which she felt was an intolerable one. All the
parents' affections were concentrated on the younger daughter. A “model child,”
she was lauded, loved, and showered with presents. She came to expect a great
deal from life. But her first experiment in living away from the pampering home
life, at school, resulted in failure; after that she never completed anything she
undertook. She was punished for her laziness, but no one questioned her
potential ability; she accepted the punishment and reproofs rather than risk
displaying her inferiority. As a married woman, she felt that her position was
extremely degrading. Her husband was much older than she, remarkably dried-
up, and in her eyes totally unfit for love and marriage. When she finally married-
-after much hesitation--her washing compulsion set in. Pronouncing her husband
unclean, she banished him from bed and board. Surprisingly, the house of a
person obsessed with the idea of cleanliness is often unclean. The reason is that
the whole social harmony of the home is destroyed, and the prevailing desire is

to find dirt everywhere.
11. The compulsion may also take the form of continual blushing. For
example, a woman had suffered since childhood from lability of the surface
blood vessels which manifested itself in frequent blushing. She was downright
proud when someone noticed this response and remarked about it. Here again we
can see the unimportance of causality. At first, her blushing actually gave her
pleasure. But when she had her first baby, in a loveless marriage, and an aunt
began to irritate her with advice on the proper way to bring up children, this
extremely ambitious woman suddenly acquired the notion that her blushing was
quite a terrible thing, and that because of it she would have to shun society--as a
vanquished hero, but a hero nonetheless. She made full use of her blushing
mania as a source of special privileges within her home, however. Here she was
the mistress, and by reducing her sphere of action to the narrowest possible
dimensions, she was able to satisfy her thirst for power.
12. One last case may not seem to fall within the category of compulsion
neurosis. I once knew a housemaid who had an odd habit: whenever she was told
to do something, she repeated the order in the first person. If her mistress asked
her to arrange a cupboard, she would say, “I'll arrange the cupboard this
afternoon.” Here we see the rejection of authority. She could act only if she had
the sense of doing so on her own volition. This peculiarity of the human mind-
the desire to be the leader, to do things on one's own initiative--is recognized in
some armies, where the soldier must repeat every command in the first person
and actually make himself feel that he is the commander. This tradition is
certainly based on a profound knowledge of human nature. Related to it in a way
is the case of a strikingly beautiful woman who developed the following
compulsion: whenever she was faced with a piece of housework that seemed
degrading in view of her prestige as a beauty, she always had to give herself the
order to do it. This symptom, together with compulsive blushing, appeared when
she was reminded by quite insignificant experiences that she was growing older
and would eventually lose her beauty.
The prognosis of compulsion neurosis is fundamentally the same as that of
any other neurosis. Undoubtedly, some forms of neurosis or psychosis begin
with an apparent compulsive symptom, and there undoubtedly these compulsive
symptoms may border on either cyclothymia or schizophrenia and resolve
themselves into one or the other. In some rare cases, it is difficult to determine
whether we are still dealing with a compulsion neurosis or with melancholia or
an early stage of schizophrenia. But certain factors, of course, are bound to mark
the difference. Several psychiatrists have clearly noted the similarities to
cyclothymia; and others, the resemblances to schizophrenia. All three groups of

symptoms are variants of a single condition--characterized by an extreme
superiority complex and differing degrees of capacity for cooperation. The
compulsion symptoms appear as soon as the patient with his insufficient social
feeling comes into conflict with social responsibilities and tasks which call for
more fellow-feeling than he has. Then he can maintain the position of superiority
which he claims only by falling back into his imaginary and emotional life.
Recapitulation. The study of compulsion neurosis reveals the following
factors and tendencies: 
1. A striving for personal superiority from fear of betraying an actual inferiority,
is diverted into easy and generally useless channels. 
2. This striving for an exclusive superiority is encouraged in childhood by
excessive pampering or self-indulgence, developing into a desire for godlike
supremacy which is mitigated and qualified by a concrete, social goal (objective
success in the world of reality), by actual useful achievement, less than in other
forms of neurosis. 
3. Compulsion neurosis occurs in the face of actual situations (problems of
social living, occupation, or love), where the dread of failure or a blow to vanity
leads to a hesitating attitude on the part of an individual. The hesitating attitude
finds expression in killing time, in seeking out and repeating a single routine,
expressive movement, or idea which will preclude further contact with the
terrifying problems of life. (It is a hesitation that represents a disguised “no” in
response to some difficulty or problem of life.) 
4. These means of relief from a difficult situation, once fixed upon, provide the
patient with an excuse for failing to reach the pinnacle of existence. Successes in
life loom much larger if achieved despite the handicap of a compulsion neurosis;
the kind of superiority obtained by means of obsessions and compulsions also
serves to alleviate the patient's strong sense of inferiority, even though it fails to
completely satisfy his great vanity. Hence, the form of compulsion--generally
plural--is so chosen that the patient can express his striving for tremendous
personal superiority (godlikeness) in a fictive guise. 
5. The construction of the compulsion neurosis is identical with the structure of
the entire life style and personality. The “outbreak” reveals itself as abnormal
conduct only when the patient faces a problem which demands a social interest
greater than he has because it was not sufficiently developed in childhood. 6. By
reason of his prestige-policy, the patient employs a countercompulsion to meet
and evade the compulsion exerted by the requirements of the social scheme.
During more recent years I have been able to add the following points: 1.
The “compulsion” does not reside in the compulsive actions themselves, but
originates in the demands of social living, which the patient feels as a menace

and threat to his prestige. He feels compelled to create a safeguard in order to
heighten his sense of superiority, serve as a means of evading failures, and
prevent a revelation of his inferiority. 
2. This energetic quest for personal superiority characterizes the patient from
early childhood on, and in accordance with his training, leads him to a
compulsion neurosis, not to other aberrations. 
3. An early-developed, unified personality like that of the compulsion neurotic
cannot be produced by causal mechanical means--such as the operation of
instincts, heredity, brain injuries, environment, or the endocrine glands. It is the
final product of a particular choice and way of training. The patient is only
misdirected and led into a mistaken attitude toward life by such factors as
physical inferiority, the influences of environment, or the imitation of examples.
Although the error may to a degree be intelligible, we cannot grant the existence
of any causal relationship. The development of the child's psyche can never be
understood from the point of view of cause and effect; it begins as a groping
process of trial and error, plausible perhaps, but never scientifically calculable
and predictable. After about his fifth year, the child experiences, apperceives,
and assimilates according to a life-pattern which by this time he has definitely
established and unified. 
4. The lifestyle of the compulsion-neurotic adopts all the forms of expression
that suit its purpose, and rejects the rest. 
5. The feelings of guilt or humility usually present in compulsion neurosis are
elaborations of the effort to kill time. They show kinship with melancholia, and
are so contrived that the patient’s environment can easily detect in them the
unstable, distorted, pathological element. Like extravagant exercises of penance,
they often serve the purpose of demonstrating the patient's unexampled virtue
and magnanimity. But they never lead to any change of conduct or “active
contrition” in the form of improved behavior. 
Therefore, the cure consists of reconciling the patient with the problems of life.
He must be made to see the defects in his life style, and he must develop his
social interest, important elements of which are active social contribution and a
generally courageous attitude toward life. Only self-knowledge can achieve
these results. And Individual Psychology--with its subtle technique, neither
easily learned nor easily understood--is a good guide to this end. 
6. The chief disturbance in the psychic life of the compulsion neurotic takes
place in the rational processes, in the realm of thought rather than emotion. The
unity and indivisibility of the psychic life was earlier and more forcibly stressed
by Individual Psychology than by any other psychological school. But I have
also stressed the complexity and uniqueness of every individual and the great

diversity of life styles. Certain elements, certain aspects of the whole, certain
particular psychic movements, are especially emphasized in various individual
cases. We may artificially isolate these particular aspects for the purpose of
discussion. They may be either chiefly rational or chiefly emotional in character,
and may take the form of either active or passive attitudes. Of all the phases of
psychic life, the rational is most strongly stressed in individuals who suffer from
compulsion neurosis, but it is an ideational life directed in such a way that it runs
counter to social interest, and hence to common sense. This tendency to
rationalize and formulate, to pay regard to formal routine and orderly
arrangement, is not restricted to obsessional ideas, but reveals itself in other
phases of the patient's life. Often he has a marked feeling for work; he is fond of
brooding over ideas; he loves to pick about at maxims and precepts; he acts as if
he firmly believes that “in the beginning was the Word.” We must grant that
persons with these inclinations may achieve fine things, provided that they
follow the path of the social good. But, unless turned to the advantage of society,
the tendency is futile and results in empty form. This is the case with the
phrasemongering of the compulsion-neurotic, and is manifest in his addiction to
compulsive prayers, repetition of ritual-like performances, and love of formulas;
in his overt curses and libels; in his earnest faith in the potency of his anathemas.
Certain repetitive actions can easily be understood as expressing an obsessional
idea--for instance, the washing compulsion which shouts more loudly than
words that everyone but the patient is a dirty swine. 
From practice, we often get the impression that words and thought have been set
at so high a premium in these compulsion cases because the patient began in
childhood to consider the power of linguistic expression as a vital element in his
life. He may have grown up as a self-spoilt child in an environment which he felt
to be hostile, and in which he was continually put to a disadvantage by others
who were more adept than he at turning thoughts, words, and curses to
advantageous ends. Words and ideas played an important role in his life.
Occasionally, the child's own timidity and reticence gives him the impression
that: 
“With words 'tis excellent disputing; 
Systems to words 'tis easy suiting.”7
Here we have another evident point of comparison with schizophrenia, which
also manifests itself chiefly in a disturbance of the thought processes, and very
frequently involves the coining of words, phrases, and maxims--voiced or silent
thoughts. 
Of course, the other elements of the psychic life--other than the one artificially
isolated for the purpose of discussion--are not absent, but they seem to follow in

the wake of the more dominant element. The dominant element may be, for
instance, high-strung emotionalism, anxiety, or hypersensitivity. Whatever it is,
it corresponds to the individual's life-long training and shows especially at the
time of the shock the patient suffers when confronted by the forthcoming tasks
of life for which he is not prepared. Such a shock must inevitably be produced in
him as soon as his childish philosophy of life collides with a quite different
reality from the one he has trained for and he feels forced into a retreat. The
patient accomplishes this retreat by strengthening his dominant characteristic,
which reflects what he has considered a vital element ever since his childhood,
but which he automatically begins to regard as the very keynote of his existence.
To the best of our knowledge (and the best is none too adequate), we can safely
assume that individuals differ considerably in their natural capacities for
intellectual and linguistic development. Exactly how much they differ no one
can say at the present time, since most of the students of heredity make the
mistake of working backwards, trying to deduce the amount of innate capacity
from the finished products, or degree of development. However, we can assume
that any superior capacity for language, like any other superior natural
endowment, is a definite advantage when properly used; that is, when it is
developed in the stream of evolution and human progress as a useful
contribution to the welfare of humanity as a whole. But if it is imprisoned in a
false conception of life, it may be useless or even injurious. This is the case in
compulsion neurosis and paranoia. 
Nonetheless, it is probable that the processes of thought and speech will be
brought into the foreground through the creative power of the child and will be
more highly developed, if the child experiences his own speech development as
a source of inferiority, either in his struggle with his environment, or because
this environment intentionally or unintentionally impresses this problem on his
mind. In such event, the feeling of inferiority may take root so strongly that the
child takes one of two courses. He can go through intensive training to improve
his results in this respect, (either on the useful or the useless side of life), or else
give up the battle. Granted possibilities of development in his natural
endowment, he may choose either alternative. In many cases of compulsion
neurosis, continual nagging, scolding, derision, and fault-finding can exert so
profound an influence on the child that, whatever his natural capacities, he will
make frantic efforts to improve his faculty of self-expression, adopting the same
tone that is used toward him, acquiring a nimble tongue or continually searching
for words, ignoring affronts or lapsing into the limping sort of wit that stumbles
on the proper retort only when it is too late. Or he may invent a standard
rejoinder--usually derogatory--which occurs to him on any occasion when his

pride and vanity are injured. The compulsion neurotic is generally of the latter
type. One of my patients, who suffered from a washing and tidying mania, had
grown up as the youngest, rather helpless child in a family where shouting and
cursing were everyday practices and she was continually scolded and ridiculed
for her faulty pronunciation. Shortly after her marriage, when her husband fell
into the same habit of reproving and criticizing her, she began to draw the long
bow herself, and freed herself from him and all her other responsibilities by an
incessant urge to clean and arrange the house. This was tantamount to her
saying, “You fool, now you see what happens when I give in to your critical
wishes for order and cleanliness!” If anything was not exactly in keeping with
her mania for cleanliness, she immediately gave expression to a formula which
was puzzling to those around her who did not understand its purpose. She cried:
“Help! Help!” 
I once presented these views before a group of physicians that included a good
many psychiatrists. In the general discussion which followed my talk, one of the
psychiatrists began to attack my statements by picking out individual words and
misinterpreting them to suit his purpose. In reply, I innocently tried to make
myself clearer with an illustration. “Take yourself for example,” I said “with
your tendency to pick apart words and ideas and attach your own meaning to
them, if you were ever so unfortunate as to acquire a neurosis, it would probably
be a compulsion neurosis.” I was very surprised to discover that my words had
produced an unforeseen effect. My colleague was speechless; he turned pale and
seemed greatly disturbed. I apologized as best I could, but later on I learned that
for two years this psychiatrist had been under unsuccessful treatment for
compulsion neurosis.
7 Translator's Note: Goethe's Faust, Part I, 1997f. Bayard Taylor's translation.
Chapter V
Pampered Children1 2
[1931]
In our culture, we cannot easily raise a child without affection. His weak,
insecure condition during the early years almost demands warmth and assistance
from parents. The constant presence of the mother tends to lead to the habit of
being on hand for anything the child requires, even beyond his time of need. Her
understandable attachment to her creation, her desire to be of benefit and to
provide exemplary service keeps her tensed day and night, establishing an
invisible, but hard to separate bond between her and her infant. Aware of the
dangers, illnesses, and accidents that threaten the child, she feels and accepts full
responsibility which the father usually shares to some degree, partly by

promoting and partly by hindering, often in a spirit of criticism. The mother's
instinct, particularly when she is well schooled and well advised in hygiene and
upbringing, cannot be replaced by anything else, particularly since it also
presents a fulfillment in her life, ascribing to her the greatest merit for sustaining
mankind, and promising beyond death a continued life in the soul and body of
her child, a contribution that aims at immortality.
In caring for her child, she unwittingly gives a major role to the rearing
methods traditional in her family which she herself had experienced from
earliest childhood and by observing her siblings. Finding the right measure that
would not engage the mother full-time in serving the child probably is one of
mankind's unattainable ideals. Luckily, undesirable results can easily be
recognized early and be improved. Perhaps, however, her model was a mother
whose goal, always springing from a hopeless but a goading feeling of
inferiority, was to demean the child with blind love or pedantry to an object of
her arbitrariness, or one who was being assertive and arrogant, constantly
nagging to gain mastery, harboring sickening ambition, and applying senseless
rules. Perhaps she had learned in her family or in her own marriage to regard the
husband as trivial and useless, and therefore, clings even more so to the child.
Perhaps the marriage was merely a way of having a child since she herself was
incapable of love.
Love in all its thousand variations is a feeling of belonging and therefore, a
social feeling. For that reason, the man and the woman most suited for love,
marriage, and parenthood cannot be surpassed for true human fellowship.
However, just as someone lacking the latter and wishing to demonstrate his
interest in another will display excessive zeal, so is it possible for a mother to
have no deep-seated love for children, but for the sake of her own enhancement
and of outdoing everyone else, to guard her child's every movement with
incessant anguish, sensing everywhere threats to her inflamed vanity. The child
is expected to laugh, speak, stand, and walk, even have teeth earlier, be more
beautiful and smarter than any other. He should overtake everyone else.
Caresses, gifts, anger tantrums, and spankings serve her willful ambition. The
child's standing, walking, sitting, and table manners provide never-ending
grounds for constant admonitions how it can be done better. With its
assignments, tests, and report cards, school creates a new martyrdom. The
progress made is never enough; bad marks are a catastrophe. The highest
expectations are loaded on the shoulders of the child and every mistake, even the
smallest, is felt and depicted as the end of all hope.
1 Opening seminar at the fifth International Congress for Individual
Psychology, Berlin, 

26-29 
September 
1930. 
It 
first 
appeared 
in 
“Zeitschrift 
für
Individualpsychologie,” 5th volume (1980), pp. 177-181. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
The role of the father in all this can be quite varied. He often draws
attention to the above cited traits while the mother, where possible, tries to
protect the child. Otherwise, he tries to compensate by indiscriminately fulfilling
the child's every wish, sometimes in open, stark contrast to the mother's
approach to rearing, sometimes in secret, but in both cases for the same purpose
of winning over the child. Contrary to findings by other psychologies, Individual
Psychology found that the child will always go to the parent who pampers him,
whether it is the mother or father. Since the first phase in the child's social
relationship is fulfilled by an affinity for the mother, a tendency toward the
father is the second phase, and a sign that the mother, in competing for the love
of the child, has become subordinate to the father.
By fully relinquishing a role in parenting, the father remains a stranger to
the child, or is used simply as a scare tactic for meting out punishment. Such
situations, of course, strengthen the bonds with the mother.
In unhappy marriages or in those approaching a divorce, one parent,
frequently the mother, will often seize the opportunity to win over the child and
openly or discreetly impute blame on the other party. The consequence in all the
cases described above is that the bonding with the child is strengthened and his
dependence is effected to such a degree that his courageous, independent
development is jeopardized.
We can easily understand how that only children particularly suffer from an
excess of concern and pampering, especially when one of the parents is
preferred. Mostly because of this preference for one of the parents, the other
partner is hounded by the strongest criticism, rejection, and even hatred. Every
minor matter and occurrence in the life of the child may then be carefully
scrutinized with a view toward casting mistake, blame, and unkindness on the
rejected parent.
The only boy among girls and the only girl among boys, sickly children, or
those mistakenly assumed to be sickly, will at times be caught in this pernicious
net of pampering and having a parent take over for the child. The same often
happens with children who have exceptional physical beauty or mental abilities
for physical beauty, but most often only coincidentally for mental abilities, thus
enormously raising the expectations and demands of selfish, ambitious parents.
This excess of pampering extends to a greater degree to first and last born
children than to the others who, therefore, suffer more seriously from the
consequences, as demonstrated by my statistics on problem children, the

nervous, and the delinquent.
The bonding with one of the parents, mostly with the mother, can last
throughout a lifetime and become so strong that all other human relationships
outside of the family, such as friendships, camaraderie, contacts at work, and
affairs of love, can be threatened. Even where he becomes aware of this
connection and finds it depressing, the once-pampered child lacks the courage,
despite continuous revolts and strife, to enter or seek new relationships--for fear
of failure.
In order for us to recognize correctly the meaning and source of this fear of
failure, we need an unbiased knowledge of the psyche of the pampered child. As
we established in agreement with earlier psychologists, an individual as if by a
secret plan establishes his lifestyle early so as not to detour from it, except when
by his own will or with the help of others he recognizes mistakes in the structure
of this lifestyle. Of course, we should not expect in an average life those super
human goals as envisioned by the young Alexander when he complained:
“Already 20 years old and nothing done for immortality,” or Caesar in his “aut
Caesar aut nihil!” Or as we have seen inscribed in the soul of the young Kant: “I
have already drawn out the course that I shall maintain. I shall begin my journey
and nothing will deter me from continuing it.” Or, as when Kepler cried out his
life's motto: “I came into this world destined to concern myself with the things
that frighten others away because of their difficulty.” Or, as when Goethe said:
“It was always my intent to point the pyramid of my being as high into the air as
possible.” The pampered child has his lifestyle forced on him by continuous
training. Everything will always be made easy for him, so that his own worth,
ever lacking accomplishments, will always hover as a question before his eyes.
To a greater or lesser extent, he will be relieved of independent accomplishments
and the mother, or at times the grandmother or aunt, will intercede when the
child should be developing his own capabilities, his own organs. She thinks
when the child should be allowed to think, and acts and speaks without allowing
the child to act and speak. It seems to be in the nature of the child's psyche to
permit such pampering with pleasure, to become accustomed to it, and until he
faces disappointment, to expect similar treatment from others. Even the concern
and care of the mother, who makes the child the center of her attention, will now
be the demand and expectation of his whole life. Whoever observes such
children in their pure state will soon become aware that their lifestyle and
expectations aim at experiencing immediate esteem, admiration, and to
protection from all criticism. Their lifestyle is directed toward a private world,
not ours, in which others exist for them in order to bring them to greater heights.
The life they will soon embark on has little room for such a lifestyle.

Despite their early offensiveness, some probably develop the strength to attain
their extreme expectations. However, most break down under disappointments
that inevitably occur and hold fast to their lifestyle instead of adapting it to the
demands of social life. The Roman poet Horaz complained about this type of
person of whom he said: “Oh, these are the people who always suffer from
headaches and are unable to sleep nights, these people who are always out to
have the world adapt to them, and not they adapting to the world.”
In fact, as much as they differ from each other, we find in pampered
children a common basic trend, an egotistical interest that cripples them. Despite
occasional attempts at hiding it, the degree of their social feeling and interest in
others is so minimal that even less astute observers take note of it. From their
behavior, or dressed in polite but meaningless phrases springs clearly the
wounded and even indignant question: “Why should I love my neighbor?” Not
even the mother is spared from their lack of love; she becomes a servant, an
object of derision, and who pays dearly for her egotistical obstinacy in wanting
to bring up the child for herself and not for society. A time will come for every
one of these children when the most pampering mother can no longer fulfill all
their desires. Wishing to become a master, the child then begins to revolt and a
tyranny toward the weaker ensues in manifold forms.
In childhood and later adulthood, their attitude becomes more hostile
toward those who unlike the mother are owed no tribute. The more difficult it
becomes for them to assert themselves without having any true interest in
anyone else, the more they long for relief. As they had done in childhood, they
move in a limited circle to avoid all obstacles, new situations, and strangers.
Alternatively, they seek compliant companions whom they can burden with their
responsibilities. They soon develop a fine sense for the easiest ways out in life
and shrink from fear whenever they are required to prove themselves. They look
fearfully for support and falsify all true feelings of friendship and love by trying
in that way to satisfy their greed for power. On their way to finding relief,
lacking a well trained social feeling or interest in the welfare of their neighbor,
who they presume shares their coldness, they far too often strangle in the net cast
over those who try to evade the demands of society, or who confront it with a
lack of feeling. We find a frightfully large number of once pampered children
among problem children, delinquents, neurotics, suicides, addicts, and perverts.
Usually, a mother is not easily persuaded that she is about to pamper her
child. We can more easily show her that she makes the child too dependent on
her. These two forms of behavior differ slightly in degree. If constant
supervising and acting for the child is reinforced by spanking and nagging, his
independent development is similarly hindered. However, my experience has

taught me that a number of indicators in child’s behavior indicate that he has
been pampered.
For instance, when the child is noticeably disorderly, we can be quite
certain that he grew up under circumstances--such as in his infancy--when the
mother took care of necessary orderliness. Also, an otherwise healthy child with
eating problems usually finds pleasure in upsetting and busying the mother with
all of his faculties. Such a child hits with admirable accuracy the vulnerable
point in the family tradition, which bothers the mother the most.
How such children act in new situations, with friends, in kindergarten, in
school, at work and in love, how they get into and create difficult situations
constitutes a very large part of psychopathology. These matters will be raised in
numerous practical as well as theoretical presentations at the current meeting of
the 5th Congress of the International Association of Individual Psychology held
in Berlin.
Chapter VI
The Fear of Women1
[1932]
A feeling of uncertainty underlies cases of impotence, ejaculatio praecox
and frigidity. This feeling depends on a bad conscience in connection with love
relationships. Why? Our concept of community feeling and its violation in all
cases of failure has been adopted by the psychoanalysts as “guilt sense,” another
name for one aspect of community feeling. However, in many cases, a conflict
regarding sexual relations, particularly a fear of women, can be traced back to a
feeling of dishonorableness. The man feels he is not honorable when he
approaches a woman. He feels like a thief, proposing to enrich himself at
another's expense. Indicating the truth of this premise, I have cured, in a
relatively short time, patients whose attention I have drawn to this fact. If I
wanted to have relations with a girl and felt I that I was going to deceive her, I
also would not be in full possession of my sexual capacities. We cannot expect a
more or less respectable fellow to deceive anyone without being bothered at all
about it. Can anyone do this? We are accustomed to it with criminals, and they
do not suffer from impotence. Among them, not all are true criminals. Under
great temptation to steal, a “would be” criminal will turn pale, blush, and make
mistakes. He will be alarmed, excited, and show all the signs of someone who
suffers from impotence.
This concept originates in I.P.: the love relationship is a task for two people.
Individual Psychology and psychoanalysis differ greatly in this regard because
for us sexuality is not a primitive urge, but a relationship between two people of
opposite sex, developed through social feeling. If one person approaches another

with the feeling that he may do her an injury, that he would not be willing to
change places with her, it is obvious that he will behave like someone who is
about to commit a crime, without having the full criminal makeup. Many do not
become impotent. Criminals also have love relationships, not in the I.P. sense.
One-half of convicted criminals are sexually dysfunctional, because sexual
dysfunction arises when one person uses another merely for his own profit. No
sexual dysfunction occurs when two people take full responsibility for each
another. Some people desire pleasure for themselves at any cost, but do not show
the criminal make-up. In treating such cases I say: “You'll never manage to win
the girl, you're much too 'respectable.' If you find a girl, really go right out for
her--then there will be no impotence.” Such cases are soon cured. If we do not
take this point into account, but muddle around in the regions of the Oedipus
complex or the “id”, we will never eliminate this disrespectful “respectability.”
1 Originally published in Individual Psychology and Sexual Difficulties, London:
The C.W. Daniel Co., January, 1932. Translated by Laura Hutton.
Other psychiatrists say: “Go to a prostitute.” Here the patient is, of course,
in the same state, and becomes impotent again, because only a man lacking in
sufficient social feeling can tolerate this situation. Individual cases vary, but
when we consider the point of view of the woman, we will find how many
women believe that sexuality means for them an injury, or an insult.
Chapter VII
Narcotic Abuse and Alcoholism1 2
[1932]
The psychological style of life of drug addicts and alcoholics presents me
with a difficult task. Because I do not often have the opportunity to deeply
examine the psychological development of a drug addict or an alcoholic in order
to develop his style of life, his underlying melodic theme, when I recall the cases
I have treated, I do not come up with much material. Therefore, do not expect
from me a great many case histories of patients, but instead the results of
intensive work on particular cases. Also, I shall not spend time with descriptions
or indications of damage done to the body, the social behavior, or the strain that
burdens the entire population needed to care for the sick, etc. Rather, I prefer to
mention those aspects that appear important to me as an Individual Psychologist
to free a patient who somehow became addicted, whose life was returned to him
to become active and productive, and whose capabilities were restored after
being fully or partly forfeited. We should not be surprised that Individual
Psychology places so much value on that point since we would not even bother
with that problem if we could not show that the relationship of the individual to

the tasks of life is disrupted by addictive substances. The drug addict or
alcoholic admittedly is not too severely depressed by his symptoms since he
does not focus on them and pays them little attention. On the other hand, we can
understand the problem of narcotics and alcohol only when we regard the
relationship of the whole person to his responsibilities to society, responsibilities
which remain more or less constant. This is the position of Individual
Psychology with regard to all problems that concern psychological dysfunctions.
Therefore, Individual Psychology contributes to discussions on this problem,
looking for the type of person who by failing to “accomplish” anything turns to
drugs and alcohol. Unquestionably, some people will absolutely not become
morphine addicts or alcoholics, although the possibility of their inclusion among
addicts is affected enormously by outside pressures. However, we must keep in
mind the stress between the individual's self-image and the task confronting him.
Since we are still discussing general diagnosis, I would like to characterize the
general schema of Individual Psychology and how we plan our approach to
recognizing such a person. The controlling factor for us is establishing the
conditions under which the abuse began. If we succeed and gain an exact insight
into how that beginning occurred, then we can answer the following question:
For what kind of situations was the patient unprepared? This question assumes
that a person has already progressed some distance in his life and now
encounters a problem that he seeks to avoid. However, this avoidance is a
conspicuous fact that the patient himself understands and describes. In all these
cases, people seek relief from a particular situation. From this, we can already
draw other conclusions. These are not people who confront difficulties with
courage, patience, and experience, but people who in difficult situations first
look for relief.
1 The first part of this publication appeared in issue No. 14, July 10, 1931,
of the periodical “Fortschritte der Medizin” (Progress in Medicine), Med. Verlag
Hans Pusch G.m.b. H., Berlin, following a lecture (held in the Berliner
Aerztehaus on March 25, 1931). Reprinted as “Rauschgift” in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. X, p.1-19, 1932. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2004.
What type of person tends to deal with problems, which everyone faces and
has to solve, by finding an easy way out in order to avoid them? True, some
morphine addicts and alcoholics intoxicate themselves before facing a problem
and then somehow still solve it. This type of person is not rare, and particularly
in the case of morphine addicts, we often find accomplished people in high
positions, who are far above the average, but who attain success in life with the

poison in their bodies. If we want to understand how such people think,
unbiased, without any preconceptions, we have to say that they believe, or act as
if they believed, that their success comes from a combination of morphine and
the strength from within them.
Others are stuck; they can no longer progress. Under the influence of
morphine they leave their problems unsolved, push them aside, turn them off in
their drugged condition. They keep taking increasing doses of morphine and
eventually become incapable of working and living.
In every case we see an individual who feels uncertain, lacks
selfconfidence, and seeks relief; a person who looks for relief through
intoxication in which he meets poorly or fails any tests of his ability to function.
This ability to function should probably be established by a physician in every
case. Yet, we encounter very little on this subject in general case histories.
However, under careful questioning, we would bring out one significant problem
encountered by that person in his development, a problem into which we now
gain a clear insight. That is his vulnerable point; his capabilities no longer extend
to that point; he is not well prepared to deal with that particular task. And now,
the additional problem arises for us to examine why he is not prepared to meet
that particular task. In that respect, Individual Psychology helps us look back
into his early life and search there for clues to explain his unsuccessful
preparation. A sufficient number of points of departure will develop from such
an examination. If we wish, we can organize them schematically: Questions
regarding the relationship between “I and thou” which deal with friendships,
truthfulness, loyalty, the ability to establish relationships, etc. For example, the
lone drinker confronts us with the question of community. The question of work
can be very threatening if someone strives impatiently after the highest quality
and godlike attributes in order to be exceptionally successful, to satisfy excessive
ambitions, to try to triumph over everyone else, which naturally leads to
exceptional, long-term stress. We find such stress as the trigger in many other
cases of neurosis: functional neuroses spreads into the body, and into inferior
organs; anxiety neuroses and phobias reach into the emotional spheres; obsessive
neuroses into the thought process in the first instance to prevent steady
accomplishments; in hysteria the motor spheres are affected; in suicide the total
turning off of life as an indirect attack against others, etc. When we then look
back, we find at every step manifestations and expressions that teach us that
these individuals are not prepared for full achievement. Here we see the
prototype, the kernel of a whole personality that can already be discerned in the
first four or five years of life, although it probably was formed earlier without
our being able to trace it back to the original germ cell. This uniqueness that

contains all possibilities for functioning in later life, all capabilities expressed in
one's attitude toward life, an opinion about one's capabilities, and the probable
limits within which one's activities will take place. If we compare this prototype,
which I call the psychic constitution of a person, with the demands of future
problems, we can predict with some accuracy the development of dangerous
tensions. The child with an organ inferiority, or one who was spoiled or
neglected, is not prepared to solve problems encountered in society, work, or
love. The structure found in such a prototype can be seen as a mood and attitude
of inferiority, uncertainty, etc.
Once we establish that the individual who has succumbed to narcotics
displayed poor preparation in childhood to face the duties of life, then we
naturally must ask ourselves: What does it mean to be properly prepared for the
duties of life? I already mentioned the relationship between “I and thou”, and
problems at work, where one's preparedness and experience can be observed
early on to determine the attitude toward the outside world, and the ability to
manage problems. I still have to address the task of romantic relationships where
we can also establish, as in the case of all three tasks, that for success a certain
degree of interest in the other person is essential. An individual cannot answer
the question of the relationship between “I and thou” in a normal manner, or
master the problem of friendship, when that interest is not already present in the
prototype and does not extend itself to the problems of life. He cannot resolve
the problems at work when he lacks interest in cooperation, playing along,
accomplishing something, which must be understood as doing something useful
for the general good; and he cannot be useful when he has no concept for it,
when he doesn't have it in him to do something for others. Naturally, he cannot
solve the problem of love when he has no interest in it, when he doesn't have the
means to give of himself to a person of the other sex. When the interest is not
inherent in him--of which he can be totally unwitting--to work on behalf of
others, to regard as his duty the continuity of the community, when such striving
is not in his style of life, or to express it better, if I failed to develop that
propensity toward community in the prototype, I cannot approach the primary
questions of life that require social interest, the action line of the feeling of
community. This should allow us to understand why Individual Psychology
places such importance on recognizing the situation that demonstrates, as in a
test of someone's ability to function, that the individual is not capable of solving
a problem that constantly asks for social interest. This social interest cannot be
removed as if separate from the total image of the individual; it is much more the
theme we have in all forms of expression. For example, when we look, we see
only that object for which we have an interest. When we listen, the basic theme

again is this communal feeling in the degree of connectedness, in the manner in
which we speak to each other and make contact. Of course, we also find that
underlying theme in the development of the mind, the common sense, which
requires that every situation, every person is seen as we expect it to be seen by
every other person. Thereby, a person becomes a part of the whole in his
judgment about things, problems, people, etc. In short, all the capabilities
required to solve a problem depend on the degree of interest in it and, as we have
seen, that problem can be solved only when the individual brings to it a
sufficient degree of interest.
Now comes another question: Who is not really prepared to possess
communal feeling, social interest? Of course, this can be answered briefly by
saying he who thinks more of himself than of others; he who takes and does not
give; he who sees life as if its sole duty is to make him comfortable, and he who
does not expect life's difficulties to concern him. We can see that in all such
styles of life unsolvable problems produce psychological stress which manifests
itself in the inferiority complex: “I am not sure of myself; I cannot solve the
problem,” in various forms of neuroses, and in the manifold forms of aberrant
behavior. We shall establish that such persons lack the necessary degree of
community feeling, and from the beginning of their lives they were not prepared
for connectedness. Now, we arrive at the principle that applies to all morphine
addicts and alcoholics: A minimal development of the general interest in people.
On this point, our examination resolves into an easily comprehensible and
usually accepted fact: he who subjects himself to narcotics proves with that
alone that he does not value sufficiently the question of the general good. How
this lack of concern developed was examined and established by Individual
Psychology quite extensively, deeply, critically, and I might say, skeptically. We
shall find that as children, drug addicts and alcoholics had an exaggerated
tendency to think soley of themselves and to exclude others. Some of them had
suffered early in life from physical ailments. Such ailments could have occurred
because they were born with inferior organs which burdened them physically,
and so that later in life they encountered greater difficulties than the average
person. Understandably, children who experienced difficulties, already carried a
heavier burden at the outset did not view life as a paradise but as a torment, to
varying degrees, but to a sufficient extent to experience life as difficult.
Physicians, such as Czerny, already have pointed this out, and it is also
statistically evident that later in life such children frequently reflect aberrant
behavior.
In 1907 and later, I pointed out how frequently children with inferior organs
suffer and how they confront life with certain antagonisms accompanied by

hypersensitivity. Such hypersensitivity shows that the child did not adjust
properly, could not see himself as a part of the whole, has a tendency to evade,
and has difficulty with things that others find easy. If we are here on the right
track here, then in terms of that characteristic we should be able to understand all
those who are ailing and lack preparation. True, this characteristic is merely a
part of the whole, and we must not permit ourselves to relinquish our perspective
of that whole; we must continually encompass the whole personality. However,
we can conceptualize the personality only inductively by passing from specific
manifestations to the higher idea of the whole. This unity of the personality is
not easy to describe, and cannot be expressed in one statement. I shall be
satisfied for now by pointing out that it appears in the inferiority complex when
a problem arises for which the personality is not prepared, and which in its
psychological hypersensitivity it expresses itself as abnormal.
Another characteristic we encounter in drug addicts as well as in their
psychological constitution, the prototype, is impatience. If we wish to
understand the meaning of a trait, we must look at it as movement. Every
character trait involves a social relationship. The particular way that a person
relates to another, to duties, etc., has been given the term character trait. The
abstract term for a firm position taken by an individual is valid actually only in
“the context of this world,” the trait cannot be innate because it represents a
social relationship, an abstract expression of a concrete relationship. The
“possibility” for character traits must already be present in the embryo, but
whatever develops from those possibilities is determined in the first four or five
years when the social relationship was already practiced during that time and
under almost consistent circumstances. From that point forward, the archetype in
its stabilized form continues to advance to face social problems. This is how we
come to examine the characteristic of impatience. It is not a quality in a person
who feels strong. The strong person can wait. The strong person in general is not
easily affected by emotions. The stronger a person the greater his selfconfidence,
and the less likely that he is impatient, hypersensitive, or emotional. Impatience
reveals fear that the person may face defeat or a loss when success is not
immediate. On the other hand, impatience means more: a demand for
satisfaction. We can speak of a “craving for sweets.” All persons whose
archetype displays a lack of interest in others have this craving for the pleasure
principle without the underlying theme of social interest. Thus, we naturally find
aside from impatience, the craving, the hypersensitivity, and also an egocentric
behavior whereby the person thinks only of himself and his personal superiority.
We then arrive at another basic trait, which probably can be found in all those
who are addicted to narcotics. They have a pathological ambition that our

society cannot easily satisfy. However, ungratified ambition is exceedingly
painful, in particular for a person who also shows tendencies toward
hypersensitivity, impatience, craving, and who thinks only of himself so that he
is vulnerable everywhere. This vulnerability combined with an inferiority
complex is much more difficult to endure for such a person than for someone
who has an interest in others and who knows that he is responsible not only for
what is agreeable but also what is disagreeable, and that life presents him with
tasks that require his cooperation for their resolution.
These are results in any general diagnosis of a failure and, therefore,
inadequate when we examine a particular person in whom we shall always
encounter something unique. The impatience of one person addicted to drugs is
not the same as the impatience of another addict. In order to deal with a
particular case we can use the general diagnostic at the outset, but we must then
apply a special diagnostic. We can follow the path that Individual Psychology
has shown us, and which I mentioned when I spoke of the inferior organs that
cause life to become burdensome. Of course, such a person will be careful, a
characteristic that we find in every person afflicted with defects. We shall also
encounter a lack of courage. Courage properly understood means to feel at home
somewhere, to feel as if belonging to this world with all of its pleasures and
pains. For that reason, everyone who fails lacks courage; instead of courage we
find cunning. All who have failed, including drug addicts and alcoholics, live as
if they were in a hostile environment. They also are suspicious, have problems
connecting with others, and anticipate aggression and depreciation. They look at
another person as an enemy. I remember a drug addict who during his
withdrawal treatment from narcotics, practiced at one time, constantly spoke of
me as a bad person, yet before that was my friend or at least appeared to have
been my friend. During the narcosis, his true opinion came out. We also find a
tendency toward jealousy, which is apparent not only in alcoholics, but also
frequently in cases of drug addicts. They live as if they were among enemies and
don't feel as if they belong among us, which means nothing other than the lack of
social interest.
We expect failures in the development of one large group of children: the
alcoholics, and morphine and cocaine addicts. They formed their prototype
under conditions of extreme pampering when they became dependent on others,
made someone else take care of them, and took advantage of that person's social
interest for their own benefit. As a rule, the mother was exploited. The
characteristic of pampering was thoroughly studied by Individual Psychology so
that we can establish on the basis of the child's relationships, if he were
pampered, or seeks to be pampered, regardless whether he displays those

characteristics openly or not. A pampered child also grows up as if he lives
among enemies. Having become used to the presence of one person, every other
situation appears unacceptable. For that reason, we find in pampered people that
every change for them is a severe invasion of their person. Under those
conditions, every pampered person succumbs to spiritual stress affecting his
thoughts, feelings, motoricity and activity. Obviously, pampered people lack
social interest since their interests are only in themselves. Again, thousands of
variations are very unpleasant for someone who would like to make it easy for
himself. However, while I don't wish for us to think of such cases as simple, we
would not want anyone to be frightened by the difficulty of an Individual
Psychological examination.
We can easily explain in general terms the pampered child in his social
setting. When I ask whether a pampered child is orderly, the answer is certainly
negative. The pampered child in his parasite existence would like others to clean
up after him. When I ask whether the pampered child can bear to be separated
from the person who pampers him, the answer again will be “no.” Such a child is
extremely sensitive to every new situation, is impatient, tense, tends to feel sad,
angry, fearful, is impatient and for those reasons not prepared to solve problems
without hesitation and without some excuses. This type of child in thousands of
variations, is the primary candidate for failures, and for becoming an alcoholic
and drug addict. This is the kind of child, and adult, who is most easily deceived
by a friendly approach. This child always seeks warmth and when shown
warmth is immediately won over. He is the kind who in his search for warmth
seeks to get close to another in order to win him over, a dependent person, whom
we find time and again among failures as well as among the alcoholics and the
drug addicts.
A third type also has to be examined. He is the person who also grows up as
if he lived in a hostile environment, which means that he searches for his way of
life under a burden. These are the neglected, the hated children who have never
known social interest, who do not know that there is such a thing as social
interest and who, therefore, experience life as something hostile and
antagonistic. They constantly speak of unrest in society and blame society, but
take no steps to improve the social climate for the common good. They are
always ready to take and never give. We occasionally find this type also among
the alcoholics and the drug addicts, although less frequently because such a pure
type is not often found. This type of person can occasionally be discovered
among illegitimate children, orphans, and unwanted children.
Thus, from the general diagnosis, I have tried to arrive at a bottom line that
also pertains to drug addicts and alcoholics. I would like to prove, based on cases

that I can recall, how that baseline is reflected in my material and how it opens
the way to a specific diagnosis.
Speaking of drug addiction, I remember a patient who was plump as a child
and had difficulty moving. If someone wished for some peace and quiet, it was
only necessary to put the child on his back, even when he was four years old,
and he was unable to stand up. He suffered early on from fear, as when left
alone, and it was impossible to get him to go to school. He came from a well to
do home with parents who had much influence in the community. It was,
therefore, possible for the parents, prior to the final examination for entrance into
the university, to have the examiner come to their home with the explanation that
the boy was beset by fears. After he married, he never had a good relationship
with his wife whom he constantly jealously pursued until she divorced him. He
was an intelligent, shrewd person. He was able to attain a senior position in the
government because of his connections. According to some, his work was
excellent; according to others he achieved nothing substantial. He told me that
before he accepted his position he became very agitated. It was the test of his
ability to function and for some time he was unable to decide whether to take the
position. He had an acquaintance who told him that in such situations he took a
shot of morphine to get over his difficulties. This was the beginning of his
morphine addiction. Every time while in this senior position, for which he was
really not qualified or trained, he took morphine when faced by difficulties. He
continued doing this for some time and finally required morphine on a
continuous basis. His problems in this position grew increasingly and he was
demoted to a lower rank. This led to his taking increasing dosages of morphine.
He was beset with feelings of degradation and excessive ambitions since he
thought himself the most competent among the officials in his office but with
whom he was constantly in conflict. He married a second time. His wife, who
did not know how to deal with a morphine addict, became very tired of him,
although he did not lose his potency. This caused him to increase his morphine
intake which probably also was out of anger with his wife for whom the
increased dosage was meant to be a hostile act. The wife tried repeatedly to
persuade her husband to abstain from his habit. After she had called a number of
outstanding physicians, her husband declared that he could not leave his bed,
that he could not move his limbs, and that he suffered from heart attacks. I came
to know him under those circumstances and sought to free him of his morphine
habit, which I was successful in doing. However, by that time he was unable to
get over the fact that his wife had rejected him. Since the wife was determined to
seek a divorce from him as her right, the husband reached for another means to
attack her: he threatened suicide and was successful in carrying out his threat. I

learned about that later. This then was the course of his life, which ran as an
unbroken, and clearly apparent unity, beginning with his childhood to his end.
We can easily observe pampering and early neurosis in the case above. In
another case, the patient was the second child born in his family, and immensely
ambitious and active. He was short in stature, an excellent student, ambitious,
and hyper sensitive, which made it difficult for him to make friends easily. One
day, while in his office, he had a shattering experience when he overheard his
supervisor asking: “Where is the little dwarf?” He left that job immediately and
could not get out of his mind the humiliation he experienced at the hands of his
boss. So as not to bear the problem of degrading criticisms, he began to take
morphine. This is the only case among many in which I was able to cure an
addict from his morphine habit freely, without any external compulsion. I must
confess that this is probably a unique case, and that I would not trust myself to
undertake such a case again without any kind of medical supervision. I also tried
with physicians, supported by their insights, to withdraw them from morphine
without confinement but was never successful.
Another patient came to me only after he had undergone six withdrawal
treatments. This person was the only boy among five girls, therefore, extremely
pampered. This patient also was very egocentric and ambitious. He was
successful and had attained a senior position, but the worm was in the apple. In
order to resolve his romantic problems, which put him under great tension, he
married a very ugly girl. Such cases generally demonstrate that a person has little
selfconfidence, that he seeks to improve his situation as if he constantly expects
that this ugly girl would admire him out of gratefulness. People don't know that
this is always a mistake. They don't know that such a situation is unbearable.
Therefore, they hope that when they marry below their station it would bring
them relief. We can see here again how this patient sought relief. During the
war, he was wounded and received several injections of morphine. When he
returned from the war, he settled down and again took up his married life. He
then realized that his wife was extremely willful, and that she also tended to be
unfaithful. The husband was extremely shocked by this and could not understand
that he, a successful persons, indulged by everyone and highly esteemed, was
now shaken in his selfconfidence by his wife. He remembered the relief he found
while wounded and reached for morphine, eventually becoming a morphine
addict. The wife soon became aware of her husbands habit and saw it as an act
of revenge: to show his partner what she had made of him. We find the same
phenomenon with alcoholics. They display misery in order to blame another and
to punish that person. When the wife saw that her husband could not be deterred
from his habit, she also reached for the morphine syringe as a form of

counterattack. As I mentioned earlier, she was a very ugly child who was under
constant pressure during her childhood from a tyrannical father. She is probably
of a type that I mentioned earlier - a hated, neglected child. Her unattractiveness
was very apparent. She was sensitive, impatient, and tended to become
emotional so that a cure could be attained only when both she and her husband
were healed. Healing came when I explained to both their mistakes, and the
errors that they had made in their original style of life, their lack of interest in
others, and their fears of not being able to succeed if they did to think of
themselves first.
Another case is of a single child from an affluent family who we can
assume was pampered. The father, a choleric person who tended to have
emotional outbursts, intervened in everything his child did. One day, the father
forcefully broke up a romantic relationship of the boy which led him to become
depressed. He entered a clinic where he was given morphine injections that
turned him into a morphine addict. He underwent six or seven withdrawal
treatments until, after his last treatment, he came to me. During his time with me
I uncovered the various parts of his lifestyle. He had a strong craving for sweets,
was sensitive, impatient, contrary, and tended to become emotional. He lived
under constant pressure from his father who nagged his son incessantly, even at
the age of 35. This patient also was cured when he was able to become
independent of his father and escaped the unnecessary pressures to which he was
subjected, and which consisted only as long as the patient took his father
seriously. When the insignificance of that relationship was made clear to him, it
was also possible to avoid a relapse. He has been free of morphine for eight
years.
Another situation is that of an only son of a millionaire family who was
very pampered, impatient, and intent on getting at his family's money. When
they did not give him enough, he caused a great deal of trouble whereby he
attained what he wanted. When his father died, his mother came into difficult
financial straits so that she was unable to give her son as much money. When he
noted that his unruly behavior no longer had the desired effect on his mother, he
fell into the hands of a drug dealer who induced him to become a morphine and
cocaine addict. The patient was committed to an institution.
I recall another case in which the patient was the youngest son of several
successful sons. With regard to the youngest children in a family, we can say as
a general diagnosis that they are exceedingly ambitious and are always striving
to get ahead of their siblings. This is analogous to the Biblical story of Joseph
who was a dreamer and fantasized that he was better than all the others, etc. The
boy of whom I speak was constantly pampered by his mother and suppressed by

his brothers. He was the most successful among them and became enormously
wealthy. During the inflation, a large part of his wealth disappeared. Since his
strength was rooted in his belief that he was better than his brothers, he lost that
support. In this state of selfpity and feeling of abandonment, he met a women
who was a morphine addict and who professed her love for him, moved him to
marry her and made him into a morphine addict to carry him over his sorrows.
That is how he became an addict. He later divorced his wife and underwent
several withdrawal treatments. During one phase when he was free of the habit,
he married again, but again became addicted when his business was not doing
well. He then entered a phase that can be seen as indicative of a morphine addict.
His wife, who constantly struggled to have him abstain from the drug was
unsuccessful. In order to demonstrate to him the harm he had done, probably
also in the belief that she could overcome her sorrows, the wife also began to
take morphine. She also was pampered as a child who never could stand not
having her way. In a general as well as in specific ways she was the type that I
have described as neurotic.
On the subject of alcoholism, on which I also can offer no extensive
material, I should like to present several cases that I have studied intensively.
One is a case of a man who came to me after having undergone a number of
treatments for drinking so heavily from time to time that he became
unconscious. It turned out that he was severely pampered as a child and that he
was unable to endure life and its responsibilities. As the only son, his mother and
one older sister pampered him. The father cared little for him so that a tensed
relationship developed between father and son; he could expect to get anything
from his mother. Interesting is a minor event from his childhood. When his
parents went on a trip, he came under the care of his grandmother who did not
pamper him. One day, at age four, he strapped his book bag on his back and
marched out of the house, declaring that he did not like where he lived and that
he would not come back. We can see from this that a person moves from one
situation which seems unbearable to another, easier situation, to save himself.
Another recollection was of his mother and sister dressing him up as a doll and
carrying him around, a clear indication of pampering. When he entered school,
his mother spoke with his teacher and asked that her son be given gentle and
friendly treatment. He lived in the United States where prohibition laws were
strictly enforced, which made little impression on anyone, and where people
drank more than before with only the quality of the alcohol being poorer. His
father drank heavily with only little visible effect while his mother remonstrated
strongly and became very upset with his habit. In America, young people often
begin with a show of manhood that manifests itself in drinking. He also began to

drink to compensate for his feelings of having been spoilt and for being easily
embarrassed, and to show himself as strong and grown up. This trait betrays a
person with little selfconfidence who looks for an easy way to make himself
important. He joined a drinking club and drank. His mother pleaded with him to
stop and never to drink, which he promised to do; a promise that he kept for only
a short time. In order to take a job he moved to another town where he had to
depend on himself, which proved too hard for him. He stayed home a great deal
of the time, read a lot, and as a good musician played music. He could not avoid
being invited on occasion, which depressed him and which brought him under
great stress. Not infrequently, prior to such an engagement, he would become
drunk and could not make the visit. He was handsome, intelligent, and
promising, which on occasion attracted girls to him. This also caused stress,
which he relieved by becoming drunk. He had no luck in his job and often
changed employment. When he had appointments with a customer he reached
for the bottle for courage and then would wander around in a daze for two to
three days. He drank most frequently when money from his mother for his
upkeep did not arrive on time. Telegrams flew back and forth and he was never
able to bring order into his financial affairs. When his mother failed to send him
money quickly, he again began to drink. It became clear that he used this
situation to tie his mother closer to him. That is the condition in which I found
him. After some time it was possible for me to bring him to where he gave up
alcohol and devote himself to his work. I met him again three years later fully
recovered. I was successful in my effort because I convinced him that he was
toyed by his pampered lifestyle.
I also should like to relate a case about an alcoholic whom I had never seen.
This report probably is totally inadequate and probably also not in accord with
the principles of Individual Psychology:
“He is the only son of his parents.” We again meet the same situation that
we had encountered earlier. “He is physically delicate, small, intelligent.” This is
possibly the result of an endocrinal deficiency. “His father was a drunkard but
was able to hold his job as a white collar worker. He died early so that his
mother became responsible for the upbringing of his only son.” That is the
frequently inadequate situation where the mother is the only person close to her
child. When we now learn that the mother kept uninterrupted watch over her son
we cannot help but feel that the mother indeed was the only person close to him.
“In school, he was excused from participating in playing or in sports. The
mother sent excuses often against her better judgment.” We expect that the
mother would not let him out of her sight. His archetype has no other contact
than to his compassionate mother. “He decided to become a teacher a field in

which he had many protectors. Despite his mother's efforts to protect him from
alcoholism, the son, feeling that he was left on his own, began to drink beer.”
Here again we see a test of the ability to function. In the absence of his mother
nothing went right, particularly when he had access to large sums of money.
This again shows a craving. In this situation, which is a strain on him, he cannot
hold himself back, and causes him to look for delectable foods, quietude, and for
some intoxicant to take him over the difficult situation of being left alone with
his work. This also means that: “my mother should be here; I am too weak to be
left alone; I cannot exist on my own.” Here we have the expression of an
inferiority complex. “The mother lied for him whenever he encountered trouble.
He succeeded in passing all his tests and in obtaining employment. When he had
his own money he succumbed to alcohol, especially on pay day, when he often
spent all of his money on liquor.”
At this point, I should like to make a remark that has to be verified. It
concerns what we call a “dipsomaniac.” It has often been stated that there are no
reasons for that, therefore, endogenous causes. As far as I know, there are
always reasons. We must not forget that this man receives his money every
payday. He is, therefore, no dipsomaniac, but acts in a given situation because of
the insecurity from which he suffers.
“He remained unmarried.” Here again we have an indication: unable to
solve a problem that requires an interest in another. I am convinced that his
sexuality is expressed in ways that show his lack of a social interest. He
probably expresses his sexuality like a loner through masturbation, or he is
impotent, again, determined by the totality of his lifestyle, not the other way
around. - “In the end, his mother was unable to bear his vice and revealed them
to his supervisor. When his mother reproached him, he treated her roughly.” We
find this in pampered children very often. They become tyrants in their own
home early on; at first defiant and later aggressive and dangerous. “He joined a
group of abstainers. He succumbed again to alcohol. He escaped from one
institute because, by his testimony, he had to do physical work. He returned to
his work but became drunk at the end of each month for shorter or longer
periods of time, despite warnings from his mother. He missed work and was in a
daze for hours during which he had no idea what he was doing.”
We can see from this report also that this is a type of person who is not
prepared for life, particularly to live alone, and who wants to have his mother or
a substitute. His dipsomania may also have been a way of attacking his mother,
whose rebukes now offend his morbid ambitions.
In summary, I should like to state that in looking back to the prototype, to
the psychological constitution that was acquired during the first years, we could

establish what we have found to be germane in many cases. This aggressive
searching for relief is already discernable in childhood in failures, in problem
children, and in neurotic and delinquent children. One of the most frequently
followed paths, one of the easiest, is daydreaming. Time and again we find the
start of daydreaming in a child who does not feel strong, suffers from inferiority
feelings, and feels demeaned. As if transformed, the child will flee into fantasy
where he has big plans and images that help him to forget his actual situation, or
help relieve him from psychic suffering. It is the seeking relief from suffering.
This is how we can characterize drug addiction and alcoholism as the daydreams
of adults.
We are all in agreement with regard to the question whether psychotherapy
by itself can be applied for treatment. As long as the person is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol we are unable to speak with him or work with him.
Therefore, withdrawal is necessary. The cause for withdrawal symptoms appears
to lie in “water poisoning” which can probably be eliminated by euphyllin. Dr.
Alexandra Adler provided withdrawal treatments at the psychiatric clinic of
Professor Pötzl in Vienna and cured morphine addicts in a waking state in three
to eight days, in most cases without hearing any significant complaints.
We shall provide only one more case history of an addict that was
submitted to us by Herr Dr. Meyer, Berlin. I shall select from this extensive
report only a few passages that are important for our approach and only briefly
summarize the rest of the report.
The general treatment for those addicted to intoxicants rests mainly on
withdrawal treatment, which has been made much easier by appropriate facilities
and the development of new methods. Whether these methods by themselves
ensure lasting success is more than questionable. There also are questions
regarding the nature of the intoxicants themselves. Clear is only that under the
influence of an intoxicant, psychological and physical inhibitions dissipate,
which, of course, is very important to the patient who is severely inhibited. For
that reason morphine and cocaine addicts occasionally point to a strong pleasure
feeling that they not infrequently translate into sexuality. Since the sexual drive
can manifest itself under all kinds of possible combinations, it should not
surprise us, and we certainly need not conclude from that, that the intake of
morphine has a particular connection with sexual feelings.
The question can be raised whether everyone today is looking for
relaxation. This means that we need not assume that it takes particular conditions
that call for a need to relax. When we know that there are morphine addicts who
can withdraw on their own and, on the other hand, that withdrawal treatments for
others are unsuccessful, then it says to us that the possibility for a cure depends

more on the general conditions of the personality rather than on a particular
situation.
We, whose starting point is Individual Psychology and the unity of the
personality, must question also in cases of drug addicts to what extent their
condition is the result of their style of life. We, therefore, must ask in every case:
To what extent is the patient suited to deal actively with the tasks of life? We
have found in all cases of drug addicts that they were more heavily burdened by
their life than appeared possible for them to bear.
 
Before we come to the next presentation of our point of view we must
examine another possibility. Is it possible to explain this phenomenon on the
basis of heredity? Even those who represent that point of view can apply their
theory with reference to drug addicts only very vaguely namely that
“psychopaths” are more likely to become drug addicts. We can see that this
would apply only to a fraction of the cases and would not explain the totality of
the problem.
Opposed to that viewpoint, Individual Psychology maintains that drug
addiction is one of the many attempts to evade responsibility for coping with the
problems of life.
Obviously, the proof for that contention must be established in every case
without the use of platitudes or formulas. We must examine exactly each
individual condition by establishing all the nuances of his style of life, and by
recognizing clearly any variations. We can then come to a definite conclusion
and establish proof of our contention. In doing so, certain common trends will be
useful to orient ourselves. They will serve to illuminate our work.
In all cases of morphine addiction I have found the portrait of a person who
generally does not fit in, who from childhood lacked in a feeling of belonging,
and who failed in his duties. We, therefore, have to examine in all cases the
extent to which the sense of belonging was lacking prior to succumbing to drug
addiction.
Another aspect should be mentioned at the outset. One must consider that
when a patient appears for treatment that there are no assurances that he will not
experience a relapse. However, he must be treated most kindly and with
consideration so as not to raise resistance on his part that might provoke a
relapse. We must consider ourselves in this as in other cases as a rescue
organization and seek to avoid a protest on the part of the patient.
If we arrive at a contextual examination we must then ask ourselves into
what category of failures we must place the drug addict. We can always observe

along the indistinct boundaries of neuroses that every neurotic attempts to
establish a barrier between himself and performance, a possibility to delay, an
excuse. It then becomes clear to us that a drug addict places his addiction, as in
ever other case of neurotic symptoms, between himself and his duties. We only
need to ask a patient: “What would you do if you were not a drug addict?” We
would then hear of all that he would achieve, but is prevented from
accomplishing by his inherent nature and lack of preparation. We shall find in
him what is so characteristic for neurotics: “Yes, but...”
We can read in the following report that the patient in 1925 already suffered
from a nervous disorder that made him uneasy. It manifested itself in the form of
a hyper sensitive hearing, mild heart trouble, etc. At that time he suffered from
diarrhea for which his physician frequently prescribed opium.
There are patients who respond to the slightest excitement with diarrhea
attacks. In this case also the cause for his condition could have been
psychological, and we ask ourselves: To what problems does the patient respond
with those symptoms? “In 1926, he married a girl with whom he had an affair,
and who became pregnant after their first sexual contact. After she became
pregnant he decided to marry her, although he had doubts whether he made her
pregnant.” We can see that we are dealing with a suspicious person who ascribed
the worst to his “partner.”
“On looking back, he did not describe the marriage as filled with love. It
should be noted that he said he had made a decision to get married because
neither the girl nor the parents forced him into marriage.” What kind of person is
that? We can find certain analogies in people who prefer to marry a cripple or an
inferior person. These are people who always count on gratitude and seek to be
the dominant partner in their marriage.
“He was a stubborn child.” It means that he was of a type who sought
strength in opposition. He also described his wife as stubborn, and again
remarked “he cannot describe his marriage as a love affair”. Obviously, he lived
under great stress at that time: a marriage not based on love, doubts regarding
the legitimacy of his child, and a bad relationship with his in-laws who did not
approve of the marriage. Did he want this marriage in spite of that?
“He lectures his wife a lot and makes her aware of her faults, but she is
stubborn.” He sees his marriage a disappointment in that his wife fails to look up
to him constantly, and is thus faced by an unsolvable problem.
“She related to me in a way that until this day I don't know how much she
cared for me. She is a good mother and housekeeper, but fails to satisfy me as a
wife.” We can see that he values his wife only as a sex object. What does a man
do in such cases? He tries revenge. The usual form of revenge is outside affairs.

This always means that all other women please the man more than his own wife.
“At that time, he constantly took opium, and was always under treatment,
also by quacks. The doctors did not notice his craving, nor did they know how to
counter it. At that point he was irascible toward his wife and very dissatisfied
with her. He also had many headaches.” He shows symptoms that require
attention. His entire behavior can be explained as an act of revenge against his
wife with whom he was unable to deal.
“He made it very clear that he had trouble with his oldest son, who was
much like him and whom he disliked for that reason.” Common sense would
never arrive at such a conclusion. How would we explain to ourselves that he
would much prefer to have his son be different from him? Obviously, he would
then have another weapon for use against his wife since his suspicions about his
son's true father would have been justified.
He told of his early childhood “he clung closely to his father, but was very
critical of his mother.” I always recognize such a situation as the second phase in
the relationship of a child to the mother. The child must already have had some
experience that caused him to be disappointed with his mother.
“The mother was a morphine addict and very nervous. An older sister of the
patient did not mean much to him; he lived in constant quarrel with his younger
sister.” We can see two women with whom he had a bad relationship. Since we
know that a lifestyle is formed in the first five year, we will not be surprised to
learn that this man could not relate well to women.
“He had sexual relations since he was 17 years old, rarely satisfactory. He
usually left every woman after the initial contact and in time had relations with
30 women. When he would truly fall in love with a girl he was unable to have
sex with her. When married he cared little for his children and when they had to
be punished he left that task to his wife.” This is the kind of person who wants to
dominate but does not trust himself to have the strength to carry it out.
“He chided his wife that her voice was low and that she is noisy.” Other
neurotics complain that the wife speaks in too high a voice. When someone
seeks to reprimand another he will always find a reason.
When we summarize our findings up to this point, we recognize that our
patient adjusts poorly to social requirements. In his behavior we find the
tendency to demean others. This is a characteristic that would also apply to
someone who is cruel to animals. Torture is also a way to depreciate someone.
Significant is the fact that he had two teachers in school who not only beat their
students without mercy, but apparently took pleasure in all forms of abuse. This
could not have failed to have an influence on him. He described these events in a
way to indicate his disapproval of them. Basically, however, his behavior shows

the same tendencies.
We should not forget that he had learned in early childhood through his
mother, the morphine addict, how in seeking this form of relief through
selfabuse, cruelty can be done to others. He also experienced that with his
attitude toward marriage and his desire to take revenge on his wife, such cruelty
becomes desirable. In this person, who already demonstrated asocial tendencies
in early childhood, greater social demands could well lead to stronger forms of
cruelty. This makes his craving for intoxicants understandable to us. In the final
analysis, it represents a failure that replaced a lack of social preparedness, and
while it provided relief to him, it also excused his failures in life, and served as a
way to accuse and punish his wife.
With regard to alcoholism, it seems to me that another cause is a particular
liking for the taste of alcohol. This appears often to be the case, and taste plays a
role in the choice of that symptom. Aside from my own observations concerning
this, I find no other evidence in the literature. Of course, as noted above, in the
struggle to cure an alcohol addict the matter of liking the taste of alcohol
becomes superfluous; it might even create it. However, if one recalls that
children suffering from rickets have a liking for cod liver oil, which is not the
case with most children, and that many people like sour foods and seemingly
unappetizing dishes, then, with regards to choosing symptoms, alcoholism
should also be examined from the perspective of liking the taste of alcohol.
Chapter VIII
Personality as a SelfConsistent Unity1 2
[1932]
An explanation of this subject is important because so much
misunderstanding is found among Individual Psychologists, and even more so
among those who follow other approaches. This misunderstanding acts as a
powerful incentive for us. We often assist those outside our circles with
improving their perception. We don't know what it is they lack, but we have
collected an inexhaustible amount of material from their errors. Illuminating
these misconceptions is a gratifying task.
I refer to the assertion by many authors that Individual Psychology is an
environmental theory, as if a person's total disposition is derived from the
environment. If we examine this view more closely, we have to ask: who seeks,
who answers, who processes the impressions? Is the human being a tape
recorder? A machine? There must be something else to it! We also cannot rely
totally upon heredity. Here, we raise the strongest objections. Even research with
twins has shown that all is not as it seems. They speak of the impact of
upbringing and the modifying influence of socializing. Who modifies? Is it a

mathematical calculation? In contrast, Individual Psychology believes that when
we address the “psyche,” we enter a transcendental realm. We know only
something of effects, of results, of relationships that become apparent. We must
make assumptions that no one who accepts the idea of a “spiritual life” as a
given any longer takes into account, or in the case of behaviorists, denies.
However, even when confronting behaviorism, we stress that due to our
thoughts, feelings, and actions, psychological movements become apparent,
about which we have come no further than the physicists when they speak of
electricity. Like every other science, Individual Psychology leads into
metaphysics. We smile at the argument that Individual Psychology can do
without metaphysical principles. We are concerned here with an area of
knowledge where we must make assumptions without which we cannot operate,
since we want to organize impressions that are before us and call them
psychological. An interpretation that we make a priori allows us to organize
events and put them under one light.
We also can attest more about our psychic life when we remain in the realm
of the transcendental. If we wish to give structure to the psychic life. then it must
coincide with our view of time and space, i.e. we must not only apply our
concept of time, which is movement, but we must also take direction into
account. From where does direction come? That direction cannot be deduced
from hereditary forces. If we construct a drive-response psychology, movement
can be included, but not direction. Here we come upon a puzzle to which
Individual Psychology devoted itself in harmony with researchers of a past that
has been long forgotten. The psychic life has a creative power that is identical
with the life force itself. This creative power has the capacity to anticipate,
which it must do, just as looking ahead appears necessary because human beings
move. The psychic life means movement and direction with one goal. Because
the individual is not isolated, that goal must be designed by a creative force that
springs from the urge to overcome the social problems that bar movement. We
must always have a goal to conquer, to accomplish for the sake of self-
preservation and fulfillment. We constantly face threats of harm, indifference, or
death.
1 Following a lecture held in the Verein für Individualpsychologie, Vienna.
Originally published as “Persönlichkeit als geschlossene Einheit” in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. X, p.81-88, 1932. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2004.
We have a preference for the common expression: overcoming. The
misunderstanding begins here: as if Individual Psychology does not merely

perceive the psychic life as a striving after power, but also propagates it. This
striving after power is not our madness; it is what we find in others. A goal of
overcoming as an abstract concept is unacceptable to the human mind in the real
world; a far more concrete version is needed. Therefore, every person arrives at
a concrete goal to overcome with his creative power, which is identical with the
“I.” Our task is to determine in what direction the individual tends to go in order
to overcome. In this he is governed by his opinion. All we can say about that
opinion is whether it is more or less incorrect. We never make the claim that we
possess an absolute truth; we claim only to be able to replace big errors with
small ones. Bigger errors prevent an active accommodation with life. At the
point where we speak of goaldirectedness, when we can understand better the
concrete goal concept, then enormous difficulties develop: we deal with a
thousand variations; we always face a unique case with a unique concrete goal.
Here we come upon the fable that has been imputed to us: that we presume or
strive for the idea that everyone is the same. Actually, we seek to examine
nuances, the uniqueness of goal setting, the uniqueness of a person's opinions of
himself and of the tasks of life. The task of Individual Psychology then becomes:
to comprehend particular erroneous directions. Therefore, if I select only a few
concepts that I wish to develop here, such as of a person seeking to be superior
for the purpose of dominating others, or evading a task so that another becomes
the object of exploitation, then these are generalized statements. They and any
variations become the tasks for Individual Psychology to explore.
When someone knows nothing else to hold against Individual Psychology,
then he says: if Individual Psychologists do not believe in heredity, then they
must believe it would be possible for a human being to develop into a goose.
Serious people do not need to discuss such nonsense. Certain possibilities must
be a given: nothing can be developed that is not somehow contained within the
structure of the human embryo. However, raising such objections could tempt us
to believe that in rare cases that kind of alternative development actually is
possible.
Another misunderstanding is the belief that we insist that children who by
nature are not capable of full development, such as those mentally defective, can
be raised to be fully competent persons. It would be like asking someone to draw
with a right hand that he had lost. I never assumed that we would have to answer
such nonsense. Obviously, wherever the structure of human beings is limited, it
will be reflected in people's behavior; this would be the case, for example, in
mentally retarded children, that is people with dysfunctional organs, such as the
brain, or endocrine glands. Such cases are not a matter of raising children to the
level of what appears normal to us.

(Note: Several paragraphs have been omitted by the editor. They addressed
criticisms of Individual Psychology made at that time which are not clinically
relevant. Consequently, the next paragraph does not logically follow the
previous one—Here, Adler summarizes his rebuttal to his critics.)
The poor “self” is pushed far into the background as if no fertilized egg
were not already perfected. To speak of drives that first have to create the self is
far-fetched. The self grows into life which we later recognize as a creative force.
Someone who believes that he can inject into drives what pertains to the “self,” a
searching, questioning, doubting, thinking, feeling, wishing, goal striving, etc., is
conjuring tricks. The most important question is: Who is the mover of the
psychological life and what direction does he give it? It always concerns the
“self.”
I would like to stress one thought that has preoccupied me lately. A false
notion has crept unnoticed into the entire literature on psychology, which is that
only what can be expressed by a concept belongs to the conscious. If this were
correct, an animal would have no consciousness. Of course, an animal has
consciousness without concepts. Does not an infant have a consciousness? Does
an infant not act extraordinarily sensibly? Are we not all conscious of things
given to us, but which we cannot conceive as a concept? Perhaps this
explanation is not terribly important, but when I point out that what is not
conscious is something not understood, it suddenly becomes “conscious” as soon
as it is realized as a concept. At that point, it also is clear that by determining
what is not conscious, the indivisible unity of “I” is not touched. Even thought
that is not conceptional, which fills every moment of our lives, is conscious in
the sense of consciousness because we are aware of it and it never disappears.
In pursuing this thought further, we arrive at conclusions that strongly
oppose other views. By establishing goals for psychological life, we also
establish the style of life. If every impulse has a goal, then it also has a form. If
everything strives after that goal (thought, feeling, wishing, deciding) then a
lifestyle is established into which every part of the spiritual life must blend, and
of which every part is a part of the whole. For that reason we are able to guess
the style of life, the individual law of movement, from fragments which we can
compare through their relationships. That style of life is not revealed to us
directly. We grasp it by means of expressions and how they relate to each other.
We can only say: here is a person whose goal is to let every task remain undone.
This goal manifests itself in that person's behavior and achievements. Serious
consideration must be given to the thousands of variations in such a lifestyle.
To move from theory to practice, I would like to relate a constructive case. I
like to present cases where the unity of the personality will be apparent to

everyone. Although many people talk of the unity of the person, I have searched
the literature without finding evidence that someone actually related to the
lifestyle all its aspects, i.e. its thoughts, feelings, desires, memories, and dreams.
This is wishful thinking. If I as well as others have made attempts to present that
unity more clearly, then so far these are merely attempts to demonstrate the unity
of the personality.
Actually, people in the past and present have demonstrated this unity. Poets,
painters, and composers create whole personalities, such as a child who becomes
the adult in a unique, never reoccurring unity, in which every part fits the whole
personality. Schopenhauer expresses his admiration for Shakespeare for
presenting Northumberland in three dramas in a unified form, jovial, a loyal
servant, until the king faces danger. Then he betrays him three times. It looks
like ambivalence: subservience and treachery. We have no one concept for the
millions of variations. Here is a person whose loyalty extends to a certain point
and not beyond that. What happens then is no longer loyalty. It is to the great
credit of Individual Psychology to have demonstrated that the best social
measure is the attainment of cooperation. I have tried to show that the most vital
tasks require this ability. For that reason a standard, the ability to cooperate is
created, on the basis of which a style of life can be characterized in terms of how
far that social interest extends and where it stops. This problem that we must
solve is not mathematical, but artistic. We must establish at what point a person
is no longer able to generate social interest, where he no longer passes the test
for functioning with social interest. Here also, we do not speak of a moral ideal,
or a religious perception, but in the sense of a scientific observation of the
psychological life of a human being. All capabilities can be developed only on
the basis of social interest. One person will develop it to a greater degree;
another to a lesser. Social interest must be taught. This does not mean that the
environmentalists can celebrate a victory. Knowledgeable educators have the
task of guiding the creative power of the child toward social interest. We must
do more than consider influences. One must evaluate whether the child’s
creative power perceives correctly that he is on the right path.
In order to show the unity of the personality with an example, I go back to a
case that appears in Problems of Neurosis3. A fifty-year old man came up to me
after a lecture and complained about depression; he cried constantly. In spite of
that, he was professionally successful and wealthy. I then had little time and
tried to snatch a few fragments of his life. He told me his earliest memory as
follows: He was the youngest of many siblings in a family that lived in great
need. He crept around the neighborhood pale and hungry so that neighbors took
pity on him and gave him presents. Already then, his sadness had its effect.

Individual Psychology demonstrates that the professional can discern the style of
life of a person in his third or fourth year of life. I have no doubt that it already
exists earlier; it only becomes clearly discernable later. The darling of his
mother, he was very spoiled. When she once tried to work in order to make
money, he cried so hard that she said: “I am not going away, I would rather
starve with you.” He had a speech defect and was invited by people to recite
poetry so they could make fun of him. In the end, he took his hat and begged for
coins. He behaved like a beggar. The man has retained the style of life of a
beggar to this day. I told him so. This made a deep impression on him and he
said: “I remember the big impression it made on me as a child when I heard a
beggar singing in the street, and he was given coins.” Even today he behaves like
a beggar and people therefore give him much more consideration. I never saw
that man again, but he wrote me a letter in which he explained how right I was.
He included in his letter a newspaper article which he had written ten years
earlier entitled, “An organization of Beggars.” Did the man have the idea of the
beggar merely in his unconscious? We see the unity in all of his thoughts, in the
way he wrote the article, his feelings, behavior, and finally also in his way of
achieving. He approaches all problems of life from the viewpoint of a beggar.
That is his law of movement.
3 Publisher, Kegan Paul, London, 1929
Another case is that of a merchant, 30 years of age, the youngest in his
family. In our experience, the situation concerning the youngest is special. He
grows up under unique circumstances. After every child comes another, except
in his case. He has no one behind him. This position means a great deal in our
view of upbringing. Usually, a time comes when new children dethrone the other
children. The youngest never experiences that. Besides, the older ones are taller,
accept more responsibility, and can achieve more. These siblings become an
important challenge for the youngest, and every youngest is exposed to
particular nuances as a consequence. At this point, the creative power of the
individual emerges. However, the strong drive imbued in the youngest cannot be
discounted (like the Biblical Joseph, the youngest in the story). This youngest
client was far ahead of his siblings, the darling of his parent, the first in school, a
very ambitious child who feared every test. This man married a woman he
believed he could dominate totally. Characteristically, he had no real friends,
revealing that he liked only those situations in which he was the master, and that
he tried to avoid all other situations. He suffered from nervous symptoms
whenever something was about to happen where he was not playing the leading
role or where he felt pressured from the outside, as for example, when he sat in a
closed off room, like a theater. These situations in which he was not aware of

exerting any influence appeared to him as dangerous.
I will digress and speak of thought processes. It is not true that we can
imagine events without desires and feelings. But some people are more inclined
toward intellectualizing, others toward emotionalizing, and others toward
exerting their will. We have a need to create the connection. If I think: I am not
free; therefore, as a human being who cannot endure force, I will develop
feelings and emotions to oppose it. In a theater, for example, these people want
to sit only at the end of a row in order to be free. Such a person differs from
other types of anxiety neurotics; he fights against it, but apparently his ambition
drives him to be ahead of others. He is helped in this effort by the impression his
symptoms make. No wonder that the impulse to fight against it is slight. We
could observe the same mechanism in the study of dreams, which contain
thoughts that are not to be understood. Even dreams contain a fragment of the
personality; feelings are awakened that the dreamer needs. The client in this case
related his dreams to me.
First dream: It took place in school; he was not well prepared. When put in
context, it means: the teacher is the physician who knows more than I do. This
must be followed by a worsening situation, which is a danger.
Second dream: He was given mathematical problems to check which
included some of his own and some of others. He found those of the others to be
incorrect. His own were correct. This contrast is an attempt to create an impulse
to put him ahead of the others. The solutions are not correct, as are also those of
the physician. We can see that this “resistance” has nothing to do with love or
with sexuality, but that in line with his character the patient wants to be the
leader. For that reason, the others cannot act as leaders.
Third dream: He sees himself having to carry home an old coat. He said: “I
have always found it most distasteful when someone gives me something to
carry.”
Fourth dream: He has two hats, one stiff, and the other soft. He used the
latter very carefully. When asked how he managed with the two hats he said:
True, to protect the soft hat, I wear the cheap one in bad weather; that means
avoiding damage in order not to have to spend too much money on hats. He
demonstrates his frugality. He turns forthcoming in order to shove me, who has
to be paid by him, into the background.
The four dreams tell us: I will not take someone confronting me like a
teacher, who perhaps gives me assignments, and thinks that he understands them
better than I, and on top of that makes me pay money for them.
For us to make this portrait totally lifelike so that the patient appears
convinced of its correctness will require additional subtle work. If we encounter

insolvable contradictions, then our opinion is incorrect and must be changed. To
this extent, Individual Psychology focuses on and pursues the individual as a
selfconsistent unity, with a seriousness not understood by many.
Chapter IX
Structure and Methods of Individual Psychology1 2 3
[1932]
The lack of understanding shown in vague critical remarks about Individual
Psychology resembles a projective test taken by a prejudiced amateur
psychologists. In psychology, intelligence cannot be excluded as a prerequisite
for accepting new ideas and experiences. I advise my friends to avoid taking
critical remarks sitting down. For instance, some people have commented about
the philosophical insight of Individual Psychology. Those who have only a
limited knowledge of philosophy will agree with William Stern that Individual
Psychology is philosophy. However, when sometimes we find people in our
group who give opponents the catchword, the opponents react immediately. The
wrong impression is established, as if Individual Psychology has nothing to do
with philosophy. The same is true for structure and methods. I have found in
many papers such poor references that it looked as if the method of Individual
Psychology still had to be established. I have nothing against positive
contributions; however, I have never found anything worthwhile from those who
approached the subject in a bragging way. When I say that we cannot succeed in
Individual Psychology without a sharpened understanding and rational
penetration, I demand a great deal from every Individual Psychologist, namely,
that he recognize if one of such dunces tries to elevate himself to high standing
and authority. Nobody should believe that such attempts escape the sharp
observation of Individual Psychologists.
We consider psyche a metaphysical construct. We interpret the psyche as
that part of life which contains all its moving structures. Above all, the psyche
consists of movement as seen in space and time. This movement is goaldirected,
a concept we have introduced in modern psychology for many years as
teleology. Movement without a goal is unthinkable. No other school of
psychology has said more about man's psyche than can be found in these few
words. Because movement means change, a systematic observation focuses on
the beginning and the end of every part of the movement. The beginning is the
incomplete situation, insecurity, or inferiority, while a striving for completion is
found in every expression. Thus, we may conclude that Individual Psychology
uses a strict method in its ongoing utilization of a strong structure that cannot be
pierced. This strong structure is one that no other psychology reveals. This
concept of goaldirected movement existed from the beginning of Individual

Psychology.
1 Lecture for the Society of Individual Psychology Physicians, Vienna,
1932. 
2 Originally published as "Die Systematik der Individual Psychologie" in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. X, p.241-244, 1932. 
3 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1995.
We consider the self as a unit which creates itself, using all possibilities,
impression of its incompleteness, and influence of the organs to reach an attitude
which we consider a congealed movement. We can see this "self" only "in
relation to," because it is always responding. Questioned and presented with
problems by the environment, it responds in its own way. This response occurs
in situations created in the community. Clearly, the accomplishments of the
individual regarding those problems, which always demand social interest, do
not result in an ideal solution, if the individual is not socially well prepared and
adjusted. In our changing, multi-faceted environment, we find many external
factors which present questions to the individual. Our evaluation of the “self”
consists of observing a person's response to the questions his social environment
presents, thereby showing the development of his social contact with the
environment. This evaluation represents a big step ahead of all other
psychological theories. Thus, when we have determined the external factors
"correctly" and the individual’s response the to them, we have to evaluate the
strength of his social ability which should have been developed earlier.
We have concluded that the degree of social interest, the desire to
participate, is established in the beginning years of a child's life. Certain
circumstances may promote social interest or block it, and mistakes may sneak
in, preventing the individual's internal formation from responding appropriately
to external social factors: friendship, work, and love. to respond to social
exogenous factors. Psychological makeup is not inherited, but formed in the
early years under the influences of organ inferiority and the environment, to
which we do not attribute unlimited causal importance, but a "statistical
probability." We evaluate all performances of a human being from two sides: 1)
from the external demands, 2) from the psychological makeup. Out of the
tension between these two sides develops the attitude of the individual in a
specific situation, his positive qualities, and his mistakes.
Today I will talk about the main forms of movement in which people who
have too little social interest express themselves; about the relationship between
the internal and external factors in people who lack the ability to solve the tasks
of life in a "correct" way. Also, in this respect we have advanced much further

than others. We have observed that all the tasks life demands can be divided into
three categories: the individual's attitude toward others, work and love. Religion
belongs primarily in the first category, because the highest Being is worshiped,
while everyday life is lived according to His laws; however, it also belongs to all
three categories in the same way a work of art does.
Today, I will show which main categories of movement are revealed when
a person lacks solid preparation for solving any of his life tasks. 
A. First, the hesitating movement--or attitude--may be observed, measured by
the type of rhythm and pace of action. At first glance, we can draw some
conclusions with the help of our method. For instance, if a twelve-year-old child
is merely a fourth grade student, we can conclude that he proceeds slowly,
exceptional circumstances excluded. This slower movement may have a certain
rhythm, manifesting itself as a character trait imperfect perseverance. If we do
not observe uniform progress, then we conclude that some insecurity exists. This
pattern is especially clear in someone who starts with great enthusiasm and gives
up very soon, as in severe cases of manic depression. 
B. The second model showing the individual's faulty relationship with others, the
faulty relationship between internal form and external factors is distance. When
someone has not yet found a friend at 20, does not yet have an occupation at 30,
and has never fallen in love at 40, we can conclude that this individual lacks
proper preparation for solving a specific task. 
C. The third model of insufficient preparation is avoidance when a problem
arises. In this group we find all failures. The strong educational influence of
Individual Psychology resulted especially from the practical knowledge of this
category, because we observed an unusually large number of cases where the
child went astray in early childhood, and steps could have been taken to avoid
his failures. 
D. With the fourth model, diminished interest and ambition reveal that the
individual is not prepared for a whole problem and pulls it into small parts. This
type of failed preparation always shows in a person's efforts to exclude certain
aspects of a problem. Here we also find characteristics of all failures, not merely
neurotics. A difficult child usually makes his mistakes the same way all the time,
a pickpocket remains a pickpocket, a burglar always a burglar. We also have to
consider diminished interest in such cases where the individual solves his
problem partly by eliminating certain parts and occasionally by becoming
ingenious in this way. 
We must consider all these aspects in each case, avoiding the temptation. to
categorize people in specific groups, but rather understanding the mistakes of
every individual. I would be curious to know what other psychological approach

has such a closely knit structure. If we consider how very critical and skeptical
Individual Psychology is, all reproaches about our insufficient methods are
ridiculous. An opponent could not validly make such an objection. If sometimes
our students make such references, this proves they have not penetrated far
enough. Our methods are so thorough and far-reaching that we don't have to
worry about overlooking important points.
Chapter X
Individual Psychology and Education1 2
[1932]
The subject of education is a part of the controversy concerning Individual
Psychology. Few pedagogues question the significance of Individual Psychology
in the progress made in education. I will go one more step and state the
following: The appreciation of Individual Psychology will increase when more
people embrace our assertion that the accomplishments of a person depend on
the opinions he holds about his own worth and capabilities, and on his opinion
about the tasks of life. Perhaps that viewpoint will soon be more evident than it
is today. We see here the optimistic force of Individual Psychology asserting that
everyone can achieve more if he does not set limits on himself. Neurosis and
other failures are probably caused by self-limitation and the individual rules of
movement a person establishes. Actually, the development of mankind supports
this view. The tasks confronting us may not be accomplished in a short period of
time and perhaps can never be accomplished. But, we shall never be able to
measure the limits of our abilities until we employ all of our strength and
courage.
Research exists along parallel lines that will shock some, but which is
known to many who have failed to relate it to human events. Several years ago
Katz and Shelderup conducted an investigation into the relationships of hens in a
chicken coop. They found that hen A pecks hen B, but hen B does not peck hen
A. Similarly, hen B can attack hen C, but hen C will not attack hen B. However,
hen C can attack hen A. We can conclude from this pattern that hen B
mistakenly has a wrong opinion about its capabilities. Is it not surprising that
human beings act in the same way regarding their problems which they face with
an attitude toward their capabilities formed in early childhood? When we
consider the problem of school, this becomes even clearer. In school, every child
has his own opinion about himself reinforced by the teacher. Other schoolmates
reflect this opinion. For example, all the students know who is the best
mathematician, the worst athlete, etc. The child continues with this intellectually
preconceived attitude that often has no rational basis and then, under the same
self-limiting conditions, enters life. What do these facts demonstrate? The

rebellious children do not accept these apparent "rules" imposed on them.
Clearly, when they have a firm opinion similar to ours, which is that everyone
can achieve more than he believes himself capable, they will often apply their
strengths quite differently. These children acquire an optimistic outlook. With
this viewpoint, they will awaken those feelings which we have shown to be
appropriate for the life goal. This tendency to limit oneself begins in early
childhood. No rational cause can be named for this phenomenon whether for
hens or for human beings. If we test the capabilities of a person with all kinds of
technical aids, the results would display the opinion of the child about himself,
and how he prepared himself up to the present. Thus, we can say little or nothing
about the child's potential capabilities if the child were to free himself from self-
imposed limits and were to adopt an attitude of: "I don't know how much I can
do. I shall presume, therefore, that I can do whatever others can." This would
change much. It would be the attitude expected from an independent person
purged of wrong opinions.
1 First appeared under the title "Das Verzärtelte Kind in der Schule" (The
pampered child in school) in Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkrakh., Vol. 93 (1931), p.
317-323. Cited here as it appeared in: Vierteljahresschrift für Jugendkunde. Vol.
2 (1932), p. 1-6. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing
assistance by Kurt A. Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
This self-limitation works in tempting ways in the development of the
pampered child, whom we have selected as an example to demonstrate the value
of Individual Psychological findings for education. The development of such a
child can be manifested in a thousand variations which cannot possibly be
encompassed by rules. We can merely grasp the basic principle: A pampered
child expects satisfaction of his wishes from others. Such a child does not have
the preparation required to solve life tasks, which always require cooperation.
Consequently, a pampered child will not show failures in development as long as
he lives under favorable conditions. This is why a large proportion of pampered
children living with their families do not show the slightest failing and often are
not among the problem children, even in school, if they are in a favorable
situation where they can demonstrate they are useful and irreproachable
students. This situation can occur in many different ways. Here again we see the
importance of the favorable situation, how the teacher acts, and the child’s
success in the early years of school. Characteristically, pampered people do well
when they are successful immediately. Only being tested in a difficult situation
will show whether or not they were well prepared. The basic feature of a
pampered child is his perception that a favorable situation is his right, and he

becomes bewildered when others do not offer this advantage to him. Only when
the child gets into a difficult situation will we see the extent of his preparation
for school and for life, his tendency toward cooperation. The extent of his social
feeling appears the moment he is tested for his willingness to cooperate. Life
always tests us for our social feeling so that in the end the outcome is not
difficult to ascertain for someone knowledgeable of this connection. I need to
emphasize, however, that a number of people who have no problems in school
and possibly for that reason are noticed favorably, later in life show how poorly
they were prepared. We can conclude only that they had encountered no
difficulties in school. The favorable situations in school alleviated the need for
deciding to struggle with any difficulties. Nevertheless, we cannot overlook that
the correctly administered school acts like an experiment, like an examination
testing whether a child is properly, in our sense, prepared for life.
What does school mean in terms of Individual Psychology? School is the
extended hand of the family. If the family were able to prepare the child so that
he could successfully go out into life, the school would then be superfluous. On
the other hand, school is also a step forward in preparation for the communal
life. Our schools must develop in the direction of this necessary preparation for
life. More than ever, school must be for upbringing and the development of
character, not merely for learning subject material. We can clearly recognize that
within the framework of upbringing, schools could more easily teach children
and win them to the path of learning. We have often experienced that children
who had to be held back could advance only when they adjusted better, when an
interest in others was awakened in them, and when they had been shown how
they hinder their progress if they have an interest exclusively in themselves. In
our efforts in Vienna, I shall never forget the day the most progressive teachers
decided to ask that they no longer be required to give grades because they had no
students who would be given poor marks. What is the point in giving grades
when no poor grades can be given? Unfortunately, that principal was not ready
to accept this proposal, but we recommend to all teachers and psychiatrists that
when you find average, normal children are not progressing, observe whether
their interest in others was developed.
I must give a brief description, that is not according to the rule, of a
pampered child in the family to show how poorly that child is prepared for the
rest of his life. School demands an interest in schoolwork, schoolmates, teachers,
and strangers. Such requirements have no place in the development and life plan
of a pampered child. That child is interested solely in one person and in making
that person serve him, usually the mother. A characteristic motion distinguishes
such children in their first years. It is a defensive arm movement when someone

other than the mother comes near them. Such an opinion of oneself, although not
consciously directed at others and at the circumstances, is unsuited for
communal life. This relationship to the mother appears in a thousand different
ways. For example, the child wants to monopolize the mother for himself,
thereby coming into conflict with the father, because he wants to maintain the
most comfortable condition. We do not condone this desire, but we understand
it. Human nature is wishes for comfortable circumstances. We emphasize that
while this is not a sufficiently good reason for a permanent attitude, we would
not be surprised were the child to arrive at a better one. Such behavior is not
causally derived because if this were the case, we would be in a serious
quandary as to how to change it. It is a faulty attitude toward the self and life. In
such a child we will find manifestations such as being disorderly, because
someone else cleans up after him. As if making a medical diagnosis, a skillful
examiner considers the meaning of every symptom. We are in a situation similar
to the diagnostician when we draw conclusions because, as in medicine, we can
confirm them with other manifestations. In the first instance we must guess,
using an intuitive process that cannot be excluded from the science of medicine
and psychology. We must illuminate the picture we thus obtain in order to
capture the specific case and its individual law of movement, then probably we
will further find that the child made efforts to maintain contact solely with his
mother. If we have understood the basic principle of pampering, then we know
also that the child does not want to be alone. Recognizing that the child is
disorderly, we expect an antipathy to being left alone and acting independently.
If that expectation can be confirmed, then we are encouraged in the conclusion
we draw. The child will carry out all his functions in a way that requires
someone’s help. After some tries, he will confidently turn his mother into a
provider. For example, when he discovers that he can hold on to his mother by
displaying problems with eating, his mother undoubtedly will place much value
eating properly. If the mother is concerned with cleanliness, it would be enough
for the pampered child not to be clean in order to make new demands on her. If
the mother, for example, places much emphasis on bowel movements, then the
child will have problems in that area. We can draw the interesting conclusion
that the attention of a pampered child should never be drawn to whatever the
mother deems important. If the mother wants the child to be alone, the child will
never want to be alone. Fear is common to almost all pampered children,
because it is the best means for keeping a mother close. We can easily ascertain
the source of fear. Perhaps every person can create fear by imagining terrible
situations, burglars, snakes, wild animals, etc.
Children understand human nature better than many adults. Actually, we

can already see the effect of pampering during the opening days of school.
Pampered children are defensive when arriving at kindergarten, sit on the side,
and wait with longing to return to their mother. They find no positive contact
with others because they are prepared only to hit and scratch them. Admittedly,
certain types exceed in winning people over. They succeed in persuading their
schoolmates and teachers to pamper them. Usually handsome, pleasant children,
they like to place themselves under the protection of others. We also understand
why and what kind of children can easily be seduced. Those who are primarily
concerned with being held in high esteem are most easily enticed. I shall
mention briefly other characteristics of pampered children, such as difficulty in
mathematics. It took me some time to understand this. If such a child has already
had some practice with figures and felt success, then he can also become
extraordinarily skilled in mathematics. If this early success eludes him, then it is
more difficult to help him get over the elementary steps in arithmetic than in the
other subjects. In writing, the child has a model, but to find a rule to figure out
something independently is difficult, and for a dependent child too difficult.
Often, these children cannot easily concentrate. Unprepared for independent
activities, they do not participate with others and long to be in a situation where
others support them. Their memory is not weaker, but their interest in
establishing contact does not exist. The first task is to awaken their interest. We
can accomplish this task if the first interest they have, which is in their own
person, can be satisfied initially. We must give them room and enlarge their
social feeling, which is easier done in school than at home. Also, these children
want to be the center of attention either by doing well or, what seems easier for
human nature, by being bad and trying to create trouble. Pampered children will
tolerate punishment, even spanking, as long as we occupy ourselves with them.
We often find the same phenomenon in public when someone cries out loud,
makes himself conspicuous, pushes ahead of others, and like a pampered child,
tries under all circumstances to attract attention by shabby means or attempting
to dominate. Here, great dangers lie ahead. It is no accident that a large number
of pampered children become criminals. Also, the preponderance of neurotics,
alcoholics, and suicides begin as pampered children. Therefore, we must sharpen
our powers of observation for the thousand variations in which the pampered
child can appear. In school, the teacher could most easily accomplish this task if
we provide him with sufficient training, as many cities already do. The teacher
can recognize such manifestations; he knows how to bring a child to the path of
progress with pedagogical tact. The child must learn to understand what we have
come to understand. We must convince him; we must make it easier for him to
extend his interest to others. The teacher can achieve this objective when he

understands that he has to guide the interest of the child first toward himself.
When he succeeds in this task, the mother no takes center stage, another person
appears on the child's horizon. The restraints that hindered the unfolding of
social feeling have been demolished.
Chapter XI
The Technique of Treatment1
[1932]
Whenever I am asked to describe the technique of treatment, I feel like
Augustine who said: “When you do not ask me, I know; when you ask me, I do
not know.” But for years I have been thinking of writing on this subject and have
always hesitated, not because it was not clear in my mind (it has become quite
automatic by now), but because a written description of the technique of
treatment involves laying down the law upon a matter that cannot be
standardized, measured, and categorized. The artistry of Individual Psychology
assumes its principal significance in its technique, so I will ask my readers to
remember throughout this chapter that, when I stress certain approaches and
aspects of technique, their application is bound to differ in accordance with the
individual case.
One of the most important points in dealing with neuroses is that the
psychiatrist must do his utmost to deflate the high value the neurotic places on
his symptoms. He must accomplish this task with the greatest tact for many
patients cannot endure having their symptoms devalued. The psychiatrist's
approach in this matter cannot be rigorously defined; he must learn to feel his
way, to sense just how far he can go in exploding the symptom; in some cases he
can puncture it directly, in others he must follow a more roundabout course. The
art of evaluation benefits the patient only if it penetrates the defenses of the
negative lifestyle, and I will try now to describe the technique of this penetration
as systematically as possible.
We begin the first time the patient walks into the consulting-room. The
psychiatrist must be as unprejudiced as possible and avoid doing or saying
anything that might give the patient the idea that the psychiatrist is committing
an act of self-sacrifice in ministering to his woes. No matter what the
circumstances may be, the psychiatrist must never say: “The greatest wish of my
life is to make my patient healthy,” because such a statement has no bearing
whatsoever on the main aspect of the problem, namely, getting the patient to
cooperate in the treatment. This cooperation must be our chief aim, and we
should let the patient see it as such at every step. In this way, we may avoid
many complications.
Cases of depression present difficult problems in treatment. The patient

exerts every effort to expound his troubles; he weeps, and describes his
symptoms so that we might think nothing like them had ever existed before.
Anxietyneurotics and compulsion-neurotics often talk a lot as well, as do many
patients even when they do not suffer from hypomania. All patients have their
own way of voicing their complaints; many of them speak abstractedly and do
not touch on the practical side of the case at all; some come from other
psychiatrists and try to explain all their symptoms from a sexual aspect. We must
never make the mistake of saying, “Cut it short, please!”; the flow of words must
be borne patiently. Sometimes, I have had patients who talked uninterruptedly
for three hours. If the patient shows no sign of stopping after an hour (as is often
the case), the psychiatrist can try and slip in while the patient pauses for breath,
and say: “Now you've told me so much I must stop and think it all over.” In any
case, having heard him out, the psychiatrist must realize that the patient has
simply been wasting time and can suggest to him very tactfully: “Good! Now
that we know what has been holding you up, we can get to work properly.” For
often a patient elaborates his symptoms as a defensive measure, because he fears
that if he fritters them away in a few words, he will not appear as important as he
would like to be.
1 Unpublished, incomplete manuscript from the Library of Congress.
When we mention that the time has come to discuss causes rather than
symptoms, we notice at once how the patient tries to veer off, and we must make
every effort to make him cooperate. Even though in the majority of cases, the
patient lacks cooperation, it is not hard for him to admit the necessity of
cooperation in life. In curing him, we must drive home that if a man cooperates
he can never become neurotic. Occasionally, I have found that it worked well to
say: “I cannot listen to you any more because if I do, our cooperation is upset,”
but usually I merely suggest that it is time to go on with the main work.
The patient must be treated with definite courtesy, so that does not get the
impression of being a defendant pleading his case before a judge. The
psychiatrist must never forget that human nature cannot endure subordinate
status and no patient will ever subordinate himself without protest.
When he turns up for the first interview, showing him to a particular chair
is a great mistake. Patients always expect to find a 'Poor-sinner’s seat,' so it is a
good idea to disarrange the seating facilities and put a number of chairs around
the room, letting the patient take his choice. The point of this strategy is to see
him in action, and we can learn a great deal from such small details as the choice
of a chair close to the psychiatrist, or one farther removed. One patient may walk
straight over to the psychiatrist’s desk--that is a good sign; another may keep

well away from it--that is not so good. These shreds of evidence can used later
on and explained to the patient.
Next we must ask the patient when his troubles began, in order to find the
exogenic factor, the difficult situation which provoked the symptoms.
Meanwhile, the psychiatrist must be thinking: “Why did the patient retreat when
he found himself in this particular situation?,” and because the answer lies in the
patient’s childhood. the discussion must turn to that topic. It is not necessary to
say: “Tell me something about your childhood,” instead we can ask for some
information about the parents: “What were your parents like? Healthy...?
Nervous.....?” We do not ask for hereditarian reasons, but to sum up the
atmosphere of the patient’s home, to find out the relationship between child and
parents. Often it is best to ask: “Tell me something about your father.” Now no
patient is unable to say something about his father’s character, and if he replies:
“Oh, my father was a very friendly sort of person,” we must remember that he
means that his father was very friendly toward him. Similarly when he says:
“But my mother was very critical,” we must read between the lines and realize
that he tried to keep at a distance from his mother. The student must remember
speaking of the mere possession of a certain virtue is meaningless; virtue exists
only in accordance with how it is employed.
Next, psychiatrist must find out how many children were in the family,
because he must know exactly where the patient stood in the family
constellation. Then he can ask: “Who was the father’s/mother’s favorite?” Often,
the patient was either his mother's or father’s favorite, or even the favorite of
both of them. Knowing that pampering is the most harmful form of upbringing,
we can usually accept such favoritism as a bad sign. When he reaches this stage
in the questioning, the psychiatrist has probably arrived at the point when the
patient’s weaknesses began.
“Were you a good or bad child?” This is not a vital question; we ask it
simply to see whether the patient was active or passive in childhood. Then other
questions: “Did you have many friends? What kind of friends were they?” and:
“Were you clear in your mind about your sexual role in life?” Because the truth
is not clear in the patient's mind, he often answers the last question very vaguely.
To this response the psychoanalysts would say: “No, his vagueness is because
the answer lies in his unconscious mind.” But this is not true; the patient has
simply never had occasion to frame the matter in words and concepts. Here too,
we must remember that we are not dealing with strictly tangible, comprehended
unconscious processes. Because a person succeeds in grasping something and
putting it into words, does not mean that he has transferred it from the
unconscious to the conscious.

We must be on the lookout for evidence of pampering, for every day I
become more and more convinced that “neurotic cases” originate in a pampered
childhood.2 The psychiatrist may easily convince the patient of his pampered
style, if he can give him examples of occasions when he has not cooperated, not
carried his work to a final conclusion. For instance, if the patient says he was
disorderly in childhood, we must be able to see the shadow of a second person in
this statement, a person who made order for him. This significant point is not
hard to explain to the patient: “You were disorderly, you put your jobs onto
other people's shoulders. Today, you are just the same and because you always
expect the help of others you are afraid of advancing alone.”
Numerous other bits of evidence indicate pampering. Sometimes an
uncooperative child becomes very precise, which is not hard to explain once we
realize that pampering can be bought, or bribed, by displaying a great love of
order and neatness. The psychiatrist must watch carefully to see how the patient
reacts to the question of friendship, whether he is worried or irritated by being
asked about his friends. We can judge by his answer whether he has adopted the
“hesitant attitude.” Few patients like to admit having no friends and no patient
finds it easy to say whether he made friends easily or not: children often reply
inaccurately, though adults' reply more correctly. But if--as we expect--the
patient admits he found making friends difficult, then he confirms our suspicion
that he never developed much sense of comradeship. Naturally, we cannot
evaluate the extent of his poor development from this answer alone, we must
also ask about other issues, i.e. whether he spent time only with girls, or with
children who submitted to him. These answers also give us some insight into the
development of domineering tendencies through pampering.
2 This means more than the word alone conveys. When we speak of a
‘pampered’ life style, we mean an outlook on life which assumes the rest of the
world to be at the individual’s beck and call.
Pampered children routinely display traits of anxiety. The moderately
pampered child he often learns at an early age to put up with being left on his
own, but his anxiety-traits may come out in other ways, such as crying,
wandering about at night, and bedwetting, all signs that he cannot bear to feel
isolated.
Other childhood traits can tell us a lot about our patient. Nail-biting, for
instance, tells us that as a child he revolted against cultural demands. The
pampered child exhibits all the traits regarded as sexual manifestations by the
psychoanalytical school: constipation and urinary difficulties, for example. In
addition, he cannot endure being crossed in any way. The psychiatrist must feel

his way amongst the numerous varieties of pampered styles and find out just
how much the pampered trait prevails in each individual case. Then, he must
compare the childhood manifestations with the patient's adult ways, thus
strengthening the belief in the significance of the first years of childhood.
Next come the earliest childhood recollections, vitally important in any
diagnosis as a means of gauging the patient's life style. The psychiatrist must
grasp more than the recollection itself, he must grasp the attitude and the wish
behind it, the intangible elements. He must make the picture a coherent one by
using his intuitive faculties. Of course he will be working with more than his
intuition alone, for through his previous questions he will have gleaned some
fragments of the personality and can employ these when he seeks to assemble
the whole picture. Anything he picks out intuitively he must carefully
corroborate with facts, and if he cannot find this corroboration, if this intuition
clashes with the facts, then he knows that his guess has mis-fired. The more we
come in contact with earliest childhood recollections, the more fascinating they
become, because we discover interrelated factors and an association of ideas that
illuminate human nature. Serious human errors can show up in the recollection. I
remember the case of a man suffering from manic-depressive psychoses who, at
short intervals, fell into a depressed state. His earliest recollection was of falling
into a fit of violent passion when his mother died. Behind his fury was the
thought: “How could my mother do such a thing? How could she die and leave
me alone?” He was a pampered child (though it is not enough to say this alone
for he remained pampered all his life and the feeling behind his recollection was
constant) and quarreled with his father because the latter was not in a position to
satisfy his every desire.
Sometimes we find that a single recollection is inadequate; it does not speak
to us clearly enough and we have to ask the patient for more. Thus, we are able
to clarify the picture still further and define the coherence of the personality
more precisely. All the recollections will show us a certain degree of inadequacy
in the cooperative function. The points I have listed will be enough to occupy the
psychiatrist for some days. If necessary, he can stimulate the patient into
presenting further material for cooperative discussion. If the patient replies that
he has nothing more to say, we can suggest that perhaps he is not cooperating
properly. Sometimes we find a quick diagnosis inadequate and we must press on,
learning to predict what the patient will do in a certain situation. The patient's
dream-world can be used as material for, as I have explained, what happens in
the dream is no different from what happens in the waking state. The psychiatrist
must remember how the patient fights the demands of common sense when he
dreams; how he avoids logic and follows the commands of his lifestyle. He must

remember that the patient is cast in one mold and that every aspect of his life
will bear its imprint. Seeking fictive superiority, every neurotic patient has
symptoms that betray this abortive struggle, a diseased and ambitious striving to
be “out of the ordinary” behind his illness. Unless we realize that symptoms
symbolize a huge muck-heap out of which the patient builds himself a refuge,
we cannot grasp the technique of treatment.
When the patient comes for treatment, he is in the “prime of his deepest
trouble” and if you ask him: “Where were you when the labor of life was
apportioned?”, he points helplessly to his muck-heap, explaining how it has
hindered him from cooperating. While we know only too well what he is doing,
he goes to great lengths citing all the obstacles that have stood in his way, like a
shrewd criminal trying to establish a perfect alibi. (I need hardly say that this
simile is not intended to erase the vast distinction separating the neurotic from
the criminal!) “If I could only get some sleep,” he says, “I would be on top of the
world,” or, “I can't get as far as I want because I am compelled to wash my
hands all day.” But we can look at these troubles in two ways; one is the patient's
way, the other the psychiatrist's. He thinks of his symptoms as obstacles: we
must think of his using them to prop up his fictive superiority and salvage his
pride. His complaints can be boiled down to a few words: “I could have done so
much if I had not been weighed down by my symptoms!” The psychiatrist must
explain what the patient does not understand, show him how this feeling of vast
personal worth crept into his composition. He must explain that no psychic
development can be normal without a degree of cooperative ability behind it,
and the solution of the problems of life require this crucial ability. The patient
declares bankruptcy because his goal of superiority demands that he do so. Even
when the patient manifests the most extreme form of inferiority complex, the
psychiatrist must not regard it as an admission of unworthiness on the part of the
patient. He produces it as proof of his illness: he shows that he is not responsible
for his own ineffectiveness. The patient rarely admits to personal inability; most
often, he exploits his “mysterious” symptoms.
We must explain to the patient the reasons for his state of tension,
remembering how the inferior organs react to it, indicating its presence. As we
strive to increase the patient’s cooperative ability, we must show him that no
normal person, no matter what his situation, would be sufficiently affected by
this tension to adopt the kind of attitude toward life that leads to such errors as
homosexuality, suicide, and crime. At the core of Individual Psychological
treatment, harmonious collaboration between psychiatrist and patient must be
effected slowly and steadily, with the patient being led in the right direction until
mutual cooperation becomes an everyday matter to him. The result is an

increased cooperative ability which sets him more at ease and slackens his
tenseness. The psychiatrist must expect thousands of questions on the subject of
cooperation; patients often ask: “But isn’t it bad for my own personal progress if
I think too much about other people?”, or, “But how do I go about making
friends?” In time, the psychiatrist collects a number of apt answers for such
occasions. He can say: “Are you not in the same position as every other human
being?” and “If something is difficult to accomplish, you make mistakes.
Doesn’t every man when he is faced with a new job?”
Explanations should take the form of vivid illustrative examples, as these
strike home more effectively than long and dreary dissertations. A little friendly
irony is sometimes telling, but it must used very carefully, as the psychiatrist
must never give the impression that he does not take the patient seriously. We
can form no bond if our attitude is flippant or unfriendly, and all explanations
demand practical acumen and cheerfulness. We need extreme patience and
tolerance, and humor and wit helps a lot.
Sometimes the issue of fees presents a few difficulties. Although Individual
Psychology is not a business, every psychiatrist must make a living out of his
work. So it is best to settle the issue of fees as soon as possible at the beginning
of the case. Say to the patient: “The treatment will last from eight to ten weeks.
If the degree of difficulty of the case is unclear, I cannot, of course, be so
definite. But anyway let us make a start and at the end of a month, I will ask if
you feel we are getting along all right. If you feel we are not on the right track,
then we will stop the treatment.” I often do this in complicated cases. Accepting
a promise of payment at some vague future date is not a good idea; in such cases
the patient had better go to the Individual Psychology clinic. Treating too many
patients for nothing is also not good, as sometimes they may suspect they get
less attention than the paying patients. In addition, some patients may be
embarrassed to find themselves among people better dressed than they are and it
is usually better if they, also, go to the clinic instead.
EXAMPLES OF THE TECHNIQUE OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY.
Example 1: A Case of Morphine Addiction and Homosexuality.
A pampered second son, the patient had an elder brother who was a
handsome lad with great charm and a fine physique--superior in these respects to
the patient. A great rivalry existed between the two, but it was hidden. The elder
brother was the more popular of the two; even outside the family circle, he was
the appreciated one and his select status weighed heavily on the patient. Their
rivalry came out in this manner: where the elder brother was brilliant and quick,
the younger brother was a shirker and gave the subject a wide berth: where the
elder was bad, the younger was outstandingly good. The elder brother was a bad

pupil in school, but he took up an intellectual profession; the younger brother
was an excellent scholar, but he went into business. He worked in one of his
father' s concerns, doing business in drugs, morphine, etc. On finding himself in
a situation where he felt he was the underdog (he was already homosexual), he
became a morphine addict. However, he did not take strong doses and it was not
difficult to wean him of the habit.
This is one of those cases in which the patient stands “In the shadow of the
Titan,” as I have described it, and the reader should take careful note of the
appropriate technique of treatment. The patient knows his brother has better
natural endowments than he has, a more manly build, and more popularity. This
combination of factors has steered off the normal line. His development more
closely approximated that of his younger sister, a very pretty girl who managed
to captivate people quickly. He imitated her, often desiring to be a girl himself.
In this way, he avoided competition with his brother. Herein lies the reason for
his homosexual tendencies and his eliminating of the norm in order to avoid a
defeat.
I said to him: “You have grown up in the shadow of a Titan.” Now the
power of this remark lies in the fact that the patient cannot bring himself to
swallow it. He thinks to himself: “My brother a Titan?” and tries at once to
prove that his brother is not a Titan at all. In so doing, he strengthens himself
after being encouraged in a friendly way. Disliking the idea of anyone
associating his mode of life with his brother's superiority, he begins to think of
his brother's shortcomings instead. He has believed his brother is a Titan without
being aware of it; he knows merely that he chose to follow a path and certain
thoughts were associated with it. Even if he thought, “I am cleverer and more
important than my brother” his frame of mind would not be changed
fundamentally at all, because his thought does not relate to the primal cause of
his present way of life; he does not grasp the whole of the matter. We can teach
him to see the big picture: whenever he is shirking, we can say: “Oh well, I
suppose your brother's the only person who could manage that job.” Using this
technique with him I succeeded in giving him back a certain amount of
confidence. His morphine addiction disappeared when he realized he used it to
avoid competition with his brother, and his homosexual tendencies were also
successfully wiped out.
This case serves as a good example of how homosexuality can be cured.
This man was homosexual because he was convinced that only his brother can
make a good impression on women. He had plenty of proof in the many
instances showing that he approached a woman as if she were a menace.) We
have to explain to him why he appears to suffer so many defeats and how his

brother’s mere existence forces him to take a back seat. For as long as he
competes with his brother, he will use morphine addiction and homosexuality to
achieve the illusion of victory. He is the type of person who gets into a thorough
mess in his normal love-relations, then tries to preserve his prestige by
conquering young boys. We must throw cold water on his schemes, but throw it
tactfully. We must show him that although he may regard himself as the
conqueror in homosexual relations, his male partner does not share this view and
takes all the credit of victory himself! As we say to the patient: “Surely it is not
possible for you both to be the victors?” We tell him homosexuality is a union in
which both biters are bit, and we try to turn his eyes in the direction of the other
sex.3 If he comes to me and says: “I have been with other men,” I reply: “You
are not cooperating.” “Oh, I forgot about that,” he says. “Yes” I tell him, “You
forgot because you are not accepting the cooperative principle.” Thus, we give
him a guiding star to follow and if he loses sight of it, we point it out to him
again.
We must not forget that such men are like dried-out human sponges and
only success can satisfy their thirst. Their conception of success is most pitiable.
Once a man said to me: “Do you know that I'm always the life and soul of a
party?” Now this is a ludicrous idea of success and it can be erased by a little
irony. “Well, well, well!” we say “Are you really as able as all that?” But, as I
have said, irony is a dangerous weapon that must not be used too freely, and the
psychiatrist must feel his way very carefully to see if the patient can take it. If he
can, it indicates that he is cooperating. If he is boastful and says, for instance: “I
always tell these fellows that they’re just a bunch of dumb guys who should feel
honored by my talking to them”--then I make him a respectful little bow.
In the present case, because I stressed the beauty of the female form and the
comparative lack of beauty in the male, he eventually came round to this way of
thinking and became capable of going to a mixed-bathing pool. (Of course, more
direct way exist to wean a patient of his overvaluation of the male physique, but
every psychiatrist will choose according to his own fancy and the circumstances
of the case. Treatment for a patient completely infatuated with the masculine
form is particularly difficult.) Afterward, I said to him: “Well, what did you do
at this pool? The question of what should be “done” is important in cases of
homosexuality. In this case, the patient took the only course left open to him and
practiced wooing a girl, something he had never done before.
He met two youths, one of whom found out that he was homosexual. The
patient asked: “What makes you think that?” and the youth replied “Because I
never see you here with a woman.” The patient said: “But you don’t see me the
rest of the day.” From this reply, I could see he was beginning to defend himself

and trying to prove his masculinity. I encouraged him to run around with these
two youths as much as he liked, as their influence was very important at this
stage of the cure and he did not regard them from a homosexual point of view.
This is the psychiatrist's work; once he has got a thorough understanding of the
case, he must see just where the patient stands and steer him in the appropriate
direction.
3 Editor’s note: In contemporary Classical Adlerian practice, a homosexual
choice would be accepted; however, any dynamics of dominance, superiority, or
depreciation would be unveiled as uncooperative, as it would be when
counseling someone in a heterosexual relationship.
Example 2.
The youngest of several children, the patient grew up in a very ambitious
family. Now a married woman, she lives in a small provincial town and has a
hard time getting along with other people, somehow managing to criticize them.
Since the day she married, she has suffered from anxiety whenever she needs to
go out and meet people, or is left alone in the house. Consequently, her husband
is forced to toe the line and plan his life in a way that helps her avoid anxiety.
Her ambitious nature demands that she constantly have the upper hand and she
employs anxiety as an effective means of eliminating other people from her life.
As she does her utmost to create situations in which she alone has the upper
hand, the psychiatrist must apply his technique to analyze this state of affairs.
Within the first hour of treatment, she clearly reveals her basic characteristics.
She intends to boss the psychiatrist as well, and we easily recognize that a young
woman likes the idea of fascinating her doctor. (This desire is particularly strong
in pampered people and led Freud to adopt the “Transference” technique.)
Women patients often set out to try and make the psychiatrist fall in love with
them. The patient shows her warm feelings to the psychiatrist and expects to be
paid back in kind, and she should not be abruptly disillusioned. Although she
baits her hook by telling him that she feels well only in his presence, he must not
rise to the bait, but must instead use his technique and a little intuition. Once he
realizes she wants to rule the roost, he can do a little prophesying and outsmart
her in a way that will smack of clairvoyance to her. He can tell her that she is
afraid of storms, nervous in a train or a crowd of people, that she can ride in an
automobile but not in a subway. Of course every rule has exceptions, but usually
the psychiatrist can sum up the situation and the patient will admit to its
correctness. Part of the technique of Individual Psychology lies in being able to
recognize which patients are susceptible to these and similar strategies.
If the patient is an obstinate type of person and says: “I don’t expect to get
anything out of this treatment; I am sure that you will soon turn me out,” or

“You are my last hope,” then the psychiatrist can employ the technique I
mentioned previously, and say: “After fourteen days of cooperative treatment, if
you don’t feel you are benefiting, then you’re perfectly free to say so and go
elsewhere.” I have never yet had a patient who chose to leave at the end of the
fortnight, but sometimes a patient has said: “You have explained certain things
that I knew all about before” and expressed delight that I completely agreed with
his or her opinion!
Women who want to rule the roost usually do not like their female role in
life. I do not mean that they never marry--rather, that they merely conform and
only partially to femininity, accepting it conditionally. Because they are frigid,
the psychiatrist raises himself greatly in the patient's esteem if he recognizes her
frigidity and tells her so, for she has believed this was an impenetrable, personal
secret. This frigidity lays a terrible burden on marital relations and must be
overcome. This type of woman is also very jealous, which means the husband is
a virtual prisoner if he pays any heed to her. He must follow in her footsteps and
foreswear the slightest glance in the direction of another woman. The
psychiatrist can easily guess when this jealousy and frigidity are present, thus
having plenty of material to work on. This knowledge will not, of course, supply
him with all the essential facts and he will have to get more information from the
patient, but he will know that the same lifestyle controls both the hidden and the
revealed material.
For instance, this patient's earliest recollection was of indulging in
masturbation at the age of three or four. She walked, sweating, into the room
where her mother was sitting with the nurse maid. Her mother said: “What's the
matter? Why are you sweating like that?” and the nurse-maid laughed, saying
“She's been playing around with herself.” The patient never forgave her for
saying this. She also recollected that the nurse-maid often came to her afterward
and told her she was going to have a baby. The patient replied: “Aren’t you very
ashamed?”
She hated that nurse-maid ever afterward and still hates her because she
robbed her of her prestige. This incident, with its personal-relations material, is
enough to give the psychiatrist an idea of the technique he should use in
handling the case. It tells him that for the patient, “Life means ruling the roost.”
It is also shows us, again, that the incident in itself is not important, but rather
the patient's interpretation of the incident, which gives it a particular tone and
individuality. Any normal person takes it for granted that a woman should obtain
satisfaction from sexual intercourse, but the patient sees the matter from a very
different angle. She must rule; she must preserve her prestige.
Example 3.

A thirty-year-old law-student can never sit for his exams. He is the
youngest child in a family which used to be very well off. The only member of
the family with whom he is on friendly terms, his mother spoiled him a great
deal. Prejudiced against his provincial home-town, he believes the young men
there spend their whole time laughing at him because he is thirty and has never
sat for any of his exams. “How very sad it is,” I said to him, “to think that these
poor fellows have nothing to do but worry about you.” This was a way of
throwing the story back in his teeth, and immediately he said that they did plenty
of other things as well. I knew from then on he would not be able to fill his head
with such ideas any more. Other young men in the town have passed their exams
successfully, but the patient shies away from them, stays at home, never goes out
and is generally despised for his behavior. However, he thinks he is vastly
superior to everyone else: he is intelligent, witty, quick in repartee and, because
he fears women and hopes to hurt their feelings, he adopts a superior attitude
towards them.
Until he reached intermediate school, he was considered a child-wonder,
and a decisive blow was struck at his prestige when he failed an examination. He
went no further after that. He was so terribly pampered that when he arrived at
school he expected to get nothing but praise and honorable mentions. The shock
effect of his disillusionment pursued him right up to the time of his legal
examinations.
We can easily visualize the whole picture of this case. In treating the
patient, I had to emphatically stress the pampering. I had to show the patient that
he sought a non-existent world, that he had drawn up a plan of life as he would
like it to be. Of course, the patient noticed the contradiction between his private
plan and real life, but all this knowledge taught him was to retreat as fast as
possible. I suggested to him that he apply this knowledge in a different way,
namely, to discount his private plan. The suggestion bore fruit, for the inexorable
law of logic was on my side and visible to the patient. He slowly began to make
progress, learn a little, and attempt to face up to the demands of his course of
study.
As we know, he is supposed to have been a child-wonder, and after he
broke down on reaching intermediate school, he was turned over to family
tutors. Thus, any success he may have had since the intermediate school period
must be credited entirely to these tutors. In other words, the patient has never
learned to work independently in a class. Though the normal person may have
difficulty imagining anyone can be so maladjusted, such is the case and therefore
we must realize that a private tutor can be a great, though temporary advantage
to someone like our patient. An intelligent tutor will do his utmost to make

himself superfluous as soon as possible. Then the boy will be able to work
independently and no longer expect to have someone looking over his shoulder
the whole time, applauding him every time he solves a problem correctly. To
learn means to be in full communication with the subject. When the psychiatrist
points out the faults in the patient's lifestyle, he teaches him something about
establishing this communication.
This case gives us an opportunity to consider the Individual Psychological
principle of inferiority feeling and over-compensation. Over-compensation takes
the form of a certain arrogance or depreciation of others. Arrogance conceals a
fundamental sense of personal weakness. When this patient avoids a problem, he
does so in order to save his prestige from shipwreck. We must explain this
dynamic to him: “You shrink back because you fear your true inability will
become apparent if you attempt to solve your problem.” This can be put with
perfect tact and kindliness. “Your arrogant attitude toward other people is like
the envy of a poor man; envy that makes you determined to be richer than the
rich. Your fear of active achievement shows that you mistrust it deeply, because
you believe that failure is the most dreadful thing in the world.”
The psychiatrist must regard a patient's dreams in the light of his lifestyle.
Fairly sure what sort of dreams this patient will have he can predict them as part
of the technique. He can tell him that in his dreams trains pull out of the station a
split-second before the patient arrives, and that he dreams of falling down. The
train dream is most typical of the patient's attitude in waking life: he lets his
opportunities slide away from under his nose, and then stays put and bewails his
misfortune. I once had another patient who exhibited a similar “poor man's
envy.” He complained that whenever he made advances to a girl, he was dogged
by bad luck. At the same time he was reputed to be a very successful man. When
he came to me, he was involved in an affair with a girl who was the most
unsuitable person he could have chosen. She protested vehemently against her
female role in life. The patient's failures in love seemed to him to be so
numerous and pronounced that he simply could not stay calm and relax. He was
tortured by the idea that he was not really masculine, a ridiculous thought as he
was very hirsute and knew that hairiness was characteristic of masculinity. But,
he said, this very hairiness that made women keep away from him. Throughout
childhood, he had not felt manly at all, and preferred the feminine role. He had a
very good-looking mother and knew that she was admired and respected by
everyone. He himself was small and delicate.
Here is a case of conflicting opinions: impatient and sensitive, the patient
feels obliged to change himself. He also has all the characteristics of a man
afraid of being unsuccessful. A vital part of the technique is making him realize

this conflict. Now most patients try to find proof that they are worthwhile human
beings, and our patient is no exception. So the psychiatrist must tell him: “I am
not interested in this proof business. We have more than enough proof already
that you are a man and not repulsive. You are quite capable of finding a mate,
but you must not treat her as though she were simply a means of proving your
masculinity.”
The patient dreamed about an ape. This ape is himself. He tried to strangle
the ape, which turned into a woman and pushed him away. (He is trying to
strangle his own ape-likeness: he wants to expunge his hairiness.) The woman
seemed to admire him, but she protested. He lost interest in her and went away.
This movement was tantamount to saying: “I wanted her merely as a means of
proving my worth, so I could get rid of my feeling of ape-likeness.” He was
enraged with her.
Example 4.
A woman married for ten years feels humiliated and resigned. The elder of
two sisters, she had a much prettier younger sister and a beautiful mother. The
mother greatly exaggerated the value of beauty and rubbed it well into her
children. As a girl, the patient was extremely ambitious, but soon became
resigned. After being successful at the lyceum, she went on to a university and
became deeply depressed because she couldn’t pass her exams like the other
students. Here again her resignation came over her. “Why,” I asked her “could
you not take your examinations like the other students? Because inside you were
thinking: What does it matter anyway? Nothing will come of it, even if I do pass
my exams all right. This attitude connects with the tragic experience you had of
being dethroned by your younger sister, and also with your mother's views on
the importance of beauty, which affect other aspects of your life as well.” (For
instance, the patient said: “My children are fine kids, but I'm afraid they're not at
all handsome.”) The younger sister married first, throwing some light on the
elder sister's way of life. She did not want to marry, and remembered saying at
the age of nineteen: “If I marry now, my whole youth will be wasted.” This
statement reveals her attitude toward marriage. For three years, a man made
advances to her, but she would have nothing to do with him. Finally, after his
coaxing and appeals to her ambitions, she resigned herself to her fate and
married him.
A simile can best explain this sort of situation to a patient. I said to her:
“For the ten years of your married life you have behaved like a housemaid; a
housemaid who thinks of nothing but her miserable remuneration and,
consequently, tries to ignore the many duties of the house.” She always felt as
though she were living in a house of cards. She paid little attention to her

children, felt she could love neither them nor her husband, and she was frigid
because she had simply resigned herself to marriage.
As a rule, with every patient we find someone in their environment who is
critical of their way of life. Now, this woman with her feeling of resignation did
not bother much about her personal appearance and her husband would have
liked to see her better dressed. Once he said to her: “The whole trouble is that
you are convinced that the cheap clothes you wear now are quite good enough
for me.” Which was true. She said to me: “I know few men as worthy as my
husband, but unfortunately he is not a handsome man.” Because he was not
handsome, she was convinced that her married life could not be a success and
was bound to collapse like a house of cards. Her whole life expressed this
resigned attitude because of her overvaluation of beauty. She picked out certain
things which she said she could not bear to do: for example, she found she could
not handle anything that was dusty, or connected with dust. As a result, she
never did any housework. She was not on good terms with her children, and if
her husband ever proposed taking her on a trip, she refused. Often, she told him
that she was happiest when he was away for a few weeks, and her ambition was
to stay in the country without her husband.
The psychiatrist will be able to cure her resignation only by curing her of
her attitude toward life. He must emphasize, almost monotonously: “Because
your husband is not handsome, you are convinced that your marriage can never
be a success. It just won’t work. You are sure that your house of cards is bound
to collapse.”
Example 5.
A man of fifty, the eldest of three brothers was a real slave at his job. When
he came to me he had been pensioned off, was unmarried and had no lovelife.
An odd character, he had various forms of sexual perversions: he was a
masochist, a shoe-fetishist, and enjoyed seeing women in riding habit with their
riding boots on. Now when a normal man is interested in a woman, his interest
embraces her whole self. But this man's interest was for superfluous parts only-
shoes, external appearances--and apart from these externals, women simply did
not exist for him. If he ever did manage to get a little closer to them than this, it
was as a weakling, a masochist. From masochism he derived a certain triumph,
(I) because he succeeded in getting satisfaction from the woman, and (2) because
she had to follow his instructions. All his traits were those of a weakling and we
must look to his childhood for the reason.
He was the eldest child and very delicate; at the age of twelve he looked
like a boy of seven. He had a brother three years his junior, who was much
stronger and more masculine than the patient and more than a match for him.

The patient avoided all games when he was a child and soon busied himself in
study. A very good pupil, to-day, he is an intelligent, musical and well-read man.
He has passed all his life alone. Now that he has been pensioned off, he
does not know what to do, how to start life afresh. Wanting to be a conqueror, he
was never able to play that role in love. Because he felt weak in other respects as
well, he never mixed with people, losing all chance of social conquests. So his
whole life centered around work, and in this sphere he was quite excellent, rising
far above the average man. He won an occupational triumph, but at the terrible
cost of wasting his abilities in all other aspects of life. When he came to me for
treatment, he had nothing at all.
We can see that he believed himself capable of success in the professional
sphere alone, and the psychiatrist's job is to show him that he reached his high,
professional eminence by hard work, not because he was “predestined” to be
simply a good worker. I treated this way and was amazed at how rapidly he
began to get better. Becoming high-spirited, he began to look around and see if it
was not too late for him to find a wife. The impression that women were the
superior sex was still strong in him (he had a few brief encounters with
prostitutes) and this came out clearly in one of his dreams. He dreamed that the
woman he had once loved was riding upon his shoulders: on top of her was a
child. Now the man was no fool, and if given his cue, he caught on to the idea
immediately. So I reminded him of a subject many great artists have put upon
canvas, “Campasta on Aristotle,” which depicts the domination of man by
woman. “But in your dream there was a child as well,” I reminded him. “Where
does it come from?” He began to want a child very much and at once asked me
if I thought it was possible for him.
While the patient was delicate and weak early in life, this was no reason
why he should have taken his particular path. How can causality be an issue in
this case? Although he was once weak, now he is a strong man. But even if he
had remained delicate and weak, this could not have led him to plan his life the
way he did. We can understand his having done so because, statistically
speaking, he was likely to plan in this way. Using the same approach as in
contemporary physics, we must explain to the patient that he built the way he did
because he founded his structure upon certain, erroneous opinions. Thus, the
whole structure of his life fell askew. 4
4 Editor’s note: This is the end of the manuscript. Chapter XII
Origin of the Striving for Superiority and Social Interest1 2
From a lecture for the Viennese Medical Society for Individual Psychology
[1933]

While it almost sounds like a timely problem to talk about striving for
superiority and the roots of social interest, for Individual Psychology it is an old
problem. The total value and meaning of Individual Psychology are contained in
these two aspects and their solution. Our work has always emphasized these two
elements, but we need to clarify their foundations to avoid any doubt about their
meaning, which we sometimes find in our friends, but more often in our
opponents. I do not think that what we mean by striving for superiority is very
well known outside our group. We must add additional information to existing
knowledge. This knowledge cannot be directly understood or found through an
analysis of visible symptoms and facts, as something new is not generally found
through analysis. In such a case we have the parts instead of the totality in front
of us. The totality tells us Individual Psychologists much more than the analysis
of the parts. Also, with synthesis nothing new emerges if one simply puts the
parts together. Where shall we start our explorations, if we want to reveal what
we have accomplished? In respect to the striving for completeness, or as it often
appears, striving for perfection, striving for superiority, or as it has often been
attributed to us by less intelligent writers: striving for power, some have always
understood the real meaning, but not fundamentally enough to communicate this
knowledge to a larger audience, or to clarify the fundamental importance this
striving has in the development of the whole personality. Individual Psychology
was first to mention that every individual has this striving for completeness. It is
absolutely unnecessary to indoctrinate people with the idea so they can develop
into superhumans, as the bold efforts of Nietzsche have shown. Individual
Psychology has pointed out that every individual is aware of striving toward
completeness, striving from lower to higher. Those who can read between the
lines will have understood that we who practice Individual Psychology are
constantly aware of the fundamental meaning of striving for superiority and that
we uncover the typical direction of this striving in any disturbed person.
Nevertheless. I must answer a question which keeps reappearing every time this
issue arises. Both friends and adversaries have questioned what probably was not
quite clear in our group. Today, I will try to bring us closer to an understanding,
because clarity for all is necessary.
1 Originally titled “Über den Ursprung des Strebens nach Überlegenhei und
des Gemeinschafsgefühles,” Aus einem Vortrag in der Wiener medizinischen
Gesellschaft für Individualpsychologie. Published in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Volume XI, 1933. 
2 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1990.
In the first place, striving for superiority is innate. Not in a concrete way or

as a drive, if there would exist a drive, which could later result in a good ending
if nurtured, it is inborn as something that belongs to life, a striving, an urge, a
development, something without which we simply cannot visualize life.
Scholars, especially nature researchers, have always emphasized this principle in
the physical development of man. Especially after Darwin, Lamarck, and others,
it is a matter of course to keep the thought of development in mind. If here we
take one step further and emphasize what was present in these researchers'
minds, we may conclude that life means development. The human mind is alas
too easily accustomed to translating everything that moves into form, not to
observing the flow, but the frozen movement which has taken on solid form.
From the beginning, Individual Psychologists have dissolved in movement what
we perceive as form. As a result, we believe that to live means to develop.
Everyone knows that the total human developed from one egg cell, but everyone
should also understand correctly that this egg cell contains the foundations for
development. How life came on earth is a question; maybe we will never find
the final answer. We should consider how, for instance, Smuts has made a
worthwhile attempt (Wholeness and Evolution) by assuming that life also exists
in inanimate matter, a consideration modern physics comes close to when
pointing out how electrons move around protons. We do not know if this
conception will prove true in the future; however, our comprehension of life as
movement cannot be doubted anymore, movement which goes in the direction of
self-preservation, of increase, of contact with the outer world, of successful
contact in order to survive. We must begin with this path of development, with a
constantly active adjustment to the demands of the world, if we want to
understand in which direction life leads and moves. We must keep in mind that
this is a matter of origin, which is connected with the source of life. We need to
overcome for the continued existence of the individual and the human race; we
need to create a favorable relationship between individual and environment. This
compulsive force to promote improved adjustment never ends. These concepts
form the foundation of our understanding of the striving for superiority.
Possibly much of what I have explained here looks familiar to you and has
been known by others. Nevertheless, Individual Psychology claims special credit
for showing a connection and how this force, called “life,” develops in every
individual. We find ourselves in the middle of evolution and notice it as little as
we feel the earth revolving. Striving toward successful assimilation in the world
is part of this cosmic connection. Even if we doubt that striving for superiority
existed at the beginning of life, the progress of billions of years shows that even
now striving for completeness is a fact for all of us. Furthermore, none of us
knows the one correct road to completeness. Often mankind has attempted to

picture this final goal of human development. So far, the best image we about
this ideal elevation of man is the concept of God.3 No doubt the concept of God
contains the same movement toward completeness as a goal, and it corresponds
most closely with the dark desire of mankind to reach perfection as a concrete
goal of completeness. Indeed, everyone has a different concept of God. Some
images cannot come close to the principle of completeness; however, the purest
expression of God succeeds as a concrete grasp of the goal of completeness.
Of course, people imagine this goal of completeness differently. We
Individual Psychologists doctors, who deal with shortcomings in neurotics,
psychotics, delinquents, and alcoholics, etc., also see this striving for superiority
in them, but going in a different direction, contrary to intelligence, rather than as
a correct goal of completeness. For instance, when someone tries to reach
completeness by dominating others, we consider this goal already unfit. A goal
of domination is no guide for the individual or mankind, because everyone
cannot choose this direction; it would force him in opposition to the force of
evolution; he would have to violate reality and protect himself, full of anxiety,
against truth and all people who acknowledge truth. When we meet people
whose goal of completeness is to lean on others, we consider this goal to
contradict common sense. When someone finds his goal of completeness in
leaving the tasks of life unsolved in order to prevent possible defeats, which
would look like the opposite of completeness, this goal is completely
inappropriate, though many people find it acceptable. Consider the question:
what has happened to those people who chose a wrong goal of completeness for
themselves and whose active adjustment has failed, because they went in the
wrong direction and not toward advancement for all (see Alfred Adler: What Life
Should Mean to You)? The extinction of species, races, tribes, families, and
thousands of individuals who have left nothing behind teaches us the necessity
for finding a tolerably correct goal of completeness. For every individual, the
goal of completeness dictates the direction for the development of his total
personality, movements of expression, outlook, thinking, feeling, and world
concept. A direction deviating somewhat from the truth will result in harm for
the individual, if not his ruin. It would be a happy discovery if we could know
more about a correct direction, because we are embedded in the stream of
evolution, which we have to follow.
Also in this respect, Individual Psychology has accomplished important
work equal to its principle of general striving for completeness. Our many
experiences have led us to understand the direction of an ideal completeness,
namely, in the criteria of Gemeinschaftsgefühl, best translated as the social

feeling of belonging and embeddedness.4 In regard to social interest, Individual
Psychology literature contains certain variations; that is why I want to talk about
it. I don't want to talk much about the usual and silly mistake, sometimes made
in our group by beginners and also outside of our group, as if what we call
“social” means a contemporary specific circle or a larger group to which a
person should belong. Social interest means much more. Specifically, it means to
feel with all concerned subspecies aeternitatis, striving toward a form of
community, which has to be conceived as eternal, as if mankind had reached the
goal of completeness. It never has anything to do with a presently existing group
or society, or with political or religious concepts. However, the goal that is most
apt to lead to completeness means the ideal community of all mankind, the last
fulfillment of evolution. Of course, people ask how I know this. Undoubtedly
not from direct experience, and I will admit that those who find in Individual
Psychology a touch of metaphysics are right. Some praise this aspect of our
approach, some condemn it. Alas, many people have a wrong idea about
metaphysics and want everything they cannot immediately understand excluded
from people's lives. In doing so, we would curtail development, possibilities, and
innovation. Every new idea lies beyond immediate experiences. Immediate
experiences never create anything new. Creative thinking, when combined with
immediate experiences, does create something new. Call it speculation or
transcendental, every science ends in metaphysics. I don't see any reason to be
afraid of metaphysics, which have influenced people's lives and development.
We are not blessed with the absolute truth. That is why we are obliged to think
about our future, about results of our actions, etc.
3 Ernst Jahn und Alfred Adler: Religion und Individua psychologie. Eine
prinzipielle Auseinandersetzung über Menschenführung. 1933 Verlag Dr. Rolf
Passer, Wien und Leipzig. 
4 Translator’s note: Hereafter translated as social interest which is generally
found in translations of Adler's works because there is no English word that
covers the concept of Gemeinschaftsgefühl.
Our concept of social interest as the ultimate development of mankind has
to contain the goal of an ideal society, because it is a situation where we imagine
all life problems solved, all relationships improved, a goal that goes in a
beneficial direction. Completion has to include the goal of an ideal society
because everything we find worthwhile in life is a product of this social interest.
I will repeat what I have worked out in another connection. The newborn child
finds only what others have added to life, the contribution of our forefathers.
This fact alone could inform us how life continues, how we can get closer to a

situation with larger contributions and greater ability to cooperate, to a time
when every individual functions as part of the total. Only the forms of
cooperative movements in the direction of this ideal community will last. We do
not want to pass judgment, but one thing we can say: a movement of an
individual or a group can count as worthwhile for us only when it contains value
for eternity, for the higher development of all mankind.
What happens to people who have not contributed anything? Disappeared,
extinguished! The force of evolution, this impulse to reach a higher stage
physically, intellectually, and spiritually, eliminates everything that does not
participate or contribute anything. A ground rule in development warns the
negative individual: go away; you don't understand what life is about! Thus, the
eternal value of the contribution by people who have accomplished something
for all becomes accentuated. However, we are prudent enough not to claim that
we have the key to say correctly in every case what is and what is estimated as
good for eternity. We know we may make mistakes. Only an objective
exploration or events themselves can decide. At least it we can avoid what does
not add to the striving for completeness. I could talk more about this
completeness and show how all our functions are calculated so as not to disturb
the society of man, but rather connect the individual with society. To see means
to absorb, to fertilize what reaches the retina. Seeing is not only a physiological
event, but also shows that man is part of the whole, who takes and gives.
Through seeing, hearing, and talking we connect with others. Thus, all functions
of our organs are correctly developed only if they are not detrimental to social
interest. We talk about virtue and mean that someone participates; about vice
and mean that he disturbs participation. Everything considered a failure is a
failure because it disturbs the development of society, such as difficult children,
neurotics, delinquents, or suicides. In all these cases participation is absent. In
the history of man we do not find isolated individuals. Our development was
possible only because mankind formed a society and in his striving for
completeness included striving toward an ideal society. All man’s movements in
the stream of evolution, express whether he has fond this direction toward an
ideal society or not. Man is lastingly directed, obstructed, punished, praised, or
challenged by the image of an ideal society, with the result that everyone does
not merely have to account for every deviation, but also has to atone for it. That
is a hard law, even gruesome. Those who have already developed a strong social
interest are firmly determined to diminish the hardships of those who take wrong
steps, as if they knew: there goes a person who has missed the correct road as a
result of causes which Individual Psychology can point out. If people understood
where they went wrong while avoiding evolution, they would leave the wrong

road and follow the better one.
Finally, what about social interest; is that also inborn or do we have to
instill it in people? Of course, it is inborn, but it can become developed only
when the child is exposed to life around him. It unfolds in social association, in
the same way that character traits are formed, however, in the limited way the
child understands social relationships. The determining factor is the creative
power of the child, guided by environment and education, as well as influenced
by the experience of his body and how he appraises it. Considering the
contemporary psychological state of mankind, and maybe also its physical state,
we must evaluate the inborn foundation of social interest as too insufficient to
develop and unfold without social understanding. Certain inborn faculties and
functions operate almost completely on their own, for instance, breathing. We
are not that far at all with social interest. We have not developed it in the same
way as breathing; yet we have to expect the development of social interest as an
end goal of completeness intensely enough that mankind will possess it in the
future and use it as he does breathing. What we have to do in the present critical
state is quite clear. No doubt this view offers us a sound foundation, not only for
the evaluation of the individual and the education of children, but also for the
improvement and direction of those who have failed. Of course, success requires
explanation and understanding. We are not sure that every child or adult knows
where he is going. It should be talked about long enough until perhaps in the
course of thousands of years talking about social interest will be superfluous,
like talking about correct breathing. Talking about social interest as belonging to
the evolution of mankind, as part of human life, shows the fundamental
importance and strength of Individual Psychology. Nowadays, everybody talks
about society and social interest. Others have discussed it, but we are the first to
strongly emphasize the fundamental essence of social interest. The concept of
society and social interest can also be abused. But he who has understood
correctly, knows that the essence of society and social interest contain an
evolutional element that turns against everything contradicting this direction. He
will avoid abusing society or letting himself be abused by others. The practical
value and importance of Individual Psychology is that it has clarified the
fundamental meaning of social interest for the improved development of the
individual and all mankind.
Chapter XIII
Physique and Psyche1 2
[1933]
No one doubts nowadays that everything we consider alive shows a striving
to become a complete unit. In this respect, the atom can be compared with the

living cell. Both have latent and manifest forces, which partly give rise to
shaping and limiting, partly to induce functioning of other parts. The main
difference is the change of the cell versus the self-sufficiency of the atom. Not
even the movements inside and outside of cell and atom offer fundamental
differences. Electrons are also never are at rest. Striving in a direction of a death
wish, which Freud has postulated, can be found nowhere in nature. The clearest
difference between the two is the assimilation and separation process of the
living cell in order to promote growth, preserve the form, and motivate a striving
toward an ideal end form.3
If the living cell, regardless of where it came from, had been put in an ideal
environment, guaranteeing untroubled eternal self-maintenance, an unthinkable
situation, it would have always remained the same. Under the pressure of
difficulties, which we should imagine in their simplest case as physical, the force
which we call life process would have been forced to some form of remedy. The
thousandfold differences in nature, undoubtedly also found in the amoeba, bring
the creatures in a more favorable situation closer to success and let them find the
better form and better adjustment. The billions of years that life on earth has
existed have evidently been enough time to form man out of the life process of
the simplest cells, as well as to let myriads of creatures disappear who were not
prepared for the pressure of their environment's assault.
With this concept, combining fundamental observations of Darwin and
Lamarek, the life process should be seen as a striving which finds its direction in
the stream of evolution by an eternal goal of adjustment to the demands of the
environment. In this striving toward a goal, which never can reach a static
balance because evidently the world's questioning forces can never be
completely answered, in this striving must also have been developed the capacity
which, from different angles we have called soul, spirit, psyche, intelligence, and
all other psychical faculties. Moving on transcendental ground when observing
psychological processes, we may conclude that the psyche, belonging to the life
process and whatever we include in this process, must show the same basic
character as the matrix out of which it has come, namely, the living cell. In the
first place, this basic character can be found in constant striving to deal
successfully with the demands of the environment, to overcome death, to reach
an ideal final form of living, which permits mankind together with the physical
forces already prepared by evolution, and with mutual influence and support, to
reach a goal of ascendancy, completeness, and security. Similar to the
evolutionary development of the body, the direction of physical development
aims toward correctly solving the tasks of the environment through conquering
its difficulties. Every wrong solution, either because of unsuitable physical or

psychological development, shows its lack of suitability by defeats which can go
as far as elimination and extermination of the individual gone astray. The
process of defeat may reach farther than the individual and harm even his family
members or descendants, or may cause families, tribes, peoples or races to be
embroiled in great difficulties. As we can observe in evolution, these difficulties
often lead to larger successes and greater power of resistance, if they have been
conquered. Multitudes of plants, animals, and people have fallen victim to this
gruesome selfpurification process. What appears at present to have general
resistance, has only passed the test for the time being.4 The conclusion of this
observation is: In the physical process we are dealing with a striving to keep the
body closely in balance with its performances in order to successfully meet the
demands of the environment, its advancements, and disadvantages. Looking at
these processes with partiality, we come to the conclusion of “The Wisdom of
the Body.”5 The psychological process is also compelled to accept this wisdom,
enabling it to solve the questions of the environment in favor of a continuous,
active equilibrium of body and soul. Within certain limits, the state of evolution
reached so far takes care of equilibrium, while the goal of superiority, the
lifestyle, the movement pattern the individual developed as a child, all take care
of the activity level. Therefore the ground rule of life is “overcoming.”
1 Originally titled “Zum Leib-Seele Problem.” Published in the
Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individual Psychologie, Volume XI, 1933. 
2 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1990. 
3See Smuts Holism and Evolution, London, McMillan.
Overcoming is promoted by striving toward self-preservation, physical and
psychological balance, physical and psychological growth, and completeness. In
striving toward self-preservation, the understanding and avoiding of dangers are
included, as well as procreation in its meaning of an evolutionary path for
continuing a physical share beyond personal death, cooperation for mankind's
development, in which the spirit of cooperating people is immortal, as well as
the total performance of all who have contributed to society in all of the
abovementioned aims.
How the body constantly exerts itself to maintain all life-important parts at
the same time, to complete some and replace others, shows us the miraculous
work of evolution. Blood coagulation after bleeding wounds, guaranteed
maintenance of water, sugar, calcium, proteins, blood and cell regeneration, the
cooperation of the endocrine glands in all parts of the body, are all products of
evolution and prove the resistance of the organism against destructive outside
influences. Preservation and intensification of this resistance is a result of

avoiding blood intermarriage, thus reducing defects, while maintaining
advantages. Also in this respect, the way people live together as a group has
helped. Prohibition of incest, therefore was nothing more than a matter of logic
in the striving toward forming society.
4 See Adler in Heilen und Bilden III Auflage, Bergman, München. 5 S. Cannon,
Norton & Co, New York.
Psychological balance faces constant threats. In his striving toward
completion, man is always psychologically in motion and feels unbalanced in
comparison to his goal of completeness. Only the feeling that he has reached an
adequate place in his upward striving may give him a feeling of peace, value,
and happiness. In the next moment his goal drives him forward again,
demonstrating that to be human means to have an inferiority feeling constantly
pushing to be overcome. The direction of the chosen way to overcome is just as
thousandfold different as the goal of imagined completeness. The stronger the
inferiority feelings are, the more intense the striving toward overcoming, and the
stronger the emotional movements. However, the assault of feelings, emotions
and affects influence the physical equilibrium. Along the lines of the vegetative
nervous system, the vagus nerve and endocrine systems react and the body gets
upset which may manifest in changes of blood circulation, secretions, muscle
tones, and almost all the organs. As temporary phenomena, these changes are
natural and only show differences in their formation in connection with the
lifestyle of the subject. If they persist, they are called functional organ neuroses.
Like psychoneurosis, they owe their existence to a lifestyle showing a tendency,
in case of failure and increased inferiority feelings, to retreat from the presenting
problem and to protect this retreat by holding on to the developed shock
symptoms of both physical and psychological nature. Thus, the psychological
process manifests itself not only in the body, but also in the psyche itself, where
it promotes all kinds of psychological mistakes, actions and omissions which
conflict with the challenges of society.
In the same way, the physical state influences the psychological process.
According to our experiences, the lifestyle is formed in early childhood. Inborn
physical stability has the greatest influence on its development. In his first
movements and performances, the child experiences the reliability of his
physical organs. He experiences them, but for a long time does not yet have
words for or comprehension about them. Because the effect of the environment
differs in every case, it remains forever unknown how far the child becomes
aware of his ability to function. With great caution and using statistical
probability, with our knowledge of organ inferiority, the digestive system, blood
circulation, breathing apparatus, secretive organs, endocrine glands and the

senses, we can reasonably conclude that the child experiences his overburdening
in the beginning of life. But how he tries to deal with it, we can merely
determine from his movements and efforts. In this respect, every causal
consideration is worthless because here the creative power of the child manifests
itself. Using trial and error, at the same time striving within the incalculable
range of his possibilities, the child trains himself and chooses a general goal to a
road of completeness which seems to offer him fulfillment. Whether striving
actively or remaining passive, dominating or serving, making contact or being
egocentric, courageous or cowardly, the child decides his rhythm and
temperament, being easily moved or apathetic, in pretended harmony with his
environment, which he interprets and responds to in his own way for his whole
life as his uniquely developed law of movement. All these directions toward a
goal of overcoming differ for every individual in a multitude of nuances. As a
result, we lack words to describe in every case more than the most typifying, and
take our refuge in far-reaching descriptions.
The individual himself can hardly say clearly where his road leads without
the interpretation of Individual Psychology. Often it says the opposite of what he
thinks. Only understanding the law of movement provides us with information.
Using this law, we find the sense and meaning of expressive movements, which
may be words, thoughts, feelings, or actions. We can observe to what extent the
body is also subject to this law of movement in the meaning of its functions, a
language mostly more expressive and clearer than words, a body language I have
given the name of organ-dialect. For example, a child who behaves obediently,
but wets the bed at night, clearly announces his refusal to submit to the accepted
culture. A man who pretends to be courageous, probably even believing in his
own courage, shows by his trembling and heart palpitations, that he has lost his
equilibrium.
A 32-year old married woman complains about violent pains around the left
eye and double vision, causing her to keep the left eye closed. The patient has
had these attacks for eleven years, the first one when she got engaged to her
husband. The present attack came seven months ago; the pain stopped
temporarily, but the double vision remained constant. She connects this last
attack with a cold bath and believes that in the past she had experienced attacks
caused by drafts. A younger brother suffers from similar attacks of double
vision, and their mother suffers from the results of a “head influenza.” In earlier
instances, the pains have evidently also occurred around the right eye or have
changed from one eye to the other.
Before her marriage, she taught the violin, performed in concerts, and loved
her profession, which she gave up after being married. She lives with the family

of her brother-in-law to be closer to her doctor and feels happy there. She
describes her family, especially her father, herself, and several siblings, as
irritable and angry. If we add to this description that on questioning, she portrays
them as domineering, we know that she represents the type I have described as
disposed to headaches, migraines, trigeminal neuralgia, and epileptic seizures.6
The patient also complains of the urge to urinate when she is under nervous
tension, such as when visiting, meeting unknown people, etc.
6 See in Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie” 4 Auflage. Verlag J. F.
Begmann, München.
I have pointed out in my work the psychological root of trigeminal
neuralgia. In cases not organically based, a heightened emotional tension,
expressing itself easily in all sorts of nervous symptoms, like the ones mentioned
above and along the vasomotor pathway, may bring about agitation of the
adrenal sympathetic system in susceptible places, very possibly through changes
in blood vessels and in blood supply, symptoms of pain, and also paralytic
phenomena. At the same time, asymmetries of the skull, the two halves of the
face, and the head veins and arteries, indicate that such asymmetry might also be
found inside the skullcap, the membrane, and the brain, which might suggest that
the course and caliber of the existing veins and arteries, maybe also the
accompanying nerve fibers and cells in one of the two halves had a weaker
development. In that case, special attention should be given to the nerve
channels, which also may be asymmetrical and too narrow on one side when
veins and arteries expand. When the individual experiences emotions, such as
anger, pleasure, fear, and worry, the content of the vessels changes, affecting the
color of the face; anger may also show on the more visible veins of the skull. It
is logical to suppose that such changes also exist in deeper layers. We need
much more research to clarify all the complications connected with this process.
In the absence of organic disease, we can prove that illnesses such as
migraines, nervous headaches, trigeminal neuralgia, and epileptic attacks can be
lastingly cured if we are successful with Individual Psychological treatment. In
this case, we have to point out that the patient had a bad temper as a result of her
domineering lifestyle; an exogenous factor before the last illness was the most
serious one so far. In addition, we have to prove that she had psychological
tensions from early childhood on, an inferiority complex as well as feelings of
superiority in comparison to everybody, and a lack of interest in other people.
We have to recognize her selflove in the present, as well as in memories and
dreams. We will achieve a lasting success by developing and expanding her
social interest, diminishing psychological tension, and changing her lifestyle.

The urge to urinate when visiting, already provides us with the picture of an
easily excitable person who responds to exogenous factors. This excitability is
also true for stuttering and other nervous disturbances and character traits, as
well as for stage fright. In her case, the exogenous factor is to be found in the
meeting with other people. At the same time, we can observe heightened
inferiority feelings. He who has Individual Psychological insight will also easily
notice her dependency on other people's judgment, resulting in higher striving
for recognition and personal superiority. The patient herself declares that she is
not especially interested in others. She asserts that she is not fearful and talks
easily with others. But she keeps constantly talking more than normal and hardly
lets me say something, a sure sign of her tendency to a hyperactive performance.
In her marriage, she is the reigning person, but is defeated by her husband's
indolence and need for peace and quiet; he works under great strain, comes
home tired late at night, not willing to go out with his wife or to talk much with
her. At the time when she had to perform, she suffered very much from stage
fright. When asked the important question I have advised practitioners to use:
What would she do if she were healthy, a question which shows clearly in its
answer what patients shy away from, her answer was evasive, referring to her
lasting headaches. On the left eyebrow is a deep scar from an operation of the
ethmoid sinus. After the operation, the migraine attacks soon returned. The
patient obstinately maintains that cold in any form harms her and may cause an
attack. Regardless of this claim, she took a cold bath which promptly produced
the last attack, she believes. The attacks are not preceded by an aura. Nausea
sometimes accompanies the beginning of an attack, but not always. She has been
thoroughly examined by several doctors, who have found no organic change. X-
rays of the skull, as well as blood and urine tests were negative. The uterus was
infantile in anteversion and anteflexion. In my Study About Organ Inferiority,7 I
pointed out that in neurotics we often find not only organ inferiorities, affirmed
by the research of Kretschmer, but also always underdeveloped sexual organs,
affirmed by Kryle, who alas has died too early. In the presented case, we have
such an example.
It turned out that ever since the patient had witnessed with great horror the
birth of a younger sister, she had an insane fear about childbirth. This fear
confirms my warnings not to introduce sexual information to children until we
are sure that they can understand and absorb it correctly. When she was eleven
years old, her father accused her incorrectly of having had sex with a neighbor
boy. This confrontation of sexual relationship, once more combined with fear
and anxiety, strengthened her protest against love, which she showed during her
marriage by being frigid. Before she got married, she demanded a binding

declaration from her bridegroom that he would forever give up the idea of
children. By holding on to her migraine attacks and her fear and she easily
reduced her sex life to a minimum. Often we find in very ambitious girls that one
way or the other, their love relationships develop with difficulty, because they
experience them with strong inferiority feeling as repression of women, a
misunderstanding promoted by our cultural concepts.
Inferiority feeling, inferiority complex, and masculine protest, the
fundamental observations of Individual Psychology, at one time opposed by the
psychoanalysts, today8 are completely accepted by Freud squeezed into his
system, though somewhat watered down. However, followers of this school of
thought is the fact, still do not understand that such a girl is constantly filled with
protesting emotions, making her body and soul vibrate and expressing
themselves as acute symptoms when she faces an exogenous stimulus or a test
on how well her social interest has developed.
In her case, the symptoms are migraines and the urge to urinate. Fear of
childbirth and frigidity are lasting symptoms since her marriage. I believe I have
added a great deal to the explanation of the migraine attacks of this domineering
and angry person, and it appears that only such persons could get ill with
migraines and similar pains, if we add the above-described asymmetry. I still
have to explain the exogenous factor that brought the last extraordinary, heavy
attack. I cannot completely deny that the cold bath set off the attack, but I am
surprised that the patient, knowing so precisely and for so long time the
damaging effect of cold, was ready to go into cold water seven months ago
without reluctance, as she says “without thinking about the danger.” Could her
level of anger at that time have risen? Was an attack at that time serving a
purpose for her? Did she have an opponent, for instance her husband, resigned in
love, whom she wanted to hurt with it, and did she go into the water in the way
someone does who wants to commit suicide out of revenge or to punish a
faithful person? Does she still rage against herself, because she rages against
someone else? Does she read literature about migraines, does she go to doctors,
and has she convinced herself that she never will become healthy in order to
push away the solution of her problems in life, which she fears because of her
lack of social interest?
7 Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen, Verlag Bergmann, 1927.
Translated into English and published as The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, Volume 2, The Alfred Adler Institute of San Francisco, 2002.
8 1933.
She has a certain appreciation for her husband, but is far removed from

love, has never really loved. To the often-repeated question: What would she do
if she were cured forever, she finally answered that she would move from the
small town to the big city, would teach the violin and play in an orchestra. He
who has mastered the Individual Psychological art of guessing cannot help but
hear that this would mean separation from her husband, who is tied to the small
town. How happy she feels in her sister-in-law's house and her reproaches of the
husband affirm this guess. As her husband respects her very much and provides
an incomparably good opportunity to give full rein to her domineering, of course
she finds it very difficult to separate from him. I would warn against making the
road to separation easy for her with advice or encouragement. I would like
especially to warn in this case, or a comparable one, against advice to take a
lover. Such patients know what love is, but don't understand it and would get
into deeper disappointments, while they would blame the physician with
responsibility for everything, if they followed his advice. In this case, the task is
to help this woman become better qualified for her marriage. First, the mistakes
in her lifestyle have to be dissolved.
After careful examination, the conclusion is: The left side of her face is a
little smaller than the right side. As a result, the point of the nose turns a little to
the left. The left eye, around which she experienced violent pain, shows a
narrower opening than the right one. Why the patient sometimes also shows the
symptom on the right side, I cannot yet explain. Maybe the patient is mistaken in
this respect.
A dream: I was with a sister-in-law and an older sister in the theater. I told
them they had to wait a little; I would show myself to them on the stage.
Explanation: She always tries to impress her relatives, would like to play in a
theater orchestra, and believes she is not appreciated enough by her relatives. My
theory of organ inferiority connected with psychological compensation also
applies, a conclusion that will be affirmed in the future as the foundation of the
studies done by Kretschmer and Jaensch. Undoubtedly, this woman's sight organ
has a shortcoming. The same is true for her brother, who suffers from the same
illness. I cannot determine if it is more than vascular or if other anomalies exist.
The vision and basal metabolic rate are normal. The thyroid gland does not show
any change. The dream of the theater and of showing herself on the stage shows
clearly a visual type concerned with outside appearance. Her marriage and living
in a small town prevent her from showing herself off. The same would be true
for pregnancy and a child.
Complete cure was achieved within a month.9 First came the explanation of
the exogenous factor leading to the last attack. In her husband’s pocket, she
found a letter from a girl, containing merely a short greeting. Her husband could

destroy her suspicion. Nevertheless, she kept her mistrustful attitude, fed her
jealousy which never existed before, and has supervised her husband ever since.
During this period, her cold bath took place and the beginning of her attack. One
of the last dreams, after stating her jealousy and her hurt vanity, still shows her
holding on to her suspicion and aims at caution and distrust of her husband. She
saw how a cat caught a fish and ran away with it. A woman followed to take the
fish away from the cat. The explanation is clear without further comment. She
tries to be prepared for a similar stealing of her husband in metaphors, which
always sound stronger. An explanation shows that she has never been jealous, as
her pride had forbidden her this vice, but she had considered the possibility of
her husband's unfaithfulness after she had found the letter. While she considered
this possibility, her anger grew against the imagined dependency of the woman
on the man. Her cold bath was therefore really the revenge of her lifestyle
against what she now believed to be the assured dependency of her value on her
husband in relation to his failing appreciation of her. If she did not have her
migraine attack, the result of her shock, she would have to consider herself
valueless in her own eyes. However, that conclusion would be the worst of all.
9 Translator’s note: Adler often worked with people on a daily basis. Chapter
XIV
The Structures of Psychic Activity1 2
A Contribution to Individual Psychological Understanding of Character
[1934]
In order to obtain a picture of the total personality from a person's attitude
to social life tasks, Individual Psychology focuses on and evaluates carefully the
level of activity with which a person approaches his problems, in addition to
other important facts. Earlier, I clearly pointed out some typical forms of failure
in connection with diminished capacity for cooperation: a hesitant attitude,
closing oneself off, avoidance, diminished energetic approach, a rash beginning
followed by a slackening of pace, or changing from one activity to another. I
have also observed that any one of these faulty approaches in their thousandfold
variations show a lesser or greater amount of activity. This level of activity was
formed in the person's earliest childhood in a sort of free choice, in which
undoubtedly hereditary and environmental factors played a role, not causally, but
as a possibility. Individual Psychology can also determine that the level of
activity which has been developed in childhood will persist during the rest of the
child's life. Furthermore, Individual Psychology has clearly shown that this
activity level remains unaltered, though in many cases it shows up only
conditionally according to personal need; for instance, when the individual finds

himself in specific favorable or unfavorable circumstances.
It is not possible to understand the constant level of activity expressed in
figures. A child who runs away or a boy who starts to sell something in the street
will be classified with a higher level of activity than a child who prefers to sit at
home and read books.
Activity should not be considered equivalent to courage, though courage
without activity does not exist. Only the kind of activity that shows getting
along, cooperation, and interest in others defines courage. Even if courage has
been claimed, we should not overlook the innumerable variations and mixed
cases, as well as cases when courage appears only under certain conditions; for
instance, in extreme danger or with the assistance of someone else.
1 Originally titled “Die Formen der Seelischen Aktivitat, Ein Beistrag der
Individualpsychologischen Charakterkunde.” First published in Ned. Tijdschr.
Psychol., Vol. 1, pages 229-235, 1933. Reprinted in the Internationale
Zeitschrift fur Individualpsychologie, Volume XII, pages 1-5, 1934.
2 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1990.
If we are convinced that the constant activity level corresponds with the
constant individual law of movement, which Individual Psychology has called
the lifestyle, then we should determine the individual level of activity. From the
smallest characteristics and movements of expression in childhood, we can
predict with which level of activity a child will later approach the problems of
life. Therefore, insight into this factor opens up a new and valuable perspective
for psychiatric treatment, education and prophylaxis. However, such a valuable
approach would still be incomplete in practice, if we could not combine it with
the proven constant level of social interest in the same case. Combined, these
two factors of Individual Psychology permit us to predict the danger of failure in
the future and what kind of failure it could be. In all cases, the level of ability to
cooperate indicates the direction.
A person fails when he confronts a problem that is very difficult to solve, as
a result of exposure to an exogenous difficulty, in general under unfavorable
circumstances. Many unfavorable circumstances exist. The trouble is that
nobody can measure these factors objectively; consequently, we have to be
aware of the often faulty exaggeration of what is considered difficult, because in
general, tasks appear more difficult to those with the largest inferiority feelings.
In addition, every individual lifestyle is incompatible with tasks which
contradict the person's imagined goal of perfection. If a person's style of life
points more or less to a goal of being first under all circumstances, then an
exclusion of all so-called insurmountable difficulties follows automatically. If in

another case the goal of superiority is found in depreciating others, the field of
action will correspond with this constant imperative demand. If someone tries
merely to avoid revealing to others his imagined lack of value, then he will
conduct himself in thinking, feeling and acting in such a way that he leaves all
tasks unsolved in order to keep at least an illusion and possibility of superiority
in reserve. If a person is a real, cooperative human being, cooperation becomes
the guiding principle of life, as demonstrated in all life tasks.
In all these cases with their millions of variables, it will always be possible
to note the same type of activity. In general, we can determine the level of
activity by observing the size of the sphere of activity, which differs for
everybody. A psychologist would have a challenging task to portray graphically
the form of individual spheres of activity.
In this paper, I will present that part of my research and conclusions that
pertains to constancy and identity of the level of activity in cases of failure and
their origin. In this case I will join the traditional naming of types of failures,
though I categorize all failures merely as symptoms of a lack in developed social
interest. Also, as far as its activity is concerned, every case shows qualitative and
quantitative differences within its typical group.
Exact knowledge of the structure of every typical failure is a necessary
presumption of such investigation. This knowledge serves Individual
Psychology to illuminate the area in which we expect to find the special case. I
distinguish typical failures as follows: problem children, neuroses and
psychoses, delinquents, alcoholics and drug addicts, sexual perversions,
prostitution, and suicide.
In 1908, I started to evaluate the level of activity in a paper about
“Aggression in Life and in Neurosis,” published in Heilen und Bilden.3 This
paper has not only resulted in a fundamental thesis of Individual Psychology, but
has also had an important influence on the development of psychoanalysis.
Difference in activity level already shows clearly in problem children,
determining the varied suitable approaches in educating them. Wild, overly
selfconfident, defiant, stealing, fighting children undoubtedly show a higher
level of activity than shy, uncommunicative, scared or dependent children. The
actionradius of the first group mentioned is visibly larger than that of the second
group. If we look in both groups for the difference in failure, the lower level of
activity in childhood correlates with the lower activity level of the neurosis or
psychosis in later life. Actually, the lower activity level in these types of illness
and symptoms also differs qualitatively and quantitatively, for instance, high in
compulsion neurosis and melancholy, lower in anxiety neurosis and
schizophrenia.

A somewhat higher activity level from childhood on typifies patients who
are alcoholic and suicidal. At the same time, this activity level forms the
structure of these failures. While their field of action is clearly larger, the nature
of their activity develops along the detour of damage to themselves. As in almost
all failures, because they have been weak and apathetic as children, they later
consider themselves so precious that an assault against their person appears to
them as an assault against fellow men and the environment.
In this interpretation, sexual perversions show up on a scale from lowest to
highest activity. On the lowest level is the masturbating individual or the
fetishist, on the highest level perversion killers, both types already marked by a
corresponding field of action and lack of social interest from childhood on.
Activity is most clearly noticeable in criminals, namely, in gradations of the
type of chosen criminality. On the lowest level of the action scale are the
cheaters, deceivers, and pickpockets; on the highest level, the murderers.
It would be completely wrong to try to find the cause of differences in
activity level or social interest in inherited factors. It is wrong not only because
we have no possibility of extracting the effects of inherited forms of expression
from the final resulting form, but also because the child experiences inherited
factors and their use in his individual way, not according to mathematical or
causal laws. The same is also true for environmental factors and the influences
of education. From all these impressions the child experiences, he builds his
lifestyle as an inspiration. This lifestyle contains as its guiding structures a level
of activity and a certain degree of direction-giving social interest. Furthermore, a
prevailing emphasis of the psychomotor sector also determines the lifestyle. This
emphasis does not relieve us from the task of also considering the influence of
other movements of the psyche. People whose overemphasizing of thinking and
the abstract is in the foreground with express their activity in life in thought. For
them, the value of their lifestyle depends on how much social interest they
generate. In favorable cases, feeling and attitude toward cooperation go together
with abstract elaboration, resulting in correct preparation to solve the life tasks.
In unfavorable cases, if social interest is absent or poorly developed, we find
cold, thoughtless, pedantic lifestyles which may show a tendency toward
neurotic compulsive thinking.
3 Verlag Bergmann, München, III Auflage. Original title “Aggressionstrieb im
Leben und in der Neurose”.
As a result of such a one-sided accent, a fundamental part of psychic events
seems to take place in the “unconscious.” However, some psychologists do not
understand the connection with the individual lifestyle, as for instance when a
compulsive neurotic indulges in brooding with words about “what is man,” “why

is he called man,” without understanding the connection with the ever-present
stirred-up feelings and attitude.
Abuse of the concept of the unconscious becomes even clearer when
examining people whose sensing, feeling, and experiencing is overemphasized,
so that thinking and comprehension seem to have disappeared within their
attitude. In such cases, if the evaluation is superficial, the impression may easily
be made that we have lifted something from the unconscious into the conscious.
This happens as soon as we turn both feeling process and attitude into
comprehension. It happens in that kind of treatment when explanations and
going back to the causes of a mistake are used to illuminate the connections
intellectually.
Also, the position the individual takes, his attitude to life in all its
peculiarity, in conjunction with his individual lifestyle, remains almost always
not understood, and at best becomes experienced as justified under pressure of
the lifestyle. In other cases, of either a cooperating or uncooperating person, his
attitude, meaning his individual activity, may be the visually most important
aspect of his life and as such should be evaluated.
In the first place, Individual Psychology emphasizes the type of activity
directed by sufficient social interest. The absence of such activity can be
corrected through insight and understanding of the mistaken development of the
lifestyle. “You will recognize them by their fruit.” In this overall observation,
activity that leads to the right evolution comes first. This challenge is solidly
established only when it is at the same time connected with a far-reaching,
abstract, intellectual understanding of the individual's development in his attitude
toward the life tasks. In Individual Psychology, the aspect of feeling fares better
than in a one-sidedly constructed drive psychology or affect-psychology because
of its strict demand to give social interest the greatest possible dimension.
In the same way, Individual Psychology takes a stand as the strongest
opponent of uncritical, self-adulating, heredity psychology. It exposes
unsparingly all mistakes which hind the strengthening of social interest, or which
directly or indirectly strangle social interest of present or future generations. No
honest psychologist can close his eyes to situations which prevent a child from
entering society and feeling at home, instead letting him grow up as if in enemy
country. The psychologist must also clarify poorly understood nationalism that
hurts all human society, and leads to wars of conquest, revenge, or prestige. He
has to help people avoid discouragement as a result of far-reaching
unemployment, and help prevent all other disturbances which would hinder
expansion of social interest in the family, the school, and society at large.
Chapter XV1 2

Psychosomatic Disturbances
[1934]
Organ inferiority responds to psychological influences, speaks their
language, and is activated by the problems an individual faces. This felt
inferiority is important for the choice of symptoms, especially for what is still
called hysteria or functional neurosis. In this respect, Individual Psychology
correctly states: if an organ temporarily or constantly shows a defect, then it
should be observed very carefully. Observation will show that the individual is
in a way marked by this organ. We also know that sometimes one or another
organ is more influenced by impressions from outside. At this point, when I
mention psychological influences, I want to focus on those which excite the
body by arousing feelings, emotions, and affects. We are not alone anymore; on
all sides psychological influences are accepted. Also, internal medicine cannot
deny that the individuality of a person changes and influences every illness.
Earlier physicians already knew that in sensitive children an infectious disease
shows up their sensitivity much more. In some children, the endocrine glands
may become taxed more heavily. These general phenomena should be observed
to determine if they bring lasting or temporary changes. In general, if we observe
what happens most often to people, we see that nearly everybody responds with
a heart attack. Whether the change is lasting or temporary is important. The
lasting change in the heart is very rare in neurosis, but we know that especially
inferior hearts, or the ones that have been damaged by illness, are more
vulnerable to such influences from the beginning, which may later cause
permanent, greater damage. The organism is a unit and the total organism
vibrates with the attack on one place. We know too little to make rules, but most
likely an organ may become damaged by such an attack.
How a psychological impression influences organs is not yet well known,
but we are sure it results in a system-wide response. The organism strives to
maintain homeostasis. From many cases, we have learned that disorders may
occur on the basis of affects. The individuality of the person has to be considered
and studied first. Individual Psychology has no great difficulties in this respect.
Most often these impressions become clear in the first interview.
1 Originally Titled “Korperliche Auswirkungen seelischer Storungen.”
Published 
in 
the 
Internationale 
Zeitschrift 
fur
Individualpsychologie,Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individualpsychologie,
71, 1934. 
2 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1990.
We deal with thousands of variables in people who all expect that the other

person will intercede for them, who look for help, for relief. This dependence on
others usually corresponds with early childhood training. These people appear
especially disturbed in our society; they consider the world enemy country; they
do not generate in themselves the motivation to overcome difficulties, but they
want to avoid them. If I go into more detail, I do not know which organ I should
omit. Almost all gynecologists affirm that psychological changes during
menstruation depend on feelings. The patient can hardly say anything about this
affect, this moodiness. The patient has become so used to her changed mood that
she does not understand why such a normal event upsets her so much. She is
resigned to the same occurrence every month, but does not understand that her
total mood exercises the greatest influence on this relatively small event. Many
girls respond defensively as a result. To explain to them how valuable menstrual
periods are does not help, because they know from other events that when shown
an advantage to a situation, a person may see it, but does not accept it. We have
to go far enough to recognize and explain the absent preparation and acceptance.
In all cases of menstrual difficulties, we can easily find the defensive attitude
from the mood. This defensiveness leads to an uncommunicative attitude. This
instinctive defensiveness would not be of such great importance, if we did not
have to consider uniqueness. The typifying characteristics of such a girl can
provide us the necessary, specific information why the regular, defensive attitude
has become strengthened, for instance, most often by refusing to accept being a
woman, or by having been told or experiencing how easily girls during puberty
or afterwards may get into difficulties. This outside situation has to be
considered because it works to release the mood.
This simple example shows that what some authors try to split when they
consider a phenomenon sometimes as endogenous, sometimes as exogenous, in
reality cannot be split. All phenomena are conditioned by both exogenous and
endogenous factors, as we see in examining a person’s functioning. I do not
consider a case completely clear until I uncover the situation in which the patient
shows himself insufficiently prepared and in which I recognize his
characteristics (lifestyle), so that I know he really is not trained for the tasks of
life.
Inadequate preparation does not have to originate in organic factors, but can
also start from an opinion. A person's opinion influences his behavior, and the
typical use of his functions. Everything depends on opinion. This approach gives
us the courage to say that a person's attitude can be changed.
False pregnancy belongs in this category. At present, we do not know how
it begins. I have witnessed a very enlightening case. The woman was the
girlfriend of a man who had been intimate with her for many years. He talked

about marrying her if she would have his child. Finally, she seemed to be
expecting. Her abdomen developed as in pregnancy, which lasted 6 to 7 months.
Then I met the lady. Some things caught my attention. I advised the couple to
see a gynecologist. After an hour they returned, the belly was gone: the
gynecologist had stated that the woman was not pregnant. He himself was very
surprised. With heavy belching, the air escaped through mouth and anus. Her
extended belly had been due to flatulence created by the woman instinctively
and possible only in a woman who was willing to create this flatulence.
Some people can produce abdominal extension. They swallow air. Internal
medicine has not paid enough attention to it. Other symptoms often accompany
this one, with the result that air-swallowing may become leverage for a symptom
of anxiety neurosis. I have often observed that a person with a tendency toward
anxiety symptoms will reach a state of inertia as a result of his extended
stomach. Such a case may show further symptoms. We can easily understand
that swallowing air takes place in a situation when the patient fears failure, when
he feels in an especially tight place, when his inferiority feelings show very
clearly. If we focus on the individuality of the person, not on symptoms, we will
find an individual who since early childhood has been aware of the social
meaning of anxiety and the impact of it on others.
In recent years I have often been able to observe the influences of feelings
and emotions on the thyroid gland. Cleary, endocrine glands may be influenced
by affects. I have even maintained that the sex glands may also be reduced to
passivity through affects. Here, we must pay attention to the opinion of the
individual. For instance, if a boy considers himself unmanly, this opinion may
result in his letting the stimulus for the development of the sex glands pass by;
he will exclude certain life situations which are important for the development of
the sex glands. Sometimes boys are kept in circumstances considered more
appropriate for girls, for instance, where they have to remain quietly at home,
play with dolls, and stay passive. Later, such boys may make a feminine
impression. I have observed how such boys, when brought together with others,
changed and showed a more masculine appearance. New York biologist Boas
has pointed out that American girls have a more masculine appearance because
of sports. Undoubtedly, the sex glands and thus physical development are
influenced by how well the individual appreciates his gender role. The activity
of the sex glands in people who have a strong liking for the other sex will show a
greater activity under comparable circumstances. If we consider how large these
influences are, we conclude that what has been called incompetence of
functioning, for instance, the decline of women in menopause, is not irrevocable,
but conditioned by the woman's frame of mind, if she considers menopause a

danger or an illness. We doctors have the special obligation to eliminate negative
beliefs in people's thinking.
The role of the thyroid gland is important, especially the hyperactive
dysfunction (incomplete forms of Basedow's disease as a result of accelerated
activity of the thyroid gland). I have had the opportunity to examine a number of
hyperthyroid patients in the Zondek clinic in Berlin. Zondek believes that we
cannot examine hyperthyroidism without including the characteristics of the
patient, which often is not easy. For instance, in the case of a 26-year old
mechanic who suffered from hyperthyroidism for two years, symptoms were
clear, with a 30% increase in activity. I tried to find redeeming causes. He was
an only son and had been very sensitive. Someone who has studied traits of
neurotics the way I have, knows that we repeatedly find oversensitivity among
their characteristics. The patient himself said, “If someone becomes ill, people
send him for observation because they suspect him.” It sounded like a reproach.
It shows that the man is oversensitive and does not easily connect. If a patient
reproaches, we may conclude that he has a special level of sensitivity. He was
impatient with occasional explosions of affect. No dreams were found. His first
memory showed he resisted new situations very strongly. Under no
circumstances would he leave his place of work. All this information does not
tell much about the situation in which the illness started. When I asked if
something happened that had excited him, nothing came out. He talked about a
love affair. Until six months ago he had a girlfriend, who then had found
someone else. If we had believed him literally, this had also been unimportant. “I
actually was happy; she did not suit me.” If we know how neurotics try to hold
on to someone and feel hurt when that person pays attention to someone else, we
may conclude that this situation triggered the illness, all the more because it
occurred when the first symptoms of trembling appeared. This is one of the more
difficult cases, and I can well understand that anybody who does not use our
methods of investigation may not notice it. Particularly those who emphasize
endogenous factors are not as advanced in diagnosing the endogenous as we are.
Some cases are more pronounced and even experienced examiners don't
feel comfortable with them. For instance, a 17-year old girl was in a
lifethreatening position because of a dysfunctioning of the thyroid gland. When I
saw her, the greatest danger was over; she showed all symptoms of
hyperthyroidism. Next to the endogenous factor of the attack, I wanted also to
establish the exogenous influences, and her psychological characteristics. The
youngest child, she was spoiled, and had a position at a jeweler's which she liked
very much. One day the boss sent her out to get an employee. She went to the
house, where she asked a woman where the man was. The woman pointed to a

door. She opened the door and looked into a bar where loud, unkempt people
were drinking. She screamed and ran away, cried wretchedly, and was ill from
that time on. It was not very easy to obtain this story. She was surprised to see
that this event could have a connection with her illness. When I asked her if she
had been excited, she tearfully told me this ridiculous affair. However, we
should consider that this girl probably had an opinion about bars that means the
worst: crimes, rape, white slave trade; she suffered from the difference in the
attitude people had to her at home and in business compared to the attitude she
expected in the bar. That made all the difference. For every one of us we could
construct a situation which would put us in a similar tension.
Here I will introduce what little we know about influencing organs. How
does the psychological work on organs? Naturally, it passes though the spheres
of our consciousness, transforming our impressions, and exciting the vegetative
nervous system. Through the vegetative nervous system, the stimulus becomes
distributed in different ways, according to the characteristics of the individual
and according to the characteristics of the organs, which this stimulation gets in
vibration. In all this stimulation, the total organism becomes excited; we can
only confirm it at those places where the stimulation shows more clearly. We
call these secondary symptoms. We have to include here many other glands, also
the liver. Excitation influences the liver in a different way for everyone. Some
people have painful attacks of the liver, when they are angry. Discharge of bile
changes. The pancreative islets of Langerhans may become excited by affects.
Some people respond to psychological excitement with sugar excretion, and we
must try to treat these people when they are not exposed to such damage.
 
Psychosis and epilepsy are hard to understand. No discerning psychiatrist
can overlook specific circumstances. For melancholy, schizophrenia, and
epilepsy the typical characteristics in the situation at the beginning of the illness,
have to be considered. If we limit ourselves to only one disorder, we have to say
that in the case of affect epilepsy, part of the brain responds to the irritation.
Possibly other changes may also occur; for instance, all cases of schizophrenia
show changes in the brain substance. In part, this change may be considered a
variant of the brain-structure, which characterizes the individuality of the person
from the beginning. Possibly, it has to do with occurrences of swelling, through
which the brain may possibly be influenced; for instance, in cases of withdrawal
of morphine, many neurotic symptoms are a result of retained water, a
conclusion which throws light on other occurrences (research from Dr.
Alexandra Adler). Psychological excitations may possibly set off other

situations. This explanation does not contradict Individual Psychological views;
we have been familiar with this mechanism for a long time.
The effect of changes in structure in cases of psychological excitation can
be clearly observed in pain from scoliosis or flat feet. Cases I have seen
contained the condition for these pains; they were present only from a certain
time on, usually when the individual lost face in a situation in which he had lost
selfconfidence. For 25 years, we have known that what is called scoliosis pain is
much more complicated. Certain pains are localized on the anterior of the thorax,
manifesting themselves in a period of depression, for instance, in melancholy.
Nonmelancholics also show the same symptoms when they feel neglected. I do
not believe that the mere assumption of nerves being compressed is correct; that
would be too simple. To assume radiating pains, possibly in the sense of the
Headsche Zone, does not sound probable to me.3 Long before we had evidence
of orthostatic albuminuria, I pointed out how often curvature of the spine is
connected with kidney symptoms. At the first urology congress, I presented this
finding to great skepticism of those present. Possibly the whole spinal segment
had been irritated during embryonal development. All curvatures clearly show
that there is a familiar deformation, characterized by a navus on top of the
scoliosis or in the segment. Having seen surprising occurrences in this respect, I
could predict where the navus was.
3 Dermtomes
The same dynamic is true for flat feet. Those complaining about pain are
often at odds with life. We can only conclude that discouraging impressions
bring about loss of muscle tone, as we can see in the whole human being. Also,
if he has no flat feet, he shows in his posture what goes on inside; he talks with
his muscles. We have to learn to understand body language. When a human
being finds himself in a situation which is too difficult for him, the body also
expresses the felt burden.
The vasomotor system and thus the skin are under psychological influences,
too. While skin diseases are stimulated by psychological influences, they are not
necessarily the trigger for everyone who has this symptom. We arrive here at a
question of great importance: Does a person who is endogenously marked for an
illness have to get that illness? If we think of schizophrenia and know its
physical characteristics, do we then have to conclude that a person with those
characteristics must become a schizophrenic? When the physical individuality of
the patient is in situations where he can keep his equilibrium, he does not
become ill. We may influence him so that psychological influences can prevent
devastating results for him.

In regard to the development of the human body shape, physiognomy
expresses movement that has taken form. We know too little about this
transition. We judge from outside appearances, often in the rashest way. Yet
undoubtedly psychological moods influence bodily form, making facial
expressions appear sympathetic or unsympathetic. Everybody who has observed
the melancholic during his melancholy phase and afterward, will be surprised.
Thus, psychological mood influences expression in everybody.
We return to our core thesis: that the foundation of all correct functions is to
be fully embedded in the evolution of mankind. Only by accepting this premise
can we understand why we perceive one person as sympathetic, the other as
unsympathetic. This observation takes place automatically, but we understand it
more clearly when we grasp what is happening. This thought fits only in a
consideration of evolution. With species, it is important to know what belongs to
the development of mankind one way or the other, so that we may understand
what can be viewed as faulty or almost correct. A far-reaching misunderstanding
exists about the concept of society. The person who understands it knows how
deeply he is involved in the evolution of mankind as something to reach for. The
outside appearance of man is more connected with his consonance with the
society he is striving for than we have previously been able to explain.
Chapter XVI1
Mass Psychology
[1934]
People generally acknowledge that mass psychology exists, and agree on
the meaning of it. Everyone talks about it. But we are hard put to explain how
the mass-psyche comes into being, to describe its significance in the progress of
humanity, or point out the constructive forces within it. Most of the more recent
books refer to the same authority, Le Bon, whenever the topic of the mass-
psyche is raised. Yet, despite his valuable contributions to the understanding of
the problem, I think I do him no injustice when I say that even he has never
advanced beyond the conclusions that the mass-psyche is greater than the sum of
individual wills and temperaments, and that a massmovement may move in both
good and evil directions. Le Bon must also be given credit for stressing that the
mass can never possess the sense of responsibility which, to some degree, is
inherent in the individual. All the works on massmovements emphasize the
importance of the leader. In this connection, Freud attempts to explain the
subordination of the mass to its leader as libidinous and analogous with the
child's love of his father.
We are indebted to the great historiographers--Plutarch, Livy, Gibbon and
others of remote and more recent times--for a huge bulk of material that still

awaits psychological interpretation. But apart from the great historical
movements, chiefly wars and revolutions, often resulting from changing
economic conditions, the dearth of food and faulty social organization, an
abundance of historical data remains that can be considered mass-action: for
instance, the miracle of language. Language cannot be understood except as a
mass-product, effected both at its origin and in its subsequent development by a
unified cooperation of the elements of the mass.
The same unified cooperation underlies the universal currency of practical
reason, aptly termed “common sense.” Every human being is bound to think and
understand as if he were an appointed agent of his community. Like language,
common sense is not static, it supplements, corrects, and enlarges itself. In the
progress of both language and common sense, we cannot help but recognize
massmovement and the approbation of the mass.
Individual Psychology upholds as irrefutable that at the basis of these
achievements lies the power of the “sense of community” and the exercise of
this sense by the individual. The individual’s vague awareness of the vital
importance of the community and the resulting potential community feeling is a
gift of evolution, either a potent or an insignificant force, depending upon its
cultivation or lack of development, as the case may be. Evidence of this common
awareness of the significance of community is that the task of averting dangers
and preventing death within the natural span of life is largely left to the care of
the community. The feelings of compassion and altruistic pleasure, the respect
and recognition granted the successful efforts to produce beauty in art and life all
show that the human masses, though their accord is by no means perfect, are
guided by a common urge to value the welfare and future of humanity as a
whole.
1 Originally titled “Zut Massenpsychologie.” First published in the Int. Z.
Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 12, pages 133-141, 1933. Translated into English and
published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 3, 283-287, 1937.
Likewise, the propagation of the human species is a subtle but constant
commandment from life with which the individual must comply, contributing
either by his active cooperation or at least by his acknowledgment of its
importance. Religious precepts, such as “multiply as the sands of the sea,” would
never have arisen or have been adopted and penalized in event of non-
observance, if procreation had not been sensed by the mass of mankind as
essential to the maintenance of the group itself, upon which the individual's life
is dependent. Similarly, the ban placed upon the marriage of persons bound by
varying degrees of blood relationship cannot be explained, despite all other
hypotheses, except as a coercion exerted by the mass-psyche. The community

had to insist upon an extensive mixing of blood, in order to bring potentialities
of all its members into the main channel of evolution and prevent itself from
stagnating by being confined within the narrow limits of family and blood-line
characteristics. In general, all the sacred commandments and prohibitions and up
to the present time, all codes of penalties, common appraisals of social values,
and established distinctions between “good” and “evil,” together with all
religious and ethical prescriptions, have been left to the dictates of the mass-
psyche. All of these were intended (whether they did so or not) to serve the
progress and welfare of the community.
We can easily understand that up to the present day, the mass-psyche has
not been able to bring all the problems of mankind to a neat and satisfactory
solution, and often overshoots the desired mark. The mass-psyche, like the
individual psyche, may turn into false and generally pernicious channels owing
to a limited understanding of the purpose and meaning of human life within the
stream of advancing evolution.
To take a single example (apart from the countless wars that have
repeatedly led mankind into the wilderness), the persecution of witches, not so
remote from our own time, was a mass movement that possessed a great part of
the human race. More than a million completely innocent girls and women
suffered death by fire after unspeakable torments, for a variety of flimsy reasons,
among which the most cogent was certainly a mad outbreak of the desire to
enforce the subjugation of women to the male principle, a desire persisting in
masspsychology since ancient times.
The question is: When is a mass movement useful, and when is it
dangerous? When does it discipline mankind for higher aims, and when does it
hinder the advance of humanity? When is it an aid to progress in the main
channel of evolution, and when does it throw mankind back to a lower stage of
development?
These questions may sometimes be highly controversial. Few have at their
disposal a clear-cut criterion for judging political, religious, and other
intellectual movements. If we could reach some general objective agreement as
to the meaning of life, apart from the private opinions of individuals, we would
have accomplished a great deal. Then everyone would understand at least that he
has to pay the physical and mental price, if he sets himself against the hard
realities established by human evolution. With all due modesty, I have tried to
approach this problem in two books. One bears the title, What Life Should Mean
to You. The other, which goes more deeply into the question, is published in
German under the title Ueber den Sinn des Lebens (Social Interest: A Challenge
to Mankind). It discusses the failures, and consequent disappointments which

result from misguided efforts to act counter to the meaning of life.
We can learn much from these typical injuries to the individual and the
mass; they lead us to postulate an irresistible power that sets the direction of
progress and determines the destiny of men. If we remain within the realm of
pure science, notwithstanding our wonder at the intuitive ability of the mass to
correctly determine rules of conduct that possess almost universal validity, we
first focus on the beginning of life for humanity and the individual. In both cases
we find, in the vigorous original structure, an ability to develop through an
active adaptation to the meaning of life, the power to assert itself against, and
advantageously master, the “objective” external world.
Thus, a far-off goal is set for the life of the individual and the totality. The
present state of humanity proves that primitive human life, however it
originated, had the potential ability to persevere and attain a higher level of
worlddomination. In the germ-cells of modern man resides a highly qualified
power attained through evolution: the ability to maintain and extend his capacity
for progress. Much life which strove in a false direction was conclusively
destroyed in the course of this ascent. The life that exists today has the prospect
of further advance and of still more favorable mastery of the “objective” external
world.
Since the inception of life, the mass and the individual have borne within
themselves this urge to, and capacity for, emergence, for evolution; and, as a gift
of evolution, the individual possesses, in his ability to think, the potential power
of choosing the direction of his development. To be sure, the period within
which the choice can be made is limited to his first three or four years, during
which his style of life, his psychic gait, and his direction and manner of striving
are so permanently fixed that later on, they can be modified only by penetrating
insight into possible defects and early mistakes. In the mass-psyche are revealed
those merits and deficiencies of the individual psyches which prevail, in the
various generations. The individual psyches are summed up, not according to
their particular individual qualities, but according to their general bearing and
attitude toward the flow of evolution, now coursing with the stream, now
fighting the current, depending on the merits or weaknesses in the style of life of
the various generations.
The question arises: What is the most favorable direction that the psyche
can take? 
After long study and reflection, I have found that individual style of life,
acquired in early childhood, results from the process of adapting to the evolving
structure of the immediate environment; this process of adaptation is effected by
relatively inadequate means, by the creative power of the child triggered by the

evolutionary urge to conquer and surmount obstacles. With this conclusion, I
came a step closer to answering this question. I realized that the whole
lifeprocess of each person moves in that direction, different for every individual,
which for him holds the proper solution of the problems set by our relationship,
as social human beings, to the duties of community. In other words, everything
depends on our opinion of what course we should take in order to develop our
potentialities so that we suffer no failures in performing the tasks set us by
community; or, in still other words, in order that we do not, from a sense of
inferiority, feel or imagine ourselves to be “worthless” outcasts from the flow of
evolution. 
Thus, the social spirit of our lives pervades the process of development to which
evolution compels us. According to the greater or smaller degree of active
participation that we have acquired in childhood, we cope with the problems of
life: our relation to others, work, and love. The attitude acquired in childhood is
strongly influenced by the social atmosphere of the child's environment, which
brings him face to face with the social responsibilities of life, often in a
tragically distorted form. Generally, it is no easy task for the child to turn the
course of his life into the channel of evolution that compels us to maintain and
advance humanity. 
The amount of activity and the degree of the sense of community are the
significant factors in all forms of human expression, so infinitely diverse in
quality and quantity. Activity directed toward the spirit of the community of
mankind is, therefore, the triumphant commandment of human evolution. 
The environment of a child more or less adequately reflects the degree of the
feeling of human brotherhood that the community has instilled in him. However,
the degree of cooperation in the child's environment is reflected in the child in
the direction that he himself fixes. It does not determine the course of his life,
but lures him to choose a certain path. A child always moves in a direction
which seems most favorable. He is an active agent, not passive; the manner in
which he uses what he has inherited, the responses he makes to his environment
(including his own body) are his own creative achievements that cannot, at least
up to now, be explained satisfactorily on the basis of causal relationships.
However, we must watch the responses he makes, be aware of the important
factors, and if the child's creative responses are not socially desirable, educate
him, help him to make new and better responses by altering his situation and
giving him some better ideas to work with. 
As we have indicated, what we call “good,” “evil,” or “worthwhile” is
determined by its proximity to the channel of evolution. These values are often
grasped intuitively and rightly by the mass, and according to the conclusions

reached above, can be attributed to practical reason and common sense. This
intuitive ability of the mass, which we can observe as an almost uniform
phenomenon, provides another instance of the mass-psyche as a productive
force. The decisions arrived at through its operation are valid not only for the
present; they are much more far-reaching, and establish the facts of good, evil,
value for all time. 
In the future, after many working and social conditions have been considerably
improved, perhaps economic conditions may have a general, positive effect on
the masses. In the immediate present, however, economic conditions are
reflected in, and met by, each individual and the masses according to their
previously acquired style of life. 
Today, in view of the irrefutable proofs that Individual Psychology has
presented, we must recognize that people meet situations in adulthood with the
viewpoint and attitude they adopted in childhood. For example, people who have
built up their style of life as pampered children will meet all later situations,
including the economic, with the expectation that others will prepare the way
and make things easier for them. No matter what sort of movement they may
join, religious, political, or cultural, they will expect everything from other
people, most often from a leader who can think and work for them, assume all
responsibility, and make himself a crutch for their indecision. If he shows them
the possibility of more favorable positions, with perhaps the higher cultivation of
humanity as his avowed ultimate goal, they will follow him enthusiastically,
even though common sense speaks against the move. 
To take another example, I have shown that a firstborn child adapts himself in
some way to his peculiar situation, one which no other member of the same
family share. For a time he is the only child, but after a while he is generally
dethroned from his position as the “one and only.” Whatever may happen later in
the lives of such firstborn children, they will follow “that first law that gave
them birth.” Whatever their circumstances, they will usually attach more
importance than others to maintaining power, fearing dethronement more than
others do. Even the common welfare will often seem to them dependent upon the
power of the individual. Whole systems of philosophy can spring from this
attitude, attracting others of an analogous bent, and leading to massmovements.
The development of art is swayed by similar currents, since the artist must
present his work in and for the theater of life. 
Throughout the course of human evolution, leading upward to the welfare of the
whole, destroying all resistance, the stream has flowed past untenable standards
of life toward an active, physical and intellectual compromise with the cosmic
forces. The sense of personal importance and the values that each individual

acquires in this process correspond to the conception of the meaning of life
which everyone, without deliberation or reflection, spins out from its inception
in early childhood through his entire life. A purely individual matter, this
opinion regarding the “meaning of life” constitutes the basis of that striving for
recognition which the individual and the mass must ceaselessly carry on. 
The particular way in which each person can appear important in his own eyes
determines his decisions on, and attitude toward, all the problems of his life. It
also determines his attitude toward massmovements and mass-ideas. Here we
can clearly observe the relation of the individual to the mass, and the influence
exerted by mass opinions upon the individual. An inactive, pampered child, with
an underdeveloped sense of community and little power of cooperation, suffers a
kind of shock when confronted by the problems of life that demand cooperation:
social relations, vocation, and love. A series of such shocks may lead to the
development of a neurosis in an individual not trained in cooperation and the art
of living together comfortably with other people. 
A kind of massmovement, or fashion can be observed even in the prevalence of
ailments. For a long time, the symptoms of hysteria were so frequent as to amaze
both scientists and laymen, but gradually “hysteria” fell into disrepute and came
to be considered an abused term. Finally, when the theory arose that hysterical
symptoms were outbursts of sexual irritation, they disappeared altogether from
the psychopathic clinic and were replaced by other forms of nervous disorder. 
Masspsychology must certainly be considered from the same point of view as
the psychology of the individual, for the mass-psyche is the confluence of
individual yearnings and aspirations. So, first of all, we must reckon with a
striving, under the pressure of evolution, to overcome a minus-situation. In the
mass as in the individual, the urge to surmount obstacles may produce an endless
number of reversals, failures, and mistakenly directed attempts. We must assume
that the evolution of mankind, like an exercise in mathematics, permits only one
ideal solution to the cosmic and social problems of life. Unfortunately, no one
possesses the perfect formula. But so far, the viewpoint of Individual
Psychology seems to come closer to it than others. 
The evolution of our social life has been tending for two thousand years in the
direction of equality (equal value) of the sexes. The subjugation of women came
with the invention of war and the consequent rise in the importance attached to
physical strength and endurance. The resulting mass attitude and movement was
decidedly unfavorable to women, and has persisted to the present day, owing to
mankind's inability as yet to put a stop to wars. The influence of the unequal
value given to the sexes is stronger in warlike countries, where it has led to such
unreasonable demands as allowing only those who can bear arms to enjoy full

rights as citizens. But the higher development of technology, science, and love
as well, unceasingly encouraged the rise of women and promoted their
participation in public life. The conflict resulting from the attempt to subjugate
women has done great harm both in private and social life. Whenever the rights
of women have been strongly asserted, the masculine viewpoint of special
privileges for the male has fought back and won. 
Among the most bloody, contemptible efforts to force women back into a
subordinate position, the three hundred years of witch-burnings occupy a
prominent place. To the surprise of no intelligent person, the universities and
their professors smoothly fell into line to provide “learned proofs” of witchcraft.
Today, of course, we realize that this ghastly episode of three hundred years
need never have occurred if men had had a better understanding of the inevitable
line of human progress, that is, a more fully developed sense of community. But
this and other disastrous interludes should convince us that only the education of
children in a spirit of human brotherhood can help us overcome the errors
committed by the mass, and that these errors can be avoided only if the training
of the child brings him closer to the stream of evolution, closer to the general
welfare and the higher development of humanity as a whole. Otherwise,
massmovements and the mass psyche must remain entangled in a conspiracy for
the satisfaction of misguided personal desires originating in a defective style of
life. 
But even the failing massmovements, with their thousands of human sacrifices,
were able to get underway and gather impetus for a time because they were the
expressions of a mass-psyche which gave to the individual a promise, albeit an
illusory one, of an enhanced sense of importance. Such movements seemed to
rescue them from their feelings of inferiority, regularly producing this new sense
of importance in them through an effort to damn others to insignificance. In the
mass-psyche, we observe the same desolate spectacle as in the psyche of the
individual when he goes astray and when his powers of cooperation have not
been sufficiently developed in his childhood. In such a case, he invariably strives
for a sense of personal importance apart from the general welfare; he deceives
himself and loves to be deceived by empty phrases and allegories, abandoning
common sense and striking out on the path of a “private intelligence.” 
In the great and small religious movements, as in the great achievement of
philosophy, science, art and political wisdom, the heart of humanity beats calmly
on, clearly audible only to those whose thoughts and efforts are fixed upon the
elevation of the human race. Whether they strive to penetrate the truth, or seek to
refine and dignify the thought, emotion, sight, and hearing of mankind, these
men and women bear with them the most exalted expression of human greatness,

consciously or unconsciously, but always deeply imprinted on their ultimate,
ideal purpose: “Love thy neighbor.” 
Whether an individual or a group is filled with this magnificence, one guiding
thought unites them: the desire to create their worth and find their sense of
importance in their contributions to the welfare of all humanity. No suffering or
oppression could ever banish such men and women from this earth. The world is
theirs alone. For they have embraced the immortal spirit of their forbears and
carry it on everlastingly. Only they, as individuals and mass, possess the impulse
to new and better works and finer thoughts, the impetus that elevates mankind.
For they alone feel themselves firmly established in the vast process of
evolution; they cannot lose the courage of faith and deed, the strength to rejoice
in every honest conquest of difficulty and not to recoil from hardships. 
Since massmovements spring from, and are borne by, the style of life that
predominates in one or two generations, the investigator in the field of
masspsychology must necessarily familiarize himself with the facts about the
development of styles of life. Heredity and the influence of environment are the
building-stones, the raw material, that the child uses to construct his personality,
which endures to the end of his days. We should focus on creating those positive
environmental influences which prevent a child from getting a mistaken notion
of the meaning of life and forming a faulty style of life. A faulty personality, or
lifestyle, can be modified only when the individual fully realizes the error
committed in the use he has made of these two factors. 
This recognition of a basic mistake is equally necessary when a massmovement
goes astray. An erring massmovement can be modified only when the mass
realizes that a real sense of importance cannot be achieved by a false means, or
in other words, that a release from a feeling of insignificance must be effected in
some other, more useful, productive, friendly way. Hence, anyone who hopes to
stop misdirected massmovements must prove rationally that the mass's feeling of
insignificance can be relieved only by some other and better means, one more in
tune with the spirit of the community of mankind. 
The final goal of evolution exists merely as an abstraction, and can be attained
only by speculation and experimentation. But, to have an effect, it must be
translated early, and grasped concretely according to times and circumstances.
This occurs regularly in the most plastic period of early childhood development,
when the child seeks a coherent solution to his problems by actively adapting
himself to his experiences, molding them to his individuality. His attempts at a
solution continue in the same direction he chose. Therefore, the idea of the
community of mankind must be instilled in early childhood. 
We still have much to learn about the child's choice of response to his

environment, the manner in which he draws from his experiences to select
certain aims and purposes. Nevertheless, our observations give us hints and
hopes of calculating statistical probabilities. Thus, we can recognize certain early
impressions as influential, if not “causative,” factors in the development of a
child's style of life, since their effects can be traced far into adulthood. 
For example, if a child experiences, senses, and recognizes injustices in his
environment that seem an unkindly introduction to life, he may become aware of
a general feeling of life's hostility, perhaps without being able to clothe his
feeling in words. His feeling of uncertainty will increase, and in this uncertainty
he will have to take some stand toward injustice. What this stand will be,
whether he will choose to endure injustice, or take arms against it, (and between
the two extremes lie a hundred different possibilities), cannot be predicted
beforehand, but can only be observed later on. If the child has awakened to a
sense of community, he will condemn injustice as worthless oppression
wherever he may later find it. In the mass is manifested the style of life of the
assembled individuals, either actively opposing, tolerating, or submitting to
injustice. 
Similarly, children who have experienced war at an early period in their lives
will react to it in a manner corresponding to the good or poor development of
their human sympathy and sense of community. To all those who walk the path
of human cooperation, war must appear loathsome and inhuman. But if a
generation, or some part of one, grows up without an adequate sense of
community, so that their personal desires loom larger than the general welfare,
then war may seem a justifiable means of satisfying personal and selfish
interests. 
When we look back at history, we see that massmovements achieve permanent
success only when they flow in the channel of evolution. Whenever they have
gone in a different direction, they have opposed the enduring realities that
evolution has created. Further conflicts, defeats, and destruction have proved
their impermanence in the currents of time. Thus, the experiences of Individual
Psychology show that the approximately coherent style of life of the more active
group in each generation appears as the mass-psyche of that generation, in all
areas of social life, art, as well as in politics and philosophy. 
The style of life of an individual is fully developed in the first three or four years
of infancy and can be corrected later only by scientific means. The impressions
of social life received in childhood by members of that generation are reflected
positively or negatively in the mass-psyche. The degree to which their sense of
community is cultivated and intensified, or stunted and limited, decides the
direction that a massmovement will take. The less active group in a generation

will either be overwhelmed, or will run with the pack until they join another
massmovement. The final evaluation of any massmovement, approving or
damning, is determined by the invincible power of human evolution, which
unyieldingly and relentlessly preserves the welfare of all mankind.
Chapter XVII
The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology1
[1935]
In introducing the International Journal of Individual Psychology in the
United States and Great Britain, it seems fitting to describe the basic structure of
Individual Psychology, in order to show the contributions of this science to
modern psychology and psychiatry. I do not want to go into details here. Those
details will be found in the articles by the contributors to this Journal. Primarily,
I want to explain the scientific framework very briefly.
The Individual Psychologist works with this basic, raw material: The
relationship of the individual to the problems of the outside world. The
Individual Psychologist observes how someone relates himself to the outside
world, including the individual's own body, bodily functions, and mental
functions. The individual does not relate himself to the outside world in a pre-
determined manner as often assumed. He relates himself according to his
interpretation of himself and of his present problem. His limits are not only the
common human limits, but also the limits which he has set for himself. Neither
heredity nor environment determine his relationship to the outside world.
Heredity endows him with certain abilities. Environment gives him certain
impressions. These abilities and impressions, and the manner in which he
“experiences” them, i.e. the interpretation he makes of these experiences, are the
bricks he uses in his own “creative” way to build his attitude toward life. His
individual way of using these bricks, in other words, his attitude toward life,
determines his relationship to the outside world.
He meets entirely different problems from his forebears, and views them
from a perspective of his own creation. He sees the environment which trains
him with his own self-created perspective, and accordingly changes its effect
upon him for better or worse. The life task which no individual can escape is to
solve a great number of problems, which are no way accidental. For clarity, I
have divided them into three parts: problems of behavior toward others;
problems of occupation; and problems of love. The manner in which an
individual behaves toward these three problems and their subdivisions is his
answer to the problems of life.
Life (and all psychic expressions as part of life) moves relentlessly toward
“overcoming,” perfection, and success. We cannot train or condition a person for

defeat. But what an individual thinks or feels as success (i.e., as a goal
acceptable to him), is his own choice. In my experience, I have found that each
individual has a different meaning of, and attitude toward, what constitutes
success. Therefore, a human being cannot be typified or classified. Perhaps
because of the parsimony of language, many scientists come to mistaken
conclusions, believing in types, categories, racial qualities, etc. Individual
Psychology recognizes, with other psychologies, that each individual must be
studied in the light of his own particular development. To present the individual
understandably in words requires an extensive reviewing of all his facets, the
elaborate demands of which are apparent in the following articles. Yet, too often,
psychologists are tempted away from this recognition, and take the easier but
fruitful road of classification. In practical work, we must never yield to that
temptation. For teaching purposes only, to illuminate the broad field, I designate
here four different types, in order to classify temporarily the attitude and
behavior of individuals toward outside problems.
1 Originally published in English in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, No. 1,
pages 5-8, 1935.
First, we find individuals whose approach to reality shows, from early
childhood through their entire lives, a more or less dominant or “ruling” attitude.
This attitude appears in all their relationships. A second type, surely the most
frequent, expects everything from others and leans on them. I might call this the
“getting” type. A third type is inclined to feel successful by avoiding the solution
of problems. Instead of struggling with a problem, a person of this type merely
tries to “sidestep” it, in an effort to avoid defeat. The fourth type struggles, to a
greater or lesser degree, for a solution of these problems in a way that benefits
others.
Each special type retains his style from childhood to the end of his life,
unless he is convinced of the mistake in his creation of his attitude toward
reality. The child creates this attitude using inheritance and impressions of the
environment as bricks tp build his particular avenue for success, according to his
own interpretation of it.
Individual Psychology goes beyond the views of philosophers like Kant and
newer psychologists and psychiatrists who have accepted the idea of the totality
of the human being. Very early in my work, I found the individual to be a unity!
The foremost task of Individual Psychology is to prove this unity in each
individual, in his thinking, feeling, and acting; in his so-called conscious and
unconscious, in every expression of his personality. This unity we call the
“LifeStyle” of the individual. What is frequently labeled “the ego” is nothing
more than the style of the individual.

Individual Psychology has shown that the first three types mentioned
above, the “ruling” type, the “getting” type, and the “avoiding” type, are not
prepared to solve the problems of life. These problems are always social
problems. Individuals of these three types lack the ability to cooperate and
contribute. The clash between such a lifestyle (lacking in social interest) and the
outside problems (demanding social interest) results in shock. This shock leads
to the individual's failures, which we know as neurosis, psychosis, etc.
Significantly, the failure shows the same style as the individual. As I mentioned
before, the lifestyle persists.
The fourth type (the socially useful type), prepared for cooperation and
contribution, shows a certain amount of activity used for the common good. This
activity corresponds with the needs of others; it is useful, normal, rightly
embedded in the stream of evolution of mankind.
The first type also has activity, but not enough social interest. Therefore, if
confronted strongly by a situation which he feels to be in the nature of an
examination, a test of his social value, a judgment upon his social usefulness, a
person of this type acts in an unsocial way. The more active of this type attack
others directly: they become delinquents, tyrants, sadists. It is as if they said,
with Richard III, “and therefore, since I cannot be a lover, I am determined to
prove a villain.” To this type also belong drug-addicts, drunkards, and suicides,
whose lesser degree of activity causes them to attack others indirectly. They
make attacks upon themselves for the purpose of hurting others. The second and
third types show even less activity, and not much social interest. This lack also
appears in the expression of their shock results, which are neuroses and
psychoses.
The principles which guide me when grouping individuals into these four
types are (1) the degree of their approach to social integration and (2) the form
of movement which they develop (with greater or lesser activity) in order to
achieve success (in their own interpretation).
But the individual shade of interpretation matters most in the end. When
reconstructing the unity of a personality in his relationships to the outer world,
Individual Psychology fundamentally undertakes to determine the individual
form of creative activity, which is the lifestyle.
I would like to close this short introduction to Individual Psychology by
saying that a great improvement in the next generation can be assured by
preventive work; while the treatment and cure of the numerous failures and
maladjustments of our time depend upon increasing the degree of social feeling
and cooperation. For difficult times like ours, the inherited potentiality for
human cooperation does not suffice. It must be further developed. The necessity

and importance of this development are inherent in the discoveries of Individual
Psychology, and the scientific method by which it may be accomplished is its
contribution to the advancement of mankind.
Chapter XVIII
What is Neurosis?1
[1935]
Many explanations and disagreements result from lack of clarity on the
topic of neurosis. Some of the many explanations are: that neurosis is irritability,
sensitive weakness, a disease of the endocrine glands; the result of infection of
the nose or teeth, of genital disease; the result of weakness of the nervous
system; the result of certain glandular predisposition, of the birth trauma; the
result of conflict with the outer world, religion, ethics, or the bad unconscious
and the compromising conscious; the suppression of sexual, sadistic and
criminal drives; the result of the noise and dangers of the big city, a sheltered or
strict upbringing, family training in general, or certain conditioned reflexes, etc.,
etc.
The pertinent aspect of these views however, can explain some partial
manifestations of neurosis. However, most of the factors in the foregoing list, are
found more frequently in the lives of people who are not suffering from neurosis,
than of those who are. Very little in these factors can help answer the question:
“What is neurosis?” The great interest in this question, as well as the frequency
of neurosis, its extraordinarily bad social effects, the fact that only a small
portion of nervous people are ever treated, and that they carry their burden of
suffering through life as immense torture, all justify a dispassionate scientific
clarification of “neurosis.” Understanding and treating this illness requires
considerable medical knowledge. Although prevention of neurosis is both
possible and necessary, it can be achieved only through a clearer recognition of
the root of the trouble. The measures used for preventing and recognizing the
small beginnings of neurosis come from medical knowledge. However, because
the family, teacher, and other assistants can provide valuable help, we need to
spread the knowledge of the nature and the origin of neurosis. I will use a simple
case to illustrate both of these elements.
A thirty-five year old attorney complained of nervousness, continuous pain
in the back of the head, various pains in the region of the stomach, dullness in
the whole head, and general weakness and fatigue. Furthermore, he was
continually excited and restless. He often feared losing consciousness when he
had to speak with strangers. In the family circle at home with his parents, he felt
relieved, although even there the atmosphere did not quite satisfy him. He was
convinced that his symptoms kept him from success.

1 Originally titled “Was ist wirklich eine Neurose?” First published in the
Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individual Psychologie, Vol. 11, pages 257-263, 
1935. Translated into English and published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 
1, No. 1, pages 9-17, 1935.
The result of the clinical examination was negative, except for a scoliosis,
which with loss of muscle tone as a result of depression, can be taken as an
explanation of the pain in the back of the head and the pains in the back. The
tiredness can be ascribed to his restlessness, and certainly the dull feeling in the
head can be understood as a partial manifestation of depression and continuous
emotion.
From this general diagnosis, the discomfort in the stomach region is more
difficult to understand. It could come from nerve irritation as a result of the
scoliosis. But it could also be the expression of a predilection, the response of an
inferior organ to a psychic irritation. The frequency of stomach disorder in the
patient's childhood and a similar complaint of his father's, likewise without
organic findings, speak in favor of the latter explanation. The patient also stated
that when he was excited, he lost his appetite and occasionally vomited.
One complaint, perhaps regarded by him as a trifle, makes it possible for us
to perceive the lifestyle of the patient a little more closely. His restlessness
clearly shows he has not completely given up the battle for “his success.” His
statement that he does not feel well even at home, speaks less clearly for the
same conclusion. His fear of meeting strangers (therefore his fear of stepping out
into life), cannot leave him, even at home.
The fear of losing consciousness affords us a peep into the workroom of his
neurosis. He tells us (though he is not aware that he is saying it) how, when he
has to meet strangers, he artificially increases his excitement by preconceived
ideas of losing consciousness. We can name two reasons why the patient, “as if”
by intention, artificially increases his excitement to the point of confusion.
One reason is clear, although not commonly understood: the patient, so to
speak, “squints” closely only at his symptoms, and not at their connection with
his whole lifestyle. The second reason is that the relentless retreat, the “advance
toward the rear,” is not allowed to be interrupted. I described this retreat a long
time ago as the most important neurotic symptom.
In the case of this patient, the retreat was connected with weak attempts to
pull himself together. The tension into which the patient falls when he is
confronted by the three problems of life: society, occupation, and love (for
which he evidently is not socially prepared), affects not only the body, producing
functional changes, but also the psyche. This tension has to be proved (for up to
now it has merely been guessed) with the aid of general diagnosis,

medicalpsychological intuition, and Individual Psychological examination. It
cannot be corrected through experience, nor through emotion, but only through
understanding. Individual Psychology also has discovered that social feeling, as
the most integrating factor of the lifestyle, must be present to a significant degree
for the solution of all the problems of life. I have described the physical and
psychic phenomena which accompany and characterize the feeling of failure as
the Inferiority Complex. The manifestations of shock, in the case of inferiority
complex, are greater in those individuals who are socially less prepared than in
those who are better prepared; less in those who are more courageous than in
those who are discouraged and who constantly look for help from the outside.
Everyone has conflicts which upset him more or less. Everyone feels them,
physically and psychologically. Due to the kind of bodies we have and to
external social circumstances, no one is spared from the feeling of inferiority
experiences. The functional disturbances of soma and psyche are the
consequences of the faulty preparation for life. The patient who has formerly
experienced smaller failures recoils from the exogenic factor. He now feels
himself continuously threatened by defeat. The more so since, as a pampered
child (a fact we later have to prove), he finds his self-erected goal of personal
superiority, a goal without sufficient interest in others, more and more
unattainable. This state of heightened emotions springs from the fear of a final
defeat. Fear, in the ordinary sense of the word, however, need not always be
clearly evident. Those symptoms we find in psychosis and neurosis originate in
accordance with the physical constitution (for the most part inborn), and in
accordance with the psychic constitution (always acquired). These physical and
psychic factors mix together and influence each other reciprocally.
But is this yet neurosis? Individual Psychology has truly done much to
show that, for the solution of the tasks of life, we can be either badly or well
prepared; in between the extremes of good and bad, thousands of varying
degrees of preparation. Individual Psychology has also made us understand that
the inability to solve the problems of life causes the vibration of the whole soma
and psyche to increase incalculably in the presence of disturbing exogenic
factors. It has also shown that poor preparation originates in earliest childhood,
and with it a felt inferiority toward the outside world.
Hereditary organ inferiorities are all too frequent in human beings for them
to avoid the probability of attack by the harsh demands of life. The factors of the
outside world which affect the child do not make it easy for him to build up a
“right” lifestyle.
Pampering or neglect (imagined or real), but especially pampering, lure the
child to oppose social feeling. In addition, the child finds its “law-ofmovement”

for the most part without correct guidance. He strives according to the deceptive
law of trial and error, according to his own free will, within his limits as a human
being, but he strives toward a goal of superiority, of which innumerable different
varieties exist. The creative power of the child takes and uses all its impressions
and sensations as impulses toward a final attitude, toward its individual, unique
“law of movement.” This dynamic, emphasized by Individual Psychology, was
later called “Einstellung” (Attitude) or “Gestalt” (Form, Configuration), without
doing full justice to the whole of the individual and to his inseparable
“connectedness” with the three great problems of life.
Are the conflicts of the “bad” child, the suicidal, the criminal, the
archreactionary, the ultra-radical fanatic, the voluptuary whose comfort is
disturbed by the misery which he sees in the world, including their physical and
psychic consequences, neuroses? In their persistent mistaken “law-of-motion,”
these people all run counter to the idea of cooperation as emphasized by
Individual Psychology. They contradict social feeling and the relentless demands
of the ideal community of mankind. Of course, they feel the manifold
consequences of this collision. To be sure, we see countless physical and psychic
variations of these consequences. But is this neurosis?
Were it not for the relentless demands of the ideal community, everyone
could, in the course of life, satisfy his wrong “law-of-motion.” Speaking more
imaginatively, we might say that he could satisfy his “drives,” his “instincts,” his
“conditioned reflexes,” then there would be no conflict. No social (normal)
person could make such an absurd demand. Such a demand dares to stir timidly
only when we overlook the “connectedness” of the individual and the
community, or try to separate them. Everyone bows more or less willingly to the
iron law of the community; only a child pampered to the utmost will expect and
demand, “res mihi subigere conor,” as Horace says reproachingly. ( Freely
translated: “to make use of the contributions of the community for myself, but
without contributing in return.”) Even such a question as “Why should I love my
neighbor?” springs from the inseparable connectedness of mankind and the stern
criterion of the community ideal. Only he who carries within himself, in his
“law-ofmovement,” a sufficient degree of the community ideal and lives
according to it as easily as he breathes, will solve his inevitably difficulties.
Everyone experiences conflicts, the neurotic as well as other people.
However, the way in which the neurotic attempts to solve them differentiates
him from others. Among the manifold variations of these attempts, we find
partial and mixed forms of neurosis. Within his “law-of-movement,” the neurotic
trains from childhood on for the retreat from social tasks. Because he fears
defeat, these tasks threaten his vanity, and his striving toward a personal

superiority too much divorced from social feeling. These tasks threaten his
striving to be the center of attention, to be the first. His life motto, “All or
nothing” (usually very little moderated); the oversensitivity of feeling constantly
threatened by defeat; his impatience; the heightened emotion of living as if in
enemy country; his greed, all lead to more frequent and more severe conflicts
than necessary. They make the retreat prescribed by his lifestyle easier for him.
The tactics of retreat, trained and tested from childhood, can easily appear to be
a “regression” to infantile wishes. But these wishes are not important to the
neurotic.
To the neurotic, his retreat is more important than infantile wishes. For this
retreat, he gladly pays with sacrifices of all sorts. Here, too, we might be misled
into confusing these sacrifices with “forms of self-punishment.” However, the
feeling of relief that he gets through the retreat, saving him from a collapse of his
vanity and pride, is more important than self-punishment.
Now finally, we can understand what the problem of “securing” (“safe
guarding”) means in Individual Psychology. It can be understood only in its
whole connection; not as something “secondary,” but as the chief concern. The
neurotic “secures” himself by his retreat, and “secures” his retreat by
aggravating the physical and mental manifestations of shock. These shock
manifestations arise when he finds himself confronted with a problem
threatening him with defeat. He prefers his suffering to the collapse of his great
personal pride. Individual Psychology has repeatedly demonstrated the strength
of that pride. Often that exalted pride becomes clearly visible only in psychosis.
His superiority complex, as I have called it, is so strong that the neurotic himself
senses it only from afar with shuddering awe. It is so strong that he gladly turns
his attention away from it, when a test of it in real life seems imminent. It impels
him forward, but he dare not risk the test. Because only retreat offers security for
his prestige, he must discard and forget everything that could hinder that retreat.
He gives room solely to retreat ideas, retreat feelings, and retreat actions.
The neurotic turns his whole interest toward the retreat, until it becomes an
elaborate “Retreat Complex.” Every step forward becomes for him a fall into an
abyss, full of all sorts of horrors, because he sees before him no possibility of
success. With all his might, feelings, and tested devices for retreat, he tries to
keep himself securely in the background. Two things permit him to cling to
those securities which save him from defeat. The first is the building up and
glorification of his shock experiences, to which he devotes all his interest; at the
same time, he turns away from one important factor, namely, his fear of
recognizing how far he is from his high, egoistic goal. The second is the display
of feelings, metaphorically clothed and artificially stirred up as they are in

dreams, in order to allow him, contrary to common sense, to persist in his own
lifestyle. These securities he has ready at hand so as not to be driven toward the
defeat which he fears.
The greatest danger to the neurotic is the disapproval of others. At the
outbreak of the neurosis, extenuating circumstances are acknowledged with
approval by others. Were it not for these extenuating circumstances, the people
around him would not acknowledge the trembling prestige of the neurotic. In
short, neurosis is: The utilization of shock experiences for the protection of
threatened prestige. Still shorter, we can summarize the neurotic's whole frame
of mind in the phrase: “Yes-but .” In the “yes” is embedded the recognition of
social feeling; in the “but,” the retreat and its securities.
When our patient left the university, he found employment as an assistant in
an attorney's office. He stayed there a few weeks, leaving “because his field of
activity was too insignificant.” After he had changed jobs several times for this
or some other reason, he decided to devote himself preferably to theoretical
studies. He was invited to give lectures on questions of law, but he declined
“because he could not speak before a large audience.” At this time (he was then
thirty-two years old), his symptoms appeared. A friend who wanted to help
offered to give a joint lecture with him. Our patient consented on the condition
that he be allowed to speak first. He stepped upon the platform, trembling and
bewildered, fearing that he would lose consciousness. He saw only black spots
before his eyes. Shortly after the lecture, his stomach trouble began, and he
imagined he would die if he had to speak again before so many people. After this
episode, he occupied himself with the instruction of children.
A doctor whom he consulted told him that in order to get well he would
have to become active sexually. We could readily have foreseen the absurdity of
such advice. Already in retreat, the patient responded to this advice with the fear
of syphilis, ethical considerations, and the fear of being betrayed, or accused of
being the father of an illegitimate child. His parents counseled him to marry.
They chose a girl and he married her. She later became pregnant and left the
house to go back to her parents, because as she said, she could not endure his
constant criticism from “above,” as though he were the superior” one.
Now we see how arrogant our patient could be when offered an easy
opportunity, but how he immediately began a retreat when matters seemed
uncertain to him. He did not bother himself about his wife and child. His sole
concern of not appearing inferior was stronger than his striving for the success
he longed for so much. When he came to the battle-front of life, he went to
pieces. He fell into a tide of feeling which closely resembled extreme anxiety,
with its physical and mental consequences. He strengthened his retreat by setting

up phantom scarecrows which made the retreat easier for him. A motorist can
easily imagine such a mechanism. He has his goal, he is on his way; now he
steps on the gas in order to reach his goal more quickly and more surely. The
patient’s goal in this case was the retreat.
We will supply stronger proofs in two ways. First, we will go back to his
early childhood to establish that he was misled into his lifestyle; second, we will
gather from his later life more incidents which resemble each other. I consider
the strongest proof of the correctness of a conclusion, if it turns out that the
incidents contributing further to the characterization of a person agree perfectly
with those already found. Should they not agree, then the conception of the
person under examination must be altered accordingly.
As the patient states, his mother was a meek, yielding woman to whom he
clung tenaciously, and who pampered him thoroughly. Also, she expected great
achievements from him. The father was less inclined to spoil him, but gave in
every time the patient cried when he wanted something. Among the children of
the family, the patient preferred a younger brother who worshipped him, fulfilled
his every wish, ran after him like a little puppy, and whom he easily managed.
Our patient was the hope of his family; he routinely got his own way with the
other brothers and sisters. This unusually easy, warm home situation did not
prepare him for the outside world; thus, he created for himself the “pampered”
style of life.
This lifestyle became apparent immediately when he went to school for the
first time. The youngest in the class, he used this fact as his motive for changing
schools twice, and for the purpose of expressing his dislike of this outside
position. However, he then studied with tremendous zeal in order to surpass all
other pupils. When he was not successful in surpassing them, he retreated. Often
tardy, he frequently stayed away from school because of headaches and stomach
aches. When he was not among the best pupils, he and his parents ascribed it to
the circumstance of being frequently absent. At the same time, our patient
strongly emphasized that he knew more and had read more than all the other
pupils.
On the slightest provocation, the parents put him in bed and nursed him
with great care. A timid child, he often cried out in his sleep in order to occupy
his mother with him, even in the night.
Although he was not clear about the meaning and connection of these
manifestations, they were the expression of his lifestyle. Neither did he know
that he read in bed at night until early morning in order to enjoy the privilege of
getting up late, thus ridding himself of part of his day's work. During the whole
time of his development into manhood, he was more shy with girls than with

men. In every situation of life, he lacked courage; under no consideration did he
risk his vanity. The uncertainty as to whether he would be well received by girls
contrasted vividly with the certainty with which he could expect devotion from
his mother. In his marriage, he wanted to establish the same mastery which he
enjoyed at home over his mother and brothers. Such an attempt must meet
failure.
I have established that the lifestyle of an individual is found in the earliest
childhood recollections. To be sure, it is often well hidden. Our patient's earliest
recollection is as follows: “A little brother had died and the father sat in front of
the house and wept.” We remember in this connection how the patient fled home
before a lecture and pretended to die.
Our attitude toward friendship characterizes our ability to be a social human
being. Our patient stated that all during his life he had had friends for merely a
short time, and that he wanted to rule them. To him, friendship was an
opportunity to exploit others. When this attitude was pointed out to him in a
friendly manner, he answered, “I do not believe that anyone exerts himself for
the community; everyone does it only for himself.”
The following shows how he armed himself for retreat. He wanted very
much to write an article or a book, but when he sat down to write he became so
agitated that he could not think. He declared that he could not sleep unless he
read beforehand. But if he read, he got such a pain in his head that he couldn't
sleep.
At the time the patient was visiting another city, his father died and he
returned home. Shortly afterward, he had the opportunity to accept a position in
the city where he had been visiting. He refused the position under the pretext
that he would die if he entered that city again. When he was offered a position in
his own city, he refused on the ground that he would not be able to sleep the first
night, and for that reason would fail the next day. He would have to get well
first.
To show that his “law-of-movement,” this “Yes-but” of the neurotic, is
found even in the patient’s dream, we will give an example. With the technique
of Individual Psychology, we can uncover the dynamics of a dream, which says
nothing new, nothing we could not recognize otherwise from the behavior of the
patient.
From the contrivances of the dream, when rightly understood, and from the
choice of dream content, we can recognize how the dreamer, guided by his “law-
of-movement” (his lifestyle), endeavors to enforce his own way, contrary to
common sense, by artificially arousing appropriate feelings and emotions. Often
we find hints as to how, under stress of a fear of defeat, the patient produced his

symptoms. Our patient told the following dream: “I was supposed to be going to
visit friends who lived on the other side of a bridge. The railing was freshly
painted. I wanted to look in the water and leaned against the railing. This pushed
against my stomach which began to hurt. I said to myself: 'You should not look
down in the water below. You could fall.' But I risked it nevertheless, went again
to the railing, glanced below, and fell back again quickly, as I reflected that it
was after all better to be safe.”
The visit to friends and the freshly painted railing indicate the trace of some
social feeling and the building up of a new style of life. The patient's fear of
falling from his heights, his “Yes-but,” are emphasized clearly enough. His
stomach trouble as a result of his feeling of fear is constitutionally present. The
dream shows us the patient's rejecting attitude toward the efforts of the doctor up
to that time, and the victory of the old lifestyle. This was accomplished by the
aid of a vivid picture of danger, when the security of his retreat was jeopardized.
Neurosis is the automatic use of functional symptoms which have their
origin in the effect of shock, and whose utilization is not understood by the
patient. Those who are too fearful about their prestige and in childhood (usually
as pampered children) have been enticed to this use of symptoms, are more
inclined to neurosis than others. The cure can come about only through the
understanding, the increased insight of the patient, and the development of his
social feeling.
Chapter XIX
The Structure and Prevention of Delinquency1
[I935]
The title of this article refers not only to reducing the number of criminal
acts, but also to preventing the commission of any crime. The two aspects of this
problem are inseparable. We can successfully reduce crime only by
understanding what causes it.
In certain conditions of our present social system, during the course of his
development, an individual faces difficulties he cannot overcome because he has
not been properly prepared to overcome them. As a result, he goes to pieces
under these burdens. As Individual Psychologists, we speak of burdens for
which the social interest of the individual must be sufficiently developed to bear.
Although it will never be attained, we can imagine an ideal state in which
man would be able to cope with every difficulty to which he might be subjected.
I shall not dwell on those difficulties. However, many social institutions present
obstacles to individuals who have not been prepared in childhood to meet them.
As statistics show, crime is not diminishing; at certain times and under
certain circumstances, it is even increasing. Some people assume that the

increased cost of living is the cause of increasing crime; others, that the decrease
in the cost of living is responsible. Even when a country is prosperous, criminal
tendencies appear which were not present at other times. When times were
comparatively good for almost everyone in the United States, when no crisis
existed, the increase of crime was attributed to Prohibition, or to how easily
some people became rich.
The problem of reducing crime is extraordinarily complicated. Although we
can approach the problem with various assumptions, we cannot say that any one
of them is conclusive. However, in this article, we focus on those fundamental
problems recognized by Individual Psychology, the solution of which leads to
preparing mankind better than it has been prepared in the past to withstand its
trials.
We must strengthen the interest in others which will enable man to
withstand his difficulties. Those who have witnessed the results of Individual
Psychology understand the important element is the cultivation of the inborn
potential for social feeling so that an individual behaves with a sufficient degree
of active social interest. In that way, the attitude toward the tasks of life is
directed toward common usefulness.
1 Originally titled “Die Vorbeugung der Delinquenz.” First published in the
Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 13, pages 196-206, 1935. Translated into English
and published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, No. 3, pages 3-13, 1935.
Crime is an intentional injury of others for personal advantage. Obviously
then, the problem concerns human beings in whom social interest is not
sufficiently developed. From many years of experience, we know how this
insufficiency comes about. We understand how social interest did not develop
sufficiently in those individuals.
We will explain the determining factors which educate the child for solving
his future problems in accordance with the common welfare. A child so trained
will feel himself a part of the whole, a member of the human race who lives,
works, and plays with other members, and who regards first the small tasks of
his childhood and later the greater tasks of his maturity in only one way: by
asking himself, “What can I contribute?” An individual so trained in childhood
will never show criminal tendencies, even when the pressure of external
circumstances becomes as severe as it is today when so many are failing.
Owing to communal life, one of our chief problems has been the way in
which an individual relates to others, the way he contributes to the advancement
of the community. In this process of the individual's relating to the community,
many mistakes have been made for which mankind has paid. Wise men have
always said that the happiness of mankind lies in working together, in living as if

each individual had set himself the task of contributing to the common welfare.
The development of the inborn potential for cooperation occurs as soon as
the child is born. It occurs first in the relationship of the child and mother,
because the mother is the first person whom the child experiences. This
relationship has its foundation in nature. The child and mother are dependent on
each other; this relationship not only arises out of nature, but is favored by it.
When other schools of psychology maintain that the child comes into the world a
complete egoist with a “drive for destruction” and no other intention than to
foster himself cannibalistically on his mother, they overlook the role of the
mother in the relationship. The mother with her milk-filled breasts and all the
other altered functions of her body (not to mention the new emotional
development of her love for her child) needs the child as much as the child needs
her. They depend on each other by nature. In this first opportunity for the
cultivation of the inborn social potential, social interest takes on life.
But even here, at the very beginning, many mistakes can be made because
humans are fallible. For instance, often satisfied with a restricted social
development for the child, the mother might not concern herself with his need to
go from her care into a much wider circle of human contacts. In such a case, the
mother concentrates the child's social potential on herself. She does not help him
extend his interest to others. Even the father may be excluded, if he makes no
special effort to enter this “closed circle.” Of course, other children and strangers
are also excluded. However, the mother's task is to keep the child from seeing
her as the only person with whom he can make contact.
Among other developments, a child may become spoiled if he suffers from
a feeling of privation and senses that only in the mother can he find the
possibility of satisfying his wants. This spoiling is especially true, for example,
of children born with organ inferiorities who consequently face life as if under a
burden which causes them to suffer. In such a case, the child learns to expect
everything from the mother, and becoming conscious of a feeling of deprivation,
apprehending his burden, he forces the mother to occupy herself exclusively
with him.
Nevertheless, the bad training given by the mother is not responsible for
producing the pampered life style. The child stumbles into this mistaken path by
himself when the mother is the only person with whom he makes contact. This
attitude could not occur unless the child claimed for himself all the advantages
of such a relationship. In other words, focused on himself, the child sees his only
possibility of success in expecting everything from his mother, in contributing
nothing, in always taking and never giving. His social feeling will go no further.
Consequently, the child’s picture of the world will be one in which he expects

everything from others.
In the obscure processes of his thinking, such a child regards others as
objects. Because he expects everything from others without giving anything to
them, they are nothing more than objects. With this viewpoint, no one can
develop the feeling of equality with others. We cannot keep the interest of others
in mind if they are merely outsiders who have to look after us and have been
made available for our exploitation.
Criminals invariably demonstrate a pampered life style. They picture the
world as a place where everyone else exists for their exploitation, where they
have the right to forcibly take possession of the goods, health, or life of others
and to set their own interest above the interest of others. A certain attitude runs
through their life history. The social interest of criminals suffered shipwreck in
childhood and did not attain full maturity. These individuals begin early to take
forcibly anything they think belongs to them.
However, their intelligence must be taken into consideration. If that is
missing, then we cannot call them criminals. We cannot employ the concept of
crime in relation to a feebleminded person who commits an offense. That term
applies to a deed planned intentionally and maliciously for the purpose of
enriching the perpetrator. A criminal act is the result of the pampered life style
insisting on “wish fulfillment.” Also, difficulties are harder for those with a
pampered life style to withstand, because they feel their own wishes more
strongly than others, considering themselves justified in these personal desires,
so that they solve their problems in a way that maintains their personal prestige.
All Freudian research and its findings relate to the pampered life style
without acknowledgment of that fact. The popularity of this school and the
resentment implicit in its theories point to a readiness in those with a pampered
life style to accept it because they feel anything that stems from the pampered
life style is justified and right.
This pampering and its results assume a variety of colors depending on
whether the child takes an active or passive attitude toward life. Even in a
passive way, he can expect everything from others; but if he shows more
activity, he will take from others whatever he wants that is not given to him
voluntarily. Right here is the beginning of delinquency. A most important result
of Individual Psychology is its ability to determine the psychic structure of a
child who is a potential delinquent and in danger of heading for a career of
crime. Criminals whom I have studied, whether in life or literature, have all been
of this type. Through pampering or self-pampering as children, they came to an
early halt in the development of their social interest, but displayed a great
amount of activity.

We can detect the criminal’s mistaken picture of the world in his earliest
childhood recollections. For example, we hear things like the following: “I was
helping with the wash when I saw a piece of money on the table, so I took it. I
was six years old;” or, “When I was five, a freight car burned at our railway
station. A lot of children’s balls were thrown out and I grabbed as many as I
could hold;” or again, “My mother was careless about leaving money lying
about, so each week I took some of it.”
Such lack of social interest bound up with activity will be found again and
again in the early recollections of delinquents. The clear expression in these
early memories of the pampered life style combined with great activity is one of
the most significant findings of Individual Psychology. Fighting, lack of
consideration for or injury of others, and running away appear early in these
people; clearly, interest in and for others is missing in them.
We dare not forget these facts in studying delinquency. In addition, with the
commonly inadequate development of social feeling the inclination to crime is
more prevalent than the actual commission of crime, which also requires an
external “cause” in a difficult situation confronting the criminal. The criminal
sees in the commission of his crime the only possible relief from his difficult
situation. His crime seems to him his only possibility of success. Never missing
from any crime, the difficult situation is like a test of the criminal’s social
interest.
However, the situation which appears to the criminal sufficiently difficult to
make him commit the crime can appear quite insignificant to the non-criminal.
For instance, a man who has no money and wants to take a girl out may become
a burglar. Such mistaken behavior shows an extraordinary degree of arrogance,
of diseased ambition which becomes extremely acute when the criminal sees
others in possession of anything he covets.
The criminal believes that he will triumph by his crime, and not be caught.
This firm conviction, too, has its roots in early childhood. I have never seen a
young delinquent who had not already committed several offenses without being
caught. So delinquents get the impression: “I can injure others without being
caught at it.” From experience, they acquire a certainty about it.
Here we must consider another factor. No crime is committed without a
plan. The criminal thinks out everything in advance, and his plan convinces him
that he is superior to the police, the law, and his victim. His premise is the
conviction of his superiority. He finds some grounds for this attitude in the fact
that almost forty percent of criminals are not apprehended and most criminals
have committed various greater or lesser offenses before capture.
In part, we can attribute the great difficulty of reforming criminals to this

fact. We can turn an individual from the criminal path only through transforming
his picture of the world from one of exploiting others to one of seeing others as
fellow human beings. Our present methods of dealing with crime exert too little
effort to increase his social interest. This statement is not intended as criticism or
blame. Crime is the most serious of all the psychic mistakes. If we really wish to
redirect the criminal to a more useful way of life, then we must employ the best
educators, who understand thoroughly that success hinges upon the increase of
his social interest.
As a rule, the criminal believes that if he had only been cleverer he would
not have been caught. Even criminals standing in the shadow of the gallows
cling to this impression. I remember a murderer who said again and again, “If
only I had not forgotten my glasses, then I would never have been caught.” A
criminal laboring under this conviction is very difficult to approach, especially
as even in prison he receives advice and instruction from other criminals as to
how his crime might have been more perfectly executed. As long as this problem
is unsolved, approaching criminals will be difficult. As long as the criminal is
convinced that if he had only proceeded differently in some small way he would
not be in prison, he will reject with disdain any other explanation of his
dilemma.
All ambitious individuals prepare an alibi whenever threatened with a
defeat that might injure their prestige. “Prestige diplomacy” is the essence of this
characteristic. We are not surprised that at St. Helena Napoleon said, “If I had
only gone to Spain first and then to Russia, the whole world would now be at my
feet.” These alibis provide both a comfort and a challenge to be cleverer the next
time. Thus, the criminal preserves his feeling of worth and his psychic balance.
For him, his failure is due to a mere trifle.
The difficulty is persuading the criminal that seeking his triumph by
defrauding others is a mistake, and making him understand that contributing to
society will lead to happiness. He should be shown his mistaken style of life
from childhood on.
In order to commit a crime, the criminal must goad himself to do it. This
bright spot in the consideration of the human psyche may be viewed as evidence
that even the criminal has social interest. The real trouble is that he does not
have enough of it. For the purpose of committing his crime he must overcome,
both mentally and emotionally, whatever amount of social interest he possesses.
He must exhaust his social interest before he can proceed on his criminal way.
Dostoevsky’s Raskolnikov presents a wonderful picture of this process.
Raskolinov lies in his bed for two months considering whether or not he dare
commit a murder. He tries to kill his social interest by imagining how much

good he could do with the money of his victim. But he is not successful in that
way, he still has too much social interest, until after two months he exclaims,
“Am I Napoleon nor a louse?” Now he is armed, he behaves like Napoleon and
murders the old woman. What has happened? He has selected a comparison, a
metaphor which has no connection with reality. Neither Napoleon nor a louse, of
course he sets up these alternatives because he doesn’t want to give up the crime
which is his goal. Now he has an impulse which facilitates his carrying out the
deed. He has exhausted his social interest. But it comes back to him after the
deed is done because the metaphor he used to stimulate its accomplishment no
longer serves him. This same dynamic occurs in all crimes.
The criminal who forgot his glasses said, “Why set so much store on the
boy I killed? There are a million other boys.” Here he shows his need of an idea
incompatible with common sense. A man who murdered his brother used a
distorted concept to facilitate his crime and in reference to it exclaimed, “It was
either him or me. The earth was not big enough for both of us!” Similar ideas
play a part in lesser crimes. For example, a criminal who had stolen a sum of
money said, “That man had plenty of money; anyhow, why should he have left
that money lying around?” Or again, “That man had fine clothes and I had none;
so I had to kill him.”
Clearly, this type of thinking does not show feeblemindedness, for we all
use such help when we resort to poetic expression to further our purposes. We
do the same thing when, for instance, we emphasize the qualities we like or
dislike in other people, when we want to represent someone as bad or even when
we attempt to make friendly contact. Such poetic expressions and devices are
attempts to support our objectives. For example, if someone wants very much to
go to the country, he begins by visualizing pictures of the mountains, and before
long he actually goes there even though according to common sense, he should
have stayed in town.
All human beings have this ability to incite themselves to do something
good or bad. The ability to develop feelings from thoughts and pictures gives an
impetus to achievements and attitudes which, though they would no doubt be
accomplished anyhow, would be accomplished much less easily under the
inhibitions imposed by common sense.
We can see the criminal’s mistaken picture of the world, his pampered life
style, in the very fact he considers others so little that he regards them merely as
victims. Lacking in social interest, he will be subject to egocentric, fantasy
impulses, because having only a “private logic,” he lacks the common sense that
binds the human race together. Social interest endows its possessor with a degree
of reason which keeps him from deceiving himself. If he does not deceive

himself, he will not wish to deceive others.
The quality so aptly termed “common sense” is the highest development of
reason. Its values are constant and incontrovertible. The undervaluing of reason,
common sense, and intelligence by so many perhaps indicates their lack of social
interest.
Now we turn to the prevention of crime. We know how social interest may
remain undeveloped, just as muscular strength may remain undeveloped. We
know that the security of mankind and the attainment of its highest destiny
require that the child be shaped into a fellowman, a co-worker, who feels a part
of the whole, connected to the community of men. Unlike the individual who
merely lets himself be carried along, the cooperator displays a great deal of
socially useful activity. This fellowman develops so that without thinking much
about it, almost automatically, he moves along a path leading to the common
welfare. Proceeding in this direction, he develops many of his latent capacities.
The chief task of education lies in developing such fellowmen.
Social interest is not inborn in human beings; merely the potential of
developing it is inborn. Inborn potential requires cultivation. The sense of touch
is also inborn, but the creative power of the child develops it to the point of
usefulness. The degree of development of the sense of touch in the cases of
Helen Keller and Laura Bridgman came about through intensive training. A
prominent neuropathologist, Frederick Tilney, who examined both of these
women, found that their sense of touch did not inherently differ from the normal,
but that through training they enabled themselves to accomplish much more than
normal. Sight can be the same in two individuals, but what each does with it
depends upon how he trains it, and may vary greatly. This important finding of
Individual Psychology will eventually modify the inheritance psychologies so
that they agree with our view.
It should be possible to develop social interest to a degree that suffices the
individual in withstanding difficulties, not in order to suppress wishes but to turn
them into the channels of general usefulness. At first sight, the mother may seem
to have the task of developing the inborn potential of social interest in the child.
But we must acknowledge that making the majority of parents into good
educators would be an endless, futile undertaking. So we must turn to the school
to assume the task of developing the inborn potential for social interest. If
teachers educated their students in this way, then when children left school, they
would possess sufficient social interest to meet the tasks of life.
We need a law that no child may leave school until he can take a useful
place in society, until his interest in others is sufficiently developed to enable
him to meet the tasks of life. In fact, children who do develop in the direction of

social interest and strive for general welfare are the very ones who achieve most
in their studies. And in turn, school achievement is a kind of preparation for later
social usefulness. But how can a student focus on his studies if being useful is
foreign to him?
Clearly, this training would impose a new responsibility upon the teacher,
but after all, the teacher should be most concerned with these matters. The
wisdom of the teacher can make the child understand why he needs to learn the
various things taught in school, and to also understand which of his schoolmates
is a fellow worker, a malingerer, or asocial. The teacher who masters this art, as
we have often found, can instruct other teachers in these methods. He soon
discovers that the foundation of helping a child is to lead him to the path of
common usefulness, so he does not feel himself in an enemy country, and seeks
his happiness in being, living, and working with others.
Only in this way will the children of coming generations be able to solve
the problems of life and make contact with their fellowmen. Only in this way
can we hope that individuals will find true vocational worth, that the problem of
love will be solved so that happy marriages based on the equality of the sexes
will be possible, and that women may freely choose their partners. To make the
child a cooperator, to make him a help instead of a burden, could become the
common tradition of education.
As soon as teachers understand the advantages of their position among the
leaders of mankind, as soon as they see that they have in their hands the power
to guide future generations, many will join this great effort. The teacher as an
individual would find that these amplifications of his work and position make it
easier for him. It is certainly easier to teach social-minded, well-balanced, useful
children than to drag along a number of maladjusted, negligent ones.
If anyone still doubts that the delinquent lacks sufficient social interest,
rendering him unable to solve the problems of life, I refer to two points. First,
fifty per cent of arrested delinquents are untrained and unskilled, meaning that
even as children they did not cooperate and it was impossible to develop their
social interest to the degree necessary for business or professional life.
Second, fifty per cent of criminals suffer from venereal diseases, meaning
that they are unable to solve the problem of love in a normal way or to consider
it a task for two equal partners. Venereal diseases often result from thinking that
sex concerns merely one person, whereas it is a task for two which can be truly
accomplished only when each partner has sufficient interest in the welfare of the
other. These two points vividly confirm my conception of the problem of
delinquency.
In conclusion, mankind would profit enormously by traveling the road

proposed by Individual Psychology. The economic cost of my program for the
prevention of delinquency does not worry me. The cost of the present system of
detection, punishment, and maintenance of criminals far exceeds the cost of
educating children to social feeling and interest in others, in short, to be
contributing members of society. Even at present, the poorest community could
afford this training. In a short time, a sufficient number of teachers could be
prepared for the task. In Vienna, we already have a great number of teachers
equipped for this work.
Furthermore, even the closest scrutiny cannot find the proposed educational
measure injurious to the religious or political requirements of any nation. I can
imagine no form of government in which the proposed increase of social interest
would be harmful; in fact, all great movements include it in their programs.
If some people question whether other psychologies can accomplish the
same results, I must answer: we Individual Psychologists are broad-minded
enough to hope that they too will have the opportunity of showing what they can
do to educate teachers for this work.
I see no reason why this exceptionally fruitful idea could not become
reality. I have found, however, that being right is not enough, and indeed can be
a disadvantage. Although we may believe this idea is so important to life that the
future welfare of mankind depends upon it, I do not think we will accomplish at
once what seems so obviously necessary to us. But that should not hinder us
from constantly hoping and thinking of it, or from working toward it.
Individual Psychologists have worked at the problem from this standpoint
for a long time, and I believe we have had good results. The solution we offer is
not only theory, but also a practical solution for the problem of crime.
When we say that the problem can be solved, we do not mean that it will be
solved immediately. Any new theory meets with the same incredulity and
resistance that this one is meeting. It has always been so when anyone found a
new way which differed from the customary trend. It was so in the development
of industrial technique. The first steamboat and the first train were looked upon
as enemies of man. Even scientists declared that anyone who used them must be
mad. Yet it has been demonstrated that man can endure far greater speed. Those
who fear that children trained in our way will surely develop headaches raise
objections similar to those raised against the steamboats and the trains.
We must not keep to ourselves the conclusions we have thoroughly tested
and found sound. We have the duty to disseminate them and challenge the world
to subject them to further proof. As a result of this increased understanding of
Individual Psychology, I hope the one-sided view of hereditarianism, the
environmental theory, the endocrine gland theory, and the Freudian sexual

theory of crime will be closely examined.
A deeper understanding of Individual Psychology will also greatly help in
the diagnosis of feeblemindedness, which at present is very uncertain, especially
in borderline cases.
If our work has just one result, that someone reading this article tests the
validity of these ideas to prove our theories, then I would be satisfied. In view of
the general inertia of mankind, I must take comfort in knowing that at least I
have done what I could.
Chapter XX
Prevention of Neurosis1 2
The theoretical foundation common to all schools of psychology should be
discussed with scientific equanimity. Such equanimity presupposes a feeling of
self-assurance. However, since the time of W. Wundt, when psychology
emerged from the general field of philosophy as a definitely demarcated science,
the theoretical foundations or “system” in each psychological movement have
been subjected to the most vehement and personal attacks. The methods of
practical procedure have not faced such attacks. We shall not go into these
controversies here, nor into the distortions of truth which have arisen from
misunderstanding, nor into the significant silence and silent exploitation with
which new discoveries have been received. We need not point out to the student
of the history of psychology how frequently borrowing from other systems has
been used to prop up a toppling structure of psychological thought. All that
needed to be done for such borrowing was to simply alter the nomenclature.
A young science like psychology naturally manifests divergent trends, lines
of attack, and objectives. As each of these trends takes form as a “system,” the
disciples follow their teachers in closing their minds to the ideas of other
systems. Eventually, the disputes, particularly those based on theory as to the
proper demarcation of the systems, degenerate into hair splitting. This result is
not surprising when we remember how often the striving for the unattainable
recognition of the “innermost in nature” attracts those very individuals who are
insecure in themselves. Such individuals resent very strongly being deprived of
their “safeguards.” When they feel such danger threatening them, they are easily
led to unwarranted personal deprecation of their “opponents.” To avoid similar
mistakes, I make it the duty of every student of Individual Psychology to acquire
as full a knowledge of other psychological systems as possible. I never object to
a nervous patient reading the books or attending the lectures of other
psychotherapists. I certainly understand how insulting others is an attempt to
transform one’s inferiority complex into a superiority complex.
For my part, I have never hesitated to acknowledge the progress of any

scientific psychological system. I have never attempted to deny some deep
common connection in the research of the various old and new systems.
Unprejudiced 
critics 
cannot 
deny 
that 
Introspection, 
Psychoanalysis,
Functionalism, Behaviorism, Purposivism, Reflexology, and Gestalt Psychology
have made valuable contributions. But the same must also be said of Individual
Psychology.
1 Originally titled “Vorbeugung der Neurose.” First published in the Int. Z.
Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 13, pages 133-141, 1935. Translated into English and
published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 1, No. 4, pages 3-12, 1935. 
2 Editor’s note: Before Adler addresses the topic of preventing neurosis, he
delivers a vigorous critique of other schools of psychology, as well as eclectics
who mistakenly attempt to combine Individual Psychology with other theoretical
approaches, thereby diluting and distorting it.
Let no one assume from this, however, that I advocate a wavering of
eclecticism. After all, each psychologist talks the language of his own “style of
life,” either in its original or a modified form. Why this “style of life” manifests
itself so distinctly in the struggle for the maintenance of one’s philosophy of life
is worthy of some psychological interpretation. This dynamic applies both to the
disciple who is entirely dependent upon his teacher, and to the writer or speaker
who endeavors to flatter his way into the teacher’s favor by deprecating others.
A psychological system has an inseparable connection with the
lifephilosophy of its formulator. As soon as he offers his system to the world, it
appeals to individuals, both laymen and scientists, with a similar world view,
providing them with a scientific foundation for their previously held attitude
toward life. The influence of science on our educational, religious, or political
beliefs is just as undeniable as the influence of literature and art on the
development of mankind. In addition to the life philosophy’s special position as
a modifying force, it must also be taken into account as one of the general
impressions the individual receives in his striving to overcome his internal
difficulties. These impressions are taken up, sifted and molded or distorted in
accordance with his biased perspective, with his “tendentious apperception,” and
with a picture of the world which he concluded very early in life. Thus, the
shades of different tendencies and attitudes in individuals are understandable
even when they originated amidst the greatest sameness of common formative
conditions. Largely, an individual will understand only what he has been
somehow cognizant of before.
Let us now consider some examples of this assumption. Recognizing this
psychological predisposition as an undeniable fact, what will be the result when

a psychological system disseminates the idea of absolute heredity, implying the
impossibility of any progressive development? Or, when such a system shifts the
motivation of all failures into the endocrine gland system? Or, when it endeavors
to attribute all human shortcomings or distinguishing traits to environmental
influence, mostly that of the mother, as if the child itself simply doesn’t count,
and as if the mother’s influence on the child were not limited by the child’s own
attitude? Or, when inborn social feeling, or the possibility and necessity of its
development under the pressure of evolution and in the interest of universal
welfare, is characterized as mere phraseology empty of meaning? We should be
aware of what influence such “findings,” expressed with the convincing
emphasis of science, may have on individuals psychologically predisposed
towards accepting them. What shape will such influence take when we hear, as
the implication of a psychological system: “Why should I love my neighbor?
Does he love me?” Or, when we are told that the fundamental drive of human
psychic life is an omnipotent drive for destruction which can only be externally
mitigated either by the insight as to how easily that drive may bring injury to
one’s self, or by the moral teachings of the parents, so often lacking?
We must understand what happens when into the philosophy of life of our
leaders creeps the conclusion that humanity is radically bad by nature, and
requires external suppression to achieve reasonable behavior; or, finally, when
the hitherto unsuccessful striving of women for equality with men, the only safe
guarantee for a happy love and marital relationship, is called a delusion because
women are without a certain organ.
The world view of each individual, his form of participation in society, his
ideas on occupation, love and marriage, and his contribution to social and human
progress all depend on his basic psychological understanding, however
erroneous it may be, of the functioning of human relationships. Shall we then
regard all manifestations of the lack of sufficient understanding of life as mere
temporary aberrations, or shall we do something to prevent such aberrations so
that their influence does not develop into a permanent danger to mankind?
We are dealing here with the practical effects of scientific systems. These
effects are not merely alterable surface layers easily detachable from the context
of the whole system. The unity of the personality of their authors, and the
seeming logic of their systems, however patched up they may be, mislead
individuals of similar dispositions to regard as normal their own social
deviations, having been sanctioned by a scientific system.
The seemingly strongest support of the hereditarians, the likeness of
identical twins, has broken down, and nobody wants to take responsibility for the
claim that identical twins are also psychically identical. The hereditarians,

however, still cling to their beliefs and conclusions. The individual child with all
his hereditary equipment, confronted with perpetually new and altering
problems, does not count with the hereditarians. As far back as 1907, when I
published my Study of (inherited) Organ Inferiority and its Psychical
Compensation, they accepted readily enough the hereditary inferiority of organs,
but they did not acknowledge the individual uniqueness of the child who
experiences such inferiority, and molds this experience creatively until he forms
his active, individual attitude toward the problems of life. Except for
Functionalism, Behaviorism, Purposivism, and Gestalt Psychology, many have
forgotten that the actual foundation of psychology is the changing relationship of
the moving individual to the problems of the outside world. Certainly, we inherit
physical attributes and specific human potential. But what matters ultimately is
what the child does with the equipment he inherits. That formulation is his own
creative achievement. Chromosomes, physical endowment, endocrine glands,
and blood composition enable an individual to move and function. But how and
for what objective he shapes these formative factors becomes manifest only
through the millions of variations in individual patterns of life; and these may
frequently appear to be disconnected. However, a closer understanding shows
each case to be a unified theme determined by the life-goal of each individual,
inseparable from his conception of the world.
Thus, we may regard heredity as a supply of bricks with different qualities,
used by each individual in his infancy to build his style of life. Resemblances
and statistical probabilities can be frequently ascertained and counted upon, but
never identical likeness. Despite my disinclination to use metaphors in scientific
discussions, let me point out here that a hammer may be a useful instrument,
fashioned by human ingenuity. Originally invented to drive a nail, it may,
however, also be used for other purposes, as a missile, paper weight, or a
murderous weapon. A hammer is thus an environmental factor, a product of
experience, similar to the properties of the body and the inherited potential of the
individual. In discussing environmental factors, we have to also deal with the
inheritance of social relationship. Similar to inherited physical properties,
environmental factors may also lead toward a certain form of response. The
child, the “father of the man,” establishes his relationship to the problems of the
outside world and molds these relationships in accordance with his style of life.
Investigators who attribute all results, particularly failures, to environment and
education show some understanding of this fact. However, none of them has
asserted that a sameness in environment, or education could create absolute
“equality.” (This notion of equality terrifies many people without any
wellfounded reason.) Environmental influences, the attitude of relatives, and

educational factors act merely as enticements for the child to follow according to
the intention of the educators or against it, in a thousand different ways. The
acceptance of these influences is likely only when they seem to hold a promise
of success for the individual’s style of life. This fact contradicts Behaviorism
and Reflexology; it will probably never be possible to produce “conditioned”
reflexes which may lead to a feeling of defeat.
These indisputable facts frequently cause an ambiguous scientific game: all
that cannot be evaluated as environmental influence is evaluated as hereditary
influence. All that cannot be ascribed to obscure hereditary factors, most of
which are presented as generalities, is attributed to environment. However the
child undoubtedly directs both hereditary and environmental factors, fumbling
and groping, as it were, in the dark, toward possibilities of success, i.e. the
successful solution of his problems. Later, when examined with a mature
knowledge, these possibilities often no longer point to success. In previous
essays, and in the book, Der Sinn Des Lebens (The Meaning of Life), I have
pointed out that for some, “success” may mean the suppression of weaker
individuals, leaning on others, or the elimination of problems that seem to
portend the possibilities of defeat. Naturally, we do not approve of such
interpretations of success.
We must accept all traits which in the inherited, changing structure of
human life are regarded as specifically human. Of course, we are not thinking
here of social relationships, but of the human potential underlying those
relationships, for which we do not even have accurate terms. We assume they
are products of an evolution of millions of years, whatever the origin of such
development may have been. And the outstanding achievements of genius,
(enriching and leading mankind in new ways,) are enlargements of the average
human capacities, not necessarily rooted in that still dark sphere of fetal
dispositions. The conception of inherited character traits, sometimes disguised as
a psychology of “drives,” is untenable if for no other reason than that character
traits do not exist as given entities.
Character traits are the external aspect of the social relationship of an
individual to the problems of the outside world, and should be regarded merely
as indications of how the individual’s life style will express itself in reaction to
an external stimulus, or to a stimulus even within himself. A man is called
“good” when he relates himself to others in a generally useful way, “bad” when
he acts contrary to social feeling. Educators and psychotherapists observe the
“bad” drives, the “destruction drives” in man, more often than his other side.
Thus, we find them frequently coming to the erroneous conclusion that man is
evil by nature.

We think we have demonstrated the existence of another power in the
structure of life along with the first which strives for the “overcoming” of
difficulties and obstacles. This second power may be named Social Feeling.
Viewed from our present level of understanding, both powers seem to be part of
evolution. The striving to “overcome” is probably the older factor.
We cannot consider the concept of life as motion without active adaptation,
or as I called it first, “aggression.” All life-functions are properly developed for
this victorious, “overcoming” contact with the outside world. Our physical and
psychic functions are evaluated as appropriate, healthy, and normal when they
can overcome common external, oppositional factors. They are then evaluated as
reasonable when they promote the progress of culture. They possess value in
relation to eternity, if they function in the interest of mankind and human
evolution.
From these two viewpoints, we assess the attitude of an individual toward
the problems of life. In investigating this attitude, we presuppose that these
aforementioned factors endeavor to secure possibilities of success, each in its
own way. Even suicide offers a possibility of success, however contradictory to
social acceptability it may be. But in the case of suicide, we must clearly
demonstrate what the individual in question may have interpreted as his success.
As soon as we have uncovered his interpretation, we can understand to what
extent his goal of superiority was incompatible with fully developed social
feeling.
In neurosis, therefore, we always face a highly placed goal of personal
superiority. When applying the principles of Individual Psychology to such a
case, we can demonstrate how this goal of superiority permeates all phases of
life and all the individual’s attitudes toward his problems form earliest childhood
on. For therapeutic purposes, this information has to be shared with the
individual carefully and kindly. Understandably, such a highly placed goal of
personal superiority reflects a lack of the proper measure of social feeling and
precludes the development of healthy interest in others. The striving for personal
superiority and the non-development of social feeling are both mistakes, not two
mistakes, but one. Finally, the investigator must look at a third element. In cases
of neurosis, we deal with comparatively less active individuals who because of
the unchanged style of life, even in their childhood lacked the activity required
for the correct solution of their problems. This examination of the individual’s
activity cannot be carried out in figures and numbers. That use of numerical
analysis is just as impossible as the quantitative examination of the degree of
social feeling or striving for personal power. Only creative, artistic empathy used
to determine the continuity of these phenomena can measure the psychological

activity of an individual.
We must be outspoken about the accomplishments of Individual
Psychology because the possibility of preventing the misery of neurosis for the
suffering individual, his environment, and mankind in general is at stake. Why
wait for research on whether Individual Psychology correctly states that neurosis
is the natural, logical development of an individual who is comparatively
inactive, filled with personal, egocentric striving for superiority, and therefore
handicapped in the development of his social feeling, as we find regularly in
pampered styles of life?
The neurotic was a child to whom leaning on other people offered a
possibility of success. During several years of his life, such a child experienced a
falsely elevated position by obtaining everything easily with the help of others,
and expecting everything from others. Thus, he came to a standstill in the
development of his social interest and acquired a picture of the world that
promised him an easy, quick fulfillment of his wishes. For him, the development
of great activity was not urgent. From childhood, the neurotic manifests the
“pampered style of life” which is not adequate for the solution of social
problems. Later, when confronted by a difficult situation, the potentially neurotic
child often becomes the neurotic patient.
However, what happens with those children who manifest the “pampered
style of life,” but seek their chances of success in a more active way? They, too,
do not look upon others as fellow-beings. They, too, live under the pressure of a
world view in which they expect to receive everything from others, or owing to
their greater activity, take everything from them. But the comparatively more
active ones are in much less danger of becoming neurotics. Depending on
exogenic factors, or a difficult situation, they tend toward criminality.
At present, psychotherapists increasingly accept the viewpoint of Individual
Psychology and acknowledge the lack of social feeling as the cause of neurosis.
Only the psychology of hereditarians is still recalcitrant in this respect. However,
a thorough examination would confirm that neurosis is the probable fate of those
children who have created for themselves the “pampered style of life,” who
possess an underdeveloped social feeling, and belong to the comparatively less
active type of individuals. When we review the facts which I have presented, we
realize how far reaching a prophylaxis we could effect to depopulate sanitariums
and asylums, and produce cooperative fellow-beings.
To save investigators from making an easy mistake, I want to stress that the
“pampered style of life” should not be read into the attitude of the mother or
grandmother. It is the creation of the child and very frequently found even where
no evidence exists of pampering by another person.

The following case demonstrates how Individual Psychology understands
and deals with a neurotic individual. I will stress the essential factors in order to
clarify our method of preventing neuroses.
A young man of twenty years came for consultation with the complaint that
he was incapable of living and working because he suffered from blushing and
spells of anxiety whenever he met strangers. This complaint is known to the
psychiatrist as erythrophobia. When alone or within his family circle, he felt at
ease and comfortable. Therefore, we recognized that the “cause” of his nervous
spells lay not within him, but in the appearance of the other, the stranger. We
could further recognize that the emotional excitement linked to this “cause” set
in motion his circulatory system which is doubtlessly very susceptible to such
“spells.” This “cause” also affected certain other organ systems and psychic
functions, as shown by the accompanying spells of anxiety. The Individual
Psychologist, for whom the social relationships of the patient are of the greatest
importance, realizes that in this case the social feeling in the young man’s style
of life is rather restricted. He further deduces that the patient experienced his
possibility of success in a retreat from the demands of communal activity. His
retreat was preceded and introduced by symptoms of fear. Obviously the patient
was not aware that he was retreating. (Many psychologists are also not aware
that such behavior as his means a “retreat.”) Moreover, he manifested the low
degree of activity to which we have referred several times. These three factors:
(1) too little social interest; (2) striving in a wrong direction, of which the patient
is not aware, but which he mistakenly feels offers him the only possibility of
“success” as he interprets it; and (3) a comparatively small degree of activity,
can always be found in the structure of a neurosis. Generally speaking, the
exogenic factor is found in problems requiring social feeling. In this case, that
exogenic factor is quite conspicuous. Here, an individual was very poorly
prepared to meet the requirements of society, occupation, and love. The
exogenic factor was his exposure to the specific precipitating situation: being
confronted by strangers.
Next, we need to clarify why this patient has not developed his social
feeling. In investigating these three factors, we will run across circumstances
which have “lured” him to his attitude toward life. He felt or mistakenly
interpreted these circumstances as “causes.” However, they might not have been
“causes” for other persons. His younger sister, for instance, had approximately
similar childhood experiences, but drew other conclusions from them; therefore,
she became an independent, courageous being.
What hindered the development of his social feeling was growing up under
the influence of a kind, but domineering mother who always wanted her children

to be around her, and subjected all their movements to her constant control.
Among his recollections, we want to point out the following: One day when his
father came to see the family in their summer residence, our patient, then three
years of age, did not recognize him. This may certainly indicate that the patient
was exclusively attached to his mother. (Freud would here invoke the Oedipus
complex, which even in the psychoanalytical distortion is nothing but the
mistaken, artificial product of the “pampered style of life.”) Furthermore, at
school he constantly kept himself in the background to avoid being noticed. He
had no friends. After his sister was born, he suffered for some time from
nocturnal fears, screaming in his sleep. Being in a dark room, or left alone were
terrible situations for him. His activity was restricted to keeping order and being
obedient in order to deserve his mother’s praise. Apart from small occasional
quarrels, he was on good terms with his sister, which in a sense may be
understood as another sign of his comparatively small degree of activity. In fact,
he later also subordinated himself to her.
After the first interview, he told me the following dream: He came to the
consultation. The physician was not present. Somebody told him that the
physician treated only insane people. In the interpretation of the dream, if we
emphasize its movement and the direction pointing to the future attitude of the
dreamer in accordance with Individual Psychology, then we conclude that the
physician, I, seem to have been eliminated, probably with some undertone of
reproach. The physician is represented here as somehow disinterested and
neglectful of his duty. The fact that, in the dream, the therapist treats only insane
people obviously means that the patient feels he is not in the proper place. Both
indications reveal the patient’s intention to interrupt the treatment with some
pretext or other. When I explained in a friendly way that his style of life
expresses itself very distinctly even in his dream, and that this occurs, as always
in a dream, in contradiction to common sense and reason, the patient understood
himself very quickly, facilitating his progress. I also informed him that his dream
revealed his restricted social feeling, limited activity level, and method of
striving for success, which is to eliminate strangers from his life. In a
comparatively short time, the patient was cured and accepted a position in which
he felt increasingly well and at ease. The further development of his neurosis
was prevented.
Chapter XXI
On the Interpretation of Dreams1
[1936]
GENERAL CONSIDERATION 
Almost every human being dreams, but very few understand their dreams.

A common activity of the human mind, dreams are usually dismissed as 
“rubbish.” Nevertheless, our interest in them dates back to the earliest periods of 
history. Human activity and interests provide the grist for the psychologist’s
mill.
Therefore, no psychologist or school of psychology can ignore the subject of
dreams and their interpretation without at the same time admitting inadequacy, 
because the process of dreaming is part of life for all of us.
THE PROPHETIC VIEW OF DREAMS IN HISTORY
The one important contribution of antiquity to the subject of dreams is that
they are of a prophetic nature. Although any scientific psychology must reject
this point of view, the consideration of some historic dreams and their
interpretation casts light on the problems involved. For example, the dreams of
Joseph, reported in the Bible, where the sun, moon, stars, and sheaves of wheat
bowed to him were understood quite correctly by his brothers. Ancient dream
books explained what a dream meant with regard to the future fortunes of the
man who dreamed it. Primitive peoples looked for omens and prophecies in their
dreams. The Greeks and the Egyptians went to their temples in the hope of
obtaining a sacred dream that would influence their future lives. Such dreams
were looked on as curative, as means for removing physical or mental
difficulties. The American Indians took great pains to induce dreams by
purification, fasting, and sweat baths, and based their conduct on how they
interpreted their dreams. Even today, some individuals insist they have had
dreams which later came true.
Ever since I first attempted to understand dreams, it has seemed clear to me
that a man who is dreaming is in a worse position to foretell the future than a
man who is awake. When awake, a man has more complete possession of his
faculties and is more likely to be able to comprehend the whole situation with all
its implications. Yet, we must take note of the traditional view of the prophetic
nature of dreams, which may provide some understanding. One fact stands out:
all historic interpretations of dreams sought to solve problems, to seek guidance
for the future. We recognize the significance of this approach though, of course,
we do not regard dreams as prophecy. We have to consider what sort of
solutions are sought and where the hope for these solutions comes from. At this
point we can say: In dreaming, an individual attempts to solve his problems in
his sleep.
1 Published in English in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 2, No. 1, pages 3-16,
1936.
We find in science, general literature, and belles-lettres, many worthwhile
views regarding dreams and their meaning. For example, as early as about 1850

the German poet, Hebbel, in his memories of childhood, says about dreams, “If a
man collects his dreams and examines them, and adds to the dreams he is now
having all the thoughts he has in association with them, all the remembrances, all
the pictures he can grasp from them, and if he combines these with the dreams
he has had in the past, he will be able to understand himself much better than by
means of any other kind of psychology.” About fifty years later, we find Freud
coming forth as the first to have the courage to follow Hebbel’s
recommendation. Although much of Freud’s interpretation of dreams is no
longer tenable today, we must honor him for laying the foundation of the science
of dream interpretation.
Freud’s theory of dream interpretation is too well known to necessitate a
detailed exposition. From the standpoint of Individual Psychology, his valid
contribution may be summarized as follows:
1. The affective or emotional attitudes in a dream indicate its real meaning
more than the purely picturesque or verbal elements. 
2. Closely allied to the above, the manifest and latent contents of the dream
differ. The manifest content is the way the dream appears to the dreamer. The
latent content consists of the associated thoughts, memories, and emotional
attitudes. The latter is the dream interpretation. 
3. Dreams are not isolated mental phenomena. They employ the same mental
dynamics as those used in slips of the tongue, daydreams, fantasies, and other
waking behavior. 
4. The method of verbal association is valid for obtaining the latent content of
the dream. 
Although Freud’s theories represented a distinct advance in the interpretation of
dreams, Individual Psychology cannot accept his point of view as final. Freud
has claimed from the first that dreams represent fulfillments of infantile sexual
wishes. Later, he found death wishes also involved in dreams. On the basis of
actual experience, this view appears to assign to dreams a toolimited scope. Why
is it that for ages most people have dreamed nearly every night and still do so?
Surely dreams serve more than that one narrow function. The findings of
Individual Psychology confirm that all the behavior of a human being fits into a
unit and the individual’s style of life. Because dreams are a form of human
behavior, they cannot be considered an exception. They are a part of the unity. 
The Freudians themselves found a sexual interpretation of dreams insufficient.
Freud then suggested that he could also see in dreams the expression of an
unconscious desire to die. Perhaps in some sense this is true. Certain dreams,
especially of neurotic persons, show an individual’s lack of courage to meet his
problems. This might be interpreted as the desire to die, but we would be using

terms in a highly figurative sense. We would not be any closer to finding how
dreams reflect the whole personality. The striving for successful achievement,
the successful solution of problems, inherently connects with the structure of
life. In cases where achievement is interrupted, the dreams of the individual
often concern death. 
Freud places the “conscious” and “unconscious” in contradiction to each other.
In so doing, he gives dreams their own special laws which contradict the laws of
everyday thinking. In primitive peoples, as well as ancient philosophers, we
often meet this desire to put concepts in strong antithesis to each other, to treat
them as opposites. Neurotics illustrate the antithetical attitude very clearly.
People often believe that left and right are contradictions, that man and woman,
hot and cold, light and heavy, strong and weak are contradictions. From a
scientific standpoint, they are not contradictions, but varieties. They represent
degrees of a scale, arranged in accordance with their approximation to some
fictive ideal. Also, good and bad, normal and abnormal, are not contradictions
but varieties. Therefore, any theory which treats dream thoughts and day
thoughts, conscious and unconscious, as contradictions is unscientific. Without
understanding it, Psychoanalysis appears to start with the premises of a
pampered child who feels his wishes must never be denied. Psychoanalysis
works out these premises in the most thorough detail. But the striving for
gratification (the basic assumption of Psychoanalysis) is only one of the
countless varieties of the striving for superiority; we cannot take it as the central
motive of all expressions of personality. 
To really discover the purpose of dreams, we must find what purpose is served
by forgetting or not understanding them. This was the most vexing problem
before me when I started, some quarter of a century ago, to try to find the
meaning of dreams. It occurred to me one day that perhaps the real significance
of a dream is that it is not to be understood; perhaps a dynamic of the mind
works to baffle us. This idea furnished me with the first real clue to an adequate
dream interpretation. Searching further, I asked myself, “For what purpose are
we “fooling” ourselves?” In answer, another clue then came to me from ordinary
social interaction. We all know people, including ourselves, who purposely
speak so as not to be understood for the purpose of concealing the truth, or they
speak to themselves in a way which common sense would not allow. Here, then,
is a very close analogy to dreams, in fact more than an analogy since the same
mental dynamic produces both of them. We do not “fool” ourselves in the
thoughts, but in the emotions and feelings aroused by the thoughts and pictures
of a dream. Emotion and mood achieve the purpose of the dream, rather than
reason and judgment. Reasoning alone could not purposely deceive us. Thoughts

may lead to errors in judgment, but those errors would be due to inadequate
factual data. When our style of life clashes with reality and common sense, in
order to preserve the style, we need to arouse feelings and emotions with the
ideas and pictures of a dream we do not understand. 
Before going into a detailed explanation of the interpretation of dreams, we must
understand the nature of sleep. Everybody knows what sleep is, but few
understand it. Sleep cannot be merely the result of fatigue, because we often find
very tired people who cannot sleep. One view is that lactic acid induces sleep.
Undoubtedly, physiologists find an increased quantity of lactic acid in the body
during sleep, but if lactic acid is taken by mouth or injected, the individual does
not necessarily sleep. It might be better considered a by-product of sleep, rather
than the cause of sleep. Recently, Zondek announced that he has found in the
lowest part of the pituitary gland a certain quantity of bromide and that this
bromide wanders to the medulla oblongata causing sleep. Individual Psychology
has a more useful idea. Sleep is a part of life. One aspect of evolution is the
change from being awake to being asleep. If we have a specific reason for
sleeping, then we also have a reason for being awake. We can say little more
about sleep than that it is a part of life and we do not know if sleep is a variety of
being awake or if being awake is a variety of being asleep. 
Sleep is not a “brother of death” as many poets would have us believe. It is not
an antithesis of being awake. If this were so, then nobody could be awakened by
noise, touch, light, or automatically. Although related to his environment, a
sleeper may exclude many of the elements by which he can be awakened. Sleep
involves something like a decision, an act of will, a “fiat” as James would say.
Sleepless persons constantly trying to hear noises or looking for light, etc.
confirm this idea. These persons do not remove the disturbing elements, but on
the contrary try to find them.
DREAMS AS AN EXPRESSION OF THE STYLE OF LIFE 
Individual Psychology maintains that the so-called conscious and 
unconscious do not contradict each other, but form a single unity. The methods
used in interpreting the “conscious” life may be used in interpreting the
“unconscious” or “semi-conscious” life, the life of our dreams. The justification
for this method is that our dream life is just as much a part of the whole as our 
waking life, no more, no less. We will find an adequate interpretation of dreams 
only by considering them as one of the expressions of the style of life.
DREAMS AS AN ATTEMPT TO SOLVE PROBLEMS OF LIFE
Dreams attempt to solve problems according to the individual style of life
and are not to be interpreted as common sense. The ancients considered dreams
in connection with a problem of life. The correctness of their view is confirmed

by the fact that the more satisfied a person becomes, that is, the less his problem
disturbs him, the less he will dream. Individual Psychology shows us that in
dreams we attempt to “fool” ourselves. The two ideas are not contradictory. We
fool ourselves into an inadequate solution of a problem, inadequate from the
standpoint of common sense but adequate from the standpoint of the style of life.
We achieve this deception by dismissing important facts, leaving merely a small
part of the problem which can, if put into figurative form, be solved easily. This
dream process differs little from waking life. For example: A young man wants
to get married, but he hesitates and expresses contradictory views regarding the
important step he is considering. A friend may say, “Don’t be a jackass!” The
friend thus reduces the whole complicated problem to being a jackass or not,
thus enabling the young man to find an easy solution.

EMOTIONAL ACCELERATION
Perhaps another comparison will help explain dreams. But let us be careful
not to let comparisons, which like a dream simplifying a problem, lead us astray.
Dreaming is like stepping on the gas in the process of driving a car. The driver
knows his objective; he is in the car, already on the way. For some reason he
may become uncertain about reaching his objective, then he steps on the gas,
giving himself a spurt forward in the same direction in which he was already
headed. He has changed neither his goal nor his direction; he has merely given
himself added impetus in a time of uncertainty to help him reach his objective.
So in a dream, the individual’s goal of achievement remains the same, but a
dream impels him toward that goal with increased emotional power. A man who
wants to jump over a stream will perhaps count three before he jumps. Is
counting three a necessary requirement before jumping? Not at all! However, he
counts to stir up his feelings and elicit all his powers. We have the means ready
in our minds to elaborate a style of life, to fix and reinforce it; one of the most
important means of establishing that style is the ability to stir up feelings. We
engage in this work every night and day. Waking or sleeping, we probably never
see a picture without having an emotional reaction. In dreams, we produce those
pictures which arouse the feelings and emotions we need for our purposes, i.e.,
for solving the problems confronting us at the time of the dream, in accordance
with our particular style of life.

SELECTION OF DREAM MATERIAL
A well-known dream is that of the Greek poet Simonides who was invited
to go on a lecture tour in Asia Minor. He hesitated, continually postponing the
trip even though the ship waited for him in the harbor. His friends tried in vain to
make him go. Then he had a dream. A dead man he had once found in a forest
and piously buried appeared to him and said, “Because you were so pious and
cared for me in the forest, I now warn you not to go to Asia Minor.” Simonides
arose and said, “I will not go.” But he had already been inclined not to go before
he ever had the dream. This dream illustrates the points discussed so far.
Obviously, Simonides was trying to solve a very real problem because in those
days a sea voyage represented great hazards. But we can see in the dream an
expression of his style of life, the tendency to hesitate. He could not solve his
problem by conscious thought alone, so he had to trick or fool himself into a
solution with the metaphorical expression of a dream. This added impetus gave
him the emotional stimulus necessary to definitely say, “I will not go.” But
notice how the problem was solved. The dream narrowed it down to merely the
question of death; no consideration was given to the possible enhancement of his
fame, to his social obligation to meet a reasonable request, to the good he might
do in spreading Greek culture and numerous other possibilities to be considered.
This example also helps us in pushing dream interpretation a step further.
Out of all his experiences, why should Simonides pick the dead man for the
dream? Apparently, he was preoccupied with thoughts of death. He was
probably afraid not only of seasickness, but also that the ship might sink. As a
result of this preoccupation with the thought of death, his dream selected the
episode concerning a dead man. But the dream was not an actual reproduction of
an experience. The dead man was made to talk, illustrating the creative power of
the human mind. That creativeness built a dream serving the purposes of the
dreamer.
DREAMS BASED ON INFERIORITY FEELINGS, STRIVING FOR
ACHIEVEMENT, AND SOCIAL INTEREST
In Individual Psychology, we cannot accept any laws or rules as binding.
We can accept mere probabilities. Thus, in regard to dream interpretation, the
elements pointed out here are merely probable. Furthermore, they are not
discrete elements; each is related to the other. So with this in mind, let us
consider another common feature of dreams. Although sometimes difficult to
find, a dream often expresses an individual’s striving for superiority. As we

know, this striving is based on inferiority feelings. Children’s fantasies and
daydreams most clearly illustrate this point. In these, we often find children
seeing themselves as the “strongest,” “the savior,” “a conqueror,” “the richest,”
etc. But the meanings of these creations differ greatly from child to child. A
child who fancies himself the richest person in order to have everything he wants
is not the same as the child who fancies himself the richest person to help the
poor. In the latter case, we see an expression of social interest. I am not sure that
he would really help the poor if he were the richest person; but at least, he does
not think of being rich without also thinking of helping others.
An actual example from my case histories makes this point clearer. A child
dreamed: “A giant chased us. We jumped into a tree and when he passed us, we
killed him with a sword we took from him.” Here is the dream of a boy afraid of
difficulties (inferiority feeling). In the dream, he conquers (striving for
superiority), but he conquers with others (“we”: a slight expression of social
interest).
SUMMARY OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY’S THEORY OF DREAM
INTERPRETATION
A dream strives to pave the way toward solving a problem by means of a
metaphorical expression of it, by a comparison, “as if”; in itself it is a sign that
the dreamer feels inadequate to solve his problems with common sense alone. A
metaphorical conception of one’s situation is a way to escape from it. A
metaphor may be used to support almost any kind of practical action. This use of
metaphor is best exemplified in those dreams which create feelings and emotions
of success or fear, as they produce a kind of intoxication which perfectly resists
the logic of communal life. Naturally, the dreamer does not recognize the
purpose of his own metaphor. If he understood it, it would be ineffective for its
purpose. It is essentially a self-deception in the interest of his goal. We should
expect, therefore, that the more the individual goal agrees with reality the less a
person dreams, and we find that it is so. Very courageous people rarely dream,
for they deal adequately with their situation in the day-time.

DREAMS OF TWO GIRLS
We can now examine more critically certain types of dreams. A girl of
about twenty-four had the following dream: “I had gone to a swimming pool
where there were a lot of people,” she says. “Somebody noticed that I was
standing on the heads of the people there. I felt that someone screamed on seeing
me and I was in great danger of falling down.” If I were a sculptor, I would
carve her in just that way, standing on the heads of others. This was her style of
life; these were the feelings she liked to arouse in herself. However, she saw her
position as precarious, she thought that others should realize her danger, too.
From other sources, I found that she had fixed as her goal, “To be a man in spite
of being a girl.” This dream contains another expression of the same goal, the
“masculine protest,” as I have called it. She wants to seem superior, as men seem
to her, rather than to deal adequately with her situation. Yet, the fear of defeat
pursues her relentlessly. To help her, we must find the way to reconcile her to
her feminine role, to take away her fear and overvaluation of the other sex, and
to make her feel friendly and equal among her fellow beings.
Another girl relates, “My most frequent dream is very odd. I am usually
walking along a street where there is a hole that I do not see. Walking alone, I
fall into the hole. It is filled with water, and as I touch the water I awake with a
jump, with my heart beating terribly fast.” The dream says to her, emotionally,
“Be cautious, dangers exist that you know nothing of.” It tells us more than this,
however. If she is in danger of falling, she must imagine she is above others
since she cannot fall if she is down. As in the preceding example, she is saying,
“I am superior, but I must always take care not to fall.”
A DREAM OF A PROBLEM BOY
A ten-year-old boy was brought to the clinic with the complaint that he was
mean and vicious to other children, that he stole things at school and put them in
the desks of other boys. One of the dreams he told at the clinic was, “I was a
cowboy in the West. They sent me to Mexico and I had to fight my way through
the United States. When one Mexican came against me, I kicked him in the
stomach.” The feeling of the dream is, “I am surrounded by enemies. I must
struggle and fight.” He thinks that being a cowboy and kicking people in the
stomach is heroic. The stomach has played a large role in his life. He himself
suffered from stomach weakness and his father has nervous stomach trouble he
constantly complains about. The boy’s aim is to hit people at their weakest point.
His dream and actions show exactly the same style of life; a lack of social

interest coupled with a high degree of activity. 
DREAM OF A PAMPERED CHILD
A boy whom we know was pampered and over-protected by his mother had
the following dream, “Two crooks scared me.” Here he expresses again his
feeling of the enmity of life outside his favorable situation. He feels, “I have to
stay with my mother.” We can easily see that this child would not fit well in
school where he is not pampered.
A DREAM OF A MARRIED WOMAN
A woman remembered this dream as taking place in a period when there
had been great dissension between her and her husband; she constantly quarreled
with him: “There was a narrow canal and I saw trees and fields along its banks.
We rowed around in the water and the water was very clear. We rowed in front
of a bungalow that my sister lives in. My sister was waiting at the door. I was
with someone but did not know who it was. I feel often in my dreams that I am
with someone but do not know who it is.” Obviously this man in the dream was
not her husband. In the dream, she is unfaithful. Not prepared to be unfaithful in
reality, she tries to prepare herself in dreams. She feels how pleasant it would be.
The sister has a bungalow near a little river; she and her hypothetical lover could
go fishing and rowing; she could have a life as pleasant as her sister. A
relationship with someone else would be clear water, not dirty water, as in her
marriage. Notice how she prepares; how she “steps on the gas” to arrive at this
goal: to go away from her husband to another man; to have a nice life; to rise to
where her sister is. This interpretation enables us to see how her dream agrees
wholly with her style of life, her activity, her striving to be ahead, to rise, and not
be subjugated.
A DREAM OF A MARRIED MAN
One of my male patients became very distrustful of his wife and lost all
faith in women. One night he dreamed, “I was in a battle in the streets of a city,
and in the midst of the shooting and burning many women were thrown into the
air as if by an explosion.” Afterward he suffered greatly from remorse in
remembering this picture, mistakenly believing he had an inherited sadistic
drive, until treatment enabled him to understand his dream. It agreed with his
attitude to his marriage problem; for in this dream he shows his rage by picturing
a general extermination of women, which he felt compelled to repudiate because
he was not without social feeling and compassion. This remorseful after-thought
enabled him to maintain the daily attitude he assumed toward his wife, that he
was not at all angry with her, but merely solicitous for the children. I analyze the
structure of the dream as follows: He selected some terrible pictures from his
memories of the war (I call this the “tendentious selection of adapted images”)

and then compared the relations between the sexes to the warfare presented by
these pictures. In this way he reduced the whole problem of the relation between
the sexes to a small part of it, a battle, leaving out the other more important
factors, thus seeking a way out of sexuality in a trial solution rejected by
common sense. Common sense as the highest expression of understanding up to
date always contains the highest expression of social interest up to date.

DREAMS OF AN ANXIOUS NEUROTIC
One of my women patients came to me suffering from an anxiety neurosis.
Thirty-seven year old, she was the youngest of seven children. She had suffered
from anxiety for many years and always felt tired. Interestingly, she came to me
after she had been treated by many doctors, by psychiatrists of various schools,
including psychoanalysts, and after each treatment, she had become worse
instead of better. We can almost guess her dreams. They must help her find a
good alibi for retreat to gain a sense of security. Of course, we cannot foretell the
actual content of the dream because this will be taken out of her own experiences
which we do no know. But we can be sure that it will be a dream protecting her
from the hazard of going ahead. She has the style of life of the pampered child.
Furthermore, she must find a person on whom she can lean; a person who will
go ahead for her; a person who will protect her and do everything for her. In the
period when she was under my care, her first dream was: “My father had a little
store and it was light and newly painted.” She had dreamed about her father’s
store before, but it had been dark, now it was light. Now the interpretation
becomes clear. Her first consultation with me was like a new store. I became the
father on whom she could lean and who owned a store from which she could
draw. She was flattering me and expecting to find in me a person on whom she
could lean. This show of affection is common among neurotics. On this point we
need to beware of what is usually called “transference.” It is not really
transference, but an attempt to trick the therapist in order to be pampered by him.
This does not mean that the patient is in love with the doctor. In such a case the
first concern of the doctor is to head off this attempted control.

DREAMS OF FALLING
Dreams of falling are very common, especially among neurotic and
psychotic persons. Why? Because fear of falling is always in their minds. It
represents the fear of loss of prestige, as if the person said, “Yes, but.” Falling is
one of the most clear-cut symbols in dreams. On the one hand, it shows the
person’s ambition to be ahead, but on the other hand, it acts as a warning signal
effectively producing an attitude of inaction. It often gives the impression of a
tight-rope walker.

DREAMS OF FLYING
Flying is another common and clear-cut dream symbol. The key to dreams
of flying is the feelings they arouse. They leave behind a mood of buoyancy and
courage. They lead from below to above. They picture the overcoming of
difficulties and the striving for the goal of superiority as easy; and the allow us
to infer, therefore, an active individual, forward looking, and ambitious, who
cannot get rid of his ambition even when he sleeps. They involve the problem:
“Should I go on or not?” And the answer suggested is: “No obstacles block my
way. I can do what others cannot do.”
DREAMS OF PARALYSIS 
Frequent dreams of paralysis often symbolize a warning that a current 
problem is insoluble. Failing to catch a train in a dream, may mean, “I would be
glad if this problem passed without any need for interference on my part. I must 
make a detour; I must arrive too late, to avoid being confronted. I must let the
train go by.”

DREAMS OF EXAMINATIONS
Many people dream of examinations. Sometimes they are astonished to find
themselves taking an examination so late in life, or having to pass an
examination on a subject which they had already passed long ago. With some
individuals the meaning would be: “You are not prepared to face the problem.”
With others it would mean: “You have passed this examination before and you
will pass the test before you at present.” One individual’s symbols are never the
same as another’s. In the dream, we must focus primarily on the residue of mood
and its coherence with the whole style of life.

RECURRENT DREAMS
Why do some people have the same dream repeatedly, in such dreams we
find the style of life expressed with great clarity. A repeated dream gives us a
definite, unmistakable indication of the individual’s goal of superiority. A
repeated dream is a repeated answer to a recurring problem.

LONG AND SHORT DREAMS
Short dreams indicate that his current problems are such that the dreamer
can find a “short cut” between them and his life style. Short dreams are, by the
way, much easier to analyze. Long or very complicated dreams indicate that
patients seek excessive security in their lives by circumventing-detours, or they
are considering various solutions for their problems. These dreams generally
reveal hesitation and a desire to postpone even a self-deceptive solution in case it
does not work out correctly. Often repeated dreams, or those which have
remained in memory for many years best show the style of life.

ABSENCE OF DREAMS
The more an individual’s life style agrees with reality, the less he dreams.
In other words, the more courageously and realistically we meet the problems of
life, the less need we feel for dreaming. But an absence of dreams does not
necessarily mean an adjusted individual. An absence of dreams may mean that
the contents are easily forgotten and merely the emotion remains. This forgetting
is but a further step in the self-deception which is one of the functions of dreams.
The purpose of forgetting his dreams is to prevent the individual from getting
insight into them. Or the absence of dreams may be a sign that an individual has
come to a point or rest in his neurosis and has established a neurotic situation
which he does not wish to change. This resting point would be an adjustment to
his style, but not an adjustment to society. A dream is a creation and
feebleminded persons cannot create. A lack of imagination, as found among
feebleminded persons, is often the reason for the rarity or absence of dreams.
THE DREAM AS ONLY A PART OF THE WHOLE
We need to warn ourselves that we cannot explain everything from a dream
without knowing its relationship to the other parts of the personality. Neither can
we lay down any fixed and rigid rules of dream interpretation. The golden rule
of Individual Psychology is: “Everything can be different.” So it is in dream
interpretation. We must modify each dream interpretation to fit the individual
concern. If we are not careful, we will look merely for a type or for universal
symbols and that is not enough. To say only that a dream is one of falling,
flying, paralysis, or examination; that it is a repeated dream, long, short, or any
one of the numerous types, often misses its vital connection with the whole
personality. Likewise, to classify the person on the basis of a dream, as visual,
acoustic, active, timid, courageous, social, pampered, etc., oversimplifies what is
sometimes useful for teaching purposes, but may be a gross injustice to the
individual analyzed. Each person is different. The only valid dream
interpretation fits with an individual’s general behavior, early memories,
problems, etc.

USE OF DREAMS IN DIAGNOSIS
In an actual examination we do not start with dreams; we start with the
complaints. From these complaints, we try to deduce the type of problem the
individual faces: a problem of society, occupation, or love. Many factors can
help us: age, social and economic status, position in the family. For example, if a
patient is eight years old, then probably it is a school problem; if he is eighteen,
it is likely to be a love problem; if he is fifty, an age problem. But the nature of
the problem must always be confirmed. We must first find proofs for everything
in Individual Psychology. The next step is to find the situation in which the
problem arose. This situation will affirm or disprove our original supposition.
After that we may use early memories, dreams, etc., to complete the picture of
the style of life. But I must emphasize that even the order of procedure suggested
here is not essential, or always desirable.
The actual dream analysis may begin by having the patient relate the dream.
Sometimes the patient may prefer to write out his dreams before a consultation.
But in each case, we should go over the contents of the dream with the patient,
and elicit from him as many explanations as possible on each point. MISUSE OF
DREAM INTERPRETATION
The interpretation of dreams is not an end in itself. It is merely one of the
means of revealing an individual’s style of life. It should certainly not be used as
a social game, a practice which seems to be part of the present psychoanalytic
vogue. This charade can be characterized only as bad taste. Nor should this
knowledge be used to “see through” people, usually done in an attempt to attain
a sense of superiority in disturbed, close human relationships. Dream
interpretation, or for that matter, all psychological knowledge, should rightfully
be used by a person solely in his capacity as therapist or educator.

AIM TO INCREASE COURAGE
Individual Psychological treatment aims to increase the individual’s
courage to meet the problems of life. If we succeed, dreams can be expected to
change in the course of treatment. The following dream from a depressed patient
just before her cure serves as a good example (also, as a fitting symbol for the
closing of this article): “I was sitting all alone on a bench. Suddenly a heavy
snowstorm came on. Fortunately I escaped it, since I hurried indoors to my
husband. Then I helped him look for a suitable position in the advertisement
columns of a newspaper.” The patient was able to interpret the dream for herself.
It shows clearly her feeling of reconciliation with her husband. At first, she hated
him and complained bitterly of his weakness and lack of enterprise in failing to
earn a good living. The meaning of the dream is: “It is better to stay by my
husband than to expose myself to danger alone.” Though we may agree with the
patient in her view of the circumstances, the way in which she reconciles herself
to her husband and her marriage still suggests too much the sort of advice which
anxious relatives are accustomed to give. The dangers of being alone are
overemphasized and she is still not quite ready to cooperate with courage and
independence.

THE NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING DREAMS
This “fooling” power of dreams needs to be understood so that we no
longer emotionally intoxicate ourselves. The emotional intoxification provided
by dreams offers, curiously enough, a method for preventing the effects of
dreams. If a person understands what he has been dreaming and realizes that he
has been intoxicating himself, then dreams will have no further danger for him.
At least, this proved to be the case with the writer. Incidentally, to be effective,
this realization must be in the nature of a thorough-going emotional conversion.
His last dream led to such a change. It occurred during the World War in
connection with his duties in the army. He was making a great effort to keep a
certain man from being sent to the front in a place of danger. In the dream, the
idea came to him that he had murdered someone, but he did not know whom. He
got himself into a bad state, wondering, “Whom had I murdered?” The fact is he
was simply intoxicated with the idea of making the greatest possible effort to put
the soldier in the most favorable position to avoid death. The dream emotion was
meant to be conducive to the strengthening of this idea, but when he understood
the subterfuge of the dream, he gave up dreaming altogether, since he did not
need to deceive himself in order to do the things that for reasons of logic he
might want either to do or to leave undone.
When we think about improving the general status of mankind, we must
concern ourselves with the problem of eliminating this self-deceiving power of
dreams. We have to learn to understand dreams in order to rid them of this
power. Many try to interpret dreams, but their efforts soon reveal glaring
inconsistencies and inadequacies. We do not claim that we have command of the
whole truth, but to my knowledge Individual Psychology’s interpretation of
dreams best fits the facts and offers the most help. Imagination, as in a dream, is
exceedingly worthwhile as long as it supports life in a useful direction.
Otherwise, with a lack of social interest, such manifestations of the imagination
as dreams are dangerous training places for unsocial actions.
Chapter XXII
The Neurotic’s Picture of the World1
[1936]
The Individual Psychologist strives to become acquainted with the neurotic
personality by looking into his unsuccessful relationship with the outside world.
He endeavors to convince his patient of the coherence of his behavior, to show
him his error, and to reveal to him his incorrect, fictitious picture of the world

leading to the faulty philosophy upon which he has built his life. In a
somnambulistic way, the neurotic person is so involved in the world he created
during his early childhood that he needs discussions with objective Individual
Psychologists to understand himself sufficiently so that he can increase his
ability to cooperate. We call an individual “neurotic” because his behavior
shows that he can cooperate with only a meager degree of community feeling,
and hence with a smaller proportion of “common sense” (sense that can be
shared), than those whom we call normal--those whose behavior we are not
justified in designating as “neurotic.” The cure of reorientation is achieved by a
correction of the faulty philosophy and the unequivocal acceptance of a mature
picture of the world. The process takes place in ways which we can express only
by means of aphoristic terms and phrases such as: growth of community
conscience, encouragement, development of greater independence of the opinion
of other people, etc. A more mature picture of the world shows a series of
problems which constantly demand solution. All the difficulties we face relate to
the three basic problems of life: work and occupation, friends and social
relations, love and marriage. Living is the process of trying to find a solution to
these problems. However, we cannot regard their correct solution as mere
acclimatization, as a worm acclimatizes himself to an apple, but rather as a
process of meeting the problems according to standards which are valid for all
and for eternity.
The neurotic's faulty picture of the world is constantly so shaken by reality
that he feels threatened from many sides. Consequently, he narrows down his
sphere of activity; he pedantically presents opinions and attitudes which he
adopted early in life. As a result of the “narrowing down” process, he eventually
shows an inferiority complex with all its consequences. Then, in order to escape
this inferiority complex and because he finally feels threatened by death, he
convulsively constructs a superiority complex as a compensatory movement.
1 Originally titled “Neurotisches Weltbild.” First published in the Int. Z.
Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 14, pages 129-137, 1936. Translated into English and
published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 2, No. 3, pages 3-13, 1936.
Extreme discouragement, continuing doubt, hypersensitivity, impatience,
exaggerated emotion, the phenomena of retreat, physical and psychic
disturbances showing the signs of weakness and need for support all indicate that
a neurotic patient has not yet abandoned his early-acquired “pampered lifestyle”.
These characteristics show that a patient with a small degree of activity, lacking
sufficient community feeling, pictures a world in which he is entitled to be first
in everything. Later, when such a favorable situation does not occur, he is
prepared to respond only with a spiteful accusation of other people, life, or his

parents. This limitation of his activity to a small circle results in leaving
important problems unsolved, and when he faces a difficulty which he is not
prepared to cope with, he suffers a shock and responds with a shock-reaction. In
such situations, he develops the shock-symptoms corresponding to his physical
type and particular lifestyle, while emphasizing those symptoms which seem to
justify him in evading the imminent problem which threatens defeat.
As I have shown in other articles, the variety of these symptoms can be
fully understood. Of course, existing psychic connections have been made from
the “understanding” of the patient; thus, with neurotic symptoms we deal not
with “the thing in itself,” not with causal factors, but with idea and attitude, with
the faulty worldpicture of the patient.
Perhaps I can make this process clearer by describing the following case. A
twenty-one year old student of anthropology complains of an inability to
concentrate, and a loss of memory, and shows manifestations of extreme fear.
We are sure to find additional nervous symptoms in his behavior.
His mother died of heart disease. Even before her death, the patient suffered
from severe palpitations of the heart, which became noticeably worse after her
death.
Some people would say at once: “Ah, he identifies himself with his
mother!” Individual Psychology's retort to those who jump to such a hasty
conclusion would be: “You come to such a conclusion merely because you look
fixedly in one direction. And you find what you planned to find. And now,
compelled by your orientation, you try to find evidence of a homosexual bent in
this patient, who wants to take his mother's place for his father.” While the
Individual Psychologist is aware of the important role identification plays, if
what we have here is really an identification with the mother, why should it
confine itself exclusively or especially to sexuality? Does nothing else in the
personality of the mother--her work in the house, her position in social affairs,
the whole make-up of her personality--inspire identification with her? Might it
not be the very release from duties that sickness had guaranteed the woman,
which her son now values above all other qualities? However, although the
abovementioned complaints of the patient did actually release him from tasks
and duties, we do not wish to rush into erroneous, premature guessing.
Furthermore, we repudiate all theories which consider neurotic symptoms
as “manufactured to order.” Rather, they are the last, automatic end-products of
deep-seated psychic disturbances. Merely an inclination to identify with one's
mother by imitating her symptoms could never lead to palpitations of the heart.
But we cannot dispute that fear, of which the patient complains, could result in
palpitations of the heart. Perhaps the Individual Psychologist trained as a

physician will hypothesize that the patient may have inherited from his mother
an organ inferiority of the heart, a reasonable conclusion since the entire present
generation of this family has suffered a great number of deaths caused by cardiac
ailments.
The patient complains further of weak eye muscles concerned with focusing
of the eye, causing nearsightedness and difficulty in reading. If we consider his
symptoms: inability to concentrate, failing memory, and difficulty in reading, we
must admit that he faces shipwreck in his work as a student. His fear stems from
an imminent examination for which he does not feel prepared. This connection
will become convincing to us and to the patient, when we show him that in
accordance with his lifestyle he responds with fear when success seems
endangered, when his vanity and his pampered lifestyle are threatened.
He also mentions a common symptom among neurotics: when walking over
a bridge he fears falling or throwing himself into the depths. As I have already
explained in connection with the interpretation of dreams, the feeling of falling
in a dream indicates that one feels “above,” but unsure of being able to maintain
that position. In a despondent or warning manner, the individual arouses a mood
and a feeling of catastrophe as if it had already occurred. The purpose of the
dream is to arouse the feelings appropriate for stimulating greater efforts to
avoid a defeat, as if saying to himself: “Look out, be careful, move cautiously.”
The striving for successful solution of problems is inherent in the psychic
structure of life. The thought of suicide and death arises when an individual feels
that all his paths to success, as he interprets it, are cut off; so that success feels
unattainable for him. In the fear of falling or throwing himself into the depths,
we see an epitomized, symbolic expression of the patient's despair of attaining
success.
This patient remembers that all his symptoms reached a culminating point
when, shortly before an examination, he listened to a lecture on Napoleon. The
description of this unusually victorious man of power and of his debacle
perturbed him excessively. In his shock we find the same strength of
identification which leads many medical students to discover in themselves all
the symptoms of those diseases with which they have become acquainted in
clinical work. Easily identifying with Napoleon, our patient has apparently
created for himself a picture of the world in which he, like Napoleon, stands out
above all others.
He describes his father as a worthless person who pays no attention to his
family. This description plays a key role in the patient's picture of the world.
Though completely unknown to the patient and not even existing in his
“subconscious,” this description of his father indicates to us that his earliest

childhood experience was too limited to allow him to adequately develop his
innate potential for community feeling. His interest in others probably stopped
with his mother.
An exceedingly kind-hearted woman, his mother was entirely absorbed in
taking care of her son, who suffered from tuberculosis as a child. She pampered
him to the highest degree. One of his grandmothers did the same. An only child,
he disliked one of his mother’s friends who objected to the way she pampered
him.
As I have already made clear in other material, a neurosis is the logical
consequence of the attitude in the “pampered lifestyle.” The “Oedipus complex”
and its consequences are nothing but the phenomena of the “pampered lifestyle.”
I want to emphasize here once again that the “pampered lifestyle” is the creation
of the child, though its formation is frequently aided by others, of course.
Consequently, this lifestyle appears occasionally in cases where we find no
evidence of pampering, but where we find, rather, neglect.
Erring in his pampered lifestyle, the child constructs his picture of the
world almost as if he were living in a dream, then sees, feels, interprets, and
responds to every one of his later experiences in the light of this attitude toward
life. Neither the experiences themselves, nor their objective significance affect
him, but rather the conception, evaluation, and meaning which he gives to them.
He interprets experiences according to his existing attitude and lifestyle. While
some psychiatrists and psychologists still regard the mere revealing of
experiences as “depth psychology,” the interpretation of Individual Psychology
cuts much deeper by showing the same pervasive lifestyle in all aspects of a
human being. Even discovering the resentment which some investigators
describe as a “sadistic drive” does not reach the depths of a personality. We
often find resentment as a reaction, as soon as others stop meeting the
expectations promised by the faultily-created picture of the world of pampered
children. Problem behavior in children, concerned with the mouth or any other
part of the body, clearly indicates an early revolt against the demands of
community-life, and fitting into it. Thus, such children become a burden to
others, not a help.
Our patient also tells how when he naturally was no longer able to
experience life as he did in his early years of pampering, he became obstinate
and quick-tempered. These qualities showed, however, only where he felt
himself free of all responsibility and he had the upper hand, as at home. At
school where he could not be the “only one” or the “first,” he demonstrated his
hostility in continual attempts to disturb. In the presence of strangers, he was shy
and reserved. It was almost impossible for him to form friendships. This

“tendency toward exclusion,” manifesting itself from his earliest years whenever
he did not feel the master of a situation, showed plainly in his pattern of life.
The most significant aspect of the “exclusion-tendency” is that it operates
as an abstract process of selection. Because the individual adopts a certain
attitude toward the problems of the outside world (including the experience of
his own body as well as the impressions of his psychic life) anything that does
not fit in with his previously adopted attitude is more or less excluded; or it is
wholly or in part stripped of intellectual content and objective meaning and
interpreted in accordance with his world view. The same dynamic occurs with
the inseparably connected emotional factors and the attitudes growing out of
them. We can observe in the whole lifestyle, in every element of behavior, in
thoughts, emotions, and actions, simply the direction selected by the individual
for his striving. What is left over after this process of elimination by the lifestyle,
remains as part of the psychic life and operates “unconsciously,” as some
authors put it, or as we say, “not-understood;” the individual with the lifestyle in
question withdraws from conscious awareness any exclusions dictated by it. The
neurotic can maintain his mistaken picture of the world only with the help of
such auxiliary forces and devices as he has withdrawn from critical review. The
attitude of our patient accordingly shows how he sought to maintain his neurotic
circle of relationships and activity by eliminating other relationships and spheres
of activity. He narrowed down the radius of his activities in attempting to protect
the fiction of his own uniqueness.
As he advanced into the higher grades and into high school, he met
friendly, sympathetic teachers for the first time. Consequently, he became one of
the best, most attentive pupils. Only mathematics gave him trouble, as often
happens with pampered children who frequently feel left alone in the wide field
of this cold, impersonal science. Experiencing meager success at the beginning,
they set narrow boundaries for themselves. Often, they take refuge in the belief
that they have no talent, thus eliminating all thought of improvement and success
in the field.
Religious instruction had an extraordinarily strong effect on him. He was
fascinated by the idea of the omnipotence of God. Religiously devout for years,
he was a faithful church-goer. Sharing in the greatness of God, and having a
connection with the highest being suited his worldpicture. But his surrender to
the Highest Being became too much for him, so he turned away from religion
and avoided going to church.
His teachers predicted a great future for him. Before he went to the
university, he accepted a position as a tutor. Being subjected to the will of a
pampering mother and a spoiled child was also too much for him, according to

his world view. He endured it less than two weeks. In a second position, he
remained five days. Then he gave up tutoring and became a student of
anthropology.
But here, too, he was disturbed by his faulty picture of the world. At the
university he sat next to a seventeen-year-old girl student. He became
overpowered by the fear that this situation might excite him sexually. As the
possibility of being examined and perhaps failing in the presence of the girl was
intolerable to him, and since in every situation he was able to take only the paths
leading surely to success, he completely eliminated the other sex from his
thoughts and reveled in thinking that he led a chaste life. That his chastity was
somewhat impaired by masturbation did not trouble him. His narrowly-limited
life permitted masturbation; indeed, masturbation was the sexual expression
appropriate to his mistaken lifestyle. Lacking sufficient development of
community-feeling; his life style had no place for the task of love, which
requires that two individuals, devoted to each other and feeling of equal value,
consummate a lasting union. His conceited, ambitious lifestyle fashioned and
trained the sexual function in a direction excluding any feeling of defeat, as he
defined it. Since his sexual functioning was not oriented in the direction of
community-feeling, he excluded normal sexuality and love, and focused merely
on the preservation of his own prestige. Consequently, he could not change the
direction of his mistaken way of training and using the sexual function away
from masturbation. This lack of social direction plays the chief role in all sexual
perversions and psychic disturbances of sexuality.
Understanding the sphere of his activity and his picture of the world enables
us to predict with reasonable accuracy his entire mode of expression, all his
movements, and manner of solving or excluding problems of life. We say, “with
reasonable accuracy,” because no one can project himself wholly into the
situation and life of another, and because we find so many possibilities for
evasion. In this case, for example, we might predict approximately what our
patient will reveal as his earliest childhood recollection. Most likely, he will
describe a situation or an event representing his picture of the world, either
verbally or symbolically. His actual earliest recollection follows: “I looked out a
high window onto a court in which soldiers in uniform were training.” Perhaps
only Individual Psychology will take seriously the detail that he was looking
down from above, finding that this looking from above shows little activity and
also connects with his nearsightedness. Children with slight eye defects
frequently develop a greater interest in the visual world than those with entirely
normal eyes. Even his early choice of vocation would not be hard to predict. In
fact, he wanted to be a pilot, an orator, a great political leader, or a locomotive

engineer. All of these choices show, either literally or figuratively, the desire to
look down from above, to be in the superior, masterful position.
He complains that he is inordinately suggestible. Among people who fail in
life and whose failures we designate by such terms as neurosis, psychosis,
delinquency, etc., we seldom find any susceptibility to “suggestion” in matters
involving cooperation and sharing with others. When we do encounter
suggestibility involving cooperation among problem children of little activity, it
is always followed by resentment and secret revolt. Occasionally during
psychotherapeutic treatment, a patient seems “willing” to follow a “suggestion,”
but we know he is not when he does nothing toward improving his behavior.
Primarily, we hear these complaints about suggestibility exactly where we really
find quite the opposite, so we seem justified in stating that the patient complains
of suggestibility in order to protect himself. In general, suggestibility appears
where it fits the lifestyle. So apparently, our patient readily agrees with others
because he fears opposition might mean a defeat. His “suggestibility” therefore
directly connects with his timidity.
This symptom of suggestibility connects with his mother’s friend, the most
important person in his immediate environment. When he visited her, he had to
dress as nicely as possible, and her reproaches hurt him most. Gradually he came
to regard her as his worst enemy, for she continually wounded his vanity.
He frequently visited the grave of his mother, whose close relationship to
him had been the center of his world view, which he felt gave him the right to be
pampered. At her grave, he often asked himself what would become of him
without her. Then his thoughts would regularly turn to his heart ailment, the
existence of which no doctor could confirm. In this case, the “suggestibility” of
which he complained was not helping him.
He turned to psychiatrists and psychologists for help. One of them asked
whether he felt as if he were being watched on the street. The patient suspected
that the physician had in mind the diagnosis of paranoia. He had never before
had such a thought. But following this question, he suspiciously looked about
while on the street, fearing that someone might be following him.
Another psychiatrist asked him if he ever heard voices. From this question,
the patient gathered that he was suspected of being schizophrenic. He denied it,
but after this remark he thought he heard noises and ringing in his ears. This
symptom was further reinforced when the aforementioned friend of his mother
explained, in answer to his apparently disinterested question, that such
symptoms were a sign of insanity. One night when the ringing in his ears
became exceptionally strong, he screamed and cried so loudly that his father had
to come and quiet him. Thereupon the roaring in his ears ceased, but it started up

again whenever he visited his mother's friend.
Should we deny he heard a roaring sound in his ears? Or, like others should
we assume the patient produced it voluntarily? I do not believe anyone could
deliberately produce it; I assume rather that he had a sensitive auditory organ, an
organ inferiority which became noticeable in times of emotional stress. Perhaps
it occurred even earlier, though before his consultation with the psychiatrist, the
patient had not given it special attention or attached any importance to it.
We see how the patient had erected a wall against the demands of actual
community life, to safeguard his picture of the world and defend his vanity.
Without realizing it, he excluded or shoved aside all disturbing problems of life,
while abandoning himself utterly to his feelings and the observation of his
symptoms. These symptoms resulted from the shock he experienced in a difficult
situation, when he felt too weak to reach the high goal which, in his vanity, he
had set for himself; when he felt too weak to play a starring role commensurate
with his picture of the world. Thus, he avoided the shock of imminent problems
and relegated them to the background. Naturally, such a procedure of exclusion
appeared the lesser of two evils to him.
Individual Psychology finds the striving for success inseparably embedded
in the lifestyle. Now, since this science of human behavior insists that no one can
change his lifestyle without changing his worldpicture, is it not reasonable to
suppose: (1) that the striving for success can be found even in the behavior of
this patient, and (2) that the personality of the patient has not yet changed?
Indeed, this patient’s present behavior corresponds to his picture of the
world, which values only those situations that satisfy his vanity. Of all the
possibilities conceivable to him in his difficult situation, according to his picture
of the world, only two seem suitable: avoiding any defeat by constructing a
tenable alibi to save his vanity; or pressing his family into his service. Thus, he
secures the advantage of remaining in his ideal situation, i.e., ideal according to
his picture of the world. He behaves as if he were saying that he could be
victorious if only the handicap of his illness were not there, but it is. The alibi
and prestige-saving device are found in the “but.” And after all this is not his
business, but the physician's. He feels free of responsibility.
Clearly, the personality of the patient has not changed, as he still lives
according to his old picture of the world. He gives the precise “answer” to the
problems of life which we might expect when we consider his lifestyle. His
exaggerated inferiority feeling triggers that response in the face of a threatened
defeat.
The selection of his particular, automatically developed, neurotic symptoms
is thoroughly understandable. At the bottom of them all lies the deep shock from

the feeling of “not being able” to live according to his vain worldpicture.
Because the dangerous external situations and problems confronting him are
continuous, so is the shock which has plunged his body and mind into an
emotional upheaval. Under the stress of his heightened emotion, the somatic
inferiorities of eye, ear, and heart, became evident first. His emotion connects
with his fear of not attaining or losing his high position, and of wounding his
vanity; his anxiety results from a strong, apparently hopeless feeling of
inferiority. The fear of falling or of throwing himself down indicates
symbolically that he faces the death problem. The seemingly paranoid features
resulted from illadvised hints from the doctors which he incorporated into his
lifestyle and used successfully for his psychic goal.
The patient's dream-life corresponds entirely to his worldpicture. His sexual
dreams show that he has not yet overcome masturbation; and masturbation
indicates his asocial conception of the sexual function. He regards sex as a task
for one person alone. He feels he must be continually on guard because dreams
of being followed and surrounded by dangers trouble him. In one of these
dreams, he stands on the summit of a mountain and looks down on the little
people below, a picture that fits perfectly with his earliest childhood recollection.
Another time he sees himself on a high church steeple, sliding down to land in
the country of the Communists. For him, “Communism” is a synonym for the
worst kind of evil.
He has gone to pieces in his studies. He dreams his professor comes up the
stairs and wants to speak to him. As the professor draws nearer, he turns aside,
says he has made a mistake, and turns to one of the other students. Feeling
forsaken then by his teacher, too, which means more to him than his studies, our
patient turns his back on science.
On the alert for any word which might help him in his retreat or serve as an
alibi, he focuses his attention on the problem of avoiding threatening defeats. His
mother's friend tells him of a man who suffered a stroke at forty; she adds that he
must have suspected his fate because he had not wanted to marry. At once, the
thought strikes him that he will suffer that same fate.
He has retained one consolation, one support. The need for consolation and
compensation moves many people to fashion a superiority complex out of their
inferiority complex. In this case, we find that same tendency to try to show at
least a “seeming” success in life. He is now convinced that he is qualified to
become a political leader in the future. Of course, this means that his
qualifications will not be tested for years to come.
His lifestyle and picture of the world form an integral system. He sees
everything through the eyes of his vanity. He approaches every situation with

fearful anticipation as to whether his prestige will be assured, seldom finds
assurance, and therefore feels compelled to withdraw from the problems of life.
His symptoms provide the means of his retreat. Shock-effects produce these
symptoms. He has found these shock-effects useful in obtaining relief from a
difficult situation. Therefore, he has no incentive to give up the shock-effects
which serve a purpose for him, so he holds on to them.
As long as he does not understand this error, and regards his fictive world
as the right one, as long as he finds the objective world unbearable for his vanity,
he will remain a neurotic. If he can abandon his dream born of vanity and
justifying vanity, then more and more he will be able to feel himself an equal
among equals, and less and less he will feel dependent upon the opinions of
others. His courage, reason, and “common-sense” will increase and gain control
replacing his “private-sense.”
The process of cure requires understanding his picture of the world which
he created early in childhood and used as his “private map” to navigate his way
through life. In order to redirect him to a more normal way of living, we need to
understand how he has been seeing the world. He will have to alter his old
private view in order to bring it more into harmony with a “common view” of
the world, remembering that by “common view” we mean a view others can
share. Most likely, others will not share his private opinion that at all times and
in all situations, he should by right occupy the primary position and receive
special privileges.
Experiences and native potential do not have an absolute market value like
commodities, but have merely as much efficacy and value for an individual as
his lifestyle permits. The individual develops his lifestyle as his unique manner
of coping with life's problems, according to how he feels and sees them in his
particular picture of the world. Those who grasp this point understand the full
heights and depths in the science of psychology.
Chapter XXIII
How the Child Selects His Symptoms2
[1936]
Symptomselection is the most difficult subject in neurosis-psychology and
psychology in general. The psychologist must first master the numerous
complexities of neurosis-psychology, discarding prejudices and personal biases,
for symptomselection demands absolutely water-tight conclusions. In fact, the
psychologist must be able to say: “Were I in the same position as this child, had
I the same misinterpretation of the meaning of life and the same training, then I,
too, would have suffered from similar symptoms.” Only after fully identifying
with the child, can he really understand the case and the reason for the child’s

selection of certain symptoms.
Understanding symptomselection requires looking at symptoms as
creations, as works of art. We must forget our self-imposed judgments and
accept with admiration that every individual is an artist in his mode of life, even
in his errors. Behind his mistakes lie influences that could not have been good
ones and to which he reacted with an erroneous response.
Thus, when we try to prove something from any particular symptom, we
must look upon that symptom as one part of a complete whole, i.e. we must find
in every symptom something that lies deeper than the outwardly visible signs,
something that underlies the actual manifestation and the form of suffering itself.
We must look behind the headache, the anxiety-symptom, the obsession-idea,
the fact of an individual being a thief, or a shirker in school, for something
personal and unique. Phrases and formulas will not help us, as the more clearly
we observe symptoms and understand the structure of the psyche, the more we
realize that no two symptoms ever have exactly the same significance. Some
distinctions are very obvious indeed. But in all cases, we can say: “This
symptom, this artistic creation of the patient, inevitably moves toward some kind
of successful achievement.” An “I will,” a will-to-become, never an “I am”,
reveals itself to the student of symptomselection. This student cannot help
connecting the selection of a symptom with the individual’s struggle if his point
of view is faulty.
First, 
we 
must 
consider 
whether 
heredity 
plays 
any 
part 
in
symptomselection, for often a patient’s family-tree shows a similarity of
symptoms. We can never draw conclusions from external similarities of
symptomatic resemblances. Even when two individuals who are related to one
another tackle the same job, the result is not the same. In Individual Psychology,
we try to discover all the factors that have caused the individual to take the
wrong path and the first of these factors is the child’s opinion of his physical
self, his attitude toward the body that will accompany him through life and
withstand the demands of the outer world. We soon can see just where the child
feels he “stands” and how he feels he should behave in life; it is not hard to see
that one child is selfconfident, another less so, one very active, another less
active; one apprehensive and thinking solely of himself, another ready to mix
with others, do things with them, help and play cooperatively and not always
ready to put the whole burden on someone else’s shoulders, etc. Of course, these
examples represent merely general types, not enough to solve the thousands of
variations of problems in individual cases. Still, we can quickly observe the
influence the child’s physical constitution has had on him and the extent to
which he is organically sound; also how he has reacted to his body and organs

and how he employs them. It is very easy for the child to go wrong. No matter
what his environment may be, he finds himself confronted by the demands of
life, and no matter how slight these demands may be, they have their effect on
his respiration, movements, assimilation of food, cleanliness, etc. Naturally, all
these everyday functions relate to the child’s organic soundness. Individual
Psychology maintains that children born with defective organs are in one way or
another impressed by this fact; they have an impression of personal weakness,
insecurity and inferiority, which becomes particularly strong when they face a
difficult situation.
2 Originally titled “Symptomwahl.” First published in the Int. Z. Psychol.,
Vol. 14, pages 
65-80, 1936. Translated into English and published in the Individual Psychology
Bulletin, Vol. 5, pages 67-78, 1946.
If such a condition of insecurity and inferiority feeling persists over a long
period, the child will plan his life and lifestyle accordingly. So we can conclude
that physical defects provide training for the child, teaching him to form a
certain attitude toward the tasks of life, an attitude characterized by abnormal
selfcenteredness and other traits that the outside will condemn as improper and
unjustified. But, from the child’s point of view, these traits are both necessary
and sensible. For instance, such a child displays exaggerated caution, telling us
he has very little selfconfidence and suspects the world of being full of dangers.
We find hypersensitivity, a sign that the child fears being the loser in the event
of attack. We find impatience, the stamp of an individual lacking in self-
certainty, who cannot wait, but believes his desires must be fulfilled immediately
or he will feel he has suffered a defeat.
Some physical symptoms constantly recur or even become chronic with no
organic cause behind them. However, they often divulge the individual’s “place
of least resistance”. For instance, children suffering in some way from weakness
of vision take a particular interest in observing perspective, color, line, shadow
and levels, in order to grasp them more completely. Clearly, they suffer from an
unusually strong tension which can be put to great advantage; directed later into
channels giving them a better grasp of visible things (painting, etc.). Sometimes,
however, they give up very soon and do not bother anymore with visual matters,
because they have tried and met with no success. The same applies to other
defective organs, to inferiority of nutritive organs, for example. Children with
defects of the nutritive tract often suffer for a long time and must go hungry in
order to be healthy or even in order to live; they must gulp down unpleasant
forms of food and watch over their nutrition in every way, so that their interest
becomes linked artificially with the problem of food. Frequently, not only is

their nutritive apparatus susceptible to illness, but also the same susceptibility
will be found in their family-tree. Such individuals may develop a great interest
in food, love to talk about food, and can even turn their interest to a certain
advantage. But they impose a burden on life and behave in a way not conducive
to harmonious living. For we must realize that an overemphasis on any thing in
the structure of our psychic existence upsets the harmony of communal life.
For example, a child may decide to overemphasize cleanliness, regarding it
as the most important thing in life. When he grows up, if he holds on to this idea
and feels that everything else must take second place to washing, then he is but a
short step from a wash-compulsion neurosis. Such an individual will present
himself to the world (not in words, but letting his cleanliness speak for him) in
all his immaculateness, much to the detriment of others, and considering no one
to be properly clean will not help him toward cooperative work. Perhaps the one
function that cannot be made personally and socially harmful by being over-
stressed is social interest. Recognition of the vital part played by overemphasis
can help us understand a vast number of symptoms both within and without the
sphere of neurosis.
Let us refer again to the child who has experienced nutritive difficulties.
Because he is deeply concerned with all problems of food, avidly voracious, and
hungry for food above all, he soon connects food and money. We often find this
double-avidity in a type which I described a long time ago as the “pocket
Napoleon.” Examples of this kind sometimes open up interesting vistas. In each
case, other noteworthy points exist, although at this time I can only indicate to
the psychologist the line he should follow. Of course, the line can be clearly
visible or tortuous to follow, and is not found solely in cases of organ
inferiorities which have influenced the lifestyle, but with all children who have
in some way placed themselves artificially in sharp opposition to the problems of
life, lacking the preparation to meet the demands of civilization.
We must also consider the influences of the child’s upbringing, including
the economic conditions in the family, the attitude of his teachers, the skill and
experience of the mother, and the entire family situation. The waves of social
life lap into the nursery, forever influencing the growing child.
To protect his personality, the child adopts an attitude toward his family; he
chooses a “direction” in which to move, one that aims to conquer the problems
of life. He takes a direction that promises to lead him to an ideal state in which
all his problems are resolved. But at the same time, the family situation will be a
strongly stimulating and motivating factor that can easily influence his choice of
symptoms, and we must consider how the child’s psyche has been affected by it.
He must prepare to meet a constant stream of demands from life which are fairly

uniform for every person. To the best of her ability, his mother must help him
prepare for this battle, for the attitude he forms can only be a man-made creation
and thus falls short of an ideal solution to his problems. Hence, the attempt to
bring his primitive capabilities into harmony with civilized life leads to a great
variety of results. Innumerable mistakes will be made that sway the child’s
attitude and make him lean in a certain direction, so that the inevitable arrival of
the tasks of life find him inadequately prepared. Metaphorically speaking, these
problems of life resemble mathematical problems. Only the individual who has
had mathematical training can find a correct solution. So we must train the child
for the cooperation our culture demands; train him to be prepared to solve the
many problems that require social interest; problems of “I” and “Thou”,
occupation, and love; in all of which the individual must have sufficient interest
in his partner and in other people generally.
As we know, the lifestyle is fixed by the fifth year of life at most and does
not undergo any change unless the child understands the flaws in the faulty
construction and corrects them. This lifestyle has a form and breadth that
corresponds with the stage of progress reached in the child’s life at the time the
style becomes fixed. So the question arises: How will this specially constructed
lifestyle, with its ingrained influence of mother, environment, and the child’s
own creative abilities, respond when he confronts a problem for which his
lifestyle is not prepared? The response tells us immediately to what extent
misconceptions of the outside world have crept into the construction of his
lifestyle and left their mark on it. The pampered child will respond by depending
entirely upon another person, thereby binding that person to him. Actually, very
few children are not pampered, and possibly every child, at the beginning of life,
experiences a certain degree of pampering. Thus, the proper mode of training
teaches him to become an independent cooperator as soon as possible. And to
this end, of course, our educational efforts are devoted. We certainly would not
mention symptoms, failures, and the family paths followed by the psyche, if we
believed that those at fault were cooperators, who lived, worked, and loved in a
cooperative way. But that is just what they do not do, and thus mankind must
create laws, and institute corrective improvements. Since the perfect method of
upbringing is so rarely employed, many weak spots exist in the development of
every child. But this is where the most important function of upbringing comes
in, namely the discovering and improving of these weak spots at an early age in
the child’s life. People often come to me and protest: “I have done absolutely
everything I could; I have tried to make my child independent, and have had no
success. For instance, he makes trouble about eating, won’t go to bed, won’t
evacuate his bowels easily, is jealous of his younger sister, wets the bed, calls

out at night, etc.” We can only reply, “Your method was not a successful one.”
Today, we have probably not yet reached the stage of being able to educate a
child so that he will automatically move in a cooperative direction. Society could
certainly do better in this respect and if it would only do more we would not
have to put up with children who refuse to carry out the daily functions of
civilized life. For a child rejects these functions only when the mother is unable
to succeed in passing them on to him. Though difficulties may arise in training a
child, surely they may be successfully overcome and if anyone doubts this, I ask:
“If you don’t believe that we can train a child to meet civilized demands, won’t
you at least believe that it is possible to train any child to be just the contrary; to
mess his bed, be difficult over eating, not go to sleep, and hate his father or
mother?” It would certainly not be difficult to do this. Thus, we can see that the
whole problem of symptoms is a matter of upbringing, and primarily pampered
children, unprepared to meet life’s problems and accustomed to having their
every wish fulfilled, hate anyone who tries to stand in the way of their desires.
They are the children who bind themselves tightly to one person, and try to
eliminate all others from their lives. They are the children who, later, (and even
at quite an early stage) can in extreme cases be described as having an Oedipus
Complex. They are children who have rejected culture, who are opposed to
culture because no one has succeeded in imbuing them with it. They have an
intense love for themselves, and boast: “I come first; I do what I want and don’t
bother myself about other people.” We see their rejection of cooperation at an
early age: Their training for maladjustment begins on the first day of life. I
cannot stress enough how important it is that the child should not be pampered in
his early years, and a definite method should be introduced into his life from the
very beginning to avoid a future clash with the demands of civilized life. As a
rule, we can be successful. But it is useless to look upon the situation simply as
though unclean children were “naturally” inclined to be nuisances.
Let us now discuss the problem of pampered children. They live in a
situation which deeply intensifies their inferiority feeling; and we all know that
this condition exists because pampered children regard any alternative situation
as a danger, a limiting of their sphere of power, so that they live in a world in
which they suspect dangers, insecurity, and defeat. Within the pampering circle
at least, they are determined to be king, and we know that pampered children are
better trained to become home-tyrants than anything else. The mother is the first
subject of this tyranny because she is the first person to offer herself to the child,
so that actually a pampering mother is the principal cause of a child choosing
erroneous paths. Unfortunately, many parents have no proper grasp of child-
rearing; sometimes they are limited by the fallacious traditions of their own

pampered childhood. They make the mistake of passing on their false notions to
the child. For instance, they exaggerate the issue of eating, thereby giving the
child the opportunity of rebelling against eating. If a pampered child notices that
by rebelling in such a way he gets a lot of attention and pampering, he rebels all
the more. Unquestionably, a child who rejects food has a far greater sense of
superiority than other children. These pampered ones, after a few preliminary
trials, hit on just the right point from which to carry on the battle. Like practiced
strategists, they attack where the resistance is most vulnerable. Thus, if the
family emphasizes cleanliness in bed, and the child has reason to suppose that he
can get his mother’s attention by night as well as by day, he may become a
bedwetter. However, I am not overlooking that defective organic functions,
physical abnormalities, etc., may also play a part in the game. But if a pampered
child with a minor physical trouble (and also a pampered child without these
troubles) is constantly being lectured to on a certain subject, such as the proper
way to speak, eat, sleep, evacuate the bowels, urinate, etc., and lectured to so
that he quickly notices a way to get a hold on others, then he will almost
certainly become a stutterer, a bedwetter, and make difficulties over eating and
sleeping. The same applies to difficulties over bowelevacuation. Many parents
regard the evacuation of the bowels as a matter of vital importance. A pampered
child will spot this fact at once and force the family to spend a vast amount of
time attending to his bowelevacuation. He moves quite instinctively, striving
frantically to gain his own ends, automatically placing his own satisfaction on an
elevated plane so that somehow he may force himself into the center of the
pampering circle.
Other aspects need to be considered, of course, but my chief intention is to
show how faulty upbringing leads to the selection of certain symptoms. If
symptoms disappear later, it is because the individual faces a situation where
they no longer serve any purpose for him. When an individual grows up and
encounters a difficulty for which he is unprepared, the reason is always in his
defective ability to be a social member, a cooperator. In such a situation a
physical tension arises, gripping the inferior organs through the vegetative
system or, to say the least, the organic-inferiority manifests itself. When a
certain method is tried and found successful, the pampered individual will use it
repeatedly. As in neurosis, he aims to enlist the support of others, exploiting
their social interest.
I have deliberately cited simple cases to show how to understand the child’s
selection of a certain symptom. To continue, because of a lack of social interest,
some children lack the more important trait that really determines the value of an
individual: namely, a positive, sufficient level of activity. Now in modern life,

even in childhood, it is very hard to avoid all activity, but we can go a long way
toward doing so, as we see in cases of neurosis. The dues of life are demanded of
all of us because we live in a community-world, but they can be reduced to the
minimum through neurosis. The neurotic attaches himself to someone who
shoulders his dues for him; he insists upon the cooperation of others, while at the
same time contributing practically nothing himself. Such a situation can arise
only if an individual feels threatened by defeat, when he has the vague
impression that he is too weak, and he has no real value. These individuals think
solely of themselves and their vanity. They never forget themselves, never
concentrate their whole strength on a bit of work. They merely think: “How do I
look? What impression am I making? What do people think about me? What do
I get?” They have strong antagonistic feelings, jealousy, spite, obstinacy, etc.,
signs of their hostile attitude toward society. This trend may be traced back to an
individual’s childhood, revealing that his education was not successful in
molding him into a cooperative individual. In every case, we find corroboration
of this fact if we examine the line of life from childhood on.
Let us now discuss how the individual uses his creative powers to form his
symptoms. For example: If I have a goal that means the avoidance of
performance, and because of my anxiety feelings I have been trained since my
childhood to let another person work for me, look after me, support me, sacrifice
personal freedom for me, and become my slave, I must create a path that will
allow me to reach my goal safely. How am I to fashion the anxiety which
absolves me from taking part in any social cooperation, forcing another person
to relieve me of my burden?
Patients hand us a clear answer to this question. They do not understand
what they tell us as the open the windows of their mental-factories, allowing us
to look in and observe what goes on when they say, for instance: “I feel the
ground is unsteady,” or “I think of my husband’s death,” or “I am afraid that I
will become unconscious, that I will have a heart-attack.” Particularly with the
pampered individual, thoughts of the death of others play a large role because
death might rob him of his supports, might take away one of his tyrannized
subjects. The patient constantly thinks how awful it would be if his supports
were to fall away from him, but by means of these thoughts, which are questions
of life and death to him, creates a strong anxiety state to feel as if the person
concerned were really dead. In other words, he identifies with a situation that
might possibly exist in the future. We see this process with depressed individuals
who live as though disaster has already occurred.
In other studies, the reader has ample opportunity to examine the problem
of symptomselection in nervous adults. So for now, I will merely say that if a

certain symptom is selected in childhood, and found workable, the neurotic adult
will often employ it in his later life as a means of furthering his asocial ends.
This symptomselection cannot be described as “repression;” it is a definite
employment of past experiences for present and future use.
In closing the present study, I will cite two simple case histories to help the
reader see the whole problem of symptomselection in clearer light. 
Case 1.A thirteen-year-old boy was in the fifth year at public school, which
meant that he had “repeated” twice already. Considered the worst pupil in the
school, he had committed thefts, and several times had run away from home,
disappearing for several days until found and brought back by the police. The
teacher had tried to improve his behavior by punishing and reprimanding him,
but neither punishment nor kindness had done him any good. So eventually, he
was sent to a reformatory and arrived there with a certificate stating that he was
feebleminded. 
One of the teachers in the reformatory was a pupil of mine, who did not merely
consider the symptoms of the case, but also studied the boy’s lifestyle and choice
of symptoms, convinced that no two thieves are exactly alike. Because he
realized that the boy’s mistakes reflected his whole personality, he strove to
uncover the core of the lifestyle in order to find the “psychic constitution.” 
He also knew he could approach the examination from any angle he chose,
because (to revert to our musical simile) every symptom contains the
individual’s complete, basic theme. He began by collecting the boy’s school
reports. He found that the boy had had good reports for the first three grades and
received a bad one only when he reached the fourth grade. From this he
concluded that the boy must, for some reason, have been unprepared to face the
fourth grade. He suspected that the boy had had a new teacher in the fourth
grade, which proved to be correct. The boy had had a friendly teacher for the
first three years and an unfriendly one in the fourth year, so that his lifestyle had
not been prepared for an unfriendly master. The teacher concluded that the boy
was a pampered child who progressed conditionally (as his lifestyle demanded),
i.e., only when he was treated pleasantly. As a result of such a psychic
constitution, if the child faced some test of his functional ability, i.e. the test of a
strict teacher, he was bound to respond with a symptom that expressed refusal.
The teacher concluded this much simply by examining the school reports, and
the child confirmed the teacher’s guesses. The teacher asked him: “What did you
do with the things and the money you stole?” The boy replied: “I gave them to
the other boys so that they’d be my friends because I haven’t got any friends;
because I’m poor and the worst in the class, the others always avoid me.” 
Here again we see the strong basic theme at work; one that leads to the selection

of stealing as a symptom. We can see the desires of this boy, his craving for
affection, and his readiness to obtain it by bribery. We can guess that his mother
pampered him, but we will have to corroborate this guess. “What was your
purpose in running away from home?” he was asked next. He said: “I hid myself
in the woods, or in a barn. But at night I always went to the woods and collected
fire-wood and put it in front of the kitchen door so that my mother would have
fuel for cooking.” Again he steals, this time in order to bribe his mother, to get
her affection, just as he did with his companions. This is the only way he knows
to get enough of the pampering attention which to him is the whole object in life.
Can anyone suggest a better way? He is a bad pupil, knocked about by his
teacher, unprepared to make his way in the world. How is he to make friends?
Under such circumstances, I can think of no more efficient means of doing so
than the means he chose. Despite his school record, this boy is intelligent. He
has done the job as thoroughly as any other intelligent person! 
Here we can see the selection of a symptom: the way he attacks at the vulnerable
point in order to reach his goal. At school, he expected only to be reprimanded.
If I expected such treatment, I would not go to school either. This choice of a
symptom is intelligent, apt, and forceful. He ran away from home because his
father was strict and if he brought home bad reports, his father beat him, his
mother cried and became unfriendly. He ran away to touch his mother’s heart.
So we see how each of his symptoms contains the major theme. He steals to
bribe others, he runs away to frighten his mother and win her affection, and he
rejects school work to protest his teacher’s lack of affection. These symptoms
are all part of a striving to get warmth, to be pampered. This case also shows
how the psychic constitution stretches far back into childhood. Two of his
earliest recollections will tell us which of the many incidents in his life made an
impression on his memory: 
“When I was four years old my father sent me to get a paper, but-” 
Already we can comment on this. The word “but” is enough to reveal that this
child is about to try and circumvent the demands made upon him by his strict
father. He is not interested in his father’s wants, just as later he was not
interested in the strict teacher. The recollection ended as follows: 
“But I went to my uncle who gave me some cakes which I took home to my
mother.” 
The child is interested only in his mother and will be partial to someone else,
man or woman, only if that person coddles him “like his mother.” Without
coddling, he never goes ahead. 
In treating this child, we must pamper him first in order to influence him; this
fact can be comprehended only if we have really grasped his whole lifestyle. We

certainly won’t achieve anything by merely pampering him; that is the same
treatment he has had before. But unless we pamper and “warm” him at the
beginning, he will not become receptive. The teacher in the reformatory realized
this fact by handling the boy along these lines. 
Another of his recollections was: 
“I was at a railway station and a freight-car caught fire. In the car there were a
lot of children’s toy balls. The workmen tried to save these balls from being
burnt and threw them out in the open. A whole crowd of children and grown-ups
were standing around and took the balls when they were thrown out.” 
We see that when he was only three years old, stealing seemed easy and
presented real possibilities. A child may readily conclude from such an event
that things can be obtained without difficulty, without cooperation, without
personal accomplishment, simply by letting others do all the work. Others will
always help and we may partake of the fruit of their labors. 
In another example, take note of something I have mentioned before about
symptomselection: accustomed to being supported, pampered children are
cowardly and anxious, thus when they find themselves in a threatening situation,
they exhibit anxiety-symptoms. 
Case 2. A five-year-old boy was one of the most unruly children imaginable. He
demanded so much of his mother that she was in a constant state of exhaustion.
He climbed onto the table with his shoes on, put his hands into the soup-tureen,
took a screw-driver and removed all the screws from the bed-frame, smashed all
his toys, etc. If his mother wanted to read, he put all the lights out; if she played
the piano, he shut his ears and began to scream at the top of his voice.
Obviously, he was a terrible burden and the parents did everything they could to
reform him. We can already tell that this naughtiness results from the child
having been put to the test in some way; he has come up against something he
cannot face. The parents were given a great deal of advice and told to send him
out with other boys. When they did so, the boy learned smutty expressions and
came home filthy. 
His father took him to the Zoo to divert his mind. For a long time, the boy had
gained the attention of his parents by sleeping troublesomely, screaming out at
night (as pampered children often do) and even sometimes walking in his sleep.
After he had been to the Zoo, he screamed still more at night and made a lot of
trouble about going to bed; he couldn’t shut his eyes because as soon as he did
he saw the snakes his father had shown him at the Zoo. We can take this child to
the Zoo, and he will simply utilize that institution according to the dictates of his
lifestyle. He had been put to the test when his younger brother was born; this
birth reduced his sphere of power, and he tried by every possible means to

expand it again in order to be the central figure once more. 
We see that this child selected anxiety as a symptom. Why did he not choose to
wet his bed? Why did he not choose to make trouble over defecation? Has he
perhaps a different inherited disposition? Has he other “vulnerable zones”?
Should you wish, I could make this child a bedwetter and cultivate in him a
tendency to make trouble over evacuating his bowels. No, we must conclude that
his mother gave little attention to questions of urination and bowelevacuation, so
that he never had occasion to realize that they too would be good weapons to
employ. 
The problem of symptomselection cannot be understood if it is treated like a
problem in mathematics which demands no more than a formula for its solution.
We must reject all formulas. We must realize that: To understand is to find proof
for what we are able to guess at by of virtue far-reaching experience. 
We must, of course, employ the general diagnosis of Individual Psychology, but
that in itself is not nearly enough and must be followed up with a special
diagnosis until the totality, the personality, of the individual has been revealed. 
Hence the name: “Individual Psychology.”
Chapter XXIV
Love is a Recent Invention1
[1936]
Papa said with some embarrassment to his ten-year-old hopeful, “Johnny,
have you been enlightened about the facts of life?” 
“Yes, Papa,” the lad replied with eager solicitude, “what is it you would like to
know?”
We know more about sex today than our fathers did. But do we know more
about love? We sometimes confuse the two. Many a Miss who comes to me for
consultation has an imposing list of “complexes” and “repressed desires.” Young
and old know the patter of psychoanalysis and behaviorism. And they know a
great deal that is not true. Forty per cent or more have at least an inkling of the
technique of sex, but hardly one out of five knows the meaning and nature of
love. Nor is this surprising, for in its ideal sense, love is a comparatively new
discovery. Or perhaps, I should call it an invention or evolution. It has evolved
only recently out of muck and confusion. It certainly did not exist one hundred
years ago. 
Love is a word that is bandied about too freely. Falling in and out of love is a
common experience, but how many men and women qualify as great lovers?
How many would receive a passing grade in amatory proficiency? Even today,
how many would deserve the degree of A.D.--Amoris Doctor--Doctor of Love? 
Poets and philosophers have written much nonsense about love. But the

percentage of human beings capable of perfect love was always insignificant.
However, it is possible to report “progress.” Possibly twenty per cent of those
who talk of love today have the right to call themselves lovers.

FALSE CONCEPTIONS
Here the reader, with contracted eyebrow, may properly ask, “What do you
mean by love?” Don’t expect a humble psychologist to say in one sentence what
ten thousand poets and rhapsodists throughout the ages have been unable to
explain. It is easier to tell what love is not than what it is.
Love is not the glorification of the body that inspired King Solomon’s Song
of Songs. Physical fascination is merely one of its elements. It is not the romance
of Antony and Cleopatra. Each of these glamorous lovers attempted to beguile
and dominate the other. That is not love. Love is not the syrupy song of the
Troubadour, whose one-sided adoration feeds on its own lyric frustration.
Tannhauser thought he knew something about love. But did he? Love is not
dramatically exaggerated seductiveness.
1 Published in Esquire Magazine, 1936.
Love is not Don Juan’s impotent lust for conquest. I remember one patient
who boasted of a new affair every week. I told him: “You are a collector of
scalps, not a lover.” It is not the pleasure hunger of Casanova. The voluptuary
seeking a sensuous thrill in every moment, in every swish of a skirt, is
pathological. He is an amorist, not a lover.
Many neurotics come to me lost in blind alleys, vainly seeking love. Love
is not a blind alley. It is not the infatuation of Narcissus with his own lovely
image, nor the inane devotion of the nymph, Echo, pining hopelessly for the
beautiful youth. I have known too many young men and women who imagined
they were in love with others when they were merely in love with themselves; I
have known too many unhappy women who frantically hug an illusion.
The other day a patient came to me who extolled the virtues of lesbianism
in which she sought her barren satisfaction. I told her: “My dear girl, you are all
wrong. The House of Love has many mansions. But Love’s other name is not
Perversion.” The passion of Hadrian and Antinous, the desire of Sappho for her
maids, may have vivified sculpture and poetry, but it was not love.2
All departures from the natural path are sired by neuroses and mothered by
inferiority complexes. They violate the first law of life. Life insists upon
perpetuating itself. I have met too many erotic egotists, too many defeatists in
love, who vainly attempt to transport to Hollywood or to Broadway, the Athens
of Plato of the Lesbos of Sappho. Stripped of aesthetic pretensions and
psychological evasions, all diversions from the path of normal love are inspired
by fear of the other sex and the refusal to make the mutual sacrifices which love

demands of both parties. They are flights from, or substitutes for, reality.
WOMEN’S EMANCIPATION
Many of these subterfuges have been mistaken for love. The ideal of
modern love did not exist until women were emancipated from their social and
economic shackles and human life was placed upon a level higher than the mere
satisfaction of physical appetite. According to legend, Venus, goddess of love,
rose from the white sea foam. I believe that love is more indebted to the vacuum
cleaner, the electric refrigerator, and the electric washer than to the briny deep.
Oscar Wilde once said that civilization depends upon the slavery of the machine.
He was right. Only the enslavement of the machine gave the average man and
woman sufficient leisure to develop the more exalted emotions. To the extent to
which our civilization still falls short of realizing these essentials, it still falls
short of achieving love.
2 Whereas Adler’s views on the equality of women were ahead of his time,
his criticism of homosexuality here (and elsewhere) reflects the common bias of
his time and place. These opinions, coming out of the early 1900’s in Vienna, do
not represent contemporary Classical Adlerian psychotherapy. While we respect
every individual’s sexual choice, we apply the same psychological criteria to all
relationships, promoting increased cooperation, respect, equality, mutual benefit
and empathy, and working to eliminate domination, subordination, depreciation,
exploitation, or abuse. Adler’s comments have been retained in the text in the
interest of scholarship and historical accuracy.
For centuries before the conception of the eight-hour day and five-day
week, grueling tasks absorbed the vital energies of men and women. As a rule,
women were uneducated and did not take exacting care of their bodies which
came with the age of plumbing. Marie Antoinette, for all her rococo daintiness,
was careless about brushing her teeth. We know this from the letters of her
mother, Maria Theresa, to the Queen of France. Bathing was regarded as a
luxury, even by royal ladies. The home of peasant and burgher, even the castle
of the feudal lord, was primarily a factory. Eve cooked and spun; she made soap
and candles and minded the children, but she did not visit the beauty parlor. She
was primarily a housewife and mother. Adam ploughed the field, he hunted and
he fought and he performed his conjugal duties with great regularity. Devotion
to the mother of his children did not always exclude the seduction of
housemaids. He was sexually active, but sex activity is not love. Domestic
devotion is not love. Love includes both, but it demands more.
We can meet these demands better than our ancestors. The new leisure has
enabled us to develop a new conception and feeling of love.

DYAD OF EQUAL PARTNERS
Love is neither a gamble nor a one-sided infatuation. Love, modern love, is
based upon mutual physical and spiritual devotion. We are not lovers until we
know that it takes two to make love. When I explained this to a patient of mine
who, in spite of innumerable amours, somehow never finds happiness, he
laughed. “And you call that a discovery? I knew that from the day when I first
made eyes at the janitor’s girl.” No doubt, that is the average reaction to my
statement. Paradoxical as it may sound, the average person does not realize that
love is a task for two. “A task?” said a pretty young friend of mine. “I thought it
was a pleasure.” I deliberately use the word “task.” Love may have its
beginnings in a sudden infatuation, but it does not mature or deserve the name of
love, without labor, discipline, cooperation, and sacrifice.
In the past, as in the present, the predatory male seized the female and the
predatory female ensnared the male. Such a relationship involves neither
reciprocity nor mutual sacrifice. Like a dance, love requires the harmonious
cooperation of two partners. To this day, German peasants impose upon a newly
betrothed couple the task of cutting a tree trunk with a two-handed saw.
Predictions as to their chances of connubial felicity are based on the way they
handle the job and their ability to cooperate.
“My husband loves me,” remarked a rotund brunette to me, “he gives me
all the money I want for clothes and does not mind if I lose his hard-earned
money at the Bridge table.” What have such things to do with love? Very little.
The husband in question receives in return merely frigid caresses. Possibly, he
even admires his wife for being a “good” woman--too good to be thrilled by
passion. Obviously, even if they consider their marriage satisfactory, neither has
guessed the secret of love.
Love is not an unequal partnership where one gives all and the other gives
little or nothing. Love is the equal partnership between a man and a woman
where two are merged into one, a human dyad, reconciling the sex urge of the
individual with the biological needs of the race and the demands of society.
“Dyad” is a dictionary word worth looking up. I use it because it is the only
word that completely expresses my meaning. It signifies the true marriage, on
equal terms, of two souls and two bodies.
ACHIEVING THE DYAD 
The following guidelines may help achieve the dyad of perfect love. 
1. Don’t look up at your mate, and don’t look down; approach love as an equal. 

2. Don’t expect an impossible perfection in others of which you yourself are 
incapable; love a woman, not an angel; a man, not a phantom ideal. 
3. Don’t think of yourselves as one or two, but as a twosome.
4. Don’t take without giving, or give without taking. 
5. Don’t pick out a partner who does not entice you physically, but do not 
entangle your fate with one who appeals to you merely on a physiological basis. 
6. Don’t lose yourself in by-paths and blind alleys; a way out of emotional 
labyrinths is possible.--Potentially, humans are fundamentally normal. 
7. Cooperate with your mate on every plane: socially, economically, 
intellectually, spiritually, emotionally, and biologically. 
8. Be a slave neither to convention, nor to your own idiosyncrasies; remember
you are not merely an individual, but a unit of your social group and the human 
race. Liebnitz, a great German philosopher, said that the soul was a “house 
without windows.” All mortals in his opinion were “monads,” solitary creatures 
incapable of communication. But he did not know that love opens the windows
of the soul. When Jack and Jill find love, they cease to be monads. In place of 
solitude, “the solitude of all created things,” the lovers discover a new and
blessed
state for which Nietzsche has coined the term Zweisankeit--dualitude. “Though 
indeed,” as Sir Thomas Brown remarks in Religio Medici, “they be really
divided, 
yet are they so united as to seem as one and make rather a duality than two 
distinct souls.” We may well say with Shakespeare of perfect lovers: “An apple 
cleft in two is not more twain than these creatures.” 
If we believe the testimony of his sonnets and his biographers, 
Shakespeare was not a successful lover himself. But he has said many beautiful 
things about love. He was sufficiently great and, belonging to all time, 
sufficiently modern, to have at least an idea of the new conception of love. 
Romeo and Juliet is a beautiful early version of modern love, a love that defies 
family convention and sacrifices, if necessary, even life itself. In the days when
Romeo and Juliet lived and in the days of Queen Elizabeth, such love was rare,
so
rare that it inspired the greatest of playwrights. Today, the story of Romeo and
Juliet is no longer exceptional. Every day, some girl in the Bronx defies her 
family for her love’s sake. 
Everywhere in the world, youngsters approach love and marriage on the 
basis of complete equality and unstinting cooperation. It is not necessary to be a 
Robert Browning to be a great lover. I have known many couples in small
houses 

and Lilliputian apartments who live in perfect dual felicity. Their names will not 
thunder down the ages, but they are contented lovers. The little girl with the 
feather in her hat, who sits opposite you in the subway, and the young man who 
gazes into her eyes, may know more about love than all the poets put together.
The philosophers knew even less than the poets. Plato has devoted 
symposium after symposium to love. But Plato himself was an imperfect lover 
because he could not, or did not wish to, find a woman who was his equal.
Nevertheless, it was Plato who originated an enticing theory of love. According 
to him the male and female were one until the gods, jealous of man’s perfect
bliss,
split them in two. Since that time each half seeks its counterpart forever, and
often seeks in vain. The search is gradually becoming more successful in recent 
times.

SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
As a rule, even the great lovers of the past lacked a social conscience.
Perfect lovers are adjusted perfectly, not only to each other, but to their social
environment. Their personal adjustment must be physical as well as emotional.
Even the most idealistic lover must realize that love is an art that requires
technique. Both the Occident and Orient have given us manuals of love,
textbooks of passion. Kamasutra for The Scented Garden, and even Lady
Chatterley’s Lover have much to offer, and popular scientific books attempt to
give expert knowledge to amateurs. But knowledge and artistry are futile unless
they are shared by both lovers in mutual devotion.
We should not, with false modesty, close our eyes to the truth that love,
even in its physical aspect, involves the harmonious and whole-hearted
cooperation of both parties. Don Juan must be forever unsatisfied, because to
him sexual intercourse is a task for one. Prostitution depends on the fatal error
that a carnal relationship is a task for one. From this error springs not only the
red-light district, but also the disease and infection bred in its unhealthy
atmosphere. No young man who understands the secret that supreme sexual
satisfaction requires mutuality can be content with the inferior artificiality of
paid pretenders.
Two American writers, Viereck and Eldridge, in Salome, the Wandering
Jewess, portray a woman who seeks perfect equality in vain for two thousand
years. Their heroine gives her favors freely to sturdy gladiators and Nubian
slaves, but denies herself to the one man she loves because she will not accept
him without absolute equality. She attempts to achieve this equality by leveling
the difference between her sex and his. Salome, or her interpreters, fail to realize
that equality in love does not imply equality of function. It requires, on the
contrary, biological differentiation.
Although it requires the union of the two sexes, love is not based solely on
the sexual function. The pleasure of sexual union is the premium nature pays to
insure propagation. But neither pleasure nor propagation is sufficient in itself
Love is not love unless it uplifts spiritually as well as physically. This uplift
must not be at the expense of society or of the race; it must be in harmony with
man’s biological function and the preservation of civilization.
In our century, love has emerged from its Dark Ages. Many elements of
modern life favor love. Nevertheless, certain factors from the imperfections of
human society still work against love. These factors inspire the “masculine

protest” in women and the inordinate “fear of women” in man. No man is
civilized or a perfect lover until he knows that he can find complete
selfrealization only in what I have called “the human dyad.”
Woman is even more handicapped than man by ancient taboos, somber
vestiges of her sexual past. Language itself creates antagonism between the male
and female by referring to Eve’s daughter as “the opposite sex.” Language
denies women the complete equality essential for love. We still say that a man
“takes” a wife. Words and proverbs in which the old prejudices still linger are
more potent than most men realize. They keep false traditions alive and subtly
corrupt our judgment. Love or marriage should involve no “taking,” but a mutual
“give and take;” a Holy Twinty (if I may be permitted to coin a word), in which
neither the male nor the female strives for domination.
Chapter XXV
How Position in the Family Constellation Influences LifeStyle1
[1937]
It is a common misconception that children of the same family experience
the same environment. Of course, children in the same home share certain
conditions, but the psychic situation of each child differs because of the order of
their birth.
My classification based on position in the family has been somewhat
misunderstood. The child’s number in the order of births does not influence his
character, but rather the situation into which he is born and the way he interprets
it. Thus, if the eldest child is feebleminded or suppressed, the second child may
acquire a style of life similar to that of an eldest child; and in a large family, if
two are born much later than the rest, and grow up together separated from the
older children, the elder of these may develop like a first child. This dynamic
also sometimes occurs with twins.
Position of the First Child
Having been the only one at the beginning of his life and thus the central
focus, the first child is generally spoiled. He resembles the only child in this
respect, and spoiling is almost inevitable in both cases. The first child, however,
usually suffers an important change of situation, being dethroned when the
second baby is born. Typically unprepared for this change, the firstborn feels he
has lost his position as the center of love and attention. Far from his goal, he
suffers great tension and begins striving to regain favor. He uses all the means
by which he has formerly attracted notice, of course, he would like to be beloved
for his goodness; but good behavior often goes unnoticed when the newcomer
keeps everyone busy. He is then likely to change his tactics and resort to old
activities which previously attracted attention, even if it was unfavorable

attention.
If intelligent, he acts intelligently, but not necessarily in harmony with the
family’s demands. Antagonism, disobedience, attacks on the baby, or even
attempts to play the part of a baby, compel the parents to give him renewed
attention. A spoiled child must have the spotlight on himself, even at the cost of
expressing weakness or imitating a return to babyhood. Thus, under the
influence of the past, he attains his goal in the present by unsuitable means: a
sudden inability to function alone, needing assistance in eating and excretion,
and requiring constant watching by flirting with danger and terrifying the
parents. The appearance of such characteristics as jealousy, envy, or egotism has
an obvious relation to the new circumstances, but he may also indulge in, or
prolong, illnesses such as asthma and whooping cough. The tension in certain
types (depending upon the bodily organization) may produce headache,
migraine, stomach trouble, petit mal, or hysterical spasms. The child may also
impress his parents with the slighter symptoms of a tired appearance and a
general change of behavior for the worse. Naturally, the later the rival baby is
born, the more intelligible and understandable will the methods appear which the
first child uses in his change of behavior. If dethroned very early, the eldest
child’s efforts are largely “instinctive” in character. The style of his striving will
in any case be conditioned by the reaction of others in the environment and his
evaluation of it. For instance, if the dethroned child finds that fighting does not
pay, he may lose hope, become depressed, and score a success by worrying and
frightening the parents. After succeeding with such methods, he will resort to
ever more subtle uses of misfortune to gain this end.
1 Published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 3, pages 211-227, 1937.
An example of the type of adult activity based on the childhood prototype
was shown in the case of a man who became afraid to swallow for fear of
choking. Why did he select this symptom instead of another? The patient had an
immediate social difficulty in the behavior of an intimate friend who attacked
him violently. Both the patient and his wife concluded that he must put up with it
no longer, but he did not feel strong enough to face the struggle. Inquiring about
his childhood, I learned that he had had a similar difficulty with swallowing
before. The eldest child, he had been surpassed by his younger brother, but by
means of difficulty in eating, he had made his father and mother watch over him.
Now faced with a personal defeat in later life and not knowing what to do about
it, he fell back upon his old line of defense, as though it might make someone
watch over him and help him.
Effects of Dethronement
The dethronement of the first child by another may make him turn away

from the mother toward the father, and adopt a critical attitude toward the
mother. Afraid of being “pushed back” all through life, a person of this type
likes to make one step forward and one backward in all his affairs, so that
nothing decisive can happen. He feels justified in fearing that a favorable
situation will change. He will face all three life tasks with a hesitating attitude
and neurotic tendencies. He will feel that problem behavior and symptoms are a
form of help and security. For example, he may approach society with a hostile
attitude; he may constantly change his occupation; and in his sexual life he may
experience failure in functioning, and show promiscuous tendencies; if he falls
in love with one person, he quickly falls in love with another. Skeptical and
indecisive, he becomes a great procrastinator. I met a perfect example of this
type once, and his earliest remembrance was this: “At three years of age I caught
scarlet fever. By mistake my mother gave me carbolic acid for a gargle, and I
nearly died.” He had a younger sister who was the favorite of his mother. Later
in life, this patient developed a curious fantasy of a young girl ruling and
bullying an older one. Sometimes he imagined her riding the old woman like a
horse.
First Child May Keep Position
By virtue of his native endowment and development, or because of the
second child’s inferiority, ugliness, organic handicap, or bad behavior, the eldest
child may be so firmly fixed in his parent’s favor that he cannot be supplanted.
Then, the second child becomes the problem, and the eldest may develop very
well as in the following case.
Of two brothers four years apart, the elder had been strongly attached to the
mother, and when the younger was born the father had been ill for some time.
The mother spent all her time and most of her attention caring for the father.
Trained in friendship and obedience to her, the elder boy tried to help her, and
the younger boy was cared for by a nurse who spoiled him. This situation lasted
for some years, leaving the younger child no reasonable chance to compete with
the elder for the love of the mother. Soon abandoning the useful side of life, he
became wild and disobedient. His behavior became still worse four years later,
when a little sister was born, to whom the mother was able to devote herself
because of the father’s death. Thus, twice excluded from his mother’s attention
and spoiled by the nurse, this second child turned out to be the worst pupil in his
class, while the elder boy was the best. Feeling hopelessly handicapped in
competition with his brother, unloved at home, and reproached at the school
(from which he was finally expelled), this second son could find no goal in life
but to dominate his mother by worrying her. Physically stronger than either his
brother or sister, he tyrannized them. Trifling away his time, at puberty he began

to waste money and incur debts. His honest and well-meaning mother provided a
strict tutor for him who did not, of course, grasp the situation, and dealt with it
superficially by punishments. The boy grew into a man who tried to get rich
quickly and easily. Easy prey to unscrupulous advisers, he followed them into
fruitless enterprises, and not only lost his money but involved his mother in his
dishonorable debts.
All the courage this man ever displayed resulted from his unsatisfied desire
to conquer. He occasionally played an odd game, especially when things went
against him. Now an old woman who earned her living in the family as a head
servant, the nurse still worshipped the second boy and interceded for him in his
numerous scrapes. The unusual sport in which he indulged was to lock her in a
room with him and make her play soldiers, commanding her to march, fall, and
jump up again at his orders; and sometimes he quickened her obedience by
beating her with a stick. Although she screamed and resisted, she obeyed.
This singular sport revealed what he really wanted, the completest
domination in the easiest way. Some writers would describe this as sadistic
conduct, but I demur2 at the use of a word which implies a sexual interest, for I
could discover nothing of the kind in it. In sexual matters the man was
practically normal, except that he changed his partners too frequently and always
chose inferiors. Genuine sadism is a domineering tendency expressed sexually,
owing to the discouragement of the individual in other spheres.
2 The contemporary use of “sadism” differs from Adler’s. Today, it does not
necessarily imply sexual interest, but refers primarily to the enjoyment of
inflicting pain on others.
This man ended in very bad circumstances, while the elder brother became
successful and highly respected.
Attitude of Eldest Toward Authority
The eldest child, partly because he often acts as the representative of
parental authority, usually believes strongly in power and the law. The ancient
and persistent custom of primogeniture shows an intuitive perception of this fact.
It is often observable in literature. Thus Theodore Fontane wrote of his
perplexity at his father’s pleasure in hearing that ten thousand Poles had defeated
twenty thousand Russians. His father was a French emigrant who had sided with
the Poles, but to the writer it was inconceivable that the stronger could be
beaten; he felt that the status quo should be preserved and that might must, and
ought to, succeed. This was because Theodore Fontane was a first child. The
lives of scientists, politicians, artists, and others show that the eldest is readier
than most to recognize power, and likes to support it. Even revolutionaries

harbor a conservative tendency, like Robespierre.
Position of Second Child
Never having had the experience of being the only one, the second child is
in a very different situation. Though at first, he is never the sole center of
attention. From the beginning, life for him is more or less a race; the first child
sets the pace, and the second tries to surpass him. What results from competition
between two such children depends on their courage and selfconfidence. If the
elder becomes discouraged, he will be in a serious situation, especially if the
younger is really strong and outstrips him.
If the second child loses hope of equality, he will try to shine more rather
than be more. That is, if the elder proves too strong for him, the younger will
tend to escape to the useless side of life. In many cases of problem children,
laziness, lying, or stealing begin to pave the way toward neurosis, crime, and
selfdestruction.
As a rule, however, the second child is in a better position than the first. His
pacemaker stimulates him to greater effort. Also, the first child often hastens his
dethronement by fighting it with envy, jealousy, and belligerence, which lower
him in parental favor. A brilliant child puts the second child in the worst
situation.
Even when dethroned, however, the elder child does not always suffer
most. I say this in the case of a girl who had been the center of attention and
extremely spoiled until she reached the age of three, when a sister was born.
After the birth of her sister, she became jealous and developed into a
problemchild. With sweet and charming manners, the younger sister grew up the
more beloved of the two. But when this younger sister went to school, she was
no longer spoiled and being unprepared to encounter difficulties, was frightened
and tried to withdraw. To escape defeat both in fact and in appearance, she
adopted a common device among the discouraged, she never finished anything
she started, escaping final judgment, and wasting as much time as possible. Time
is the great enemy of discouraged people because under the pressure of the
requirements of social living, they feel as if time continually persecutes them
with the question, “How will you use me?” Hence their strange efforts to “kill
time” with silly activities. This girl habitually came late and postponed every
action. She did not antagonize anyone, even if reproved, but her charm and
sweetness, maintained as before, did not prevent her from being a greater worry
and burden than her aggressive sister.
When the elder sister became engaged to be married, the younger sister was
desperately unhappy. Though she had won the first stage of the race with her
rival by gentleness and obedience, she had given up in the later stages of school

and social life. Feeling her sister’s marriage as a defeat, her only hope of
regaining ground would be to also marry. However, she lacked enough courage
to choose a suitable partner and automatically sought a second-best. First, she
fell in love with a man suffering seriously from tuberculosis. Can we regard this
action as a step forward? Does it contradict her preestablished custom of leaving
every task unfinished? Not at all. The poor health of her lover and her parents’
natural resistance to the match provided sure causes of delay and frustration. She
preferred an element of impossibility in her choice. Another scarcely eligible
partner appeared later, in a man thirty years older than she was. He was senile,
but did not die as the previous one had, and the marriage took place. However, it
was not a great success for her because the attitude of hopelessness in which she
had trained herself did not allow her any useful activity. It also inhibited her
sexual life, which she considered disgusting, feeling humiliated and soiled by it.
She used her usual methods to avoid love and postpone relations at the
appropriate times. Not quite successful in these evasive maneuvers, however,
she became pregnant, which she regarded as another hopeless state. From that
time on, she not only rejected caresses but also complained that she felt soiled,
and began to wash and clean all day long. She not only washed herself, but
cleaned everything that had been touched by her husband, the maid servant, or
the visitors, including furniture, linen, and shoes. Soon she allowed no one to
touch any of the objects in her room, and lived under the stress of a neurosis, a
washingcompulsion. Thus, she was excused from the solution of her problems,
and attained a lofty goal of superiority, she felt more fastidiously clean than
anyone else.
The neurosis of a “washingcompulsion” vividly expresses the exaggerated
striving for an exalted goal of high distinctiveness. A person who feels that sex
is “dirty” uses illness as a means of avoiding sexual relations. Invariably, it gives
the fantastic compensation of feeling cleaner than everybody else.
However, because he feels life is a race, the second child usually trains
himself more rigorously and, if his courage holds, is well on the way to
overcoming the eldest on his own ground. If he has a little less courage, he will
choose to surpass the eldest in another field, and if still less, he will become
more critical and antagonistic than usual, not in an objective but in a personal
manner. In childhood, this attitude appears in relation to trifles: he will want the
window shut when the elder opens it, turn on the light when the other wants it
extinguished, and be consistently contrary.
The story of Esau and Jacob describes this sibling situation clearly when
Jacob succeeds in usurping the privileges of the eldest. The second child lives in
a condition similar to an engine under a constantly excessive head of steam. A

little boy of four expressed it well when he cried out, weeping, “I am so unhappy
because I can never be as old as my brother.”
Some writers attribute children’s repetition of the psychic behavior of older
siblings and parents to an imitation “instinct” or “identification” of the self with
another; but it is explained better when we see that a child imitates only that
behavior which offers him a successful way of asserting an equality denied to
him on other grounds. Psychic resemblances to the conduct of ancestors or even
of savages do not signify that the pattern of psychic reaction is hereditary, but
rather that individuals use the same means of offense and defense in similar
situations. When we find so much resemblance between all first children, all
second, and all youngest children, we may well ask what part remains for
heredity to play in determining those similarities. Thus, as psychologists we lack
sufficient evidence to accept that the mental development of the individual ought
to repeat the development of the race of mankind in successive stages.
In later life, the second child is rarely able to endure the strict leadership of
others or to accept the idea of “eternal laws.” He will be much more inclined to
believe, rightly or wrongly, that no power in the world is invincible. Beware of
his revolutionary subtleties! I have known many cases in which the second child
used the strangest means to undermine the power of ruling persons or traditions.
Not everybody, certainly not these rebels themselves, would easily agree with
my views of their behavior. For though it is possible to endanger a ruling power
with slander, more insidious ways exist. For example, excessive praise may
idealize and glorify someone until the reality cannot stand up to it, as illustrated
in Mark Anthony’s oration in Julius Caesar. Dostoyevsky also successfully used
these methods, perhaps unconsciously, to undermine the pillars of old Russia.
Those who remember Father Zosima in The Brothers Karamazov, and also recall
that he was a second son, will have little difficulty accepting the influence
played by position in the family.
Of course, the style of life of a second child, like that of the first, may also
appear in a child in a different chronological position, if the situation involves a
similar pattern.
Position of Youngest Child
The baby of the family, the youngest child, has never known the tragedy of
being dispossessed by a younger, the fate shared by most other children. In this
respect, he finds himself in a favored situation and often better educated, as the
economic position of the family generally improves in later years. The older
children frequently join the parents in spoiling the youngest, who thus becomes
too indulged. On the other hand, the youngest may also be too stimulated by his
elders. In the former case of overindulgence, the child will strive throughout life

to be supported by others. In the latter case, the child will instead resemble a
second child, competitively striving to overtake those setting the pace for him,
and in many cases failing to do so. Therefore, he often looks for a field of
activity remote from the other members of the family, revealing a sign of hidden
cowardice. If the family is business-oriented, for instance, the youngest often
inclines to art or poetry; if scientific, he wants to be a salesman. Many of the
most successful men of our time were youngest children, and I am convinced
this is also the case in other ages. In Biblical history, we find a remarkable
number of youngest children among the leading characters, such as David, Saul,
and Joseph. A particularly good example, the story of Joseph illustrates many of
the views we have presented. Because his younger brother, Benjamin, was
seventeen years his junior, he played little part in Joseph’s development.
Joseph’s psychological position, therefore, was that of a youngest child.
Interestingly, Joseph’s brothers fully understood his dreams. More
precisely, they understood the emotion of the dreamer. The purpose of a dream
is not to be understood, but to create a mood and a feeling.
In the fairy tales of all cultures, the youngest child plays the role of a
conqueror. I infer that in earlier times, when both circumstances and men’s
apprehension of them were simpler, it was easier to collect experiences and to
understand the coherent pattern of the life of the latest-born. This traditional
grasp of character survives in folklore, although the actual experiences have
been forgotten.
I found a strange type of spoiled youngest child in the case of a physician
with a “begging” style of life. Difficulties with his mouth had made him fearful
of cancer. Unable to swallow normally for twenty years, he could take only
liquid food. He had recently had a dental plate made for him, which he
continually pushed up and down with his tongue, causing pain and soreness of
the tongue, so that he feared he was developing cancer.
The youngest of a family of three with two older sisters, he had been sickly
and much indulged. At the age of forty, he could eat only alone or with his
sisters. Every approach to society had been difficult for him. He had no friends,
and merely a few associates whom he met weekly in a restaurant. Because he
faced the tasks of life with an attitude of fear and trembling, the presence of
other people created tension which made him unable to swallow food. Living in
a kind of stage fright, he feared not making a sufficiently good impression.
This man responded to the life task of occupation with tolerable
competence, because his parents had been poor and he could not live without
earning, but he suffered exceedingly in his profession and nearly fainted during
his examinations. His ambition as a general practitioner was to obtain a position

with a fixed salary and later, a pension. This great attraction to a safe official
position reveals a feeling of insecurity. People with a deep sense of inadequacy
often aspire to a “safe job.” For years, he surrendered to his symptoms. When he
became older and lost some of his teeth, he decided to have a plate made, which
led to the development of his latest symptom.
When he came to me, the patient was sixty years old and still living in the
care of his two sisters. Both suffered from their advanced years, and this aging
man, spoiled by two unmarried and much older women, faced a new situation.
He feared his sisters would die. Needing to be continually watched over, what
would he do in that case? Unable to find a woman whom he could trust with his
fragile happiness, he had never been in love. How could he believe that anyone
would spoil him as his mother and older sisters had done? It was easy to guess
the form of his sexuality, masturbation, and some petting affairs with girls. But
recently an older woman had wanted to marry him, so he wished to appear more
pleasant and attractive in behavior. The beginning of a struggle seemed
imminent, but his new dental plate came to the rescue. In the nick of time, he
became anxious about contracting cancer of the tongue.
As a doctor, he doubted the reality of this cancer. The many surgeons and
physicians he consulted all tried to dissuade him from belief in it; but he
persisted in his uncertainty, continued to press his tongue against the plate until
it hurt, then consulted another doctor.
Such preoccupations, “overvalued ideas” as Eernicke calls them, are
carefully cherished in a neurosis. The patient shies away from the right objective
by fixing his glances more and more firmly upon a point some distance from a
good, productive course. He does this in order to swerve away from a direction
beginning to be required by logical necessity. The correct solution of his
problem contradicts his style of life, and because the style of life rules (as the
only approach to life he has learned), he has to establish emotions and feelings
which will support his lifestyle and will insure his escape.
In spite of this man being sixty years old, the only logical solution was to
find a trustworthy substitute for his spoiling sisters before their departure. His
distrustful mind could not hope to achieve this possibility; nor could logic dispel
his doubts, because throughout his life he had built up appearance, the dental
plate should have been a help, but he turned it into an insuperable impediment.
In treating this case, it was useless to attack his belief in the cancer. When
he understood the coherence of his behavior, the patient’s symptoms were
greatly alleviated. The next day he told me of a dream: “I was sitting in the
house of a third sister at a birthday celebration of her thirteen-year-old son. I was
entirely healthy, felt no pain, and could swallow anything.” But this dream was

related to an episode in his life which took place fifteen years before. Its
meaning is very obvious: “If only I were fifteen years younger.” Thus, the
lifestyle is maintained.
Difficulties of an Only Child
The only child also has his typical difficulties. Retaining the center of the
stage without effort and generally pampered, he forms a style of life based on
being supported by others and at the same time ruling them. Very often, he
grows up in a sheltered environment. The parents may be fearful people and
afraid to have more children. Sometimes the mother, neurotic before his birth,
does not feel equal to rearing more children, and develops such behavior that
everyone must feel, “It is a blessing that this woman has no more children.”
Birth control may absorb much of the family’s attention, leading to tension and
anxiety for both parents. The care then devoted to the only child never ceases,
and often impresses him with a belief that not being watched or guarded is a
mortal danger. Such children often grow up cautious, and sooner or later may
become successful, gaining the esteem and attention they desire. But if they
confront different conditions where life is difficult for them, the may show
striking insufficiency.
Only children are often sweet and affectionate, and later in life may develop
charming manners in order to appeal to others, because they have trained
themselves this way. Usually closer to the more indulgent parent, generally the
mother, they sometimes develop a hostile attitude toward the other parent.
While the proper upbringing of an only child is not easy, parents can
conceivably understand the problem and solve it correctly. Although we do not
regard the only child’s situation as dangerous, without the best educational
methods, bad results frequently occur which having brothers and sisters would
have avoided.
Case of Homosexual Development3
I now present a case of the development of an only child, a boy attached
entirely to his mother. Although the father contributed materially, he was of no
importance in the family, and obviously without interest in the child. The mother
was a dressmaker who worked at home, and the little boy spent all his time with
her, sitting or playing beside her. He played at sewing, imitating his mother’s
activity, and ultimately became extremely proficient at it, but he never took part
in any boy’s games. The mother left the house each day at five p.m. to deliver
her work, returning punctually at six. During that time, the boy was left with an
older girl cousin and played with sewing materials. Always looking for his
mother’s return, he became interested in timepieces. He could tell the time when
he was merely three years old.

3 Whereas Adler’s views on the equality of women were ahead of his time,
his criticism of homosexuality here (and elsewhere) reflects the common bias of
his time and place. These opinions, coming out of the early 1900’s in Vienna, do
not represent contemporary Classical Adlerian psychotherapy. While we respect
every individual’s sexual choice, we apply the same psychological criteria to all
relationships, promoting increased cooperation, respect, equality, mutual benefit
and empathy, and working to eliminate domination, subordination, depreciation,
exploitation, or abuse. Adler’s comments have been retained in the text in the
interest of scholarship and historical accuracy.
The cousin played games with him in which she was the bridegroom and he
was the bride, and he looked significantly more like a girl than she did. He came
to school unprepared to associate with boys, but he established himself as a
favored exception because others liked his mild, courteous disposition. He began
to approach his goal of superiority by being attractive, especially to boys and
men. At fourteen, he acted the part of a girl in a school play. The audience had
not the slightest doubt that he was a girl; a young fellow began to flirt with him
and he was very pleased to have excited such admiration.
He had worn girlish clothes during his first four years, and until the age of
ten he did not know whether he was a boy or a girl. When he learned his gender,
he began to masturbate, and in his fantasy he soon connected sexual desire with
what he had felt when boys touched or kissed him. To be admired and wooed
became his goal in life; to this end he used all his capacities in such a way that
he might be admired especially by boys. The only girl he had known, his older
cousin was gentle and sweet, but she had played the man’s role in their games
and otherwise had ruled him like his mother. His mother’s overindulgent,
excessive care led to his great feeling of inferiority. Married late at the age of
thirty-eight, she did not wish to have more children by the husband she disliked.
Her anxiety, undoubtedly of earlier origin, and her late marriage indicate a
hesitant attitude toward life. Strict in sexual matters, she wanted her child to be
educated in ignorance of sex.
At the age of sixteen this patient looked and walked like a flirtatious girl,
and soon fell into the snare of homosexuality. In order to comprehend this
development, we must remember that he had had, in a psychological sense, the
education of a girl, and that the difference between the sexes had been made
clear to him much too late in his development. He had experienced his triumphs
in the feminine role, with no certainty of gaining as much by playing a man.
Clearly he saw the open road to his goal of superiority in the imitation of girlish
behavior.
In my experience, boys with this type of upbringing look like girls. The

growth of the organs and probably the glands is partially ruled by the
environment and the child’s attitude toward it; and they adapt to them. Thus, if
early environmental training toward femininity is succeeded by a personal goal
of the same tendency, the wish to be a favored girl will influence not only the
mind, but also the carriage and even the body.
This process clearly illustrates how a homosexual trains himself mentally
for his abnormal attitude toward sex. We do not need to postulate an inborn or
hereditary, organic deviation.
When the boy in question came to me, he had a relationship with another
boy who was the neglected second child of a domineering mother. This other
boy’s striving was to overcome men by his personal charm, which he used
successfully to rule his weak father. When he reached the age of sexual
expression, he was shocked. He had based his notion of women on his
domineering mother, who had neglected him. Although he felt the need to
control, he entertained no hope of ruling women because, in accordance with his
early experience of a strong and aggressive mother, he felt that a woman was too
powerful to control. His only chance to be the victor was in a relationship with
men, so he became homosexual. Consider then the hopeless situation of my
patient! He wanted to conquer by female means, with the charm of a girl, but his
friend wanted to conquer men.
I helped my patient realize that, whatever he thought or felt in this liaison,
his friend considered himself a conquering man-charmer. Therefore, my patient
could not be sure that his was the real conquest, so his homosexuality was
accordingly checked. By this means I was able to break off the relationship, for
he saw that it was stupid to enter into such a fruitless competition. This also
made it easier for him to understand that his abnormality was due to lack of
interest in others, and that his feeling of inadequacy, the result of being
pampered, had led him to measure everything in terms of personal triumph. He
then left me for some months; when he visited me again he had had sexual
relations with a girl, but had tried to play a masochistic role with her. In order to
prove to himself that his original view of the world was correct, he obviously
wished to experience with her the same inferiority that he had felt with his
mother and cousin. This masochistic attitude showed when his goal of
superiority required the girl to do to him what he commanded. He then wished to
complete the act at this point without achieving sexual intercourse, so that the
normal was still excluded.
The great difficulty of changing a homosexual lies not only in his lack of
general social adjustment, but also in the invariable absence of correct training in
the sexual role, which must begin in early childhood. The attitude toward the

other sex is strained in a mistaken direction almost from the beginning of life. In
order to realize this fact, we must note the kind of intelligence, behavior, and
expectations such a case exhibits. Compare normal persons walking in the street
or mixing in society with a homosexual in the same situations. The normal
majority are interested primarily in the opposite sex, the homosexuals only in
their own. The latter evade normal sexuality also in dreams. The patient I have
just described used to dream frequently that he was climbing a mountain by a
serpentine road. The dream expresses his discouraged, circuitous approach to
life. (He moved rather like a snake, bending his head and shoulders at every
step.)
In conclusion, I will summarize some of the most disastrous cases I have
known among only children. A woman asked me to help her and her husband in
the case of their only boy, who tyrannized them terribly. He was then sixteen, a
very good pupil at school, but quarrelsome and insulting. He was especially
combative toward his father, who had been stricter with him than his mother.
Antagonizing both parents, if he could not get what he wanted he attacked,
sometimes wrestling with his father, spitting at him, and using bad language.
Such development is possible with a pampered only child who is trained to give
nothing but to expect everything, until the indulgence can continue no longer. In
such cases, treating the patient in his old environment is difficult, because it
revives too many old recollections which disturb the harmony of the family.
In another case, a boy of eighteen had been accused of murdering his father.
An only spoiled child, he had stopped his education and was wasting, in bad
company, all the money he could extort from his parents. One day when his
father refused to give him money, the boy killed him by hitting him on the head
with a hammer. No one but the lawyer defending him knew that he had killed
another person several months before. Consequently, he felt perfectly sure of
escaping discovery this second time.
In yet another case of criminal development, an only boy was brought up by
a very well-educated woman who wanted him to be a genius. At her death,
another experienced woman continued nurturing him in the same way, until she
became aware of his tyrannical tendencies. Believing sexual repression to be the
cause of his aggressiveness, she had him analyzed. His tyrannical attitude did not
cease, however, so she then wished to be rid of him. But he broke into her house
one night intending to rob her, and strangled her.
The characteristics typical of certain positions in the family can, of course,
be modified by circumstances. Despite the many possibilities of variation,
however, the outlines of these patterns will remain substantially correct. Among
the possibilities, we may include the position of a boy growing up among girls.

If he is older than they are, he develops the same as an elder brother close to a
younger sister. The individual pattern of behavior will reflect differences in age,
in the affection of the parents, and in the preparation for life.
Where a female majority and feminine influence dominate the environment,
a single boy is likely to have a goal of superiority and a style of life directed
toward femininity. This dynamic occurs in various degrees and ways: in a
humble devotion to and worship of women, in an attitude imitating women, in a
tendency toward homosexuality, or in a tyrannical attitude toward women.
People usually avoid educating boys in an overly feminine environment because
such children develop toward one of two extremes: either exaggerated vanity or
aggressiveness. In the story of Achilles, many points reveal that the latter case
was well understood in antiquity.
Importance of Evaluation of Men and Women
We find the same contradictory possibilities in the cases of only girls who
grow up among boys or in an entirely masculine environment. In such
circumstances a girl may, of course, be spoiled with too much attention and
affection, but she may also adopt boys’ attitudes and wish to avoid looking like a
girl. In any case, the result largely depends on how men and women are valued
in the environment. Every environment has a prevailing attitude in regard to this
issue. Therefore, the child will wish to assume the role of a man or a woman in
accordance with the relative value given to men and women in that attitude.
Other views of life prevailing in the family may also influence the pattern
of a child’s behavior, or lead to difficulties, as for example the superstition about
character being inherited, and the belief in fanatical methods of education. Any
exaggerated method of education will probably harm the child, as we can often
trace in the children of teachers, psychologists, doctors, and people engaged in
the administration of laws: policemen, lawyers, officers, and clergymen.
Educational exaggerations surface in the life-histories of many problem children,
delinquents, and neurotics. The influence of both the superstition regarding
heredity and a fanatical mode of training appear in the following case.
A woman came to me with a daughter of nine, both of them in tears and
desperation. The mother told me that the girl had only recently come to live with
her, after spending years with foster parents in the country. Because she had
completed the third grade of her schooling there, she entered the fourth grade in
the city school, but her work became so bad that her teacher had her put back
into the third grade. Soon afterwards her work became still worse, so she was
demoted again and put in the second grade. Thoroughly upset, the mother was
obsessed with the idea that her daughter’s deficiency was inherited from the
father.

From the beginning, I could see that the mother treated the child with
exaggerated educational insistence, which was particularly unfortunate because
the girl had been brought up in a congenial environment and expected still
greater kindness from the mother. But in her eagerness that her child should not
fail the mother was overstrict, keenly disappointing the girl. She developed a
great emotional tension, blocking her progress both at school and at home.
Exhortation, reproaches, criticism, and spanking only intensified the emotion,
with consequent hopelessness on both sides. To confirm my impression, I spoke
with the girl alone about her foster parents. She told me how happy her life with
them had been. Then, bursting into tears, she also told me how she had enjoyed
being with her mother at first.
I had to make the mother understand her mistakes. The girl could not be
expected to put up with such harsh training. Putting myself in her place, I could
perfectly understand her conduct as an intelligent reaction, that is, as a form of
accusation and revenge. In a situation of this type, with less social feeling, a
child may easily become delinquent, neurotic, or even suicidal. But in this case, I
was sure the girl could improve if the mother were convinced of the truth, and
impressed the child with a sufficient change of attitude. Therefore, I explained to
the mother that the belief in inheritance was nothing but a nuisance, after which I
helped her realize what her daughter had reasonably expected when she came to
live with her, and how she must have been disappointed and shaken by such
disciplinary treatment, to the point of utter inability to do what was expected of
her. I wanted the mother to confess to the child that she had been mistaken and
would like to reform her method, so I told her I did not really believe she could
bring herself to do it, but that it was what I would do in the circumstances. She
answered decidedly, “I will do it.” In my presence and with my help, she
explained her mistake to the child. They kissed, embraced, and cried together.
Two weeks later they both visited me, smiling and well satisfied. The mother
brought me a message from the third-grade teacher: “a miracle must have
happened. The girl is the best pupil in the class.”
Chapter XXVI
Significance of Early Recollections1
[1937]
The discovery of the significance of early recollections is one of the most
important findings of Individual Psychology. It has demonstrated the
purposiveness in the choice of what is remembered longest, though the memory
itself is quite conscious or the recollection is easily elicited upon inquiry.
Correctly understood, these conscious memories give us glimpses of depths just
as profound as those more or less suddenly recalled during treatment.

Of course, we do not believe that all early recollections are accurate records
of actual facts. Many are even imagined; perhaps most are changed to a time
later than that in which the events are supposed to have occurred; but this does
not diminish their significance. What is altered or imagined also expresses the
patient’s goal, and although the effect of fantasy and memory differs, we can
relate both to the total style of life of the individual, and recognize their unity
with his main line of striving toward a goal of superiority.
In recollections from the first four or five years of life, we find primarily
fragments of the prototype of the individual’s lifestyle, or useful hints as to why
his life-plan was elaborated into its own particular form. Here we may also
gather the surest indications of self-training to overcome the organic difficulties
or deficiencies felt in the early environment. In many cases, the early
recollections reveal signs of the person’s degree of activity, courage, and social
feeling. Because of the great number of spoiled children who seek treatment, we
find the mother rarely absent from the earliest remembrance; indeed, if the
lifestyle is one of a pampered child, the guess that the patient will recall
something about his mother is usually correct. If the mother does not appear in
his early recollections, that may also have a certain significance; it may indicate
his feeling of having been neglected by her. However, he has never understood
the meaning of his early remembrances. In answer to my question, he may
simply say, “I was sitting in a room playing with a toy, and my mother was
sitting close to me.” He regards a recollection as a thing by itself with no
significance; he never thinks of its coherence in the whole structure of his
psychic life. Unfortunately, many psychologists do the same.
To estimate its meaning, we have to relate the early pattern of perception to
all we can discover of the individual’s present attitude, until we find how one
clearly mirrors the other. In the example just given, we begin to see this
correlation when we learn that the patient suffers from anxiety when alone. The
interest in being connected with the mother may appear even in the form of
fictitious remembrances, as in the case of the patient who said to me, “You will
not believe me, but I can remember being born, and my mother holding me in
her arms.”
1 Published in English in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., No. 3, pages 283-287, 1937.
Very often the earliest memory of a spoiled child refers to its dispossession
by the birth of a younger brother or sister. These recollections of feeling
dispossessed vary from slight and innocent reminiscences, such as, “I recollect
when my younger sister was born,” to instances highly indicative of the
particular attitude of the patient. A woman once told me, “I remember having to
watch my younger sister, who was lying on a table. She was restless and threw

off the coverlets. I wanted to adjust them and I pulled them away from her,
whereupon she fell and was hurt.” This woman was fortyfive when she came to
me; at school, in marriage, and throughout life she had felt disregarded, just as in
childhood when she had felt dethroned. A similar attitude, even more expressive
of suspicion and mistrust, was expressed by a man who said, “I was going to
market with my mother and little brother. Suddenly it began to rain, and my
mother took me up in her arms, and then remembering that I was the elder, she
put me down and took up my younger brother.” Successful as he was in his life,
this man distrusted everybody, especially women.
A student thirty years of age came to me in trouble because he could not
face his examinations. He was in such a state of strain that he could neither sleep
nor concentrate. The symptoms indicated his lack of preparation and courage,
and his age showed the distance at which he stood from the solution of the
problem of occupation. Because of his lack of social adjustment, he had no
friends and had never fallen in love. He expressed his sexuality in masturbation
and nocturnal emissions. His earliest memory was of lying in a cot, looking at
the wallpaper and curtains. This recollection reflects the isolation of his later life,
and also his interest in visual activity. Astigmatic, he was striving to compensate
for this organic deficiency. We must remember, however, that any strongly
developed function related to a strong degree of social interest may disturb the
harmony of life. For instance, to watch is worthwhile, but when the patient
barricades himself against all other activities and wants merely to gratify his
eyes all day, watching may become a compulsion-neurosis. Some people are
interested primarily in seeing. But few positions merely require an interest in
seeing. Even those positions cannot be found by a person who is socially
maladjusted. As we have seen, this patient had not been a real fellow man to
anyone, so he found no practical use for his peculiar interest.
Earliest remembrances frequently reveal an interest in movement, such as:
traveling, running, motoring, or jumping. This movement is often characteristic
of individuals who encounter difficulties when they are required to work in
sedentary occupations. For example, a man of twenty-five, the oldest son of a
very religious family, was brought to me because of misbehavior. Disobedient,
idle, and deceitful, he had accumulated debts and stolen. His sister, three years
younger, was a familiar type: striving, capable, and well-educated, an easy
winner in the race with him. His misconduct began in his adolescence, which
many psychologists would ascribe to an emotional “flare-up” caused by the
growth of the sexual glands, a theory which might seem all the more plausible in
this case because of premature and mischievous sexual relations, often found in
similar cases. But we ask: Why should the perfectly natural period of puberty

cause a crisis and moral disaster in this case but not in another; not in the sister’s
case, for example? We answer: Because the sister was in a more favorable
position. From the experience of many cases, we know the brother’s situation to
be one of special danger. Furthermore, when we go more deeply into his history,
we find that he wanted to be first in every situation; adolescence did not change
this young man’s style of life. Before that time the boy had gradually been losing
hope of being “first” in a life of social usefulness, and the more hopeless that
direction appeared, the more he wandered into the easier path of useless
compensation.
This young man’s earliest remembrance gives a clear hint of his great
interest in motor activity and movement in general. It was: “I was running round
the whole day in a kiddy car.” After treatment, when he improved, he was taken
back into his father’s office, but he did not like the sedentary routine there. He
finally adapted himself to life as a traveling salesman.
Many first remembrances concern dangerous situations, and they are
usually told by persons with whom the use of fear is an important factor in the
style of life. A married woman once came to ask me why she was terrified
whenever she passed a pharmacy. Some years previously she had spent a long
time in a sanatorium undergoing treatment for tuberculosis, and a few months
before I say her a specialist had pronounced her cured, entirely healthy, and fit to
have children. Shortly after this complete absolution by the doctor, she began to
suffer from her obsession. The connection is obvious. The pharmacy was a
warning reminder of her illness, an employment of the past in order to make the
future seem ominous. She was connecting the possibility of having a child with
danger to her health. Though she and her husband had agreed that they wanted a
child, her behavior clearly showed her secret opposition. Her secret objection
was stronger than any reasonable and common sense logic which said that for
her bearing children was no longer dangerous. As a medical expert, the doctor
could minimize the danger to her health, but he could not remove the symptom
of fear. In this as in many similar cases, we know in advance that the real
reasons for the symptoms are deeply rooted, and can be found only if we
discover the main line of striving in the style of life.
Resistance to having children is seldom based on objective fears of
childbirth or illness. In this case, the woman had been a pampered child who
wanted to be in the center of the stage. Such women do not wish to bring a little
rival onto the scene, so they argue against it with every variety of reason and
unreason. This woman had trained herself perfectly to be on the lookout for
danger, and to perceive opportunities for taking the center of attention. Asked for
her earliest recollections, she said, “I was playing before our little house on the

outskirts of the town, and my mother was terrified when she saw me jumping on
the boards that covered the well.”
A student of philosophy came to consult me about his fear of blushing.
From earliest childhood, he had been teased because he blushed so easily, and
for the past two months this had increased so much that he was afraid to go to a
restaurant, attend lectures, or even leave his room. I found that he was about to
take an examination. Faint-hearted, timid, and bashful, whether he was visiting
in society, working, or with a girl, in all situations he suffered from feelings of
tension. Because his blushing had recently worried him more, he began to use it
as a pretext for retreating from life. From childhood, this man had had a strong
antipathy toward his mother, who he felt was partial to his younger brother.
Living in the greatest competition with his brother, he now no longer believed
that he could achieve any success. Here is the earliest remembrance: “When I
was five years old, I went out with my three-year-old brother. My parents were
very excited when they found we had left the house, because there was a lake
nearby, and they were afraid that we had fallen into it. When we returned, I was
slapped.” I understood this to mean that he did not like his home, where he felt
that he was slighted, and my opinion was corroborated when he added, “I was
slapped, but not my brother.” But the discovery that he had been in a dangerous
situation had still impressed him, as reflected in his present behavior, which was
dominated by his guiding idea: not to go out, not to venture too far. Such persons
often feel as though life were a trap.
We can easily imagine this patient’s painful experience in the company of a
girl. We can understand how he put his blushing between himself and women,
thus preventing a relationship with any of them. In this way, he avoided the risk
of losing out to another man. He always feared other men would be preferred to
him, as he felt his mother had preferred his brother.
When correctly understood in relation to the rest of an individual’s life,
early recollections contain the central interests of that person. They give us
valuable hints and clues in finding the direction of a person’s striving. They help
reveal values to be aimed for and dangers to be avoided. They help us see the
kind of world a particular person feels he lives in, and the early ways he found of
dealing with that world. They illuminate the origins of the style of life. The basic
attitudes guiding an individual since childhood and in his present situation are
reflected in those fragments he selects to epitomize his feeling about life, and to
cherish in his memory as reminders. He has preserved these as his early
recollections.
Chapter XXVII
The Progress of Mankind1

[1937]
Although many express interest in whether the progress of mankind is
possible, we cannot agree on the meaning of progress. People tend to overlook
the larger contexts, and regard all problems, including scientific ones, from their
own, usually too narrow, personal perspective. This is also true for the issue of
progress. Everyone subordinates experiences and ideas to his own point of view,
usually a tacit assumption unknown to the person. Yet he lives and dies for the
inferences he draws from such a perception. It is amusing, and sad at the same
time, to see how even scientists--especially philosophers, sociologists, and
psychologists--are caught in this net. Individual Psychology is no exception, in
that it also has its assumptions and a point of view. But it differs in that it is well
aware of this fact.
Basic Assumptions of Individual Psychology
Individual Psychology was the first school of psychology to break with the
assumption of inner forces, such as instincts, drives, unconsciousness, etc., as
irrational material. This break has proved most helpful in understanding an
individual or a group. Furthermore, Individual Psychology makes the following
assumptions.
The personality is a selfconsistent unity.
The individual behaves toward the changing problems of life based on his
opinion of himself and his environment. 
The individual’s striving for successful solution of his problems anchors 
the structure of life. But the judgment of what constitutes success is again 
left to the opinion of the individual. 
Our criterion for appraising a specific variable, whether in an individual or a
group, is always the direction toward the ascending development and welfare of
mankind. In other words, the degree and kind of social interest necessary to
arrive at this goal of general welfare and upward development is the most crucial
factor. The weightiest reason for this assumption is that every individual faces
problems that can be solved only with sufficient social interest. He may have had
this from childhood, or may acquire it later. All problems of life merge into the
three social areas of friendship, work, and sexual love. We find a degree of
social interest, although usually inadequate, in all men, with the exception of
idiots, and even in animals. We therefore feel justified in assuming that this
social interest, demonstrated throughout life, is rooted in the germ cell. But it is
rooted as a potential, not as an actual ability. 
Like all innate human potential, social interest develops in accordance with the
individual’s selfconsistent style of life. The child forms his style of life out of his
creative poser, i.e., from the way he perceives the world and what appears to him

as success. Such a foundation of a psychology supports the certainty of the
observer. First, since the assumptions are made explicit, he gains certainty in that
he knows and understands them well and can check them at any time. Second, he
is protected from false conclusions and mistaken appraisals regarding an
individual or a group, because he is forced to seek the existing degree of social
interest in all the expressive movements, personality traits, and symptoms. This
latter advantage he owes to the basic view of the unity and selfconsistency of the
personality in thinking, feeling, willing, and acting.
1 Originally titled “Ist Fortschritt der Menschheit moeglich? warscheinlich?
unmoeglich? sicher?” First published in the Internationale Zeitxchrift fur
Individualpsychologies, Vol. 15, pages 1-4, 1937. Translated into English and
published in the Journal of Individual Psychology, Vol. 13, No. 1, pages 9-13,
1957.
The Idea of Progress
Our basic assumptions lead to an important conclusion about the progress
of mankind. We define human progress as a function of the higher development
of social interest. Admittedly, the level of social interest is presently still low, as
indicated by such phrases as “Why should I love my neighbor?” and “After me,
the deluge.” But social interest continually grows. No matter how dark the times
may be, in the long-range view the individual and the group evolve to higher
levels. Human progress reflects the greater development of social interest;
therefore, human progress will be inevitable as long as mankind exists.
Three Supporting Considerations 
The following points support the view that evolution leads to the success 
of social interest, confirming the optimism of Individual Psychology. (1) I once
read an anecdote in an American article that moved me very 
strongly. A multimillionaire who had spent a hard youth in miserable poverty 
wanted to protect his descendants from similar deprivations. Consulting a
lawyer, 
he told him the size of his fortune, and that he wanted to protect his descendants 
to approximately the tenth generation. The lawyer took his pen and began to 
figure. When he finished, he turned to his client and said: “Your fortune is so 
great that it is completely sufficient to provide for your descendants adequately
up 
to the tenth generation. But do you know that if you do this, you are protecting 
children, each of whom is related to over 1,000 persons of your generation as 
closely as he is related to you?” If we widen our view to include 100 and more 
generations, then everything people have contributed, even if only in the
apparent 

interest of their own family, irrevocably benefits all mankind. This “equalization
process” may be slowed down at times for lack of useful contributions, but it 
cannot be stopped. 
(2) In my forthcoming book, Social Interest: a Challenge to Mankind, I 
raise the question, “What do we find when we are born?” The answer is: we find
all the previous useful contributions from our forebears. We find human beings
in 
their bodily and mental development, social institutions, art, science, lasting 
traditions, social relations, values, schooling, etc. We receive these and build
upon them, advancing, improving, and changing, for the purpose of future 
usefulness. This inheritance from our forebears is their contribution in which
their spirit lives on immortally after the body has fallen away. 
What happened to the earthly life of those who contributed nothing, or 
who interfered with the developmental process? The answer is: it has 
disappeared. Nothing from their lives can be found. Is this not an inviolable law 
aimed against those who supply no contributions for later generations? Their 
trace on earth is lost forever. 
Furthermore, the life of the individual presents itself as a “compensation
process,” attempting to overcome felt or alleged “inferiorities,” in a physical or 
psychological manner. One goal of this compensatory striving is the steadily 
growing culture of mankind which collects all useful, productive contributions
of
the various generations and passes them on. 
The power of social interest, an innate aptitude determining human nature 
and lacking only in the feebleminded, comes to life and becomes productive 
through the creative power of the child. Although not strong enough at present to
solve human difficulties for the benefit of the entire human family, existing
social 
interest is nevertheless so powerful that individuals and groups must
acknowledge 
it. Human judgment can do no more than consider whether the line of a proposed
movement will ultimately merge into the well-being of man in general. Political 
movements, the utilization of the advances of science and technology, laws, and 
social norms are included in this evaluation. Claims of interest in the well-being 
of the community, however, have power in the long run only if their
consequences support the general welfare. 
(3) Some degree of social progress seems inevitable. The composite of 
individual lives, both useful and useless, merges into the progress of mankind. 
Although some circumstances are discouraging and destructive, we generally 

hope for eventual improvements in the next generation. Even new responses can 
lead to new, unexpected consequences and difficulties. We are never fully
prepared for these surprises. Again and again, the creative power of the child and
the adult faces the tension of new problems that have never arisen before, until 
new solutions have been found and useless ones discarded. 
Struggling with old and new tasks, pitted against the environment, each 
new generation maintains its equilibrium physically and psychologically with 
increasing understanding. This equilibrium can be gained only if the sum of the 
energies of the individual, supported by a rational picture of the world, succeeds 
in bringing the problems of the environment closer to a solution. 
In the holistic relationship between man and cosmos progress will 
continue until the decline of the human family. “The environment molds man, 
but man molds the environment” (Pestalozzi). With the limitation of our senses
and our limited understanding of the ultimate truths, rational science speaks the 
last word. At this point, Individual Psychology speaks loudest with its emphasis 
on the whole and on social interest.
Success is never final. 
Failure is never fatal. 
It is one’s courage that counts. (Winston Churchill)
Chapter XXVIII
How I Chose My Career1
[1947]
I was born in a house that lay on the outskirts of Vienna. I was the second
child of the family. One of my earliest recollections is of sitting on a bench,
bandaged because of rickets, with my healthy elder brother sitting opposite me.
He could run, jump, and move quite effortlessly, while for me movement of any
sort was a strain and an effort. Everyone went to great pains to help me, and my
mother and father did all that was in their power to do. At the time of this
recollection I must have been about two years old.
My next recollection is of an incident that took place when I was nearly
four years old. My younger brother had been born. I remember him only very
slightly, but his death remains firmly fixed in my mind. Before he was born, I
was reared and watched with the greatest solicitude because of my sickliness. I
am sure that I must have been forced to put up with a great deal less attention
when my younger brother was born. I have a vague idea that I took this apparent
loss of attention on the part of my mother very much to heart. But it did not
affect me in regard to my father who was out all day working and to whom I
became deeply attached. As I found out later, I wronged my mother in feeling
that she deprived me of her affection. Throughout her life, she loved all her

children with the same degree of warmth and affection.
I did not enjoy staying at home, perhaps because my attitude toward my
mother was at fault, but also because I definitely did my utmost to excel at
running, jumping, and rushing around, activities of which my elder brother was
constantly making me aware. I was always eager to get outside, helped by the
fact that almost next door to our home was an open, practically unused plot and a
big field. Few vehicles were about, and they moved so slowly that we had little
chance of being run over or involved in an accident. But despite this relatively
safe environment, I was run over twice when I was four of five years old, but
without being seriously hurt.
The field near our house was the meeting-place of all the local children.
Most of the people in this district were quiet and humble, usually poor people
who frequently asked me into their homes. Because of my friendliness and
liveliness, I was well received wherever I went.
My elder brother was the only one with whom I did not get along well and
he never took part in our games. At an early age, I became part of a wide social
milieu, and in our games both the boys and girls learned to look upon one
another as natural equals.
1 Published in The Individual Psychology Bulletin, Vol. 6, pages 9-11, 1947.
So, early organic inferiority that I struggled hard to overcome, and an early
connection with events beyond the family circle, definitely laid the foundations
of my psychic structure and my attitude toward life. As an additional spur, I
wanted to never lag behind my elder brother. Those who are familiar with my
life-work, “Individual Psychology,” will clearly see the connection between the
facts of my childhood and the views I expressed in my Studies of Organ
Inferiority and in my main work, The Nervous Character.2 The similarity
between my experiences and the basic views of Individual Psychology is
interesting considering the time I devoted in later years to the inferiority feeling
as the motivating power of the striving for achievement, and social feeling which
aims at an ideal of perfection for mankind. We can also see quite clearly how my
childhood experiences established a tendency more or less representative of my
position in the family and my desire to move freely--to see all psychic
manifestations in terms of movement. My childhood experiences in themselves
were not important, but rather the manner in which I judged and assimilated
them.
The importance of interpretation applies to another incident that occurred
when I was three years old. My parents left us two boys for a few days in the
care of a governess. When they came back I met them, singing a street-song, the

words of which are still in my mind today, with the melody to which I sang it. (It
is possible that I sang or heard this song at some later period so that my
remembrance and understanding of its significance might spring from that later
date.) This song was about a woman who explained that she couldn’t eat chicken
because she was so hurt by the killing of the animal. In response to her
comment, the singer asks how she can have such a soft heart, when she thinks
nothing of throwing anything she can lay her hands on at her husband’s head.
My father at once decided to dismiss the governess, concluding quite rightly that
she had taken me to musical shows in the evenings. In spite of the fact that he
was pleased at my singing, he looked at what lay behind it, looked deeper,
something I also learned to do. But I, too, saw deeper, realizing that in the future
I must judge people not by their spoken words, but by their actions. Once the
song had put this idea into my head, it remained forever, growing stronger and
stronger.
My early realization of the fact of death, a fact which I grasped sensibly and
wholesomely, not morbidly--not regarding death as an insurmountable menace
for a child--was increased when I had pneumonia at the age of five and the
doctor, who had suddenly been called in, told my father there was no point in
going to the trouble of looking after me because there was no hope of my living.
At once a frightful terror came over me and, a few days later when I was well, I
decided definitely to become a doctor so I would have a better defense against
the danger of death and weapons to combat it superior to my doctor’s.
2 Editor’s note: This book is now titled, The Neurotic Character.
Shortly afterwards, the father of one of my playmates, a lamp-maker, asked
me what I was going to be in life. “A doctor,” I said. He answered, “Then you
should be strung up at once to the nearest lamppost.” This remark made no
impression on me at all; I merely thought, “There’s another person who’s had a
bad time at the hands of a doctor. But I shall be a real doctor.” Soon after, it
struck me that this angry lamp-maker had his trade, rather than me, uppermost in
his mind. After that incident, the determination to become a doctor never left me.
I could never picture myself taking up any other profession. Even the fascinating
lure of art, and my considerable abilities in various forms of music, were not
enough to turn me from my chosen path, and I persisted although many complex
difficulties lay between me and my goal.
It is these psychological tendencies which even in my childhood had
formed my style of life, to which I am also indebted for my insight into psychic
manifestations.
To this I must add what the friendly reader has perhaps already guessed
from my account: That I decided at an early age to face and struggle with all of

my difficult problems, so that I might be in a better position to solve them.
Index
A

abnormality ...................................................................................................................................................
205 
above..22, 28, 29, 34, 44, 51, 57, 65, 93, 102, 105, 107, 124, 130, 137, 142, 158, 163, 165, 171, 172, 175,
181 
abuse ..............................................................................................................................23, 30, 51, 65, 190,
203 
accusation 
..............................................................................................................................................171,
207 
accuse ........................................................................................................................................................ 65 
achievement ............................................................12, 32, 33, 34, 36, 38, 52, 91, 126, 146, 151, 159, 161,
179 
activity ... 1, 16, 25, 28, 29, 32, 55, 102, 109, 110, 111, 112, 116, 123, 131, 136, 143, 146, 154, 155, 156,
157, 164, 170, 171, 174, 175, 184, 191, 196, 199, 201, 203, 209, 210, 211 
active .... 4, 6, 11, 29, 40, 50, 57, 67, 82, 91, 96, 97, 102, 121, 122, 123, 124, 128, 131, 137, 141, 143, 151,
153, 154, 166, 167, 180, 191 
activity level .............................................................................................................102, 109, 110, 111, 156 
adapt.............................................................................................................................7, 14, 21, 23, 25, 46,
204 
adaptation ...........................................................................................................................26, 122, 123, 153 
addiction ..................................................................................................................................40, 56, 63, 86,
87
addict .............................................................................................. 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 86 
adjustment.......................................................................................................... 96, 97, 101, 167, 193, 205,
210 
adolescence 
...................................................................................................................................................
211 
affect ................................................................................ 11, 15, 23, 36, 92, 112, 115, 117, 118, 134, 173,
217 
affection ............................................................................................................... 23, 34, 43, 165, 186, 206,
217 
aggression ..........................................................................................................................................26, 55,
153 
alcohol......................................................................................................................................50, 59, 61, 62,
65
alcoholism.......................................................................................................................7, 23, 59, 60, 62, 65 
alibi ...................................................................................................................... 35, 36, 84, 144, 165, 177,
178 
ambiguity 
........................................................................................................................................................
28 
ambition ........................................................................... 17, 29, 31, 43, 44, 54, 71, 74, 92, 143, 165, 166,
202 
ambitious .................................................................... 33, 37, 45, 57, 59, 70, 84, 88, 92, 106, 144, 166, 175 
ambivalence .............................................................................................................................................. 28,
69 
analogy..........................................................................................................................................................
159 
anger ............................................................................................................................35, 44, 57, 105, 107,
108 
anthropology 
..........................................................................................................................................171,
174 

antithesis 
................................................................................................................................................159,
160 
antithetical ............................................................................................................................................... 159 
anxiety.... 2, 6, 10, 17, 26, 27, 28, 30, 41, 52, 71, 83, 88, 97, 106, 111, 116, 137, 155, 165, 177, 179, 185,
187, 188, 203, 204, 210 
anxious......................................................................................................................................168, 187, 202 
apperception....................................................................................................................................................
27 
archetype................................................................................................................................................... 
54,
60 
Aristotle 
..........................................................................................................................................................
93 
arrangement .............................................................................................................................................. 33,
40 
arrogance............................................................................................................................................22, 
90,
143 
art ......4, 10, 12, 35, 40, 41, 73, 80, 107, 121, 124, 125, 126, 128, 133, 136, 139, 146, 150, 179, 181, 193,
201, 215, 219 
artist ............................................................................................................................................10, 124, 179 
artists ................................................................................................................................................. 93, 198 
as if ...16, 17, 29, 40, 45, 51, 53, 55, 56, 57, 66, 67, 68, 72, 87, 98, 99, 113, 120, 131, 133, 135, 141, 142,
150, 162, 164, 165, 172, 173, 176, 177, 185, 199 
assertion .................................................................................................................................................... 66,
75 
association..........................................................................................................................................83, 
99,
158 
assumption .......................................................................................................................21, 118, 150, 159,
213
assumptions ........................................................................................................................66, 140, 213,
214 
asthma 
...........................................................................................................................................................
196 
attention ..... 8, 15, 17, 20, 23, 30, 35, 36, 44, 45, 48, 50, 64, 78, 79, 85, 92, 105, 116, 117, 135, 136, 172,
176, 178, 183, 186, 188, 195, 197, 198, 203, 206, 211, 217 
attitude ..3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 16, 23, 26, 31, 39, 40, 46, 52, 65, 73, 75, 77, 83, 85, 90, 91, 92, 108, 109, 112,
115, 117, 123, 124, 125, 129, 130, 134, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 159,
164, 165, 171, 173, 180, 181, 184, 196, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 217, 218 avoiding
................................................................................... 16, 17, 71, 74, 99, 102, 103, 130, 177, 178, 199 
avoidance........................................................................................................................15, 51, 74, 109, 185 
awareness...................................................................................................................................21, 
24, 
121,
174

B
beauty.............................................................................................................................38, 45, 87, 92,
121, 191 
becoming.................................................................................... 5, 11, 14, 24, 32, 56, 58, 60, 74, 142, 154,
193 
being .3, 5, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25, 26, 32, 33, 35, 43, 45, 48, 50, 52, 58, 59, 61, 66, 67, 69,
71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 83, 85, 86, 88, 91, 92, 102, 104, 106, 110, 115, 118, 119, 120, 121, 127, 130, 134,
137, 138, 143, 146, 147, 148, 149, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 161, 162, 163, 166, 168, 172, 173, 174, 176,
177, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 187, 192, 195, 196, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 210, 211, 215,
217 
belief .............................................................................................................. 27, 59, 68, 83, 174, 202, 203,
207 
belonging ........................................................................................................... 6, 43, 55, 63, 97, 100, 102,
192 
below .......................................................................................................................................58, 139, 165,
177 
biting............................................................................................................................................................... 83
blind .................................................................................................................................................43, 190,
192 
blushing......................................................................................................................................37, 
38, 
155,
212
body 2, 11, 16, 43, 50, 52, 99, 102, 103, 104, 106, 114, 119, 123, 129, 133, 141, 152, 160, 173, 177, 180,
189, 204, 215

C
case3, 6, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 50, 51, 52, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65,
66, 67, 
68, 69, 70, 71, 74, 77, 80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 94, 95, 99, 101, 103, 105, 106, 107, 110, 111, 
115, 116, 117, 118, 121, 126, 132, 133, 137, 141, 142, 151, 153, 155, 162, 165, 166, 167, 168, 171, 175, 
176, 178, 179, 181, 184, 185, 186, 196, 197, 198, 201, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207, 210, 211 cases...2, 12, 14,
15, 16, 18, 23, 29, 31, 32, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 48, 49, 50, 52, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 62, 63, 64, 68, 69, 74, 80, 81,
82, 85, 86, 87, 99, 105, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 117, 118, 122, 146, 148, 154, 159, 173, 179, 180, 181, 183,
184, 195, 198, 200, 201, 205, 206, 209, 211 
causality .........................................................................................................................................31, 32, 37,
94 
caution............................................................................................................................................103, 
108,
180 
change ...... 7, 18, 28, 29, 32, 40, 48, 55, 72, 76, 77, 91, 101, 106, 108, 114, 118, 160, 167, 168, 175, 176,
182, 
195, 196, 207, 211 
character.......... 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 17, 22, 31, 40, 54, 71, 74, 77, 82, 93, 99, 102, 105, 153, 195, 196, 201,
207 
character traits............................................................................. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 17, 22, 54, 99, 105, 153 
characteristics ..............................1, 4, 55, 74, 78, 88, 91, 110, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 171, 196, 206 
child ..1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25, 31, 34, 35, 37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 52,
53, 
55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 90, 93, 98, 99, 102, 103, 104, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 113, 115, 120, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 130, 134, 135, 137, 138, 141, 142, 143, 146, 147, 
150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 159, 162, 164, 165, 173, 174, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187, 188, 195, 
196, 197, 198, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, 214, 215, 218 
children . 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 23, 30, 31, 36, 37, 44, 45, 46, 47, 53, 55, 56, 61, 65, 68,
70, 76, 77, 78, 82, 83, 88, 92, 99, 106, 111, 114, 124, 126, 128, 137, 139, 141, 142, 143, 146, 147, 148, 154,
156, 162, 163, 164, 165, 173, 174, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 187, 188, 191, 195, 198, 200, 201, 203, 204,
206, 207, 209, 211, 214, 217 
choice..11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 30, 39, 65, 81, 87, 109, 114, 122, 127, 130, 139, 175, 181, 185,
186, 
190, 199, 203, 209
clean........................................................................................................................... 3, 12, 42, 55, 78, 181,
199 
cleaning...................................................................................................................................................... 37 
cleanliness............................................................................................. 11, 12, 15, 37, 42, 78, 180, 181, 183 
collective.........................................................................................................................................................
27 
common sense....... 22, 23, 24, 40, 53, 84, 97, 120, 124, 126, 136, 139, 145, 156, 159, 160, 162, 165, 170,
211 
community . 4, 6, 21, 24, 31, 48, 51, 52, 53, 56, 73, 98, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 135, 138, 141,
146, 147, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 184, 215 
communal ............................................................................................................. 53, 77, 141, 155, 163, 181 
communal life .....................................................................................................................77, 141, 163, 181 
community feeling ................................................................................................48, 53, 121, 170, 171, 173 

comparison...............................................................................................................41, 103, 105, 145, 161,
162 
compensation ..................................................................................................... 37, 90, 107, 178, 199, 211,
215 
compensatory....................................................................................................................................171, 215 
competition ......................................................................................................................86, 197, 198, 205,
212 
completion .............................................................................................................................................. 25,
103 
complex............................................................................................................................7, 12, 23, 28, 171,
219 
compulsion...... 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 57, 80, 111, 181, 199,
210 
compulsive........................................................................ 17, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 36, 38, 39, 40, 96, 112 
concentrate .......................................................................................................................78, 171, 172, 184,
210 
concept.......................................... 2, 3, 5, 33, 48, 52, 67, 68, 69, 72, 97, 98, 100, 101, 112, 119, 142, 145,
153
conception..............................................4, 22, 41, 87, 96, 125, 137, 147, 152, 153, 162, 173, 177, 191, 192
conflict ......................................................................................... 14, 29, 38, 48, 57, 77, 91, 103, 125, 132,
135 
conscience............................................................................................................................34, 36, 48, 170,
193 
conscious.........................................................2, 8, 22, 26, 68, 82, 112, 130, 132, 142, 159, 160, 161, 174,
209 
consciousness........................................................................................................30, 68, 118, 132, 133, 136 
constitution......................................................................................... 18, 19, 23, 52, 54, 61, 134, 180, 185,
186 
contact.....................................................4, 20, 39, 53, 60, 63, 64, 73, 78, 83, 96, 104, 141, 142, 145, 147,
153 
contribution........................................................................ 1, 6, 15, 25, 40, 41, 43, 98, 131, 151, 157, 158,
215 
contrition................................................................................................................................................... 
29,
40 
cooperate.............................................4, 8, 11, 14, 15, 16, 22, 69, 76, 80, 81, 98, 110, 130, 147, 168, 170,
191 
cooperation . 7, 16, 19, 26, 38, 52, 54, 69, 76, 80, 81, 85, 102, 103, 109, 110, 112, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126,
128, 131, 141, 175, 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 190, 191, 193, 203 
cosmos .................................................................................................................................................... 21,
216 
countercompulsion................................................................................................................................... 27, 39
courage..... 6, 28, 31, 45, 51, 55, 60, 75, 104, 109, 115, 127, 138, 158, 165, 168, 178, 197, 198, 199, 200,
209, 210, 216 
courageous.............................................................................................. 22, 40, 44, 104, 134, 155, 163, 167 
coward 
cowardice........................................................................................................................................... 16, 201 
craving .......................................................................................................................17, 54, 58, 61, 64, 65,
186 
creative....1, 11, 12, 13, 17, 21, 22, 23, 30, 41, 67, 68, 69, 70, 99, 104, 123, 129, 131, 134, 146, 151, 154,
162, 182, 185, 214, 215 

creative power..............................................1, 13, 23, 41, 67, 69, 70, 99, 104, 123, 134, 146, 162, 185, 215 
crime ............................................................................................ 16, 48, 85, 140, 142, 143, 144, 145, 148,
198 
criminal..................................................................... 7, 48, 84, 132, 134, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 206 
criminality...................................................................................................................................23, 111, 154 
critical .................................................................................................. 42, 64, 72, 74, 82, 92, 99, 174, 196,
200 
critique 
..........................................................................................................................................................
149 
cruel ............................................................................................................................................................ 2,
65 
cruelty .................................................................................................................................................. 32, 65 
cry 
...................................................................................................................................................................
20 
crying................................................................................................................................................... 20, 83 
culture ................................................................................ 13, 14, 15, 25, 36, 43, 104, 153, 162, 182, 183,
215 
cure .........................................................................31, 40, 57, 58, 62, 65, 88, 92, 108, 131, 139, 168, 170,
178 
curse 
cursing ....................................................................................................................................................... 42 
cyclothymia.....................................................................................................................................................
38 
Czerny, Adalbert ....................................................................................................................................... 12,
53

D
Darwin, Charles ...................................................................................................................................... 96,
101 
de Vries..............................................................................................................................72, 95, 101, 109,
114 
death.............. 17, 43, 67, 101, 102, 121, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 168, 171, 172, 177, 185, 197, 206, 217,
218 
defeat...31, 33, 34, 35, 54, 86, 102, 130, 134, 135, 136, 139, 144, 152, 163, 171, 172, 175, 177, 180, 183,
184, 196, 199 
defense .....................................................................................................................................29, 196, 200,
218 
defensiveness 
................................................................................................................................................
115 
defiance...........................................................................................................................................................
16 
defiant................................................................................................................................................ 61, 111 
deficiency.........................................................................................................................................60, 
207,
210 
delinquency....................................................................................................................................143, 
147,
175 
delinquent .....................................................................................................................45, 61, 143, 147, 207 
delusion.........................................................................................................................................................
151 
dependence.............................................................................................................................................. 
44,
115 
dependency .................................................................................................................................23, 105, 108 
depreciation..........................................................................................................................55, 87, 90, 190,
203 
depreciation of others ................................................................................................................................ 90 
depression ......................................................................................................................17, 69, 74, 80, 118,
133 
depressed .................................................................................................... 50, 58, 60, 83, 92, 168, 185, 196
deprivation 
....................................................................................................................................................
142 
depth 
.............................................................................................................................................................
173 
depth psychology ..........................................................................................................................................
173 
desire to dominate ...........................................................................................................................................
32 
despair...........................................................................................................................................................
172 
destruction......................................................................................................................128, 141, 151, 153,
198 
dethronement .................................................................................................................................124, 196,
198 

detour ...............................................................................................................................................45, 111,
166 
detours ..................................................................................................................................................... 166 
development... 1, 8, 12, 14, 21, 23, 27, 39, 41, 44, 46, 50, 51, 53, 55, 62, 68, 73, 75, 76, 77, 83, 84, 86, 95,
96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103, 105, 111, 112, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130,
131, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 145, 146, 148, 150, 153, 154, 155, 156, 170, 175, 182, 197, 200, 201, 202,
203, 204, 205, 206, 213, 214, 215 
diagnosis ................................................................................ 20, 50, 55, 56, 59, 77, 83, 84, 133, 148, 176,
188
difficulty ........... 29, 39, 45, 54, 55, 56, 78, 85, 90, 106, 110, 127, 140, 144, 171, 172, 184, 187, 196, 200,
205 
difficulties10, 26, 27, 35, 51, 53, 56, 67, 76, 83, 85, 101, 102, 110, 115, 135, 140, 142, 146, 150, 153, 157,
162, 165, 170, 181, 183, 184, 199, 203, 206, 209, 210, 215, 219 
discipline................................................................................................................................................122,
191 
discouraged ............................................................................................................................134, 198, 199,
205 
discouragement.........................................................................................................................113, 171, 198 
disease.................................................................................................................... 105, 114, 116, 132, 171,
193 
disorderly .............................................................................................................................................46, 77,
82 
disposition..........................................................................................................................29, 66, 150, 188,
204 
distance ..........................................................................................................................32, 51, 74, 82, 202,
210 
distrust...........................................................................................................................................................
108 
dominance.......................................................................................................................................................
87 
dominant ...........................................................................................................................34, 36, 41, 64, 130 
Don Juan ................................................................................................................................................190,
193 
doubt .................................................................................. 8, 14, 22, 23, 32, 70, 95, 96, 99, 145, 171, 191,
204 
doubting..................................................................................................................................................... 68 
dream 36, 71, 84, 91, 93, 107, 138, 139, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168,
169, 172, 173, 177, 178, 201, 202, 205 
dreams .. 24, 69, 71, 84, 91, 93, 105, 108, 117, 136, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168, 169, 172, 177, 201, 205 
dreams.24, 69, 71, 84, 91, 93, 105, 108, 117, 136, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168, 169, 172, 177, 201, 205 
drive ............................................................................. 26, 31, 62, 67, 70, 81, 96, 112, 141, 150, 152, 164,
173 
drives .................................................................................... 1, 2, 7, 21, 31, 68, 71, 103, 132, 135, 153, 213
drug 
drug addiction .............................................................................................................................7, 56, 62, 63 
drugs .........................................................................................................................................50, 55, 62, 86 
Drug ............................................................................................. 7, 23, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 62, 63, 111,
131

E
early
memories.......................................................................................................................................143, 167 
earliest memory ................................................................................................................................. 70, 210 
earliest recollections ...........................................................................................................34, 187, 211, 217 
early recollections.....................................................................................................................143, 209, 212 
eating.................................................................................................. 11, 12, 14, 15, 47, 78, 182, 183, 195,
196 
economy
economic....................................................................................... 13, 23, 120, 124, 147, 167, 181, 190, 201 
education.................................................7, 8, 13, 75, 76, 99, 110, 111, 126, 146, 147, 152, 184, 204, 206,
207 
educator ................................................................................................................................................... 168 
educators.........................................................................................................................7, 69, 144, 146, 152 
ego 
................................................................................................................................................................
130 
egotism ................................................................................................................................................ 5, 196 
eldest child .......................................................................................................................93, 195, 196, 197,
198 
emotion .............................................................................. 36, 40, 126, 133, 135, 166, 168, 171, 177, 201,
207 
emotional .. 2, 4, 5, 21, 38, 40, 52, 54, 58, 103, 105, 141, 155, 158, 161, 168, 174, 176, 177, 192, 193, 207,
211 
empathy....................................................................................................................................17, 
154, 
190,
203 
encourage 
encouragement..................................................................................................................................107, 170 
endocrine............................................................................................ 39, 68, 103, 114, 116, 132, 148, 150,
151 
enemy............................................................................................................... 55, 113, 115, 135, 147, 176,
199
enemies .......................................................................................................................................55, 148, 163 
energy 
.............................................................................................................................................................
30 
energetic ............................................................................................................................................ 39, 109 
environment . 4, 7, 13, 21, 23, 25, 39, 40, 41, 42, 55, 56, 66, 73, 92, 96, 99, 101, 103, 111, 123, 127, 129,
130, 152, 154, 160, 176, 180, 182, 193, 195, 196, 203, 204, 206, 207, 209, 213, 215, 216, 217 envy
...........................................................................................................................................16, 91, 196, 198
epileptic..................................................................................................................................................104,
105 
epilepsy.................................................................................................................................................... 118 
equal........................................................................................... 14, 97, 125, 147, 163, 175, 178, 192, 193,
203 
equality ..................................................................... 125, 142, 147, 151, 152, 190, 193, 194, 198, 200, 203 
equilibrium.....................................................................................................................102, 103, 104, 119,
215 

error ........................................................................................................... 28, 39, 104, 127, 134, 170, 178,
193 
Esau 
..............................................................................................................................................................
200 
escape..................................................................................................... 6, 21, 72, 129, 162, 170, 198, 199,
202 
ethics 
.............................................................................................................................................................
132 
Eve 
.........................................................................................................................................................191,
194 
evil ...........................................................................................................................28, 120, 121, 124, 153,
177 
evolution .. 15, 41, 96, 97, 98, 100, 101, 102, 112, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 150,
153, 160, 189, 214 
examination........... 18, 21, 24, 36, 51, 53, 55, 56, 63, 77, 90, 107, 131, 133, 137, 154, 166, 167, 172, 185,
212 
examinations............................................................................................... 10, 24, 36, 90, 92, 166, 202, 210
exclusion ........................................................................................................................................110, 173,
176 
excuse ................................................................................................................................16, 29, 39, 56, 60,
63 
excuses............................................................................................................................................16, 56, 60 
expectation ...............................................................................................................................4, 23, 45, 78,
124 
expecting...........................................................................................................................115, 142, 154, 165 
experience .. 1, 4, 12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 22, 23, 27, 30, 31, 46, 51, 52, 53, 56, 57, 63, 64, 70, 92, 98, 99, 106,
130, 133, 141, 143, 151, 152, 158, 162, 173, 181, 188, 189, 195, 196, 198, 204, 205, 211, 212 expressive
movement.......................................................................................................................39, 104, 214

F
failure......5, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 27, 28, 30, 33, 36, 37, 39, 45, 48, 55, 65, 91, 99, 103, 109, 110, 111, 116,
131, 133, 138, 144, 196 
failures ...... 5, 7, 13, 14, 16, 17, 23, 27, 39, 55, 56, 61, 63, 65, 74, 75, 76, 91, 110, 111, 122, 123, 125, 130,
131, 134, 150, 152, 175, 182 
fairy tale ........................................................................................................................................................
201 family..7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 23, 29, 31, 33, 34, 36, 42, 43, 45, 47, 57, 58, 59, 70, 77, 82, 86, 88, 89, 90,
102, 104,
113, 121, 124, 132, 133, 137, 155, 156, 167, 172, 177, 179, 181, 182, 183, 192, 195, 197, 200, 201, 203, 
206, 210, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218 
family 
constellation.........................................................................................................................................
82 
fantasy..............................................................................................................................61, 145, 197, 204,
209 
fate ...................................................................................................................................92, 154, 178, 192,
201 
father...... 14, 19, 20, 32, 34, 35, 43, 44, 58, 59, 60, 64, 77, 82, 84, 86, 104, 106, 120, 133, 137, 138, 141,
152,
156, 163, 165, 171, 172, 176, 183, 186, 187, 188, 196, 197, 198, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 211, 217, 218, 
219 
fatigue 
....................................................................................................................................................132,
160 
favoritism........................................................................................................................................................
82 
fear ......2, 6, 8, 14, 16, 17, 20, 30, 31, 33, 35, 38, 45, 46, 48, 54, 56, 78, 90, 105, 106, 133, 134, 136, 137,
139, 
148, 155, 163, 165, 171, 172, 174, 177, 190, 194, 196, 201, 211, 212 
fear of falling ....................................................................................................................139, 165, 172, 177 
feeblemindedness......................................................................................................................................... 148
feeling ...4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 16, 17, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 40, 42, 43, 46, 48,
49, 
52, 53, 59, 60, 62, 63, 68, 76, 79, 84, 91, 92, 97, 103, 106, 110, 112, 113, 123, 127, 130, 131, 133, 134, 
135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 142, 143, 144, 147, 149, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 163, 164, 168, 172, 175, 
177, 191, 199, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 210, 212, 214, 217, 218 
feeling at home ........................................................................................................................................ 113 
feeling of community................................................................................................................................. 52 
feeling of inferiority.................................................................. 5, 6, 8, 14, 17, 21, 28, 42, 43, 134, 177, 204 
feeling of superiority.................................................................................................................................. 16 
feeling of worth ....................................................................................................................................... 144 
fellow man .............................................................................................................................................. 13,
210 
female .......................................................................................................... 87, 89, 91, 191, 193, 194, 205,
206 
feminine......................................................................................................................91, 116, 163, 204, 206 
fiction............................................................................................................................................................
174 

fictitious............................................................................................................................................170, 210 
finalism .............................................................................................................................................................
1 
firstborn.........................................................................................................................................................
195 
forget................................................................................................ 1, 5, 61, 65, 77, 81, 87, 136, 143, 179,
184 
forgetting ....................................................................................................................................24, 159, 166 
form ..7, 10, 13, 14, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 54, 58, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 74, 82, 84, 85, 87, 90,
96, 
98, 101, 106, 110, 111, 119, 123, 131, 147, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 158, 160, 173, 178, 179, 180, 182, 
185, 196, 202, 207, 209, 210 
free 
will.........................................................................................................................................................
134 
freedom ................................................................................................................................................... 17,
185 
Freud .................................................................................................... 29, 30, 88, 101, 106, 120, 156, 158,
159 
friendship ............................................................................................................... 46, 52, 73, 83, 138, 197,
214 
frigidity ..............................................................................................................................................48, 89,
106 
future...... 16, 17, 31, 52, 85, 96, 98, 99, 108, 110, 112, 121, 124, 141, 147, 148, 156, 157, 174, 178, 183,
185, 
211, 215, 218

G
gait ................................................................................................................................................................
122 
game.......................................................................................................................................152, 
168, 
184,
197 
games..................................................................................................................................93, 203, 204, 217 
genital 
...........................................................................................................................................................
132
genius...............................................................................................................................................34, 153,
206 
glance...................................................................................................................................................30, 
73,
89 
glands......................................................................................... 39, 68, 103, 114, 116, 118, 132, 151, 204,
211 
goal ...11, 13, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 26, 29, 31, 38, 43, 67, 68, 72, 76, 84, 97, 98, 99, 101, 103, 104, 110,
122, 124, 127, 130, 134, 136, 137, 145, 152, 153, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 176, 177, 185, 186, 195, 197,
199, 204, 205, 206, 209, 213, 215, 219 
goal of perfection..................................................................................................................................... 110 
God ..............................................................................................................................................29, 37, 97,
174 
Goethe....................................................................................................................................................... 
41,
45 
greed 
..................................................................................................................................................12, 
46,
135 
group ........................................... 5, 25, 42, 55, 61, 72, 74, 95, 98, 103, 110, 111, 121, 126, 128, 192, 213,
214 
guessing ...........................................................................................................................................10, 107,
171 
guidance.................................................................................................................................................134,
157 
guiding principle ...........................................................................................................................................
110 
guilt..........................................................................................................................................21, 29, 32, 40, 48

H
habit ........................................................................................................... 29, 38, 42, 43, 57, 58, 59,
60, 86, 93 
happy ............................................................................................................... 97, 104, 107, 117, 147, 151,
207
happiness .......................................................................................................... 103, 141, 144, 147, 191, 202 
hate.......................................................................................................................................................... 
14,
183 
hated child ................................................................................................................................................. 56 
hate..................................................................................................................................................................
44 
headache 
................................................................................................................................................179,
196 
headaches................................................................................................ 10, 46, 64, 104, 105, 106, 138, 148 
heart ................................................17, 19, 57, 63, 104, 114, 126, 163, 171, 172, 176, 177, 185, 186, 217,
218
Hebbel, 
Christian 
Friedrich...........................................................................................................................
158 
heredity ...........................................................11, 21, 31, 39, 41, 62, 66, 67, 112, 129, 150, 152, 179, 200,
207 
hero ........................................................................................................................................................... 30,
37 
hesitiation 
hesitating attitude..........................................................................................................6, 23, 27, 32, 39, 196 
homosexuality........................................................................................ 36, 85, 86, 87, 190, 203, 204, 205,
206 
homosexual...................................................................................................................86, 87, 171, 204, 205 
hostility ..............................................................................................................................................4, 127,
173 
hostile ..................................................................................................... 5, 41, 46, 55, 56, 57, 184, 196, 203 
human ...3, 7, 8, 13, 15, 16, 21, 23, 24, 25, 29, 31, 32, 38, 41, 43, 45, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 81,
83, 85, 87, 91, 96, 97, 100, 103, 110, 113, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 138,
141, 144, 145, 146, 150, 151, 152, 153, 157, 158, 162, 168, 173, 176, 189, 190, 192, 194, 214, 215, 216
human nature....................................................................................................................38, 78, 79, 81, 83,
215 
humiliation......................................................................................................................................................
57 
humility..................................................................................................................................................... 
32,
40 
hunger ..................................................................................................................................................... 18,
190 
hurting...........................................................................................................................................................
131 
hypersensitivity ....................................................................................................................................41, 53,
54 
hypochondriasis ................................................................................................................................................

2 
hypomania.......................................................................................................................................................
81 
hysteria...................................................................................................................................3, 17, 52, 114,
125

I
id 
.....................................................................................................................................................................
49 idea....2, 8, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40, 54, 61, 66, 67, 70, 80, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 93, 95, 98,
106,
127, 130, 135, 145, 148, 150, 159, 160, 168, 171, 174, 179, 181, 192, 200, 207, 212, 217, 218 ideal
.......... 13, 14, 26, 28, 69, 73, 97, 98, 99, 101, 102, 125, 126, 135, 140, 159, 177, 181, 189, 190, 192, 218 
ideal community ................................................................................................................................ 98, 135
ideal final form ........................................................................................................................................
102 
idealism...........................................................................................................................................................
21 
identification ............................................................................................................................10, 171, 172,
200 
illness ........................................ 2, 12, 84, 85, 105, 108, 111, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 132, 177, 181, 199,
211 
image..............................................................................................................................1, 6, 50, 53, 97, 99,
190 
images.................................................................................................................................6, 36, 61, 97, 164 
imagination ......................................................................................................................................28, 167,
169 
imaginary........................................................................................................................................27, 30, 38 
imitation...........................................................................................................................................39, 
200,
204 
immortality................................................................................................................................................ 
43,
45 
impatience.......................................................................................................... 5, 11, 17, 54, 55, 135, 171,
180 
impatient .................................................................................................................5, 51, 54, 56, 58, 91, 117 
imperfection 
imperfect............................................................................................................................................ 74, 193 
impotence........................................................................................................................................................
48 
inborn................................................................................................. 3, 7, 96, 99, 134, 140, 141, 146, 150,
204 
incest............................................................................................................................................................. 103
incomplete..................................................................................................................................72, 
80, 
110,
116
incompleteness................................................................................................................................................
73 
indecision................................................................................................................................................ 
32,
124 
independence 
.........................................................................................................................................168,
170 
independent............................................................................................. 13, 44, 45, 46, 58, 76, 78, 155, 182 
Individual Psychology.... 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35,
40, 43, 44, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 60, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 77, 80, 85, 88, 95, 96, 97,

99, 100, 104, 106, 109, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 120, 124, 125, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 134, 135, 138, 140,
143, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 153, 154, 155, 156, 158, 160, 162, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 176, 179, 180,
188, 209, 213, 214, 216, 217, 218 
individuality ................................................................................... 2, 3, 20, 25, 29, 89, 114, 116, 118, 119,
127 
indolence.......................................................................................................................................................
105 
inertia 
.....................................................................................................................................................116,
148 
infantile ..........................................................................................................................................106, 135,
158 
inferiority . 5, 6, 11, 14, 23, 26, 28, 30, 37, 38, 39, 42, 52, 53, 54, 61, 72, 84, 90, 103, 105, 106, 110, 114,
116, 123, 126, 134, 149, 151, 162, 170, 177, 178, 180, 183, 184, 190, 197, 205, 218 
inferiority complex ..................................................... 28, 53, 54, 61, 84, 105, 106, 134, 149, 170, 178, 190 
inferiority feeling ...................................................61, 90, 103, 105, 106, 110, 116, 162, 177, 180, 183, 218 
insane ...............................................................................................................................................34, 106,
156 
insecurity.............................................................................................. 11, 23, 25, 26, 61, 72, 74, 180, 183,
202 
insight .................................................................................. 51, 72, 83, 105, 110, 112, 122, 139, 151, 167,
219 
instinct................................................................................................................................................26, 
43,
200 
intelligence.................................................................................................................72, 97, 101, 142, 145,
205 
intelligent................................................................................ 19, 33, 56, 60, 90, 93, 95, 126, 186, 195, 207 
intention .........................................................................................................................133, 141, 152, 156,
184 
intentions ................................................................................................................................................... 29 
interest.4, 8, 12, 13, 15, 24, 25, 28, 29, 32, 44, 46, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 61, 69, 73, 74, 77, 78, 91, 93, 98,
99, 105, 109, 111, 112, 130, 131, 132, 134, 136, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 150, 153, 154, 157,
163, 173, 175, 180, 182, 190, 197, 203, 205, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215 
intuition..............................................................................................................................................83, 
88,
133 
irritability 
......................................................................................................................................................
132 
irritable ................................................................................................................................................ 2, 104 
isolation.........................................................................................................................................................
210

J
Jacob
............................................................................................................................................................. 200 
James, 
William..............................................................................................................................................
160 
jealousy ................................................................................................................ 16, 55, 89, 108, 184, 196,
198 
jealous...................................................................................................................14, 89, 108, 182, 193, 198 
justice...................................................................................................................................................... 
23,
134

K
Kant. Emanuel ........................................................................................................................................
45, 130 
Kretschmer.............................................................................................................................................106,
108 
Kryle, Josef ...................................................................................................................................................
106

L
language......................................................................................... 2, 21, 41, 104, 114, 119, 120, 130,
150, 205 
law .......... 31, 69, 70, 78, 80, 89, 90, 99, 104, 107, 110, 124, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 143, 146, 190, 198,
215
law of life................................................................................................................................................. 190 
law of movement ....................................................................................................69, 70, 78, 104, 110, 134 
laws......................................................................................... 59, 64, 73, 111, 159, 162, 182, 200, 207, 215 
laziness.................................................................................................................................................... 
37,
198 
leadership......................................................................................................................................................
200 
leader ....................................................................................................................38, 71, 120, 124, 175, 178 
learning ................................................................................................................................................34, 77,
84 
life plan ..................................................................................................................................................... 22,
77 
life problems ............................................................................................................................................. 26,
98 
life style (see also style of life) .........................3, 4, 6, 28, 31, 36, 39, 40, 82, 83, 142, 143, 145, 153, 166,
175 
life tasks ..................................................................................................................... 73, 76, 109, 110, 112,
196 
limping............................................................................................................................................................
42 
liveliness 
.......................................................................................................................................................
217 
logic ........................................................................................................... 84, 90, 103, 151, 163, 169, 202,
211 
love5, 6, 13, 18, 27, 29, 36, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 52, 59, 64, 65, 71, 73, 74, 83, 87, 88, 91, 92,
93, 105, 106, 107, 117, 120, 123, 125, 129, 133, 135, 141, 147, 150, 151, 155, 165, 167, 170, 175, 181, 182,
183, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 199, 202, 210, 214 
loyalty ....................................................................................................................................................... 51,
69 
lying ...................................................................................................................................2, 143, 145, 198,
210

M
maladjustment...............................................................................................................................................
183 
male ........................................................................................................... 33, 87, 121, 126, 164, 191, 193,
194 
manic-depressive.............................................................................................................................................
83 
mania ................................................................................................................................................... 37, 42 
mankind . 13, 33, 43, 75, 96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 119, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 135, 140, 141,
146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 153, 154, 169, 182, 200, 213, 214, 215, 218 
marriage ..... 37, 42, 43, 64, 65, 92, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 121, 138, 151, 164, 168, 170, 192, 193, 194,
199, 204, 210 
marry.................................................................................................. 58, 59, 63, 64, 89, 92, 137, 178, 199,
202 
masculine protest .....................................................................................................................33, 106, 163,
194 
masculinity................................................................................................................................................ 
88,
91 
masculine.................................................................................. 33, 87, 91, 93, 106, 116, 126, 163, 194, 206 
masochism 
......................................................................................................................................................
93 
mastery.............................................................................................................................................43, 
122,
138 
masturbation...............................................................................................................61, 89, 174, 177, 202,
210 
mathematics .................................................................................................................13, 20, 78, 125, 174,
188 
mature ............................................................................................................................................152, 170,
191 
mature picture of the world ...........................................................................................................................
170 
maturity..................................................................................................................................................141,
142 
May, 
Karl......................................................................................................................................................
197 
melancholia..........................................................................................................................................29, 
38,
40 
melancholy.....................................................................................................................................111, 
118,
119 
memory .................................................................................................... 78, 117, 166, 171, 172, 187, 209,
212 
menopause 
....................................................................................................................................................
116
menstruation..................................................................................................................................................
115 
metaphor 
................................................................................................................................................145,

162 
metaphysics......................................................................................................................................2, 22, 66,
98 
migraine .................................................................................................................................106, 107, 108,
196 
mind ....12, 13, 17, 24, 30, 31, 32, 35, 38, 42, 50, 53, 57, 67, 80, 82, 86, 96, 116, 136, 142, 157, 159, 162,
176, 177, 188, 191, 202, 204, 217, 218, 219 
misbehavior...................................................................................................................................................
210 
misinterpretation 
...........................................................................................................................................
179 
mistrust 
................................................................................................................................................... 
91,
210 
modesty............................................................................................................................................22, 
122,
193 
mood .................................................................................................. 35, 52, 115, 119, 159, 165, 166, 172,
201 
moodiness 
.....................................................................................................................................................
115 
morphine .....................................................................50, 51, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 86, 87,
118 
mother .....4, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 30, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65, 70, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 89,
91, 104, 137, 138, 141, 142, 143, 146, 150, 155, 164, 171, 172, 173, 174, 176, 178, 181, 182, 183, 186, 187,
188, 191, 196, 197, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207, 209, 210, 212, 217 
motivation ........................................................................................................................................15, 115,
150 
movement .... 11, 13, 14, 15, 19, 25, 26, 28, 44, 54, 67, 72, 73, 75, 77, 91, 96, 97, 98, 102, 104, 119, 120,
121, 122, 124, 125, 127, 128, 131, 134, 135, 138, 139, 149, 156, 171, 210, 211, 215, 217, 218
murder...........................................................................................................................................................
144 
murderer........................................................................................................................................................
144 
muscle tone ....................................................................................................................................103, 119,
133 
muscles 
..................................................................................................................................................119,
172 
music....................................................................................................................................................... 
60,
219 
musical.............................................................................................................................................93, 
185,
218 
musician..........................................................................................................................................................
60

N
nagging
................................................................................................................................................42, 43, 46 
narcissism 
.......................................................................................................................................................
21 
nation ........................................................................................................................................................ 8,
147 
need...... 12, 14, 21, 43, 45, 62, 63, 67, 70, 71, 76, 84, 85, 95, 96, 105, 109, 126, 132, 134, 141, 145, 146,
149, 155, 159, 161, 165, 166, 167, 169, 171, 178, 184, 204, 205 
neglect....................................................................................................................................................134,
173 
neglected child........................................................................................................................................... 58 
neuralgia 
................................................................................................................................................104,
105 
neurasthenia ......................................................................................................................................................
2 
neurosis ...... 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 52, 57,
111, 114, 116, 125, 130, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 139, 149, 153, 154, 155, 156, 165, 167, 173, 175, 179,
181, 184, 198, 199, 202, 210 
neuroses .....................................................................7, 10, 23, 52, 53, 63, 80, 103, 111, 131, 135, 155, 190 
neurotic4, 5, 6, 12, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 39, 40, 42, 59, 61, 63, 80, 81, 82, 84, 112,
118, 133, 135, 136, 138, 154, 155, 158, 165, 167, 170, 171, 172, 174, 177, 178, 184, 185, 196, 203, 207 
Nietzsche, Friedrich ................................................................................................................................ 95,
192 
normal ...6, 29, 32, 36, 52, 68, 77, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 93, 105, 108, 115, 131, 135, 146, 147, 151, 153,
159, 170, 175, 178, 190, 192, 198, 205

O
obedience ...............................................................................................................................................197,
199 
objective............................................................8, 38, 79, 99, 122, 151, 161, 170, 173, 174, 178, 200, 202,
211 
obstinacy ................................................................................................................................................. 46,
184 
occupation.................................................13, 22, 34, 39, 74, 129, 133, 151, 155, 167, 170, 182, 196, 202,
210
Oedipus complex .................................................................................................................14, 21, 49, 156,
173
only child ........................................................................................................... 35, 44, 124, 173, 195,
203, 205 
opinion ........ 5, 6, 22, 26, 28, 52, 55, 67, 71, 75, 77, 89, 115, 116, 117, 123, 125, 170, 178, 180, 192, 212,
213 
opponent 
..........................................................................................................................................74, 
107,
112 
optimism ................................................................................................................................................. 16,
214 
optimistic .................................................................................................................................................. 75,
76 
orator.............................................................................................................................................................
175 
organ ............................... 16, 23, 52, 73, 103, 104, 106, 107, 114, 115, 133, 134, 142, 151, 155, 172, 176,
181 
organ inferiority.............................................................................................. 23, 52, 73, 103, 107, 172, 176 
orientation ..........................................................................................................................................20, 21,
171 
overburdening 
...............................................................................................................................................
103 
overcoming ............................................................................ 23, 29, 30, 67, 102, 103, 104, 129, 153, 165,
200

P
pain .............................................................................2, 104, 105, 107, 118, 119, 132, 133, 138, 197, 201,
202 
palpitation 
palpitations ...............................................................................................................................104, 171, 172 
pampering .. 4, 13, 14, 15, 19, 23, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46, 55, 57, 59, 78, 82, 90, 134, 143, 155, 173, 174, 182,
183, 186, 187 
pampered .... 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 30, 31, 35, 45, 46, 55, 57, 58, 59, 61, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79,
82, 83, 86, 88, 90, 124, 125, 134, 135, 137, 139, 142, 143, 145, 154, 155, 156, 159, 164, 165, 167, 171, 172,
173, 174, 176, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 203, 205, 209, 211 
pampered style of life ...............................................................................................................154, 155, 156 
pantomime 
......................................................................................................................................................
35 
paralysis .............................................................................................................................................3, 166,
167 
paranoia................................................................................................................................................... 
41,
176 
paranoid ................................................................................................................................................... 177 
parent .........................................................................................................................................44, 70, 197,
203 parents 8, 20, 23, 37, 43, 44, 45, 56, 59, 60, 64, 81, 133, 137, 138, 146, 151, 171, 183, 187, 188, 195,
199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207, 212, 218 
parsimony 
.....................................................................................................................................................
130 
passivity 
........................................................................................................................................................
116 
passive .................................................................................................................. 40, 82, 104, 116, 123, 143 
patient .3, 6, 11, 16, 17, 24, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 49, 50, 56, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63,
64, 65, 71, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 104, 105, 106, 107, 115, 116, 117, 119,
133, 136, 137, 138, 139, 149, 154, 155, 156, 165, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178,
179, 185, 190, 191, 196, 202, 204, 205, 206, 209, 210, 212 
pattern ............................................................................................ 24, 39, 74, 75, 102, 173, 200, 201, 206,
209 
peace ................................................................................................................................................56, 103,
105 
pedantry 
..........................................................................................................................................................
43 
perception ...................................................................................... 1, 3, 5, 11, 12, 23, 66, 69, 76, 198, 209,
213 
perfection .....................................................................................................................21, 95, 97, 129, 192,
218 
personal superiority.................................................................................... 6, 29, 38, 39, 54, 105, 134, 135,
153 
personality 1, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 39, 52, 54, 62, 69, 71, 83, 84, 95, 97, 109, 127, 130, 131,
151, 159, 167, 170, 171, 173, 177, 181, 185, 188, 213, 214 
perspective ..................................................................................................... 1, 54, 65, 110, 129, 150, 180,
213 

perversion 
.....................................................................................................................................................
111 
philosophy........................................................................ 3, 34, 41, 72, 124, 126, 128, 149, 150, 151, 170,
212 
phobia ...............................................................................................................................................................
2 
phobias....................................................................................................................................................... 52 
physician ........................................................................................ 25, 51, 63, 71, 107, 156, 172, 176, 177,
201 
physics ...................................................................................................................................................... 94,
96 
physique...............................................................................................................................................34, 
86,
87 
pity ............................................................................................................................................................ 59,
70 
Plato 
.......................................................................................................................................................190,
193 
play ............................................. 4, 11, 15, 32, 93, 107, 116, 145, 176, 180, 184, 185, 195, 197, 200, 204,
205 
pleasure ...................................................................28, 37, 45, 47, 48, 54, 62, 65, 105, 121, 190, 191, 194,
198 
poet 
..................................................................................................................................................46, 
158,
161
poetry ...............................................................................................................................................70, 190,
201 
politics...........................................................................................................................................................
128 
possession ....................................................................................................................29, 48, 82, 142, 143,
157 
poverty 
..........................................................................................................................................................
214 
power ....5, 15, 20, 21, 27, 30, 37, 38, 41, 46, 67, 69, 86, 95, 102, 120, 122, 124, 125, 128, 147, 153, 154,
161, 168, 169, 172, 183, 188, 198, 200, 215, 217, 218
practical.......................................................22, 32, 47, 74, 81, 85, 100, 120, 124, 130, 148, 149, 151, 162,
210 
praise..........................................................................................................................................90, 
98, 
156,
200
pregnancy...............................................................................................................................................108,
115 
pregnant ...................................................................................................................................63, 116, 137,
199 
preparation .................................... 13, 18, 27, 51, 52, 54, 63, 73, 74, 76, 77, 112, 115, 134, 146, 181, 206,
210 
prestige..................................................32, 36, 38, 39, 87, 89, 90, 113, 136, 139, 142, 144, 165, 175, 177,
178 
pride ................................................................................................................. 29, 30, 37, 42, 84, 108, 135,
136
primitive................................................................................................................. 13, 21, 27, 48, 122, 159,
182 
private 
intelligence........................................................................................................................................

126 
private logic ..................................................................................................................................................
145 
private map ...................................................................................................................................................
178 
probability..............................................................................................................................7, 31, 73, 103,
134 
problem ...... 10, 13, 23, 27, 36, 37, 39, 42, 45, 46, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 57, 61, 63, 64, 69, 74, 75, 76, 80, 90,
95, 103, 110, 111, 120, 122, 129, 130, 135, 140, 141, 144, 147, 148, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 169,
171, 175, 177, 178, 181, 182, 183, 185, 188, 196, 197, 198, 202, 203, 207, 210 
problem child................................................................................ 10, 23, 45, 46, 61, 76, 111, 175, 198, 207 
profession............................................................................................................... 25, 32, 36, 86, 104, 202,
219 
prohibition.......................................................................................................................................................
59 
projective 
........................................................................................................................................................
72 
proof....................................................................................................................... 63, 85, 87, 91, 137, 148,
188 
prostitute 
.........................................................................................................................................................
49 
prostitution....................................................................................................................................................
111 
protection .....................................................................................................................................26, 45, 78,
136 
prototype ........................................................................................................................52, 54, 55, 61, 196,
209 
provocation 
...................................................................................................................................................
138 
psyche ...... 6, 11, 12, 32, 39, 45, 66, 72, 101, 103, 112, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 133, 134,
144, 179, 181, 182 
psychic . 13, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 40, 41, 52, 61, 66, 67, 84, 112, 122, 129, 133, 135, 143, 144, 150,
153, 155, 171, 172, 173, 175, 177, 181, 185, 186, 195, 200, 209, 218, 219 
psychology ..... 1, 3, 7, 8, 10, 23, 25, 32, 67, 68, 72, 78, 112, 120, 121, 125, 127, 129, 141, 149, 151, 153,
154, 157, 158, 178, 179, 213, 214 
psychological .... 1, 2, 7, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 32, 40, 50, 53, 54, 61, 62, 63, 66, 68, 69, 73,
74, 99, 102, 103, 105, 107, 114, 115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 133, 149, 150, 151, 154, 168, 190, 201, 203, 204,
215, 219 
psychosis..................................................................................................................38, 111, 130, 134, 136,
175 
psychotic.................................................................................................................................................. 165 
punishment............................................................................................................. 18, 37, 44, 79, 135, 147,
185 
purpose. 26, 32, 40, 41, 42, 44, 67, 107, 121, 126, 131, 137, 142, 144, 159, 163, 167, 172, 178, 184, 186,
201, 215

Q
quantitative.............................................................................................................................................110,
154
querulousness....................................................................................................................................................
4

R
race............................................................................... 8, 96, 121, 126, 141, 145, 192, 194, 198, 199, 200,
211 
radius 
.....................................................................................................................................................111,
174 
rage 
....................................................................................................................................................5, 
107,
164
rational .................................................................................................................................40, 72, 75, 215,
216 
readiness 
................................................................................................................................................142,
186 
reality ...................... 3, 5, 6, 21, 26, 28, 38, 41, 97, 115, 130, 145, 148, 159, 163, 164, 166, 170, 190, 200,
202 
reason7, 13, 18, 34, 37, 39, 43, 55, 62, 64, 65, 68, 69, 71, 76, 77, 86, 93, 94, 98, 120, 124, 133, 136, 138,
145, 148, 152, 153, 156, 159, 160, 161, 167, 178, 179, 183, 184, 186, 211, 213 
reasoning................................................................................................................................................... 
22,
28 
recollection....................................................................... 19, 59, 83, 84, 89, 138, 175, 177, 187, 209, 210,
217 
reflexes...................................................................................................................................1, 7, 132, 135,
152 
regression......................................................................................................................................................
135 
rejection .............................................................................................................................................38, 44,
183 
religion.............................................................................................................................................34, 
132,
174 
religious .................................................................................. 29, 69, 98, 121, 122, 124, 126, 147, 150, 210 
remorse 
.........................................................................................................................................................
164 
reorientation 
..................................................................................................................................................
170 
repression...................................................................................................................................2, 
106, 
185,
206 repressed ..................................................................................................................................................
189 
resentment..........................................................................................................................34, 35, 142, 173,
175 
resistance............................................................................................ 63, 71, 102, 103, 124, 148, 180, 183,
199 
responsibility.................................................................... 15, 43, 48, 63, 70, 107, 120, 124, 146, 151, 173,
177 
responsible......................................................................................................................54, 60, 85, 140, 142 
restlessness....................................................................................................................................................
133 
retreat ............................................................41, 81, 90, 103, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 155, 165, 171,
178

retreating ..........................................................................................................................................27, 155,
212 
revenge................................................................................................................. 58, 64, 65, 107, 108, 113,
207 
revolutionary.................................................................................................................................................
200 
rigid...............................................................................................................................................................
167 
role ......4, 10, 11, 14, 17, 23, 33, 36, 41, 43, 44, 65, 70, 82, 89, 91, 93, 109, 116, 141, 163, 171, 172, 175,
176, 185, 201, 204, 205, 206 
rule ..................................................36, 55, 77, 78, 88, 89, 92, 98, 102, 138, 144, 167, 183, 191, 193, 198,
204 
rules .................................................................................................. 33, 43, 75, 76, 114, 122, 162, 167, 202

S
sadism ....................................................................................................................................................197,
198 
sadistic ..................................................................................................................32, 33, 132, 164, 173, 197 
safeguarding....................................................................................................................................................
30 
safeguarding tendency ............................................................................................................................... 30 
safeguards .......................................................................................................................................... 29, 149 
Saul 
...............................................................................................................................................................
201 
schema 
............................................................................................................................................................
50 
scheme .................................................................................................................................................26, 27,
39 
schizophrenia .....................................................................................................................38, 41, 111, 118,
119 
school......8, 11, 18, 19, 22, 26, 30, 36, 37, 40, 44, 47, 56, 59, 60, 65, 70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 83, 86,
90, 106, 113, 137, 141, 142, 146, 149, 156, 157, 163, 164, 165, 167, 173, 174, 179, 185, 186, 197, 199, 204,
205, 207, 210, 213 
Schopenhauer, Arthur .....................................................................................................................................
69 
science................... 2, 5, 21, 22, 30, 35, 66, 78, 98, 122, 125, 126, 129, 149, 150, 158, 174, 176, 178, 215,
216 
second child ............................................................................................. 57, 195, 197, 198, 200, 201, 204,
217 
secondary field of action .................................................................................................................................
27 
security................................................................................................. 4, 17, 102, 136, 139, 146, 165, 166,
196 
seduction 
.......................................................................................................................................................
191 
self ....8, 11, 14, 17, 29, 30, 31, 35, 38, 40, 41, 42, 50, 51, 54, 57, 59, 60, 65, 67, 68, 71, 73, 75, 76, 77, 80,
93, 96, 101, 102, 105, 111, 112, 118, 129, 134, 135, 143, 149, 151, 163, 166, 167, 169, 179, 180, 194, 198,
200, 209, 213, 214 
selfcenteredness...................................................................................................................................... 180 
selfconfidence........................................................................................ 8, 11, 51, 54, 57, 60, 118, 180, 198 
selfconsistency ....................................................................................................................................... 214 
self-esteem................................................................................................................................................. 35
self-preservation ...........................................................................................................................67, 96,
102 
self-training.............................................................................................................................................. 209 
senile............................................................................................................................................................. 199
sensitive ............................................................................................... 6, 56, 57, 58, 63, 91, 114, 117, 132,
176 
sex......... 36, 48, 52, 64, 65, 87, 93, 106, 116, 147, 163, 174, 177, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 199, 204,
205 

sexual 7, 17, 29, 48, 62, 63, 64, 81, 82, 83, 89, 93, 106, 111, 125, 132, 148, 158, 175, 177, 190, 193, 194,
196, 197, 199, 203, 204, 205, 206, 211, 214 
sexuality................................................................................... 48, 49, 61, 62, 71, 165, 171, 175, 202, 205,
210 
Shakespeare ............................................................................................................................................ 69,
192 
shock ............................................. 41, 75, 90, 103, 108, 125, 130, 131, 134, 136, 139, 171, 172, 176, 177,
178 
sibling 
rivalry..................................................................................................................................................
23 
sicher.............................................................................................................................................................
213 
sickness 
.........................................................................................................................................................
171 
significance ........................... 2, 6, 7, 12, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 75, 80, 83, 120, 121, 157, 159, 173, 179, 209,
218 
significant ................................................................................ 1, 6, 14, 22, 51, 62, 82, 123, 133, 143, 149,
173 
silence 
...........................................................................................................................................................
149 
simile 
.................................................................................................................................................84, 
92,
185 
simplicity 
........................................................................................................................................................
18 
skin................................................................................................................................................................
119 
sleep ....................................................................14, 15, 20, 36, 46, 84, 138, 156, 158, 159, 183, 184, 188,
210 
sleep .......................................................................................................................................160, 161, 184,
188 
social.....3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 15, 16, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 46, 48,
49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61, 65, 67, 69, 73, 76, 79, 93, 95, 97, 98, 99, 105, 106, 107, 109, 110, 111, 112,
116, 120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144,
145, 146, 147, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159, 162, 164, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 175, 181, 182,
184, 185, 190, 192, 193, 196, 199, 205, 207, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218 social context
.................................................................................................................................................... 3 
social interest 4, 12, 13, 16, 39, 40, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61, 69, 73, 95, 97, 98, 99, 105, 106, 107, 110, 111,
112, 130, 131, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 154, 155, 162, 164, 165, 169, 181, 182, 184, 210,
213, 214, 215, 216 
social usefulness.......................................................................................................................22, 131, 146,
211 
socially useful ........................................................................................................................................131,
146 
society ...8, 16, 31, 33, 36, 37, 40, 46, 50, 52, 54, 56, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 113, 115, 119, 133, 144, 146,
147, 151, 155, 167, 184, 192, 194, 196, 201, 205, 212
Socrates...........................................................................................................................................................
22 
solitude..........................................................................................................................................................
192 
soul...............................................................................................................................43, 45, 87, 101, 106,

192 
spasms...........................................................................................................................................................
196 
speech ....................................................................................................................................................... 41,
70 
stage fright .............................................................................................................................................105,
201 
stature..............................................................................................................................................................
57 
status ............................................................................................................................32, 81, 86, 167, 169,
198 
stealing.....................................................................................................................19, 108, 111, 186, 187,
198 
Stern, William............................................................................................................................................. 1,
72 
stomach ............................................................................................ 12, 116, 132, 133, 136, 138, 139, 163,
196 
stress .....................................................12, 50, 51, 53, 55, 60, 64, 66, 68, 80, 90, 139, 155, 176, 177, 183,
199 
striving ..6, 12, 14, 15, 21, 26, 27, 29, 31, 36, 38, 39, 52, 59, 67, 68, 72, 84, 95, 96, 97, 99, 101, 102, 103,
104, 105, 119, 122, 125, 135, 137, 149, 150, 151, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159, 162, 164, 165, 172, 174, 176,
184, 186, 195, 196, 199, 201, 204, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 215, 218 
striving for achievement .......................................................................................................................... 218 
striving for completion .............................................................................................................................. 72 
striving for security.................................................................................................................................... 26 
striving for success ...................................................................................................156, 159, 172, 176, 213 
striving to overcome ................................................................................................................................ 150 
stupid 
............................................................................................................................................................
205 
stuttering 
.......................................................................................................................................................
105 
style of life ..... 4, 6, 50, 52, 58, 62, 63, 68, 69, 70, 110, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 128, 137, 139, 144, 150,
152, 154, 155, 156, 158, 159, 160, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 195, 200, 201, 202, 203, 206, 209,
211, 212, 214, 219 
success ..... 5, 8, 23, 27, 28, 29, 34, 38, 51, 52, 54, 62, 76, 78, 87, 90, 92, 93, 99, 101, 105, 128, 129, 130,
131, 133, 136, 137, 142, 143, 144, 152, 153, 154, 155, 163, 172, 174, 177, 178, 180, 182, 196, 199, 212,
213, 214 
suffering..............................................................17, 28, 34, 61, 65, 83, 126, 132, 136, 154, 165, 179, 180,
199 
suggestibility..........................................................................................................................................175,
176 
suggestion ............................................................................................................................................... 90,
175 
suicide ............................................................................................................ 16, 52, 57, 85, 107, 111, 153,
172 
suicides .............................................................................................................................23, 46, 79, 99, 131 
superiority .. 6, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 84, 86, 87, 95, 96, 97, 102, 105, 110,
134, 136, 144, 149, 153, 154, 159, 162, 165, 166, 168, 171, 178, 183, 199, 204, 205, 206, 209 superior
........................................................................... 34, 35, 41, 67, 86, 90, 93, 137, 143, 163, 175, 218 
superiority complex ..............................................................................................28, 38, 136, 149, 171, 178 

superstition.............................................................................................................................................. 
33,
206 
suspicion ......................................................................................................................................6, 83, 108,
210 
syle......4, 6, 27, 28, 32, 40, 50, 52, 58, 62, 63, 68, 69, 70, 80, 82, 84, 89, 90, 91, 110, 122, 123, 124, 126,
127, 128, 130, 131, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142, 144, 150, 152, 154, 155, 156, 158, 159, 160,
161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 185, 186, 187,
188, 195, 196, 200, 201, 202, 203, 206, 209, 211, 212, 214, 219 
symbol....................................................................................................................................................165,
168 
symbols.....................................................................................................................................165, 166, 167 
sympathy.......................................................................................................................................................
128 
sympathetic...............................................................................................................................105, 119, 174 
symptom 10, 17, 18, 19, 20, 26, 32, 36, 38, 65, 77, 80, 107, 116, 119, 133, 172, 176, 179, 184, 185, 186,
187, 188, 196, 202, 211 
symptoms . 2, 4, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 26, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 38, 50, 62, 63, 64, 65, 70, 71,
80, 81, 84, 95, 103, 105, 106, 110, 111, 114, 116, 117, 118, 125, 133, 134, 136, 139, 155, 171, 172, 176,
177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 196, 202, 210, 211, 214

T
teacher............................... 18, 19, 34, 59, 60, 71, 75, 76, 79, 132, 146, 147, 150, 178, 185, 186, 187,
207, 208
teachers ..................................................................8, 18, 65, 77, 78, 146, 147, 148, 149, 174, 181, 185, 207 
teeth ...................................................................................................................................44, 89, 132, 191,
202 
teleology 
.........................................................................................................................................................
72 
temper 
...........................................................................................................................................................
105 
temperament..................................................................................................................................................
104 
tendentious 
apperception...............................................................................................................................
150 
tension................................. 2, 16, 57, 73, 85, 104, 105, 117, 133, 180, 184, 195, 196, 201, 203, 207, 212,
215 
the question ......................... 7, 14, 15, 25, 32, 51, 52, 53, 62, 73, 82, 83, 97, 102, 122, 132, 161, 182, 199,
215 
theoretical ..................................................................................................................................31, 47, 136,
149
thinking .. 2, 16, 29, 68, 69, 80, 81, 87, 92, 97, 98, 107, 110, 112, 116, 130, 142, 145, 146, 147, 148, 152,
159, 162, 174, 180, 214 
thirst .......................................................................................................................................................... 38,
87 
thought ..... 3, 4, 16, 17, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 52, 57, 68, 71, 83, 86, 91, 94, 96, 106, 112,
119, 126, 149, 161, 162, 163, 164, 172, 174, 176, 178, 190, 191, 205, 219 
thyroid............................................................................................................................................108, 
116,
117 
time .....1, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 22, 27, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 43, 46, 48, 50, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59,
61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 70, 72, 74, 75, 78, 80, 81, 83, 85, 88, 89, 90, 91, 96, 98, 101, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107,
111, 112, 117, 118, 121, 124, 125, 126, 128, 131, 133, 136, 137, 138, 139, 144, 147, 148, 149, 156, 157,
161, 163, 174, 177, 181, 182, 184, 186, 188, 190, 192, 193, 197, 199, 201, 202, 203, 206, 209, 211, 213,
214, 217, 218, 219 
timidity.................................................................................................................................................... 
41,
175 
training..... 11, 16, 24, 29, 39, 41, 42, 45, 79, 115, 126, 132, 142, 146, 147, 169, 175, 179, 180, 182, 204,
205, 207 
trait....................................................................................................................... 3, 4, 5, 29, 54, 60, 74, 83,
184 
traits ...............................................................3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 29, 34, 44, 83, 93, 117, 150, 152, 153, 180, 214 
transference...................................................................................................................................................
165 
trap 
................................................................................................................................................................
212
trauma 
...........................................................................................................................................................
132 treatment .. 19, 27, 34, 42, 45, 55, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 80, 84, 85, 86, 88, 93, 105, 110, 112, 131, 156,

164, 165,
168, 175, 186, 187, 207, 209, 211 
truth.......................................................................................... 48, 67, 82, 97, 98, 126, 149, 159, 169, 193,
207 
truth......................................................................................................................................................28,
34, 51 twin
twins ...........................................................................................................................................66, 151, 195

U
ugliness
......................................................................................................................................................... 197 
uncertainty ........................................................................................................... 28, 48, 52, 127, 138, 161,
202 
unconscious.............................................................2, 22, 27, 31, 59, 70, 82, 112, 130, 132, 158, 159, 160,
185 
understanding. 1, 4, 6, 7, 12, 13, 17, 24, 25, 26, 32, 72, 74, 88, 96, 99, 102, 104, 112, 120, 121, 126, 133,
139, 140, 148, 151, 152, 153, 157, 159, 165, 171, 178, 213, 215, 216, 218 
unfaithful................................................................................................................................................. 
58,
164 
unfaithfulness........................................................................................................................................... 108 
unhappy....................................................................................................................................44, 
190, 
199,
200 
unique ........................................................................................ 2, 11, 27, 28, 55, 57, 67, 69, 70, 134, 178,
179 
uniqueness.................................................................................................. 21, 23, 24, 40, 52, 67, 115, 151,
174 
unity ..................................................22, 28, 40, 54, 57, 62, 68, 69, 71, 130, 131, 151, 158, 160, 209, 213,
214 
upward striving ......................................................................................................................................... 6,
103

V
vain 
................................................................................................................................................161,
177, 193 value..6, 7, 15, 22, 25, 33, 35, 50, 53, 76, 78, 80, 92, 95, 98, 100, 103, 108, 110, 112, 121, 124,
125, 131, 153, 175, 178, 184, 206 
values............................................................................................ 23, 64, 121, 124, 145, 171, 177, 212, 215
vanity ..........................................................16, 32, 35, 39, 42, 44, 108, 135, 138, 172, 176, 177, 178, 184,
206 
venereal 
disease
............................................................................................................................................ 
147
virtue....................................................................................................................................40, 82, 99, 188, 197
vomiting............................................................................................................................................................
3

W
war ...........................................................................................................................................58, 125, 128,
164 
washing compulsion.................................................................................................................................. 37,
40 
wasting time.........................................................................................................................................32, 37,
81 
weakness .............................................................................. 6, 11, 17, 23, 25, 90, 132, 163, 168, 171, 180,
195
weapon...............................................................................................................................................64, 
87,
152 
weeping.........................................................................................................................................................
200 
Wild ........................................................................................................................................................ 78,
197 
willfulness.......................................................................................................................................................
20 
wisdom...........................................................................................................................................102, 
126,
146 
wish..2, 10, 14, 44, 51, 54, 55, 66, 67, 80, 83, 101, 137, 142, 144, 145, 167, 171, 183, 188, 193, 204, 206,
211 
witches 
witch-burning........................................................................................................................................... 126 
withdrawal .......................................................................................................................55, 57, 58, 59, 62,
118 
woman.19, 27, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 43, 48, 49, 64, 70, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92, 93, 104, 107, 108, 115, 116, 117,
137, 145, 159, 164, 171, 173, 187, 191, 192, 193, 197, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207, 210, 211, 218 work ....6, 8,
13, 16, 19, 24, 25, 33, 36, 40, 45, 47, 50, 51, 52, 56, 60, 61, 62, 63, 70, 71, 73, 81, 82, 85, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93,
95, 97, 102, 105, 117, 123, 124, 130, 131, 138, 147, 148, 161, 166, 170, 171, 172, 181, 184, 185, 186, 187,
194, 203, 207, 210, 214, 218
world .... 3, 5, 13, 14, 26, 27, 29, 30, 38, 45, 46, 52, 54, 55, 67, 82, 84, 90, 91, 96, 97, 101, 115, 122,
126, 129, 
131, 132, 134, 135, 137, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 148, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 
175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 193, 200, 205, 212, 214, 215

Y
younger 14, 20, 33, 37, 64, 86, 91, 104, 106, 137, 155, 182, 188, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201, 203, 206,
210, 211, 212, 217 
youngest..................................................................................... 30, 42, 59, 70, 88, 89, 117, 137, 165, 200,
201 youngest child.........................................................................................................30, 59, 89, 117, 200,
201
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep
insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness 
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it 
ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the
psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.

1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian
Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be
consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be selfcentered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as
impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater

desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace
exaggerated self-protection, self-enhancement, and self-indulgence with
courageous social contribution.

