
In this third volume of The Quantum Theory of Fields, Nobel Laureate Steven 
Weinberg continues his masterly exposition of quantum field theory. This volume 
presents a self-contained, up-to-date, and comprehensive introduction to super-
symmetry, a highly active area of theoretical physics that is likely to be at the 
center of future progress in the physics of elementary particles and gravitation. 
The text introduces and explains a broad range of topics, including supersymmet-
ric algebras, supersymmetric field theories, extended supersymmetry, supergraphs, 
non-perturbative results, theories of supersymmetry in higher dimensions, and su-
pergravity. A thorough review is given of the phenomenological implications of 
supersymmetry, including theories of both gauge- and gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking. Also provided is an introduction to mathematical tech-
niques, based on holomorphy and duality, that have proved so fruitful in recent 
developments. This book contains much material not found in other books on 
supersymmetry, including previously unpublished results. Problems are included. 
From reviews of Volume I 
' ... an impressively lucid and thorough presentation of the subject ... Weinberg 
manages to present difficult topics with richness of meaning and marvellous 
clarity. Full of valuable insights, his treatise is sure to become a classic, doing 
for quantum field theory what Dirac's Quantum Mechanics did for quantum 
mechanics. I eagerly await the publication of the second volume.' 
S. S. Schweber, Nature 
'For over twenty years there has been no good modern textbook on the subject. 
For all that time, Steven Weinberg has been promising to write one. That he has 
finally done it is cause for celebration among those who try to teach and try to 
learn the subject. Weinberg's book is for serious students of field theory ... it is the 
first textbook to treat quantum field theory the way it is used by physicists today.' 
Howard Georgi, Science 
'Steven Weinberg, who contributed to the development of quantum chromo-
dynamics and shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to the 
electroweak theory, has written a definitive text on the physical foundations of 
quantum field theory. His book differs significantly from the long line of previous 
books on quantum field theory ... To summarize, Foundations builds the structure 
of quantum field theory on the sure footing of physical insight. It is beautifully 
produced and meticulously edited ... and it is a real bargain in price. If you want 
to learn quantum field theory, or have already learned it and want to have a 
definitive reference at hand, purchase this book.' 
O. W. Greenberg, Physics Today 
'In addition to a superb treatment of all the conventional topics there are 
numerous sections covering areas that are not normally emphasized, such as the 
subject of field redefinitions, higher-rank tensor fields and an unusually clear 
and thorough treatment of infrared effects ... this latest book reinforces his high 
scholarly standards. It provides a unique exposition that will prove invaluable 
both to new research students as well as to experienced research workers. Together 

with Volume II, this will become a classic text on a subject of central importance 
to a wide area of theoretical physics.' 
M. B. Green, CERN Courier 
'I believe that what readers will find particularly helpful in this volume is the 
consistency of the whole approach, and the emphasis on quantities and properties 
that are directly useful to particle physicists. This is particularly true for those 
who are interested in the more phenomenological aspects. The reader only needs 
limited background knowledge, and a clear line is followed throughout the book, 
making it easy to follow. The author presents extremely thorough but elementary 
discusssions of important physical questions, some of which seem to be an original 
way of addressing the subject.' 
J. Zinn-Justin, Physics World 
'This is a well-written book by one of the masters of the subject ... it is certainly 
destined to become a standard text book and should find its way to the shelves 
of every physics library.' 
J. Madore, Classical and Quantum Gravity 
'The book starts out with an excellent historical introduction, not found anywhere 
else, giving citations to many by now classic papers ... a valuable reference work 
as well as a textbook for graduate students.' 
G. Roepstorff, Zentralblatt fur Mathematik 
From reviews of Volume II 
'It is a majestic exposition. The two volumes are structured in a logical way. 
Everything is explained with incisive clarity. Weinberg always goes to the heart 
of any argument, and includes many things that cannot be found elsewhere 
in the literature. Often I find myself thinking: "Ah! Now I understand that 
properly." ... I find it hard to imagine a better treatment of quantum field theory 
than Weinberg's. All serious students and researchers will want to have these 
volumes on their shelves.' 
John C. Taylor, Nature 
'Weinberg's Modern Applications goes to the boundaries of our present under-
standing of field theory. It is unmatched by any other book on quantum field 
theory for its depth, generality and definitive character, and it will be an essential 
reference for serious students and researchers in elementary particle physics.' 
O. W. Greenberg, Physics Today 
' ... Steven Weinberg is one of our most gifted makers of theoretical tools as well as 
a virtuoso in their use. His new book conveys both the satisfaction of understand-
ing nature and the feel of the atelier, for the "modern applications" of its subtitle 
include both the derivation of physical consequences and the development of new 
tools for understanding and applying field theory itself. .. Modern Applications is 
a splendid book, with abundant useful references to the original literature. It is a 

very interesting read from cover to cover, for the wholeness Weinberg's personal 
perspective gives to quantum field theory and particle physics.' 
Chris Quigg, Science 
'Experienced researchers and beginning graduate students will delight in the 
gems of wisdom to be found in these pages. This book combines exposition 
of technical detail with physical insight in a unique manner that confirms the 
promise of Volume I and I have no doubt that these two volumes will rapidly 
constitute the classic treatment of this important subject.' 
M. B. Green, CERN Courier 
' ... a valued reference and a mine of useful information for professional field 
theorists.' 
Tom Kibble, New Scientist 
' ... a clear presentation of the subject, explaining the underlying concepts in much 
depth and in an accessible style. I expect that these volumes will become the 
first source we turn to when trying to answer the challenging questions asked by 
bright postgraduates when they first encounter quantum field theory ... I have no 
doubt that The Quantum Theory of Fields will soon be found on the bookshelves 
of most particle theorists, and that it will be one of the main sources used in the 
preparation of lectures on the subject for postgraduate students.' 
C. T. C. Sachrajda, The Times Higher Education Supplement 
' ... Weinberg has produced a masterpiece that will be a standard reference on the 
field for a long time to come.' 
B. E. Y. Svensson, Elementa 
From reviews of Volume III 
' ... has produced a treatise that many of us had long awaited, perhaps without 
fully realizing it ... with the publication of The Quantum Theory of Fields, Vol. III, 
has performed an analogous service for supersymmetry ... Although this volume 
is the third in a trilogy, it is quite different from its two predecessors, and it stands 
on its own ... Maya new generation of students imbibe its content and spirit.' 
Physics Today 
'The third volume of The Quantum Theory of Fields is a self-contained introduction 
to the world of supersymmetry and supergravity. It will be useful both for 
experienced researchers in the field and for students who want to take the first 
steps towards learning about supersymmetry. Unlike other books in this field, it 
covers the wide spectrum of possible applications of supersymmetry in physics.' 
Hans Peter Nilles, Nature 
'Weinberg is of course one of the creators of modern quantum field theory, as 
well as of its physical culmination, the standard model of all (nongravitational) 
interactions. It is ... very timely that this latest part of his monograph, devoted 
to supersymmetry and supergravity, has just appeared. As a text, it has been 

pretested by Weinberg for a freestanding one-year graduate course; as a clear 
organizing reference to this extremely vast field, it will help the experts as 
well ... Weinberg's style of presentation is as clear and meticulous as in his 
previous works.' 
Stanley Deser, Journal of General Relativity and Gravitation 
'Weinberg tries to be as elementary and clear as possible and steers clear of 
more sophisticated mathematical tools. Together with the previous volumes, this 
volume will serve as an invaluable reference to researchers and a textbook for 
graduate students.' 
G. Roepstorff, Zentralblatt MATH 

The Quantum Theory of Fields 
Volume III 
Supersymmetry 
Steven Weinberg 
University of Texas at Austin 
HCAMBRIDGE 
• 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK 
http:/ fwww.cup.caro.ac.uk 
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA 
http:/ jwww.cup.org 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain 
@ Steven Weinberg 2000 
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without 
the written permission of Cambridge University Press. 
First published 2000 
Printed in the United States of America 
Typeface Times (Monotype) ll/13pt. System Jb.T£)( [DBD] 
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 0 521 66000 9 hardback 

Contents 
Sections marked with an asterisk are somewhat out of the book's main line of 
development and may be omitted in a first reading. 
PREFACE TO VOLUME lli 
xvi 
NOTATION 
XX 
24 
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION 
1 
24.1 
Unconventional Symmetries and 'No-Go' Theorems 
1 
SU(6) symmetry o Elementary no-go theorem for unconventional semiMsimple 
compact Lie algebras o Role of relativity 
24.2 
The Birth of Supersymmetry 
4 
Bosonic string theory o Fermionic coordinates o Worldsheet supersymmetry o 
Wess-Zumino model o Precursors 
Appendix A 
SU(6) Symmetry of Non-Relativistic Quark Models 
Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
Problems 
References 
25 
SUPERSYMMETRY ALGEBRAS 
25.1 
Graded Lie Algebras and Graded Parameters 
8 
12 
22 
22 
25 
25 
Fermionic and bosonic generators D Super-Jacobi identity o Grassmann par-
ameters o Structure constants from supergroup multiplication rules o Complex 
conjugates 
25.2 
Supersymmetry Algebras 
29 
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem o Lorentz transformation of fermionic gen-
erators o Central charges o Other bosonic symmetries o R-symmetry D Simple 
Vll 

Vlll 
Contents 
and extended supersymmetry o Four-component notation 0 Superconformal 
algebra 
25.3 
Space Inversion Properties of Supersymmetry Generators 
40 
Parity phases in simple supersymmetry o Fermions have imaginary parity 0 
Parity matrices in extended supersymmetry o Dirac notation 
25.4 
Massless Particle Supermultiplets 
43 
Known particles are massless for unbroken supersymmetry o Helicity raising and 
lowering operators o Simple supersymmetry doublets o Squarks, sleptons, and 
gauginos 0 Gravitino 0 Extended supersymmetry multiplets o Chirality problem 
for extended supersymmetry 
25.5 
Massive Particle Supermultiplets 
48 
Raising and lowering operators for spin 3-component 0 General massive multi-
plets for simple supersymmetry o Collapsed supermultiplet o Mass bounds in 
extended supersymmetry 0 BPS states and short supermultiplets 
Problems 
References 
26 
SUPERSYMMETRIC FIELD THEORIES 
26.1 
Direct Construction of Freid Supermnltiplets 
53 
54 
55 
55 
Construction of simplest N = 1 field multiplet o Auxiliary field o Infinitesi-
mal supersymmetry transformation rules 0 Four-component notation o Wess-
Zumino supermultiplets regained 
26.2 
General Superfields 
59 
Superspace spinor coordinates o Supersymmetry generators as superspace dif-
ferential operators o Supersymmetry transformations in superspace 0 General 
superfields 0 Multiplication rules o Supersymmetric differential operators in su-
perspace o Supersymmetric actions for general superfields o Parity of component 
fields o Counting fermionic and bosonic components 
26.3 
Chiral and Linear Snperfields 
68 
Chirality conditions on a general superfield 0 Left- and right-chiral superfields 0 
Coordinates x± o Differential constraints o Product rules o Supersymmetric IF-
terms o ~-terms equivalent to D-terms o Superpotentials 0 Kahler potentials 
o Partial integration in superspace o Space inversion of chiral superfields 0 
R-symmetry again 0 Linear superfields 
26.4 
Renormalizable Theories of Cbiral Superfields 
75 
Counting powers 0 Kinematic Lagrangian o IF-term of the superpotential o 
Complete Lagrangian o Elimination of auxiliary fields 0 On-shell superalgebra o 
Vacuum solutions o Masses and couplings o Wess-Zumino Lagrangian regained 

Contents 
1X 
26.5 
Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation 
8 3 
O'Raifeartaigh mechanism 0 R-symm.etry constraints o Flat directions o Gold-
stino 
26.6 
Superspace Integrals, Field Equations, and the Current Superfield 
86 
Berezin integration 0 D- and ~-terms as superspace integrals o Potential su-
perfields 0 Superspace field equations o Conserved currents as components of 
linear superfields o Conservation conditions in superspace 
26.7 
The Supercorreot 
90 
Supersymmetry current o Superspace transformations generated by the super-
symmetry current 0 Local supersymmetry transformations o Construction of 
the supercurrent 0 Conservation of the supercurrent o Energy-momentum ten-
sor and R-current o Scale invariance and R conservation 0 Non-uniqueness of 
supercurrent 
26.8 
General Kabler Potentials' 
102 
Non-renormalizable non-derivative actions o D-term of Kahler potential 0 
Kahler metric 0 Lagrangian density o Non-linear a--models from spontaneous 
internal symmetry breaking 0 Kahler manifolds 0 Complexified coset spaces 
Appendix 
Majorana Spioors 
Problems 
References 
27 
SUPERSYMMETRIC GAUGE THEORIES 
27.1 
Gaoge-Iovariant Actions for Chiral Snperfields 
107 
111 
112 
113 
113 
Gauge transformation of chiral superfields o Gauge superfi.eld V o Extended 
gauge invariance 0 Wess-Zumino gauge 0 Supersymmetric gauge-invariant kine-
matic terms for chiral superfields 
27.2 
Gange-Iuvariaot Action for Abelian Gauge Superfields 
122 
Field strength supermultiplet 0 Kinematic Lagrangian density for Abelian gauge 
supermultiplet D Fayet-Iliopoulos terms 0 Abelian field-strength spinor super-
field Wac 0 Left- and right-chiral parts of W., O W 11 as a superspace derivative of 
V 0 Gauge invariance of Wac o 'Bianchi' identities in superspace 
27.3 
Gange-Invariant Action for General Gange Superfields 
127 
Kinematic Lagrangian density for non-Abelian gauge supermultiplet o Non-
Abelian field-strength spinor superfi.eld WAac 0 Left- and right-chiral parts of 
WAac 0 8-tenn 0 Complex coupling parameter r 
27.4 
Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields 
132 
Supersymmetric Lagrangian density o Elimination of auxiliary fields o Condi-
tions for unbroken supersymmetry o Counting independent conditions and field 

X 
Contents 
variables 0 Unitarity gauge o Masses for spins 0, 1/2, and 1 O Supersymmetry 
current 0 Non-Abelian gauge theories with general Kahler potentials 0 Gaugino 
mass 
27 .S 
Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed 
144 
Supersymmetry breaking in supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics 0 General 
case: masses for spins 0, 1/2, and 1 0 Mass sum rule o Goldstino component of 
gaugino and chiral fermion fields 
27.6 
Perturbative Non-Renonnalization Theorems 
148 
Non-renormalization of Wilsonian superpotential O One-loop renormalization 
of terms quadratic in gauge superfields 0 Proof using holomorphy and new 
symmetries with external superfields o Non-renormalization of Fayet-Iliopoulos 
constants eA 0 For ~A = 0, supersymmetry breaking depends only on super-
potential 0 Non-renormalizable theories 
27.7 
Soft Supersymmetry Breaking* 
155 
Limitation on supersymmetry-breaking radiative corrections o Quadratic diver-
gences in tadpole graphs 
27.8 
Another Approach: Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry Transformations 157 
De Wit-Freedman transformation rules o Preserving Wess-Zumino gauge with 
combined supersymmetry and extended gauge transformations 
27.9 
Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry* 
160 
N = 2 supersymmetry from N = 1 supersymmetry and R-symm.etry 0 La-
grangian for N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theory o Eliminating auxiliary fields 
o Supersymmetry currents o Witten-Olive calculation of central charge 0 Non-
renormalization of masses o BPS monopoles o Adding hypermultiplets o N = 4 
supersymmetry 0 Calculation of beta function D N = 4 theory is finite o 
Montonen-Olive duality 
Problems 
References 
175 
176 
28 
SUPERSYMMETRIC VERSIONS OF THE STANDARD MODEL 179 
28.1 
Superfields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
180 
Quark, lepton, and gauge superfields 0 At least two scalar doublet superfields 
0 §"-term Yukawa couplings 0 Constraints from anomalies o Unsuppressed 
violation of baryon and lepton numbers 0 R-symmetry o R parity o J.L-term o 
Hierarchy problem 0 Sparticle masses o Cosmological constraints on lightest 
superparticle 
28.2 
Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification 
188 
Renormalization group equations for running gauge couplings 0 Effect of super--

Contents 
XI 
symmetry on beta functions o Calculation of weak mixing angle and unification 
mass o Just two scalar doublet superfields 0 Coupling at unification scale 
28.3 
Where is Supersymmetry Broken? 
192 
Tree approximation supersym.metry breakdown ruled out o Hierarchy from non-
perturbative effects of asymptotically free gauge couplings o Gauge and grav-
itational mediation of supersymmetry breaking 0 Estimates of supersymmetry-
breaking scale 0 Gravitino mass o Cosmological constraints 
28.4 
ne Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
198 
Supersymmetry breaking by superrenormalizable terms o General Lagrangian o 
Flavor changing processes o Calculation of K 0 -
""ftl 0 Degenerate squarks and 
sleptons o CP violation 0 Calculation of quark chromoelectric dipole moment 
o 'Naive dimensional analysis' o Neutron electric dipole moment o Constraints 
on masses and/or phases 
28.5 
The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
209 
D-term contribution to scalar potential 0 p-term contribution to scalar poten-
tial 0 Soft supersymmetry breaking terms o Vacuum stability constraint on 
parameters o Finding a minimum of potential 0 B p =I= 0 o Masses of CP-odd 
neutral scalars o Masses of CP-even neutral scalars o Masses of charged scalars 
o Bounds on masses o Radiative corrections 0 Conditions for electroweak 
symmetry breaking 0 Charginos and neutralinos 0 Lower bound on IJ.tl 
28.6 
Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
220 
Messenger superfields o Supersymmetry breaking in gauge supermultiplet prop-
agators o Gaugino masses 0 Squark and slepton masses D Derivation from 
holomorphy o Radiative corrections 0 Numerical examples o Higgs scalar 
masses 0 Jl problem 0 A;j and C;j parameters 0 Gravitino as lightest sparticle 
0 Next-to-lightest sparticle 
28.7 
Baryon and Lepton Non~Conservation 
235 
Dimensionality five interactions o Gaugino exchange 0 Gluino exchange sup-
pressed o Wino and bino exchange effects o Estimate of proton lifetime 0 
Favored modes of proton decay 
Problems 
References 
29 
BEYOND PERTURBATION THEORY 
29.1 
General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
240 
241 
248 
248 
Finite volume o Vacuum energy and supersymmetry breaking o Partially broken 
extended supersymmetry? 0 Pairing of bosonic and fermionic states o Pairing 
of vacuum and one-goldstino state 0 Witten index 0 Supersymmetry unbroken 

X1l 
Contents 
in the Wess--Zumino model 0 Models with unbroken supersymmetry and zero 
Witten index o Large field values 0 Weighted Witten indices 
29.2 
Supersyrnmetry Current Sum Rules 
256 
Sum rule for vacuum energy density o One-goldstino contribution o The 
supersymmetry-breaking parameter F o Soft goldstino amplitudes 0 Sum rule 
for supersymmetry current-fermion spectral functions 0 One-goldstino contribu-
tion 0 Vacuum energy density in terms of !F and D vacuum values O Vacuum 
energy sum rule for infinite volume 
29.3 
Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
266 
Non-perturbative effects break external field translation and R-conservation 0 
Remaining symmetry 0 Example: generalized supersymmetric quantum chromo-
dynamics o Structure of induced superpotential for C1 > Cz 0 Stabilizing the 
vacuum with a bare superpotential o Vacuum moduli in generalized supersym-
metric quantum chromodynamics for Nr: > Nt o Induced superpotential is linear 
in bare superpotential parameters for C1 = C2 0 One-loop renormalization of 
[Wa Wa]Y term for all Ct. Cz 
29.4 
Supersyrnmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
276 
Witten index vanishes in supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics o C-weighted 
Witten index o Supersymmetry unbroken in supersymmetric quantum electro-
dynamics 0 Counting zero-energy gauge field states in supersymmetric quantum 
electrodynamics o Calculating Witten index for general supersymmetric pure 
gauge theories o Counting zero-energy gauge field states for general supersym-
metric pure gauge theories 0 Weyl invariance 0 Supersymmetry unbroken in 
general supersymmetric pure gauge theories 0 Witten index and R anomalies o 
Adding chiral scalars o Model with spontaneously broken supersymmetry 
29.5 
The Seiberg-Witten Solution• 
287 
Underlying N = 2 supersymmetric Lagrangian o Vacuum modulus o Leading 
non-renormalizable terms in the effective Lagrangian 0 Effective Lagrangian for 
component fields 0 Kahler potential and gauge coupling from a function h(4>) o 
SU(2) R-symmetry o Prepotential o Duality transformation o h(4>) translation o 
:Z8 R-symmetry 0 SL(2, :Z)-symmetry 0 Central charge o Charge and magnetic 
monopole moments o Perturbative behavior for large lal 0 Monodromy at 
infinity o Singularities from dyons 0 Monodromy at singularities 0 Seiberg.--
Witten solution 0 Uniqueness proof 
Problems 
References 
30 
SUPERGRAPHS 
30.1 
Potential Superfields 
305 
305 
307 
308 

Contents 
xm 
Problem of chiral constraints o Corresponding problem in quantum electro-
dynamics o Path integrals over potential superfields 
30.2 
Superpropagators 
310 
A troublesome invariance 0 Change of variables o Defining property of super-
propagator 0 Analogy with quantum electrodynamics 0 Propagator for potential 
superfields 0 Propagator for chiral superfields 
30.3 
Calculations with Supergraphs 
313 
Superspace quantum effective action o Locality in fermionic coordinates 0 D-
terms and !F -terms in effective action 0 Counting superspace derivatives 0 No 
renormalization of !F -terms 
Problems 
References 
31 
SUPERGRA VITY 
31.1 
The Metric Superfield 
316 
316 
318 
319 
Vierbein formalism o Transformation of gravitational field 0 Transformation of 
gravitino field o Generalized transformation of metric super:field Hll o Interaction 
of Hll with supercurrent D Invariance of interaction o Generalized transformation 
of H ll components 0 Auxiliary fields o Counting components o Interaction of 
Hll component fields o Normalization of action 
31.2 
The Gravitational Action 
326 
Einstein superfield Ell 0 Component fields of Ell o Lagrangian for Hll 0 Value of 
" 0 Total Lagrangian 0 Vacuum energy density 0 Minimum vacuum energy 0 
De Sitter and anti-de Sitter spaces 0 Why vacuum energy is negative 0 Stability 
of flat space o Weyl transfonnation 
31.3 
The Gravitino 
333 
Irreducibility conditions on gravitino field o Gravitino propagator o Gravitino 
kinematic Lagrangian 0 Gravitino field equation 0 Gravitino mass from broken 
supersymmetry o Gravitino mass from s and p 
31.4 
Anomaly-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
337 
First-order interaction with scale non-invariance superfield X 0 General formula 
for X 0 General first-order interaction o Gaugino masses o Gluino mass 0 B 
parameter o Wino and bino masses o A parameters 
31.5 
Local Supersymmetry Transformations 
341 
Wess-Zumino gauge for metric super:field o Local supersymmetry transforma-
tions o Invariance of action 

XIV 
Contents 
31.6 
Supergravity to All Orders 
343 
Local supersymmetry transformation of vierbein, gravitino, and auxiliary fields 
o Extended spin connection o Local supersymmetry transformation of general 
scalar supermultiplet 0 Product rules for general superfields o Real matter 
superfields 0 Chiral matter superfields 0 Product rules for chiral superfields 0 
Cosmological constant and gravitino mass O Lagrangian for supergravity and 
chiral fields with general Kahler potential and superpotential 0 Elimination of 
auxiliary fields o Kahler metric o Weyl transformation 0 Scalar field potential 
o Conditions for flat space and unbroken supersymmetry o Complete bosonic 
Lagrangian O Canonical normalization o Combining superpotential and Kahler 
potential 0 No-scale models 
31.7 
Gravity-Mediated Snpersymmetry Breaking 
355 
Early theories with hidden sectors o Hidden sector gauge coupling strong at 
energy A 0 First version: Observable and hidden sectors 0 Separable bare 
superpotential 0 General potential 0 Terms of order K4A8 ::::; mi o A estimated 
as ~ 1011 GeV 0 p.- and Bp.-terms 0 Squark and slepton masses o Gaugino 
masses 0 A-parameters 0 Second version: Observable, hidden, and modular 
sectors 0 Dynamically induced superpotential for modular superfields o Effective 
superpotential of observable sector 0 p.-term 0 Potential of observable sector 
scalars o Terms of order " 8 A 12 ~ mi o Soft supersymmetry-breaking terms 0 A 
estimated as :=::: 1013 GeV o Shifts in modular fields o Absence of Cii terms o 
Squark and slepton masses 0 Gaugino masses 
Appendix 
The Vierbeio Fonnalism 
Problems 
References 
375 
378 
379 
32 
SUPERSYMMETRY ALGEBRAS IN HIGHER DIMENSIONS 
382 
32.1 
General Supersymmetry Algebras 
382 
Classification of fermionic generators 0 Definition of weight 0 Fermionic gen-
erators in fundamental spinor representation 0 Fermionic generators commute 
with PJ.L 0 General form of anticommutation relations 0 Central charges o Anti-
commutation relations for odd dimensionality o Anticommutation relations for 
even dimensionality oR-symmetry groups 
32.2 
Massless Multiplets 
393 
Little group O(d- 2) 0 Definition of 'spin' j o Exclusion of j > 2 0 Missing 
fermionic generators 0 Number of fermionic generators ::s; 32 o N = 1 supersym-
metry ford= 11 0 Three-form massless particle 0 Types IIA, liB and heterotic 
supersymmetry for d = 10 
32.3 
p-Branes 
397 
New conserved tensors 0 Fermionic generators still in fundamental spinor repre-

Contents 
XV 
sentation o Fermionic generators still commute with Pll o Symmetry conditions 
on tensor central charges o 2-form and 5-form central charges for d = 11 
Appendix 
Spinors in Higher Dimensi.o.os 
Problems 
References 
AUTHOR INDEX 
SUBJECT INDEX 
401 
407 
407 
411 
416 

Preface To Volume III 
This volume deals with quantum field theories that are governed by 
supersymmetry, a symmetry that unites particles of integer and half-integer 
spin in common symmetry multiplets. These theories offer a possible way 
of solving the 'hierarchy problem,' the mystery of the enormous ratio of 
the Planck mass to the 300 Ge V energy scale of electroweak symmetry 
breaking. Supersymmetry also has the quality of uniqueness that we search 
for in fundamental physical theories. There is an infinite number of Lie 
groups that can be used to combine particles of the same spin in ordinary 
symmetry multiplets, but there are only eight kinds of supersymmetry 
in four spacetime dimensions, of which only one, the simplest, could be 
directly relevant to observed particles. 
These are reasons enough to devote this third volume of The Quantum 
Theory of Fields to supersymmetry. In addition, the quantum field theories 
based on supersymmetry have remarkable properties that are not found 
among other field theories: some supersymmetric theories have couplings 
that are not renormalized in any order of perturbation theory; other 
theories are finite; and some even allow exact solutions. Indeed, much of 
the most interesting work in quantum field theory over the past decade 
has been in the context of supersymmetry. 
Unfortunately, after a quarter century there is no direct evidence for 
supersymmetry, as no pair of particles related by a supersymmetry trans-
formation has yet been discovered. There is just one significant piece 
of indirect evidence for supersymmetry: the high-energy unification of 
the SU(3), SU(2), and U{l) gauge couplings works better with the extra 
particles called for by supersymmetry than without them. 
Nevertheless, because of the intrinsic attractiveness of supersymmetry 
and the possibility it offers of resolving the hierarchy problem, I and 
many other physicists are reasonably confident that supersymmetry will be 
found to be relevant to the real world, and perhaps soon. Supersymmetry 
is a primary target of experiments at high energy planned at existing 
accelerators, and at the Large Hadron Collider under construction at the 
CERN laboratory. 
XVI 

Preface 
XVll 
After a historical introduction in Chapter 24, Chapters 25-27 present 
the essential machinery of supersymmetric field theories: the structure of 
the supersymmetry algebra and supersymmetry multiplets and the con-
struction of supersymmetric Lagrangians in general, and in particular 
for theories of chiral and gauge superfields. Chapter 28 then uses this 
machinery to incorporate supersymmetry in the standard model of elec-
troweak and strong interactions, and reviews experimental difficulties and 
opportunities. Chapters 29--32 deal with topics that are mathematically 
more advanced: non-perturbative results, supergraphs, supergravity, and 
supersymmetry in higher dimensions. 
I have made the treatment of supersymmetry here as clear and self-
contained as I could. Wherever possible I take the reader through cal-
culations, rather than just reporting results from the literature. Where 
calculations are too lengthy or complicated to be included in a book of 
this sort, especially in Chapter 28, I have tried to present simpler versions 
that give the reader an idea of the physical issues involved. 
I have made a point of including topics here that have generally not been 
covered in earlier books, some because they are too new. These include: 
the use of holomorphy to study perturbative and non-perturbative radi-
ative corrections; the calculation of central charges; gauge-mediated and 
anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking; the Witten index; duality; 
the Seiberg-Witten calculation of the effective Lagrangian in N = 2 su-
persymmetric gauge theories; supersymmetry breaking by modular fields; 
and a first look at the rapidly developing topic of supersymmetry in higher 
dimensions, including theories with p-branes. 
On the other hand, I have shortened the usual treatment of two topics 
that seemed to me to have been well covered in earlier books. One of these 
is the use of supergraphs. Many of the previous applications of the super-
graph formalism in studying the general structure of radiative corrections 
can now be handled more easily by using the arguments of holomorphy 
described in Sections 27.6 and 29.3. The other is supergravity. In Sections 
31.1-31.5 I have given a detailed and self-contained treatment of super-
gravity in the weak-field limit, which makes it clear why the ingredients of 
supergravity theories ~ the graviton, gravitino, and auxiliary fields -
are 
what they are, and which allows us to derive some of the most important 
results of supergravity theory, including the formula for the gravitino 
mass and for the gaugino masses produced by anomaly-mediated super-
symmetry breaking. In Section 31.6 I have outlined the calculations that 
generalize supergravity theory to gravitational fields of arbitrary strength, 
but these calculations are so lengthy and unlovely that I was content to 
quote other sources for the results. However, in Section 31.7 I have given 
a fuller than usual treatment of gravitationally mediated supersymmetry 
breaking. I regret that I have not been able to in,clude exciting work of the 

XVlll 
Preface 
past decade on supersymmetry related to string theory, but string theory 
is beyond the scope of this book, and I did not want to report results for 
which I had not provided a basis of explanation. 
I have given citations both to the classic papers on supersymmetry 
and to useful references on topics that are mentioned but not presented 
in detail in this book. I did not always know who was responsible for 
material presented here, and the mere absence of a citation should not 
be taken as a claim that the material presented here is original, but 
some of it is. I hope that I have improved on the original literature 
or standard textbook treatments in several places, as for instance in 
the proof of the Coleman-Mandula theorem; in the treatment of parity 
matrices in extended supersymmetry theories; in the inclusion of new soft 
supersymmetry-breaking terms in the minimum supersymmetric standard 
model; in the derivation of supercurrent sum rules; and in the proof of 
the uniqueness of the Seiberg-Witten solution. 
I have also supplied problems for each chapter. Some of these problems 
aim simply at providing exercise in the use of techniques described in the 
chapter; others are intended to suggest extensions of the results of the 
chapter to a wider class of theories. 
In teaching a course on supersymmetry, I have found that this book 
provides enough material for a one-year course for graduate students. I 
intended that this book should be accessible to students who are familiar 
with quantum field theory at the level it is presented in the first two 
volumes of this treatise. It is not assumed that the reader has gone 
through Volumes I and II, but for the convenience of those fortunate 
readers who have done so I use the same notation here, and give cross-
references to material in Volumes I and II wherever appropriate. 
* * * 
I must acknowledge my special intellectual debt to colleagues at the 
University of Texas, notably Luis Boya, Phil Candelas, Bryce and Cecile De 
Witt, Willy Fischler, Daniel Freed, Joaquim Gomis, Vadim Kaplunovsky, 
and especially Jacques Distler. Also, Sally Dawson, Michael Dine, Michael 
Duff, Lawrence Hall, Hitoshi Murayama, Joe Polchinski, Edward Witten, 
and Bruno Zumino gave valuable help with special topics. Jonathan 
Evans read through the manuscript of this volume, and made many 
valuable suggestions. Thanks are due to Alyce Wilson, who prepared 
the illustrations, to Terry Riley for finding countless books and articles, 
and to Jan Duffy for many helps. I am grateful to Maureen Storey of 
Cambridge University Press for working to ready this book for publication, 

Preface 
XIX 
and especially to my editor, Rufus Neal, for his continued friendly good 
advice. 
Austin, Texas 
May, 1999 
STEVEN WEINBERG 

Notation 
The big issue in choosing notation for a book on supersymmetry is whether 
to use a two-component or a four-component notation for spinors. The 
standard texts on supersymmetry have opted for the two-component Weyl 
notation. I have chosen instead to use the four-component Dirac notation 
except in the first stages of constructing the supersymmetry algebra and 
multiplets, because I think this will make the book more accessible to those 
physicists who work on particle phenomenology and model building. It 
would be a pity to see the growth of a separate enclave of supersymmetry 
specialists, who communicate well with each other but are cut off by their 
notation from the larger community of particle theorists. 
There is no great difficulty anyway in converting expressions in four-
component form into the two-component formalism. In the representation 
of the Dirac matrices used throughout this book, in which Ys is the 
diagonal matrix with elements +1, +1, -1, and -1 on the main diagonaL 
any four-component Majorana spinor tpa. {such as the supersymmetry 
generator Qa., the superspace coordinate Oa., or the superderivative EPa.) 
may be written in terms of a two-component spinor Xa as 
where e is the 2 x 2 antisymmetric matrix with e12 = + 1. The two-
component spinor Xa is what in other books is often called tp= = iPa , 
while (ex* )a would be called tpa. A summary of useful properties of 
four-component Majorana spinors is given in the appendix to Chapter 26. 
Here are some other features of the notation used in this book: 
Latin indices i, j, k, and so on generally run over the three spatial 
coordinate labels, usually taken as 1, 2, 3. Where specifically indicated, 
they run over values 1, 2, 3, 4, with x4 = it. 
Greek indices J-t, v, etc. from the middle of the Greek alphabet generally 
run over the four spacetime coordinate labels 1, 2, 3, 0, with x0 the 
time coordinate. Where it is necessary to distinguish between spacetime 
XX 

Notation 
XXI 
coordinates in a general coordinate system and in a locally inertial system, 
indices 1.1., v, etc. are used for the former and a, b, etc. for the latter. 
Greek indices a, p, etc. from the beginning of the Greek alphabet gener-
ally (except in Chapter 24) run over the components of four-component 
spinors. To avoid confusion, I depart here from the conventions of Vol-
ume II, and use upper-case letters A, B, etc. to label the generators of 
a symmetry algebra. Components of two-component spinors are labelled 
with indices a, b, etc. In particular, four-component supersymmetry gen-
erators are denoted QIX, while two-component generators (the bottom two 
components of QIX) are called Qa. 
Repeated indices are generally summed, unless otherwise indicated. 
The spacetime metric 'l~tv is diagonal, with elements Y/11 = Y/22 = Y/33 = 
1, Y/00 = -1. 
The d'Alembertian is defined as o = tt~'"iJ2 jiJx~'8x" = V2 -
iJ2jiJil, where 
V2 is the Laplacian iJ2 jiJxiiJxi. 
The 'Levi-Civita tensor' e~'"Pa is defined as the totally antisymmetric 
quantity with e0123 = + 1. 
Dirac matrices y11 are defined so that y11yv + YvY11 = 2q11v. Also, Ys = 
i'}'o'}'I Y2'}'3, and P = iy0 = Y4· Where explicit matrices are needed, they are 
given by the block matrices 
0 
·[0 1] 
y = -l 1 0 
• 
. [ 0 
a ] 
"'= -r -a 0 
' 
where 1 is the unit 2 x 2 matrix, 0 is the 2 x 2 matrix with elements zero, 
and the components of a are the usual Pauli matrices 
Cfl = ( ~ ~ ) • Cf2 = ( ~ ~i ) ' 
ff3 = ( ~ ~ 
1 ) 
We also frequently make use of the 4 · x 4 block matrices 
Ys = [ ~ ~1 ] • 
€ = [ ~ ~ ] ' 
where e is again the antisymmetric 2 x 2 matrix icr2. For instance, our phase 
convention for four-component Majorana spinors s may be expressed as 
s• = -PYs es. 
The step function O(s) has the value +1 for s > 0 and 0 for s < 0. 
The complex conjugate, transpose, and Hermitian adjoint of a matrix 
or vector A are denoted A*, AT, and At = A*T, respectively. We use 

xxii 
Notation 
an asterisk * for the Hermitian adjoint of an operator or the complex 
conjugate of a number, except where a dagger tis used for the transpose of 
the matrix formed from the Hermitian adjoints of operators or complex 
conjugates of numbers. + H.c. or +c.c. at the end of an expression 
indicates the addition of the Hermitian adjoint or complex conjugate of 
the foregoing terms. A bar on a four-component spinor u is defined by 
u = utp. 
Units are used with 1i and the speed of light taken to be unity. Throughout 
-e is the rationalized charge of the electron, so that the fine structure 
constant is cc = e'2 /4n::::::: 1/137. Temperatures are in energy units, with the 
Boltzmann constant taken equal to unity. 
Numbers in parenthesis at the end of quoted numerical data give the 
uncertainty in the last digits of the quoted figure. Where not otherwise 
indicated, experimental data are taken from 'Review of Particle Physics,' 
The Particle Data Group, European Physics Journal C 3, 1 (1998). 

24 
Historical Introduction 
The history of supersymmetry is as peculiar as anything in the history of 
science. Suggested in the early 1970s, supersymmetry has been elaborated 
since then into a beautiful mathematical formalism that unites particles of 
different spin into symmetry multiplets a.nd has profound implications for 
fundamental physics. Yet there is so far not a shred of direct experimental 
evidence and only a few bits of indirect evidence that supersymmetry has 
anything to do with the real world. If (as I expect) supersymmetry does 
tum out to be relevant to nature, it will represent a striking success of 
purely theoretical insight. 
Chapter 25 will begin the construction of supersymmetry theories from 
first principles. In the present chapter we shall introduce supersymmetry 
along chronological rather than logical lines. 
24.1 
Unconventional Symmetries and 'No-Go' Theorems 
In the early 1960s the symmetry SU(3) of Gell-Mann and Ne'eman 
(discussed in Section 19.7) successfully explained the relations between 
various strongly interacting particles of different charge and strangeness 
but of the same spin. The idea then grew up that perhaps SU(3) is part of 
a larger symmetry, which has the unconventional effect of uniting SU(3) 
multiplets of different spin.1 There is such an approximate symmetry in the 
non-relativistic quark model, under SU(6) transformations on quark spins 
and flavors, analogous to an earlier SU(4) symmetry of nuclear physics 
that had been introduced in 1937 by Wigner.2 As described in detail in 
Appendix A of this chapter, this SU(6) symmetry unites the pseudoscalar 
meson octet 11:, K, K, and '7, the vector meson octet p, K., K*, and w, and 
the vector meson singlet cfJ in a single 35 multiplet, and also unites the 
spin 1/2 baryon octet N, 1:, A, and E with the spin 3/2 baryon decuplet 
1\, 1:(1385), 8(1530), and 0 in a single 56 multiplet. The SU(6) symmetry 
scored a number of successes, but it is actually nothing but a consequence 
of the approximate spin and flavor independence of forces in the quark 
1 

2 
24 Historical Introduction 
model; the S U(6) symmetry is somewhat weaker than the assumption of 
spin and flavor independence, but, as shown in Appendix A, there is no 
evidence that the predictions of SU(6) symmetry are any more accurate 
than those of complete spin and flavor independence. 
Nevertheless, there were various attempts to generalize the SU(6) sym-
metry of the non-relativistic quark model to a fully relativistic quantum 
theory.3 These attempts all failed, and a number of authors showed under 
various restrictive assumptions that this is in fact impossible.4 The most 
far-reaching theorem of this sort was proved in 1967 by Coleman and 
Mandula. 5 They adopted reasonable assumptions about the finiteness of 
the number of particle types below any given mass, the existence of scat-
tering at almost all energies, and the analyticity of the S-matrix, and used 
them to show that the most general Lie algebra of symmetry operators 
that commute with the S-matrix, that take single-particle states into single-
particle states, and that act on multiparticle states as the direct sum of 
their action on single-particle states consists of the generators Pfl and Jflv 
of the Poincare group, plus ordinary internal symmetry generators that act 
on one-particle states with matrices that are diagonal in and independent 
of both momentum and spin. We will use this theorem as an essential 
ingredient in our analysis of all possible supersymmetry algebras in four 
spacetime dimensions in Chapter 25, and in higher spacetime dimensions 
in Chapter 32. In Section 32.3 we will consider supersymmetry algebras in 
theories that involve extended objects, for which the Coleman-Mandula 
theorem does not apply. 
Coleman and Mandula's proof is ingenious and complicated. A version 
~ 
is presented in Appendix B to this chapter. In the present section we shall 
give a very simple purely kinematic proof of one piece of this theorem, 
but this piece is enough to show clearly why an unconventional symmetry 
like SU(6) is possible in non-relativistic but not in relativistic theories. 
We shall use Lorentz invariance to show that if the Lie algebra of all 
symmetry operators Ba. that commute with the momentum generators Pfl 
consists of the Pfl themselves plus the Hermitian generators BA of some 
finite-parameter semi-simple compact• Lie subalgebra d, then the BA. 
must be the generators of an ordinary internal symmetry, in the sense 
that they act on single-particle states with matrices that are diagonal in 
and independent of both momentum and spin. No use is made in this 
theorem of the properties of the S-matrix, of the finiteness of the particle 
spectrum, or of assumptions about how the symmetry generators act on 
physical states. The Lie algebra of S U(6) is of course both semi-simple 
• For the definition of semi-simple and compact Lie algebras, see the footnote in Section 
15.2. 

24.1 Unconventional Symmetries and 'No-Go' Theorems 
3 
and compact, so this theorem rules out the use of any such symmetry in 
relativistic theories to derive relations among particles of different spin. 
Here is the proof. Let all symmetry generators that commute with 
the four-momentum PJl form a Lie algebra spanned by the generators Ba.. 
Consider the effect on these generators of a proper Lorentz transformation 
xll ~ All vXv. which is represented on Hilbert space by the unitary operator 
U(A). It is easy to see that the operator U(A)Ba.U-1(A) is a Hermitian 
symmetry generator that commutes with A/ Pv, so since A/ is non-
singular, this operator must commute with PJl• and therefore must be a 
linear combination of the Ba.: 
u(A)Ba. u-1(A) = 2: DP a.( A) Bp , 
fJ 
(24.1.1) 
with DP a.( A) a set of real coefficients that furnish a representation of the 
homogeneous Lorentz group 
(24.1.2) 
Further, the U(A)Ba.U-1(A) satisfy the same commutation relations as the 
Ba., so the structure constants C~p of this Lie algebra are invariant tensors 
in the sense that 
c~P = 2: Dr~ a.(A) DfJ' p(A) DY y'(A - 1) c;P' . 
(24.1.3) 
rZ {Jy' 
Contracting this with the corresponding equation for c;lJ, we find that 
~ {J' 
(j' 
gplJ = L...JD p(A)D lJ(A)gfJ'lJ', 
(24.1.4) 
{J' (jl 
where gplJ is the Lie algebra metric 
&PlJ = L c~P c;(j . 
(24.1.5) 
'rt 
Because all of these generators COmtllUte With p Jl• we have c;/J = -CpJl = 
0, so g.Jll% = &a.Jl = 0. 
We will distinguish the symmetry generators other than the P Jl by 
using subscripts A, B, etc. in place of ex, p, etc. Using the vanishing 
of Cffa = -C~Jl in Eq. (24.1.5) gives &AB = LCD C~c c~D· We as-
sumed that the generators BA span :t compact semi-simple Lie algebra, 
so the matrix &AB is positive-definite. Eqs. (24.1.4) and (24.1.2) show that 
the matrices g112D(A)g-112 furnish a real orthogonal and hence unitary 
finite-dimensional representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group. But 
because the Lorentz group is non-compact, the only such representation 
is the trivial one, for which D(A) = 1. (This is the pia'~ where relativity 
makes all the difference; the semi-simple part of the Galilean group is the 

4 
24 Historical Introduction 
compact group S U(2), which of course has an infinite number of unitary 
finite-dimensional representations.) With D(A) = 1, the generators BA 
commute with U(A) for all Lorentz transformations N"v· 
Acting on the state lp, n) of a single stable particle with momentum pJl 
and spin and species labelled by a discrete index n, an operator like B A 
that commutes with PJ.l can only yield a linear combination of such states 
BAip,n) = L (bA(P))mnlp,m) · 
(24.1.6) 
m 
The fact that the BA commute with what we called 'boosts' in Section 2.5 
implies that the bA(P) are independent of momentum, and the fact that 
the BA commute with rotations implies that the bA(P) act as unit matrices 
on spin indices, so the B A are the generators of an ordinary internal 
symmetry, as was to be proved. 
24.2 
Tbe Birth of Supersymmetry 
If theoretical physics followed logic in its evolution, then after the proof 
of the Coleman-Mandula theorem someone seeking exceptions to this 
theorem would have noticed that it deals only with transformations that 
take bosons into bosons and fermions into fermions and are therefore gen-
erated by operators that satisfy commutation relations rather than anti-
commutation relations. This would have raised the question of whether 
a relativistic theory can have symmetries acting non-trivially on particle 
spins that take fermions and bosons into each other, and that there-
fore satisfy anticommutation relations rather than commutation relations. 
Exploring the possible structure of such a superalgebra along the lines 
described in the following chapter, supersymmetry would have emerged 
as the only possibility. 
This is not what happened. Instead, supersymmetry arose in a series 
of articles on string theory and independently in a pair of little-noticed 
papers, about which more later, none of which show any sign that the 
authors were at all concerned with the Coleman-Mandula theorem. 
Starting in the late 1960s, the effort to constructS-matrix elements for 
strong-interaction processes that would satisfy various theoretical require-
ments led to a new picture of various types of hadrons, as different modes 
of vibration of a string.6 A point on a string labelled by a parameter (Y 
will at time -ron some fixed clock have spacetime coordinates Xll((Y, -r), so 
the theory of a string's motion in d spacetime dimensions may be regarded 

24.2 The Birth of Supersymmetry 
5 
as a two~diinensional field theory with d bosonic fields, with action 
T J J 
[aXtt axv 
axtt axv] 
I[X] = -
dtr 
d1: '1ttv ---- -
2 
a-r: 
a-r: 
atr 
atr 
J J 
axtt axv 
= T 
dtr+ 
dtr- '1ttv atr+ atr- , 
(24.2.1) 
where T is a constant known as the string tension; Jl = 0, 1, ... , d- 1; 
and tr± are the two-dimensional 'light-cone' coordinates tr± = 1: + tr. 
This action can be derived from a more general version, with complete 
invariance* under transformations of a pair of 'worldsheet coordinates' tFk 
T J 2 
~ 
kl axtt axv 
I [X] = -2 d tr '1ttv y Det g g atrk atrl , 
{24.2.2) 
by passing to a special coordinate system in which the worldsheet metric 
gkl satisfies the condition 
(24.2.3) 
In much the same way that in electrodynamics the problems introduced by 
the negative sign of the action for timelike photons are eliminated by the 
gauge in variance of the theory, here the problems introduced by the nega-
tive sign of '1ttv in Eqs. {24.2.1) and (24.2.2) for Jl = v = 0 are eliminated by 
the in variance of the action {24.2.2) (for appropriate boundary conditions) 
under general transformations of the worldsheet coordinates. In the spe~ 
cial coordinate system in which the action takes the form {24.2.1), there is 
an important remnant of invariance under general worldsheet coordinate 
transformations: invariance under the global conformal transformations: 
(f± --+ f±(tr±) ' 
{24.2.4) 
with f± a pair of independent arbitrary functions. 
The particles described by this string theory do not match those seen 
in the real world. Ramond7 and Neveu and Schwarz8 in 1971, aiming 
respectively to introduce particles with half~integer spin or with the quan-
tum numbers of pions, suggested the addition of d fermionic field doublets 
V'f{tr, 1:) and 1p~(tr, t). Shortly after, Gervais and Sakita9 introduced an 
action for this theory: 
J J [ 
axtt axtt 
. J.l a 
. J.l a 
] 
I[ X, V'l = 
dtr+ 
dtr-
r atr+ atr- + z1p2 otr+ V'2tt + l"P1 otr_V'ttt • 
{24.2.5) 
• This symmetry is violated by quantum anomalies, like those discussed in Chapter 
22, except in d = 26 spacetime dimensions for the purely bosonic theory, or d = 10 
dimensions after the introduction of fermions. 

6 
24 Historical Introduction 
and noted that conformal invariance could be maintained by extending 
the conformal transformations (24.2.4) to act also on the fermion fields 
(
df+)-l/2 
VJi --+ 
d(f+ 
VJ't ' 
(24.2.6) 
Gervais and Sa.kita pointed out that, in addition to two-dimensional con-
formal invariance and d-dimensional Lorentz invariance, for appropriate 
boundary conditions this theory has a symmetry under infinitesimal trans-
formations that interchange the bosonic field X~-' with the fermionic fields 
111/.l· 
"'YT' 
a 
(jVJi(ff+,ff-) =iT a2(ff-) a(f_X~-'(ff+,ff-), 
a 
(jVJf(ff+,ff-) =iT e<1(ff+) a(f+XJl(ff+,ff-), 
(24.2.7) 
()XJl( q+, O"-) = a2(ff-) VJ~(ff+, ff-) + e<1 (q+) VJf( ff+, ff-) , 
where a1 and e<2 are a pair of infinitesimal fermionic functions of ff+ 
and O"-, respectively, like the Grassmann variables introduced in Section 
9.5. This was an example of what has subsequently come to be called 
supersymmetry, a symmetry connecting bosons and fermions, but thus 
far it was only a symmetry of a two-dimensional field theory, not of a 
physical theory in four spacetime dimensions. 
A few years later Wess and Zumino10 referred back to the example of 
supersymmetry that had been provided by References 7-9, and commented 
that it would be natural to try to extend the idea of supersymmetry to 
quantum field theories in four spacetime dimensions. They constructed 
several supersymmetric models. The simplest involved a single Majorana 
(self-charge-conjugate Dirac) field VJ, a pair of real scalar and pseudoscalar 
bosonic fields A and B, and a pair of real scalar and pseudoscalar 
bosonic auxiliary fields F and G, with invariance under the infinitesimal 
transformation •• 
()A= (iiVJ), 
()B = -i(iiYsVJ), 
(jVJ = al.l(A + iysB)yJla + (F- iysG)a, 
(24.2.8) 
()F = 
(iiy~-' al.llJJ), 
()G = -i (iiy5y~-'a~-'VJ), 
where a is an arbitrary constant infinitesimal Majorana fermion c-number 
•• The notation for Dirac matrices used here is explained in the Preface and in S1~ction 
5.4. The )15 used here (which satisfies y~ = 1) is a factor of i times that used by Wess 
and Zum.ino, and the covariant conjugate ijJ of any spinor 1fJ is defined here as i times 
that ofWess and Zum.ino. For this re·ason, some of the phases in Eqs. (24.2.8H24.2.10) 
are different from those in Reference 10. 

24.2 The Birth of Supersymmetry 
7 
parameter. If we require invariance of the action under these transfor-
mations, then the most general real, Lorentz-invariant, parity-conserving, 
renormalizable Lagrangian density built out of these ingredients is 
!£ = -&8JlA81lA- &8JlB81lB- !iJiyll8JlVJ 
+ !(F2 + G2) + m [FA+ GB- !1Pw] 
+ g(F(A2 + B2) + 2GAB- tp(A + iysB)11'] . 
(24.2.9) 
Since the auxiliary fields F and G enter quadratically, we can derive an 
equivalent Lagrangian by setting them equal to the values given by the 
field equations 
F = -mA- g(A2 + B2), 
G = -mB - 2gAB . 
(24.2.10) 
The Lagrangian density then becomes 
!l' =- !8JlA 81l A- !8JlB 81lB- !ifyll8Jllp 
- !m2 [A2 + B2]- !mifw 
- gmA(A2 + B2)- !g2 (A2 + B 2)2 - gtp(A + iysB)VJ . (24.2.11) 
This Lagrangian density exhibits relations not only between scalar and 
fermion masses, but also between Yukawa interactions and scalar self-
couplings, which are characteristic of supersymmetric theories. Wess and 
Zumino also described supersymmetry transformations and gave a La-
grangian for a supermultiplet containing a vector field. (We shall go into 
all this in more detail in Chapter 26.) Finally, in a second paper, Wess 
and Zumino11 recalled the Coleman-Mandula theorem and traced the 
apparent violation of this theorem to the fact that the symmetry genera-
tors here satisfY anticommutation rather than commutation relations. It 
was a few more years before Gliozzi, Scherk and Olive11a showed that it 
was possible to construct a superstring theory with spacetime as well as 
worldsheet supersymmetry by imposing suitable periodicity conditions on 
the fields of the Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz model. 
Unknown to Wess and Zumino, at the time of their first papers on 
supersymmetry in four spacetime dimensions this symmetry had already 
appeared in a pair of papers published in the Soviet Union. In 1971 
Gol'fand and Likhtman12 had extended the algebra of the Poincare group 
discussed in Section 2.4 to a superalgebra and used the requirement 
of invariance under this superalgebra to construct supersymmetric field 
theories in four spacetime dimensions. Their paper though prophetic gave 
few details, and was generally ignored until much later. Independently 
Volkov and Akulov13 in 1973 discovered what today would be called 
spontaneously broken supersym.metry, but they used their formalism to 
identify the Goldstone fermion associated with supersymmetry breaking 

8 
24 Historical Introduction 
with the neutrino, an idea that met with no success. For most theorists, 
especially outside the Soviet Union, supersymmetry as a possible symmetry 
of nature in four spacetime dimensions began with the 1974 papers of 
Wess and Zumino. 
Appendix A 
SU(6) Symmetry of Non-Relativistic Quark Models 
This appendix will describe the way that an SU(6) symmetry that relates 
particles of different spin arises in non-relativistic quark models. This has 
nothing directly to do with supersymmetry, but it provides the historical 
background for the Coleman-Mandula theorem, which is an essential 
input to the construction of general supersymmetry algebras in Sections 
25.1 and 31.1. 
In general, the Hamiltonian of the non-relativistic quark model could 
depend not only on positions and momenta but also on the spin and flavor 
operators o-}n) and A.~)' where the o-[n) (with i = 1, 2, 3) act on the spin 
indices of the nth quark as the Pauli matrices O"i defined by Eq. (5.4.18), 
while the A.~) (with A = 1, 2, ... , 8) act on the flavor indiices of the 
nth quark as the Gell-Mann SU(3) matrices A.A defined by Eq. (19.7.2). 
(Where n refers to an antiquark, o-in) and A.~) act as the matrices -o-r 
and -A.! of the contragredient representations.) If we were to assume 
only that there is no spin-orbit coupling, so that the total orbital angular 
momentum Li is separately conserved, then we could conclude only that 
the Hamiltonian commutes with the total spin and unitary spin 
n 
T - I'"" ,(n) 
A= 2 ~AA ' 
n 
(24.A.l) 
as well as Li. 
On the other hand, if we were to suppose that the 
Hamiltonian depends only on quark positions and momenta, and not at 
all on spins or quark flavors, then such a Hamiltonian would commute 
not only with the total orbital angular momentum L, but also with each 
of the operators o-~n) and A.~). In between these two extremes there is the 
interesting possibility that in addition to commuting with the Li. Si, and 
TA, the Hamiltonian also commutes with the operators 
D .. = ! '""+ O"~n) A_(n) 
niA 
2L....,.-J 
A• 
(24.A.2) 
n 
where the sign is + or - for quarks and antiquarks, respectively: The S;, 
TA, and RtA form the Lie algebra of the group SU(6), with commutation 
• The minus sign for antiquarks arises because the terms in R;A for antiquarks must act 
on spin and flavor indices as the matrix -(a;A.A)T = -(-ar)(-A.J). 

Appendix A 
SU(6) Symmetry of Non-Relativistic Quark Models 
9 
relations 
[Si, Sj] = (LEijkSk, 
[TA, TB] = i''f:~fABcTc, 
[Si, TA] = 0, 
k 
c 
[Si, RiA] = i I:, Eijk~A, 
[TA , R,B] = i L f ABcR,c, 
(24.A.3) 
k 
c 
[RAi, RBj] = i(jij L f ABC Tc + FJAB L E;jk sk + i L Eijk dABc~c . 
c 
k 
~ 
Here f ABC and dABC are respectively totally antisymmetric and totally 
symmetric numerical coefficients, 14 with independent non-vanishing values 
given by 
ft23 = 1 , 
/458 = /678 = v'312' 
!147 = ft6s = /246 = fzs1 = /345 = /376 = 112 , 
(24.A.4) 
and 
d146 = dts7 = -d247 = dzs6 = d344 = d3ss = -d366 = -d3n = 112, 
du8 = d228 = d333 = -d888 = 11 J3, 
(24.A.5) 
d448 = dss8 = d668 = dn8 = -11(2J"j). 
This is the symmetry that remains if we include a spin· and flavor-
dependent two·body interaction in the Hamiltonian that commutes with 
R.;A as well as with the Si and TA- There are such interactions, given by 
linear combinations of two-body operators of the form 
(24.A.6) 
where the sign + is negative if one of the particles n, m is a quark and 
the other an antiquark and positive if they are both quarks or both 
antiquarks. 
Of course, even in the non-relativistic quark model the SU(6) symmetry 
is at best approximate. It is broken by spin-orbit and spin-spin forces, and 
also by the mass of the s quark, which reduces the flavor SU(3) symmetry 
to the SU(2) and U(1) of isospin and hypercharge conservation. If we 
avoid the effects of this quark mass difference by restricting ourselves to 
hadrons built up from the light u ~nd d quarks and antiquarks, then the 
only non-vanishing A.A matrices are the A.a with a = 1, 2, 3 (which for 
the u and d quarks are given by the Pauli matrices (5.4.18) (that in this 
context are conventionally called ra) and A8 (which is just the number 
11 .j3 for the u and d quarks, and -1 I .J3 for the u and d antiquarks ). The 

10 
24 Historical Introduction 
interaction (24.A.6) thus becomes 
(24.A.7) 
Aside from quark number conservation, the remaining symmetry is then 
SU(4), with generators Sh Ta, and ~a which commute with (24.A.7). This 
was proposed by Wignerl in 193 7 as a symmetry of nuclear forces, though 
of course with protons and neutrons in place of u and d quarks. The 
interaction (24.A. 7) is known in nuclear theory as a Majorana potential 
to distinguish it from an interaction that does not depend on spin or 
isospin, called a Wigner potential, or an interaction proportional to just 
the spin-dependent or just the isospin-dependent factor in (24.A.7), known 
respectively as a Bartlett potential and a Heisenberg potential. 
It is amusing to note that, although in non-relativistic theories there 
is no theoretical barrier to symmetries like S U(6) that act on spin as 
well as particle type, there never was any experimental evidence for such an 
assumed SU(6) symmetry of the non-relativistic quark model that is any bet-
ter satisfied than the assumption of complete spin and flavor independence. 
These assumptions are not the same; if the Hamiltonian of a system of 
N non-relativistic quarks and/ or anti quarks is completely independent of 
spin and flavor, then its symmetry is SU(6)N, not SU(6). For instance, 
a two-particle interaction like (24.A.6) and various other multiparticle 
interactions break SU(6)N to SU(6). Of course, all these symmetries are 
only approximate anyway. The question is whether SU(6) is less badly 
broken than SU(6)N? 
This cannot be answered by studying the multiplet that contains the 
baryon octet, which consists of the nucleon and hyperons A, r., and E. In 
the non-relativistic quark model these particles are interpreted as bound 
states of three quarks with zero orbital angular momentum. Because these 
states are color neutral, the wave function is completely antisymmetric 
in the suppressed color indices, and therefore it is completely symmetric 
under the combined interchange of spin and flavor. The baryon octet 
would therefore have to be put in the symmetric third-rank tensor rep-
resentation 56 of S U( 6), which besides the baryon octet contains a spin 
3/2 decuplet, which may be identified as the one consisting of the famous 
'3-3' resonance A and the I:.(l385), 8(1530), and n particles. (Numbers 
in parentheses give masses in MeV, where these are needed to distinguish 
the particles from others of the same isospin and strangeness but lower 
mass.) The S U(6) symmetry leads to good predictions for the baryon 
magnetic moments: The quark charge operator is q = e(A.3/2 + A.s/2-/3), 
so if quarks have the magnetic moments 3qj2mN of Dirac particles of this 

Appendix A 
SU(6) Symmetry of Non-Relativistic Quark Models 
11 
charge and mass mN j3, then the magnetic moment operator is 
/Ji = 3jJN [~~3 + 2~~8] , 
where /JN = ej2mN is the nuclear magneton, and RA is defined by 
Eq. (24.A.2). It is straightforward to calculate the matrix elements of 
this symmetry generator between the members of the 56 multiplet, with 
the result that the magnetic moments for p, n, A, I:+, I:-, a-, and '2P 
in units of JJN are respectively +3, -2, -1, +3, -1, -1, and -2, which 
may be compared with the corresponding experimental values +2. 79, 
-1.91, -0.61, +2.46, -1.16, -0.65, and -1.25. The agreement is fair, and 
somewhat better (except for I:-) if we take the quark magnetic moment 
to be a little less than 3JJN· Because of the symmetry of the three-
quark wave function, nothing new is learned here if we assume that the 
Hamiltonian is completely independent of spin and flavor; the states of 
zero angular momentum would still have to fall in a multiplet consisting 
of 6 x 7 x 8/6! = 56 members. In particular, the operator (24.A.6) 
has the same value 4 for any state of two quarks that is symmetric 
under simultaneous interchange of their spins and flavors, whether it is 
symmetric both under interchange of spins and interchange of flavors, or 
antisymmetric under both interchanges. 
In order to decide whether SU(6) is any better than SU(6)N, it is more 
useful to study the mesons, which in the non-relativistic quark model are 
interpreted as bound states of a quark and antiquark. If the Hamiltonian 
of these states is completely independent of spin and flavor then its 
symmetry is S U(6)2, and the meson states fall into its 36-dimensional 
(6, 6) representation, while for SU(6) symmetry we could only say that the 
mesons belong to either of the two representations of S U(6) contained 
in 6 x 6: the adjoint representation 35 or the singlet representation. To 
be more specific, the 35 consists of an S U(3) singlet with spin S = 1, an 
SU(3) octet with S = 0, and an SU(3) octet with S = 1, corresponding to 
the SU(6) generators Si, TA, and ~A. which is split from the SU(3) singlet 
state with S = 0 by the interaction (24.A.6). Since all these assumptions are 
approximate anyway, the question in deciding whether S U(6) symmetry is 
more accurate than complete spin and flavor independence is whether the 
splitting of the S U(3) singlet S = 0 state from the other 35 states of the 
same orbital angular momentum is any greater than the splittings within 
the 35 supermultiplet. 
For orbital angular momentum L = 0 the quark-antiquark states have 
negative parity P, and positive or negative charge-conjugation quantum 
number C (for self-charge-conjugate states) according to whether the total 
spin S is zero or one, respectively. (For an explanation, see Section 5.5.) 
The 35 therefore consists of a singlet with JPC = 1--, a o-+ octet, and 

12 
24 Historical Introduction 
a 1-- octet, which may be identified respectively as: the t/>(1020); the 
pseudoscalar octet n, 17, K, and K; and the vector octet p, m, K*, and K*. 
There is also a o-+ SU(3) singlet 11' at 958 MeV, which can be regarded 
as the SU(6) singlet. The splitting of this singlet from the particles in 
the 35 multiplet is not distinctly greater than the splittings within the 35 
multiplet. 
It may be argued that the L = 0 mesons do not provide a good 
test of the symmetries of the non-relativistic quark model, because they 
include the Goldstone bosons n, 17, K, and .K., which become massless 
for zero u and d quark masses and are therefore not well described by 
this model. Therefore let us consider the quark-antiquark states with 
L = 1. These states have P positive and C positive or negative according 
to whether S = 1 or S = 0, so the p-wave 35 consists of: SU(3) singlets 
with S = 1 and JPC = o++, 1 ++, 2++, which may be identified as the 
/o(l370), the ft(l285), and the fz(1270); an S = 0 1+- octet identified 
as ht(ll70), bt(1235), K 1(1400), and K1(1400); and S = 1 octets: a o++ 
octet consisting of f 0(980), ao(980), Kri(l950), and Kri"(1950); a 1++ octet 
consisting of ft(1420), a1(1260), K{(1650), and Kt"(1650); and a 2++ octet 
consisting of /2(1430), a2(1320), Ki(1980), and Ki(1980). In addition to 
these 35 x 3 states, there is a another particle with the right quantum 
numbers to be the p-wave SU(6) singlet: the 1+- isoscalar h1(1380). Of 
course, we could interchange the identifications of ht(ll70) and h1(1380), 
or identify the SU(3) singlet and octet isoscalar 1+- states as orthogonal 
linear combinations of ht(l170) and h1(1380). The important point is that 
there are two of these 1 +- isoscalars, with no indication that one of them, 
belonging to an S U ( 6) singlet, is more strongly split from the particles of 
the 35 than the particles of the 35 are split from each other. Here too, 
then, there is no evidence that SU(6) symmetry is any more accurate than 
the stronger assumption of complete spin and fia vor independence. 
Appendix B 
Tbe Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
This appendix provides a proof of the celebrated theorem of Coleman 
and Mandula5 that the only possible Lie algebra (as opposed to super-
algebra) of symmetry generators consists of the generators P ll and J w~ 
of translations and homogeneous Lorentz transformations, together with 
possible internal symmetry generators, which commute with Pll and lflv 
and act on physical states by multiplying them with spin-independent, 

Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
13 
momentum-independent Hermitian matrices. • By 'symmetry generators' 
here is meant any Hermitian operators: that commute with the S-matrix; 
whose commutators are also symmetry generators; which take one-particle 
states into one-particle states; and whose action on multi particle states is 
the direct sum of their action on one-particle states (as in Eq. (24.B.l)). 
A further technical requirement will be added when needed later. Apart 
from the general principles of relativistic quantum mechanics described in 
Chapters 2 and 3, the only other assumptions needed in this proof are: 
Assumption 1 For any M there are only a finite number of particle types 
with mass less than M. 
Assumption 2 Any two-particle state undergoes some reaction at almost all 
energies (that is, at all energies except perhaps an isolated set). 
Assumption 3 The amplitudes for elastic two-body scattering are analytic 
functions of the scattering angle at almost all energies and angles ... 
It is not necessary to assume that the S-matrix is governed by a local 
quantum field theory. The proof presented here is somewhat rearranged 
and streamlined, and it spells out some steps that Coleman and Mandula 
left to the reader. 
It is convenient to start by proving this theorem for the subalgebra 
consisting of those symmetry generators Br.r. that commute with the four-
momentum operator P w (This part of the theorem is of some interest 
in itself; it rules out symmetries in relativistic theories that act like the 
SU(6) symmetry of the non-relativistic quark model.) The action of such 
• As we shall see, in theories with only massless particles there is also the possibility 
that in addition to the generators PJJ and JJJ• there are additional generators D and 
K,. that fill out the Lie algebra of the conformal group.15 
•• Strictly speaking, this assumption is not satisfied in theories with infrared divergences 
such as quantum electrodynamics, where, as shown in Sectio·a 13.3, the S-matrix 
element for any one scattering process involving charged particles actually vanishes, 
except for elastic forward scattering. In Abelian gauge theories like electrodynamics 
this problem can be avoided by applying the Coleman-Mandula theorem to the 
theory with a fictitious gauge boson mass, and then working only with 'infrared-safe' 
quantities like masses and suitably integrated cross-sections that are finite in the limit 
of zero gauge boson mass. There is no problem in non-Abelian gauge theories like 
quantum chromodynamics, in which all massless particles are trapped -
symmetries 
if unbroken would only govern S-matrix elements for gauge-neutral bound states, 
like the mesons and baryons in quantum chromodynamics. As far as I know, the 
Coleman-Mandula theorem has not been proved for non-Abelian gauge theories with 
untrapped massless particles, like quantum chromodynamics with many quark flavors. 

14 
24 Historical Introduction 
symmetry generators on multiparticle states is given by 
Ba ipm, q n, ... ) = L (ba(P))m'm lpm', qn, ... ) 
m' 
+ L (ba(q))n'n ipm, q n', ... ) + · · · , 
(24.B.l) 
n' 
where m, n, etc. are discrete indices labelling spin z-components and 
particle type for particles of a definite mass .J-p11 pP, and the ba.(P) are 
finite Hermitian matrices, which define the action of the Ba. on one-particle 
states. 
Now, we can see from Eq. (24.B.l) that the mapping that takes the 
Ba. into ba(P) for some fixed p is a homomorphism in the sense that the 
commutation relations 
[Ba., Bp] = i L C~pBy 
(24.B.2) 
y 
are also satisfied by the Hermitian matrices ba.(P): 
[ba.(p), bp(p)] = i L C~p by(p). 
(24.B.3) 
A well-known theorem proved in Section 15.2 tells us that any Lie al-
gebra of finite Hermitian matrices like ba.(P) must be a direct sum of a 
compact semi-simple Lie algebra and U(l) algebras. However, we cannot 
immediately apply this result to the operator algebras Ba. because the 
homomorphism between the operators Ba. and matrices ba.(p) is not nec-
essarily an isomorphism. For it to be an isomorphism would require also 
that whenever Ea. ca ba.(p) = 0 for some coefficients ca. and momentum 
p, then Ea. ca.ba(k) = 0 for all momenta k, which is equivalent to the 
condition Ea. ca Ba = 0. 
Instead of considering the homomorphism that maps the Ba. into the 
one-particle matrices ba.(p), Coleman and Mandula considered the homo-
morphism that maps the Ba. into the matrices that define the action of Ba. 
on two-particle states with fixed four-momenta p and q: 
(24.B.4) 
The invariance of the S-matrix for the elastic or quasi-elastic scattering of 
two particles with four-momenta p and q into two particles with momenta 
p' and q', with masses J 
-~ p'll = .J-p 11 [JJ' and J 
-q~ q'll = .j=q11 qP, 
yields the condition 
ba.(p',q')S(p',q';p,q) = S(p',q';p,q)ba.(p,q). 
(24.B.5) 
Here S(p', q'; p, q) is a matrix of the same dimensionality as b(p, q) and 
b(p',q'), defined in terms of the connected S-matrix elements S(pm,qn ~ 

Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
15 
p'm', q'n') by 
S(pm,qn-+ p'm',q'n') = t54(p'+q'-p-q) (s(p',q';p,q)) 
. (24.B.6) 
mn',mn 
According to Assumption 2 and the optical theorem (see Section 3.6), 
for almost any choice of p and q the elastic scattering amplitude is non-
vanishing in the forward direction, and Assumption 3 then tells us that 
the matrix S(p',q' ;p, q) is non-singular for almost all p' and q' on the same 
mass shells and satisfying the conservation condition p' +q' = p +q, so for 
almost all such four-momenta Eq. (24.B.5) is a similarity transformation. 
It follows then that if I:IX ciXbiX(p, q) = 0 for almost any fixed four-
momenta p and q, then L,IX ciXbiX(p', q') = 0 for almost any four-momenta 
p' and q' on the same mass shells that satisfy p' +q' = p+q. Unfortunately, 
this does not tell us that I:IX c«biX(p') and I:IX ciXbiX(q') vanish, but only 
that these matrices are proportional to the unit matrix (with opposite 
coefficients). To do better, it is necessary to consider not the biX(p) or 
biX(p, q ), but their traceless parts. 
One immediate consequence of Eq. (24.B.5) is that 
Tr biX(p', q') = Tr biX(p, q) . 
(24.B. 7) 
With Eq. (24.B.4), this tells us that 
N( v-q~' q~') trbiX(p') + N( v-PJJ p~') tr biX(q') 
= N(v-q~'qP)trbiX(p) +N(y'-pppP)trbiX(q). 
(24.B.8) 
where N(m) is the multiplicityt of particle types with mass m, and the 
lower case t in 'tr' indicates a sum over one-particle rather than two-
particle labels. In order for this to be satisfied for almost all mass-shell 
four-momenta for which p' + q' = p + q, it is necessary that the function 
tr biX(p)/ N(.j-p~'j)P) be lineartt in p: 
tr ba(P) 
_ a~-' 
N(.j-Pp ptl) -
IX PI' ' 
(24.B.9) 
with a~ independent of p (and of everytlring else but the displayed indices.) 
We may define new symmetry generators by subtracting terms linear in 
t These multiplicity factors were not shown explicitly by Coleman and Mandula. They 
are needed in justifying a step that Coleman and Mandula made without explanation. 
that of defining the symmetry generators B! with traceless kernels. 
tt A constant term is easily seen to be ruled out in Eq. (24.B.9) by the existence of 
processes in which the number of particles is not conserved, processes which are 
inevitable in any relativistic quantum theory satisfying the cluster decomposition 
principle. Even if we considered only two-particle processes and did not use this 
argument, a constant tenn in Eq. (24.B.9) would only amount to a change in the 
action of internal sytnm.etries on physical states. 

16 
24 Historical Introduction 
the momentum operator PJ.l: 
B: = B11 -
a~Pil, 
(24.B.10) 
which according to Eq. (24.B.9) are represented on one-particle states by 
the traceless matrices 
( # 
) 
( 
) 
trb(%(p) 
bl%(p) n'n = 
bl%(p) n'n- N(.J-pfl j)P) ~n'n . 
(24.B.ll) 
Because P fl commutes with B11 and the unit matrix commutes with every-
thing, the commutators of the Bf are the same as those of the B(%, and the 
commutators of the bf(p) are the same as those of the b11(p): 
[B~, B$] = i 2: C~pBr = i 2: C~p [B: + a~Pil] , 
(24.B.l2) 
l' 
l' 
[b!(p), b~(p)] = i L C~pb,(p) = i 2: C~p [b~(p) + ~Ptl] . (24.B.l3) 
l' 
l' 
Also, Eq. (24.B.l3) and the fact that commutators of the finite matri-
ces bf(p) have zero trace* imply that 2:, C~fJ a~ = 0, and using this in 
Eq. (24.B.l2) then shows that the Bf satisfy the same commutation rela-
tions as the B11 : 
[B:, B:] = il:C~pBf. 
(24.B.14) 
l' 
Because Bf is a symmetry generator, the scattering amplitude satisfies 
b~(p', q') S(p', q'; p, q) = S(p', q'; p, q) bf(p, q) , 
(24.B.15) 
where the bf(p, q) are the matrices representing the Bf on the two-particle 
states 
(24.B.16) 
and satisfy the same commutation relations as the B!: 
[b!(p, q), b~(p, q)] = i 2: C~p b:(p, q) . 
(24.B.17) 
l' 
The advantage of dealing with these two-particle matrices is that, since 
S(p', q'; p, q) is a non-singular matrix, it follows that if 2:11 c
11bf(p, q) = 0 for 
some fixed mass-shell four-momenta p and q, then 2:11 dxbf(p', q') = 0 for 
:t This is one of the places where we use Assumption 1, without which commutators 
need not have zero trace. Also, at this point it is crucial that we are dealing with 
commutation rather than anticommutation relations, since the unit matrix does not 
anticommute with other matrices, and anticommutators of finite matrices do not 
necessarily have zero trace. 

Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
17 
almost all p' and q' on the same respective mass shells with p' +q' = p+q. 
Because we are dealing now with traceless matrices, this tells us that 
L c« b!(P
1
) = L err. b!(q') = 0. 
(24.B.l8) 
We would like to conclude from this that Lrr. c«bf(k) = 0 for all mass-shell 
four-momenta k, but so far we have proved only that Lrr. c« bf(p') = 0 for 
almost all of those p' for which q' = p + q- p' as well asp' is on the mass 
shell (and correspondingly for q'.) To get around this limitation, we can 
use a trick of Coleman and Mandula, noting that if Lrr. ca. bf(p, q) = 0 
then (24.B.18) and {24.B.16) together yield 
L c« b! (p, q') = 0 , 
'f. 
so that, according to Eq. {24.B.15), 
L ca. b!(k, p + q'- k) = 0, 
'f. 
and therefore 
(24.B.19) 
for almost all mass-shell four-momenta k for which p + q' - k is also on 
the mass shell. Now, the conditions that q' and p + q - q' be on the mass 
shell leave two parameters free in q', so that we have enough freedom in 
choosing q' that the condition that p + q'-k is on the mass shell leaves us 
free to choose k to be anything we like, at least within a finite volume of 
momentum space. This volume can be adjusted to be as large as we like 
by taking p and q sufficiently large, so if La. c«bf(p, q) = 0 for some fixed 
mass-shell four-momenta p and q then La: c«bf(k) = 0 for almost all mass-
shell four-momenta k. But then if Ea: c«bf(ko) =I= 0 for some particular 
mass-shell four-momentum ko, a scattering process in which particles with 
four-momenta ko and k scatter into particles with four-momenta k' and 
k" will be forbidden by the symmetry generated by Err. c« Bf for almost all 
k, k', and k'', in contradiction with our assumption about the analyticity 
of the scattering amplitude. We conclude then that if Err.ca:bf(p,q) = 0 
for some fixed mass-shell four-momenta p and q then 'Err. c«bf(k) = 0 for 
all k, and therefore Lrr. c« Bf = 0, so that the mapping that takes Brr. into 
bf(p, q) is an isomorphism. 
One immediate consequence is that, since the number of independent 
matrices bf(p, q) cannot exceed N(.j-pllpP.) N(.j-qllqll), there can be at 
most a finite number of independent symmetry generators Brr.. As em-
phasized by Coleman and Mandula, in proving their theorem it is not 
necessary to make an independent assumption that the symmetry algebra 
is finite-dimensional. 

18 
24 Historical Introduction 
The theorems of Section 15.2 tell us further that a Lie algebra of finite 
Hermitian matrices like b!(p, q) for fixed p and q is at most the direct 
sum of a semi-simple compact Lie algebra and some number of U(l) Lie 
algebras. We have seen that this Lie algebra is isomorphic to that of the 
symmetry generators Bf, so the Bf must also span the direct sum of at 
roost a compact semi-simple Lie algebra and U(l) Lie algebras. 
Let us first dispose of the U(l) Lie algebras. For any pair of mass-shell 
momenta p and q we can find a Lorentz generator J that leaves both 
p and q invariant. (If p and q are lightlike and parallel then take J to 
generate rotations around the common direction of p and q. Otherwise, 
p + q will be timelike, so we can take J to generate rotations around 
the common direction of p and q in the center-of-mass frame in which 
p = --q.) We can choose the basis of two-particle states to diagonalize J, 
so that 
Jjpm, qn) = a(m, n)jpm, qn) . 
(24.B.20) 
Now, PI' commutes with all Bf, and [J,Pil] is a linear combination of 
components of Pll, so Pll commutes with all [J,Bf], and therefore the 
symmetry generator [J, Bf] must be a linear combination of the Bp, which 
by definition form a complete set of symmetry generators that commute 
with Pw More specifically, since the matrices representing a commutator 
of symmetry generators are necessarily traceless, [J,Bf] has to be a linear 
combination of the BJ. But any U(l) generator Bf (taken Hermitian) in 
the algebra of the Bj would have to commute with all the BJ, and hence 
in particular must commute with [J,Bf]: 
[Bf, [J, Bf]] = 0. 
Taking the expectation value of this double commutator in the two-particle 
basis in which J is diagonal, we have 
0 = 2::: (a(m', n')- a(m, n)) I ( 
bf(p, q)) m'n',nm/
2 
, 
m',n' 
(24.B.21) 
for any m and n. The indices run over a finite range, so if there were any 
a for which there existed an m and n with a(m, n) =a and an m' and n' 
with a(m', n') =/= 0', with (bf(p, q))m'n' ,mn =/= 0, then there would have to be 
a smallest such a, in which case the right-hand side of Eq. {24.B.21) for 
this m and n would be positive-definite, contradicting Eq. (24.B.21). We 
conclude that (bf(p, q))m'n',nm must vanish for all m, n, m', and n' for which 
a(m',n') =/= a(m,n). Because the algebra of the bf(p,q) is isomorphic to that 
of the Bf, this means that each of the U(l) generators Bf commutes with 
J. Since we can choose p+q to be in any timelike direction, it follows that 

Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
19 
each of the U(l) generators Bf commutes with all the generators Jflv of the 
homogeneous Lorentz group. The fact that they commute with what we 
called 'boosts' in Section 2.5 implies that the (bf(p))n'n are independent of 
three-momentum, and the fact that they commute with rotations implies 
that the (bf(p))n'n act as unit matrices on spin indices, so these generators 
are the generators of an ordinary internal symmetry. 
This leaves the Bf that generate a semi-simple compact Lie algebra. 
The argument of Section 24.1 (a somewhat more explicit version of the 
reasoning given by Coleman and Mandula) tells us that the generators of 
the semi-simple compact part of the Lie algebra commute with Lorentz 
transformations and, as shown for the U(l) generators, this means that 
they too are the generators of internal symmetries. We have thus shown 
that the symmetry generators Ba. that commute with Pit are either internal 
symmetry generators or linear combinations of the components of P"' 
itself. 
Next, we must take up the possibility of symmetry generators that do 
not commute with the momentum operator. The action of a general 
symmetry generator Aa. on a one-particle state ipn) of four-momentum p 
would be 
Aa.IP, n) = L j ctp' (d a.(p', p)) n'n ip', n') , 
n' 
(24.B.22) 
where n and n' are again discrete indices labelling both spin z-components 
and particle types. Of course, the kernel d a.(P', p) must vanish unless both 
p and p' are on the mass shell. We shall show first that the da.(p',p) 
vanishes for any p' =/= p. 
For this purpose, note that if Aa. is a symmetry generator, then so is 
A!= j tfx exp(iP · x) Aa. exp(-iP · x)f(x), 
(24.B.23) 
where P11 is the four-momentum operator, and f(x) is a function that can 
be chosen as we like. Acting on a one-particle state, this gives 
A! lp,n) = L j t/'p' f(p'- p) (da.(p',p))n'n lp',n'), 
n' 
(24.B.24) 
where J is the Fourier transform 
f(k) = j ctx exp(ix · k)f(x). 
(24.B.25) 
Suppose that there is some pair of mass-shell four-momenta p and p + 1\ 
with 1\ =I= 0 such that d(p + 1\, p) =1= 0. Generic mass-shell four-momenta 
q, p', and q' with p' + q' = p + q will not have q + 1\ or p' + 1\ or q
1 + 1\ 
on the mass shell· If we take f(k) to vanish outside a sufficiently small 

20 
24 Historical Introduction 
region around .!l, then A! will annihilate all one-particle states with four-
momenta q, p', and q', but not the one-particle states with four-momentum 
p, so such a symmetry would forbid any scattering process in which any 
particles of momenta p and q go into any particles of momenta p' and q', 
in contradiction with the consequence of Assumptions 2 and 3 that there 
is some scattering at almost all energies and angles. 
This result does not mean that any symmetry generator Acx must com-
mute with Pfl, because the kernels d cx(p',p) may include terms proportional 
to derivatives of <5 4(p'- p) as well as terms proportional to <54(p'- p) it-
self. To deal with this possibility, Coleman and Mandula made the 'ugly 
technical assumption' that the kernels d a;(p', p) are distributions, which 
means that each can contain at most a finite number D~~. of derivatives 
of <5 4(p'- p). To put this another way, each symmetry generator A~~. is 
assumed to act on one-particle states as a polynomial of order Dcx in the 
derivatives a 1 a pfl, with matrix coefficients that at this point are allowed 
to depend on momentum and spin. To use the above results for symmetry 
generators that commute with the momentum operators, Coleman and 
Mandula considered the Dcx-fold commutator of momentum operators 
with Acx 
BI'!···I'Df% = [Pill [PJl2 
[PflDa A ] ] 
] 
a; 
-
, 
,... 
' 
11. 
•••• 
{24.B.26) 
The matrix elements of the commutators of B:t""I'Dc; with P~' between 
states with four-momenta p' and p are proportional to D~~. + 1 factors of 
p' - p, times a polynomial of order D~~. in momentum derivatives acting 
on <54(p'- p ), and therefore vanish. Since the generators B~
1 ... "'0" commute 
with the momentum operators, according to the results obtained so far 
they act on one-particle states with matrices of the form 
(24.B.27) 
where the b!flt""IJD,. are momentum-independent traceless Hermitian ma-
trices generating an ordinary internal symmetry algebra, and the a~l't--·!Jo,. 
are momentum-independent numerical constants, with both b!"'1···flo,. and 
d!r_flt""I'Drx symmetric in the indices Ji.t · · · Ji.D,.· Also, even though the A~~. 
do not necessarily commute with PJl, they cannot take one-particle states 
off the mass shell, so since Assumption 1 requires that the mass-squared 
operator -P"'Pfl has only discrete eigenvalues, the Acx must commute with 
-P"'Pfl. It follows in particular that forD> 1 
0 -
[P~' 1 P [Pil2 
[PflD,. A ] ] 
] - 2P Bllt""l'o,. 
-
Ill' 
'. . • 
, 
11. 
• • • 
-
I'! 
11. 
' 
so that 
(24.B.28) 

Appendix B 
The Coleman-Mandula Theorem 
21 
As long as the theory contains massive particles this must be satisfied for 
pin any timelike direction, so for Da. > 1 
b#Jlt"""JlD 
a. 
« =0, 
(24.B.29) 
and 
(24.B.30) 
But for Da > 2 Eq. (24.B.30) together with the symmetry of a~Jlt·""Jlo 
in the indices Ji.l · · · Jl.Da. would require that a~Jlt···Jloa. = 0. 
(For then 
__ /AJlt #2 ... JlD 
JlJl2Jl! ""'JlD 
Jl2JlJll" .. JlD 
__}J2Jl!W'· JlD 
lA! #2/l""'JlD 
«a. 
" = aa. 
"" = - aa 
" = - «a. 
" = «a 
"" = 
~tJlJl
2 '"'JlDa = -
~JltJl
2 ··'Jlo(! .) We are left with at most two kinds of non-
vanishing symmetry generator: those with Da. = 0, for which the generator 
Aa. commutes with P Jl and therefore must be either an internal symmetry 
generator or some linear combination of the PJl; and those with Da. = 1, 
in which case 
(24.B.31) 
with a~v some numerical constants antisymmetric in J1. and v. Eq. (24.B.31) 
requires that 
A -
t· ll"J 
B 
a - -
21 aa. 
pv + a. , 
(24.B.32) 
where J Jl" is the generator of proper Lorentz transformations, which 
according to Eq. (2.4.13) satisfies [P",JPU] = -irJ"Ppu + irJ
11uPP, and Ba. 
commutes with P w Since Aa. and J w~ are symmetry generators, so is 
Ba., which must therefore be a linear combination of internal symmetry 
generators and/or the components of Pw Eq. (24.B.32) therefore completes 
the proof of the Coleman-Mandula theorem. 
* * * 
In theories with only massless particles Eq. (24.B.30) does not necessarily 
follow from Eq. (24.B.28); since pJlpJl = 0, we can also have 
(24.B.33) 
In this case the symmetry algebra consists of internal symmetries plus the 
algebra of the conformal group, which is spanned by generators KJl and 
D together with the generators Jll'~~ and pll of the Poincare group. The 
commutation relations are 
[Pil, D] = iPJl, 
[Kil, D] = -iKJl, 
[Pil, K"] = 2irJJl'~~D + 2iJil", 
[Kil, K"] = 0, 
(24.B.34) 
[JPu , K ll] = i17JlP Ku -
irJJlu K P , 
(JPu , D] = 0 , 

22 
24 Historical Introduction 
together with the commutation relations (2.4.12)-(2.4.14) of the Poincare 
algebra 
i [Jf'V, JllO"] = 11vp jJ.la _ 111'P ru _ 11ul' JPV + 11uv JPI' , 
i[P~', JllO"] =11"ppu -11JmpP, 
(24.B.35) 
[P" , PP] = 0 . 
The infinitesimal group element 
U(1 + m,t:,A.,p) = 1 + (ij2)J"vmJlv + iPJleJl + iA.D + iKJlpJl 
(24.B.36) 
induces the infinitesimal spacetime transformation 
(24.B.37) 
These are the most general infinitesimal spacetime transformations that 
leave the light-cone invariant. 
Problems 
1. Show that the most general symmetry algebra allowed under the 
assumptions of the Coleman-Mandula theorem in the case where 
all particles are massless consists of internal symmetry generators 
plus either the Poincare algebra or the conformal algebra (24.B.34), 
(24.B.35). 
2. Show that the Gervais-Sakita action (24.2.5) is invariant under the 
worldsheet supersymmetry transformation (24.2.7). 
3. Calculate the change in the Wess-Zumino Lagrangian density (24.2.9) 
under the spacetime supersymmetry transformation (24.2.8). 
References 
1. B. Sakita, Phys. Rev. 136, B 1756 (1964); F. Gursey and L. A. 
Radicati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 173 (1964); A. Pais, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
13, 175 (1964); F. Gursey, A. Pais, and L. A. Radicati, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 13, 299 (1964). These articles are reprinted in Symmetry Groups 
in Nuclear and Particle Physics, F. J. Dyson, ed. (W. A. Benjamin, 
New York, 1966), along with a helpful set of Dyson's lecture notes 
on this subject. 
2. 
E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 51. 106 (1937). This is reproduced m 
Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle Physics, Ref. 1. 

References 
23 
3. A. Salam, R. Delbourgo, and J. Strathdee, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 
A 284, 146 (1965); M. A. Beg and A. Pais, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 267 
(1965); B. Sakita and K. C. Wali, Phys. Rev. 139, B 1355 (1965). 
These are reproduced in Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle 
Physics, Ref. 1. 
4. 
W. D. McGlinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 467 (1964); 0. W. Greenberg, 
Phys. Rev. 135, B 1447 (1964); L. Michel, Phys. Rev. 137, B 405 
(1964); L. Michel and B. Sakita, Ann. Inst. Henri-Poincare 2, 167 
(1965); M. A. B. Beg and A. Pais, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 509, 577 
(1965); S. Coleman, Phys. Rev. 138, B 1262 (1965); S. Weinberg, 
Phys. Rev. 139, B 597 (1965); L. O'Raifeartaigh, Phys. Rev. 139, B 
1052 (1965). These are reproduced in Symmetry Groups in Nuclear 
and Particle Physics, Ref. 1. 
5. S. Coleman and J. Mandula, Phys. Rev. 159, 1251 (1967). 
6. For an introduction with references to the original literature, see 
M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz, and E. Witten, Superstring Theory 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987); J. Polchinski, String 
Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998). 
7. 
P. Ramond, Phys. Rev. D3, 2415 (1971). This ·article is reprinted 
in Superstrings ~ The First 15 Years of Superstring Theory, J. H. 
Schwarz, ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1985). 
8. A Neveu and J. H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B31, 86 (1971); Phys. Rev. 
D4, 1109 (1971). These articles are reprinted in Superstrings~ The 
First 15 Years of Superstring Theory, Ref. 7. Also see Y. Aharonov, 
A. Casher, and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. D5, 988 (1972). 
9. J.-L. Gervais and B. Sak.ita, Nucl. Phys. B34, 632 (1971). This article 
is reprinted in Superstrings -
The First 15 Years of Superstring 
Theory, Ref. 7. 
10. J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70, 39 (1974). This article is 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World 
Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). 
11. J. Wess and B. Zumino,.Phys. Lett. 49B, 52 (1974). This article is 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 10. 
lla. F. Gliozzi, J. Scherk, and D. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B122, 253 (1977). 
12. Yu. A. Gol'fand and E. P. Likhtman, JETP Letters 13, 323 (1971). 
This article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 10. 
13. D. V. Volkov and V. P. Akulov, Phys. Lett. 46B, 109 (1973). This 
article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 10. 
14. M. Gell-Mann, Cal. Tech. Synchotron Laboratory Report CTSL-20 
(1961), unpublished. This is reproduced along with other articles on 

24 
24 Historical Introduction 
SU(3) symmetry in M. Gell-Mann and Y. Ne'eman, The Eightfold 
Way (Benjamin, New York, 1964). 
15. R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257 
(1975). This article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 10. 

25 
Supersymmetry Algebras 
This chapter will develop the form of the supersymmetry algebra from first 
principles, following the treatment of Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius.1 
As we shall see, under conditions in which the Coleman-Mandula theorem 
applies, this structure is almost uniquely fixed by the requirements of 
Lorentz invariance. The supermultiplet structure of one-particle states 
will then be deduced directly from the supersymmetry algebra. 
25.1 
Graded Lie Algebras and Graded Parameters 
We saw in Section 2.2 how to express any continuous symmetry trans-
formation in terms of a Lie algebra of linearly independent symmetry 
generators ta that satisfy commutation relations [ta, tb] = i Ec C~tc. In 
much the same way, supersymmetry is expressed in terms of symmetry 
generators ta that form a graded Lie algebra,Z embodied in commutation 
and anticommutation relations of the form 
tatb - ( -1 )'la'lb tbta = i 2::: c~btc . 
(25.1.1) 
c 
(The summation convention is suspended in this section.) Here 1'/a for each 
a is either +1 or 0 and is known as the grading of the generator ta, and 
the C~ are a set of numerical structure constants. Generators ta for which 
tfa = 1 are calledfermionic; the· others, for which 1'/a = 0, are called bosonic. 
Eq. (25.1.1) provides commutation relations for bosonic operators with 
each other and with fennionic operators, but anticommutation relations 
for fermionic operators with each other. We will come back soon to the 
motivation for Eq. (25.1.1); for the moment we will just take a look at its 
consequences for the structure constants. 
According to Eq. (25.1.1 ), the structure constants must satisfy the con-
ditions 
(25.1.2) 
25 

26 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
For any operator formed as a functional of field operators, the products 
of two bosonic or two fermionic operators are bosonic, and the products 
of a fermionic with a bosonic operator are fermionic, so that 
c~ = 0 unless 1'/c = 1'/a + 1'/b (mod 2) . 
(25.1.3) 
Also, for any operator formed in this way, the Hermitian adjoint of a 
bosonic or fermionic operator is, respectively, bosonic or fermionic. If the 
ta are Hermitian operators, then the structure constants satisfy a reality 
condition 
c" 
cc 
cab =-
ba. 
(25.1.4) 
The structure constants also satisfy a non-linear constraint, which fol-
lows from a super-Jacobi identity 
( -1 )'lc'7a [[ta, tb },tc} + ( -1 )'1a'lb [[tb, tc}, ta} + ( -1 )'lb'lc [[tc, taL tb} = 0 · 
(25.1.5) 
Here '[ ... }' denotes a commutatorfanticommutator like that appearing 
on the left-hand side of Eq. (25.1.1 ), but here extended to any graded 
operators 0, 0', etc. 
[0, O'} = OO'- ( -1)"<0 l'1(0'lo'O = - ( -1)"<0 l'I(O'l[O', 0} , 
(25.1.6) 
it now being understood that any product 0 = tatbtc · · · of generators is 
given a grading 17(0) = 1'/a +rJb +rJc +···(mod 2). (To prove Eq. (25.1.5), 
it is sufficient to prove that the coefficients of tatbtc and tatctb vanish, for 
then the symmetry of the left-hand side of Eq. (25.1.5) under the cyclic 
permutations abc ---.. bca ---.. cab will ensure that the coefficients of all other 
products of generators also vanish. The coefficient of tatbtc in Eq. (25.1.5) 
IS 
( -1 )'lc'la _ ( -1 )'1a'lb( -1 )'la('lb+'lc) = O , 
while the coefficient of tatctb is 
( -1 )'la'lb ( -1 )'lb'lc { -1 )'la('lb+'lc) _ { -1 )'lb'lc { -1 )'lc'la = 0 
1 
completing the proof.) By inserting Eq. (25.1.1) in Eq. (25.1.5), we find the 
constraint 
2.)-1)'1c'laC~Cdc + :2.)-1)'1a'lbCCcCda + L(-1)'1b'lcC~aCdb = 0. (25.1.7) 
d 
d 
d 
Of course, in the case where all generators are bosonic Eq. (25.1.5) is the 
usual Jacobi identity, and Eq. (25.1.7) is the usual non-linear condition 
(2.2.22) on the structure constants. 
Eq. (25.1.1) can be taken as our starting point, but it can also be given 
a motivation like that given for ordinary Lie algebras in Section 2.2, as 
a necessary feature of finite continuous symmetry transformations. The 

25.1 Graded Lie Algebras and Graded Parameters 
27 
difference is that now these transformations depend on continuous graded 
parameters. A set of graded c-number parameters can be thought of as 
'numbers,' including Grassmann parameters (see Section 9.5) as well as 
ordinary numbers, which satisfy the associative and distributive rules of 
arithmetic, but which instead of simply commuting satisfy relations 
(J.a ph = ( -1)'1a'lb pb(J.a, 
(25.1.8) 
where~. pa, ... are used to distinguish different values of the ath param-
eter, in the same way that in vector algebra we might let va and ua denote 
the a-components of different values of some real vector. Again the ath 
graded parameter is given a grading Yla equal to +1 or 0 when ~ is a 
fermionic or bosonic parameter, respectively. That is, these parameters 
commute if either is bosonic, and anticommute if both are fermionic. 
The product ~pbyc · · · of a set of graded parameters is given the grading 
Yla +Yib +Yic + · · · (mod 2); that is, such a product is fermionic if it involves 
an odd number of fermionic parameters, and is otherwise bosonic. With 
this grading, it is easy to see that products of graded parameters satisfy a 
commutation or anticommutation rule just like Eq. (25.1.8). 
Consider a continuous transformation T((J.), given by a formal power 
series in the graded parameters ~ : 
T((J.) = 1 + L(J.ata + L~~tab + · · · 
(25.1.9) 
a 
ab 
where ta, tab, etc. are a set of (I.-independent operator coefficients, not 
yet assumed to satisfy any algebraic relations like Eq. (25.1.1). Because 
the parameters (J.a satisfy Eq. (25.1.8), the coefficients tab··· must satisfy 
symmetry/ antisymmetry conditions, such as 
tab= (-1)'1a'lbtba. 
(25.1.10) 
It is convenient also to assume that the transformation T(P) commutes 
with any value (J.a of any graded parameter, in which case the operator 
coefficients in (25.1.9) satisfy the conditions 
(25.1.11) 
(25.1.12) 
That is, tb and the commute or anticommute with graded parameters as 
if they were graded parameters themselves, with grading Y/b and Y/b + Y/c 
(mod 2), respectively. 
The other constraints on these operators follow from the requirement 
that the T((J.) form a semi-group; that is, that the product of the operators 
for different values (J. and p of the graded parameters is itself a T -operator 
T((J.)T(P) = T(f((J.,p)), 
(25.1.13) 

28 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
where fC(r:x, P) is itself a formal power series in the graded parameters. 
Because T(O)T(p) = T(p) and T(r:x.)T(O) = T(r:x), we must have 
F(O, {J) = pc • 
r(r:x, 0) =(XC' 
(25.1.14) 
and therefore the power series expansion for f(r:x, p) must take the form 
F(r:x.,p) =a'+ pc + L f~b ri'" ph+··· , 
(25.1.15) 
ab 
where f~ is a set of ordinary (that is, bosonic) constants, and '· · ·' 
denotes terms of third or higher order in the graded parameters. In order 
for fC(r:x.,p) to be a graded parameter, it is necessary for each term in 
Eq. (25.1.15) to have the same grading, which implies that 
~~ = 0 unless rrc = rra + rrb (mod 2) . 
(25.1.16) 
Inserting the power series (25.1.9) and (25.1.15) into the product rule 
(25.1.13) gives 
[1 + L !Xata + Lri'"c/tab + · · ·] [1 + L pata + L papbtab + · · ·] 
a 
ab 
a 
ab 
= 1 + L 
( !Xc + pc + L f~r:xa pb + ... ) tc 
c 
ab 
+ L ( 
r:xc + pc + ... ) (ad + pd + ... ) ted + ... 
cd 
The coefficients of 1, ri'", pa, r:xafl, and papb match on both sides of this 
equation, but the condition that the coefficients of ri'" ph are the same yields 
the non-trivial relation 
( -1 )'la'lb tatb = L f~tc + tab + ( -1 )'la'lb tba = L f~tc + 2tab . 
(25.1.17) 
c 
c 
(The sign factor on the left-hand side arises from the interchange of ta 
and ph.) Together with higher-order relations of the same sort, this allows 
us to calculate the whole function (25.1.9) if we know the generators ta 
and the group-composition function fa( a, p). But for this to be possible, 
ta must satisfy a constraint. Using Eq. (25.1.10), the difference or sum of 
Eq. (25.1.17) and the same equation with a and b interchanged yields the 
Lie superalgebra relations Eq. (25.1.1), with structure constants given by 
iC~ = (-1)"""bf~b- jga. 
(25.1.18) 
Also, Eq. (25.1.3) follows immediately from Eqs. (25.1.16) and (25.1.18). 
The complex conjugate a· of an anticommuting c-number a is defined 
so that the Hermitian adjoint of the product of a and an arbitrary operator 
l9 is 
(25.1.19) 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
29 
It follows that products of c-numbers behave the same under complex 
conjugation as operators do under Hermitian conjugation: 
(rx{J)* = {J*rx* , 
(25.1.20) 
and that rx'" has the same grading as rx. 
The graded Lie algebras of importance to physics are severely restricted 
by spacetime symmetries. 
We now tum to a consideration of these 
restrictions. 
25.2 
Supersymmetry Algebras 
Consider a g<:meral graded Lie algebra of symmetry generators that com-
mute with the S -matrix. If Q is any of the fermionic symmetry generators, 
then so will be u-1(A) Q U(A), where U(A) is the quantum mechanical 
operator corresponding to an arbitrary homogeneous Lorentz transfor-
mation AJ'y. Therefore u-1(A) Q U(A) is a linear combination of the 
complete set of fermionic symmetry generators, and hence this set of gen-
erators must furnish a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group. 
The individual generators may therefore be classified according to the 
irreducible representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group to which 
they belong. 
As described in Section 5.6, the representations of the homogeneous 
Lorentz group furnished by any set of operators can be specified by giving 
their commutation relations with generators A and B, defined by 
A = ! ( J + iK) , 
B = ! ( J - iK) , 
(25.2.1) 
where J and K are the Hermitian generators of rotations and boosts, 
respectively. These satisfy the commutation relations 
[Ai, Aj] = L:>=ijkAk' 
[Bi, Bj] = L EijkBk , 
[Ai, Bj] = 0, 
(25.2.2) 
k 
k 
where i, j, and k run over the values 1, 2, 3, and Eijk is totally antisym-
metric, with Et23 = +1. Thus representations of the homogeneous Lorentz 
group are labelled, like states with two independent spins, by a pair of 
integers or half-integers A and B, with elements of the representation 
labelled by a pair of indices a and b, which run by unit steps from -A 
to +A and from -B to +B, respectively. More specifically, a set of 
(2A + 1)(2B + 1) operators Q1f that form an (A, B) representation of the 
homogeneous Lorentz group satisfies the commutation relations 
[A, Q1f] =-2:.1: ~f, 
[B, Q1f] =- LJ~!} Q:9, (25.2.3) 
d 
d 

30 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
where JU) is the spin three-vector matrix for angular momentum j: 
( U>) 
J3 
= {Ju'uU . 
u'u 
(25.2.4) 
From Eq. (25.2.4 ), it follows that 
-(JU>)• 
= (-1)u'-u(JU)) , 
. 
ql,u 
-u ,-u 
(25.2.5) 
Thus if Qt are a set of operators that transform according to the spin 
j representation of the rotation group, then so are (-1).i-qgi~u· Also, 
Eq. (25.2.1) shows that A* = B. 
By taking Hermitian adjoints in 
Eq. (25.2.3), we see that the Hermitian adjoint Q!af* of operators that 
transform according to the (A, B) representation of the homogeneous 
Lorentz group are related by a similarity transformation to operators Q.:aA 
that transform according to the (B,A) representation: 
Q~· = (-1)A-a (-1)B-b Q~t.-a. 
(25.2.6) 
The Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem1 states in part that the fermion 
symmetry generators can only belong to the (0, 1/2) and (1/2, 0) represen-
tations. As we have seen, the Hermitian adjoint of a (0, 1/2) or (1/2,0) 
operator is a linear combination respectively of ( 1/2, 0) or (0, 1 /2) opera-
tors, so the complete set of fermionic symmetry operators may be divided 
into (0, 1/2) generators Qar (with the superscript 0! omitted) and their 
(1/2, 0) Hermitian adjoints Q:r, where a is a spinor index running over the 
values + 1/2, and r is used to distinguish different two-component gener-
ators with the same Lorentz transformation properties. •• 
The theorem 
further states that the fermionic generators may be defined so as to satisfy 
the anticommutation relations 
{Qar, Qbs} = 21Jrs~Pil, 
{Qar, Qbs} = eab Zrs, 
(25.2.7) 
(25.2.8) 
where P" is the four-momentum operator, the Zrs = -Zsr are bosonic 
symmetry generators, and u 11 and e are the 2 x 2 matrices (with rows and 
• We use an asterisk for the Hermitian adjoint of an operator or the complex conjugate 
of a number. The dagger t will be used for the transpose of the matrix formed from 
the Hermitian adjoints of operators or complex conjugates of numbers. 
•• We are using roman instead of italic letters for the two-component Weyl spinors Qar. 
to distinguish them from four-component Dirac spinors that will be introduced later 
in this section. There is a notation due to van der Waerden, according to which a 
(0, 1/2) operator like Q is written with dotted indices, as Q .... , while ( 1/2, 0) operators 
are written with undotted indices. We will not use this notation here, but will instead 
explicitly indicate which two-component spinors transform according to the (0, 1/2) 
or (1/2,0) representations of th1~ homogeneous Lorentz group. 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
columns labelled +1/2, -1/2): 
CTl = ( ~ ~ ) , 
uo = ( ~ ~ ) ' 
31 
Finally, the fermionic generators commute with energy and momentum: 
[Pil, Oar]= [Pil, o:,] = 0. 
(25.2.10) 
and the Zrs and z;s are a set of central charges of this algebra, in the 
sense that 
0 = [Zrs' Oat] = [Zrs. o:tl = [Zrs' Ztu] = [Zrs' z:-u] 
= [z;s, Oatl = [Z7:, 0~] = [Z;st z:-u] . 
(25.2.11) 
To prove these results, let us start by considering non-vanishing fermionic 
symmetry generators that belong to some (A, B) irreducible representation 
of the homogeneous Lorentz group, and that therefore may be labelled 
Q:f, where a and b run by unit steps from -A to +A and from -B to 
+B, respectively. As already mentioned, the Hermitian adjoint is related 
to operators belonging to the (B, A) representation by Eq. (25.2.6), so the 
anticommutator of these operators must take the form 
A+B 
A+B 
C 
D 
{Q::. Q~f,*} = (-1l-a'(-1)B-b' L 
L L L 
C=IA-BI D=IA-BI c=-C d<=-D 
X CAB(Cc; a, -b') CAB(Dd; -a'b)x;p , 
(25.2.12) 
where CAB(ju;ab) is the usual Clebsch-Gordan coefficient for coupling 
spins A and B to form spin j, and x;p is the ( c, d)-component of an 
operator that transforms according to the ( C, D) representation of the 
homogeneous Lorentz group. Using the well-known unitarity properties 
of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, we may express the operator X'Jl in 
terms of these ariticommutators: 
A 
B 
A 
B 
x';l = L L L L (-1)A-a(-1)B-b' 
a=-A b=-B a'=-A b'=-B 
X CAB(Cc;a- b') CAB(Dd;-a'b){qAaf, Q:,f,*}. (25.2.13) 
Not all of these operators are necessarily non-zero. But the only non-zero 
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients CABUu, ab) for j = u =A+ B and j = -u = 
A+ B are the ones for a= A, b = B and a= -A, b = -B, respectively, 
which both have the value unity, so by taking C = D = c = -d = A + B 
in Eq. (25.2.13), we find that 
XA+B.A+B = (-1)2B {QAB 
QAB• } 
A+B, -A-B 
A,-B• 
A,-B · 
(25.2.14) 

32 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
This cannot vanish unless Q:t-B = 0, which would imply (taking com-
mutators with the 'lowering' operators At - iAz and 'raising' operators 
Bt + iBz) that all the Q'if vanish. Hence if there are any non-vanishing 
(A, B) fermionic generators, then their anticommutators with their ad joints 
must at least involve non-zero bosonic symmetry generators belonging to 
the (A+ B,A +B) representation. 
Now, the Coleman-Mandula theorem tells us that the bosonic symme-
try generators consist of the (1/2, 1/2) generators Pp. of translations, the 
(1,0) + (0, 1) generators Jp.v of proper Lorentz transformations, and per-
haps the (0, 0) generators TA of various internal symmetries. (Recall that 
symmetric traceless tensors of rank N transform according to the represen-
tation ( N /2, N /2), antisymmetric tensors of rank 2 transform according 
to the representation (1, 0) + (0, 1), while Dirac fields transform according 
to the representation (1/2, 0) + (0, 1/2).) Hence the fermionic symmetry 
generators can only belong to representations (A, B) with A + B < 1/2. 
These operators turn bosons into fermions and vice-versa, so they cannot 
be scalars, leaving only the (1/2, 0) and (0,1/2) representations, as was to 
be shown. Labelling the linearly independent (0, 1/2) fermionic genera-
tors as Qar, the anticommutator { Qar, Q,b3} belongs to the representation 
(0,1/2) x (1/2, 0) = (1/2,1/2), and therefore must be proportional to the 
only ( 1/2, 1/2) bosonic symmetry generator, the momentum four-vector 
P p.· Lorentz in variance dictates that the form of this relation must be 
(25.2.15) 
where N,s is a numerical matrix. 
To see this, we use the isomorphism of the Lorentz group (or more 
properly its covering group) with the group S L(2, C) of two-dimensional 
unimodular complex matrices A., discussed in Section 2.7. The effect of a 
Lorentz transformation A~' v on the (0, 1/2) fermionic generators is 
u-1(A)Qar U(A) = LAab Qbr. 
b 
where A is the Lorentz transformation defined by 
A. up. ;.t =A" p.t:Tv • 
(25.2.16) 
(25.2.17) 
We can check that Eq. (25.2.16) applies for (0,1/2) operators by noting 
that for an infinitesimal Lorentz transformation A~-' 11 = 
b~' v + mP. v with 
m"'v = -ru""'' Eq. (25.2.17) is satisfied for 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
33 
whilet 
U(A) = 1 + ! iwJlv Jll" = 1 + ! icijkW;jJk- iw;oKi. 
(Repeated latin indices i, j, k are summed over values 1 , 2, 3.) In this 
case, by equating the coefficients of Wij and w;o in Eq. (25.2.16), we find 
that 
[J, Qa] = -LL:aab Qb, 
b 
or, equivalently, 
[B, Qa] = -! LaabQb, 
b 
[K, Qa] = -
~ i La ab Qb , 
b 
[A, Qa] = 0, 
which shows that an operator satisfying Eq. (25.2.16) belongs to the (0, 1/2) 
representation. Now, the a Jl form a complete set of 2 x 2 matrices, so we 
can put the anticommutator {Qar. Q;;s} in the form Nf!s (aJl)ab, where NJl 
is some matrix of operators. Eqs. (25.2.16) and (25.2.17) show that these 
operators are four~vectors, in the sense that u-1(A)NJlU(A) = AJlv N'~, and 
so by the Coleman-Mandula theorem they must be proportional to PJl, 
the only four-vector of bosonic symmetry operators. Setting Nfs = 2PJt Nrs 
then gives Eq. (25.2.15). 
Now we will apply a linear transformation to the Qar, to put their 
anticommutators in the form (25.2. 7). 
For this purpose, we need to 
establish that the matrix Nrs is Hermitian and positive-definite. That 
it is Hermitian follows immediately bx. taking the Hermitian adjoint 
of Eq. (25.2.15). To see that it is positive-definite, recall that the Qar 
are taken linearly independent, so for any non-zero linear combination 
Q = l:r da c, Qar there must be some state I'P) that Q does not annihilate. 
Taking the expectation value of Eq. (25.2.15) in this state implies that 
2('PI L u:bPJldadb I'P) L c,c;Nrs = ('PI{Q, Q*}I'P) > 0. 
ab 
rs 
This shows immediately that l:rs c,c;Nrs cannot vanish for any c, that 
are not all zero, so Nrs is either positive-definite or negative-definite. The 
operator l:ab(aJl)abP.Udadb is positive on the space of physical states with 
-PJlP.u > 0 and P0 > 0, so the matrix N,8 must be positive-definite.tt 
tHere Ki is defined as JKJ. There was a mistake in the first two printings of Volume 1: 
Ki was defined as JiO in Sections 2.4, 3.3, and 3.5, but as JiO in Sections 5.6 and 5.9, 
with A and 8 throughout given by Eq. (25.2.1). 
tt Tbis argument may be turned around. Assuming a supersymmetry with N,. positive-
definite, as in Eq. (25.2.7), we can deduce that P 0 > 0 for all states.2 However, this 
conclusion is not valid when gravitation is taken into account, and unless gravitation 
is taken into account a shift in the energy of all states by the same amount would 
have no physical effects. 

34 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
We may now define new fermionic generators 
0 ' _ "'"'N-l/20 
ar=~ rs 
as, 
s 
for which the anticommutators take the form 
{ o:r. o/,:} = 2brs (T~ p Jl • 
From now on we shall assume that the fermionic generators are defined 
in this way, and drop the primes, so that Eq. (25.2.7) is satisfied. 
Next we must show that the Oar commute with the momentum four· 
vector PJl. The commutator of a (1/2, 1/2) operator like PJl with a (0,1/2) 
operator like 0 can only be a (1/2,0) or (1/2, 1) operator, but we have 
seen that there are no (1 j2, 1) symmetry generators, so the commutator 
of Pp. with O can only be proportional to the (1/2,0) symmetry generator 
0*. Lorentz invariance requires this relation to take the form 
[.,11 ab, Ocr] = L eac Krs O.bs , 
(25.2.18) 
s 
where K is a numerical matrix, and .,II is the matrix of operators 
.;{{ = (T 1-'pll . 
(25.2.19) 
(The matrix eac is the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient for coupling two spins 
1/2 to give zero spin.) It is straightforward then to calculate that 
[.,11_!-1• [.,11_1-1• {O!r• Ois}]] = -4(.,11)_!-i(KKt)rs. 
(25.2.20) 
Using Eq. (25.2.7), the left·hand side is a linear combination of multiple 
commutators [PI-', [Pv, P1]], all of which vanish, while (.,II)-1/Z-I/Z is non· 
zero for generic momenta, so KKt = 0, and therefore K = 0, which 
with Eq. (25.2.18) shows that [PIJ,Oarl = 0. The complex conjugate gives 
[PI-', O:rJ = 0. 
Now we can take up the anticommutator of two Os. The anticommu· 
tator of two (0, 1 /2) symmetry generators must be a linear combination 
of (0, 1) and (0, 0) symmetry generators. The Coleman-Mandula theorem 
tells us that the only (0, 1) symmetry generators are linear combinations 
of the generators Jv1 of proper homogeneous Lorentz transfiDrmations, 
but since the Os commute with PI-' so must their anticommutators, and 
Eq. (2.4.13) shows that no linear combination of the Jvl commutes with 
P w This leaves just (0, 0) operators, which commute with both P ~-' and J IJY· 
Lorentz invariance then requires the anticommutators of the Os: with each 
other to take the form of Eq. (25.2.8). The internal symmetry generators 
Zrs are antisymmetric in r and s because the whole expression must be 
symmetric under interchange of r and a with s and b, and the matrix eab 
is antisymmetric in a and b. 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
35 
It now only remains to show that the Zs are central charges. It follows 
immediately from Eqs. (25.2.8) and (25.2.10) that 
[PJl, Zrs] = 0 . 
(25.2.21) 
Next consider the generalized Jacobi identity (25.1.5) involving two Qs 
and a Q*: 
o =[{Oar. ObsL Q~tl + [{Qbs. o;t}, Oarl + [{Q;t, Oar}. Obsl. 
Eqs. (25.2.7) and (25.2.10) show that the second and third terms vanish, 
so 
(25.2.22) 
Finally, consider the generalized Jacobi identity for a Z, a Q, and a Q•: 
0 = -[Z,s. {Oat. Qbu}l + {Qbu• [Zrs. Oatl}- {Oat. [Qbu• Zrsl}. 
The first and third terms vanish because of Eqs. (25.2.21) and (25.2.22), 
respectively, so we are left with the second term 
{ Qbu, [Zrs• Oat]} = 0 . 
(25.2.23) 
Now, [Zrs. Qatl is a (0, 1/2) symmetry generator, so it must be a linear 
combination of the Qs: 
[Zrs• Oat] = L Mrstu Qau. 
(25.2.24) 
u 
Eq. (25.2.23) then reads 
u~PJlMrstu = 0, 
for all a, b, r, s, t, and u. Since the operator u~PJl is not zero, we conclude 
that Mrstu = 0, so that 
(25.2.25) 
Using the anticommutation relation (25.2.8) and its adjoint together with 
the commutation relations (25.2.22) and (25.2.25) and their adjoints then 
gives 
[Zrs , Ztu] = [Zrs, Z~] = [Z;s, zt:l = 0 , 
(25.2.26) 
which finishes the proof of Eq. (25.2.11), and with it the proof of the 
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem. 
Of course, the fact that the Zrs are central charges of the supersymmetry 
algebra does not rule out the possibility that there may be other Abelian or 
non-Abelian internal symmetries. Let TA span the complete Lie algebra 
of bosonic internal symmetries. Then [TA, Oar] is a (0, 1/2) symmetry 
generator, so it must be a linear combination of the Qs: 
[TA, Oar] =- L(tA)rsQas · 
(25.2.27) 
s 

36 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
From the Jacobi identity for two Ts and a Q, we learn that thetA matrices 
furnish a representation of the internal symmetry algebra 
[tA , tB] = i L ClB tc , 
(25.2.28) 
c 
where the coefficients C~B are the structure constants of the internal 
symmetry algebra 
[TA, TB] = iL c1B Tc. 
(25.2.29) 
c 
The Z,5 will then be central charges not only of the superalgebra con-
sisting of the Qs, Q*s, Pp.. Zs, and Z*s, but also of the larger symmetry 
superalgebra that in addition contains all the TA. To see this, note from 
Eqs. (25.2.27) and (25.2.8) that 
[TA, Zrs] =- L(tA)rrZr's- L{tA)ss'Zrs' , 
r' 
s' 
so the Zrs form an invariant Abelian subalgebra of the whole bosonic 
symmetry algebra. But recall that in proving the Coleman-Mandula 
theorem we found that the complete Lie algebra of internal bosonic 
symmetries, which in our case is spanned by the TA, is isomorphic to 
a direct sum of a compact semi-simple Lie algebra and several U(l) 
algebras. The only invariant Abelian subalgebras of such a Lie algebra 
are spanned by U(l) generators, so the Zrs must be U(l) generators, and 
hence commute with all the TA. 
Even though the Z s commute with all symmetry generators, they are 
not just numbers; they are quantum operators, whose value may vary from 
state to state. In fact, the Z s must obviously take the value zero for a 
supersymmetric vacuum state, which is annihilated by all supersymmetry 
generators, but they need not vanish in general. In Section 27.9 we 
will see how the Z s may be calculated in gauge theories with extended 
supersymmetry. 
In the absence of central charges, the supersymmetry algebra (25.2.7), 
(25.2.8) is invariant under a group U(N) of internal symmetries 
(25.2.30) 
with V,5 an N x N unitary (not necessarily unimodular) matrix. This 
is known as R-symmetry. This symmetry may or may not be a good 
symmetry of the action, and if it is then it may be violated by anomalies, 
or it may be spontaneously broken, or it may be a good symmetry of 
nature. 
A supersymmetry algebra where r, s, etc. run over N > 1 values is 
known as anN-extended supersymmetry. Where there is just one Q, the 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
37 
condition Zrs = -Zsr tells us that the Z s vanish, yielding a simpler form 
of the anticommutation relations 
{Qa, Qb} = 2CT~ pfj, 
{Qa, Qb} = 0 · 
(25.2.31) 
(25.2.32) 
This is known as the case of simple supersymmetry, or N = 1 super-
symmetry. In this case the R-symmetry transformations are U(1) phase 
transformations 
Qa -+ exp( iqJ) Qa , 
(25.2.33) 
with qJ a real phase. 
For several purposes it is convenient to combine the (0, 1/2) operators 
Oar together with (1/2, 0) operators, which according to Eq. (25.2.6) inay 
be taken as eabQi,,, into four-component Majorana spinor generators Qcu, 
defined as 
Q -
( eQ; ) 
r = 
Q, 
' 
or more explicitly 
Qlr = Q~~r • Qzr = -Q~r' Q3r = Q~,' Q4r = Q-!r · 
This is a Majorana spinor in the sense that 
Q, = -pt:ysQ;' 
(25.2.34) 
where p, E, and 1'5 are 4 x 4 matrices that may be written as the 2 x 2 
block matrices: 
P=(i ~) 
c=(~ ~) 
(The properties of Majorana spinors are reviewed in the appendix to 
Chapter 26.) The form (25.2.34) is chosen in accordance with the usual 
notation for the four-component Dirac representation of the homogeneous 
Lorentz group, in which according to Eq. (5.4.4) the rotation and boost 
generators are represented according to Eqs. (5.4.19) and (5.4.20) by 
1 [ O'j 
0 ] 
Ji = 2 
0 
O'j 
' 
:Ki = _.!_ [ O'j 
0 ] . 
2 
0 
-CTi 
(25.2.35) 
With Eq. (25.2.1), this shows that the operators A and B act only on the 
top two and bottom two components of the Dirac spinor, respectively, 
which is why we use the (0, 1/2) operators Qar as the bottom rather than 
the top components· in Eq. (25.2.34). 

38 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
In this four-component notation, the fundamental anticommutation 
relations (25.2.31) and (25.2.32) for simple supersymmetry read 
{ Q, Q} = 2 ( a Jl~P -e (a '({Jl)T e ) = -2i P Jl yll . 
(25.2.36) 
Our notation for Dirac matrices is reviewed in the Preface to this volume; 
here we need only recall that 
o 
·a 
. ( 0 
no ) 
}' = -lp = -J 
O'Q 
0 
' 
. ( 
0 
t1 ) 
Y = -J -a 0 
' 
(25.2.37) 
while eaT e = a, ea0e = -a0, and as usual Q = Qt f3. The presence of 
central charges will change this formula in the case of extended super-
symmetry; instead of Eq. (25.2.36), we have 
{ 
-
} _ 
• 
Jl 
( 1 + Ys) • ( 1 - }'s) 
Qr, Qs - -2lPpy brs + - 2-
Zsr + 
2 
Zrs. 
(25.2.38) 
The analysis presented here for the case of four spacetime dimensions 
will be repeated, in a somewhat less explicit form, for general spacetime 
dimensions in Chapter 32. As we will see there, the supersymmetry 
generators always belong to the fundamental spinor representation of the 
higher-dimensional Lorentz group, even in theories with extended objects 
that allow the construction of bosonic symmetry generators other than 
those allowed by the Coleman-Mandula theorem. 
* * * 
In theories of massless particles that are invariant under the conformal 
symmetry algebra (24.B.34}-(24.B.35) there are two additional bosonic 
symmetry generators D and Kp that can appear on the right-hand side of 
the supersymmetry anticommutation relations. These new generators have 
the Lorentz transformation properties of a scalar and a vector, respectively, 
just like Zrs and P Jl• so once again the fermionic generators must belong 
to the fundamental (1/2,0) spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra, 
and its Hermitian adjoint, the (0, 1/2) representation. It is convenient 
to classify all generators also according to their commutators with the 
dilation generator D; an operator X is said to have dimensionality a if 
[X, D] = iaX. 
(25.2.39) 
Inspection of Eq. (24.B.34) shows that the bosonic symmetry generators 
Jll'~, Pll, Kll, and D have dimensionalities 0, +1, -1, and 0, respectively. 
Also, the generators of any Lie group of internal symmetries have dimen-
sionality 0. The anticommutator of a fermionic generator of dimensionality 
a with its adjoint is a positive-definite bosonic operator of dimensionality 
2a, so since the only positive-definite bosonic symmetry generators are 
linear combinations of the components of P Jl and K Jl• the only fermionic 

25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras 
39 
symmetry generators have dimensionalities +1/2 and -1/2. The (0, 1/2) 
fermionic symmetry generators of dimensionality 1/2 and their adjoints 
may again be assembled into Majorana spinors Qnh with 
{ Qrll , Qsp} = - 2iP 1kyll)llp<5rs , 
[ P 1-l , Qrll] = 0 , 
[D, Qrll] = - !i Qrll · 
(25.2.40) 
(25.2.41) 
(25.2.42) 
(Note that central charges are not allowed here, because their dimension-
ality would be 0, not +1.) The commutators of the Kll with the Qrll 
are linear combinations of Majorana fermionic symmetry generators Qfll, 
which Lorentz invariance allows us to write in the form 
(25.2.43) 
(An arbitrary factor on the right-hand side has been absorbed into the 
normalization of Q~p· The phase of the right-hand, side is chosen so 
that Q~p will satisfY the standard reality condition (26.A.2) for Majorana 
spinors.) The Q~p have dimensionality +1/2- 1 = -1/2, so 
(25.2.44) 
Taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.43) with P" and using the commutator 
of Kll with P" given by Eq. (24.B.34) gives 
(25.2.45) 
We see that the Qs and Q#s are paired. By taking the commutator of the 
anticommutation relation (25.2.40) with Kll we find the anticommutators 
of the Q#s and Qs: 
{Qrll, Qsp] = 2iD<5rs<>tlp + 2Jw<>rs.f~p + Ors<>llp + O~s('ys)llp , 
(25.2.46) 
where .fll" = -i[yll, y
11]/4, and 0 73 and o;s are Lorentz invariant operators 
of zero dimensionality with 
Ors =- Osr, 
(25.2.47) 
Taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.43) with Kv and using the fact that 
[Kv,KIJ] = 0, we find that (yiJ)Ilp [K", Q,p] is symmetric in J1 and v, which 
with a little algebra tells us that 
[K",Q,p] = 0. 
Also, taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.46) with Kv gives 
{ Q~, Q# sp} = +2iK!-l(yll)llp<5rs · 
(25.2.48) 
(25.2.49) 
Finally, taking the commutator of Eq. (25.246) with Qty shows that Drs and 
O~s act as the generators of the R-symmetry group U(N), with the left- and 

40 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
right-handed parts of Q,a: transforming according to the representations 
Nand Nl respectively, while the PJ.L, KJ.L, and D are U(N)-invariant. The 
U ( N) commutation relations of these generators with each other and with 
other generators together with Eqs. (24.B.34), (24.B.35), (25.2.40H25.2.49) 
and the commutators of J w~ and D with the various generators constitute 
the superconformal algebra. One of the outstanding differences between 
this algebra and that of ordinary simple or N -extended supersymmetry 
is that the U(N) symmetry is not merely an outer automorphism of the 
algebra that may or may not be a symmetry of the action -
it is a part 
of the superconformal algebra, which therefore must be a symmetry of 
any action that is supersymmetric and confonnally invariant 
25.3 
Space Inversion Properties of Supersymmetry Generators 
In theories that respect the conservation of parity, the result P~
1 QarP of 
acting on the fermionic symmetry generator Qar with the parity operator 
P must also be a fermionic symmetry generator. Since Ji and Ki are 
respectively even and odd under space inversion, Eq. (25.2.1) shows that 
the effect of acting on Ai with the parity operator is 
(25.3.1) 
According to Eq. (25.2.3), the definition of Qar as a (0, 1/2) operator 
means that 
[B;, Qar] = - f L ( ffi) ab Qbr , 
b 
Applying the parity operator yields 
[A, I p-1QarP] =- f L (a,) p-lQbrP I 
b 
ab 
(25.3.2) 
so p-1Qa,P is a (1/2, 0) symmetry generator, and therefore must be a linear 
combination of the Q;,.. According to Eq. (25.2.6), Lorentz invariance 
dictates the form of this relation as 
p-1QarP = L ?JJ,s eabQbs ' 
bs 
(25.3.4) 
where flJ is a numerical matrix, and the matrix e is given by Eq. (25.2.9). 
We can learn something about the properties of the matrix f!lJ by requir-
ing that Eq. (25.3.4) be consistent with the fundamental anticommutation 
relation (25.2.7). Eq. (25.3.4) and its adjoint yield 
p-l { Qar, Qbs}P = L f!lJ rt eac f!JJ.:U ebd { Q;t, Qdu} · 
cdtu 

25.3 Space Inversion Properties of Supersymmetry Generators 
41 
Inserting Eq. (25.2. 7), this becomes 
hrsG'~ p-l P !lp = 'I~>31' rt eac t'J:U ebd htu G'~c P !l · 
cdtu 
But ea(e-1 = -ai and eaJe-1 = +o-o, while p-l PiP= -Pi and p-1 PoP= 
P0, so this reduces to the statement that t'J is unitary 
{'J {'Jt = 1 . 
(25.3.5) 
The matrix t'J is to some extent arbitrary, because for any set of 
fermionic generators Oar that satisfies Eqs. (25.3.2) and (25.2.7), we con-
struct another set Q~, that also satisfies Eqs. (25.3.2) and (25.2.7) by a 
unitary transformation 
qJt = cft-1 
' 
s 
so that the parity transformation rule (25.3.4) becomes 
p-IQ~,P = L:~seabQb:, 
bs 
where 
(25.3.6) 
(25.3.7) 
(25.3.8) 
For simple supersymmetry t'J is just a 1 x 1 phase factor, and Eq. (25.3.4) 
reads 
p-1QaP = t'J L eabQb. 
b 
Combining this with its adjoint gives 
p-2Qa p2 = -Qa' 
(25.3.9) 
(25.3.10) 
independently of the value chosen for the phase factor t'J. This has the 
striking consequence that if a boson in a supermultiplet of particles has a 
real intrinsic parity, then the fermions obtained by acting on this boson 
state with Qa have imaginary intrinsic parities. 
Because for simple supersymmetry i.fl and t'J are just phase factors, it is 
obvious from Eq. (25.3.8) that by a suitable choice of i.f/, the phase factor 
9' can be made anything we like. It will be convenient to choose 9' = +i, 
so that Eq. (25.3.7) takes the simple form (now dropping primes) 
p-lQaP = iL: eabQb. 
(25.3.11) 
b 
Just as for spinor field operators, the representation of space inversion is 
simpler if we combine the (0, 1/2) operators Qa and the (1/2, 0) operators 
Lb eabQi, into the four-component Dirac spinor generator Qa defined by 

42 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
Eq. (25.2.34). In these terms, Eq. (25.3.11) and its adjoint read 
p-1Q p = ip Q. 
(25.3.12) 
(We are using the notation for Dirac matrices given in Section 5.4 and in 
the Preface to this volume, which gives 
P=(~ ~), 
where 1 and 0 are understood as 2 x 2 submatrices.) 
For extended supersymmetry it is not always possible to choose 111.1 so 
that r!l' is diagonal. However, a theorem in matrix algebra (proved in 
Appendix C of Chapter 2) shows that it is possible to choose 111.1 so that 
r!l' is block diagonal, in general with some of the matrices on the diagonal 
equal to 1 x 1 submatrices that can be chosen equal to i (or any other 
phase factors we like), and other submatrices on the diagonal given by 
2 x 2 matrices that can be chosen to have the form 
( 
0 
exp(icj>) ) 
exp(-icj>) 
0 
' 
with various phases cj>. Correspondingly, with this choice of 111.1 (and now 
dropping primes) the two-component Qs are of two types. The Qs of the 
first type also satisfy Eq. (25.3.11): 
P-1Qa,.P = i L eab Qi,r. 
(25.3.13) 
b 
The two-component Qs of the second type come in pairs, which we will 
call Oasl and Oas2. with the sth pair having the parity transformation rule 
p-I Oasl p = eirPs L eab Qbs2 ' 
b 
In particular, we now have 
p-20astP2 = -~ir/JsQasl • 
p-l Oas2 P = e-ir/Jj L eab Qbsl . (25.3.14) 
b 
P-2Q 
p2 _ 
-2ir/JsQ 
as2 
- -e 
as2 · 
(25.3.15) 
This shows that, unless cPs = 0 (mod 1r:), it is not possible to form 
supersymmetry generators of the first type out of linear combinations of 
extended supersymmetry generators of the second type. 
In terms of the four-component spinors (25.2.34 ), the effect of the parity 
operator on extended supersymmetry generators of the first type is 
p-lQr P = ip Qr, 
(25.3.16) 
while for generators of the second type 
p-l Qsl P = P Ys exp(iyscJ>s) Qsz , 
p-l Qsz P = P Ys exp( -iyscJ>s) Qsl . 
(25.3.17) 

25.4 Massless Particle Supermultiplets 
43 
25.4 
Massless Particle Supermultiplets 
Supersymmetry requires that the known particles be accompanied in 
irreducible representations of the supersymmetry algebra by 'sparticles': 
bosonic 'squarks' and 'sleptons' accompanying quarks and leptons, and 
fermionic 'gauginos' accompanying gauge bosons. None of these sparticles 
have been observed, so supersymmetry is certainly broken, with the masses 
of the sparticles almost certainly much larger than the quark, lepton, and 
gauge boson masses produced by the spontaneous breakdown of the 
electroweak SU(2) x U(1) gauge group, and hence of the same order 
of magnitude as the splittings within supermultiplets. Thus it is very 
likely that at energy scales that are large enough so that we can neglect 
supersymmetry breaking and these mass splittings, we can also treat the 
known quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons and their superpartners as 
massless. Therefore we will be specially interested in supermultiplets of 
massless particles. 
Consider a state containing a single massless particle belonging to some 
supermultiplet. We obtain the other states in the same supermultiplet 
by applying operators Qar and/ or Q:, to this state. 
Since Qar and 
Q:, commute with Pp.. all these states have the same value of the four-
momentum. We will work in a Lorentz frame in which the four-momentum 
of these states is p1 = r? = 0 and p3 = p0 =E. With this choice of four-
momentum, we have 
(25.4.1) 
which aside from the factor 2E is the projection matrix onto the subspace 
with helicity + 1/2. The anticommutation relation (25.2. 7) therefore shows 
that {Q(-l/2)r, Q(-t/Z)r} gives zero when acting on any state in a super-
multiplet with this momentum, and thus so do Q(-1/2)r and Q(-t;Z)r" We 
must therefore construct· the states of the supermultiplet by acting only 
with Q(l/2)r and Q(1;z)r" Furthermore, we are labelling the Qs with their 
h values, in the sense that 
(25.4.2) 
so Q(1/2)r and Q(t;Z)r respectively lower and raise the helicity by 1/2 
We will first consider the case of simple supersymmetry. Consider a 
supermultiplet with maximum helicity A.max, and let IA.max) be any one-
particle state with this helicity and four-momentum pi!. Then 
(25.4.3) 
while acting on this state with Q112 gives a state IA.max -1/2) with helicity 

44 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
Amax- 1/2. We will define this state as 
IAmax- 1/2) = (4E)-l/2 Qt IAmax}. 
! 
(25.4.4) 
The fundamental anticommutation relation (25.2.7) together with Eqs. 
(25.4.1) and (25.4.3) shows that this state is normalized in the same way 
as llrnax) 
{Amax -1/21lmax- 1/2) = {lmaxiAmax) , 
(25.4.5) 
and in particular this state cannot vanish. 
Eq. (25.2.32) shows that 
Qt12 = 0, so acting with Q1;2 on IAmax- 1/2) gives zero: 
Q! IAmax- 1/2) = { 4E)-lf2Q! llroax) = 0 . 
(25.4.6) 
On the other hand, acting with Q~12 on this state gives the state with 
which we started. That is, 
Q~ IAmax- 1/2) = (4E)-
112Q~ Qtllmax) = (4Er
112 {Q~, Qt}IAmax), 
':!' 
! 
':!' 
! 
':!' 
so that Eq. (25.4.1) and the anticommutation relation (25.2.31) yield 
Q~ llmax- 1/2) = (4E)1121lmax) . 
(25.4.7) 
':!' 
Thus the supermultiplet consists of just two states, with helicities Amax and 
Amax- 1/2. In the basis provided by these two states, the operators Ot;2 
and Q~12 are represented by the matrices 
(25.4.8) 
while the operators 0-t/2 and o:..l/2 are represented by zero. 
It is worth emphasizing that this is the only kind of massless super~ 
multiplet in theories with simple supersymmetry. There are no massless 
particles that are not accompanied with a superpartner, and none that 
have more than one superpartner. Of course, CPT invariance implies that 
for every supermultiplet of massless particles of helicities A and A- 1/2 
there must be an antimultiplet with helicities -A+ 1/2 and -A. In par-
ticular, a massless particle and antiparticle with helicities +1/2 and -1/2 
must be accompanied by a massless particle and antiparticle either with 
helicities + 1 and -1 or with helicities both zero. 
How might the known quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons fit into this 
picture? We will assume that the supersymmetry generator commutes with 
the generators of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauge group.* The quarks 
• In simple supersymmetry the generator Q,. must in any case commute with the 
SU(3) x SU(2) generators, because semi-simple algebras like SU(3) x SU(2) have no 
non-trivial one-dimensional representations. 

25.4 Massless Particle Supermultiplets 
45 
and leptons belong to different representations of the gauge group from 
the gauge bosons, so they cannot be in the same supermultiplets. We 
have to conclude then that in the limit of high energy where SU(2) x U(1) 
symmetry breaking may be neglected, the massless quarks and leptons of 
each color and flavor are in supermultiplets with pairs of massless squarks 
and sleptons of zero helicity and the same color and flavor, while the 
massless gauge bosons are accompanied by massless gauginos of helicity 
+ 1/2 comprising an adjoint representation of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l). 
Because gravity exists we know that in addition to the particles of the 
standard model there must also exist a massless particle of helicity + 2, the 
graviton. Massless particles with helicity A. having 111 > 1/2 must couple 
at low momentum to conserved quantities.•• Soft massless particles of 
helicity + 1 can couple to various internal symmetry generators, soft mass-
less particles of helicity + 3/2 can couple to the supersymmetry generators 
Qa, and a soft particle of helicity + 2 can couple to a single conserved 
quantity, the momentum four-vector P f.l• but there are no conserved quan-
tities to which a soft massless particle with IA.I > 2 could couple. We 
conclude that the graviton cannot be in a supermultiplet with particles of 
helicity +5 /2, so it must be in a supermultiplet with a massless particle 
of helicity + 3/2, known as a gravitino, coupled to the supersymmetry 
generators themselves. The field theory of this supermultiplet is known as 
supergravity, and will be discussed in Chapter 31. 
Now let us consider the case of extended supersymmetry, with N 
supersymmetry generators. We first note that because the Q(-1/2)r all 
give zero when acting on the states of a supermultiplet (including a state 
obtained by letting Q(l/2) s act on any other state of the multiplet), the 
central charges Zrs must also annihilate any state of the multiplet. With 
central charges out of the picture, the supersymmetry generators Q(I/2)r 
all anticommute when acting on a massless particle supermultiplet, so 
applying n of them to a one-particle state of maximum helicity A.max and 
four-momentum pP gives N!fn!(N- n)! one-particle states of the same 
four-momentum and helicity A.max - nj2, fi::>rming a rank n antisymmetric 
tensor representation of the S U(N) R-sym:metryt (25.2.30). The maximum 
value of n that gives a non-zero state is n = N, so the minimum helicity 
in a supermultiplet is given by 
Aroin = Amax- N /2. 
(25.4.9) 
If we wish to exclude massless particle helicities A. with IA.I > 2, then 
•• This is discussed for the case of integer helicity in Section 13.1. The argument for 
half-integer helicity was given by Grisaru and Pendleton.3 
t The U(l) part of U(N) R-symmetry is often violated by quantum mechanical 
anomalies. 

46 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
Amax -
Amin ::::;; 4, so extended supersymmetries are allowed only with 
N < 8. 
For N = 8, with helicities with IAI > 2 excluded, there is only one 
possible supermultiplet, consisting of: 1 graviton with each helicity ±2; 
8 gravitinos with each helicity +3/2; 28 gauge bosons with each helicity 
+ 1; 56 fermions with each helicity + 1/2; and 70 bosons with helicity zero. 
Compare this with the case N = 7, again excluding helicities with 
IAI > 2. Here there are two supermultiplets. One supermultiplet contains: 
1 graviton with helicity +2; 7 gravitinos with helicity +3/2; 21 gauge 
bosons with helicity + 1; 35 fermions with helicity + 1j2; 35 bosons with 
helicity zero; 21 fermions with helicity -1/2; 7 gauge bosons with helicity 
-1; and 1 gravitino with helicity -3/2. The other is the CPT -conjugate 
supermultiplet, with all helicities reversed. Adding the numbers of particles 
in these two supermultiplets, we have 1 graviton with each helicity +2; 
7 + 1 = 8 gravitinos with each helicity + 3/2; 21 + 7 = 28 gauge bosons 
with .each helicity + 1; 35 + 21 = 56 fermions with each helicity + 1/2; and 
35 + 35 = 70 bosons with helicity zero. Extended supergravity theories 
with N = 8 and N = 7 thus have precisely the same particle content and 
are in fact identical. 
On the other hand, extended supergravity theories with N < 6 have just 
N gravitinos of each helicity +3/2 and are therefore all distinct. 
For N ::::;; 4 there is also the possibility of global supersymmetry theories, 
theories with supermultiplets that do not include gravitons or gravitinos. 
For global N = 4 supersymmetry there is just one supermultiplet, contain-
ing: 1 gauge boson of each helicity +4; 4 fermions of each helicity + 1/2; 
and 6 bosons of helicity zero. This is equivalent to the global supersym-
metry theory with N = 3, which has two supermultiplets: 1 supermultiplet 
with one gauge boson of helicity +1, 3 fermions with helicity +1/2; 3 
bosons with helicity zero; and 1 fermion with helicity -1/2; and the other 
the CPT conjugate supermultiplet with opposite helicities. Adding the 
numbers of particles of each helicity in these two N = 3 supermultiplets 
gives the same particle content as for N = 4 global supersymmetry. The 
gauge field theory with N = 4 supersymmetry has remarkable properties, 
which will be discussed in Section 27.9. 
For N = 2 extended global supersymmetry there are supermultiplets 
of two different types, apart from those related by CPT. 
There are 
gauge supermultiplets,· each containing one gauge boson of helicity + 1, 
two fermions of helicity +1/2 forming a doublet under the SU(2) R-
symmetry (25.2.30), and one boson of helicity zero, together with their 
CPT-conjugate supermultiplets, with helicities reversed. Together each 
gauge supermultiplet and its antimultiplet contain one gauge boson with 
each helicity ±1, an SU(2) doublet of fermions of each helicity +1/2, and 
two S U (2) singlet bosons of helicity zero. Then there are hypermultiplets, 

25.4 Massless Particle Supermultiplets 
47 
which contain one fermion of each helicity +1/2 and an SU(2) doublet of 
bosons of helicity zero, together with its CPT --conjugate. (In quantum field 
theory a hypermultiplet cannot be its own antimultiplet, because then the 
helicity zero particles would be described by just two real scalar fields, 
which cannot form an S U (2) doublet.) Of course, in the real world there 
would also have to be a graviton supermultiplet, containing a graviton 
of helicity +2, an S U(2) doublet of gravitinos with helicity +3/2, and 
one gauge boson with helicity +1, together with their CPT-conjugates, 
with opposite helicity. Gauge theories with N = 2 supersymmetry are 
constructed in Section 27.9, and explored non-perturbatively in Section 
29.5. 
The particle content of these supermultiplets reveals a difficulty in 
incorporating extended supersymmetry in realistic t®ories of particles 
at accessible energies. In all cases but one, the helicity +1/2 fermions 
belong to supermultiplets along with helicity + 1 gauge bosons. Gauge 
bosons belong to the adjoint representation of the gauge group, so if the 
supersymmetry generators are invariant under the gauge group then the 
helicity + 1/2 fermions must also belong to the adjoint representation, 
which is real. This is in conflict with the fact that the known quarks 
and leptons belong to a representation of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) which is 
chiral- that is, for which the helicity + 1/2 fermions belong to a complex 
representation, which is then necessarily different from the representation 
furnished by their CPT-conjugates, the helicity -1/2 fermions. The one 
exception, where helicity + 1/2 fermions are not in a supermultiplet with 
gauge bosons, is theN = 2 hypermultiplet discussed above. But in this case 
particles of both helicities +1/2 and -1/2 are in the same supermultiplet, 
and therefore must transform the same under any gauge transformations 
that leave the supersymmetry generators invariant. They may belong to a 
complex representation of this gauge group, but then the CPT-conjugate 
of this hypermultiplet belongs to the complex-conjugate representation, 
and the fermions of each helicity then belong to the sum of the two 
representations, which is real, again in conflict with the chiral nature of 
the known quarks and leptons. 
In contrast, for simple supersymmetry there are supermultiplets con-
taining just helicity + 1/2 and helicity zero, which may be in a complex 
representation of the gauge group, distinct from the representation fur-
nished by the CPT-conjugate supermultiplet. Here there is no conflict 
with chirality. For this reason, most discussions of supersymmetry as a 
symmetry that remains unbroken at accessible energies have focused on 
simple rather than extended supersymmetry. 

48 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
25.5 
Massive Particle Supermultiplets 
Although the known quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons and their super-
partners may probably be treated as massless at energies where super-
symmetry breaking is negligible, this is not necessarily true for other 
particles, including the extra gauge bosons of large mass required by the-
ories that unify the strong and electroweak interactions. Also, ever since 
the Wess-Zumino model, massive particle theories have been useful test 
cases for studying supersymmetry theories. It will therefore be worthwhile 
for us briefly to consider the implications of unbroken supersymmetry for 
massive particles. 
As in the previous section, we obtain the various one-particle states in 
a supermultiplet by acting on any one of them with the operators Qar 
and Q:,. and all of these states have the same four-momentum. Unlike 
the case of zero mass, for mass M > 0 we may now take this to be 
the four-momentum of a particle at rest, with pi = 0 for i = 1, 2, 3 and 
p0 = M. In this frame of reference, we have 
(25.5.1) 
Thus, acting on any state 1 ) in a supermultiplet with this four-momentum, 
the anticommutation relation (25.2. 7) yields 
{ Qar, Qbs} I ) = 2M Jab ->rs I ) · 
(25.5.2) 
In contrast with the case of zero mass, here no component of Qar or Q:r 
can vanish on the whole multiplet, so we have two sets of raising and 
lowering operators: both Q(l/Z)r and Q(_112)r lower the spin 3-component 
by 1/2, while both Q(-1/2)r and Q(1; 2)r raise the spin 3-component by 1/2. 
However, as we shall see, for extended supersymmetry it is possible for 
certain linear combinations of the Qs and Q*s to vanish. 
We will first consider the case of simple supersymmetry. By using 
the supersymmetry algebra (25.2.31), (25.2.32), we shall show that the 
general massive supermultiplet consists of a particle of spin j + 1/2, a 
pair of particles of spin j, and a particle of spin j- 1/2. Where parity is 
conserved, the particles of spin j + 1/2 have equal intrinsic parity, given 
by some phase Y/, while the two particles of spin j have parities +iY! and 
-iY!. Here j is any integer or half-integer greater than zero. There is also 
a collapsed supermultiplet, consisting of two particles of spin zero and a 
particle of spin 1/2. When parity is conserved the particles of spin zero 
have pari ties iY! and -it'/, where Y/ is the parity of the particle of spin 1 /2. 
Here is the proof. We first show that any supermultiplet will contain at 
least one spin multiplet of states lj, a) with spin 3-component a running 
by unit steps from - j to +j, having the special property that, for all such 

25.5 Massive Particle Supennultiplets 
49 
d and for a= +1/2, 
Qa IJ, d) = 0. 
(25.5.3) 
Starting with any non-zero state I'P) in the supermultiplet, we can define 
non-zero states 
and 
Qt;21'P} f 0 
Q1;21'P) = 0 
Q-1;21'P'} f 0 
Q-1/21'P'} = 0 
Because the Qa anticommute, Q1;2I'P') = 0, and so Qai'P") = 0 for a = 
+1/2. If any state I'P"} satisfies the condition that Qai'P"} = 0, then so does 
U(R)Itp"}, where U(R) is the unitary operator representing an arbitrary 
spatial rotation. It follows that the states that satisfy this condition may 
be decomposed into complete spin multiplets IJ, d}, satisfying condition 
(25.5.3). 
Now focus on any one of these spin multiplets satisfying Eq. (25.5.3), 
normalized so that 
(25.5.4) 
For j > 0, by applying the spin 1/2 operators• Q: to these states we can 
construct states of spin j + 1/2: 
li + 1/2, d} = k ~ 
C! /J + 1/2, d; a, d- a) Q: IJ,d- a), (25.5.5) 
where Cil(j", d"; d, d') is the conventional Clebsch--Gordan coefficient for 
coupling spins j and j' with 3-components d and d 1 to make spin j'' 
with 3-component d 11• Using Eqs. (25.5.2H25.5.5) and the orthonormality 
properties of the Clebsch--Gordan coefficients, we can show that these 
states are properly normalized: 
(J + 1/2, o-IJ ± 1/2, d
1
} = haa' , 
{j + 1/2, dl} + 1/2, d
1
} = 0' (25.5.6) 
so none of the states 11 + 1/2, d) can vanish. The only exception is for 
j = 0, in which case of course there is no state li- l/2,d). We can 
also construct other states by applying two Q·s to IJ, d). Since each Q: 
• Since Qa transforms under rotations like a field that destroys a particle of spin 
1/2 and spin 3-component a, it is 0: that transforms like a field that creates 
such a particle, and hence transforms like the particle itself. To put this formally, 
[J;, Qa] = - I:b t(cr;)ah Qb. so [J;, o:J = I:b i(cr;)ba Q~. which may be compared with 
the transformation property of a spin 1/2 particle, J; Ia) = I:b i(cr;)ba lb). 

50 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
anticommutes with itself, the only such non-zero states are formed by 
applying the operator Qi12Q:_112 = -Q:_112Qi12. This operator may be 
written as !eabQ:Qb, which shows that it is rotationally invariant, so this 
gives a second spin multiplet with spin j: 
(25.5.7) 
which is distinguished from lj, a} by the fact that instead of Eq. (25.5.3), 
we have 
(25.5.8) 
Again using Eqs. (25.5.2)--{25.5.4), we find that these are also normalized 
states: 
l1 U 'I . )l1 
s: 
,a ],a 
= Ua'a, 
U. a'lj, a)P = 0 . 
(25.5.9) 
It is then easy to show that the states constructed so far form a complete 
representation of the supersymmetry algebra. The orthonormality prop-
erty of the Clebsch~Gordan coefficients allows us to rewrite Eq. (25.5.5) 
as 
Q~ lj, a) = JiM L Ct/2i(i + 1/2,a + a;a, a) li + 1/2, a+ a) . (25.5.10) 
± 
Also, Eq. (25.5.2) shows that, for any state I ) in the supermultiplet, 
[Qa. Q~Q:_~J I}= 2MLeabQb I}, 
b 
so Eqs. (25.5. 7) and (25.5.3) give 
Qa lj, a}P = L eab Qb lj, a} 
b 
(25.5.11) 
=JiM L: eab L: cv(j + 112,a + b; b, a) u + 112, 0' +b). (25.5.12) 
b 
± 
From Eqs. (25.5.2), (25.5.3), and (25.5.5) we have 
Qalj+ 1/2,a) = Ji.Mc!lj+1/2, a; a, a-a) lj,a -a), (25.5.13) 
while Eqs. (25.5.5), (25.2.31), and (25.5.7) yield 
Q:lj+1/2,a} = Ji.ML:eabC!i(i+1j2,a;b,a-b) lj,u-b}P. (25.5.14) 
b 
Eqs. (25.5.3), (25.5.8), (25.5.10), and (25.5.12H25.5.14) give the action of 
the Qs and Q*s on all the state:s of the supermultiplet. 

25.5 Massive Particle Supennultiplets 
51 
For j = 0 we have the collapsed supermultiplet: Eqs. (25.5.3), (25.5.8), 
(25.5.10), and (25.5.12H25.5.14) become 
Qa 10,0) = 0, 
0: IO,O}tJ = 0, 
0: 10, 0) = .JfM 11/2, a}, 
Qa 10, O}tJ = JfM'Lb eab Jl/2,b}, 
Oa ll/2,b) = .jfMbabiO,O}, 0: Jl/2,b) = JfMeab JO,O}U. 
(25.5.15) 
Now suppose that parity is conserved. Recall that the phase of the 
supersymmetry generator may be chosen so that the action of the parity 
operator on these generators is given by Eq. (25.3.13). Then o: acting on 
PJj,a) is a linear combination of the states PQali.a}, which vanish, and 
since P!j, a) has the same rotation properties as lj, a )P, it must simply be 
proportional to it 
Plj,o-) = -'7Ji,a}~P. 
(25.5.16) 
Since P is unitary, '1 is a phase factor, with I'll = 1. A correspond-
ing argument shows that Plj, a }P is proportional to lj, a}. To find the 
proportionality coefficient, we note that 
Plj, a)u = (2M)-1P Q~ Q* 1 Jj, a}= -'7(2M)-1 Q , Q, Jj, a)~ 
2 
--,; 
-! 
! 
= -'7(2M)-2 Q_t Qt Q~ Q* 1 lj,a) = -'7Jj,a). 
! 
! 
! 
-! 
We can then define states of spin j 
lj,a)± = ~(lj,o'} +iJj,a}~), 
(25.5.17) 
with definite parity 
(25.5.18) 
Finally, applying the parity operator to Eq. (25.5.5) and using Eqs. (25.3.13) 
and (25.5.16) gives 
P Jj+ 1/2,a} =- ~ 
2: C! i(i+ 1/2, a; a, a-a) 2: eabQb Jj,a-a)P. 
y~lt'J 
a 
b 
Eq. (25.5.12) and the orthonormality property of the Clebsch--Gordan 
coefficients then yield 
P Jj ± 1/2, a) = 'lli + 1/2, a), 
(25.5.19) 
as was to be shown. 
We now tum briefly to the case of extended supersymmetry, with N 
supersymmetry generators. As mentioned in the previous section, there 
can be no massless particle with a non-vanishing eigenvalue for any central 
charge. We can go further and show that the eigenvalues of the central 
charge operators set a lower bound on the mass of any supermultiplet. 

52 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
Because the central charges Zrs and z;s commute with each other and with 
P~J, one-particle states can be chosen to be eigenstates of all the central 
charges as well as of P ,.u and because the central charges commute with 
the Qar and Q~r> all states in a supermultiplet have the same eigenvalues. 
To derive an inequality relating the mass M of a supermultiplet and 
the eigenvalues of the central charges on this multiplet, we use the anti-
commutation relations (25.2.7) and (25.2.8) to write 
L { ( Qar- L eabUrsQbs)' ( Q:,-L eacU;tQcr)} 
~ 
~ 
ct 
= 8NP0 -2Tr(zut + uzt), 
(25.5.20) 
where U,s is an arbitrary N x N unitary matrix. The left-hand side is 
a positive-definite operator, so by letting this act on the states of the 
supermultiplet at rest, we find 
(25.5.21) 
where now Zrs denotes the values of the central charges for the super-
multiplet of mass M. The polar decomposition theorem tells us that any 
square matrix Z may be written asH V, where His a positive Hermitian 
matrix and V is unitary. We can obtain a useful inequality (which is in 
fact optimal) by setting U = V, in which case Eq. (25.5.21) becomes 
1 
1 
M > -TrH = -Tr.Jztz 
-
2N 
2N 
. 
(25.5.22) 
States for which M equals the minimum value allowed by this inequality 
are known as BPS states, by analogy with the Bogomol'nyi-Prasad-
Sommerfeld magnetic monopole configurations discussed in Section 23.3, 
whose mass also equals a lower bound on general monopole masses. 
In fact, this is more than an analogy; we will see in Section 27.9 that 
the lower bound on monopole masses in gauge theories with extended 
supersymmetry is a special case of the lower bound (25.5.22). 
As we can see from this derivation of Eq. (25.5.22), for BPS supermulti-
plets the operator Qar- l::bs eab U,sQbs gives zero when acting on any state 
of a supermultiplet, so there are only N independent helicity-lowering op-
erators Q(l/2)r and only N independent helicity-raising operators Q(-l/Z)r• 
just as in the case of massless supermultiplets. This leads to smaller 
supermultiplets than would be found in the general case. 
For instance, for N = 2 supersymmetry the central charge is given by a 

single complex number·· 
Problems 
z-( o z0tz) 
-
-Z12 
The inequality (25.5.22) here reads 
M > IZtzl/2. 
53 
(25.5.23) 
(25.5.24) 
Where M = IZ12I/2, the helicity contents of the massive particle super-
multiplets are the same as for those of zero mass: there are gauge su-
permultiplets, consisting of one particle of spin 1, an SU(2) R-symmetry 
doublet of spin 1/2, and one particle of spin 0 (the other helicity zero state 
belonging to the spin one particle), and hypermultiplets, consisting of one 
particle of spin 1/2 and an SU(2) R-symmetry doublet of spin 0. These 
are sometimes called 'short' supermultiplets, to distinguish them from the 
larger supermultiplets encountered when M > IZI21/2. 
Problems 
1. Find a set of 2 x 2 matrices that fomt a graded Lie algebra containing 
fermionic as well as bosonic generators. 
2. Following the approach of Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius, derive 
the form of the most general symmetry superalgebra in 2 + 1 space-
time dimensions. (Hint: With the generators of the Lorentz group 
in 2 + 1 spacetime dimensions labelled At = -ilto, Az = -iJz0, 
A3 = ltz, the commutation relations of the Poincare algebra are 
[Ai, , A j] = i Lk eiikAk. so the representations of the homogeneous 
Lorentz group in 2 + 1 spacetime dimensions are labelled with a 
single positive integer or half-integer A.) Assume that the conditions 
for the Coleman-Mandula theorem are satisfied here. 
3. Suppose that there were no massless particles with helicity greater 
than +3/2 or less than -3/2. Find the most general massless 
particle multiplets for N = 6 extended supersymmetry and (using 
CPT symmetry) N = 5 extended supersymmetry. What does the 
comparison between the particle content you find suggest about 
these two extended supersymmetries? 
4. What are the possible parities of the particles in the short supermul-
tiplets of extended N = 2 supersymmetry? 
•• In some articles on N = 2 supersymmetry the central charge Z is what we would call 
Zj2..ji. 
. 

54 
25 Supersymmetry Algebras 
References 
1. R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257 
(1975). This article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. 
(North Holland/World Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). 
2. 
B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B89, 535 (1975). This article is reprinted in 
Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
3. M. T. Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys. Lett. 67B, 323 (1977). 

26 
Supersymmetric Field Theories 
Now we know the structure of the most general supersymmetry algebras, 
and we have seen how to work out the implications of this symmetry for 
the particle spectrum. In order to learn what supersymmetry has to say 
about particle interactions, we need to see how to construct supersymmet-
ric field theories. 
Originally the construction of field supermultiplets was done directly, 
by a repeated use of the Jacobi identities, much as in the construction of 
supermultiplets of one-particle states in Sections 25.4 and 25.5. Section 
26.1 presents one example of this technique, used here to construct su-
permultiplets containing only scalar and Dirac fields. Fortunately there 
is an easier technique, invented by Salam and Strathdee, 1 in which su-
permultiplets of fields are gathered into 'superfields,' which depend on 
fermionic coordinates as well as on the usual four coordinates of space-
time. Superfields are introduced in Section 26.2, and used to construct 
supersymmetric field theories and to study some of their cons.equences 
in Sections 26.3-26.8. This chapter will be concerned only with N = 1 
supersymmetry, where the superfield formalism has been chiefly useful. At 
the end of the next chapter we will construct theories with N -extended 
supersymmetry by imposing the U(N) R-symmetry on theories of N = 1 
superfields. 
26.1 
Direct Construction of Field SupermuJtiplets 
To illustrate the direct construction of a field supermultiplet, we will 
consider fields that can destroy the particles belonging to the simplest 
supermultiplet of arbitrary mass discussed in Section 25.5: two spinless 
particles and one particle of spin 1/2. We saw in Eq. (25.5.15) that the 
one-particle zero spin state 10, 0) is annihilated by the supersymmetry 
generator Qa but not by Q:, so we would expect the scalar field c/>(x) that 
creates this particle from the vacuum (which is assumed to be annihilated 
by all supersymmetry generators) to commute with Qa but not with Q:. 
55 

56 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
That is, 
[Qa, rp(x)] = 0, 
(26.1.1) 
- i :E eab[Ql:, rp(x)] = 'a(x) :f= 0. 
(26.1.2) 
b 
The antisymmetric 2x2 matrix eab (with el/2,-1/2 = +1) is introduced here 
because it is Lb eabQb that transforms under the homogeneous Lorentz 
group according to the (1/2,0) representation. It follows that Ca(x) is a 
two-component spinor field that also belongs to the (1/2,0) representation 
of the homogeneous Lorentz group.* 
From Eqs. (26.1.1)--{26.1.2) and the anticommutation relation (25.2.31), 
we find 
{ Qb, Ca} = -i :E eac[{ Qb, Q;}, rp(x)] = 2i(a~'e)ba [P ~', rp] , 
c 
and so 
(26.1.3) 
On the other hand, Eq. (26.1.2) and the anticommutation relation (25.2.32) 
gives 
-il:eac{Ql:, Cc} = {Ql:, [Q:, rp]} = -{Q;, [Qi:, r/J]} = il:ebc{Q:, Cc)}, 
c 
c 
so Lc eac{Q[;, Cc} is antisymmetric, and therefore proportional to the 
antisymmetric 2 x 2 matrix eab: 
i{Ql:, (a(x)} = 215ab .F(x) . 
(26.1.4) 
Lorentz invariance requires that the coefficient §"(x) is a scalar field. 
We must now go one step further, and calculate the commutators of the 
supersymmetry generators with §"(x). Using Eqs. (26.1.4), (26.1.2), and 
(25.2.32), we have 
t)ab [Q;, .FJ = !i[Q;, {Q[;, 'a}]= !i[{Q;, Ca}, Qb] =- l5ac [Q[;, §"] · 
By taking a= b :f= c, we find that this commutator vanishes: 
[Q;, §"(x)] = 0. 
(26.1.5) 
• At this point we are not assuming anything about the masses or interactions of the 
particles described by these fields. but it may be noted that, as explained in Section 5.9, 
a (1/2,0) free field can create massless particles only of helicity +1/2, in agreement 
with the result (25.5.15) that the massless spinless one-particle state 10, 0) that is 
annihilated by Q., is in a supermultiplet with a state of helicity + 1/2. 

26.1 Direct Construction of Field Supermultiplets 
57 
Finally, using Eqs. (26.1.4), (25.2.31), and (26.1.3), we have 
bab [Qc, ~] = F[Qc, {Qb, 'a}]= ii[{Qc, Q;}, '"]- 4i[Qb, {Qc, 'a}] 
= -(J'~baJ.t'" + i(a~-'e)ca [Q;, aJ.tq.,] 
=- (J'~b a"''"+ I:, ebd (a~-'e)ca aJ.tcd. 
) 
d 
Contracting with bab, this becomes 
[Qc, ~(x)] = - 2:, a~a o"'Ca(x) . 
(26.1.6) 
a 
Eqs. (26.1.1H26.1.6) show that the fields Q>(x), Ca(x), and ~(x) furnish a 
complete representation of the supersymmetry algebra. These fields are not 
Hermitian, so their complex conjugates furnish another supermultiplet: 
[Q:, q.,"(x)J = 0, 
-i 2:, eab[Qb, Q>"(x)] = C~(x), 
b 
{QJ:, GCx)} = 2(ea~-')aboJ.tljJ"(x), 
-i{Qb, ,;(x)} = 2bab ~·{x), 
[Qc, ?"(x)] = 0, 
[Q;, ?"(x)J =I:, af:c a"'GCx) . 
a 
(26.1.7) 
(26.1.8) 
(26.1.9) 
(26.1.10) 
(26.1.11) 
(26.1.12) 
We can express these commutation and anticommutation relations as 
transformation rules under a supersymmetry transformation, which shifts 
any bosonic or fermionic field operator £D(x) by the infinitesimal amount 
Ol!!(x) = [ ~ 
(e:Q. + e4 Q;) , l!!(x)] , 
(26.1.13) 
where ea is an infinitesimal fermionic c-number spinor. 
(Because ea 
and e~ anticommute with Qa and Q~, the quantity e~Qa + eaQ~ is anti-
Hermitian, so Eq. (26.1.13) gives (blD)"' = blD*.) The commutation and 
anticommutation rules (26.1.1)-(26.1.6) are equivalent to the transforma-
tion rules 
blf>(x) = -i 'I:, ea eab Cb(x), 
ab 
t5Ca(x) = -2 2:, eJ: (a 11e)ba a"'Q>(x)- 2iea ~(x) , 
b 
b~(x) = - L eJ: a:a oJ.tCa(x) . 
ab 
(26.1.14) 
(26.1.15) 
(26.1.16) 
This may be put into a four-component Dirac notation by introducing 

58 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
an infinitesimal, Majorana,•• four-component, spmor transformation 
parameter 
(26.1.17) 
so that Eq. (26.1.13) becomes 
i ~(9(x) = [CiQ, (9(x)] 
(26.1.18) 
The transformation rules (26.1.14)--{26.1.16) and their complex conju-
gates may be put into a convenient covariant form by introducing a set 
of real bosonic fields A, B, F, and G, defined by 
A + iB = A. 
F- iG = 
or 
.ji -
'Y ' 
.ji -
.7" ' 
(26.1.19) 
and a four-component Majorana spinor 1p, defined by 
1 ( 
Ca 
) 
1p = .ji - l:b eah(b 
· 
(26.1.20) 
Let's also recall the relation between the 4 x 4 Dirac matrices and the 
2 x 2 matrices u 1-': 
Yp ~ ( i~p -i~Je ) 
The transformation rules now take the form 
~A= Ci1p, 
~B = -i Ciys tp , 
~tp = 81-'(A + iysB)y~-'IX + (F- iysG)IX, 
(26.1.21) 
~F = ay~-' a~-'w, 
~G = -iaysy~-' o~-'tp. 
A direct but tedious calculation shows that this transformation leaves 
•• With the phase convention we will be using here, a Majorana four-component spinor 
is formed from a (l/2,0) two-component spinor ua as 
Eq. (26.1.17) fits this definition. with u = -ie. Equivalently, a Majorana spinor can be 
formed from a two-component (0, 1/2) spinor Va as 
An example is provided by Eq. (25.2.34 ). Properties of Majorana spinors are considered 
in detail in the appendix to this chapter. 

26.2 General Superjields 
invariant the action 
1 = j tt x {-! a .uA a.u A -
~a .uB a.u B -
~ vr1.u a Jl tp 
+ HF2 + G2) + m [FA+ GB -
~1P11'] 
+ g [F(A2 + B2) + 2GAB- V'(A + iysB)1p}} . 
59 
(26.1.22) 
Eqs. (26.1.21) and (26.1.22) agree with the transformation rules (24.2.8) 
and Lagrangian density (24.2.9) found in the original work of Wess and 
Zumino. In the next three sections we will explore a convenient technique 
for checking the supersymmetry of Eq. (26.1.22) and for deriving more 
general supersymmetric actions. 
Where the fermion field tp(x) satisfies the free-field Dirac equation 
(y.ua,u+m)1p = 0, these transformation rules show that F+mA and G+mB 
are invariant, and therefore commute with Qa and Q:, and hence also 
with P w This does not prove that F = -mA and G = -mB, but without 
changing any of the commutation and anticommutation rules (26.1.1)-
(26.1.6) or transformation rules (26.1.21 ), we can redefine the fields F and 
G by subtracting the co.nstants F+mA and B+mG, respectively, so that the 
new fields F and G are given by F = -mA and G = -mB, and therefore 
.F = -m¢*. This is not true in the presence of interactions, but even in 
the interacting case .F(x), F(x), and G(x) are typically auxiliary fields that 
can be expressed in terms of the other fields of the supermultiplet, as is 
the case for the action (26.1.22). 
26.2 
General Superfi.elds 
It is straightforward to construct supermultiplets of fields by the direct 
technique illustrated in the previous section, but in order to construct 
supersymmetric actions we also need to know how to multiply field 
supermultiplets to make other supermultiplets. A great deal of work can 
be saved by using a formalism invented by Salam and Strathdee, 1 in which 
the fields in any supermultiplet are assembled into a single superfield. 
Just as the four-momentum operators P,u are defined as the generators 
of translations of the ordinary spacetime coordinates x.u, the four super-
symmetry generators Qa and Q: may be regarded as the generators of 
translations of four fermionic c-number superspace coordinates, which 
anticommute with each other and with fermionic fields but commute with 
the x.U and all bosonic fields. We aim at constructing Lorentz-invariant La-
grangian densities, so it will be convenient to adopt the four-component 
Dirac formalism described in Section 25.2. 
The supersymmetry gen-
erators are gathered into a four-component Majorana spinor Qa:, and 

60 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
correspondingly, the superspace coordinates are gathered into another 
four:-component Majorana spinor 8a.. (Various properties of Majorana 
spinors are outlined in the appendix to this chapter.) The supersym-
metry generators have non-vanishing anticommutators, so we cannot take 
them as simply proportional to the supercoordinate translation opera-
tors 0 I o8a.. Instead, Salam and Strathdee found that the supersymmetry 
algebra would be satisfied if we suppose that the commutator or anticom-
mutator of the supersymmetry generator Q with any bosonic or fermionic 
superfield S(x, 8) is 
[Q,S}=i,qs, 
where ,q is the superspace differential operator 
a 
a 
,q = - ao + yiJ 8 axiJ · 
(26.2.1) 
(26.2.2) 
(As usual 8 = ()t p. All derivatives with respect to fermionic c-number 
variables should be understood as left-derivatives, calculated by moving 
the variable to the left of any expression before differentiating with respect 
to it.) For Majorana spinors 8 = ()Ly5E, with the 4 x 4 matrix € given by 
Eq. (26.A.3), so Eq. (26.2.1) may be expressed more explicitly as 
,qa. = L(YsE)a.r a:, + .L:r~8r o~IJ . 
(26.2.3) 
}' 
I 
}' 
Likewise, 
-
"' 
a 
~ 
o 
_qp = ~ 
_qy(')'5€)yp = a8p- ~(')'5€')'/J)py8y OXIJ. 
l' 
}' 
(26.2.4) 
It is straightforward to calculate that 
{ 
-} 
a 
a 
,qa.' !l.p 
= (')'5 €')'/J ')'5 €)pll axiJ + Y:p oxiJ . 
(26.2.5) 
But Eq. (5.4.35) shows that yJ = -rtfy/Jrtf-1, where rtf is the matrix 
rtf= -ysE, so both terms on the right·hand side of Eq. (26.2.5) are equal, 
and therefore 
(26.2.6) 
Eqs. (26.2.6) and (26.2.1) together with the generalized Jacobi identities 
(25.1.5) show that 
[{Qa., Qp}, SJ = {,qa., !l.p} S = 2y:poJJS = -2ir:p[PJJ, SJ, 
(26.2.7) 
in agreement with the anticommutation relation (25.2.36). 
It is often more convenient to express the commutation and anti-
commutation relations (26.2.1) as transformation rules under infinitesimal 

26.2 General Superjields 
61 
supersymmetry transformations. Combining Eqs. (26.1.18), (26.2.1), and 
(26.2.2) shows that a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal 
Majorana spinor parameter r1. changes a superfield S(x, B) by an amount 
(26.2.8) 
Recall that a I ao here acts on the left of any expression. In particular, 
where ¥ is any linear combination ~f the ma!rices 1, }'S'}'p, and y5 for 
which BMB does not vanish, we have(}' M B" = (J"M B', so 
:o (OMB) =2MB. 
(26.2.9) 
The components of B anticommute, so any product of their components 
vanishes if two of them are the same component. But B has only four 
components, so any function of B has a power series that terminates with 
its quartic term. Furthermore, as shown in the appendix to this chapter, a 
product of two Bs is proportional to a linear combination of (OB), (l1yJ.ty5B), 
and (OysB); a product of three Bs is proportional to (OysB)B; and a product 
of four Bs is proportional to (OysBf The most general function of x~' and 
B may therefore be expressed as 
S(x, B)= C(x)- i(8 Ys co(x)) -
~ (o Ys ti)M(x)- ~ (o B )N(x) 
+ ~ (o ys Y~t B) Vfi(x)- i(8 ys B) ( 8 [ .t(x) + ~ f'co(x)J) 
-i (iJ ys 9) 
2 
(D(x) + ~DC(x)) . 
(26.210) 
(The terms t~co and tDC(x) are separated from .t(x) and D(x), respect-
ively, for later convenience.) If S(x, B) is a scalar then C(x), M(x), N(x), 
and D(x) are scalar (or pseudoscalar) fields; co(x) and .t(x) are four-
component spinor fields; and V~'(x) is a vector field. Also, using the 
reality properties of bilinear products of Majorana fields given in the 
appendix to this chapter, we see that if S(x, B) is real, then C(x), M(x), 
N(x), V~'(x), and D(x) are all real, while w(x) and .t(x) are Majorana 
spinors satisfying the phase convention s* = -peyss. 
Now we must work out the supersymmetry transformation properties of 
the component fields in Eq. (26.2.10). Applying Eqs. (26.28) and (26.2.9) 

62 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
to the expansion (26.2.10) gives 
_ 
oc 
JS = 
(1Xy~'B) ox~-' 
( -
ow) 
+ i (ilysro) - i (cxy~-'8) Bys ox~' 
i 
(-
) oM 
+ i (ilysB) M- :2 (lly 11B) 6ysB 
ox~' 
1 
(- ) oN 
+ (cxB) N - :2 (lly~-'8) 68 
ox~' 
· 
-
oV" 
- i (ilysyvB) V" + ~ (cxy 11B) ( 6ys}'v B) oXI' 
+ 2i (iXysB) (8[A. + 4 ¢w]) + i (oysB) (a[A. + ~ ¢w1) 
-i(cxy11B) (BysB) (t1011[A.+ 4 ¢rol) + (8ysB) (ilysB)[D+ !DC]. 
We need to put each term in the standard form of Eq. (26.2.10). For this 
purpose, we note that: Eq. (26.A9) gives 
(ily 11B)(Oyso11w) = -HBB)(il ¢ysw)- HBysy"B)(ll ¢YvW)- l(OysB)(iX ¢w) ; 
Eq. (26.A.16) gives 
Eq. (26.A.17) gives 
(cxy 11B)(BysyvB) = -(ccy11yvB)(BysB) ; 
Eq. (26.A.9) gives 
(ilysB)(O[A. + ! ¢w]) = -HBB)(ilys[A. + 4 ¢w]) + HBys-y 11B)(ily11 [A. + f ¢w]) 
- HBysB)(cx[A. + ! ¢w]) ; 
and Eq. (26.A.19) gives 
(cxy~'B)(BysB)(Oo~-'[A. + ! ¢ro]) = - Hil ¢Ys [A.+ ~ ¢w])(BysB)2 . 
Using these relations and rearranging terms in order of increasing numbers 
of B factors, we have 
JS = i (ccysw) + (iX(pC + iysM + N- iys .Y]B) 
- !i (eo) (llys[A.+ ¢w]) + !i (8ysB) (cc[A.+ ¢w]) 
+F(Bysy~'B) (ccy11 A.) + !i(Bysy"B)(cxovw) 
+~ (8ysB) (ll[-i¢M -ys¢N -i¢.Y +Ys(D + ~oC)]B) 
-~i (8ysB)
2 
(ilyslfA.+ !DwJ) , 

26.2 General Superjields 
or, using the symmetry property (26.A. 7), 
JS = i (aysw) + (8[- ~C + iysM + N- iys rJa) 
- 4i (88) (ays[.A.+ ~w]) + 4i (8ys8) (a[.A.+ ~w]) 
+&i (8ysyll8) (ayll.A.) + &i (8ysyv8) (aovw) 
63 
+ t (8ys8) (8[i ~M- Ys ~N- ioll ryll + Ys(D + !DC)]a) 
- ti (8ys8) 
2 
(aysi:¢.A. + ~ow]) . 
If we now compare this with the terms up to second order in 8 in the 
expansion (26.2.10), we find the transformation rules: 
JC = i ( aysw) , 
Jw = ( -iys ~C - M + iysN + r) a , 
15M= -(a [.A.+ ~wJ), 
aN= i (ays [.A.+ ~wJ), 
15 V~' = ( aywA.) + ( aollw) . 
The terms of third and fourth order in 8 give 
(26.2.11) 
(26.2.12) 
(26.2.13) 
(26.2.14) 
(26.2.15) 
J[.A. + ! ~wJ = 4 [ -~M- iys ~N +oil ryll + iys(D + 4oc)] a, 
a[D +&DC]= i (ay 5[¢.A. +&ow]). 
Combining the latter two transformation rules with the transformation 
rules (26.2.11) and (26.2.12) for C and w yields much simpler transforma-
tion rules for .A. and D: 
. dl = ( l[ o,r, y"] + iysD) a, 
aD = i (a Ys ~.A.) . 
(26.2.16) 
(26.2.17) 
It is to achieve this simplification that the terms & ~w and 4 DC were 
separated from .A. and Din the expansion (26.2.10). 
The whole point of the superfield formalism is to simplify the task of 
making supermultiplets out of other supermultiplets. Given two super-
fields S1 and S2 that both satisfy the transformation rule (26.2.8), their 
product S = S1S2 satisfies 
JS = [(aQ). S1S2] = (JSt)S2 + St(I5S2) 
= (<a ~)St )s2 + St (<a~) )s2 =(a~) s. 
(26.2.18) 

64 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
and is therefore also a superfield. A straightforward calculation using 
Eqs. (26.A.7), (26.A.16), (26.A.18), and (26.A.19) gives its components as 
C = CrC2 , 
(26.2.19) 
w = C1w2 + Czw1 , 
(26.2.20) 
M = C1M2 + CzM1 + ~i ( w1 ys wz) , 
(26.2.21) 
N = C1N2 + C2N1- ! ( Wt wz) , 
(26.2.22) 
V11 = Ct Vf + Cz Vf-
~i( Wt YsY 11Wz) , 
(26.2.23) 
A.= C1A.2 + CzA.t- ~y
11w1a11C2- 4f111w2a11C1 + ~i rryswz + ~i rzYsWl 
+ HNt - iysMl) wz + HNz- iysM2) rot , 
(26.2.24) 
D = -a11Ct a11Cz + C1D2 + CzDt + M1M2 + N1N2 
- (rot [A.z + ~ iJw2]) - ( w2 [A.t + ~ f'wt]) - Vt 11 Vf . 
(26.2.25) 
It is trivial that linear combinations of superfields are superfields, in the 
same sense, and that spacetime derivatives and complex conjugates of 
superfields are superfields. But multiplying a superfield by some function 
of B or differentiating it with respect to B does not in general yield a 
superfield. (For instance, B itself is evidently not a superfield, because B 
is a fermionic c-number and therefore commutes with aQ, while !28 =!= 0.) 
There is, however, a way of combining a derivative of a superfield with 
respect to B and multiplying it by a factor B which does yield another 
superfield. 
Consider the superspace differential operator 9)01 defined by 
a 
a 
~ =-ao - yll (} axJl ' 
(26.2.26) 
or more explicitly 
a 
a 
~oc = l:<yse)OC'}' ao, - 2:: y:..,By axil . 
y 
I 
y 
(26.2.27) 
The only difference between the definitions of ~ and !2 is a change of sign 
of the terms involving the spacetime derivative. In consequence of this 
change of sign, in the anticommutator of ~ p with !201 , instead of getting 
two equal terms like those in Eq. (26.2.5) with the same sign, we get them 
with opposite signs, so thafthey cancel: 
(26.2.28) 
Since ct. is fermionic, it follows that (a!l) commutes with ~lh so if S(x, B) 
is a superfield, then 
b~ pS = -i[(iXQ), ~ pS] = -i~ p [{iXQ), S] = ~p(ri!l)S = (a!l)~ pS , 
(26.2.29) 

26.2 General Superfields 
65 
so that ?2 pS is also a superfield. Thus an arbitrary polynomial function of 
superjields Sand their superderivatives ?JpS, ?Jp?2yS, etc. is also a superfield. 
It is not necessary to add here that in constructing a superfield out of 
other superfields we can also include their spacetime derivatives, because 
these can be obtained from second superderivatives. 
Since the only 
difference between ?) fJ and !lp is in the sign of the term involving ali, the 
anticommutators of the ?Js are the same as those of the !ls, except for a 
change of sign: 
(26.2.30) 
Now let us consider how to construct a supersymmetric action out of 
superfields. There is no such thing as a supersymmetric Lagrangian den-
sity, because the anticommutation relation (26.2.6) shows that if 1J !£ = 0 
then !£ must be a constant Even if the Lagrangian density is not super-
symmetric, the action will still be supersymmetric if fJ!R(x) is a derivative, 
which would not contribute to 1J J !£ tfx. In general, the Lagrangian den-
sity !£ can be written as a sum of terms, each of which is some component 
of a superfield that is constructed out of elementary superfields and their 
superderivatives. Inspection of the transformation rules (26.2.11)-(26.2.17) 
for the individual components shows that in the absence of any special 
conditions on a general superfield, the only component of such a super-
field whose variation is a derivative is the D-component. Also, for the 
D-component of any superfield to be a scalar, the superfield itself must be 
a scalar. Therefore, unless there are special conditions on the individual 
superfields from which the Lagrangian density is constructed, a supersym-
metric action can only be the integral of the D-term of a scalar superfield 
A: 
I = J 
tfx [A]D . 
(26.2.31) 
But in fact no action of this sort would be physically satisfactory without 
special conditions on the superfields from which it is constructed. For 
a general superfield S(x, 0), the only sort of supersymmetric kinematic 
action / 0 that is bilinear in S and s• and involves no more than two 
derivatives of the component fields is of the form 
10 
oc j tfx [s• s]D. 
(26.2.32) 
From Eq. (26.2.25), we see that s· S has the D-component 
[s" s] D = -a lie· oliC- t ( w ylio/im) + t (<o/iw) ylim) 
+C*D +D"C- (wl)- (1m) 
, +M*M +N*N- v;vli. 
(26.2.33) 

66 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
The terms quadratic in C or w look promising as the kinematic La-
grangians for massless fields of spins zero and 1/2; the final three terms 
are harmless; but the terms involving D or A. have the disastrous effect in 
path integrals of constraining C and w to vanish. Fortunately, as we shall 
see in the following section, there are constrained superfields from which 
we can construct physically sensible actions. The introduction of these 
constrained superfields will also open up ways of constructing supersym-
metric terms in the action that are not the D-components of functions of 
superfields. 
If parity is conserved, then the space inversion properties of the com-
ponent fields of a superfield will be related by supersymmetry. 
To 
work out this relation, we apply the parity operator P to the com-
mutation/anticommutation relation (26.2.1) and use the transformation 
property (25.3.16) of supersymmetry generators, which gives 
ip [Q, p-1s(x, 9) P} = !l p-1s(x, 9) P. 
(26.2.34) 
The solution of Eq. (26.234) for a scalar superfield is of the form 
p-1 S(x, 9) p ='I S(Apx, -ipO) , 
(26.2.35) 
where 'I is some phase (the intrinsic parity of the superfield) and Apx = 
( -x, +x0). (To check that Eq. (26.2.35) satisfies Eq. (26.2.34 ), note that 
Eq. (26.2.35) gives the left-hand side of Eq. (26.2.34) as 
irrP(-
~ (} +yll(-ipO)fJ(Aa)) S(Apx,9)=rr!lS(Apx,-ip8), 
fJ( -zp ) 
px ll 
in agreement with what Eq. (26.2.35) gives for the right-hand side of 
Eq. (26.2.34).) Using the expansion (26.2.10) in Eq. (26.2.35) then gives 
the space inversion properties of the component fields: 
p-1c(x) P = rr C(Apx) , 
p-1w(x) P = -irr p w(Apx) , 
p-1 M(x) P = -'1 M(Apx), 
p-1 N(x) P ='I N(Apx), 
(26.2.36) 
p-1 Vll(x) P = -rr (Ap )ll v vv (Apx), 
p-1 A.(x) P = i 'I p A.(Apx) , 
p-1 D(x) P = 'I D(Apx) . 
* * * 
The general real superfield S involves four real spinless fields C, M, N, 
and D, plus one real four-vector field Vll, for a total of eight independent 
bosonic field components. For comparison, there are two four-component 
Majorana spinor fields w and A., als0 for a total of eight independent 

26.2 General Superjields 
67 
field components. The equality of the numbers of independent bosonic 
and fermionic field components holds in general not only for the un-
constrained general superfield studied in this section, but also for all 
superfields obtained from the general superfield by imposing supersym-
metric constraints, such as the chiral and other constrained superfields 
discussed in the next section. 
To see this in general, suppose that we have a representation of the 
supersymmetry algebra provided by NB linearly independent real bosonic 
field operators bn(x) and NF linearly independent fermionic field operators 
fk(x). We will assume that these fields satisfy only non-trivial field equa-
tions, so that no linear combination of the bn or {k with non-vanishing 
coefficients satisfies a homogeneous linear field equation. Consider a real 
supersymmetry generator Q(u), defined as 
Q( u) - ( u Q) = ( Q u) ' 
(26.2.37) 
where u is some ordinary numerical Majorana spinor (not an anticom-
muting c-number). (For extended supersymmetry, in place of Qa: we could 
use any one of the Qra:. say Qla:·) In order for the bn and fk to furnish a 
representation of the supersymmetry algebra, we must have 
[Q(u), bn] = (Lqnk(a){k, 
(26.2.38) 
k 
{ Q(u), {k} = L Pkn(a) bn, 
(26.2.39) 
n 
for some matrix differential operators q( a) and p( a). Taking the anticom-
mutator of Eq. (26.238) and the commutator of Eq. (26.2.39) with Q(u) 
gtves 
[Q2(u), bn] = iL ( q(a)p(a))nm bm, 
(26.2.40) 
m 
{ Q2(u), fk] = il: (p(a) q(a))kt!t. 
t 
(26.2.41) 
The anticommutation relation (25.2.36) or (25.2.38) gives the square of 
Q(u) as Q2(u) = -iPil ( uyllu ). Hence the square matrices p(a)q(a) and 
q( a)p( a) must both be non-singular, because if there were any non-
vanishing coefficients en( a) or dk(a) for which En cn(a)(q(a)p(a))nm = 0 
or Ek dk(a)(p(a)q(a))kt = 0 then bn or {k would satisfy the homogeneous 
linear field equations 
( uy~'u) all :E Cn(a)bn = 0 or 
( uyllu )all L dk(a)fk = 0. 
n 
k 
in contradiction with our assumption that the fields do not satisfy such 
field equations. In order for qp to be non-singular we must have N F ~ N B, 

68 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
and in order for pq to be non-singular we must have NB ~ NF, so we 
can conclude that NB = N F· Also the square matrices q and p must both 
be non-singular, so the complex conjugate of Eq. (26.2.38) tells us that 
r = q*-1qf, so that the number of independent fermion fields is NF 
rather than 2N F, and is therefore equal to the number N B of independent 
boson fields, as was to be shown. 
26.3 
Chiral and Linear Superfields 
In the previous section we found that the presence of D and A components 
in a general superfield stood in the way of using such superfields in a 
physically satisfactory Lagrangian density. Suppose then that we consider 
a superfield with 
A=D=O. 
(26.3.1) 
Are these conditions preserved by supersymmetry transformations? Ac-
cording to Eqs. (26.2.17) and (26.2.16), the condition D = 0 is invariant 
if A = 0, but the condition A = 0 is only invariant if we also impose the 
condition that ol-' Vv- Ov VI-'= 0, which requires that VI-' be a pure gauge: 
(26.3.2) 
Eq. (26.2.15) shows that, with A = 0, this condition is preserved by 
a supersymmetry transformation. We have thus arrived at a reduced 
superfield, subject to the constraints (26.3.1) and (26.3.2), with component 
fields having the transformation properties 
bC = i ( iX Y5 ru) , 
bru = ( -iy5 ¢C- M + iy5N +¢Z) ex, 
t5 M = - ( iX ¢ru) , 
bN = i ( liy5 ¢w) , 
t5z=(ccru). 
(26.3.3) 
(26.3.4) 
(26.3.5) 
(26.3.6) 
(26.3.7) 
Comparing with Eq. (26.1.21), we see that this is the same as the su-. 
permultiplet constructed by direct methods in Section 26.1, with the 
identifications 
C=A, 
(.() = -i'}'51p ., 
M=G, 
N=-F, 
Z = B . (26.3.8) 

26.3 Chiral and Linear Superjields 
69 
A superfield satisfying the conditions (26.3.1) and (26.3.2) is said to be 
chiral.* 
To distinguish a chiral superfield X(x, B) from the general superfield 
S(x, B) of the previous section, we will use A, B, F, G, and 1p for its 
components, instead of C, M, N, Z, and w. By using Eqs. (26.3.1), 
(26.3.2), and (26.3.8) in Eq. (26.2.10), we find the form of a general chiral 
superfield to be 
X(x, B) = A(x)- (B1p(x)) + l (8 () )F(x)- ~ (8 y5 8) G(x) 
+~ (Bys yll B)oll B(x) + ~ (8ys B) (8ys ¢1p(x)) 
1 (-
)2 
- 8 () Ys 8 
DA(x) . 
(26.3.9) 
(We could just as well have taken C = -B, w = 1p, M = -F, N = -G, 
and Z = A. We make the identifications (26.3.8) because, as we see here, 
for a scalar superfield they are consistent with the usual convention that 
A and Fare scalars while B and G are pseudoscalars.) 
The chiral superfield (26.3.9) may be further decomposed, as 
X(x,B) = ~[(J>(x,B)+tb(x,8)], 
(26.3.10) 
where 
(J>(x, B)= Q>(x)- ~(B1pL(x)) + ~(x) ( 8 ( 1 ~ Ys) 8) + ~ (8y5yll() )ollQ>(x) 
- ~(BysB)(8¢1pL(x))- ~(BysB)
2
oq,(x), 
(26.3.11) 
tb(x, 8) = ;jJ(x)- ~(BtpR(x)) + ~(x) ( 8 ( 1 ~ ys) ()) -
~ (8y 5yll8 )oll;jJ(x) 
1 (-
) (-
) 
1 (-
)2 -
+ ,J2 8ys~ (} fl'1pR(X) - 8 8ys9 
DQ>(x), 
(26.3.12) 
with component fields defined by 
-~-. _ A + iB 
_ ( 1 + Ys ) 
'Y = 
J2 ' 
VJL = 
2 
tp ' 
w: _F-iG 
.,?" = -,Ji--.,-2,.--- ' 
(26.3.13) 
• Some authors use the term 'chiral' to describe a special case of such superfields, 
introduced below, which are here called left-chiral or right-chiral. Our use here of the 
term chiral may at first seem strange, because it hru1 no counterpart for Dirac spinors. 
Any Dirac spinor is the sum of Dirac spinors that are left-chiral and right-chiral, in 
the sense that they are respectively proportional to 1 + y5 and 1 - ys, so no special 
term is needed for such sums of Dirac spinors. In contrast, it is only superfields 
satisfYing Eqs. (26.3.1) and (26.3.2) that can be expressed as the sum of a left-chiral 
and a right-chiral superfield. 

70 
-
A-iB 
¢= ~ ' 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
( 1-1'5) 
1J.'R =: 
2 
lp' 
az- _ F + iG 
:!1'= 
~ 
(26.3.14) 
The component fields of either ci> or ~ furnish complete representations 
of the supersymmetry algebra: 
where as usual 
JtpL = ~OJlcp yl-laR + ,J2ff IXL, 
(26.3.15) 
J/F = ~( 
IXL ¢1J.'L) , 
(26.3.16) 
Jcp = ~( 
IXRlpL) , 
(26.3.17) 
J1pR = ~oJL{i> yJL IXL + )2~ IXR , 
Jj; = J2( IXR ¢1J.'R) , 
J¢ = ~(IXL1J.'R) , 
IXL = ( 
1 ~ ')'
5 
) IX , 
IXR = ( 
1 ~ ')'
5
) IX , 
(26.3.18) 
(26.3.19) 
(26.3.20) 
and likewise for 0. A superfield of the form (26.3.11) or (26.3.12) is known 
as left-chiral or right-chiral, respectively. In the special case where a chiral 
superfield X (x, ()) is real, its left-chiral and right-chiral parts ci> and <i> are 
complex conjugates, so that (i> = ¢ •, j; = :F., and tp is a Majorana field. 
However, if we do not require X(x, 0) to be real then in general there 
is no relation between ci> and <i>; it is even possible that one of the two 
vanishes. 
The component fields of the superfield ci> include two complex bosonic 
components ¢ and :F, or four independent real bosonic components, 
and one Majorana fermion field tp, which has four independent fermionic 
components. This is another example of the general result, derived at 
the end of the previous section, that any set of fields that furnish a 
representation of the supersymmetry algebra must have an equal number 
of independent bosonic and fermionic components. 
We can use Eqs. (26.A.5), (26.A17), and (26.A.18) to rewrite Eqs. (26.3.11) 
and (26.3.12) in a form that clarifies the way that these superfields depend 
on ()L and OR: 
ct>(x, 0) = ¢(x+)- ~(oie lJ'L(x+)) + :F(x+)( Oie ()L) , 
(26.3.21) 
~(x,O) = (i>(x_) + ~(o~etpR(x-))- ff(x-)(O~eoR), 
(26.3.22) 
where 
(26.3.23) 

26.3 Chiral and Linear Superjields 
71 
The expansions of ¢(x+) and i/>(x-) in powers of xJl- 4 terminate 
with quadratic terms, the expansions of t;JL,R(X±) terminate-with linear 
terms, while the expansions of §"(x+) and j:"(x-) terminate at zeroth 
order, because all higher terms make contributions in Eqs. (26.3.21) and 
(26.3.21) that contain three or more factors of fh or (}R and therefore 
vanish. For the same reason, it is easy to see that any superfield that 
depends only on (}L and x~ but not otherwise on (}R must take the form 
(26.3.21 ), and any superfield that depends only on (}R and ~ but not 
otherwise on (}L must take the form (26.3.22). 
We have seen that for a superfield to be left-chiral or right-chiral is 
entirely a matter of what the superfield is allowed to depend on. It follows 
immediately that any function of left-chiral superjields (or of right-chiral 
superjields), but not their complex conjugates or spacetime derivatives, is a 
left-(or right-)chiral superjield. This can also be shown in a more formal 
way. Because Cl>(x, 9) depends on (}R only through its dependence on X+· 
and d>(x,O) depends on (}L only through its dependence on x_, they satisfy 
the conditions 
(26.3.24) 
where !')Rand !')L are the right- and left-handed parts of the superderiva-
tive (26.2.26): 
~ •• "' [ ( 1 ~ Ys) ~ l. =-~ 
'•P a:Rp - (y"OL). a~" , (26.3.25) 
~ 
u. "' [ c 
~ Ys) ~ l. = + ~ '•P a:LP - (y"6RJ. a:" , (26.3.26) 
for which 
p)Ra~ =!')La.~= 0. 
Conversely, if a superfield ci> satisfies !')Ret> = 0 it is left-chiral, and if it 
satisfies ~Let> = 0 it 'is right-chiral. Any function f(Cl>) of superfields Cl>n 
that all satisfy !')Rci>n = 0 or all satisfy !')LCI>n = 0 will satisfy !')Rf(Cl>) = 0 
or !')Lf(tJ~) = 0, and hence be left-chiral or right-chiral, respectively. But 
a function of left-chiral and right-chiral superfields is in general not chiral 
at all. 
Using the representation (26.3.21) for left-chiral superfields makes it easy 
to work out their multiplication properties. For instance, if C1>1 and C1>2 
are two left-chiral superfields, then their product ci> = C1>1 Cl>z is a left-chiral 
superfield, with components 
¢ = 4>t4>2. 
1pL = QJ 1"P2L + QJ21p1L , 
(26.3.27) 
(26.3.28) 

72 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
(26.3.29) 
The presence of chiral superfields in a theory opens up an additional 
possibility for constructing supersymmetric actions. Inspection of the 
transformation rule (26.3.16) shows that a supersymmetry transformation 
changes the :F -term of a left-chiral superfield C1l by a derivative, so that 
the integral of the :F -term of any left-chiral superfield is supersymmetric. 
Thus we can form a supersymmetric action as 
(26.3.30) 
where f and K are any left-chiral superfield and general real superfield, 
respectively, formed from the elementary superfields. 
On what can f and K depend? The function f will be left-chiral if it 
depends only on left-chiral elementary superfields Cll,., but not their right-
chiral complex conjugates. On the other hand, the superderivative of a 
chiral superfield is not chiral, so we cannot freely include superderivatives 
of the Cll,. in f. It is true that, acting on a superfield S that is not left-chiral 
(such as one involving complex conjugates of left-chiral superfields), a 
pair of right superderivatives gives a left-chiral superfield, because there 
are only two independent right superderivatives and they anticommute: 
~Rrx(~RfJ~RyS) = 0. 
However, the §'-term of any function f that is constructed in this way 
makes a contribution to the action that is the same as that of a D term 
of some other composite superfield. Since the ~s anticommute, the most 
general left-chiral superfield formed by acting on a general superfield S 
with two ~Rs may be expressed in terms of (~kEE!dR)S. If one of the 
left-chiral superfields in the superpotential is of this form, then since each 
~R annihilates all the other superfields in the superpotential, we can write 
the whole superpotential as f = (~kE~R)h for some other superfield h. 
Now, 
(~kE~R) (0kE0R) = -4, 
so, apart from spacetime derivatives that do not contribute to the ac-
tion, (~kE2)R)h is the coefficient of -(OkEOR)/4 in h. But, again apart 
from spacetime derivatives. ff]~ is the coefficient of (OlEOL) in f, so 
[(~kE~R)h]~ equals the coefficient of -(OlEOL) (Ok.EOR)/4 =- (B ys0)2 j4 
in h, and therefore 
(26.3.31) 
Thus we do not need to include terms in f that depend on left-chiral 
superfields of the form ~RfJ~RyS -
any such terms will be inclu~ed 

26.3 Chiral and Linear Superfields 
73 
in the list of all possible D-terms. When f is expressed as a function 
only of elementary left-chiral superfields and not their superderivatives or 
spacetime derivatives, it is known as the superpotential. 
In contrast, the function K is in general a real scalar function of both 
left-chiral superfields <Dn and their right-chiral complex conjugates <D;, as 
well as their superderivatives and spacetime derivatives, known as the 
Kahler potential. (Any right-chiral superfield is the complex conjugate of 
a left-chiral superfield, so there is no loss of generality in supposing K 
to depend only on left-chiral superfields and their complex conjugates.) 
However, not all K s obtained in this way will yield distinct actions. For 
one thing, chiral superfields have no D-terms, so two Ks that differ by a 
chiral superfield make the same contribution to the action. 
It is also possible to change the form of K without changing the action 
by a partial integration in superspace. The D-term of the superderivative 
£!&a.S of an arbitrary superfield makes no contribution to the action because 
J ttx [2}a.S]D = 0 . 
(26.3.32) 
To see this, recall that 
-~( ) ~-
/J 
~ 
£!&a.S -
L...J y5e 
::l(J 
( y B)a. ::l 
• 
p 
a.{J u p 
ux/J 
Since S is a polynomial at most of fourth order in B, the first term in £i.&a.S 
is a polynomial in () at most of third order and therefore cannot have a 
non-zero D-term that is not a derivative, while the second term is also a 
spacetime derivative, so that its D-term is also a spacetime derivative, and 
therefore neither the first nor the second terms in £i.&a.S can contribute to 
the integral in Eq. (26.3.32). Also, the superderivative acts distributively, so 
it follows from Eq. (26.3.32) that we can integrate by parts in superspace: 
for any two bosonic superfields St and S2, 
J tf'x [St2}a.S2]D = - J ttx [S2£i.&a.SdD . 
(26.3.33) 
In Sections 26.4 and 26.8 we will consider in detail the case where f and 
K depend only on elementary superfields, but not their superderivatives 
or ordinary derivatives. 
We saw in the previous section that in theories in which parity is 
conserved, the effect of the space inversion operator on a general scalar 
superfield is to subject its arguments to the transformations x!J -+ (Ap )P. .,.x" 
and()-+ -ip8, and perhaps to multiply the superfield by a phase 'I· Under 
these transformations, the arguments :4 in Eqs. (26.3.21) and (26.3.22) 
are changed by 
-
x± -+ (Apx)/J + ! (opy5yllfi()) = (Apx+)/J, 
(26.3.34) 

74 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
while fh ---+ -iPOR and ()R ---+ -iP8£. Thus space inversion takes left-
chiral superfields into right-chiral superfi.elds, and vice-versa. The only 
right-handed scalar superfield whose component fields involve creation· 
and annihilation operators for the same particles that are created and 
destroyed by a left-handed scalar superfield <I> is <I> cc <I> .. so p-1<1i P must 
be proportional to <I>*. By a suitable choice of phase of <I>, we can arrange 
that this transformation rule reads 
p-1<I>(x, ()) P = <li'"(Apx, -ip8). 
In terms of component fields, this transformation is 
p-1¢(x)P = ¢*(Apx), 
p-1tpL(x) P = -iEy5PVJ~(Apx), 
p-
1 ~(x)P = §*(Apx). 
(26.3.35) 
(26.3.36) 
There is another type of possible symmetry, known as R-symmetry, that 
is important in some models of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking 
discussed in Section 26.5, and that will also be used in proving no-
renormalization theorems in Section 27.6. As mentioned in Section 25.2, in 
theories of simple N =1 supersymmetry an R-symmetry is in variance under 
a U(1) transformation under which the left-handed components of the 
supersymmetry generator (called Qa in Section 25.2) carry a non-vanishing 
quantum number, say -1, in which case their adjoints, the right-handed 
components of the supersymmetry generator carry the opposite quantum 
number + 1. 
Inspection of Eq. (26.2.2) shows that the () superspace 
coordinate has a non-trivial transformation property under R-symmetry 
transformations: ()L carries R-quantum number +1 and ()R, which is 
proportional to 0£, carries R quantum number -1. In addition, the whole 
superfield may be given an R quantum number. If we give a left-chiral 
superfield <I> the R quantum number &.;,, then its scalar component ¢ has 
the same R quantum number, while the left-handed spinor component 
1JYL has ~ = &.;, - 1, and the auxiliary field lF has R!i' = &.;, - 2. In 
particular, in order for the superpotential term J d4x [f]!l' to conserve R, 
the superpotential itself must have Rf = + 2, so if f depends on a single 
left-chiral superfield <I>, then it must be proportional to <I>2/R.,. To put this 
another way, if f(<li) is a pure mass term proportional to ciJ2 then we must 
choose &.;, = +1, while if f(<li) is a pure interaction term proportional 
to <I>3, then we must choose &.;, = 2/3. On the other hand, inspection 
of Eq. (26.2.10) shows that the D-term of a superfield has the same R 
value as the superfield, so in order for the term J ~x[g]D in the action to 
conserve R it is only necessary that K have R = 0, which will be the case 
if each term in K contains equal numbers of <I> and <I>* factors, whatever R 
value we give to <I>. Of course, there is no general reason why R-symmeVY 

26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields 
75 
should be respected by the action, or why it should not be spontaneously 
broken. 
* * * 
There are other ways of constraining superfields, to yield other types 
of supermultiplets of fields. Among the more common are the linear 
superfields. To learn the conditions defining this sort of superfield, we 
note that if S is a general superfield, then we can form a chiral superfield 
S' -
~ ( fiJ Ej) S . 
(26.3.37) 
This is a chiral superfield because it can be written as a sum of !C~L EjL) S, 
which is right-chiral, and !Cf»R EjR) S, which is left-chiral. Its components 
are given in terms of the components of S by 
C'=N ' 
a/ = A. + fm , 
M' = -8 v.u 
,u 
' 
N' =D+DC, 
v; = -a.uM, 
A.'= D' = 0. 
(26.3.38) 
(26.3.39) 
(26.3.40) 
(26.3.41) 
(26.3.42) 
(26.3.43) 
A multiplet S is said to be linear if the superfield S' defined in this way 
vanishes 
(f»Ej)S=O, 
(26.3.44) 
or in terms of its components, 
N = M = 8,u y.u = 0 , 
A. = -
fW , 
D = -DC . 
(26.3.45) 
This leaves four independent bosonic fields, C and the three components 
of V,u subject to the condition a ,u V .u = 0, and four independent fermionic 
fields, the components of the Majorana four-spinor ru. We will see in 
Section 26.6 that the ·current superfields, whose V,u-terms are the conserved 
currents associated with symmetry transformations, are linear superfields. 
26.4 
Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields 
We will now work out the details of a general renormalizable theory of 
scalar chiral superfields. This will proVJide some insight into the impli-
cations of supersymmetry, and the theory we obtain will be part of the 
supersymmetric standard model to be discussed in Chapter 28. 
As discussed in Section 12.2, the Lagrangian density in a renormalizable 
theory can contain only operators with dimensionality (counting powers 

76 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
of energy or momentum, with 1i = c = 1) four or less. Eq. (26.2.6) shows 
that ~a. and hence a;aea. has dimensionality 1/2, so q)a. has dimensionality 
+ 1/2, and Ba has dimensionality -1/2. The g;- and D-terms of a superfield · 
S are the coefficients of two or four factors of 8, respectively, so if 
the superfield has dimensionality d( S) then its ff- and D-terms have 
dimensionalities d(ff8 ) = d(S) + 1 and d(D8 ) = d(S) + 2. Thus in a 
renormalizable theory the functions f and K in Eq. (26.3.30) consist of 
operators with dimensionality at most three and two, respectively. 
The dimensionality of an elementary scalar superfield Wn is that of an 
elementary scalar field, or + 1, so in order for each term in the function f 
to have dimensionality three or less, it can contain at most three factors of 
Wn and/or derivatives of ox~' and/or pairs of spinor superderivatives qfia.· 
As discussed in the previous section, any left-chiral term in f that involves 
superderivatives could be replaced with a term inK, so superderivatives 
can be omitted in f. Eq. (26.2.30) shows that spacetime derivatives can 
be expressed in terms of superderivatives, so these too can be omitted. 
(In any case, Lorentz invariance would rule out terms with one spacetime 
derivative, and terms with two derivatives in a renormalizable theory could 
involve only one Wn factor, on which these derivatives would have to act, 
so such terms would not contribute to the action.) We conclude that f(.P) 
is at most a cubic polynomial in the Wn, without spacetime derivatives or 
superderi va tives. 
The same dimensional analysis shows that in a renormalizable theory 
K is at most a quadratic function of Wn and w;, without derivatives. 
But any term in K(w,w•) that involves only Wn or only w; would be 
a chiral superfield, and chiral superfields by definition have no D-terms, 
so [K(.P, -t>'")]D receives contributions only from terms in K(.P, 4>'") that 
involve both Wn and w;. Thus K(.P, w*) must be of the form 
(26.4.1) 
mn 
with constant coefficients gnm forming a Hermitian matrix. 
We must now calculate the~- and D-components of f(.P) and K(w,w·), 
respectively. To calculate the D-component of K(.P, 4>*), we note that the 
term in w:wm of fourth order in (} is 
[w:wmL~4 = -~(8ys8}
2
[<J>:o<J>m + (o¢~)<1>n] 
+(8ys (}) [ ( tpn 8) (8y~'of.l tpm) + ( ( Op tpn) yl'(}) (8 tpm) J 
+~g;: ff m (8(1 - Ys)(}) (8(1 + Ys)(}) 
-~o~'<J>: av <l>m (8ysyp8) (8ysyv8) . 

26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields 
11 
Using (26.A.18) and (26.A.19) allows us to convert the (} dependence of 
this expression to an over-all factor (Oys(})2 : 
[ <~>: <!>,. Jo- = -h Oy,o )' [ ~ q,; o q,,. + h 
oq,~) <1>. - ( 'P• y" a" 'Pm) 
+ ( (a "'PnlY" 'Pm) + 29": ff m - a" <t>: a""""]· 
The D-term of a superfield is the coefficient of- !(8y5e)
2 minus !D 
acting on the {}-independent term, which for <b;<bm is ¢;¢m, so 
~ [K(<I>, <!>.) L 
=~g..., [- a"q,: a"<t> .. + 9<:,:F m 
- ~ ( lpoL y" a" 'PmL) + ~ (a"( lpnL )y" 'PmL) l· (26.4.2) 
If we~ write <bn as a linear combination Lm Nnm<b~ of new superfields <b:,., 
then K ( <b, <b*) is given in terms of the new superfields by a formula which is 
the same as Eq. (26.4.1), except that gnm is replaced with g:un = (Nt gN)nm. 
In order for the kinematic terms for the scalar and spinor fields to have 
a sign consistent with the quantum commutation and anticommutation 
relations, it is necessary that the Hermitian matrix gnm be positive-definite 
and, as shown in Section 12.5, this means that we can choose N so that 
g:un = bnm. Dropping primes, the term (26.4.2) is now 
HK (<I>, <I>.)] o = ~ [ - a"q,; a"q,. + 9':F • 
· - ~ ( V>"" r" a" 'PnL) + ~ (a"( V>"" l r" "'"") ]· (26.4.3 l 
We can still use a unitary transformation to redefine the superfields 
without changing the form of Eq. (26.4.3), a freedom we will need to 
exercise shortly. 
The terms in Eq. (26.4.3) involving ¢n and tpnL are the correct kinematic 
Lagrangians for conventionally normalized complex scalar and Majorana 
spinor fields. We will rewrite the fermion terms in a more familiar form 
after we have had a chance to consider mass terms. 
To calculate the §'-term of f(<b), it is most convenient to use the 
representation (26.3.21) of the superfields, and pick out the term of second 

78 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
T 
T 
o2f(¢(x)) 
[f(<P(x,e))L~i = ~ 
(eLeVJnL(x))(eLeVJmL(x)) o¢n(x)o¢m(x) 
of( ¢(x)) 
T 
+ ~~n(X) Ol/Jn(X) (eLeeL). 
(We have replaced x+ here with x because the term (Okcy"'OL) in Eq. 
(26.3.21) vanishes when multiplied by an expression with two eL factors.) 
The e dependence of the first term on the right-hand side can be put into 
a standard form by using Eq. (26.A.ll) to write'" 
(eieVJnL)<eieVJmL) = (VJJLe(
1 ~Y
5 )e) (eTe(
1 ~Y
5 )tpmL) 
= - ~ ( tiJnL lpmL) ( ei € 0 L) . 
The ~-term of any left-chiral superfield is the coefficient of (OieOL), so 
here 
(26.4.4) 
The complete Lagrangian density is the sum of the terms (26.4.3), (26.4.4), 
and the complex conjugate of (26.4.4): 
Sf - ~ [- 0 ,4>: 0" cf>n + F:F n 
-~ (1pnL y'O, 'i'>oL) + ~ ( ( 8" 'P•L) Y" 'PnL) l 
1 
o
2f(¢) (-
) 
1 
( o
2f(¢) ) • (-
). 
-2 ~ 
Ol/Jn Ol/Jm VJnL VJmL - l ~ ol/Jn ol/Jm 
lpnL VJmL 
+ E~n of<¢>+ E~: (of(¢))'" 
(26.4.5) 
n 
o¢n 
n 
o¢n 
The auxiliary fields ~ 
n enter quadratically in the action, with constant 
coefficients for the second-order terms, so they can be eliminated by 
setting §" n equal to the value at which the Lagrangian density (26.4.5) is 
stationary with respect to ~ 
n and §"~ : 
~ =_(of(¢))· 
n 
o¢n 
(26.4.6) 
• Note that ip,.L is the left-handed component of lPn• not V'nL· 

26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields 
19 
Inserting this in Eq. (26.4.5) gives 
!l' = ~ [- OJl</J: o~'</Jn- ~ ( 1JJnL ylliJJllpnL) + ~ ( (0Jl1JJnL) y~'VJnL)] 
1 
8
2 J ( <P) ( _ 
) 
1 
( a 
2 J ( ¢) ) " ( _ 
) • 
-2 ~ 
0</Jn o¢m lJJnL 1JJmL - 2 ~ OcPn oc/Jm 
tpnL lJJmL 
- L ( a f < ¢) ) • a f < <P) . 
(26.4. 7) 
n 
o¢n 
o¢n 
Thus the scalar field potential is V(¢) =En jof(¢)/8¢nl2. 
With the auxiliary fields eliminated in this way, the action is no 
longer invariant under under the supersymmetry transformations (26.3.15), 
(26.3.17) of the remaining fields VJnL and <Pn: 
( of(¢))" 
blpnL = ../ioJl</Jny~'rJ.R- ..fi 
o</Jn 
r!.L, 
This is because the expression (26.4.6) does not obey the transformation 
rule b!Fn = ../i(r~.L ~tpnL) for !Fn given by Eq. (26.3.16), but instead 
J(- of(</J))" =-2.:( azf(</J) )" J<P~ = -..fi2.:( azf(¢) )" (r~.LVJmR). 
o</Jn 
m 
o</Jno¢m 
m 
o¢no<Pm 
For the same reason, after eliminating the auxiliary fields the commutators 
of the supersymmetry transformations of <Pn and lJJnL are no longer given 
by the supersymmetry anticommutation relations, and in fact do not form 
a closed Lie superalgebra. But this is not inconsistent with the existence 
of quantum mechanical operators Qa: that satisfy the anticommutation 
relations of supersymmetry. These operators generate supersymmetry 
transformations, in the sense that the commutator of -i(iXQ) with any 
Heisenberg-picture quantum field <Pn or 1JJnL equals the change in that 
field under a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal parameter 
rJ.. With !F n given by Eq. (26.4.6) the commutator of -i(ilQ) with !F n 
is given by b!Fn =· ~(r~.L ~VJnL), because in the Heisenberg picture the 
quantum field VJnL satisfies the field equation derived from the Lagrangian 
(26.4.7): 
( 
iJ2f(</J) ) • 
~lpnL = - ~ iJ</Jn iJ</Jm 
lJJmR • 
Likewise, the supersymmetry transformations of the quantum fields <Pn 
and lJJnL do form a closed Lie superalgebra when the field equations are 
taken into account. Such algebras are often called on-shell. 
The zeroth-order expectation values </Jn0 of the scalar fields ¢n must 
be at 1he maximum of the last term in Eq. (26.4.7). Since this term is 
always negative or zero, the maximum will be at spacetime-independent 

80 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
field values ¢nO at which this term vanishes, so that 
iJf(¢)1 
= 0 
o¢n t/l=t/lo 
' 
(26.4.8) 
provided of course that a solution of this equation exists. Eq. (26.4.8) not 
only maximizes the last term in Eq. (26.4.7)- it is also the condition for 
supersymmetry to be unbroken. Invariance of the vacuum under super-
symmetry transformations requires that the vacuum expectation value of 
the change in any field under a supersymmetry transformation should 
vanish. The change in a bosonic field is a fermionic field, which of course 
has zero expectation value anyway, but Eq. (26.3.15) shows that the vac-
uum expectation value of btpnL is proportional to the vacuum expectation 
value of the auxiliary field Fn, which therefore must vanish if supersym-
metry is unbroken. According to Eq. (26.4.6), in zeroth-order perturbation 
theory this condition requires that Eq. (26.4.8) must be satisfied. We will 
see in Section 27.6 that if Eq. (26.4.8) is satisfied then supersymmetry is 
unbroken to all orders of perturbation theory. 
For a single left-chiral scalar superfield (]), the fundamental theorem of 
algebra tells us that the polynomial iJf(¢)/iJ¢ always has at least one zero 
somewhere in the complex plane. This is not necessarily true when there 
is more than one superfield. If we assume that there is a solution ¢nO of 
Eq. (26.4.8), we can evaluate the physical degrees of freedom of the theory 
by setting 
¢n = ¢nO + CfJn ' 
(26.4.9) 
and expanding in powers of CfJn· The masses of the particles of this theory 
can be calculated by inspecting the terms of second order in cp and tp: 
.2' 0 = ~ [- 0 .q>: O•q>. - ~ ('PnL 1" "· 'PnL) + ~ (a.( 'i'nLl Y"'PnL) l 
-4 L vlf nm ( 1PnL tpmL) - 4 L vlf~ ( 1PnL tpmL) * 
nm 
nm 
- L (v~ttv~t)mncp~C(Jn • 
(26.4.10) 
nm 
where vH is the symmetric _complex matrix 
vH 
= ( iJ2f(¢) ) 
mn -
o¢no¢m 
tfl=t/lo 
Now if we redefine the fields by a unitary transformation 
(26.4.11) 
(26.4.12) 

26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields 
81 
then the free-field Lagrangian (26.4.10) will take the same form, but with 
.A replaced with .A', where 
.A' = 0/t T .,1/0/t . 
(26.4.13) 
According to a theorem of matrix algebra, for any complex symmetric 
matrix .A it is always possible to find a unitary matrix 0/t such that the 
matrix .A' defined by Eq. (26.4.13) is diagonal, with real positive elements 
mn on the diagonal. (For future use, we note that .A't .A'= out .At .AO/t, so 
the quantities m~ are just the eigenvalues of the positive Hermitian matrix 
.At .A.) Redefining the fields in this way and dropping the primes, the 
quadratic part of the Lagrangian is now 
Z o = ~ [- O,q>: O• 'I'• - ~ ( 'I'•LY"O • 'PnL) + ~ ( O,('l'nLh" 'PnL) l 
-~ I: mn ( iPnL lpnL) -
~ I: mn ( fPnL lpnL) • 
n 
n 
(26.4.14) 
n 
To put the fermion mass terms in a more familiar form, we introduce 
fields tpn(x) defined as the Majorana fields whose left-handed components 
are tpnL(x). Then, using the symmetry properties (26A.7) of Majorana 
bilinears: 
-~ (tpnLY~'OptpnL) + ~(ol'(tpnL)y~'tpnL) 
= -~ ( tpn y~' ( 1 ~ Y5) Optpn) + 4 ( 
Op(tpn) y~' ( 1 ~ Ys) tpn) 
= -~(tpny~' (1 ~Y5) Ol'tpn)- 4(tpny~' (1 2Y5) Ol'lpn) 
= -~ ( tpn y~'ol' lpn) , 
while the reality properties (26.A.21) give 
( fPnL lpnL) + ( iPnL tpmL) • = 2 Re ( Vln ( 1 ~ YS) tpn) = ( tpn tpn) . 
The complete quadratic Lagrangian is then 
fRo= I: [- al'cp: a~'cpn- Em~ cp: (/Jn 
n 
n 
-~ ( 'l'n y"O• 'l'n) - ";" ( 'l'n 'I'•) ]· 
(26.4.15) 
The factor 1/2 in the fermion terms is correct because these are Majorana 

82 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
fermion fields, while there is no factor 1/2 in the scalar terms becau~ 
these are complex scalars. We see that the spinless and spin 1/2 particles 
have equal masses m,h as required by the unbroken supersymmetry of the 
theory. 
The interaction part !i'' of the Lagrangian density is given by the terms 
in Eq. (26.4.7) of higher than second order in lfJn and tpn. Since the superpo-
tential f( cf>o + lfJ) is being assumed to be a cubic polynomial and stationary 
at lfJn = 0, with lfJ defined so that the second-order terms are ~ En mnlfJ;, 
we may write the superpotential (apart from an inconsequential constant 
term) as 
1'"' 
2 
1'"' 
f(c/>o + ({J) = 2 L.t mn lfJn + 6 L.tf nmt lfJn ({Jm ({Jt · 
n 
nmt 
(26.4.16) 
Using this in Eq. (26.4.7) gives the interaction as 
2' = -~ LfnmtlfJn (lpm (1 
~)IS) lpt) 
nmt 
1'"'. ·(-(1-ys) ) 
-2L.tfnmtlfJn 
1JJm 
2 
tpt 
nmt 
1 '"' 
f 
• 
1 "' 
f* 
• * 
-2 L.t mn nmtlfJnlfJm({Jt- 2 ~ 
mn nmtlfJnlfJmlfJt 
nmt 
nmt 
1 '"' 
• 
• • 
-4 L.t f nmtf nnit'lfJm({JtlfJrrtlfJt' · 
nmtrr(t' 
(26.4.17) 
We see that a knowledge of the masses mn and the 'Yukawa'' couplings 
f nmt of the scalars and fermions is enough to determine all the cubic and 
quartic self-couplings of the spinless fields. 
As an illustration, consider the case of a single left-chiral superfield. 
For comparison with earlier results, let us write the single coefficient f in 
Eq. (26.4.16) as 
(26.4.18) 
where A. is real and ct is some real phase. We will also introduce a pair 
of real spinless fields A(x) and B(x) by writing the single complex scalar 
here as 
__ -ia. (A+ iB) 
({J=e 
J2 
. 
(26.4.19) 
The total Lagrangian density is then given by the sum of Eqs. (26.4.15) 
and (26.4.17) as 
2 =- ~a~Aa~A- ~a~B a~B- ~m
2 (A2 + B 2) 
-
~ ( 11Jy~ap1JJ) -
4m ( 1/J1JJ) 

26.5 Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking 
83 
-lA ( ij;tp) - il B ( ii'Ystp) 
-mlA(A2 +B2)- !l2 (A2 +B2)2 . 
(26.4.20) 
which is the same as the Lagrangian density (24.2.9) originally found by 
Wess and Zumino.2 It is noteworthy that in this simple case the Lagrangian 
turns out to be invariant under a space inversion transformation 
A(x)--+ A(Apx), 
B(x)--+ -B(Apx), 
tp(x)--+ iptp(Apx), (26.4.21) 
even though we did not assume parity conservation in deriving it. The 
appearance of parity conservation as an 'accidental' symmetry is a familiar 
feature of various renormalizable gauge theories (see Sections 12.5 and 
18.7) but not of theories involving spinless fields, so this is a special 
consequence of supersymmetry in the renormalizable theory of a single 
scalar superfield. 
26.5 
Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree 
Approximation 
We saw in the previous section that supersymmetry is unbroken (at least 
in the tree approximation) in renormalizable theories of chiral superfields 
if Eq. (26.4.8) has a solution, that is, if there is a value ¢0 of the fields at 
which the superpotential /(¢)is stationary: 
of(¢) I 
= o. 
(26.5.1) 
o¢n 
!/J=!/Jo 
There are as many independent variables here as there are equations to 
satisfy, so we generally expect there to be solutions of Eq. (26.5.1 ). In 
order for supersymmetry to be spontaneously broken in these theories, it 
is necessary to impose restrictions on the form of the superpotential. 
To see how a choice of superpotential may allow supersymmetry to 
be spontaneously broken, we will consider a generalization of a class of 
models due to O'Raifeartaigh. 3 Suppose that the superpotential is a linear 
combll:tation of a set Yi of left-chiral superfields, with coefficients given by 
functions fi(X) of a second set of left-chiral superfields Xn: 
(26.5.2) 
The conditions for supersymmetry to be unbroken by the values Xn and 
Yi of the scalar components of these superfields are that 
0 = of(x,y) = /i(x)' 
(26.5.3) 
oy; 

84 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
(26.5.4) 
Eq. (26.5.4) can always be solved by taking y; = 0, with no effect on the 
problem of solving Eq. (26.5.3). On the other hand, if the number of Xn 
superfields is smaller than the number of Yi superfields, then Eq. (26.5.3) 
imposes more conditions on the Xn than there are variables, so without 
fine-tuning a solution is impossible, and supersymmetry is broken. 
It may appear that the initial assumption (26.5.2) itself represents a 
radical form of fine-tuning, but in fact this form can be imposed on 
the superpotential by assuming a suitable R-symmetry. As discussed in 
Section 26.3, in theories with N = 1 supersymmetry an R-symmetry is a 
U(l) symmetry for which the 6 superspace coordinate has a non-trivial 
transformation property. If we assume an R-symmetry for which fh 
carries quantum number +1, then the .F-term of any superpotential has 
a quantum number equal to that of the superpotential itself minus 2, so 
R invariance requires the superpotential itself to have R = 2. We can 
therefore impose the structure (26.5.2) by requiring R invariance, with the 
Yi and Xn superfields given R quantum numbers +2 and 0, respectively. 
The scalar fields in this sort of model have a potential 
2 
V(x,y) = ~ 
l/i(x)l
2 + Ln ~Yi a~~:) 
l 
I 
(26.5.5) 
The potential is always minimized by choosing the Xn to minimize the 
first term; whatever values this gives the Xn, the second term can always 
be minimized by taking Yi = 0. Whether or not supersymmetry can be 
spontaneously broken, these models have the peculiar feature that there 
are always directions in the space of the fields in which the minimum 
of the potential is flat. Whatever values Xno of the Xn minimize the first 
term in Eq. (26.5.5), the second term vanishes not only for Yi = 0, but 
for any vector y; in a direction orthogonal to all the vectors (vn); = 
(ofi(x)joxn)x=xo· If there are Nx superfields Xn and Ny superfields Yi 
with Ny > Nx, then the vn cannot span the space of the ys, and there 
will be at least Ny - Nx of these flat directions. For any non-vanishing 
values Yi = Yoi along any one of these flat directions, the R-symmetry of 
the Lagrangian density is spontaneously broken, and the Goldstone boson 
field¢ associated with this global symmetry breakdown corresponds to a 
term ¢Yoi in the Yi· 
The simplest example of this class of models is provided by the case 
where there is just one X superfield and two Y superfields. Renormaliz-
ability requires the coefficient functions [i(X) to be quadratic functions of 
X, and by taking suitable linear combinations of the Yi and shifting and 

26.5 Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking 
85 
rescaling X we can choose these functions so that 
/t(X) =X -a, 
h(X) =X2 , 
(26.5.6) 
with an arbitrary constant a. There clearly is no simultaneous solution of 
the two equations (26.5.1) unless the superpotential is fine-tuned so that 
a = 0. The potential (26.5.5) here is 
V(x,y) = lxl4 + lx- al 2 + IY1 + 2xy2l 2 . 
(26.5.7) 
The sum of the first two terms has a unique global minimum x0• The flat 
direction here is the one for which Yt + 2xoy2 = 0. For a= 0 we have 
x0 = 0, and the minima of the potential are along the line with y1 = 0 
and Y2 arbitrary. 
Whatever the reason for a spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry, 
this phenomenon always entails the existence of a massless spin 1/2 
particle, the goldstino, analogous to the Goldstone bosons associated 
with the spontaneous breakdown of ordinary global symmetries. (The 
one exception, discussed in Section 31.3, is that in supergravity theories, 
where supersymmetry is a local symmetry, the goldstino appears as the 
helicity +1/2 states of a massive particle of spin 3/2, the gravitino.) 
In renonnalizable theories of chiral superfields, the tree-approximation 
vacuum expectation values ¢no of the scalar fields must be at a minimum 
of the potential Ln lof(¢)/o¢nl2 in Eq. (26.4.7), so 
L Atnm ( iJ!(¢) I 
) • = 0, 
(26.5.8) 
m 
u<J>m 
<P=t/Jo 
where 
Atnm = 02f(¢) 
o¢no¢m <P=<Po 
(26.5.9) 
If Eq. (26.5.1) is not satisfied, then Eq. (26.5.8) tells us that the matrix 
At nm has at least one eigenvector with eigenvalue zero, so according to 
Eq. (26.4.10) there must be at least one linear combination of the spin 
1/2 particles described by tpn with zero mass. For instance, for the model 
defined by Eqs. (26.5.2) and (26.5.6), the matrix At has the non-vanishing 
components 
Alxyt = Alytx = 1' 
(26.5.10) 
so this matrix has eigenvalues ±2x0 and 0, with the last eigenvalue cor-
responding to the goldstino mode. In Chapter 29 we will show without 
the use of perturbation theory that the spontaneous breakdown of super-
symmetry requires the existence of goldstinos, and explore their general 
properties. 

86 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
26.6 
Superspace Integrals, Field Equations, and the Current 
Superfield 
The '§"-terms' and 'D-terms' from which we construct the Lagrangian 
density may be expressed as integrals over the superspace coordinates 
8a.. The rules for integrals over fermionic parameters originally given 
by Berezin4 are derived in Section 9.5. Briefly, because the square of 
any fermionic parameter vanishes, any function of a set of N fermionic 
parameters en may be expressed as 
f{e) = (§;e.) c + terms with tOwer e factors, 
and its integral over the e s is defined simply by 
JaNe J (e) = c . 
(26.6.1) 
(26.6.2) 
The coefficient c may itself depend on other unintegrated c-number vari-
ables that anticommute with the e s over which we integrate, in which case 
it is important to standardize the definition of c by moving all e s to the left 
of c before integrating over them, as we have done in Eq. (26.6.1). With 
this definition, integration over fermionic variables is a linear operation. 
It resembles the integral over a real variable in the sense that, since a 
shift en -+ en +an of the variable en by a constant an changes the product 
IIn en only by terms involving fewer e factors, it does not affect the value 
of the integral 
(26.6.3) 
Also, as a special case of Eq. (26.6.2), the integral over N fermionic 
parameters of a polynomial of order < N vanishes. 
Integrals over 
fermionic and bosonic parameters are strikingly different in the way 
they respond to change of variables: for bosonic parameters Xn we have 
dNx' = Det(ox'jox)dNx, while for fermionic parameters 
(26.6.4) 
In particular, the dimensionality of de is opposite to the dimensionality of 
e. 
According to Eq. (26.2.10), the D-term of a general superfield S(x,8) 
(which may be elementary or composite) is equal, up to a derivative term, 
to the coefficient of -(Oy58)2 /4 = -(8TEIJ)Z /4. Any one of the four 8s 
can be 81, and each possibility gives an equal contribution, so we may 
assume that 81 is the left-most, and pick up a factor of 4. Then 82 must, 
be the next-to-left-most. Any of the two remaining (Js may be 83, and 

26.6 Superspace Integrals, Field Equations, Current Superfield 
87 
each possibility gives an equal contribution, so we may assume that 83 is 
third from the left and pick up a factor of 2, and 84 must then be the 
right-most. That is, 
-
2 
-HOys8) = -! x 4 x 2 x 81828384, 
so the coefficient of this function of 8 is -1/2 the integral over d48. Since 
this is the D-term up to a derivative, we have then 
j tfx [S]D = -~ j tfx j ~8 S(x, 8) . 
(26.6.5) 
In the same way, using Eq. (26.3.11 ), we find that the spacetime integral of 
the §-term of a generalleft-chiral superfield ~ (again, either elementary 
or composite) may be expressed as 
J 
~X (~].#" = ~ J 
~X J d28L ~(X, 8). 
(26.6.6) 
Since we are now integrating over 8s, it is convenient to introduce a 
delta function, defined as usual by the condition that for an arbitrary 
function f ( 8) 
According to Eq. (9.5.40), this condition is satisfied by 
J4(8'- 8) = (81 - 8!)(82- 8z)(8~- 83)(8~- 84) 
(26.6.7) 
= ~[(8L-8£)T e(8L-8£)] [(8R-8R)T e(8R-8R)]. (26.6.8) 
The representation of the action as an integral over superspace allows 
an easy derivation of the field equations in superfield form. Consider, for 
instance, the action for a S€~t of left-chiral scalar superfields ~n (which 
includes as a special case the general renormalizable theory of left-chiral 
superfields ~n): 
I=~ J 
~x [K(~, ~·)]D +2Re J 
~x [.f(~)]ff, 
(26.6.9) 
with K an arbitrary function of ~n and ~: without derivatives, and f 
an arbitrary function of ~n. also without derivatives. (The motivation 
for this form of the action and the expression of the action in terms 
of component fields is described in Section 26.8.) We cannot derive 
correct field equations by simply demanding that this is stationary with 
respect to arbitrary variations in ~. because the ~n are constrained by 
the requirement that they satisfy the requirement !?fiR~n = 0 for left-
chiral superfields. To make sure that this condition is preserved by any 
variation, we can use a trick that will also tum out to be useful in deriving 

88 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
superspace Feynman rules in Chapter 30. We write the cl>n in terms of 
potential superfields Sn(x, IJ) as 
cl>n = !')i Sn , 
from which it follows (using Eq. (26.A.21)) that 
cl>: = -P}i s:. 
(26.6.10) 
(26.6.11) 
where !')i and 2)1_ are abbreviations for (!')lf'!')R) -
-(~RP}R) and 
(P}IEP}L) = 
(~LP}L), respectively. To see that it is always possible to 
find an Sn (not necessarily local) that satisfies Eq. (26.6.10), note that for . 
any left~chiral superfields cl>n, 
!')i!')tcl>n = -16Dcl>n, 
so that Eq. (26.6.10) is satisfied by the solution of 
- 16DSn = 2)1_ <I>n · 
(26.6.12) 
(26.6.13) 
The expression 22i S is left~chiral for any S, so the action must be 
stationary with respect to arbitrary variations in the Sn. Using Eq. (26.6.5), 
the action may be expressed in terms of the Sn and s; as 
I = -
~ j tfx j tftJ K ( -P}iS*, P}JtS) + 2 Re j tfx [f(!')1S)t •. 
(26.6.14) 
The variation of the first term under infinitesimal changes bSn in the 
Sn (but not the s;) is easily calculated by an integration by parts in 
superspace: 
Eqs. (26.3.31) and (26.6.5) allow us to express the variation of the integral 
in the superpotential term under infinitesimal changes J Sn in the Sn as 
J J tfx [f<P}iS)t. = L J tfx [a f~cl>) I -
2 !')1Jsn] 
n 
n 
t'1>-¥JRS 
:F 
~ j d'x [2#~ ( af~:t_~~s dS.) L 
= 2 I: Jatx [a f(cl>) 1 
Jsn] 
n 
a cl>n 
tf>=¥J~S 
D 
= -I: J tfx J 
attJ a f(cl>) I 
DSn . 
n 
a cl>n 
tf>=¥J~S 

26.6 Superspace Integrals, Field Equations, Cu"ent Superfield 
89 
The condition for Eq. (26.6.14) to be stationary with respect to arbitrary 
variations in Sn is then 
2Ji JK(-2J1_s·, 2JiS) = _ 4 a f(ct») 1 
t52JiSn 
a Cl»n 
fll=!?I~S ' 
or in terms of the chiral superfields 
~2 JK(ct», ct»*) _ _ 
a J(ct») 
R 
JCI»n 
-
4 a Cl»n . 
(26.6.15) 
The complex conjugate yields 
2J2 JK(ct», ct»*) = 
(af(ct»))* 
L 
Jet»• 
4 
a 
e~» 
n 
n 
(26.6.16) 
It can readily be checked that the components of these equations yield the 
field equations for the components of e~»: and Cl»n. For instance, recalling 
that 2Ji( 81E8R) = -4, the 8-independent part of 2Jict»~ is 4~:. while the 8-
independent part of a f(CI»)ja Cl»n is a f(¢)ja ¢n, so the 8-independent part 
of Eq. (26.6.15) forK = Ln e~»;e~»n yields the relation~: =-a f(¢)ja ¢n, 
in agreement with Eq. (26.4.6). 
As an example of the use of this formalism, let us consider the superfields 
to which conserved currents belong. Suppose that the superpotential and 
Kahler potential in the action (26.6.9) are invariant under an infinitesimal 
g]obal transformation 
(26.6.17) 
m 
m 
with E a real infinitesimal constant and !T nm a Hermitian matrix, perhaps 
part of a Lie algebra of similar transformation matrices. Since the super-
potential depends only on the Cl»n, it is automatically also invariant under 
the extended transformations 
(26.6.18) 
m 
m 
where A(x, 8) is a superfield that must be taken left-chiral in order that 
the JCI»n be left-chiral, but is otherwise unrestricted. On the other hand, 
other terms such as the Kahler potential are not in general invariant under 
these transformations, because A =I= A*. For general fields the change in 
the action must therefore be of the form 
151 = iE J 
cfx J 
tf8 [A -A*]/, 
(26.6.19) 
where f(x, 8) is some real superfield, known as the cu"ent superfield. But 
if the field equations are satisfied then the action is stationary under any 
variation in the superfields, so the integral (26.6.19) must vanish for any 

90 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
left-chiral superfield A(x, 8). Any such A may be put in the form A = 2}~8, 
so this means that the current superfield must satisfy 
2}if = 2}if = 0 . 
(26.6.20) 
That is, / is a linear superfield. As we saw in Section 26.3, this means 
that its components satisfy 
N.l = M.l = fY.'V;f = 0, 
A..f =- ~w.f, D.! = -oc.t. 
(26.6.21) 
This allows us to identify the V -component V { as the conserved current 
associated with this symmetry. 
For the particular action (26.6.9), the current superfield takes the form 
If=~ JK($,$'") m-
m =""" JK($,$*) or 
m* 
6622) 
,/' 
L.....t 
J<J) 
o7 nm'Pm 
~ 
J<J)* 
:"/ mn'Pm , 
(2 · · 
nm 
n 
nm 
n 
with the equality of these two expressions a consequence of symmetry 
under the transformation (26.6.17). Then, using the field equation (26.6.15), 
2 
~ 
[ 
2 JK($, $*)] or 
~ 
Jf($) 
2}RJ = L.....t 2}R 
J<J) 
:"/ nm<J)m = -4 L. ~§" 
nm<J)m, 
(26.6.23) 
nm 
n 
nm 
n 
which vanishes because of the assumed invariance of the superpotential 
under the transformation (26.6.17). In the same way, using the second of 
the two expressions for / and the field equation (26.6.16), we find that 
2}i,,f = 0, thus verifying the conservation condition (26.6.20). 
26.7 
The Supercurrent 
Like any other continuous global symmetry, supersymmetry leads to the 
existence of a conserved current.5 The conservation and commutation 
properties of the supersymmetry current are operator equations that will 
remain valid even when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, and that 
will therefore be useful to us in Chapter 29, when we consider theories 
of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in a non-perturbative context. 
Also, the supersymmetry current is related to components of a superfield 
known as the supercurrent,6 that will be of fundamental importance in 
our treatment of supergravity in Chapter 31. 
As we saw in Section 7.3, the existence of an ordinary global symmetry 
of the Lagrangian density under an infinitesimal transformation I -+ 
l + ef!i't (with I a generic canonical or auxiliary boson or fermion field 
and fli't a function of the canonical and auxiliary fields) leads to the 
existence of a current 
~-'( ) 
~ J2'(x) 
art ) 
J 
X 
OC ~ 
o(JXf(x)joxl-'):1/' (x ' 

26.7 The Supercurre111t 
91 
which is conserved for fields satisfying the field equations, and generates 
the symmetry in the sense that the canonical commutation relations give 
[j d3xJ0(x), ;l(y)J oc ~1(y). 
The supersymmetry current requires a somewhat more complicated treat-
ment for two reasons. One is that supersymmetry is only a symmetry of 
the action, not of the Lagrangian density or the Lagrangian. Instead, the 
variation of the Lagrangian density under an infinitesimal supersymmetry 
transformation is a spacetime derivative, which we may write in the form 
b.?= L (ao~'KJl), 
(26.7.1) 
t 
with K~' a four-vector of Majorana spinors. In consequence, the super-
symmetry current is not the usual Noether current. The Noether current 
is a four-vector N~' of Majorana spinors defined by 
~ 
a~;~'~)Jt =-(aN~'), 
(26.7.2) 
whose divergence is given by the Euler-Lagrange equations as 
(a a"w) = - ~ a;;9f J/ - ~ 
a:;_~) a 
"JI 
= -{}.?. 
(26.7.3) 
(Here oR denotes the right partial derivative, defined by moving differen-
tiated fermionic variables to the right before differentiating.) Instead, we 
must define the supersymmetry current as 
S~' = N" +K~', 
which Eqs. (26.7.1) and (26.7.3) tell us is conserved: 
a~'s~' = o. 
(26.7.4) 
(26.7.5) 
The second complication is that the change {J t in a canonical field t 
under a supersymmetry transformation is not just a function of canon-
ical fields, but also involves their canonical conjugates. For instance, 
Eq. (26.3.15) shows that the change in the tp-component of a chiral 
scalar superfield involves the time derivative of the ¢-component. As 
a result the commutator of the Noether charge I d3x ~ with a general 
canonical field does not give the supersymmetry transformation of that 
field. Fortunately, this complication is cancelled by the first complication: 
when the commutators of I d3xK0 as well as I d3x ~with the fields are 
taken into account, the operator I d3x S0 does generate supersymmetry 

92 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
transformations" in the sense that 
[/ d3 X ( iX 8°) , l] = i lJ l , 
(26.7.6) 
consistently with Eqs. (26.2.1) and (26.2.8). 
For example, we may derive an explicit formula for the supersymmetry 
current in the general renormalizable theory of left·chiral superfields <I»n, 
which can be used to check that it does generate supersymmetry transfor· 
mations, in the sense of Eq. (26. 7.6). The Lagrangian density (26.4. 7) for 
• This is a general result for currents constructed in this way. For instance, consider a 
Lagrangian L (not Lagrangian density) that depends on a set of canonical variables q" 
and their time derivatives q", with no constraints of any class. In quantum field theory 
the label n includes spatial coordinates as well as discrete spin and species labels, and 
L = J d3 x !i'. Our assumption here that the Lagrangian density is invariant up to 
spacetime derivatives under some infinitesimal transformation () means that fJL is the 
time derivative of some functional F. That is, 
'"' aL {J "+'"' aL {J." = ~F. 
L..J aq" q 
L..J aqn q 
dt 
n 
n 
Using the canonical equations of motion, this can be written as a conservation law 
Q = 0, where the conserved charge is 
Q = _ '"' oL fJq" + F . 
L..J aqn 
It 
In our case here, Q = J d3x [Nl + K 0]. We assume the usual unconstrained commu-
tation relations 
[ 
aL 
m] 
-~m 
aqn'q 
=-lull, 
and find the commutator 
[ Q, qm] = i Jqm _ ~ 
;~ ~:~I [ 
q", qm] + ~ ;; [ q", qm] . 
To evaluate the second and third terms, we note that the second time derivatives ij" 
appear linearly in the invariance condition, so their coefficients must match: even 
without using the equations of motion, we have 
I: ;~ ~~:' = :; . 
I 
The second and third terms in the commutator therefore cancel, leaving us with the 
desired result 
Taking the time derivative gives also 
[ Q , q_m] = j {Jqm . 
This result has been extended to theories with constraints.7 

26.7 The Supercurrent 
93 
this theory may be put in the form 
!l' = ~ ~ [- O"q,; 0"</>n - ~ ( 'I'Ln y"O" lpL..,) - h 
'I'Rn y"O" 'I'Rn) l 
+non-derivative terms. 
(26.7.7) 
Using the transformation rules (26.3.15), (26.3.17), (26.3.18), and (26.3.20) 
(with '¢=¢*),the Noether current defined by Eq. (26.7.2) is 
N~-' = ~ ~ [2 ( o~-'¢:) VJnL + 2 ( o~-'¢n) VJnR + ( ~¢n) y~-'lpnR + ( ~¢:) y~-'lpnL 
-9' n Y~-'VJnR - ff: y~-'tpnL] · 
(26. 7.8) 
We can calculate the change in the Lagrangian density either directly, or, 
more easily, by noting that the changes of D-terms and F-terms under 
supersymmetry transformations are given respectively by Eqs. (26.2.17) 
and (26.3.16). Either way, we find that the current KJ.I in Eq. (26.7.1) is 
K" = ~ ~ 
Y" [- ( ;q,.) 'I'•R - ( ;q,;) 'PnL + .'F: 'PnL + .'F •'I'•R 
( of(¢)) 
(of(¢))* 
] 
+2 
o¢n 
lpnL + 2 
o¢n 
VJnR . 
(26.7.9) 
Adding (26.7.8) and (26.7.9) gives the supersymmetry current for this class 
of theories 
S" = ,/2 ~ [ ( ;q,.)y"'l'nR+ ( ;q,;)Y"'I'nL+ u:Jr•'PnL + u:.r Y"'l'nR l· 
(26.7.10) 
It is straightforward then to use the canonical commutation and anti-
commutation relations to verify that f d3x S0 satisfies the commutation 
relations (26.7.6). 
There is another definition of symmetry currents, in terms of the re-
sponse of the matter action to a local symmetry transformation, which is 
particularly useful when the associated symmetries are 'gauged,' as super-
symmetry will be when we tum to supergravity theories in Chapter 31. In 
the absence of supergravity fields, the action is not invariant under local 
supersymmetry transformations. If we make such a transformation with a 
spacetime--dependent parameter ct(x), the action will change by an amount 
that, in order to vanish when ct(x) is constant, must (even when the field 
equations are not satisfied) be of the form 
(26.7.11) 
with S~'(x) a four-vector of Majorana spinor operator coefficients. This 

94 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
does not define SJ.I(x) uniquely, because when we generalize global super-
symmetry transformations to local transformations, we might in general 
give the change J x of a field x under a local supersymmetry transforma-
tion an arbitrary dependence on the derivatives of ct(x). There is, however, 
one way of defining local supersymmetry transformations that guarantees 
that the coefficient Sf.l(x) in Eq. (26.7.11) is the same as the current defined 
by Eq. (26.7.4), which as we have seen generates the symmetry transfor-
mations in the sense of Eq. (26.7.6). It is to specify that derivatives of 
ct(x) do not appear in the supersymmetry transformation of the canonical or 
auxiliary fields l. For instance, the local versions of the transformation 
rules (26.3.15)-(26.3.17) for the components of a left-chiral superfield are 
JtpL(x) = .,fiop¢(x) yf.l ctR(x) ¢(x) + ...;-Lff(x) ctL(x), 
(26.7.12) 
J§"(x) = .,fi( ctL(x) ~VJL(x)) , 
(26.7.13) 
J¢(x) = ..fi( ctR(x)tpL(x)) . 
(26.7.14) 
Eq. (26.3.21) shows that the superfield may be expressed in terms of its 
component fields at x~ without derivatives, so the transformation rule for 
the superfield may be expressed as 
(26.7.15) 
where~ is the operator (26.2.2). 
With local supersymmetry transformations defined in this way, the 
change of the action that they induce consists of two terms. 
First, 
although the variation in canonical fields under a supersymmetry trans-
formation does not involve derivatives of ct(x), the variation in derivatives 
of canonical fields does. This produces a change in the Lagrangian density 
which is the same as Eq. (26.7.2), except that a is replaced with opa: 
J1J =-j tl'x ( [fJf.la(x)] Nf.l(x)). 
The second term in the change of the action arises from the fact that the 
Lagrangian density is not invariant even under the part of the supersym-
metry transformation that does not involve derivatives of ct(x). According 
to Eq. (26.7.1), this produces a change in the action 
J2J = J 
cfx ( a(x) of.lKJ.I(x)) =- J 
cfx (<of.la(x))KP(x)) . 
Adding J1J and J2J gives a total change in the action of the form (26.7.11), 
with Sf.l(x) given by Eq. (26.7.4), as was to be shown. 
Even with this specification of the transformation property of the com-
ponent fields, the supersymmetry current Sf.l(x) is not uniquely specified 

26.7 The Supercurrent 
95 
by Eq. (26.7:11), because we could always introduce a modified current 
(26.7.16) 
where A~tv = Avll is an arbitrary antisymmetric tensor of Majorana spinors. 
The term ovA ~tv is conserved whether or not the field equations are satisfied, 
and its time component is a space derivative, so J d3x s~ew = J d3x S0, 
leaving Eq. (26.7.6) unchanged. 
There is in fact a particular choice of A.uv with the convenient feature 
that y pS/tew turns out to be a measure of the violation of scale in variance 
by the theory. By using the Dirac equations derived from the Lagrangian 
density (26.4.7): 
it is straightforward to calculate that 
y ,s• = - 2.,!2 ~ { ' ( </>. 'l'nR+ <1>: 'l'nL) 
+ (E ¢m o2f(¢) - 2of(¢)) tpnL 
m 
o¢no¢m 
o¢n 
( 
o2f(¢) 
of(¢))· 
} 
+ ~ 
¢m o¢no¢m - 2 o¢n 
tpnR 
. 
We can eliminate the first term by introducing a modified supersymmetry 
current of the general type of Eq. (26.7.16): 
s~ew = s.u + f [y.U' yv] L Ov ( if>ntpnR + ¢:tpnL) ' 
n 
(26.7.18) 
for which 
y,s:.., = - 2.,!2 ~ { ( ~ 
<l>m aa;~~:~ -2 at~~)) 'l'nL 
( 
o2f(¢) 
of(¢)). 
} 
+ ~ 
if>m Oif>nOif>m - 2 Oif>n 
tpnR 
. 
(26.7.19) 
The right-hand side vanishes for a scale-invariant Lagrangian density, 
with j(cJ)) a homogeneous polynomial of third order in the Cl,)n· 
We now tum to the supersymmetry transformation property of the 
supersymmetry current. It is straightforward to check that the current 
given by Eqs. (26.7.18) and (26.7.10) is related to the co-component ro~ of 

96 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
a real non-chiral superfield SJ.I by .. 
S J.l 
= - 2al~ J.l -+- 2yll yv o/~ 
new 
v • 
where 
e" . 1;2 ~ 
[ <W>:a,<~>. - <W>.a,<~>; + ( (!»<~>;lY,(!ll<~>.l) ]· 
The superfield E)J.I is known as the supercurrent. 
(26.7.20) 
(26.7.21) 
The supercurrent obeys a conservation law that incorporates the con-
servation of the supersymmetry current (26. 7.20) and much else besides. 
To derive it, we may use the anticommutation relation (26.2.30) to writet 
[.@R, (EtL.@L)] = -4 ~.@L. 
Together with the chirality conditions .@R<I>n = .@L<I>; = 0, this gives 
yJ.I.@L L 
[<~>:aJ.I<I>n-<I>noJ.I<I>:] = -~L<l>:.@R(EtL.@L)<I>n-L(~<l>:).@L<I>n 
n 
n 
n 
and 
yJ.I.@ L L ( (Et<l>:) }' Jl(.@<I>n)) = 4 L( ~<1>:) .@<l>n + 2 L .@<1>: (.@ L.@ L )<I>n , 
n 
n 
n 
so that the superfield (26.7.21) satisfies 
'YJ.I.@ LE)Jl = 
~ i L (.@R<I>:) ( .@L.@L) <I>n- fi: i L <I>:.@R ( .@L.@L )<I>n · 
n 
n 
(26.7.22) 
We saw in Section 26.6 that the field equations for the Lagrangian density 
(26.4.7) may be expressed in the form 
(Eh.@L)<I>n = -4 (
8
~~:)) • 
(26.7.23) 
··Here we introduce a notation that will be used extensively in Charter 31; following 
Eq. (26.2.10), the components C5 , w 5 , M 8, N 8 , V!, 18 , and D of an arbitrary 
superfield S(x, 9) are defined by the expansion 
S(x, 9) = C
8(x)- i( 0 y5 w5(x)) -
~ ( 0 Ys e )M5(x)- ~ ( 0 e )N5(x) 
+Hom· o)v:(x)-i( 9y, 9) (o [•'(x) + 
~ jw'(x)]) 
-Hoy, o)' [n'(x) + &oc'(x)]. 
tIt should be noted_ that it}L and it}R are the left- and ri@!:handed components of the 
covariant adjoint !?J, rather than the covariant adjoints !!JJL and !!JJR of !!JJL and !?JR. 

26.7 The Supercurrent 
97 
(26.7.24) 
The Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (26.7.24) is 
y" "'R e, =- ~ i!h [ ~ 
<I>/t~~)- 3 f(<I>)] 
(26.7.25) 
The sum of this and Eq. (26.7.24) then gives the conservation law 
~)Pq; e = !!i x 
I 
1.1 
' 
(26.7.26) 
where X is a real chiral superfield given (up to an additive constant) in 
this class of theories by 
2 
[ 
of(fl>) 
] 
X = JIm ~ 
fl>n ofl>n - 3 /(fl>) 
. 
(26.7.27) 
Although it has been derived here only for renormalizable theories 
of chiral superfields, we may expect that the conservation law (26.7.26) 
holds more generally, though of course with X not necessarily given by 
Eq. (26.7.27), because of the other conservation laws that it incorporates. 
(A generalized formula for X will be given in Section 31.4.) To derive these 
relations, we must use Eq. (26.2.10) to express e~.~ in terms of components 
C~, w~, etc. and use Eq. (26.3.9) to express the chiral superfield X in 
terms of components Ax, tpx, etc. With the aid of Eqs. (26.A.9), (26.A.16), 
(26.A.17), and the Dirac matrix identities 
yll,;Pyv = Yfi.IPyV _ YfJ.IVyP + YfVPy!.i + iys eJ.IvpuYu, 
we can then expand both sides of Eq. (26.7.26) in the terms 
1' (}, rsO, 
y'~'(}' 'Ys'Yv(}' ys[y!.i, yv](}' 
(oo), (orso), (orsrvo), 
o (or sO) , ysO (oysO) , y v o (or sO) , 
y v rsO (By sO) , [yP, yu](} ( OysO) , ( Oy50) 
2 
• 
(26.7.28) 
(26.7.29) 
Matching the coefficients of 1, 0, ysO, yvo, y5yvo, y5[y1.1, :~v]o, respectively, 

98 
yields the results tt 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
x 
. 
1-1 e 
tp 
= -l)'sY OJJ.I_ , 
pX = a~tC~, 
Gx = (Ve)ll~t ' 
allAx = -N~, 
allBX = M~, 
0 = v~- Vv~ + E~tvpuaucep. 
(26.7.30) 
(26.7.31) 
(26.7.32) 
(26.7.33) 
(26.7.34) 
(26.7.35) 
Matching the coefficients of either (08) or (Oys8) yields the same result: 
0 -
'lJJ.I A.e 
-
r 
J.l' 
(26.7.36) 
and matching the coefficients of (O'YsY v 8) yields the result 
- iys ['}'v, ~] tpx = 2yllyv A.~+ 'YJ.l ['Yv, ~]OJ~ . 
(26.7.37) 
From Eqs. (26.7.30), (26.7.36), and (26.7.37) we obtain the conservation of 
the supersymmetry current (26.7.20): 
0 = a~tSf:ew = -2a~tOJ~ + 2 ~'Y~tOJ~, 
and a relation among A.~ and OJ~: 
(26.7.38) 
A.~ = -
~OJ;>+ avy~tOJ~ . 
(26.7.39) 
Matching the coefficients of 8(0r58) and rs8(0ys8) gives relations that 
can be obtained by taking the divergence of Eqs. (26.7.34) and (26.7.33), 
respectively. Matching the coefficients of yP8(0r58) gives 
apGx = a~tv! + a~tV;!- apV911 , 
(26.7.40) 
which, combined with Eq. (26.7.32), yields the conservation law 
all r~-~v = o. 
(26. 7.41) 
where T~tv is the symmetric tensor 
T 
_ 
1 ye 
1 ye + 
yel 
/tV = -
} 
/tV -
2 
V /l 
'1 J.lV 
l • 
(26.7.42) 
Matching the coefficients of rPys8(0rs8) gives 
aJ.lFX = 2.!>~ +DC~ +epvupavyepu, 
(26.7.43) 
which, with Eqs. (26.7.31) and (27.7.35), yields a relation between D~ and 
Ce. 
J.l" 
tt Note that VI'~ is the V,--component of 9~', not the V1'-component of 9,. 
(26.7.44) 

26.7 The Supercurrent 
99 
Matching the coefficients of [yP, yu]8(0ys0) and (Oy50)2 gives results that 
already follow from Eq. (26.7.34) and from Eqs. (26.7.38) and (26.7.39), 
respectively. 
The conserved symmetric tensor TJJv may be identified as the energy-
momentum tensor of the system. To check this, we use Eqs. (26.1.18) and 
(26.2.12) to write the change in ro~(x) under a supersymm.etry transfor-
mation with infinitesimal parameter rx as 
£5ro~ = -i [(Qrx), w~] = +i[ro~, (Qrx)J 
= ( -iys ~C~- M~ + iy5N~ + yvv~)rx. 
Eqs. (26.7.33H26.7.35) allow us to put this in the form 
i{ro~,Q} = !Yv(V~+Vv~)-oJl(BX+ysAX)-iys ~C~+!eJJvKu)lvoKC8 u. 
In terms of the currents (26.7.20) and (26.7.42), this reads 
i {Sgew• Q} = 2yv TJ.Jv + 2(oJJ- yll ~)(Bx + YsAx)- eJJvKu"lvOKC;' 
+2iys( ~C8
JJ -y~tl ~c'[- !YJJ[~,yu]c_?). (26.7.45) 
For 11. = 0 all the terms on the right except the first are space derivatives, 
and therefore vanish when we integrate over space, leaving us with 
i {I d3x s~ew' Q} = 2yv I d3x TOv . 
(26.7.46) 
We have defined the supersymmetry current Sl:ew to give f d3x sgew = Q, 
so the fundamental anticommutation relation (25.2.36) tells us that 
1 
d3x rov = pv • 
(26.7.47) 
which, with the conservation condition (26.7.41), allows us to identify TJJV 
as the energy-momentum tensor. 
It is important to ,note which energy-momentum tensor we have con-
structed in this way. Either directly from Eq. (26.7.21), or by considering 
the supersymmetry transformation of the current (26.7.18), we can calcu-
late that the energy-momentum tensor TJlv for renormalizable theories of 
chiral superfields is 
T"' = ~ 
[ a•q,;a· "'· + a• q,;a•q,.]- q"' ~ [ a•q,;a •"'· + I 
at~;) n 
+~('7JJVO -
a~tav) L lcf>nl2 + ... ' 
(26.7.48) 
n 
where the dots denote terms involving fermions, which do not concern 
us here. We see that the last term, which is related by supersymmetry 

100 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
to the correction term in Eq. (26.7.18), has the effect that the energy-
momentum tensor is traceless for the massless free-field theory with no 
superpotential, in which case D4Jn = 0. A simple calculation shows that 
Tllv is also traceless more generally for scale-invariant theories, with f(4J) 
a homogeneous polynomial of third order in the 4Jn-
Supersymmetry also imposes an interesting relation among violations 
of scale invariance and R conservation. Eqs. (26.7.30H26.7.32) show that 
y#S:ew = 6yJtw9 1l, 81lC~, and T 11 = 2V9 1lll (which measures the violation 
of scale in variance) are proportional to components of a chiral superfield 
X, so if any one of these vanishes as an operator equation (that is, not 
just for some particular field configuration), then they all do. In this case, 
we can show that C9 P is proportional to the current of an R quantum 
number. To see this, note that Eq. (26.2.11) gives 
c5c;> = i [c;>, (aQ)] = i (arsw;>), 
so that in general 
[c;>, Q] = rsw;>. 
(26.7.49) 
We have seen that if C~ is conserved then yllSJt = 0, so that Eq. (26.7.20) 
gives Su = -2w~. Setting u = 0 and integrating over x in Eq. (26.7.49) 
then gives 
[/ d3 x C0 e , Q J = - trs Q . 
(26.7.50) 
We can therefore introduce a current 
rJill = 2 Clle, 
(26.7.51) 
which if conserved is the current of a quantum number rJi = J d3 x gt/) for 
which QL and QR destroy the values +1 and -1, respectively. Since the 
commutator of QL with a scalar superfield <I> involves a term 8<I>j8fh, this 
means that fh carries the rJi value + 1, in accord with the usual definition. 
A theory in which the superfield X vanishes, or, equivalently, in which 
TllJt, yllSil, and allrJtll all vanish, is invariant under an enlarged set of 
supersymmetry transformations, generated by the superconformal algebra 
described at the end of Section 25.2. 
In scale-invariant theories the value of the rJi quantum number carried 
by various superfields is fixed by the structure of the Lagrangian. For 
instance, in a scale-invariant theory of chiral scalar superfields, the su-
perpotential must be a homogeneous polynomial of third order in the 
superfields. The oF-term of the superpotential is proportional to the co-
efficient of Of, which has rJi quantum number + 2, so the rJi quantum 
number of the :?-term of the superpotential is the rJi quantum number 
of the superpotential ·itself minus two. rJi in variance then requires that 

26.7 The Supercurrent 
101 
we give the scalar superfields an ~ quantum number +2/3, so that the 
superpotential will have~ quantum number +2, and its .F-term will have 
fJt quantum number zero. That is, the scalar components 4>n have fJt = 2/3 
and the spinor components ljJnL (proportional to the coefficient of fh in 
the superfield) have fJt = -1/3. This can be verified by calculating the 
current fJt~-' from the C-term of the supercurrent (26.7.21) for this class of 
theories: 
(26.7.52) 
(The second term contains an extra factor of 1/2 because 1p is a Majorana 
spinor.) 
Quantum corrections can introduce violations of fJt invariance (through 
Adler-Bell-Jackiw anomalies) and of scale invariance (through the renor-
malization group running of the coupling constants) but supersymmetry 
continues to impose a relation between these symmetry violations despite 
these corrections.7a We will see an example of this in Section 29.3. 
* * * 
The conservation condition (26.7.26) does not uniquely determine either 
the supercurrent 8~-' or the associated chiral superfield X. In particular, 
we may add to 8~-' a change 
(26.7.53) 
with Y an arbitrary chiral superfield. The left-hand side of Eq. (26.7.26) 
is then changed by 
'}'"'.@AS"' = ~.@Y . 
For a left-chiral superfield YL the chirality condition .@R YL = 0 and the 
anticommutation relations (26.2.30) give 
~.@rzY = -~ [{.@L,~R}.@RL YL 
~ -; [.@r..(!hR.!»R) Y, + ~ 
§JL,B.@R•.@Lp h l 
The matrix e'}'s in ~L/3 in the second term on the right of the above 
expression may be moved to the final operator .@L/3• so that the chirality 
condition and anticommutation relations give 
L ~ 
L/3~ Ra!?.hp YL = - L !?ihp!?.d Ra~ L/3 YL = 2( ~.@)a YL , 
f3 
f3 
and hence 
~.@YL =- 4 [.@( .@.@) YL + 2 ~.@YL] =- ~.@(~£d) YL. 

102 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
The same result can be derived in the same way for any right-chiral 
superfield, and hence it holds also for an arbitrary sum Y of a left-chiral 
and a right-chiral superfield 
'Y~t§JL\E>Il =~§JY =- ~§)( ~§)) Y . 
(26.7.54) 
This is of the same form as the conservation condition (26. 7.26), with the 
associated chiral superfield X changed by the chiral superfield 
AX=- H~§J) y . 
(26.7.55) 
It is easy to check that the addition of 1\E>Il to E)ll changes Tll0 and 
S2ew only by space derivatives, and therefore does not change the energy-
momentum four-vector Pll or the supercharge Q. 
We saw in Section 26.6 that any chiral superfield X may be expressed 
in the form X = (~§J)S, and hence can be removed by adding a term 
of the form (26.7.55) to E)Jt with Y = 4S. But in generalS and the new 
E)ll constructed in this way will not be local. This situation is already 
familiar from our experience with triangle anomalies, discussed in Chapter 
22 -
we saw there that, although it is always possible to construct terms 
that if added to the Lagrangian density would cancel these anomalies, 
in general these terms would not be local, and hence must be excluded 
from the Lagrangian density. There are chiral superfields that can be 
expressed as (?J§J)S with S local, and that therefore, if present in the 
associated chiral superfield X, could be eliminated by adding local terms 
of the form (26.7.53) to E>ll. They include, for instance, a term of the 
form Re (kof(<I>)jo<IJ), with k an arbitrary complex constant, because 
the field equations (26.6.15) and (26.6.16) show that (~§J)Re (k*<f>) = 
4Re (kof(<I>)jo<I>). But in general the changes in X that can be made in 
this way are quite limited. 
26.8 
General Kahler Potentials" 
There are several circumstances in which it is necessary to consider non-
renormalizable Lagrangian densities of the general form (26.3.30) 
(26.8.1) 
where the superpotential f is an arbitrary function of left-chiral scalar 
superfields <I>n but not their derivatives, and the Kahler potential K is an 
arbitrary function of the <~>n and <~>: but not their derivatives. 
• This section lies somewhat out of th<~ book's main line of development. and may be 
omitted in a first reading. 

26.8 General Kahler Potentials 
103 
This situation arises in effective field theories whose symmetries rule 
out any renormalizable interactions, or in which the renormalizable in-
teractions all happen to be small. It is often then possible to calculate 
scattering amplitudes at low energy from tree graphs, using a Lagrangian 
with the smallest value for some combination of the numbers of deriva~ 
tives, fermion fields, and any small renormalizable couplings. In Section 
19.5 we examined such an effective field theory with no renormalizable 
couplings, involving nucleons and soft pions. The dynamically broken 
gauge theories discussed in Section 21.4 provide examples of effective field 
theories of this sort with small renormalizable couplings.- This circum-
stance also arises in supersymmetric theories whose symmetries do not 
allow a superpotential, or where the superpotential is for some reason 
small. We will encounter an example of this sort when we consider the 
extended N = 2 supersymmetric theory of Abelian gauge superfields and 
gauge-neutral chiral scalar superfields in Section 29.5. We will show there 
that low-energy scattering amplitudes in this theory are generated by tree 
graphs using a Lagrangian density of the form (26.8.1), with f = 0 and 
K a function only of the <I>n and <~>: but no derivatives, plus fF -terms 
quadratic in gauge superfields. The inclusion of Kahler potentials having 
arbitrary dependence on <I>n and <1>; but not on their derivatives is partic-
ularly important in effective field theories in which some scalar fields are 
of the same order of magnitude as the fundamental energy scale of the 
underlying theory, although all other field values and all energies are much 
smaller. This will be of interest, for instance, in connection with theories 
of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking, discussed in Section 31.6. 
Let us consider how to express the Lagrangian density (26.8.1) in terms 
of component fields. We did not use the assumption that /(<I>) is a cubic 
polynomial in deriving Eq. (26.4.4), so this continues to give the ~-terms 
in the Lagrangian contributed by an arbitrary superpotential. To derive 
the D-terms, we note that the term in the Kahler potential of fourth order 
in 0 is 

104 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
To make the reality properties of the fermion kinematic terms transparent, 
we can use Eq. (26.A.21) to write 
(1Pn ~lfJmR) = ( lfJn ~lpmL) • • 
The D·term of K(fl>, fl>*) is the coefficient of -(Oy58)2 /4 minus half 
the d'Alembertian of the O·independent term in K(fl>,f1>•), which is just 

26.8 General Kahler Potentials 
105 
K(lj>, fj>*), so 
HK(<I>,<I>•)]D = Re ~~~[- ~('Pm ~(1 +ys)'Pn) 
+F ·'~ - a""'" a•q,:.] 
iJ3 K ( lj>, 4> *) -
* 
- Re L of/> of/> of/>* ( 11'n11'mL )~ ( 
nml 
11 
m 
l 
iJ3K(l/> fj>*) 
+ Re L of/> of/>' of/>* ( 11'mYP11'tR) iJJJf/>11 
nml 
11 
m 
I 
1 
o4K(l/>, lj>*) 
_ 
_ 
+4 L of/> of/> of/>* of/>* ( 11'n11'mL) ( 1l'k11'IR) ' 
(26.8.4) 
nmlk 
11 
m 
I 
k 
where "§( 4>, 4>*) is the Kahler metric 
""'-
(.+. .+. *) = iJ2 K ( lj>, lj>*) 
(26 8 
;:,nm '1-'• o/ 
of/>, olf>:n 
. 
• .5) 
Note that the constant matrix gnm in Eq. (26.4.2) is replaced here with the 
Kahler metric '§nm( 4>, 4>*). Because the Kahler metric is field-dependent, we 
cannot in general make it equal to the unit matrix by a field redefinition, 
so the total Lagrangian must be left in the form 
ff' = Re ~ 
~~ [- ~ ('I'm ~(1 Hs)tp.) + F.ff~- a.q,. a•q,~l 
iJ3K(lj>, fj>*) 
-
• 
- Re L of/> of/> of/>* ( 11'n11'mL )~ ( 
nml 
11 
m 
I 
iJ3K(lj> lj>*) 
+ Re L of/> of/>' of/>* (11'mYJJ11'tR) a 
JJ4>11 
nml 
n 
m 
l 
1 
'o4K(lj>,lj>*) 
_ 
_ 
+4 L of/> of/> of/>* of/>* ( TPn11'mL) ( 1l'k 1l'lR) 
nmlk 
11 
m 
l 
k 
o2f(4>) (-
) 
of(l/>) 
-Re L of/> of/> 
11'n11'mL + 2Re L ~11 ~. 
11111 
11 
m 
11 
o/n 
(26.8.6) 
The biilinear ( VJm 
~Ys11' 11 ) is a total derivative, and could be discarded if 
"§11111 we:re a constant, but must be kept for general Kahler potentials. This 
result will be extended to include gauge superfields at the end of Section 
27.4. 
* * * 
As discussed in Section 19.6, the spontaneous breakdown of a global 

106 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
symmetry group G to a subgroup H entails the existence of a set of real 
massless Goldstone bosons with scalar fields nk. for which the term in the 
Lagrangian with the minimum number of derivatives takes the form 
!£ GfH = -I.: Gu(n)oJJnkoJJnt, 
(26.8.7) 
kt 
where Gu( n) is the metric of the coset space G I H. 
(Theories with 
Lagrangian densities of this general form are known as non-linear u-
models.) By writing the complex fields rf>n in terms of their real and 
imaginary parts, the term - Lmm "#nm( f.j>, rj>•)oJJrf>noJJf./>;, in the Lagrangian 
density (26.8.6) can be put in the form (26.8.7), but the converse is 
not generally true: the condition that a set of real coordinates like the 
Goldstone boson fields nk can be interpreted as the real and imaginary 
parts of a set of complex coordinates like the fields rf>n with the metric 
in these coordinates locally given by Eq. (26.8.5) defines what is called 
a Kahler manifold. •• But it should not be thought that in the common 
cases where G/ H is not a Kahler manifold, it is impossible for G to 
be spontaneously broken to H while keeping supersymmetry unbroken. 
What happens in these cases is the appearance of extra massless bosons, 
which, together with the Goldstone bosons, do form a Kahler manifold. 
This is because the superpotential /(f./>) depends on f./> but not f.j>", so 
if the whole Lagrangian is invariant under a global symmetry group G 
then the superpotential is automatically invariant under a group Gc, the 
complexification of G: if G consists of transformations exp(iLA OAtA) 
with generators tA and arbitrary real parameters OA, then Gc consists of 
transformations exp(iLA ZAtA) with the same generators and arbitrary 
complex parameters ZA. (For instance, if G is U(n) then Gc is GL(n,C), 
the group of all complex non-singular matrices, while if G is S U(n) 
then Gc is SL(n,C), the group of all complex non-singular matrices with 
unit determinant.) Likewise, if some stationary point rj><0> of /(f./>) is left 
invariant by some subgroup H of G, then it will also be left invariant by a 
•• The significance of Kahler manifolds in this context was pointed out in an early 
paper by Zumino.8 Note that it is not necessary for the metric to be expressible in 
the form (26.8.5) over the whole manifold with a single Kahler potential K(,p,,p•); it 
is only necessary that the manifold can be covered in finite overlapping patches in 
which this holds, with different Kahler potentials in each patch. The simplest example 
of a Kahler manifold is the -flat complex plane, with Kahler potential lz12- As an 
example of a coset space GjH that is a Kahler manifold, Zumino gave tbe case where 
G = GL(p,C) x GL(p+q,C) and H = GL(p,C), with p and q arbitrary positive-definite 
integers, and GL(N,C) the group of complex non-singular N x N matricc:s. The coset 
space GjH here has complex coordinates tPn that may be taken as the components of 
a complex p x (p + q) matrix A, which under G and H undergoes the transformations 
A--+- BAC and A--+- BA, respectively, where Band Care square non-singular complex 
matrices of dimensionality p and p + q, respectively_ The Kahler potential in this case 
is simply K oc lnDetAAt. 

Appendix Majorana Spinors 
107 
subgroup He of Ge, the complexification of H. Whether or not GjH is a 
Kahler manifold, the complexified coset space Ge/ He is always a Kahler 
manifold. This follows because Ge/He is a complex submanifold of the 
flat complex space of the 4>n, which is a Kahler manifold, and it is a 
theorem that any complex submanifold of a Kahler manifold is a Kahler 
manifold.9 If parameterized by the values of 4>n(z) = [exp(ii:A ZAtA)4><0>]n, 
the Kahler manifold Ge/ He has the metric obtained by embedding it in the 
flat complex space of the 4>n, usually taken with line element "En d4>n d4>:. 
It is true that Ge is not a symmetry of the whole Lagrangian, but the 
Goldstone bosons associated with the breakdown of Gc to He are nev-
ertheless exactly massless. This is guaranteed by the non-renormalization 
theorem of Section 27.6, or, more simply, by the result of Section 25.4, 
that massless spin zero particles must come in pairs that are related by 
supersymmetry transformations and that therefore have the same trans-
formation under any global symmetry group G that ~commutes with super-
symmetry. 
Appendix 
Majorana Spinors 
This appendix summarizes some algebraic properties of Majorana spinors 
that are needed in dealing with superfields. 
Consider a four-component fermionic Majorana spinor s that like Q or 
(}may be expressed in the form 
(26.AJ) 
where c; is some two-component spinor and e is the 2 x 2 matrix 
( 0 
1 ) 
. 
e = _1 O = UT2. 
Such a spinor is related to its complex conjugate by 
s* = ( ~e ~ ) s = -fl Ys e s , 
(26.A.2) 
where e is the 4 x 4 matrix 
(26.A3) 
and as usual y5 and f1 are 4 x 4 matrices 
/'S = ( ~ ~1) ' 
fl=(~ ~)' 

108 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
with 1 and 0 understood here as 2 x 2 submatrices. Taking the transpose 
of Eq. (26.A.2) and multiplying on the right by p gives the equivalent 
formula 
{26.A.4) 
The anticom.mutation of the spinor components limits the variety of 
covariants that can be formed from a Majorana spinor. To see this, it 
will be convenient first to consider the symmetry properties of bilinear 
covariants, which will be of some interest in themselves. For a pair of 
Majorana spinors s1 and s2 and any 4x4 numerical matrix M, Eq. (26.A.4) 
gtves 
St M s2 = LSllxS2p (e}'S M)a.p =- LS2aStp (e')ls M)pa. 
a.p 
aP 
= + LS2.zS1p(MTE')Is)a.p = s2(€")1s)-1MTeysst, 
r:.P 
with the minus sign following the second equal sign arising from the 
fermionic nature of these spinors. In Section 5.4 we found that the 16 
covariant matrices formed from Dirac matrices satisfy 
where ~ is the matrix 
M = 1, rs'Yil· ')Is 
M = 'Yil, [yll, Yv] 
~ = 'Y2P = -eys = ( ~e ~ ) . 
It follows that 
(-M ) 
{ +(s2M si) 
St 
s2 = 
(-M ) 
-
S2 
St 
M = 1, Ys'Y.u· Ys 
M=yll, [yll,yv] 
In particular, setting s1 = s2 = s, we find that 
sylls = s [y.u, }'v] s = 0' 
(26.A.5) 
(26.A.6) 
(26.A.7) 
(26.A.8) 
so the only bilinear covariants formed from a single Majorana spinor s 
are s s, sysyll s, and s rs s. 
In considering the form of the most general superfields, we need to 
have expressions for the products of two or more Majorana spinors. For 
two spinors, we recall that any 4 x 4 matrix may be expanded as a sum of 
the 16 covariant matrices 1, ')Ill, [Y.u, }'11], Ys'Y.u• 'YS· Lorentz invariance tells 
us that for the matrix sa sp this expansion must take the form 
ss = ks (ss) + kv yll (syll s) + kr [yll, rv1 (s [yll, }'
11
] s) 
+kA Ysrll (srsyll s) + kp Ys (sys s), 

Appendix 
Majorana Spinors 
109 
where the ks are constants to be determined. Eq. (26.A.8) shows that we 
may take kv = kr = 0. The remaining coefficients may be calculated by 
multiplying on the right with 1, 'Ys'Y1\ and 'Ys and taking the trace, which 
gives ks = -1/4, kA = +1/4, and kp = -1/4. In this way we find that 
ss=-i(ss)+ ~Ys'Yil(sysylls)- tYs(syss). 
(26.A.9) 
By multiplying on the right with -eys and using Eq. (26.A.4), we may put 
this in the form 
(26.A.10) 
or, equivalently, 
sa. sp = H eys )a.p (s T e 'Ys s) + i(ylle )a.p (sT e yll s) + i Ea.p (sT e s) . (26.A.ll) 
Now consider the product sa.spsy of three components of a Majorana 
spinor s. We can divides into left- and right-handed parts 
s = sL + sR, 
sL = !(1 + 'Ys)s, 
sR = !(1- Ys)s. 
(26.A.12) 
Each of SL and SR h~s only two independent components, so since the 
square of any fermionic c-number vanishes, we have SLa.SLpSLy = 0 and 
sRa.SRpSRy = 0 for all a, {J, and y, and therefore 
Sa.SpSy = SLa,SLpSRy + SLa,SRpSLy + SRa.SLpSLy + L +-+ R ' 
with 'L +-+ R' denoting the sum of previous terms with labels L and R 
interchanged. To evaluate this expression, we multiply Eq. (26.A.l1) by 
suitable factors of (1 + y5)/2, and find 
SLa sLp = He(1 + '}'s)]a.p (siesL). 
If we now multiply this with SRy, since (sk.esR)SRy = 0 we can drop the 
label Lon the spinors in the bilinear (siesL): 
SLa.SLpSRy = He(1 +rs)]a.p (sTes)sRy. 
The same arguments also yield 
SRa.SRpSLy = He(l-ys)]a.p (sTes)sLy. 
Adding the sum of these two expressions to the same quantity with y 
replaced with a or fJ yields finally 
Sa.SpSy = i (sTES) [ea.p Sy- (eys)a.p ('}'sS)y- Ea.y Sp 
+(eys)a.y (yss)p + epy sa.- (eys)py {yss)a. J . 
(26.A.13) 
To calculate the products of four Majorana spinor components, we note 
that (sTes) contains only terms with two SLS or two SRS, so 
(sTES)SyS,5 = (sTes)[SRySRo5 + SLySL,5] · 

110 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
Using Eq. (26.A.ll) to evaluate the sum in square brackets, and noting 
that 
(sT es) (sTeyss) = (siesL)(s'kesR)- (s'kesR)(siesL) = 0, 
we find that 
(sTes)SySc5 = 
~ Eyc5(STes)2 . 
Multiplying Eq. (26.A.13) with sc5 therefore yields the result 
SrtSpSyS8 = f6 ( ST ES) 
2 
[ ErtfJ Ey8 - ( E'}'s)rtp ( E'}ls )y8 -
Erty E /18 
(26.A.14) 
+(rys)fl1' (rys)pc5 + ep1 e~- (e'Ys)p1 (rys)~ J . 
(26.A.l5) 
Any product of five components of s vanishes, so this completes the list 
of formulas for products of components of a Majorana spinor. 
We can use these formulas to derive some additional relations that will 
be useful in dealing with superfields. By contracting Eq. (26.A.13) with 
(rys)p1 and (e-yll)p1, we find 
s« (ss) = -(-yss)«(s-yss) 
(26.A.l6) 
and 
s« (s'Ys'Yps) = -(-ylls>«(s-yss). 
(26.A.17) 
From Eqs. (26.A.16) and (26.A.17) we may derive 'Fierz' identities 
(ss)
2 
= -(syss)
2
, 
(s-y5-y!ls) (s'Ys'Yvs) = -qllv (s-yss)
2
. (26.A.18) 
Also, Eq. (26.A.14) may be put in a covariant form 
(26.A.19) 
It will also be useful to record the reality properties of bilinear products 
of Majorana spinors. For any pair of Majorana spinors st, s2 satisfymg 
the phase convention (26.A.l), Eqs. (26.A.2) and (26.A.4) give 
(st M s2)"' = -(s!rys M* si) = (s1 {1 eys M* {1 eys s2). 
(The minus sign in the middle expression arises from reversing the inter-
change of st and s2 that occurs when we take the complex conjugate.) But 
Eqs. (5.4.40) and (26.A.6) give flrysy;flrys = 'Y!l• so 
{JeysM* fle'Ys = { +~ 
and therefore 
(-M )* _ { +(s1Ms2) 
Sl 
S2 
-
(-M ) 
-
St 
s2 
M = 1, Yp• ['Yil, 'Yil] 
M = YllYs, 'Ys 
M=l,yll, [-yll,yll] 
M = 'Y!l'Ys, 'Ys 
(26.A.20) 
(26.A.21) 

Problems 
111 
Finally, we mention that any spin or u may be written in terms of a pair 
of Majorana spinors s± as 
(26.A.22) 
where 
s+ = ~ ( u- fJrysu•) , 
(26.A.23) 
To check that S± are Majorana spinors satisfying Eq. (26.A.2), it is only 
necessary to recall that fJrys is real, and that (fJe'Ys)2 = 1. 
Problems 
1. Using the direct technique of Section 26.1 in the case of N = 2 
supersymmetry, find the supersymmetry transformation rules of the 
massive field supermultiplet with just one Majorana spinor field and 
two complex scalars. 
2. Calculate the component fields of a time-reversed superfield 
T-1S(x,O)T 
in terms of the components of the superfield S(x, 0). What sort of 
superfield do we get by the time reversal of a left-chiral superfield? 
Of a linear superfield? 
3. Consider theN= 1 supersymmetric theory of a single left-chiral su-
perfield <1>. In superfield notation, list all the terms of dimensionality 
5 involving <I> and/or <I>* that might be added to the Lagrangian 
density. 
4. Consider the theory of three left-chiral scalar superfields <l>t, ~. and 
<1>3, with a conventional kinematic term, and with a superpotential 
/(<l>t, <1>2, <l>3) = <l>t <~>5 + <1>2 ( ~ +a) . 
where a is a non-zero real constant. Show that this is a theory with 
spontaneously broken supersymmetry. Find the minimum value of 
the potential. Express the field of the goldstino in terms of the 
fermionic components of <l>t, <1>2, and <1>3. 
5. Find all the components of the current superfield for the action 
(26.6.9), in terms of the components of the left-chiral superfields <I>n 
and derivatives of the superpotential f and the Kahler potential K. 

112 
26 Supersymmetric Field Theories 
6. Check that the supersymmetry current given by Eqs. (26.7.18) and 
(26.7.10) is related to the co-component of the superfield (26.7.21) by 
Eq. (26.7.20). 
References 
1. A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Nucl. Phys. B76, 477 (1974). This article 
is reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World 
Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). 
2. J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70, 13 (1974). This article is 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
3. L. O'Raifeartaigh, Nucl. Phys. B96, 331 (1975). This article is 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
4. 
F. A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization (Academic Press, 
New York, 1966). 
5. J. Iliopoulos and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B76, 310 (1974); S. Ferrara 
and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B87, 207 (1975). These articles are 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
6. This section follows the approach of S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Ref. 
5. 
7. X. Gracia and J. Pons, J. Phys. A25, 6357 ( 1992). I am grateful 
to J. Gomis for suggesting the use of the equation matching the 
coefficients of qn. 
?a. M. Grisaru, in Recent Developments in Gravitation - Cargese 1978, 
M. Levy and S. Deser, eds. (Plenum Press, New York, 1979): 577. 
8. B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 87B, 203 (1979). This article is reprinted in 
Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
9. 
P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic Geometry (Wiley; 
New York, 1978): 109. I thank D. Freed for telling me of this 
application of the general theorem. 

27 
Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
The successful theories of strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions 
described in the first two volumes are all gauge theories. In order to see 
how simple supersymmetry may make contact with reality, we must there-
fore consider how to construct actions that satisfy both supersymmetry 
and gauge invariance.1 
27.1 
Gang&-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superfields 
Consider a set of Abelian or non-Abelian gauge transformations that leave 
the supersymmetry generator Q invariant. (For simple supersymmetry 
there is just one Majorana spinor supersymmetry generator, which can 
only furnish a trivial representation of any semi-simple gauge group.) 
Each component field in a supermultiplet must transform in the same 
way under such gauge transformations. In particular, for a left-chiral 
superfield we have 
cPn(x)- L [exp (<~~:>AAA(x))] 
cf>m(x), 
m 
A 
nm 
1JJnL(x)- L [exp (i L tAAA(x))] 
1JJmdx), 
(27.1.1) 
m 
A 
nm 
Fn(x)- L [exp (iL tAAA(x))] 
Fm(x), 
m 
A 
nm 
where tA are Hermitian matrices representing the generators of the gauge 
algebra, and AA(x) are real functions of xJ.I that parameterize a finite 
gauge transformation. (We are using the same notation for gauge trans-
formations as in Section 15.1, except that in order to avoid confusion with 
Dirac indices we label the gauge generators and gauge transformation 
parameters with the letters A, B, etc. instead of rx, {3, etc.) 
The left-chiral superfield (26.3.11) involves derivatives of some of 
the component fields, so its tnmsformation is more complicated than 
113 

114 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
Eq. (27.1.1). However, Eq. (26.3.21) shows that the superfield does not 
involve derivatives if expressed in terms of 0 L and the variable x+ defined 
by Eq. (26.3.23). It therefore has the transformation property 
<I>n(X, 0) --+ L [exp (i L tAAA(x+) )] 
<I>m(X, 0). 
(27.1.2) 
m 
A 
nm 
If a term in the action depends only on left-chiral superfields, and not 
their derivatives or complex conjugates, like the term J d4x [f(<J>)]y in 
Eq. (26.3.30), then it (and its complex conjugate) will be invariant under the 
local transformation (27.1.2) if it is invariant under global transformations 
with AA(x) independent of xf.l. The need for introducing gauge fields in 
renormalizable theories of chiral superfields arises only in the D-terms, 
which involve both <I>n and <1>;. Because the matrices tA are Hermitian, 
the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (27.1.2) is 
<I>!(x,O)--+ L:<~>l(x,O) [exp ( -iL:tAAA(x+r)] 
. 
(27.1.3) 
m 
A 
mn 
If it were not for the difference between AA(x+)* = AA(x-) and AA(x+), 
this would just say that <J)t transforms according to the representation of 
the gauge group that is contragredient to the representation furnished by 
<I>, and any function of <I> and <J)t that is invariant under global gauge 
transformations would also be invariant under local gauge transforma-
tions. Because x+ and x_ are different, we must introduce a gauge 
COnnection matrix r nm(X, 0), with the transformation property 
r(x, 0) --+ exp ( +i L tAAA(x+r) r(x, 0) exp ( -i L tAAA(x+)) . (27.1.4) 
A 
A 
Then by multiplying <I> t on the right with r we obtain a superfield that 
transforms as 
[<~>t(x,O)r(x,O)L--+ ~ 
[<~>t(x,O)r(x,O)]m[exp(-i~tAAA(x+)) ]mn, 
(27.1.5) 
so that any globally gauge-invariant function constructed from <I> and 
<J>tr (and not their derivatives or complex conjugates) will also be locally 
gauge-invariant. One obvious example is the gauge-invariant version 
(<J>tr<I>)v of the D-term in the Lagrangian constructed in Section 26.4. 
Any r(x, 0) that transforms as in Eq. (27.1.4) will allow us to construct 
gauge-invariant Lagrangians of chiral superfields. 
The choice is not 
unique; if r transforms as in Eq. (27.1.4), and we multiply on the right 
with any left-chiral superfield Y L with the transformation rule 
YL(x,O)--+ exp (iLtAAA(x+)) YL.(x,O) exp ( -iL:tAAA(x+)), 
A 
A 

27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superjields 
115 
then we obtain a new gauge connection that also satisfies Eq. (27.1.4). 
One simplification is to take r(x, IJ) Hermitian: 
rt (x, IJ) = r(x, IJ) . 
(27.1.6) 
This is always possible if there is any r(x, IJ) that satisfies Eq. (27.1.4), 
for then by taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (27.1.4) we easily see 
that rt(x, IJ) transforms in the same way as r(x, IJ), so if r(x, IJ) is not 
Hermitian then we can replace it with its Hermitian part (r + rt)/2 
(or, if that vanishes, by its anti-Hermitian part (r- rt)/2i.) Another 
simplification of great physical importance is to express r(x, IJ) in terms 
of fields whose gauge transformation properties do not depend on the 
specific representation tA of the gauge algebra under which the chiral 
super:field <P(x, IJ) transforms, so that these fields can be used to form 
a suitable matrix r(x, IJ) for chiral super:fields that transform according 
to any representation of the gauge group. For this purpose, it is useful 
to recall the Baker-Hausdorff formula, which states that, for arbitrary 
matrices a and b, 
eai = exp (a+ b + Ha,b] + h[a, [a,b]] + h[b, [b,a]] + ·· ·), (27.1.7) 
where '· · ·' denotes higher-order terms that can be written as multiple 
commutators of as and bs, like the second- and third-order terms that are 
shown explicitly. It follows from this that for any representation of a Lie 
algebra, we have 
exp(Z:::~tA) exp(LbAtA) =exp(LfA(a,b)tA), 
(27.1.8) 
A 
A 
A 
where 
fA(a,b)=~+iJA+ ~iL:CABcaBbC--&. L 
cABcCcvEaBaDbE 
BC 
BCDE 
-12 L 
cABcCcvEbBbDaE + ... ' 
(27.1.9) 
BCDE 
which depends on the Lie algebra through its structure constants cA BC, 
defined as usual by 
[tB, tc] = (L: CABC tA, 
A 
but does not depend on the particular representation furnished by the tA. 
We will therefore take r(x, IJ) in the form 
r(x,O) = exp ( -z~:;tA VA(x,O)) , 
(27.1.10) 
where vA(x, IJ) are a set of real super:fields (so that r is Hermitian), not 
depending on the representation of the gauge algebra furnished by the tA. 

116 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
We can achieve an important further simplification by noting an addi-
tional symmetry of supersymmetric gauge theories. If some function of 
~ and ~tr is invariant under global gauge transformations, then it will 
automatically be invariant not only under the local gauge transforma-
tions (27.1.2)-(27.1.4), but also under the larger group of extended gauge 
transformations 
~nL(x,8) -to L 
[exp (iLtAnA(x,8))] 
~mL(x,8) 
m 
A 
~ 
(27.1.11) 
and 
r(x, 8) -to exp ( -i L tAnA(x, 8)) r(x, 8) exp ( +i L tA!lA(x, 8)*) ' 
A 
A 
(27.1.12) 
where QA(x, 8) is an arbitrary left-chiral super:field- that is, an arbitrary 
function of 8 L as well as x+ Under this transformation, 
(27.1.13) 
where '· · ·' denotes terms arising from the commutators in Eq. (27.1.7), 
which are of first or higher order in gauge coupling constants. As a 
generalleft~chiral super:field, n may be written in the form (26.3.11) 
(27.1.14) 
in which WA(x) and ;rA(x) are arbitrary complex functions of xf.l, and 
we introduced Majorana spinors wA(x) defined so that the left-handed 
spinor components of the super:fields are H1 + y5)wA(x). Using the com-
plex conjugation properties (26.A.21) of Majorana bilinears, the complex 
conjugate of Eq. (27.1.14) gives 
(27.1.15) 
We write the real super:fields VA(x, 8) in terms of component fields as in 

27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Super.fields 
117 
Eq. (26.2.10): 
vA(x, 8) = cA(x) - i(e Ys roA(x)) -
~ (e Ys 8) MA(x) -
~ (e 8) NA(x) 
+~ (ii y,y" 0) v;(x) - i( ii Ys 0) ( ii [ AA(x) + ~ ~wA(x)]) 
-~(iiys 0)
2 
(DA(x) + ~DCA(x)) , 
(27.1.16) 
where CA(x), MA(x), NA(x), and v;(x) are all real, and roA(x) and A.A(x) 
are Majorana spinors. Using Eqs. (27.1.14)-(27.1.16) in Eq. (27.1.13), 
we find that the component fields of the gauge super:field undergo the 
extended gauge transformation 
cA(x) ~ cA(x)- Im WA(x) + ... ' 
1 
roA(x) ~ roA(x) + y'lwA(x) + · · · , 
v;(x) ~ v;(x) + 8pRe WA(x) + ... ' 
MA(x)~MA(x)-Re'iYA(x)+···, 
(27.1.17) 
NA(x) ~ NA(x) + Im 'iYA(x) + · · · , 
A.A(x) ~ A.A(x) + ... , 
DA(x) ~ DA(x) + · · · , 
where again '· · ·' denotes terms that arise from the structure constants in 
Eq. (27.1.9) and that are therefore proportional to one or more factors 
of gauge coupling constants. We can use such an extended gauge trans-
formation to put the gauge super:fields into a convenient form, known as 
Wess-Zwnino gauge, 1 in which 
(27.1.18) 
so that 
(27.1.19) 
To accomplish this to zeroth order in the coupling constants, it is only 
necessary to set lm WA(x) = cA(x), wA(x) = - y'lroA(x), and 'iYA(x) = 
MA(x) -
iNA(x). For Abelian gauge theories, in which the structure 
constants vanish, this ends our task. For non-Abelian gauge theories it is 
necessary to add terms to Im WA(x), wA(x), and 'iYA(x) of first order in 
gauge coupling constants to cancel the terms arising from commutators 
of zeroth-order terms, then add terms to Im WA(x), wA(x), and 'iYA(x) 

118 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
of second order in gauge coupling constants to cancel the terms arising 
from commutators of :first~order terms with zeroth-order terms, and so 
on. It is not easy to calculate the series of terms in Im WA(x), wA(x), and 
'if'"A(x) needed to satisfy the gauge conditions (27.1.18) to all orders in 
gauge couplings, but there is no need -
the important thing is that it is 
possible. 
Inspection of the transformation rules (26.2.11)-(26.2.14) shows that the 
Wess-Zumino gauge condition (27.1.18) is not invariant under supersym-
metry transformations unless v; = A_A = 0, and the condition A_A = 0 is 
not supersymmetric unless also nA = 0, in which case the whole superfield 
vanishes. Once we adopt Wess-Zumino gauge, the action is no longer 
invariant under either general extended gauge transformations or under 
supersymmetry, but it is invariant under supersymmetry transformations, 
which take us out of Wess-Zumino gauge, followed by suitable extended 
gauge transformations that take us back to Wess-Zumino gauge. (We 
will go into this explicitly in Section 27.8.) As we shall now see, it is 
also invariant under the ordinary gauge transformations (27.1.2)-(27.1.4), 
which preserve Wess-Zumino gauge. 
With the gauge super:field satisfying the Wess-Zumino gauge condition 
(27.1.18 ), it becomes relatively easy to calculate its behavior under ordinary 
infinitesimal gauge transformations. In this case, W(x+) are left-chiral 
super:fields of the form (26.3.11 ), but with no 1p L- or §"-components, and 
with ¢-components given by real infinitesimal functions AA(x): 
To calculate the product of exponentials in the transformation rule (27.1.4), 
we use a version of the Baker-Hausdorff formula: 
exp(a) exp(X)exp(b) = exp [x +Lx · (b-a)+(Lx cothLx) ·(b+a)+ · · · J ~ 
(27.1.21) 
where a, b, and X are arbitrary matrices, Lx is the operator 
Lx · f = ![X, f] , 
(27.1.22) 
and '· · ·' here denotes terms of second and higher order in a and/ or b. In 
our case we have 
b +a= 2 L tA ImAA(x+) = -i(8ysyp8) L tA ofJAA(x)' 
A 
A 
b- a= -2i~)A ReAA(x+) = -2i~ tA [AA(x)- ~(8y58toAA(x)] , 

27.1 
Gauge~Invariant Actions for Chiral Superjields 
119 
X= -2L:tA vA(x,8) = -22:tA [~(8ysyP8)v:(x) 
A 
A 
-i(O Ys 8) (W(x)) - ~ (0 Ys 8) 
2 
DA(x)] . 
Now, every term in X involves at least one factor of 81 and at least one 
factor of 8R, while a+ b has just one factor of 81 and one factor of 8R, 
so we can drop any terms in Lx coth Lx of second or higher order in 
Lx. Since Lx coth Lx is an even function of Lx, this means that we can 
replace it with its term of zeroth order in Lx, which is just unity. Also, 
we may drop the term in b- a proportional to (Oy58)2, since when acted 
on by Lx it would yield at least three factors of either 81 or OR. Thus the 
argument of the exponential on the right-hand side of Eq. (27.1.21) may 
be replaced with 
X+ HX,b-aJ + b+a = -2L:tA [vA(x,8)+ L:cABcSB(x,8)Ac(x) 
A 
BC 
+ li(Orsr.8)a•AA(x)] . 
Thus for infinitesimal gauge transformations, the transformation rule 
(27.1.4) yields 
VA(x,8)--+ VA(x,8) + LCABcSB(x,8)AC(x) + ~i(Oysyp8)oPAA(x). 
BC 
(27.1.23) 
It is important to note that under ordinary gauge transformations, a 
gauge superfield in Wess-Zumino gauge remains in Wess-Zumino gauge. 
In terms of the component fields in Eq. (27.1.19), Eq. (27.1.23) reads 
v:(x)--+ L cABC v:(x)Ac(x) + a~AA(x)' 
(27.1.24) 
' 
BC 
.J.A(x)--+ L cABC .J.B(x)Ac(x)' 
BC 
DA(x)---+ L cABC DB(x)A c(x). 
BC 
(27.1.25) 
(27.1.26) 
We recognize Eq. (27.1.24) as the usual Yang-Mills gauge transformation 
rule (15.1.9) of a gauge field, while Eqs. (27.1.25) and (27.1.26) tell us that 
the fields .J.A(x) and DA(x) transform as 'matter' fields that belong to the 
adjoint representation of the gauge group. The Majorana spinors ;.A are 
known as gaugino fields, while the real scalars DA will turn out to be 
another set of auxiliary fields. 

120 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
Next we must evaluate the matrix r that is needed in constructing 
gauge-invariant functions of chiral super:fields. Because all terms with 
more than four factors of (} vanish, the expansion of the exponential is 
very simple in Wess-Zumino gauge: 
r(x,O) = exp ( -22::>A vA(x,O)) 
A 
= 1-i(8y5 yPO) L:tA v:(x) 
A 
-~(8ysyllo)(8ysyvo) L:tAtB v:(x)v:(x) 
AB 
+2i (8ys o) L:tA (8.A.A(x)) + ~(8ys0)
2 L:tADA(x). 
A 
A 
We can construct a gauge-invariant density by multiplying this on the 
right with a column vector of left-chiral superfields of the form (26.3.11): 
<Pn(X, 0) = f/Jn(x)- ..Ji(81pnL(X)) + Y n(x) ( 8 ( 1 ~ Ys) (}) 
+~(8ysypO)oflf/Jn(x)- )i(8ys0) (8 ~1JJnL(x)) 
1 (-
)2 
-8 OysO 
Df/Jn(x), 
and multiplying on the left with the column 
<Pn(x, 0)* = f/l:(x) - Ji( 1JJnL(x)(}) + Y:(x) ( 8 ( 1 ~ Ys) (}) 
-~ (8ysyp(}) oflfjl;(x)- )z (8ys0) op ( 1JJnL(x)yll(}) 
1 (-
)2 • 
- 8 OysO 
Df/ln(x). 
The term in this product of fourth order in(} is 
[<t>tr<t>],. = -~(iiy59)
2 
{ [q,toq,J + [(oq,t)q,]} 
+(iiyso){ [('PLo)(iiy•a.'PL)] + [(<a"'I'Lh"9)(ii'PL)]} 
+~(8(1-ys)(})(o(l +y5)(}) [s;t s;] 
-~(8y5yPO) (8ysyvo) [apfjlt Bv<P] 

27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superjields 
121 
-~(iim"B) (iiy,y' a) ~ v,;{ [q,t 'Aa,q,J- [(a,q,t)tAI/l]} 
-~(BYsYJl o) (8Ysi
1 o) L:: v;v: [<t>t tA tB <~>] 
AB 
-2i (ersYpo) L:: v; [(V'Lo) tA (e1pL)] 
A 
-2i.fi (eys o) L:: [ ( li'L o) tA (e;.A)<P J 
A 
-2i.fi (eys o) L: [<t>t ( J.A o) tA (e li'L) J 
A 
+~(8ys0)
2 LDA [<t>ttA</J], 
A 
in which we use square brackets to indicate scalar products in the flavor 
indices n, m, and continue to use round brackets to indicate scalar products 
in Dirac indices. Just as in Section 26.4, we may use the identities 
(26.A.17)-(26.A.19) to put all 0 dependence in the form of an over-all 
factor (Oy50)2 : 
[wt r w].,. ~ (iiy58) 2 { - ~ [q,toq,]-H( oq,t) q,J 
+~[(1pLYJLOJL1pL)]- ~ [((OplJ'L)YJL1pL)] 
-~ [#"t ff] + ~ [aJl<Pt oll<f>] 
+~ 2::: v: [ 
4>t tA oll<f>] - ~ L v; [(oll<f>t) tA 4> J 
A 
A 
1 
i 
+2 L: v; yBJL [<Pt tA tB 4>] - 2 L:: v; [ ( li'AYJltA 1pA)] 
AB 
A 
-
~L[(lpLtAAA)<f>]+ ~L[<f>t(J.AtA1pL)] 
y2 A 
y2 A 
+~~?A [1/lttAI/l]}. 
The D-term is the coefficient of - HBys0)2 minus !D acting on the 0-
independent term, which for [<Dtr<J)] is [</>t </>], so 
[<Dtr<DJv = -2[ojl4>t oll<f>] 
-[(li'LYJLOJL1pL)] + [((optpL)yJl1pL)] +2[fft ff] 

122 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
-2iL V# [tPt tA iWtP] + 2iL v: [(ofltPt) tA tP] 
A 
A 
-2L v:yBJJ[tPttAtBtP] +2iL v: [(VJAYJJtA1pA)] 
AB 
A 
+2i.[i L [(1pLtAAA)tP] -2i../iL: [tPt (J.AtA1pL)] 
A 
A 
-2LDA [tflttAtP] · 
A 
To see that this is gauge-invariant, we note that it may be written as 
~ [~tr~JD =- [(DJJtP)t DfltP] 
-~ [ ( 11'L yfJ DJJ1pL)] + ~ [ ((DfJ1pL) yfJ 1/)L)] + [fft ff] 
+i.fi L [ (1pL tA ;.A)tP] - i..fiL: [tPt ( J.A tA 11'L)] 
A 
A 
- L DA [ tPt tA tP] ; 
(27.1.27) 
A 
where DJJ is the gauge-invariant derivative (15.1.10): 
DJJ1pL = OJJ1pL- i L tA v: 1/)L' 
A 
DJJtP- aJJtP-iLtA V#tP. (27.1.28) 
A 
Eq. (27.1.27) is thus a suitable gauge-invariant kinematic Lagrangian 
for the scalar and spinor components of a left-chiral superfield, now 
supplemented with Yukawa couplings of gaugino fields to the scalar and 
spinor components of chiral superfields as well as terms involving auxiliary 
fields ff n and D A. 
27.2 
Gauge-Invariant Action for Abelian Gauge Superfields 
We must now consider how to construct a gauge-invariant supersymmetric 
action for the gauge superfields VA(x, 8) that contain the gauge fields 
Vtf(x). In order to motivate this construction we will first consider the 
case of a single Abelian gauge field (dropping the superscript A), and then 
return to the general case in the next section. 
In an Abelian gauge theory like quantum electrodynamics, the gauge-
invariant field constructed from VJJ(x) is the familiar field-strength tensor 
(27.2.1) 
The supersymmetry transformation rule for fJJv(x) is then given by the 

27.2 Gauge-Invariant Action for Abelian Gauge Superjields 
123 
transformation rule (26.2.15) for V"'(x) as 
(jfJlv = ( ~ (OJl'Yv - Ov'YJJ)...l) · 
(27.2.2) 
Eq. (26.2.16) gives the transformation rule for ...l(x) as 
{J...l = (- ~~JJ" [yll, y "] + i 'Y5 D) o: , 
(27.2.3) 
while Eq. (26.2.17) gives the transformation rule for D(x): 
{JD = i ( ~'Y5 ~;.) . 
(27.2.4) 
None of this depends on whether or not the superfield S(x) is taken to be 
in Wess-Zumino gauge. We see that the fields fJJv(x), ...l(x), and D(x) form 
a complete supersymmetry multiplet. 
It is not hard to construct a suitable kinematic Lagrangian density 
for the fields of this supermultiplet. The only Lorentz-invariant, parity 
conserving, and gauge-invariant functions of these fields with dimension-
ality four are fJJvf"'", 1 ftJ., and D2• We can make V"' a conventionally 
normalized vector field by taking the coefficient of f"'vf"'" to be -~.so we 
may tentatively take the kinematic Lagrangian density as 
2 gauge =- ~!JJvfJJ" -CA. (l ~...~.) - cvD2 , 
with coefficients c;. and cv to be determined from the condition that 
J 2gauged4x is supersymmetric. Using Eqs. (27.2.2)-{27.2.4), an infinites-
imal supersymmetry transformation changes the operators in the La-
grangian by 
(j(fJJvfll") = 2fll"(~(Yv0JJ -yJl8v)...l), 
{J(l~J.) =2(~[+~/JJv[y"', '}'
11] +iy5D] ~...t), 
{JD2 = 2iD ( ~'Y5 ~...l) , 
in which we drop derivative terms that do not contribute to the variation 
of the action. In order to see how these terms cancel, it is necessary to use 
an identity for gamma matrices· 
[yll' '}'11] yP = -21'fllPy" + 21'f"PyJJ- 2ieJJVPU'Yu'Y5 . 
(27.2.5) 
The term -ieJJ"Puf"'v(~Yu'Y50p...l) does not contribute to Jtfx {)2, because 
integrating by parts yidds a contribution proportional to cJJvpu 8 p/ JJY• which 
·To derive this, use the fact that any 4 x 4 matrix may be expressed as a linear 
combination of the 16 independent covariant matrices described in Section 5.4, which 
in our case is limited by Lorentz invariance and space inversion invariance to the 
terms shown here. The coefficients of these terms can be calculated ·by giving fJ.VP the 
values 121 and 123. 

124 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
vanishes for an /pv of the form (27.2.1). This identity then allows us to 
rewrite the variation of the .A.-term as 
The cancellation of terms proportional to fJlv A. requires that C,t = 1/2, 
while the cancellation of terms proportional to D.A. requires that en = -c,t, 
so the supersymmetric Lagrangian density takes the form 
(27.26) 
This shows that with VP canonically normalized, the field ,l related to 
VP by the transformation rules (27.2.2) and (27.2.3) is also canonically 
normalized. 
In addition, for Abelian gauge theories there is a superrenormalizable 
term, known as a Fayet-Iliopoulos term :2 
(27.2.7) 
with ~ an arbitrary constant. Its variation under a supersymmetry trans-
formation is shown by Eq. (27.2.4) to be a derivative, so that it yields 
another supersymmetric term in the action. As we will see in Section 27.5, 
the presence of such a term can provide a mechanism for the spontaneous 
breakdown of supersymmetry. 
Both for its own interest and as a tool in constructing supersymmetric 
interactions involving the fields /pv• .l, and D, it is interesting to ask what 
sort of super:field has these as component fields. Somewhat surprisingly, 
it turns out to be a spinor superfield Wa:(x), with component fields (in the 
notation of Eq. (26.2.10)) given by 
C(cc)(x) = Aa:(x) , 
W(a:)~(x) = !i( yPy" c t~/pv(x) + (YsE)a:pD(x) , 
V(a:)JJ(x) = -iiJJl(ys.l(x)t, 
(27.2.8) 
M(a:)(x) = -i (~ys.A.(x)t, 
N(cc)(x) =- (~.A.(x)t, 
A(a:)~(x) = D(a:)(x) -= 0. 
(The subscript a on these component fields is put inside parentheses to 
emphasize that it labels the whole super:field.) It is straightforward to 
use Eqs. (27.2.2)--(27.2.4) to check directly that the superfield components 
given by Eq. (27.28) do transform as in Eqs. (26.2.11H26.2.17). 
Inserting the component fields (27.2.8) in Eq. (26.2.10) and using 

27.2 Gauge· Invariant Action for Abelian Gauge Super.fields 
125 
Eq. (26.A.5), we find that the superfield Wa takes the form 
W.(x, 0) = [ .!(x) + jy"y' 0 f p,(x) -
iysO D(x) - l ( OT eO) ~Ys.!(x) 
+ ~(8Tcy58) ~A.(x) + ~(eTeyJJ8)y58p2(x) 
-
~ ( eT £8) Y5YfJYV yq 8 Oqfpv(x) 
+ li( oT £IJ) y• o a.D(x) - l ( oT £IJ) 
2 o.<(xl. 
(27.2.9) 
As we showed in Section 26.3, a superfield like this with zero 2· and D· 
components is chiral -that is, it is the sum of left·chiral and right·chiral 
superfields 
W(x, 8) = WL(x, 8) + WR(x, 8) . 
(27.2.10) 
Here the left- and right-chiral superfields are simply the projections of W 
on the subspaces with )'5 = +1 and )'5 = -1, respectively: 
W'L(x, 8) = 
~(1 + y5)W(x, 8) 
= AL(X+) + !yfJyv8Lfpv(X+) + (8Lc8L) ~AR(X+)- i8LD(x+), 
(27.2.11) 
WR(x,8) = !(1-y5)W(x,8) 
= AR(x_) + ~yPyv8Rfw(x-)- (8~£8R) ~A.L(x_)- i8RD(x_), 
(27.2.12) 
with x~ given by Eq. (26.3.23). 
As we saw in Section 26.3, we can construct suitable Lagrangian densi· 
ties from the !F ·term of any scalar function of a left-chiral superfield, plus 
its Hermitian adjoint. The simplest scalar function of the left-chiral super-
field (27.2.11) is l:ap 'cap WLa WLP· To calculate the !F·term, we note that, 
when expressed a:s a function of 8L and x+, the term in l:ap cap WLaWLp 
of second order in 8 L is 
-[L:capWuWLp]IP. = (eiceL) [ -2(..ti(x)c~A.R(x)) +D2(x)] 
ap 
L 
+ 
1~ (eL[yP, yv] [yP, yq]8L) fpv(x)fpq(x). 
(The argument of the fields here can be taken as xJJ rather than ~ because 
· the difference would yield tenms that contain at least three factors of 8 L, 
which therefore vanish.) Lorentz invariance together with the fact that 
(s[yp, )'v]s) and (s[yp, Yvh5s) vanish for any Majorana fermion s tell us 

126 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
that the bilinear (8L[yll, y"] [yP, yu]8L) must be proportional to a linear 
combination of (8L8L)(rtllPrt"u- rtJ.tu'lvp) and (lhlh)EJlvpu_ We can find the 
coefficients by giving JlVpa the values 1212 or 1230, and in this way we 
find that 
(th [yJ.t' y"] [yP' yqJ8L) = 4(8L8L) [- 'fJlp'fvu + 'fJlU'fvp + iEJlvpu]. 
The ff -term is the coefficient of ( 8L 8 £), so 
- [~ 
'·~ Wr..WLp ], ~ -z( lR ~lR)- ~! ,.,!"' + ~<"'P" J ,.,fp• + D2 . 
(27.2.13) 
Eq. (26.A.21) shows that (I ~A.) is rea~ while o: ,)'sA) is imaginary, so the 
real part of Eq. (27.2.13) yields the Lagrangian (27.2.6) for the gauge and 
gaugino fields 
-! Re [LEap WLa WLp] 
= _! (1 ~A) - -4
1 fJlvfll" + -2
1 D2 . 
(27.2.14) 
2 
afJ 
:F 
2 
The physical significance of the imaginary part will be discussed in a more 
general context in the next section. 
There is another way to derive the form of the spinor superfield, 
which will turn out to provide a more convenient way of deriving the 
components of the gauge super:field in non-Abelian gauge theories. A 
tedious but straightforward calculation shows that the gauge-invariant 
superfield (27.2.9) may be expressed in terms of the gauge superfield 
(27.1.16) as 
(27.2.15) 
where §Ja is the superderivative introduced in Eq. (26.2.26): 
a 
a 
a 
a 
q;(J. = ~(YsE)ap o8p - (yllO)IX oxll = - a8a - (yllO)a oxll . 
This result might have been obtained (aside from the normalization factor) 
by noting that the function (27.2.15) has the desired property of being 
a gauge-invariant chiral spinor superfield. First, note that Eq. (27.2.15) 
is a superfield, because it is formed by acting on the super:field V with 
superderivatives. Also, it follows from the anticommutation of the §Js that 
the product of any three or more §JLs or three or more §JRs vanishes, so 
that 
( q;TEq; )§) = ( 9JIE9JL )q;R + ( §J~E§JR )q;L. 
(27.2.16) 
Because 9JL(9J!c9JL) = 9JR(9J~E9JR) = 0, the super:field (27.2.15) is chiral, 

27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Super..fields 
127 
with 
WLIX(x,8) = ~(.~le.@R).@Lx V(x,8), WRIX(x,8) = ~(.@Ie.@L).@RIX V(x,8). 
(27.2.17) 
Finally, we can show that (27.2.15) is invariant under the generalized gauge 
transformation (27.1.13), which for a single Abelian gauge super:field is 
simply 
V(x,8)-+ V(x, 8) + ~ [n(x,8)- !t(x, 8)] , 
(27.2.18) 
where Q(x, 8) is an arbitrary left-chiral superfield. Since .@LQ" = 0, the 
change in WLIX is proportional to (.@le.@R).@LIXn. But .@RQ = 0 and 
[(.@ke.@R), .@LIX] = -2 [(1 + Ys) ~.@RL, 
so the change in W LIX vanishes. A similar argument shows that W RIX is also 
gauge-invariant. (The work of checking Eq. (27.2.15) is greatly reduced 
by using this gauge-invariance property to put V(x, 8) in Wess-Zumino 
gauge.) 
The chiral superfields (27.2.11) and (27.2.12) are evidently not of the 
most general form for left- and right-chiral superfields. To put the con-
straints satisfied by these superfields in a manifestly supersymmetric form, 
we note by using the anticommutation relation (26.2.30) that 
eiXp.@LIX(.@'E_e.@R).@Lp = -2.@RIX.@Lp(e(1 +ys) ~)piX+ (.@'E_e.@R)(.@Ie.@L) 
= eiXfJ.@RIX ( .@Le.@L) .@Rp . 
(27.2.19) 
From Eq. (27.2.17) it follows then that WL and WR are related by the 
constraint 
(27.2.20) 
It is straightforward to show that the most general chiral spinor superfields 
satisfying Eq. (27.2.20) are of the form (27.2.11) and (27.2.12), with fJlv 
constrained to satisfy the 'Bianchi' identities cJlVP(J 8PfJlv = 0. 
27.3 
Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Superfi.elds 
Our experience in the previous section with supersymmetric Abelian gauge 
theories suggests immediately that in a general non-Abelian gauge theory 
the kinematic Lagrangian for the fields v:(x), J.A(x), and DA(x) should 
. appear as part of the gauge-invariant generalization of Eq. (27.2.6): 
~l'gauge = -~ LfAJlvf~v-! L (2A(/>A)A) + 1 LDADA · 
(27.3.1) 
A 
A 
A 

128 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
We are now using a basis for the Lie algebra with totally antisymmetric 
structure constants, and we are consequently not preserving the distinction 
between upper and lower group indices, writing all indices A, B, etc. as 
subscripts. Also, f Af.lv is the gauge-covariant field-strength tensor 
/Apv = 8f.lVAv -8vVAf.l + LCABCVBf.lVcv, 
BC 
(27.3.2) 
and Df.l). is the gauge-covariant derivative of the gaugino field, which in 
the adjoint representation is 
(Df.l).)A = 8f.l).A + L CABC VBf.lAc. 
(27.3.3) 
BC 
The question is: does Eq. (27.3.1) yield a supersymmetric action? 
Since the Lagrangian density (27.3.1) is manifestly gauge-invariant, we 
can test whether the action is supersym.metric in any convenient gauge. 
To find out whether J!t'gauge is a derivative at some point Xf.l, it is 
convenient to adopt a specific version of Wess-Zumino gauge in which 
V~(X) = 0. Then at X the changes in the component fields are given by 
Eqs. (26.2.15H26.2.17) at x =X as 
(27.3.4) 
(27.3.5) 
(27.3.6) 
(We must set xf.l in these expressions equal to Xf.l after calculating the 
change under a supersymmetry transformation, not before.) Also, the 
non-linear terms in f~v are quadratic in the V s and therefore at x = X 
have zero variation, so at x = X 
(27.3.7) 
With one exception, the terms in Eq. (27.3.1) and their transformations 
under supersymmetry transformations are thus just a number of copies 
(labelled by A) of the Abelian theory discussed in the previous section, 
and therefore give a supersymmetric action. The one exception that might 
disturb the supersymmetry of the action arises from the second term in 
the gauge-covariant derivative (27.3.3) of the gaugino field: 
!t'..uv = -~ L 
CABc(AA .PBAc), 
(27.3.8) 
ABC 

27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Super.fields 
129 
whose variation at x = X is 
~.!t',uv = -~ L CABc(..tA(~ rB)Ac) =- 4 L CABC(AAf'tJAC) (ay"A.B). 
ABC 
ABC 
(27.3.9) 
We can write the product of bilinears on the right-hand side as the sum 
of two terms 
with 
XABC = ~ L ( ..1.A(1 + Ys)y"'A.c) ( iiy"'(1 ± Ys)A.B) , 
± 
YABC - l L ( ..1.A(1 + Ysh"'A.c) ( iiy"'(l + Ys)A.B) . 
± 
By using standard Fierz identities and the anticonnnutativity of the spin or 
fields, we have 
(..tA(1 +ys)ytJA.B) (a(1 +ys)yll2c) = (..tA(1 +ys)y"'A.c) (a(1 +ys)y"'A.B), 
( ..1.A(1 + ys)ytJAB) ( ii(1 =F ys)y"' A.c) = ( A.c(l + Ys)YwlB) ( ii(l + }'s)y"' AA) . 
(To derive the first of these relations, we note that [(1 +ys)YtJ]ay [(1 +ys)Y"']op 
may be thought of as the ct./3 matrix element of a matrix depending on 
~ and y, and may therefore be expanded in a linear combination of la:p, 
Y~p· [y"', y"JIXp, (YsY")a:p, and (ys)a:P· Because of the factors (1 + Ys), the only 
term in the expansion is proportional to [(1 +y5)y"']a:P· Lorentz invariance 
and the presence of the other 1 + Ys factor tell us that this expansion takes 
the form 
To determine the proportionality constant k, we may contract both sides 
with (Yv )ya: and find k = -1. The minus sign is cancelled by a minus sign 
arising from the anticommutation of A.c and ii. The other :pierz identity 
is proved in the same way, except that we also need to use the symmetry 
property (26.A.7) for Majorana bilinears.) Hence XABC is symmetric under 
interchange of Band C, while YABC is synnnetric under interchange of A 
and B. Since CABC is totally antisymmetric, both XABC and YABC make a 
vanilshing contribution to the sum in Eq. (27.3.9), leaving us ~.!t' ,uv = 0, 
so that Eq. (27.3.1) gives a supersynnnetric action, as was to be shown. 
We can understand why Eq. (27.3.1) gives a supersymmetric action by 
identifying the superfield that has f AtJv• A. A, and D A as component fields. 
Recall that under a generalized gauge transformation, the vector superfield 

130 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
VA(x, 0) has the transformation property (27.1.12): 
exp ( -2 ~?A VA(x,O)) -+ exp ( -i~?A!lA(x,O)) 
x exp ( -2 ~ 
t A VA (x, 0)) exp ( +i ~ 
tAn A. (x, 0)) , (27.3.1 0) 
where QA(x, 0) is a general left-chiral superfield. This is not a gauge-
covariant transformation rule, because nA_ =fo nA. To eliminate the factor 
involving QA_, we note that QA_ is a right-chiral superfield, so that .@r.a!lA. = 
0, and therefore 
exp ( -2 ~ 
tA VA(X, o)) ~,.exp ( +2 ~ 
tA VA(x, o)) 
-+ exp ( -i~ tA!lA(x,o)) exp ( -2 ~ 
tA VA(x,O)) 
X ~IA [ exp ( +2 ~ 
tA VA(X, 0)) OXp ( +i~ tA!lA(x,O)) l· (27.3.11) 
This is still not gauge-covariant, because the left-superderivative .@La. acts 
on exp( +i l:A tA!lA(x, 0)) as well as on exp ( +2 l:A tA VA(x, 0)). This is 
eliminated if we follow the lead of the Abelian theory discussed in the 
previous section, and define a spinor superfield 
2 
I:>AwALa.(x,O) = Lep,..@Rp.@R1 [exp (-2 L)A VA(x,o)) 
A 
py 
A 
x ~,. exp ( +2 ~ 
tA VA(x,o))] . 
(27.3.12) 
Because the product of any three !jRs vanishes, WALa. is left-chiral 
!j RP WAr.a(x, 0) = 0 , 
(27.3.13) 
and because fjRpfjRy!?iJr.a!lA oc fjRonA = 0, WALa. is gauge-covariant in 
the sense that, for a generalized gauge transformation, 
L tA WALa.(x, 0) ~ ~xp ( -i L tA!lA(X, 0)) L tA WAr.a(x, 8) 
A 
A 
A 
X exp ( +iLtAQA(x,O)). 
(27.3.14) 
A 
To calculate the spinor superfield at a point x~' = 
X~', we can again 
adopt a version of Wess-Zumino gauge in which VA(X) = 0, and after a 

27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Super.fields 
131 
straightforward calculation find that in this gauge 
WAL(X, 8) = AAL(X+) + !yllyv8L (all VAv(X+)- 8v VAp(X+)) 
+(8LE8L) ~ARA(X+)- i8LDA(X+). 
Since WAL is gauge-covariant, at a general point in a general gauge it 
must have the value 
WAL(x,8) = AAL(x+)+ ~yllyv8L f Apv(x+)+ (8£E8L) PA.RA(x+)- i8LDA(x+). 
(27.3.15) 
From this, we can construct a Lorentz- and gauge-invariant fF -term 
bilinear in W 
-[LErxpWALrxWALP]y = L [- (A.A ~(1-ys)A.A)- ~/Apv/~v 
ArzP 
A 
i 
!Jlvfp(J v2] 
+4Epvpu A 
A + A 
• 
(27.3.16) 
Just as in the previous section, the gauge-invariant Lagrangian (27.3.1) is 
obtained from the real part of this F-term: 
- ~ Re[I: Erzp WAL<X WALP ]Y = .!fgauge · 
ArzP 
What about the imaginary part? This is given by 
(27.3.17) 
- Im[:L: Erzp WALa wALP]y = -iL: (A.A PysA.A) + ~Ewp(J L:tr f~(J. 
A~ 
A 
A 
(27.3.18) 
Eq. (26.A. 7) and the antisymmetry of the structure constants show that 
(A.A PYsAA) = !8p(AA'Yil'YsAA), so the first term is a total derivative, while 
Eq. (23.5.4) tells us that the second term is a total derivative also. In 
Abelian gauge theories, this means that a term like (27.3.18) would have 
no effect. But as discussed in Sections 23.5 and 23.6, in non-Abelian gauge 
thl~ories the existence of instanton solutions allows the density (27.3.18) 
to have a non-vanishing integral over spacetime. We therefore must allow 
for the possibility of a new term in the Lagrangian density 
g28 
] 
.!f 9 = - 16 2 Im [ L Erzp WALrz W ALP 
, 
n 
ArzP 
Y 
(27.3.19) 
where 8 is a new real parameter, and g is a gauge coupling, which can 
·be conveniently defined for a simple gauge group so that if tA, tB, and 
tc are in the 'standard' SU(2) subalgebra of the gauge algebra used in 
calculating instanton effects, we have CABC = g EABC· With this definition 

132 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
of the gauge coupling, Eq. (23.5.20) gives for simple gauge groups 
I tfx Ef.lvpq L !~" f~(J = 64n2v I g2 , 
A 
(27.3.20) 
where v = 0, + 1, +2, ... is an integer, the winding number, which char-
acterizes the topological class of the gauge field configuration. Thus for 
instantons of winding number v, the Lagrangian density .se 9 contributes 
a phase to path integrals, given by 
[exp (i I tfx !l'e) L 
= exp(iv8), 
(27.3.21) 
so the effects of Iee are periodic in 8, with period 2n. 
It is often convenient to absorb a factor g into the gauge field, so that 
the structure constants do not depend on g, and instead the Lagrangian 
density for the gauge field is multiplied by an over-all factor 1jg2. In 
this notation, the complete Lagrangian density for the gauge field may be 
written in terms of the rescaled gauge fields and structure constants as 
(27.3.22) 
where tis the complex coupling parameter 
4ni 
8 
t = g2 + 2n. 
(27.3.23) 
According to Eq. (23.5.19), the contribution of instantons of winding 
number v to path integrals is suppressed by a factor exp(-8n21vl/g2), 
which together with the factor (27.3.21) yields an over-all factor 
[
. 8 
8n21vll 
{ exp(2nivt) 
exp zv -
= 
g2 
exp(2niv-r•) 
v>O 
v < 0 . 
(27.3.24) 
27.4 
Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Cbiral Snperfields 
We will now put together the pieces assembled in the previous three 
sections, to construct the most general renormalizable action for chiral su-
perfields interacting with general gauge fields. Adding the terms (27.1.27), 
(27.2. 7), and (27.3.1) and the superpotential terms in Eq. (26.4.5) gives the 
Lagrangian density 
z ~ ~ [wt exp ( -2 ~ 
tA v+I>L- ~Re ~ 
( wi1•WAL), 
-
g6
28
2 LIm (wiLEWAL) 
1 n 
A 
!F 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields 
133 
=- L(DJJ</J);(DIJ</J)n- ~ L ( V.'n'YJJ(DJJtp)n)) + L fl';§'n 
n 
n 
n 
82f(</J) ( T 
) 
8f(</J) 
-Re ~ 
8</Jn8</Jm 1pnLE1pmL + 2Re ~ 8</Jn Fn 
-2.jiim L(tA)nm (1pnLAA)</Jm +2.Jiim L(tA)mn (1JlnRAA)tP~ 
A~ 
A~ 
- L<fJ;(tA)~</JmDA- L~ADA + ~ LDADA 
~ 
A 
A 
1 '"" 
JJV 
1 '"" (~ fJ, ) 
g18 
'""'jJlvjpu 
--4 L...tf Apvf A - -2 L...t AA( A)A + 64 2 Epvprr L...t A A . (27.4.1) 
A 
A 
n 
A 
Here f(</J) is the superpotential, a gauge-invariant complex function of </Jn 
(but not of </J;) which the condition of renormalizability requires to be a 
cubic polynomial; the eA are constants which gauge invariance requires to 
vanish except where tA is a U(l) generator; the gauge-covariant derivatives 
are 
DJJ1pL = 8JJ1pL- i L tA VAp 1pL ' 
A 
Dp</J = 8JJ</J- i L tA VAJJ </J , 
A 
(DJJA.)A = 8jJAA + L CABC VBJJAC • 
BC 
and f AJJv is the gauge-covariant gauge field-strength tensor 
f Ajjv = 8p VAv- 8v VAJJ + L CABC VBJJ Vcv . 
BC 
(27.4.2) 
(27.4.3) 
(27.4.4) 
(27.4.5) 
The auxiliary fields enter quadratically, with field-independent constants 
as the coefficients of the second-order term, so they can be eliminated by 
setting them equal to the values at which the Lagrangian density is 
stationary: 
~n = -(8f(</J)/8</Jn) •, 
(27.4.6) 
D A = eA + L </J:(tA)nm</Jm · 
(27.4.7) 
nm 

134 
27 Super.symmetric Gauge Theories 
Using these back in Eq. (27.4.1), the Lagrangian density becomes 
!£ =- ~)Dill/>): (Dillf>)n 
n 
(27.4.8) 
Lorentz in variance requires the fields tpnL, AA, and f AJlv to have vanish-
ing vacuum expectation values, while the tree-value vacuum expectation 
values of the lf>n are at the minimum of the potential 
V(,P) ~~I at~~) I'+~~ (e.+ ~,p;(tA)nm<Pm)' 
(27.4.9) 
This potential is positive, so if there is a set of field values at which V ( 4>) 
vanishes, then this is automatically also a minimum of the potential. For 
V(¢) to vanish at some field value lf>n =£/>no, it is necessary and sufficient 
that 
(27.4.10) 
and 
(27.4.11) 
nm 
This in turn is the necessary and sufficient condition for supersymmetry 
not to be spontaneously broken, since Eq. (26.3.15) gives (btpnL)vAc = 
.J2(:F n)vAC rxL, and Eq. (26.2.16) gives (b.lA)vAC = i(D A)VAC ysrx. 
It is worth stressing here that spontaneous symmetry breaking is more 
difficult for supersymmetry than for other symmetries. For most symme-
tries of the action there will be field configurations at which the sym-
metry is unbroken and the potential is stationary, but the symmetry will 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields 
135 
nevertheless be spontaneously broken if none of these configurations are 
minima of the potential. In contrast, any supersymmetric field configura-
tion gives the potential a value of zero, which is necessarily lower than 
the value of the potential for any non-supersymmetric configuration, so 
the existence of any supersymmetric field configuration insures that super-
symmetry is unbroken. As we will see in Section 27.6, this conclusion goes 
beyond the tree approximation used in this section; it is unaffected by 
corrections of any finite order in perturbation theory. 
It may appear that Eqs. (27.4.10) and (27.4.11) impose too many con-
ditions on the scalar fields to expect a solution, without some fine-tuning 
of the superpotential. However, for a gauge group of dimensionality D, 
the superpotential f( 4>) is subject to the D constraints 
(27.4.12) 
for all A and all £/>. Hence if 4> has N independent components, then the 
number of independent conditions (27.4.10) is N -D, while the number of 
conditions (27.4.11) is D, so there are just N conditions altogether. With 
the number of conditions equal to the number of free variables, it is likely 
to find solutions for generic superpotentials. In fact, it is more usual to 
find solutions than not. For instance, for chiral scalar superfields in a 
non-trivial representation of a semi-simple gauge group we have ~A = 0, 
while /(£/>) can have no terms linear in the £/>n, so both Eqs. (27.4.10) 
and (27.4.11) are satisfied for £/>nO = 0. There may be other solutions 
of Eqs. (27.4.10) and (27.4.11) which break the gauge symmetries, but in 
such a theory supersymmetry cannot be broken, at least not in the tree 
approximation, and, as we shall see in Section 27.6, not in any order of 
perturbation theory. 
More generally, it is easy to see that, even if the gauge gmup has U(1) 
factors and even if the superpotential involves gauge-invariant super:fields, 
if there exists a set of scalar field values £/>nO that satisfy Eq. (27.4.10), then 
there is another that satisfies both Eq. (27.4.10) and Eq. (27.4.11), provided 
only that the Fayet-Iliopoulos constants ~A all vanish. To show this, we 
note that since the superpotential f( 4>) does not involve 4> •, it is invariant 
not only under ordinary gauge transformations 4> -+- exp(i LA AAtA)l/> 
with AA arbitrary real numbers, but also under transformations with AA 
arbitrary complex numbers. Under all these transformations the ff' -terms 
in Eq. (27.4.10) transform linearly, so if £/Jo satisfies Eq. (27.4.10), then so 
does £/>A = exp(i LA AAtA)£/>0• On the other hand, the scalar product [4> t £/>] 
. is not invariant under transformations with AA complex, but [£/>At £/>A] 
does remain real and positive for complex AA, so it is bounded below, 
and therefore has a minumum. For ~A= 0, the condition that [£/>At £/>A] be 

136 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
stationary at this minimum is just that 4>A should satisfy Eq. (27.4.11). We 
see then that in the absence of Fayet-Ilioupoulos D-terms, the question of 
whether supersymmetry is unbroken in gauge theories is entirely a matter 
of whether the superpotential allows solutions of Eq. (27.4.10). The same 
result applies even in non-renormalizable theories. 3 
Now let us assume that there is a set of values l/JnO at which V(l/Jo) = 0, 
so that supersymmetry is unbroken. The spin 0 degrees of freedom are 
described by a shifted field 
(/Jn = l/Jn -
QJnO · 
(27.4.13) 
There is then a cross-term between cp and the gauge fields, arising from 
the first term in Eq. (27.4.1): 
2I:Im (apcpn(tAl/>o):)v~. 
nA 
As shown in Section 21.1, it is always possible to eliminate this term by 
adopting a 'unitarity gauge,' in which 4>n satisfies a constraint that makes 
this term vanish: 
I: Im ( 4>n ( t A 4>o ): ) = 0 . 
(27.4.14) 
n 
This will have the effect of eliminating the Goldstone bosons associated 
with broken gauge symmetries. 
We shall now work out the masses of the particles of spin 0, spin 
1/2, and spin 1 that arise in this theory if supersymmetry is unbroken, 
taking into account the possibility that the gauge symmetries may be 
spontaneously broken. 
Spin 0 
Because 8f(Q>)/84>n and ~A+ "£nm4>: (tA)nm 4>m must both vanish at 4>n = 
4>no, the terms in V(Q>) of second order in (/Jn = 4>n- l/>n0 and/or cp: are of 
the form 
Vquad(l/J) = 1:(.4(* .A)nm(/J:(/Jm + L (tAQJO) n (tAl/Jo): (/J:(/Jm 
nm 
Anm 
+~ L (tAQJO ): (tAQJO ): (/Jn(/Jm + ~ L (tAQJO) n (tAQJO) m (/J:(/J~, 
Anm 
Anm 
where .4( is the complex symmetric matrix (26.4.11): 
.A 
= ( a2f(4>) ) 
nm-
84Jn84Jm 
tP=tPo 
(27.4.15) 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superjields 
137 
This can be written as 
-
1 [ (/) ]t 
2 [ (/) ] 
Vquad - 2 
(/)* 
Mo 
(/)* 
, 
(27.4.16) 
where M~ is the block matrix 
MS = [ .A" .A+ LA(tAl/Jo)(tAl/Jo)t 
LA (t A l/Jo)* ( t A l/Jo )t 
LA(tAl/Jo)(tAl/Jo)T 
] 
.A .A*+ LA (tAl/Jo)*(tAl/Jo)T 
(27.4.17) 
Now we must look for the eigenvalues of this mass-squared matrix. 
Differentiating Eq. (27.4.12) with respect to l/Jn gives 
(27.4.18) 
But as we have seen, 8f(l/J)/8l/Jm vanishes at l/J = l/Jo, so by setting l/J at 
this value in Eq. (27.4.18), we find 
L .Anm (tAl/Jo)m = 0. 
(27.4.19) 
m 
It follows that 
M~ [ ±tt:~:)* ] = ~ 
( l/Jl[tAtB + tBtA]l/Jo) [ +t:a~:)* ] 
But the vanishing of D A at l/J = l/Jo and the global gauge in variance of ~A 
tell us that 
( l/Jl[tA, tB]l/Jo) = i L CABC ( l/Jbtcl/Jo) = -i( lPblPo) L CABC~c = 0. 
c 
c 
(27.4.20) 
The matrix (27.4.17) therefore has a pair of eigenvectors for each gauge 
symmetry 
[ LB CB tBl/Jo ] 
u = 
LB cB (tBlfJo)" 
' 
[ 
LB CB tBl/Jo 
] 
v = 
- LB cB (tBl/Jor 
' 
(27.4.21) 
for which -
M~u = Jl2u, 
M~v = 0, 
(27.4.22) 
where Jl2 and c A are any real solutions of the eigenvalue problem • 
L ( l/Jb{tA, tB}l/Jo )cB =leA, 
(27.4.23) 
B 
·The presence of a factor 1/2 in Eq. (21.1.17) which does not appear in Eq. (27.4.23) is 
due to a difference in the way that the scalar fields are normalized. 

138 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
with the exception that if the eigenvalue JJ.2 vanishes then LB CBtB4>o = 0, 
so that the eigenvectors u and v are absent. The massless particles associ-
ated with the v eigenvectors are Goldstone bosons, which are eliminated 
from the physical spectrum by the unitarity gauge condition (27.4.14). In 
addition to these mass eigenstates, there is another set that are orthogonal 
to all the us and vs and that therefore take the form 
(27.4.24) 
where 
(27.4.25) 
n 
Eq. (27.4.19) shows that the space of (s satisfying Eq. (27.4.25) is invariant 
under multiplication with the Hermitian matrix ,At .A, so it is spanned 
by the eigenvectors of this matrix, satisfying 
,At .A ( = m2( 
(27.4.26) 
with m2 a set of real positive (or zero) eigenvalues. Eq. (27.4.26) and its 
complex conjugate together with Eq. (27.4.25) show that w± are eigenvec-
tors of M5 with eigenvalues m2 : 
MSw± = m2w± . 
(27.4.27) 
We thus have two self-charge-conjugate spinless bosons of each mass m 
satisfying Eq. (27.4.27), and one self-charge-conjugate spinless boson of 
each non-zero mass Jl. satisfying Eq. (27.4.23). 
Spin 1/2 
The fermion masses arise from the non-derivative terms in Eq. (27.4.8) 
that are of second order in the fermion fields tpn and lA: 
fil1;2 =-~L.Anm(tpJLetpmL) -ivf2~)tA4Jo)~ (lLetpmL) +H.c. 
nm 
Am 
(27.4.28) 
We saw in Section 26.4 that if the fermion mass term in the Lagrangian 
for a column x of Majorana spinor fields is put in the form 
fil1;2 = -~(xieMxL) + H.c., 
(27.4.29) 
then the fermion squared masses are the eigenvalues of the Hermitian 
matrix Mt M. Eq. (27.4.28) gives the elements of the matrix A1 here as 
Mnm =.A nm, 
MnA =MAn = ivf2(tA4Jo)~, 
MAB = 0, (27.4.30) 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Super.fields 
139 
for which, using Eqs. (27.4.19) and (27.4.20), 
(Mt M)nm = (.,Ht .,H)nm + 2 l:(tAl/>o)n(tAl/>o)~, 
A 
(Mt M)nA = (Mt M)An = 0, 
(Mt M)AB = 2(£/>btBtAl/>o) = (l/>l{tB, tA}l/>o). 
(27.4.31) 
The eigenvectors of the matrix (27 .4.30) are of three types. First are those 
of the form 
z = [ ~ ] ' 
(27.4.32) 
with eigenvalues m2, where (n and m2 are any eigenvectors and corre-
sponding eigenvalues of .,Ht .,H. Next are those of the form 
g = [ ~ ] ' 
(27.4.33) 
with eigenvalues p.2, where c 8 and p.2 are any eigenvectors and eigenvalues 
of the matrix (l/>l{tB, tA}l/>o). Finally, there are those of the form 
h = [ L:B c0
BtBl/>o ] , 
( 27.4.34) 
with eigenvalues p.2, where CB and p.2 are again any eigenvectors and 
eigenvalues of the matrix (l/>b{tB, tA}l/>o). The only exception is that the 
eigenvectors c of this matrix with eigenvalue zero have l:A cAtAl/>o = 0, 
corresponding to unbroken symmetries, so that in this case the vector 
(27.4.34) vanishes and we have only the eigenvector (27.4.33). Thus there 
is one Majorana fermion of each mass m satisfying Eq. (27.4.26), two 
Majorana fermions of each non-zero mass p. satisfYing Eq. (27.4.22), and 
one Majorana fermion of zero mass for each unbroken gauge symmetry. 
Spin 1 
The mass terms in the Lagrangian for the gauge fields arise from the part 
of the first term in Eq. (27.4.1) that is of second order in the gauge field 
VP. 
A· 
!l'v =- I:(tA£/>o):(tB£/>o)n VAp v; . 
(27.4.35) 
nAB 
Since the fields VAp are real, their mass-squared matrix is the matrix in 
Eq. (27.4.23): 
(27.4.36) 

140 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
There is one spin 1 particle of mass Jl for each eigenvalue Jl2 of the matrix 
(27.4.36). 
Putting this all together, we see that for each eigenvalue m2 of the 
matrix .A* .A there are two self-charge-conjugate spinless particles and one 
Majorana fermion of mass m; for each non-zero eigenvalue of the matrix 
Jl~B there are one self-charge-conjugate spinless boson, two Majorana 
fermions, and one self~charge-conjugate spin 1 boson of mass Jl; and for 
each zero eigenvalue of this matrix there is one Majorana fermion and 
one self-charge-conjugate spin 1 boson of zero mass. It is not surprising 
that the particle multiplets for each zero or non-zero mass are just the 
same as we found by direct use of the supersymmetry algebra in Sections 
25.4 and 25.5. What is a bit surprising is that the masses of the gauge 
and chiral particles are unaffected by each other. The masses m that are 
given by eigenvalues of (.A* .A)nm and the particles with these masses are 
just what they would be in a theory of chiral superfields without gauge 
superfields, and the masses Jl that are given by eigenvalues of Jl~B and 
the particles with these masses are just what they would be in a theory of 
gauge superfields with no chiral superfields. 
For future use in Section 27.9 we will now apply the method described in 
Section 26.7 to construct the supersymmetry current for the supersymmet-
ric gauge Lagrangian (27.4.1). In the gauge used earlier, an infinitesimal 
supersymmetry transformation changes VA, .A.a, and D A by the amounts 
(27.3.4)--{27.3.6). Adding the Noether supersymmetry current given by 
Eq. (26.7.2) for these fields to the Noether current for lf>n, tpn, and ff n 
already given in Eq. (26.7.8), with derivatives replaced by gauge-invariant 
derivatives, gives the total N oether supersymmetry current: 
Njj = L f~v '}'vAA -
~ L f Apu [l'P, '}'
17]'}'P AA -
~ i L D A '}'S'}'p AA 
A 
A 
A 
+ ~ ~ [2 (DPlf>): tpnL + 2 
(DPlf>)n tpnR + (/)~P)n '}'PtpnR 
+( Pl/> ): '}'ptpnL -
fF n '}'ptpnR - F; YjjV'nL J . 
(27 .4.37) 
This is not the supersymmetry current, because the Lagrangian density is 
not invariant under supersymmetry; instead, its change is the derivative 
(27.4.38) 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields 
141 
where** 
KJ.I = ~ i L eP
11P
11fApa'}'v'}'SAA + ~ L[yP,y
11]'}'J.IlAfApo- + ~i L DA '}'s'}'J.IAA 
A 
A 
A 
- i 2:(tA)nm'}'S'}'J.IAA<J>:<J>m 
Anm 
(27.4.39) 
The first two terms are derived using the identity (27.2.5). Using the same 
identity again with Eq. (26.7.4) gives the total supersymmetry current: 
SP=NP+KP 
= -~LfApo-['}'P,'}'
11]'}'J.I).A- i L(tA)nm'}'5'}'J.IAA</>:<J>m 
A 
Anm 
+ ~ ~ [(N).r''I'•R+(N.ld'PnL 
( of(</>)) 
(of(</>))* 
] 
+2 
o<J>n 
'}'J.ItpnL + 2 
o<J>n 
}'J.ItpnR . 
(27.4.40) 
* * * 
In Section 26.8 we considered a class of supersymmetric theories with 
a superpotential f(tP) that has an arbitrary dependence on a set of left-
chiral scalar superfields tPn but not their derivatives, and with a Kahler 
potential K(tP,tP•) that has an arbitrary dependence on the tPn and tP~, 
but not their derivatives. We can extend the same considerations to 
gauge theories, again with the dependence of the Lagrangian on the chiral 
superfields limited only by supersymmetry, but without introducing new 
superderivatives or spacetime derivatives. The renormalizable Lagrangian 
density is then replaced with 
2 = -2
1 [K(tP, tPtexp(-2LtAVA))] +2Re [f(tP)] 
A 
D 
!F 
--2
1Re L 
[hAB(tP) (W1eWBL)] 
, 
(27.4.41) 
AB 
!F 
•• The easiest way to calculate the change in the term [<I>t exp(-2 LAtA VA)<I>]n is to 
calculate the A.-component of <I>t exp( -2 LAtA VA)<I> and use Eq. (26.2.17). In this way 
of doing the calculation, the important term on the second line of the right-hand side 
of Eq. (27.4.39) arises from the A.-component of exp(-2 LAtA VA)· 

142 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
where hAB(<fJ) is a new function of the <IJn, but not of the <tJ; or derivatives. 
The chiral gauge and scalar superfields are given by the expansions 
(26.3.21) and (27.3.15): 
WAL(x, 0) = IAdx+) + 4'}'p'}'v OL f Apv(x+) + ( OteOL) PIAR(x+) 
-iOLD A(x+) , 
<IJn(x, 0) = 4>n(x+)- vf2 ( OLelf.'ndx+)) + s;;-n(x+) ( OteOL) , 
where ~ is the shifted coordinate (26.3.23). The terms of second order in 
OL (and independent of OR) in l:AB hAB(<fJ)(W]LeWBL) are then 
-[L hAB(<tJ)(WJLeWBL)] 
-
AB 
9f. 
( T 
) ~ 
( T 
) [1 ~ ( T 
) o
2
hAB(4>) ""or ohAB(4>)] 
eLeOL it IALeABL 
2 fin: lf.'nLelpmL 
of/Jno4>m - ~.? n 84>n 
+( OLeOL) L hAB(4>) [- ( AA 1>(1 - '}'s)IB) - ~~ Apvf~v 
AB 
+~ep,pof: flj' + D ADB l 
+vf2 I: oh;;(4>) ( Otelf.'nL) [ -( I~Le'}'Jl'}'V eL )! Apv + 2i( I~LeOL)] ' 
ABn 
n 
with all fields now understood to be evaluated at xll rather than ~- (The 
first and second terms on the right-hand side are taken from Eqs. (26.4.4) 
and (27.3.16), respectively.) Also, by writing OuOLp as iecxp(OLeOL). the 
third term on the right-hand side can also be expressed as proportional 
to (OteOL): 
( oielpnL) [ ( lf.'B'}'Jl'}'V OL )! Apv - 2i(lpB0L)] = 
4(0te0L) [( lf.'B'}'p'}'vlpnL)- 2i( lf.'Blf.'nL)DA] 
The §"-term is the coefficient of (0Le0L), so 

27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields 
143 
+ LhAB(<t>)[- (lAP(l-ys)lB) -~fAJn·fr + leJlvpo-!~
11!~
11 
AB 
+DADs] 
.J2 ~ 
ohAB( 4>) [ ( 
11 
) 
( 
) 
] 
+2 ~ oQ> 
-
tp B1'Jl1' TPnL f AJtv + 2i tp BTPnL D A 
ABn 
n 
The other terms in Eq. (27.4.41) are just given by the gauge-invariant 
version of the Lagrangian density (26.8.6). Putting this together gives the 
Lagrangian density 
One interesting feature of this result is the appearance of a gaugino mass 
in theories with 4>n-dependent functions hAB(</>), when supersymmetry is 
broken by a non-vanishing value of !/' n· This mechanism is used to 

144 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
generate gaugi.no masses in some theories of gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking, discussed in Section 31.7. 
27.5 
Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation 
Resumed 
We saw in the previous section that if the Fayet-Iliopoulos constants ~A all 
vanish and if there exists a solution of the equations of(4>)/o4>n = 0, then 
there is also some solution of these equations where the D-components 
of the gauge superfields all vanish, so that supersymmetry is unbroken. It 
follows that there are only two (non-exclusive) ways that supersymmetry 
can be spontaneously broken in the tree approximation in renormalizable 
theories of gauge and chiral superfields: the superpotential /(4>) may be 
arranged so that there are no solutions of all the equations of(4>)/o4>n = 0, 
or for gauge groups with U(1) factors there may be Fayet-Iliopoulos terms 
in the action. 
We have already seen in Section 26.5 how it can happen that there 
might not be any value of 4> for which of(4>)/o4>n = 0. No change in that 
discussion is needed when the chiral super:fields interact with gauge fields, 
so let's turn to the other possibility: spontaneous supersymmetry breaking 
produced by Fayet-Iliopoulos terms. Since this can only arise for gauge 
groups with U(1) factors, the simplest case is a theory with a single U(1) 
gauge group. As discussed in Section 22.4, to avoid U(1)-U(1)-U(1) and 
U(1)-graviton-graviton anomalies it is necessary that the sum of the U(1) 
quantum numbers of allleft-chiral superfields and the sum of their cubes 
should vanish. We will consider the simplest possibility: two left-chiral 
superfields <D+, with U(1) quantum numbers +e. (This is a supersymmetric 
version of quantum electrodynamics, with the spinor components lp-L 
and lJJ+L of the two superfields providing the left-handed parts of the 
electron field and of its charge conjugate.) The most general U(1 )-invariant 
superpotential in a renormalizable theory is just f(<D) = m<D+<D-· The 
scalar potential {27.4.9) for the scalar components 4>± of these superfields 
is then 
V(<f>+,<f>-) = m214>+12 +_m214>-12 + ( ~ + ~14>+1
2 - e214>-12) 
2
. 
(27.5.1) 
Unless the Fayet-lliopoulos constant~ vanishes, it is evidently not possible 
to find a supersymmetric vacuum with V = 0. 
For ~ > m2 j2e2 or 
~ < -m2 j2e2 the potential (27.5.1) has a minimum with either 4>+ = 0 
and 14>-12 = (2e
2~- m2)/2e4 or 4>- = 0 and 14>+f = ( -2e2~- m2)/2e4, 
so the U( 1) gauge symmetry is broken along with supersymmetry. For 
1~1 < m2 j2e2 the minimum of the potential is at 4>+ = 4>- = 0, so 

27.5 Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed 145 
here the gauge symmetry is unbroken. There is in general no necessary 
connection between the possible breakdown of supersymmetry and of 
gauge symmetries. 
Whether supersymmetry is spontaneously broken by the Fayet-Ilio-
poulos mechanism discussed here or by the O'Raifeartaigh mechanism of 
Section 26.5 or by some combination of the two, supersymmetry leaves a 
remnant in the pattern of tree-approximation masses. Inspection of the 
Lagrangian (27.4.8) for a general renormalizable supersymmetric theory 
of gauge and chiral superfields shows that the spontaneous breakdown 
of supersymmetry in this theory produces the following corrections to the 
masses calculated in Section 27 .4. 
Spin 0 Masses 
If the ji="-terms :!Fn = -(of(tf>)/otf>nr do not vanish at the minimum 
tf>o of the potential, then the terms in the potential of second order in 
<f'n = tf>n- tf>no have additional terms beyond those listed in Eq. (27.4.15): 
Vquad(</') = L(.A* .A)nm<f':<f'm + L 
(tAtJ>o) n (tAtf>o): </':<I'm 
nm 
Anm 
1'"' 
1'"' 
* *. 
+2 LJ% nm<f'n<f'm + 2 LJ% nm<f'n<f'n 
nm 
nm 
+ L DAo(tA)nm<f':(/'m, 
Anm 
where .A is again the complex symmetric matrix (26.4.11): 
.A 
= ( fJ2j(tj>) ) 
nm -
otf>notf>m 
tP=tPo • 
% nm is a riew ingredient 
_ 
( 
o
3f(tf>) 
) 
% nm = - L :!Flo 
otJ> otJ> otJ> 
, 
t 
n 
m 
( 
tP=tPo 
(27.5.2) 
(27.5.3) 
and !? o and D AO are again the ~-terms and D-terms of the chiral scalar 
and gauge superfields at the minimum of the potential: 
fF nO= - [of(tf>)] .. 
otf>n 
tP=tPo ' 
DAo =~A+ L tJ>:o (tA)nm tf>m0 · 
nm 

146 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
If we write the quadratic part (27.5.2) of the potential in the form (27.4.16): 
v quad = H :. r Mq :· 1 , 
then, instead of Eq. (27.4.17), we now have the scalar mass matrix 
2 _ 
[ Jt* Jt + d + l:A D AO tA 
f!l + JV* 
l 
~-
. 
where 
f!l• + JV 
J(J(" + d" + l:A DAo t~ 
d = l:(tA4>o)(tA4>o)t, 
A 
f!l = ~)tA4>o)(tA4>o)T. 
A 
Spin 1/2 Masses 
The fermion mass matrix M here is given again by Eq. (27.4.30): 
Mnm = .Anm, 
MnA =MAn= i)i(tA4>o):, 
MAB = 0. 
(27.5.4) 
However, now instead of Eq. (27.4.19), the gauge invariance condition 
(27.4.18) yields 
(27.5.5) 
m 
m 
Thus the Hermitian positive matrix whose eigenvalues are the squared 
masses of the fermions is given by 
(MtM)nm = (Jtt.A)nm +2~)tA4>o)n(tA4>o)~, 
A 
(27.5.6) 
(Mt M)An = (Mt M)~ = i)i L !F me(tA)mn . 
m 
Spin 1 Masses 
The squared masses of the vector bosons are again given by the eigenvalues 
of the matrix (27.4.36): 
(Jl2)AB = ( 4>&, {tB, tA}4>o) . 
(27.5.7) 
With the exception of the D-terms in Eq. (27.5.4), all of the changes in 
the mass-squared matrices are in their off-diagonal components. Therefore 

27.5 Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed 147 
Eqs. (27.5.4), (27.5.6), and (27.5.7) yield particularly simple results for the 
traces of these matrices: for spin 0 
Tr MJ = 2Tr (.,/(*.A) + Tr J.l2 + 2 I: D AO Tr t A , 
A 
and for spin 1/2 
Tr.(Mt M) = Tr(.A* .A)+ 2Tr J.l2 . 
(27.5.8) 
(27.5.9) 
Since the trace is the sum of the eigenvalues, we obtain from this a mass 
sum rule: 
I: mass2 -2 L mass2 + 3 L mass2 = -2 'LDAoTrtA. (27.5.10) 
spin 0 
spin 1/2 
spin 1 
A 
The trace of tA automatically vanishes unless tA is a U(1) generator, and, 
as mentioned in Section 22.4, the trace must also vanish (when taken over 
all left-handed fermions) for U(1) gauge generators to avoid gravitational 
contributions to an anomaly that would violate conservation of the U(1) 
current. Thus (27.5.10) leads to the simpler result4 
L mass2 - 2 L mass2 + 3 L mass2 = 0 . 
(27.5.11) 
spin 0 
spin 1/2 
spin 1 
Of course, the unbroken conservation of charge, color, and baryon and 
lepton numbers prevents the mass matrices from having elements linking 
particles with different values of these quantum numbers, so all these 
results hold separately for each set of conserved quantum numbers. 
The sum rule (27.5.11) is often quoted as providing evidence against 
models in which supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in the tree ap-
proximation within the minimum supersymmetric extension of the stan-
dard model. We will discuss this along with other arguments in Section 
28.3. 
As already observed in Section 26.5 (and discussed in greater generality 
in Sections 29.1 and 29.2), the spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry 
necessarily entails the existence of a massless fermion, the goldstino. For 
renormalizable gauge theories in the tree approximation, the goldstino 
field g appears as a term in the spinor components lpn and .A. A of the chiral 
and gauge superfields, with coefficients given by 
lpnL = i.ji $' nQ &L + " · , 
AAL = D AO &L + " · , 
(27.5.12) 
where the dots denote terms involving spinor fields of definite non-zero 
mass. To check this we have to confirm that (i)2$' n0, D AO) is an eigenvec-
tor of the fermion mass-squared matrix Mt M with eigenvalue zero. For 
this purpose we will need to use the condition that the potential (27.4.9) 

148 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
is stationary at £jJ = £/Jo: 
0 = :: I 
= -I:.,/{ nm §" mO + I: D AO( l/J~tA)n . 
o/n tfo=t/>o 
m 
A 
(27.5.13) 
We also need the gauge invariance condition (27.4.12), which at £jJ = £/Jo 
reads 
(27.5.14) 
n 
Combining Eqs. (27.5.13) and (27.5.14) with Eqs. (27.5.5) and (27.5.6) then 
yields 
i.J2l:(MtM)nm~mO = i.j2LDA(tA~~)n =- L(MtM)nADAo 
m 
A 
A 
(27.5.15) 
and 
i,J2L(MtM)Am§"mo = -2L'nO(tA)nm§"mO =- l:(MtM)ABDBo. 
m 
nm 
B 
(27.5.16) 
That is, 
(27.5.17) 
as was to be shown. 
27.6 
Perturbative Non-Renormalization Theorems 
From the beginning, several of the ultraviolet divergences in ordinary 
renormalizable quantum field theories were found to be absent in the 
supersymmetric versions of these theories. With the development in 1975 
of supergraph techniques, in which all particles in each supermultiplet are 
considered together, it became possible to show that some radiative correc-
tions are not only finite, but are absent altogether in perturbation theory. 5 
Supergraphs will be described in detail in Chapter 30, but as it happens 
they are not needed to prove the most important non-renormalization the-
orems. This section will give a version of a method developed by Seiberg6 
in 1993, which showed how the non-renormalization theorems may be 
easily obtained from simple considerations of symmetry and anallyticity. 
Consider a general renormalizable supersymmetric gauge theory with 
a number of left-chiral superfi.elds <I>n andjor gauge superfields VA. As 
mentioned in Section 27.3, if we remove the factor g in the tA and CABC 
and include it instead in the gauge superfields, then the Lagrangian density 

27.6 Perturbative Non-Renormalization Theorems 
149 
will be of the form 
~ = [<llt e-v <ll] + 2 Re [f(<ll)] + ~Re [ L ecxp WAo:L WApL] 
D 
:F 
2g 
Aa.p 
:F ' 
(27.6.1) 
where the superpotential f(<ll) is a gauge-invariant cubic polynomial in 
the left-chiral superfields. (We are ignoring a possible 0-term, which has 
no effect in perturbation theory.) 
Suppose we impose an ultraviolet cut-off A. on the momenta circulat-
ing in loop graphs. As discussed in Section 12.4, we can find a local 
'Wilsonian' effective Lagrangian density ~ 
-t that, with this cut-off, gives 
precisely the same results as the original Lagrangian density for S -matrix 
elements of processes at momenta below .A.. The effective Lagrangian 
density has masses and coupling parameters that now depend on A., and 
usually there will be an infinite number of coupling terms in the effective 
Lagrangian density, all possible terms allowed by the symmetries of the 
theory. But things are much simpler in supersymmetric theories. The 
non-renormalization theorems tell us that, as long as the cut-off preserves 
supersymmetry and gauge invariance, to all orders in perturbation theory 
the effective Lagrangian will have the structure 
fR-t = [d-t(<ll,<llt, v,~·· ·)Jv +2Re [f(<ll)]:F 
+2
1 
2 Re [I: ea.p WAa.L WApL] 
, 
g,t 
Aa.p 
:F 
(27.6.2) 
where d;. is a general Lorentz- and gauge-invariant function; ·~ · · ·' 
denotes terms invol.ving superderivatives or spacetime derivatives of the 
preceding arguments; and g,t is the one-loop effective gauge coupling, 
given by the same formula as the one-loop renormalized gauge coupling 
constant 
gJ:2 = constant - 2b ln A. , 
(27.6.3) 
where b is the coefficient of g3 in the Gell-Mann-Low function {3(g), 
discussed in Chapter 18. This is for a simple gauge group, with a single 
gauge coupling, but the extension to a direct product of simple and U(1) 
gauge groups is trivial. Note in particular that the effective superpotential 
is not only finite in the limit A. ~ oo, but at least in perturbation theory it 
contains no terms beyond those in the original superpotential, and there 
is no change in the coefficients of the terms it does contain. 
To prove this theorem, we shall interpret this theory as a special case 
of one with two additional external gauge-invariant left-chiral superfields 

150 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
X and Y, with Lagrangian density 
fi'# = 4 
[ctJt e-v ctJ]D + 2Re [ Y f(ctJ)]$0 + ~Re [XL Ert.fJ WA(l[. WApL]$0. 
Art.fJ 
(27.6.4) 
This Lagrangian density becomes equal to the original one when the scalar 
components x andy of X and Y are given the values x = 1/g2 andy= 1, 
and the spinor and auxiliary components of X and Y are set equal to zero. 
Since supersymmetry and gauge invariance are assumed to be preserved 
in the cut-off procedure, the effective Lagrangian density in the presence 
of these external superfields must be the sum of the D-term of a general 
superfield and the real part of the !¥-term of a left-chiral superfield: 
IL'j = [dA(ctJ,cfJt, V,x,xt, Y, yt,_q} .. ·)Jv +2Re [aA(cfJ, WL,X, Y)],jO, 
(27.6.5) 
with d A and &lA both gauge-invariant functions of the displayed argu-
ments. We do not include any superderivatives or spacetime derivatives in 
the F-term because, as in Section 26.3, terms involving derivatives of any 
of the left-chiral super:fields or their adjoints may be rewritten as contri-
butions to [d 1]v. (It is true that Eq. (27.3.12) gives WL itself in terms of 
two ,qfi Rs acting on a superfield exp(-2 V),qfi L exp(2 V), but this superfield 
is not gauge-invariant, and we are requiring that d 1 be gauge-invariant.) 
The dependence of Bl.t on X and Y is severely limited by two additional 
symmetries of the action obtained from the Lagrangian density (27.6.4). 
(Both of these symmetries are broken by non-perturbative effects, which 
will be considered in Chapter 29.) The first symmetry is a perturbative 
U(1) R-symmetry, of the sort discussed in Section 26.3, for which fh and 
OR are given the R values +1 and -1, the superfields cfJ, V, and X are 
R-neutral, and Y has the R value +2. (Recall that f 3> is the coefficient 
of 0[ in j, so in order for f ,jO to have the R value 0, f must have the 
R value 2.) Because WL is given by two ,q}Rs and one ,q}L acting on 
R-neutral superfields, it has the R value +1. Now, R invariance requires 
&11, like the superpotential, to have the R value +2. It cannot depend 
on any superfields with negative R values, such as adjoints of left-chiral 
superfields, because it is holomorphic, so the terms in Bl.t can only be of 
first order in Y or of second order in W L, with coefficients depending 
only on the R-neutral superfields cfJ and/ or X: 
&11(~. wL.x. Y) = Y h(ctJ,X) + I: e(f.p wArt.LWBpLhuB(ctJ,X). (27.6.6) 
rt.fJAB 
(Lorentz in variance requires the spin or indices on the W Ls to be contracted 
with Ert.fJ·) 
The other symmetry is translation of X by an imaginary 
numerical constant, X---+ X +i;, with; real. This changes the Lagrangian 

27.6 Perturbative Non-Renormalization Theorems 
151 
density (27.6.4) by an amount proportional to Im l:Aa:p WAa:L WApL, which 
as we saw in Section 27.3 is a spacetime derivative, and therefore can 
have no effect in perturbation theory. This translation symmetry prevents 
X from appearing anywhere in the effective Lagrangian density (27.6.5) 
except where it appears in the original Lagrangian density (27.6.4). We 
therefore conclude that/;. is independent of X, while huB consists of a 
<IJ-independent term proportional to X b AB. plus a term that is independent 
of X. That is, 
aJA(<fJ, wL.x. Y) = y h(<IJ) + 2: ea;p WAa;LWBpL [cAbABX + tuB(<tJ)] ' 
a:pAB 
(27.6.7) 
where c A is a real cut-off-dependent constant. 
The point of introducing the external auxiliary superfields X and Y is 
that, by giving them suitable values, we can make use of weak-coupling 
approximations to determine the coefficients in Eq. (27.6.7). If we set the 
spinor and auxiliary components of X and Y equal to zero, and take their 
scalar components x and y to approach infinity and zero, respectively, 
then the gauge coupling constant vanishes as 1/.ji, and all Yukawa and 
scalar couplings derived from the superpotential vanish as y. In this limit, 
the only graph that contributes to the term in (27.6.7) proportional to Y 
has a single vertex arising from the term 2 Re [Y f(<IJ)]~ in Eq. (27.6.4), so 
/;.(<IJ) = f(<IJ) . 
(27.6.8) 
Also, with Y = 0 there is a conservation law which requires every term 
in .P~ to have equal numbers of <fJs and <tJts,, so since <tJt cannot occur in 
tuB, neither can <IJ. Gauge in variance then requires the constant t AAB to 
be proportional to bAB for a simple group: 
(27.6.9) 
Now, since gauge propagators go as 1/x while pure gauge interactions 
go as x and scalar propagators and interactions are x-independent, with 
y = 0 the number of powers of x in a diagram with V w pure gauge boson 
vertices, I w internal gauge boson lines, and any number of scalar-gauge 
boson vertices and scalar propagators is 
Nx = Vw-Iw. 
(27.6.10) 
The number of loops is given by 
L = Iw +!(})- Vw-
V<~> + 1, 
(27.6.11) 
where 1<~> is the number of internal <fJ lines and V<~> is the number of cp_y 
interaction vertices. All the <IJ-V vertices have two <fJ lines attached, so 
with no external <D lines 1<~> and V<~> are equal, and therefore cancel in 

152 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
Eq. (27.6.11), so that Eq. (27.6.10) may be written 
Nx = 1-L. 
(27.6.12) 
Thus the coefficient c;. of X in Eq. (27.6.7) is correctly given by the tree 
approximation and is therefore what it was in the original Lagrangian, 
simply c;. = 1, while the coefficient L;. of the X -independent term is given 
by one-loop diagrams only. Putting this all together, we have 
.Pf = [ d;. ( 4J, 4J t, V, X, xt, Y, Y t, ~ · · ·)] D + 2 Re [ Y f( 4J)] $"" 
+~Re [(x +L;.) LE(lpWA!XLWApL] 
, 
(27.6.13) 
A~p 
$"" 
where L;. is the one-loop contribution. Setting Y = 1 and X= ljg2 then 
gives Eq. (27.6.2), with gi2 = g-2 + L;.. As shown in Section 18.3, the 
leading order contribution to )..dg;.jd).. is the same function of g;. whatever 
renormalization scheme is used to define this coupling, so to one-loop 
order we must have 
)..dg;.jd).. = bg1' 
(27.6.14) 
where b is the same coefficient of g3 as in the renormalization group 
equation of Gell-Mann and Low. The solution is Eq. (27.6.3), completing 
the proof. 
In theories with a U(1) gauge superfield V1, the Lagrangian may contain 
a Fayet-Iliopoulos term (27.2.7): 
.PFI = ~ [ V1] D · 
(27.6.15) 
It is easy to see that the coefficient~ of such a term is not renormalized.7 
If the corresponding coefficient ~..1. in the Wilsonian Lagrangian density 
did depend on the gauge couplings or the couplings in the superpotential, 
then when we replace the original Lagrangian (27.6.1) with a Lagrangian 
(27.6.4) involving the external superfields X and Y, this term in the 
Wilsonian Lagrangian would be required by supersymmetry to take the 
form 
(27.6.16) 
with ~..1. a function with a non-trivial dependence on X andjor Y and/or 
their adjoints. But such a term would not be gauge-invariant, because, 
according to Eq. (27.2.18), a gauge transformation shifts V1 by a chiral 
superfield i(Q- Q*)/2, and although the D-term of a chiral superfield 
vanishes, the product ofi(Q-Q*)/2 and ~..1. is not chiral for general gauge 
transformations if ~..1. has any dependence on other superfi.elds. There 
actually are diagrams that make contributions to ~..1. that are independent 

27.6 Perturbative Non-Renormalization Theorems 
153 
-- ~--- _, 
\ 
. ... >- ... 
, 
' 
I 
\. 
~ 
.... -~ ... 
\ 
I 
I 
Figure 27.1. A one-loop diagram that could be quadratically divergent in theories 
with supersymmetry broken by trilinear couplings among scalar fields and their 
adjoints. The lines all represent complex scalar fields. 
of all coupling constants. For the Lagrangian (27.6.1) there are no factors 
of the gauge coupling g at vertices at which the gauge superfield interacts 
with chiral matter, but instead a factor g-2 for each gauge propagator, so 
a graph with no internal gauge lines and no self-couplings of the chiral 
superfield will have no dependence on coupling constants. The only such 
graphs that contribute to e;. are those in which a single external gauge 
line is attached to a chiralloop. (See Figure 27.1.) The contribution of all 
such graphs is proportional to the sum of the gauge couplings of all chiral 
superfields- that is, to the trace of the U(1) generator. But as discussed 
in Section 22.4, this trace must vanish (if the U(1) symmetry is unbroken) 
in order to avoid gravitational anomalies that violate the conservation of 
the U ( 1) current. 
The most important application of these theorems is a corollary, which 
tells us that if there is no Fayet-Iliopoulos term and if the superpotential 
/((f)) allows solutions of the equations of(l/J)/olf>n = 0, then supersymmetry 
is not broken in any finite order of perturbation theory. 
To test this we must examine Lorentz-invariant field configurations, 
in which the (f)n have only constant scalar components lf>n and constant 
auxiliary components !!Fn, while (in Wess-Zumino gauge) the coefficients 
VA of the gauge generators tA in the matrix gauge superfi.eld V have only 
auxiliary c·omponents DA. Supersymmetry is unbroken if there are values 
of lf>n for which !l';. has no terms of first order in !IF n or D A. in which case 
there is sure to be an equilibrium solution with !!F n = D A = 0. (In Section 
29.2 we will see that this is the sufficient as well as the necessary condition 
for supersymmetry 1to be unbroken.) In the absence of Fayet-Iliopoulos 
terms, this will be the case if for all A 
"oK;.(l/J,l/J*)(t > A.'" =O 
~ ()A.• 
A mno/m 
nm 
o/n 
(27.6.17) 

154 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
and for all n 
of(</J) = 0 
o</Jn 
' 
where the effective Kahler potential K1(</J, <jJ*) is 
Kl(</J,</J*) = .911(</J,</J",O,O· · ·), 
(27.6.18) 
(27.6.19) 
with .911( </J, <jJ •, 0, 0 · · ·) obtained from .Jll1 by setting the gauge superfield 
and all superderivatives equal to zero. (With superderivatives required 
to vanish by Lorentz invariance, the only dependence of .Jll1 on V is a 
factor exp(-V) following every factor c~»t.) We now use a trick that we 
have already employed in Section 27.4. If there is any solution <jJ<0> of 
Eq. (27.6.18), then the gauge symmetry tells us that there is a continuum 
of such solutions, with </Jn replaced with 
</Jn(z) = [ exp(i I:> A ZA)] nm </J~) , 
A 
(27.6.20) 
where (since f depends only on </J, not <jJ*) the ZA are an arbitrary set of 
complex parameters. If K1(</J, <jJ*) has a stationary point anywhere on the 
surface <jJ = </J(z ), then at that point 
"""" oK1( </J, <P*) 
.J. 
"""" oK1( </J, <P ·) ( 
.J.. ;: • 
( 
6 1) 
0 = L-t 
o.J. 
(tA)nmo/m OZA - L-t 
o</J* 
tA)mno/m uZA . 27 .. 2 
nmA 
o/n 
nmA 
n 
Since this must be satisfied for all infinitesimal complex ozA, the coefficients 
of both OZA and oz,4 must both vanish, and therefore Eq. (27.6.17) as 
well as Eq. (27.6.18) is satisfied at this point. Thus the existence of a 
stationary point of K1(</J, </J*) on the surface <jJ = </J(z) would imply that 
supersymmetry is unbroken to all orders of perturbation theory. The 
zeroth-order Kahler potential ( <jJ t <jJ) is bounded below and goes to infinity 
as </J ---+ CX), so it certainly has a minimum on the surface </J = </J( z ), where 
of course it is stationary. If there were no flat directions in which K 1 is 
constant at this minimum then any sufficiently small perturbation to the 
Kahler potential might shift the minimum, but would not destroy it. At 
the minimum of the Kahler potential on the surface <jJ = </J(z) there are 
flat directions: ordinary global gauge transformations o</J = i EA OZAtA<P 
with ZA real. 
But these, are also flat directions for the perturbation 
K1(</J,<jJ")- (</Jt</J), so there is still a local minimum of K1 on the surface 
</J = </J(z) for any perturbation in at least a finite range, and thus to all 
orders in whatever couplings appear in Kl(</J,</J*). As we have seen, this 
is a set of scalar field values at which !#' n = 0 and D A = 0 for all n and 
A, which means that supersymmetry is unbroken. 
* * * 

27.7 Soft Supersyrnrnetry Breaking 
155 
These results may be extended to non-renormalizable theories. 3 In such 
theories the first term [<J>te-v<1>]D in Eq. (27.6.1) is replaced with the 
D-term of an arbitrary real gauge-invariant scalar function of <t>t, <1>, V, 
and their superderivatives and spacetime derivatives, while the second and 
third terms in Eq. (27.6.1) are replaced with the .?"-term of an arbitrary 
globally gauge-invariant scalar function f(<J>, W) of<J>n and Wa. It has been 
shown that, to all orders of perturbation theory, the function fl(<J>, W) 
appearing in the SF-term of the Wilsonian Lagrangian is the same as 
f(<J>, W), except for the one-loop renormalization of the term quadratic in 
w. 
27.7 
Soft Supersymmetry Breaking• 
We will see in the next chapter that, even if supersymmetry is an exact 
symmetry of the action, the spontaneous br,eakdown of supersymmetry 
at very high energy can produce superrenonnalizable terms that violate 
supersymmetry conservation in the effective action that describes physics 
at lower energies. These superrenormalizable terms may explain the lack 
of supersymmetry observed in phenomena at accessible energies. In this 
. section we will consider the radiative corrections that can be produced by 
such supersymmetry-breaking superrenormalizable terms, in part to see 
whether this provides a criterion for including or rejecting such terms in 
supersymmetric versions of the standard model. 
The sign of supersymmetry breaking is the appearance of expectation 
values of D-terms of general superfields or SF-terms of chiral superfields. 
Any operator d!J in the Lagrangian density that breaks supersymmetry 
can be written in a supersymmetric form, as aD-term 
(27.7.1) 
where S is a non-chiral superfield that has (!) as its C-term, and Z is 
a non-chiral external superfield whose only non-vanishing component is 
[ZJD = E. Some but not all operators dfJ that break supersymmetry can 
also be written as !F-terms, 
E@ =[no],, 
(27.7.2) 
or their adjoints, where 0 is the left-chiral superfield whose jF-term is 
(D and Q is an external left-chiral superfield whose only non-vanishing 
component is [Q],- = E. We can count the order in E in which a given 
• This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development and may be 
omitted in a first reading. 

156 
27 Super symmetric, Gauge Theories 
correction to the effective Lagrangian will occur by counting the: powers 
of Z or Q needed to construct this correction in a supersymmetric way. 
We will find interesting limitations on the radiative corrections that can 
be produced by those interactions that can be written in the form (27.7.2) 
as well as (27.7.1). 
According to the results of the previous section, there are no radiative 
corrections to !IF -terms, so all supersymmetry-breaking radiative correc-
tions to the Wilsonian Lagrangian density must take the form of D-terms. 
This theorem does not prevent any given operator from appearing in the 
Wilsonian Lagrangian density, because even if an operator e/1.!£ cannot 
be expressed in the form [Z A]n, where A is the general superfield whose 
C-term. is !1.:£, yet il!J..Y can be expressed in the form: 
(27.7.3) 
But not all operators can be produced by radiative corrections of first 
order in Q or n·. In particular, a function only of the </>-term of a 
left-chiral superfield ~. but not of <J>*, cannot be written as the D-term 
of a superfield linear in 0. (Note that [Oh(~)]n is a derivative, while 
[Q*h(~)]n = 2[~]:Foh(<,b)/o<P is not a function of <Palone.) We conclude 
then that the supersymmetry-breaking terms in the Wilsonian Lagrangian 
that depend on <P alone cannot be produced by radiative corrections that are 
of first order in supersymmetry-breaking interactions of the form (27. 7.2 ). 
This result is significant because the most divergent radiative corrections 
are those that are of lowest order in superrenormalizable couplings. To 
be more specific, the coefficient of an interaction of dimensionality ~ 
has dimensionality (in powers of energy) 4- ~. so dimensional analysis 
indicates that the contribution of a set of interactions of dimensionality 
dt, d2, etc. to the coefficient of an interaction of dimensionality d can 
contain the ultraviolet cut-off to at most a power 
p = 4- d- (4- dt)- (4- d2)- ... 
(27.7.4) 
and is therefore finite if p < 0. (This argument ignores possible ultraviolet 
divergences in subintegrations; for a thorough treatment of this topic, see 
Reference 8.) Superrenormalizable interactions are 'soft,' in the sense that 
they reduce the degree of divergence of the graphs in which they appear. 
In particular, in a renormahzable theory where all interactions have di < 4, 
and the strictly renormalizable interactions with di = 4 are supersymmet-
ric, the contribution of one or more superrenormalizable interactions to 
the coefficient of an interaction with d = 4 will always have p < 0, so even 
if they are not supersymmetric the superrenormalizable interactions will 
not produce supersymmetry-violating ultraviolet-divergent corrections to 
the coefficients of the supersymmetric d = 4 interactions. 

27.8 Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry Transformations 
157 
On the other hand, in such a theory there may be divergent radiative 
corrections to the superrenormalizable interactions themselves.9 The most 
worrisome are quadratic (or higher) divergences, which if cut off at some 
high energy scale Mx may require a fine-tuning of the bare coupling 
constants to preserve supersymmetry as a good approximate symmetry 
at energies below Mx. According to Eq. (27.7.4), in renormalizable 
theories where all interactions with di = 4 are supersymmetric, radiative 
corrections can produce quadratic or more highly divergent (p > 2) 
supersymmetry-violating operators of dimensionality d only if they involve 
insertion of a superrenormalizable supersymmetry-violating interaction of 
dimensionality d 1 > 2 + d. This allows either d = 0 and d 1 > 2, which 
arises only when we calculate the cosmological constant, or d = 1 and 
dt = 3, which arises only when we calculate the 'tadpole' graphs in 
which a scalar field line disappears into the vacuum. The cosmological 
constant raises fine-tuning problems for all known theories10 and will 
not be considered further here. The tadpole graphs represent operators 
linear in 4> or 4> • and, as we have seen, can not be produced to first 
order in supersymmetry-violating interactions that can be put in the 
form (27.7.2). Such superrenormalizable interactions are therefore 'soft' 
in the sense that they do not induce quadratic or higher divergences. 
_ Along with the superrenormalizable interactions with d < 2, including 
arbitrary quadratic polynomials in 4> and¢", the supersymmetry-breaking 
interactions that are soft in this sense include terms of third order in the 
q,, which can be expressed as ¢ 3 = [Q<I>3].F, and likewise terms of third 
order in the¢", and also d = 3 gaugino mass terms, which can be written 
as [Q t:a:p Wa: Wp].F, but not terms like ¢ 2¢* or ¢¢2*, which in general can 
produce quadratically divergent tadpole graphs.9 
Nevertheless, tadpoles can only arise for scalar fields that are neutral 
with respect to all exact symmetries. In theories without such neutral 
scalars, like the supersymmetric standard model discussed in the next 
chapter, all superrenormalizable interactions may be considered to be 
soft. 
27.8 
Another Approach: Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry 
Transformations* 
It is somewhat disturbing that the supersymmetry transformation rules dis-
cussed so far involve ordinary spacetime derivatives, not gauge-invariant 
• This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development and may be 
omitted in a first reading. 

158 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
derivatives. For instance, in a U ( 1) gauge theory, the transformation of th~ 
component fields of a chiral scalar superfield is given by Eqs. (26.3.15)---
(26.3.17) as 
01p L = Jio 1'</J yll fXR </J + _J7ff fXL , 
o§ = Ji( fXL ¢1JJL) , 
o</J = Ji( fXR1J)L) · 
(27.8.1) 
One might have thought that in the transformation of a chiral super-
field that carries U(1) charge q, the ordinary spacetime derivatives in 
Eq. (27.8.1) should be replaced with gauge-covariant derivatives, given in 
terms of the U ( 1) gauge field VJJ by 
(27.8.2) 
With such gauge-invariant supersymmetry transformations of the chiral 
superfields, one would still attempt to formulate supersymmetry transfor-
mations of the gauge supermultiplet that involve only the physical and 
auxiliary fields V#, A., and D: 
Jv~' = (ocyw.t), 
J;. = iDysrx + ~ [apr, yll]rx, 
JD = i(Eiys ¢J.), 
(27.8.3) 
in which ordinary spacetime derivatives appear because the gauge super-
field carries no U(1) charge. 
This doesn't work. The algebra of these transformations does not close: 
the commutator of two of the modified supersymmetry transformations 
is not a linear combination of bosonic symmetry transformations, such as 
spacetime translations and gauge transformations. It follows that it is not 
possible to construct a Lagrangian for the chiral and gauge superfields that 
would be invariant under these modified supersymmetry transformations, 
because if there were such a Lagrangian then it would have to be also 
invariant under the commutators of these transformations, so that these 
commutators would have to be bosonic symmetries of the Lagrangian. 
In 1973 de Wit and Freedman11 showed that the supersymmetry algebra 
could be made to close by modifying the supersymmetry transformation 
properties of the chiral superfields not only by changing ordinary deriva-
tives to gauge-invariant derivatives, but by also adding an extra term in 
the transformation of the §'-component, so that for U ( 1) gauge theories 

27.8 Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry Transformations 
159 
the modified supersymmetry transformation rules read 
J1pL = vilDIJ<J> yll et:R </> + vil:F et:L, 
J/F = vil( et:L fJ1JlL) -2 i q </> (rxL).R) , 
(27.8.4) 
J<J> = .Ji( Ct:R1pL) · 
With this change, they were also able to construct a Lagrangian that is 
invariant under the transformations (27.8.3H27.8.4) and that turned out 
to be just the one we have found in Sections 27.1 and 27.2. 
There is nothing wrong with continuing to use the conventional transfor-
mation rules (27.8.1), so we do not need the de Wit-Freedman formalism 
to deal with supersymmetric gauge theories. Nevertheless this formalism 
is of some interest, because in supergravity theories the analog of the 
conventional formalism is very cumbersome. As described in Chapter 31, 
the formalism that has been chiefly used to derive physically interesting 
results in supergravity theories follows an approach like that of de Wit and 
Freedman, with supersymmetry transformation rules involving covariant 
derivatives in place of ordinary derivatives, rather than an approach based 
on conventional supersymmetry transformations like those ofEq. (27.8.1). 
It is therefore of some interest to understand the relation between the de 
- Wit-Freedman formalism and the conventional approach in the relatively 
simple context of U(1) gauge theory, and in particular to explain the 
origin of the extra term in the transformation rule for ~-
In writing supersymmetry transformations (27.8.3) that did not involve 
the components C, M, N, or ro of the gauge superfield V, de Wit and 
Freedman were implicitly adopting the Wess-Zumino gauge discussed in 
Section 27.1. But the choice of Wess-Zumino gauge is not invariant under 
either the conventional supersymmetry transformations (26.2.11H26.2.17) 
or the extended gauge transformations (27.1.17), so once we adopt this 
gauge both symmetries are lost. We can, however, define a combined 
transformation, acting on fields in Wess-Zumino gauge, which consists of 
a conventional supersymmetry transformation followed by an extended 
gauge transformation that takes us back to Wess-Zumino gauge. This is 
the de Wit-Freedman transformation J."* 
To construct the de Wit-Freedman transformations in this way, note 
that for a gauge superfield that satisfies the Wess-Zumino gauge conditions 
•• This was not shown explicitly by de Wit and Freedman But, in fact, although the 
point of their paper was to emphasize that the details of the transformations (27.8.3) 
and (27 .8.4) could be inferred from the requirement of a closed supersymmetry algebra 
(also for non-Abelian gauge theories), they remarked that they had actually found 
these transformations by identifying the fermionic transformations that survive in 
Wess-Zumino gauge. 

160 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
C = M = N =OJ= 0, the transformation rules (26.2.11)-(26.2.14) give 
oC = 0, oOJ =rex, oM= -(rl).), oN= i (rtY5 ).) . 
(27.8.5) 
According to Eqs. (27.1.17), we can get back to Wess-Zumino gauge by 
performing an infinitesimal extended gauge transformation (27.1.13): 
v -+ v + ~ [ 0 - 0*] ' 
(27.8.6) 
where 0 is a left-chiral superfield with components 
4P=O, V'2=-.fircxR, 
~n=-(ri(l-y5)).). 
(27.8.7) 
According to Eq. (27.1.11 ), this extended gauge transformation induces 
on a chiral superfield of charge q the transformation 
o' <J> = i q o <J> • 
(27.8.8) 
Using the multiplication rules (26.3.27H26.3.29), the transformation of 
the components of <l> is 
0
11J'L = -i.fiq</J rcxR, 
0
1~ = -2iq<f>(cxL).R) -i.jiq(cxL r1J'L), 
o'£/J=O. 
(27.8.9) 
Adding this to Eq. (27.8.1) and comparing with Eq. (27.8.4) shows that 
the de Wit-Freedman transformation is indeed the combination of a con-
ventional supersymmetry transformation and the corresponding extended 
gauge transformation (27.8.8): 
~<J> = o<J> + o'<J>. 
(27.8.10) 
27.9 
Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry* 
Theories with unbroken extended supersymmetry are not considered to 
be good candidates for realistic extensions of the standard model, because 
of the non-chirality of particle multiplets discussed in Section 25.4. Nev-
ertheless gauge theories with "extended supersymmetry are worth some 
consideration here because they have provided paradigms for the use of 
powerful mathematical methods to solve dynamical problems. 
There are a number of special formalisms that have been proposed 
to construct Lagrangians with N = 2 extended supersymmetry, 12 but 
• This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development and may be 
omitted in a first reading. 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
161 
fortunately we can get by with the tools already at hand. Any theory with 
N = 2 supersymmetry also has N = 1 supersymmetry, so its Lagrangian 
must be a special case of the Lagrangians already considered in this 
chapter. To construct a Lagrangian with N = 2 supersymmetry for some 
set of theN = 2 supermultiplets of particles constructed in Sections 25.4 
and 25.5, we need only write down the most general Lagrangian with 
N = 1 supersymmetry whose N = 1 supermultiplets contain physical 
fields for the particles in the N = 2 supermultiplets, and then impose a 
discrete R-symmetry on the Lagrangian: a symmetry that acts differently 
on different components of N = 2 supermultiplets. The Lagrangian 
density will then be invariant under a second supersymmetry, whose 
supermultiplets are given by acting on the supermultiplets of ordinary 
N = 1 supersymmetry with the R-symmetry. 
It will be convenient to choose the discrete R-transformation so that 
(27.9.1) 
If the central charge were zero then the supersymmetry algebra would be 
invariant under an SU{2) R-symmetry group, which has the transforma-
tion (27.9.1) as one finite element exp(inr2/2), but symmetry under the 
discrete symmetry is sufficient for our purposes, so we do not need to 
assume a zero central charge. In fact, it will tum out that the Lagrangians 
we construct by this method will have an SU(2) R-symmetry, not just 
symmetry under the discrete transformation (27.9.1). 
Let us first consider the renormalizable theory of the gauge bosons 
of a general gauge group, together with the superpartners required by 
N = 2 extended supersymmetry. We saw in Section 25.4 that inN= 2 
global supersymmetry theories a massless gauge boson can only belong 
to a multiplet also containing a pair of massless fermions of each helicity 
+ 1/2 that transform as a doublet under the SU(2) R-symmetry and a pair 
of S U(2)-singlet spinless bosons. Since N = 2 supersymmetry includes 
N = 1 supersymmetry, the renormalizable Lagrangian for this theory 
must be a special case of the general renormalizable Lagrangian density 
(27.4.1). One feature of this special case is that since the gauge boson 
belongs to. the adjoint representation of the gauge group, so must also the 
fermions and scalar field. To furnish N = 2 supermultiple1ts of fields with 
the correct particle content, we must have one N = 1 chiral superfield ci> A 
with component fields </>A, 'IJ'A, !IF A (with 'IJ'A Majorana and </>A and !FA 
both complex) for each N = 1 gauge multiplet V~. A.A. DA· We impose a 
discrete R -symmetry under the transformation 
(27.9.2) 
(with all other fields invariant) because this is the effect of the transforma-
tion (27.9.1). Since a non-trivial superpotential would give 1J'A interactions 

162 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
or mass terms that are absent for ).A, the superpotential must vanish. The 
Lagrangian (27.4.1) therefore takes the special form 
.!l' =- L(DJJ</>)~ (D!l<f>)A- ~ L ( lpA (fJ1Jl)A) + L g-~ g-A 
A 
A 
A 
where 
and 
- 2.j2Re L CABC ( ).~L VJcL) <Pi 
ABC 
+i L CABc4>'B4>cDA- L~ADA + ~ LDADA 
ABC 
A 
A 
1 """ 
JJV 
1 """ (- fJ). ) 
g
2
fJ 
""""fJJVfpu 
--4 LJfAJJvfA - 2 LJ ).A ( 
)A + 64 2 ~jjvpu L.t A A ' 
A 
A 
n 
A 
(D#1p)A = OIJ1pA + L CABC VBjJ1pC' 
BC 
(D#).)A = (JIJ).A + L CABC VBJJ).C' 
BC 
(D#</>)A = oJJ<f>A + 2: cABc vBjJ</>c • 
BC 
/AjJV =a# VAv- Ov VA#+ L CABC VB# Vcv. 
BC 
(27.9.3) 
(27.9.4) 
(27.9.5) 
(27.9.6) 
(27.9.7) 
(Recall that in the adjoint representation (tA)Bc = -iCABc, where CABC 
is the real structure constant, defined as usual in this book to include 
factors of gauge couplings, and taken in a basis in which it is totally 
antisymmetric.) The Lagrangian density (27.9.3) has N = 1 supersymmetry 
with multiplets </>A, 1JlA, SF A and V~, ).A, DA, because it is a special case of 
Eq. (27.4.1), and it has an SU(2) symmetry relating 1JlA and ).A, including 
invariance under the finite SU(2) transformation (27.9.2), so it also has 
a second independent N = 1 supersymmetry with multiplets 4> A, ).A, FA 
and v~. -lpA, D A· It therefore satisfies the conditions imposed by N = 2 
supersymmetry. 
We can eliminate the auxiliary fields by setting them equal to the values 
at which the Lagrangian density (27.9.3) is stationary: 
g-A= 0, 
DA = -i2: CABc4>'B<Pc. 
(27.9.8) 
' 
BC 
(We are now assuming that the Fayet-Iliopoulos constants ~A all vanish.) 
Inserting these values back in Eq. (27.9.3) gives an equivalent Lagrangian 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
163 
density 
.ft' =- L(DJl</>)~ (D14</>)A- ~ L ( lpA (fJ1p)A) 
A 
A 
+ft. L CABC (V'B (1 
~Ys) AA) 4>c 
ABC 
-fi2: CABC (AA (1 
~Ys) 1pc) 4>~- V(<j>,<j>*) 
ABC 
1 """' 
JlV 
1 """' (-
) 
g
2 
(J 
"""' 
JlV pa 
--4 
L!fA~tvfA -2 L! AA (fJJl)A + 64 
2~J.lvpa L!fA fA ' 
A 
A 
n 
A 
(27.9.9) 
where the potential is 
V(</>,4>*) = -~ L [2: CABC 4>~4>c]
2 
= 2 2: [2: CABC Re</>B Im</>c]
2 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
(27.9.10) 
This potential has a minimum value of zero, which is reached not only 
for 4>A = 0 but also for any set of <j>s for which LBc CABC 4>iJ4>c = 0 for 
-all A or, in other words, for which 
[t·Re<j>, t·Im<j>] =0, 
where t · v = LtBVB. 
(27.9.11) 
B 
That is, the minimum of the potential is reached for those scalar fields for 
which all generators t · Re 4> and t · Im 4> belong to a Cartan subalgebra of 
the full gauge algebra, all of whose generators commute with one another. 
Though all such values of 4> give zero potential, and hence unbroken 
N = 2 supersymmetry, they are not physically equivalent, as shown for 
instance by the different masses they give the gauge bosons associated 
with the broken gauge symmetries. 
One remarkable feature of extended supersymmetry is that the central 
charges of the supersymmetry algebra in any state can be calculated in 
terms of 'charges' in that state to which bosonic fields are coupled.13 The 
easiest way to do this calculation is to use the transformation properties 
under ordinary N = 1 supersymmetry of the extended supersymmetry 
currents Sf(x) with r = 2, 3, .. . ,N to calculate the anticommutators 
{Q1a, s:p(x)}. We can then calculate the central charges from the anti-
commutators 
(27.9.12) 
It turns out that the· integrand on the right-hand side is a derivative with 

164 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
respect to space coordinates, but its integral does not vanish if the states 
have fields that do not vanish rapidly as x ~ co. 
To see how this works in detail, let's consider the case of N = 2 
supersymmetry with an S U (2) gauge symmetry and a single N = 2 gauge 
supermultiplet, with no additional matter supermultiplets. The Lagrangian 
here is given by Eq. (27.9.3), with A, B, and C running over the values 1, 
2, 3, and 
~A =0. 
(27.9.13) 
(The coupling constant here is denoted e because this is the charge with 
which the massless gauge field of the unbroken U ( 1) gauge symmetry 
interacts.) The usual N = 1 supersymmetry current (distinguished now 
with a subscript 1) is given by Eq. (27.4.40) as 
sr = -~ L f Apa [yP' ylT]yiJ ).A - e 'E EABC YsY#l ).A <P B <Pc 
A 
ABC 
+ ~ ~ 
[(,1)</>)A Y''PAR + (,1)</>.)A r"'PAL ]· 
(27.9.14) 
We can calculate the second supersymmetry current by subjecting Sf to 
the finite S U (2) R-symmetry used above, which simply amounts to making 
the replacements 1J'A ~).A, lA ~ -V'A· This gives 
Sf=~ LfApa[yP,ya]yll1pA +e L EABCY5Y#l1J'A <Pi,<Pc 
A 
ABC 
+ ~ ~ [ ( ,!)</>)A yP lA.R + ( ,!)</> • )A. yP A,AL l· 
(27 .9 .15) 
It will be enough for our purposes (and somewhat easier) to calculate 
only the change in the right-handed part of this current under anN= 1 
supersymmetry transformation. After setting the auxiliary fields equal to 
their equilibrium values 
we find 
DA = -ie L EABc<Pi,<Pc, 
Be 
oSfR = f LfApa[YP' ytT]yll(fJ</J)A~R 
A 
-~e L 
EABCY#l(fJ</J)A~R<PB<Pc-f f Apa(fJ<!J)Ayll[yP, ya]~R 
ABC 
-~e L EABc<Pi,</Jc(fJ</J)Ay#l~R + · · · , 
ABC 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
165 
where the dots denote terms bilinear in fermion fields~ which do not con-
cern us here because we are interested in effects of long range boson fields. 
We can combine terms by using the Dirac anticommutation relations and 
the identity 
[yP' yG] [yl'' ')l.Y] + [yl'' ')IV] [yP' yG] = _ 8qi'Pf/YG + 8qGI'f/PV + 8 j ei'VfJG')IS 
and find 
oSfR = -2-/iLf~v (Dv</J)ArxR- i../iL ew~pa /Apa(Dv</J)ArxR 
A 
A 
-2../ie L eABc</Ji<Pc (D~'</J)ArxR + · · · . 
ABC 
In order to write this as a derivative, we need to use the Yang-Mills field 
equations given by Eqs. (15.3.6), (15.3.7), and (15.3.9): 
Dvf~y = J~ = e L CABC ((D~'</J)a</Jc- </Ja(D~'</J)c) ' 
BC 
ewpa(Dv jPa)A = 0. 
These allow us to write oSfR as a total derivative 
oSfR = DvX~'v !XR , 
where 
X~'v = -2../i.Lf~v </JA- i../iL e~'vpa /Apa</JA + · · · , 
A 
A 
(27.9.16) 
(27.9.17) 
with the dots again indicating irrelevant terms involving fermion fields. 
Eq. (26.1.18) allows us to write Eq. (27.9.16) as an anticommutation 
relation 
{ QRa, S~p} = i [ e ( 1 ~ Ys) Lp DvX~'v . 
(27.9.18) 
Since X~'v is a gauge~invariant quantity, its gauge-covariant derivative 
is the same as its ordinary derivative. Also, XJJV is antisymmetric~ so 
Dvxov = oiX0i. From Eqs. (27.9.12) and (27.9.18), we have at last 
(27.9.19) 
with the integral taken over a large closed surface enclosing the system 
in question, with surface area differential dS taken normal to the surface. 
Comparing this with Eq. (25.2.38) gives the central charge 
Z 12 = -i J 
dSi X 0i . 
(27.9.20) 

166 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
If we choose a gauge in which 4> A (almost everywhere) has only the 
constant non-vanishing component 4>3 = v, then 
Lf~i</>A = -vEi, 
~ LEOipa/Apq</>A = vBi, 
(27.9.21) 
A 
A 
where E and B are the electric and magnetic fields associated with the 
unbroken U(l) subgroup of the SU(2) gauge group. Therefore the central 
charge (27 .. 9.20) here is 
(27.9.22) 
where q and Jt are the electric charge and magnetic monopole moment, 
defined by 
(27.9.23) 
As discussed in Section 23.3, this theory, with SU(2) gauge symmetry 
spontaneously broken by the expectation value of an S U(2) triplet of 
scalars, is one in which magnetic monopoles actually do occur. 
The application of the results of Section 27.4 to the Lagrangian density 
(27.9.3) shows that, after the spontaneous breaking of the SU(2) gauge 
symmetry, this theory will contain elementary particles of charge +e, zero 
magnetic monopole moment, and tree-approximation mass M = .file vi. 
Specifically, for each sign of the charge there is one such particle of spin 
1, two of them with spin 1/2, and one with spin 0. It is a striking 
consequence of the results obtained here that the mass value .file vi is 
exact, being unaffected by either radiative corrections or non-perturbative 
effects, provided that the quantity v is defined by Eq. (27.9.22) for the 
central charge. 13 
To see this, note that the massive one-particle states for each sign of 
the charge are 'short' N = 2 supermultiplets, which, as shown at the end 
of Section 25.5, have masses that saturate the lower bound (25.5.24): 
M = IZ12I/2. 
(27.9.24) 
Even if we did not trust the tree approximation to give us the precise 
value of the particle masses, we would not expect corrections to this 
approximation to turn short :t;nultiplets into the full multiplets, with many 
more states, that could have larger masses, so we can be confident that 
Eq. (27.9.24) is exactly valid. For particles with electric charge q = +e and 
zero magnetic monopole moment, Eq. (27.9.20) gives Z12 = +2 ..fiiv e, so 
Eq. (27.9.24) tells us that their masses are 
M = ..file vi . 
(27.9.25) 
This is the result found in the tree approximation, but now we see that it 
is exact. 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
167 
The semi-classical calculations described in Section 23.3 show that 
electrically neutral magnetic monopoles in this theory have monopole 
strengths** 
ii _ 4nv 
,/n -
' 
e 
(27.9.26) 
with v the winding number, a positive or negative integer. The formula 
(27.9.22) for the central charge together with the inequality (25.5.24) thus 
give a lower bound on the monopole masses 
M > 4n.J21v vi . 
-
lei 
(27.9.27) 
Interestingly, this is the same as the Bogomol'nyi lower bound 14 on 
monopole energies derived in Section 23.3.t In fact, the monopole solution 
for v = 1 that was described in Section 23.3 saturates this bound. More 
generally, the 'dyons' of this theory, 15 particles with both charge and 
magnetic moment, have masses given by16 
(27.9.28) 
which again is the minimum value allowed by Eqs. (25.5.24) and (27.9.20). 
Indeed, all of the known particles in this theory have masses given in the 
semi-classical limit by Eq. (27.9.28)_17 
Returning now to general N = 2 gauge theories, we may also include 
additional 'matter' fields in the Lagrangian. For simplicity, we will re-
strict ourselves to 'short' massive hypermultiplets (with central charge :!£ 
saturating the inequality (25.5.24)), each consisting of a single fermion of 
spin 1/2 and an SU(2) doublet of spin 0 particles, together with distinct 
antiparticles. This is the same spin content as is given under N = 1 super-
symmetry by pairs of left-chiral scalar superfields ~ and «<Y,:, together 
with their right-chiral adjoints, with the complex scalar field components 
</>~ and </>~ and their ad joints forming pairs of S U (2) doublets, and the 
spinor fields all S U(2) singlets. (We are using primes and double primes 
to distinguish these superfields and their components from ~A and its 
components.) If some of these hypermultiplets cl>'n and cl>'~ are non-neutral 
•• Note that the magnetic moment .A defined by Eq. (27.9.23) is related to the magnetic 
moment g defined in Section 23.3 by .A = 4:ng. 
t The canonically normalized field with a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value is 
Jj.Re I/J3 (for rc~al v), so the quantity (1/J} appearing in the Bogomol'nyi inequality 
(23.3.19) is Jiv. 

168 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
under the gauge group, then a superpotential is allowed, of the form :tt 
f(<D,If>',<D") = ~ L(SA)nm<D'n<D'~<I>A + ~ :L.unm<D~<D~ · 
Anm 
nm 
(27.9.29) 
To the Lagrangian density (27.9.3) we then must add a Lagrangian density 
for these hypermultiplets, given by the first eight terms on the right-hand 
side of Eq. (27.4.1), and find a total Lagrangian density 
.P =- L(D11 </J');(D~'q>')n- L(D 11</>");(D~'</J")n- L(D11</J)~ (D~'</J)A 
n 
n 
A 
-~ L ( 
1p~(fJV>')n) -
~ L ( 
1p~(fJ1p")n) 
n 
n 
-~ L ( 1pA (fJV>)A)- ~ L ( AA (fJA)A) 
A 
A 
+ L,:F~*,:F~ + l::F~*,:F~ + Lgl~,:FA 
n 
n 
A 
-Re L(sA)nm</>A ( 1p~lc1JJ~L)- 2~Re L CABC ( A}LE1J>CL) <Pi 
Anm 
ABC 
- Re L(sA)nm</>~( 1p~lc1J>AL)- Re L(SA)nm</>~( 1p~lc1J>AL) 
Anm 
Anm 
Fi 
~ t' 
( 'T 
) 
'• 
;;::; 
"'"' t'' 
( "T 
) "* 
+2-y.dm L.,..( A)mn 1J>nLEAAL </Jm + 2y2lm L.,..( A)mn 1J>nLEAAL </Jm 
Anm 
Anm 
+Re L(SA)nm</>A</J~:F~ + Re Z:)sA)nm</>A</>~:F~ 
Anm 
hm 
+ Re L (sA)nm</>~</>~il' A 
Anm 
+ Re L .Unm</>~:F~ + Re L 
,Unm</>~9'~ - Re L .Unm ( 1p~lc1J>~L) 
Anm 
Anm 
nm 
tt There still cannot be any terms in the superpotential that are of second or higher order 
in the <llA. for the same reason as before: such terms would lead to scalar couplings 
or masses for the 1/JA, with no qorresponding couplings or masses for their SU(2) 
partners A.A. Also, there cannot be any term that is trilinear in the <ll~ and/or <ll~. 
because then the term in Eq. (27.4.1) involving the product of fermion bilinears with 
second derivatives of the superpotential would lead to a coupling of the SU{2)-singlet 
fermions to SU(2) doublet fields t/J~ or t/J~. Thus the only trilinear interaction terms 
in the superpotential must involve one factor of <I> A and two factors of CV, and/or <ll'~. 
There cannot be any trilinear terms involving a <I> A and two <ll~s or two <ll;;s, because 
that would give the SU(2) singlet auxiliary fields !#'A an interaction with SU(2)-triplet 
products <flnt/J'm or t/J~t/J~, and there cannot be any bilinear terms involving two <ll~s 
or two <ll'~s. because that would yield SU{2)-triplet mass terms (1p~T€1p~) or (w:T€1p~). 
The only remaining allowed bilinear or trilinear terms are of the form (27.9.29). 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
169 
-
L(t~)nm</>~* </>~D A- l:(t~)nm<P:· </>~D A + i 2::: CABC <Pa</>cDA 
A~ 
A~ 
~C 
- LCADA.-+!L:DADA 
A 
2 A 
1 ~ 
f 
f~'v 
g2(J 
"'"'fi'VfPa 
-4 ~ A}JV A + 641!/;JJVpa ~ A A , 
(27.9.30) 
where the (t'A)~ and (t'~)~ are the matrices (including coupling constant 
factors) representing the gauge group on the left-chiral scalar superfields 
~ and <))~, respectively. The Yukawa couplings between fermions and 
scalars have a discrete R-symmetry under the transformation 
AAL-:-+ -1pAL ' 
"PAL~ +A.AL ' 
</>~ ~ 
-</>~. ' 
</>~ ~ 
</>~· ' (27.9.31) 
provided that 
(27.9.32) 
(Note in particular that Eq. (27.9.32) requires the representations of the 
gauge group furnished by~ and <))~ to be complex conjugates.) This is 
also a symmetry of all the other terms in the Lagrangian density (27.9.30), 
except for those involving the auxiliary fields. 
It is not possible to extend the symmetry under the transformation 
(27.9.31) to the auxiliary fields, but the symmetry appears after the auxil-
iary fields are eliminated.+ After setting DA, F~, and§"~ equal to values 
at which the Lagrangian density is stationary, and combining D- and 
F-terms, the Lagrangian density (with SA and t'~ given by Eq. (27.9.32), 
and CA taken to vanish) .takes the form 
fe =- L(DI'</>')=(D~'</>')n- L(D11</>"):(D11</>")n- l:(D11</>)~ (D~'</>)A 
n 
n 
A 
-~ 2::: ( 
1p~(fJ1J'
1
)n) -
~ 2::: ( 
1p~(fJ1Jl
11
)n) 
n 
. 
n 
-~ L ( 'IJ'A (fJ'IJ')A)-4 I: ( AA (fJA.)A) 
A 
A 
-2v'2Im l:(t'A)mn<!>A(1p;It:1p::U.)- 2v'2Re L 
CABC (..t1Lt:1JlcL) </>~ 
A~ 
ABC 
* After elimination of the auxiliary fields, the resulting action is invariant under the 
original N = 2 supersymmetry transformation only 'on-shell' ~ that is, only up to 
terms that vanish when the fields satisfy the interacting field equations. This doesn't 
hurt, because there still are two conserved supersymmetry currents whose integrated 
time-components satisfy the N = 2 supersymmetry anticommutation relations when 
the fields of which they are composed are required to satisfy the field equations of 
the Heisenberg picture. 'Off-shell' formulations of N = 2 supersymmetry exist, but are 
subject to various complications.18 

170 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
-2..j2Im L(t'A)mn</>~(V>~le1JJAL)- 2..j2Im L(t'A)mn<P~(V>~lE1J'AL) 
Anm 
Anm 
+2.J2Im L(t'A)mn ( 1p~IEAAL )<P~- 2vf2Im L(t'A)nm ( 1p~IEAAL )<P~* 
Anm 
Anm 
1 '""'"' 
pv 
g
2
fJ 
'""'"' pvfpu 
--4 ~~ApvfA + 64 2EJ.Ivpu ~~A A 
A 
n 
A 
- L {t'A' t'B}mn</>A<P~( </>~</>~ • + </>~* <P~) 
ABnm 
-~ ~ 
[ ~(t'A) ... ( "'~. "'~ - "':"'~.) r 
2 
+~ I: CABcCADE</>~<Pc<Pv<PE- 2 L L:<t~)nm<P~<P~ 
ABCDE 
A nm 
-4 Re L(t'A.U)nm</>~ • </>~- 4 Re L(.U t'A)nm</>~<P~" 
nm 
nm 
(27.9.33) 
nm 
nm 
The last five lines on the right-hand side come from the terms in 
Eq. (27.9.30) involving auxiliary fields, and now these too are invariant 
under the discrete transformation (27.9.31), provided that 
(27.9.34) 
We can now go a step further and consider the case of N = 4 extended 
global supersymmetry. (As remarked in Section 25.4, N = 3 supersym-
metry is the same as N = 4 supersymmetry.) The only massless multiplets 
of N = 4 supersymmetry that do not contain gravitons or gravitinos 
consist of a single particle of helicity 1, an SU(4) quartet of particles of 
helicity 1/2, and an S U(4) sextet of particles of helicity 0, together with 
their CPT -conjugates of opposite helicity. There is one such supermul-
tiplet for each generator tA of the gauge group. These particles can be 
grouped into supermultiplets of N = 2 supersymmetry: for each tA there 
is one gauge supermultiplet consisting of one particle of helicity 1, two 
particles of helicity +1/2, 'and one particle of helicity 0, together with 
their CPT -conjugates of opposite helicity, plus two hypermultiplets, each 
consisting of one particle of each helicity +1/2 and two particles of helic-
ity 0. The N = 2 gauge superfield consists of an N = 1 gauge superfield 
VA and a left-chiral scalar superfield cJ>A and its complex conjugate, while 
the two N = 2 hypermultiplets consist of two additional ]eft-chiral scalar 
superfields <D'A and <D'i and their complex conjugates. 
Since N = 4 supersymmetry includes N = 2 supersymmetry, the 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
171 
Lagrangian density after elimination of the auxiliary fields of N = 1 
supersymmetry18 must be a special case of Eq. (27.9.33), but with the 
labels n, m, etc. running over the indices A, B, C, etc. of the adjoint 
representation. Also, the coefficient Jtnm in the superpotential (27.9.29) 
must vamsh here, because otherwise Eq. (27.9.33) would contain terms 
quadratic in the fermion fields 1p~ and 1p~, with no counterpart for their 
N = 4 superpartners AA and 1JlA· Also setting (t'A)Bc equal to the gener-
ators -i CABC in the adjoint representation, we find that the Lagrangian 
density must take the form 
5£ =- 'f)Dill/J')~(DilljJ')A- I)Dill/J")~(DilljJ")A- L(Dill/J)~ (DiliJJ)A 
A 
A 
A 
-~ L ( 1p~(P1JJ')A))- ~ L ( 
1p~(P1J.'")A)) 
A 
A 
_! L ( 'IJ.'A (f>1Jl)A)-! L ( AA (f>l)A) 
2 A 
2 A 
(27.9.35) 
where the potential is 
2 
-~ L CABcCADEiJJ'Bl/Jcl/JD£/JE + 2 L :[ CABcl/J~l/J~ . (27.9.36) 
ABCDE 
A BC 
With no further constraints needed, this Lagrangian has an SU(4) R-
symmetry, which implies that it is invariant under N = 4 supersymmetry. 
To see this, we need to use the Jacobi identity to write the cross-term in 

172 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
the second line of the right-hand side of Eq. (27.9.36) in the form 
~ 
I * I ..1,.11 * ..1,.11 
~ 
I "' 
I ..1,.11 * A,.lf 
L.t CABcCADE4>B 4>c~'"D '+'E =-
L.t CABcCADEcPB 4>D'+'E '+'C 
ABCDE 
ABCDE 
~ c 
c 
A.' • A,.l .+." * .+." 
-
L..J 
ABC ADE't'B '+'E'+'C '+'D • 
ABC DE 
which allows us to write the potential (27.9.36) in a form symmetric among 
the scalars and their adjoints 
2 
2 
2 
v = :E :E cABc<t>j,<t>(; + :E 2: cABc<t>;,<~>r + :E 2: cABC4>B<t>'c 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
2 
2 
+ L L CABC</>B4>~ * + L L CABC</>~ .. 4>~ 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
2 
2 
~ ~ 
I 
II 
1 ~ ~ 
I ..1,.1 * 
+ L.t L.t CABC4>B4>c + 2 L.t L.t CABC</>B'+'c 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
2 
2 
+~ L L CABc4>'B4>~" + ~ L L CABC</>B</>c" 
(27.9.37) 
A 
BC 
A 
BC 
Now to make the SU(4) symmetry apparent, we introduce an S U(4) 
notation for the fields. We assemble the left-handed fermion fields into an 
SU(4) vector: 
1JJ1AL = 1JJAL , 
1J'2AL = 
).AL , 
1J'3AL :;:::;::: 1p~L , 
1J'4AL = 
lp~L · (27.9.38) 
In order for the fermion kinematic terms in the Lagrangian density to be 
SU(4)-invariant, we then must assemble the right-handed fermion fields 
into a contragredient vector: 
1113 
-
1111 
'YAR = 'YAR • 
1114 
-
1p" 
'YAR = 
AR · 
(27.9.39) 
The Majorana condition on the fermion fields then takes the SU(4)-
invariant form 
(27.9.40) 
with indices i, j, etc. running over the values 1, 2, 3, 4. In order for the 
Yukawa couplings between the fermion and scalar fields to be SU(4)-
invariant, we must give the scalars the transformation properties of an 
antisymmetric S U(4) tensor 
.-~,.12 = A.. 
.-~,.13 = A." 
.-~,.14 -
A.' 
'+'A -'+'A' 
'+'A -'+'A • 
'+'A =-'+'A' 
.-~,.23 -
..1,.
1* 
.-~,.24 =- .-~,."• 
.-~,.34 -
A. 
'+'A=-'+'A• 
'+'A-
'+'A• 
'+'A='t'A• 
(27.9.41) 

27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 
173 
which also obeys an SU(4)-invariant reality condition 
(27.9.42) 
The whole Lagrangian density (27.9.35) can then be written in the mani-
festly SU(4)-invariant form 
.!l' = _! L(DJl</Jij)A(Dil<jJii)~ 
2 Aij 
-~ L ( 1J'~Lc(Pwk)A) + ~ L ( 
vY~1c(P1J'iL)A) 
Ai 
Ai 
- v'2 Re L 
C ABc</J~ ( 1J'Jn E1p JCL) - V 
ABCij 
1 '"' f 
JlV 
g2 (} 
'"' JlV pa 
-4 ~ AJlVfA + 64n2EJlvpa ~fA fA ' 
where the potential is 
2 
v = -8
1 "E L 
CABC</J~<P~ 
Aijkl BC 
(27.9.43) 
(27.9.44) 
The potential has a minimum value zero, so that supersymmetry is not 
broken in this theory. The minimum is reached when the generators 
LA tA </J~ all commute with one another. 
For zero theta angle, the gauge theories with a simple gauge group 
and either N = 2 or N = 4 supersymmetry have just a single coupling 
constant, the gauge coupling constant g. Since these theories haveN= 1 
supersymmetry, they share the property discussed in Section 27.6, that 
the only infinity in higher orders of perturbation theory is in a one-loop 
correction to this coupling.tt The function p(g) in the renormalization 
group equation JUig/df.l. = p(g) is then given to all orders of perturbation 
theory by the one-loop formula (18.7.2), with a suitable correction for the 
presence of scalar fields: 
(27.9.45) 
t1 The trilinear term in the superpotential (27.9.29) is proportional to the gauge coupling, 
and is therefore renormalized, despite the nO-renormalization theorem of Section 27.6. 
This is because here we are renormalizi.ng the left-chiral scalar superfields ci>A, ~n• and 
IP;. as well as the gauge superfield VA so as to keep them canonically normalized. The 
bilinear term in Eq. (27.9.29) is renormalized for the same reason. 

174 
where 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
L CABcCABD = g2Ct«5cv, 
AB 
[Tr(tctv)] 
. 
. 
= g2C{Jcv, 
(27.9.46) 
MaJorana fenmons 
[Tr(tctv)] 
= g
2C~Jcv. 
complex scalars 
In general theories with N = 2 supersymmetry we have two Majorana 
fermions A.A and lJ'A in the adjoint representation and H pairs of Ma-
jorana fermions 1p~ and 1p; whose left- and right-handed parts are m 
representations with generators either t'A or -t'A T, so 
c{ = 2Ct + 2HC2, 
(27.9.47) 
where C.2 is defined by 
(27.9.48) 
Also, we have one complex scalar cf> A in the adjoint representation and H 
pairs of complex scalars cf>~ and cf>~ in representations with generators ~ 
or -t'AT• so 
Cl = Ct +2HC~. 
(27.9.49) 
The beta function (27.9.45) is therefore 
g2 ( 
' 
ft(g) =-Sn2 Ct- HC2) . 
(27.9.50) 
The case of N = 4 supersymmetry is just the special case with H = 1 pairs 
of N = 2 hypermultiplets in the adjoint representation, with C2 =Ct. so 
in this case the beta function vanishes. This is therefore a finite theory, 
with no renormalizations at all 19 
Gauge theories with N = 4 supersymmetry have another remarkable 
property, known as duality. 
This was first conjectured by Montonen 
and Olive17 for purely bosonic theories in which a simple gauge group 
is spontaneously broken to a U(1) electromagnetic gauge group. They 
noticed that semi-classical calculations (of the sort described in Section 
23.3) give the mass of particles with charge q = ne and magnetic monopole 
moment ..H = 4nmje (with nand m integers of any sign) as 
M = ~~v (ne+ 4n:m)l' 
(27.9.51) 
which is invariant under the transformations 
n--+ -m, 
e +-+ 4nje. 
(27.9.52) 

Problems 
175 
On this basis, they suggested that the theory with a weak gauge coupling 
e is fully equivalent to one with a strong gauge coupling 4nje. Neither 
the purely bosonic theory nor the simplest versions of the N = 1 and 
N = 2 extended supersymmetry theories really have this property ;2o for 
one thing, the massive charged elementary vector bosons of the broken 
gauge symmetries have spin 1, while all of the monopoles and dyons have 
spins 1/2 or 0. (We will see in Section 29.5 that N = 2 theories do have a 
duality property of a more subtle sort.) But for N = 4 supersymmetry the 
monopole states form multiplets with one particle of spin 1, four particles 
of spin 1/2, and two particles of spin 0, just like the elementary particles. 20 
Evidence has accumulated21 that N = 4 supersymmetric gauge theories are 
indeed invariant under the interchange of electric and magnetic quantum 
numbers and of e with 4n I e. The equivalence of theories with large and 
small coupling constants has become an increasingly important theme in 
string theory, but this is beyond the scope of this book. 
Problems 
1. To second order in gauge coupling constants, calculate the compo-
nents of the superfields fr4 that are needed to put the gauge superfield 
yA in Wess-Zumino gauge by the transformation (27.1.12). 
2. Show that the most general chiral spinor superfield Wa satisfYing the 
condition (27.2.20) has components f llv satisfying the homogeneous 
Maxwell equations EllvpaoPff.lv = 0. What conditions on the other 
components of Wa are imposed by Eq. (27.2.20)? 
3. Consider a general renormalizable N = 1 supersymmetric gauge 
theory with an SU(2) gauge group and a single chiral superfield 
belonging to the 3-vector representation of S U(2). What is the most 
general superpotential for this theory? Construct the Lagrangian 
density of the whole theory explicitly. Eliminate the auxiliary fields. 
Show that supersymmetry is not broken in this theory. What are the 
masses of the particles of this theory? 
4. Express the gaugino and chiral fermion fields in the supersymmetric 
version of quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5 in 
terms of the goldstino field and other spinor fields of definite mass. 
5. Consider the renonnalizable N = 2 supersymmetric theory with an 
SU(3) gauge symmetry and no hypermultiplets. What are the values 
of the scalar fields for which the potential vanishes? What are the 
massless gauge fields for non-zero values of these scalars? Calculate 

176 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
the central charge in terms of the quantities to which these massless 
gauge fields are coupled. 
References 
1. Supersymmetry was applied first to Abelian gauge theories without 
using the superfield formalism by J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. 
B78, 1 (1974). It was then extended to non-Abelian gauge theories 
by S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B79, 413 (1974); A. Salam 
and J. Strathdee, Phys. Lett. SIB, 353 (1974). These references are 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North HollandjWorld 
Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). 
2. 
P. Fayet and J. Iliopoulos, Phys. Lett. SIB, 461 (1974). This reference 
is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
3. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3702 (1998). 
4. S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, and F. Palumbo, Phys. Rev. D20, 403 
(1979). This article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. Special 
cases of this sum rule had bt::en given by P. Fayet, Phys. Lett. 84B, 
416 (1979). 
5. M. T. Grisaru, W. Siegel, and M. Rocek, Nucl. Phys. BIS9, 429 
(1979). 
6. 
N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993). 
7. This was first proved in the supergraph formalism by W. Fischler, 
H. P. Nilles, J. Polchinski, S. Raby, and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
47, 757 (1981). The proof presented here was given by M. Dine, in 
Fields, Strings. and Duality: TASI 96, C. Efthimiou and B. Greene, 
eds. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997); S. Weinberg, Ref. 3. 
8. A detailed proof of the statement that superrenonnalizable terms 
that violate some global symmetry do not introduce infinite sym-
metry breaking radiative corrections to the coefficients of renormal-
izable interactions is given by K. Symanzik, in Cargese Lectures 
in Physics, Vol. 5, D. Bessis, ed. (Gordon and Breach, New York, 
1972). This is discussed briefly in the footnote on p. 507 of Volume 
I. 
9. L. Girardello and M. T. Grisaru, Nucl. Phys. Bl94, 65 (1982), 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1; K. Harada and N. Sakai, Prob. 
Theor. Phys. 67, 67 (1982). 
10. For a review, see S. Weinberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 1-23 (1989). 

References 
177 
11. 
B. de Wit and D. Z. Freedman, Phys. Rev. Dl2, 2286 (1975). This 
article is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
12. The first examples of gauge theories with N = 2 extended super-
symmetry were given by P. Fayet, Nucl. Phys. Bll3, 135 (1976); 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. The approach presented here is 
similar to that of Fayet. A superfield formalism was subsequently 
given by R. Grimm, M. Sohni us, and J. Scherk, Nucl. Ph ys. Bl13, 
77 (1977). Gauge theories with N = 2 and N = 4 supersymmetry in 
four spacetime dimensions were constructed by dimensional reduc-
tion of higher-dimensional theories with simple supersymmetry by 
L. Brink, J. H. Schwarz, and J. Scherk, Nucl. Phys. B113, 77 (1977); 
M. F. Sohnius, K. S. Stelle, and P. C. West, Nucl. Phys. Bll3, 127 
(1980). For other approaches, see M. F. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B138, 
109 (1979); A. Halperin, E. A. Ivanov, and V. I. Ogievetsky, Prima 
JETP 33, 176 (1981); P. Breitenlohner and M. F. Sohnius, Nucl. 
Phys. B178, 151 (1981); P. Howe, K. S. Stelle, and P. K. Townsend, 
Nucl. Phys. B214. 519 (1983). 
13. E. Witten and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. 78B, 97 (1978). Also see H. 
Osborn, Phys. Lett. 83B, 321 (1979). 
14. E. B. Bogomol'nyi, Sov: J. Nucl. Phys. 24, 449 (1976). 
15. D. Zwanziger, Phys. Rev. 176, 1480, 1489 (1968); J. Schwinger, Phys. 
Rev. 144, 1087 (1966); 173, 1536 (1968); B. Julia and A. Zee, Phys. 
Rev. Dll, 2227 (1974); F. A Bais and J. R. Primack, Phys. Rev. 
D13, 819 (1975). (The last article was incorrectly attributed to Julia 
and Zee in Chapter 23 of the first printings of Volume II.) 
16. M. K. Prasad and C. M. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35. 760 
(1975); E. B. Bogomol'ny~ Ref. 14; S. Coleman, S. Parke, A. Neveu, 
and C. M. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. DIS, 544 (1977). 
17. This was noted by C. Montonen and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. 72B, 
117 (1977). The absence of one~loop corrections to the masses was 
shown by A. D'Adda, R. Horsley, and P. Di Vecchia, Phys. Lett. 
76B, 298 (1978). 
18. Obstacles to formulating theories with auxiliary fields for N = 4 
supersymmetry have been analyzed by W. Siegel and M. Roeek, 
Phys. Lett. 105B, 275 (1981). 
19. The finiteness of theN= 4 theory was shown by M. F. Sohnius and 
P. C. West, Nucl. Phys. BlOO, 245 (1981); S. Mandelstam, Nucl. Phys. 
B213,, 149 (1983); L. Brink, 0. Lindgren, and B. E. W. Nilsson,Nucl. 
Phys. B212, 401 (1983); Phys. Lett. 123B, 328 (1983). The proof of 
finiteness was extended to non-perturbative effects by N. Seiberg, 

178 
27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories 
Phys. Lett. B206, 75 (1988). Also see S. Kovacs, hep-th/9902047, to 
be published 
20. H. Osborn, Ref. 13. 
21. A. Sen, Phys. Lett. B329, 217 (1994); C. Vafa and E. Witten, Nucl. 
Phys. B 431, 3 (1994); L. Girardello, A. Giveon, M. Porrati, and A 
Zaffaroni, Phys. Lett. B334, 331 (1994). 

28 
Supersymmetric Versions 
ofthe Standard Model 
Physical phenomena at energies accessible in today's accelerator labora-
tories are accurately described by the standard model, the renormalizable 
theory of quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons, governed by the gauge group 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1), described in Sections 18.7 and 21.3. The standard 
model is today usually1 understood as a low-energy approximation to 
some as-yet-unknown fundamental theory in which gravitation appears 
unified with the strong and electroweak forces at an energy somewhere 
in the range of 1016 to 1018 GeV. This raises the hierarchy problem: what 
accounts for the enormous ratio of this fundamental energy scale and the 
energy scale :;::;:) 300 Ge V that characterizes the standard model? 
The strongest theoretical motivation for supersymmetry is that it offers 
a hope of solving the hierarchy problem. Quarks, leptons, and gauge 
bosons are required by the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge symmetry to 
appear with zero masses in the Lagrangian of the standard model, so that 
the physical masses of these particles are proportional to the electroweak 
breaking scale, which in turn is proportional to the mass of the scalar 
fields responsible for the electroweak symmetry breakdown. The crux of 
the hierarchy problem1a is that the scalar fields, unlike the fermion and 
gauge boson fields, are not protected from acquiring large bare masses 
by any symmetry of the standard modd, so it is difficult to see why their 
masses, and hence all other masses, ar1e not in the neighborhood of 1016 
to 1018 GeV. 
It has been hoped that this problem could be solved by embedding the 
standard model in a supersymmetric theory. If the scalar fields appear 
in supermultiplets along with fermions in a chiral representation of some 
gauge group, then supersymmetry would require vanishing bare masses 
for the scalars as well as the fermions. All the masses of the standard 
model would then be tied to the energy scale at which supersymmetry 
is broken. The hope of a solution of the hierarchy problem along these 
lines has been the single strongest motivation for trying to incorporate 
supersymmetry in a realistic theory. 
179 

180 
28 Sup~~rsymmetric Standard Models 
Unfortunately, none of the new particles required by supersymmetric 
theories have been detected, and no entirely satisfactory supersymmetric 
version of the standard model has emerged so far. This chapter will 
describe the attempts that have been made in this direction. 
28.1 
Superfields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
In this section we shall attempt to decide at least tentatively what ingre-
dients should appear in a supersymmetric version of the standard model. 
None of the quark and lepton fields of the standard model belong to the 
adjoint representation of the S U(3) x S U(2) x U(1) gauge group, so they 
cannot be the superpartners of known gauge bosons and must therefore 
be included in chiral scalar superfields. We will define U;, D;, [h, [)j, N;, 
Ei, and .Ei as the left-chiral superfields whose 1/JL components are the left-
handed fields of the quarks of charge 2e j3 and -e j3, of the antiquarks 
of charge -2ej3 and +e/3, of the leptons of charge 0 and -e, and of the 
antileptons of charge +e, respectively, with i a generation label running 
over values 1, 2, and 3. (For instance, the spinor components of Ut. U2, 
and U3 are the left-handed fields of the u, c, and t quarks, respectively.) 
Of these superfields, U; and D; form SU(2) doublets, N; and E; also form 
SU(2) doublets, and the others are SU(2) singlets. The quark superfields 
form SU(3) triplets and the antiquark superfields form SU(3) antitriplets, 
with color indices suppressed, and the leptons and antilepton superfields 
are SU(3) singlets. As mentioned earlier, the particles described by the 
scalar components of these superfields are known as squarks, antisquarks, 
sleptons, and antisleptons. There are also the gauginos, the spin 1/2 
superpartners of the gauge bosons of SU(3), SU(2), and U(1), respectively 
known as the gluino, wino, and bino. * 
We must also add some mechanism that produces a spontaneous break-
down of SU(2) x U(1) and gives mass to all the quarks and leptons as well 
as to the w± and Z0. The simplest possibility is to suppose the existence 
• As discussed in Section 28.3, the energy scale that characterizes supersymmetry break-
ing is expected to be considerably higher than the ~ 300 Ge V that characterizes 
the breaking of SU(2) x U(l), so there is a substantial range of energies in which 
supersymmetry but not SU(2) x U(l) may be considered to be broken. In this range, 
the gauginos have masses that are governed by SU(2) x U(l) symmetry, so the neutral 
electroweak gauginos of definite mass are superpartners of the SU(2) triplet W0 and 
the SU(2) singlet B, known as the neutral wino and the bino, rather than superpartners 
of the zo and the photon. When SU(2) x U(l) breaking is taken into account there 
is a small mixing of the neutral wino and bino. 

28.1 Superjields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
181 
of just two more SU(2) doublets of left-chiral superfields: 
(28.1.1) 
which appear in the Lagrangian density in linear combinations of the 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant §"-terms: 
[ (D;H?- UiH!)Dj]_~, 
[ ( E;H?- NiH! )E:jt., 
(28.1.2) 
and 
(28.1.3) 
with obvious contractions of color indices. According to Eq. (26.4.24 ), a 
non-vanishing expectation value of the scalar component of H? gives mass 
to the charged leptons and charge -ej3 quarks, while a non-vanishing 
expectation value of the scalar component of H~ gives mass to the charge 
+2ej3 quarks. These expectation values of course also give mass to the 
w± and Z 0 vector bosons and, since the H1 and Hz are SU(2) doublets, 
we automatically get the same successful results for these masses as found 
in Section 21.3. Note that supersymmetry does not allow the complex 
conjugates of the Ht and H2 left-chiral superfields to appear in the 
superpotential, so a vacuum expectation value of the scalar component 
of H? cannot give masses to the charge +2ej3 quarks, and a vacuum 
expectation value of the scalar component of H~ cannot give mass to the 
charge -e/3 quarks or the charged leptons, which is why both H1 and Hz 
are needed to give masses to all the quarks and leptons. 
Of course, there might be more than one of the H1 and/or Hz dou-
blets. Their numbers are partly constrained by the condition of anomaly 
cancellation. We saw in Section 22.4 that the gauge symmetries of the 
non-supersymmetric standard model are anomaly-free, as they must be 
for quantum mechanical consistency, but now there are additional spinor 
fields in the Lagrangian. The gaugino fields don't create any problems, 
because their left-handed components belong to the adjoint representation 
of the gauge group, which is real for all gauge groups. The only problem 
can arise from the higgsinos -
the spin 1/2 components of the superfields 
(H?, H!) and (Hi, Hg). The spinor components of each (H?, Hl) dou-
blet of superfields produces an SU(2)-SU(2)-U(1) anomaly proportional 
to 2: t5y = ( !g)2( !g')+(- !g)z( tg') = !g2g', while the spinor components 
of each (Hi, H~) doublet of superfields produces an SU(2)-SU(2)-U(1) 
anomaly proportional to l:tjy = (tg)z(-tg')+(-~g)2 (-tg') = -tgzg'. 
The cancellation of anomalies thus requires an equal number of (H?, Hl) 
and (Hi, Hg) doublets. In this case, all anomalies cancel, including the 
U(1)3 and U(1)-graviton-graviton anomalies. The next section will give 
an argument that there is in fact just one of each type of doublet. 

182 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
In a theory constructed along these lines, we have to give up one of the 
attractive features of the non-supersymmetric standard model, that is, that 
it automatically excludes any renormalizable interactions that violate the 
conservation of baryon or lepton number. There are several renonnalizable 
supersymmetric SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant F-tenns that could be 
included in the Lagrangian density that would violate baryon and/or 
lepton number conservation without violating the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) 
gauge symmetries: 
[(D·N ·- U·E -)IJk] 
I 
J 
I 
J 
§"' 
(28.1.4) 
and also 
(28.1.5) 
with the three suppressed color indices in Eq. (28.1.5) understood to be 
contracted with an antisymmetric t:-symbol to give a color singlet. With 
all of these interactions present, there would be no clever way to assign 
baryon and lepton numbers to the squarks and sleptons that would avoid 
an unsuppressed violation of baryon and lepton number conservation. For 
instance, the exchange of the scalar boson of the iJ superfield between 
vertices for interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5) would lead to the process 
uLdRuR ---i> eR, observed for instance as p ---i> n° + e+, at a catastrophic rate 
that is only suppressed by factors of coupling constants. To avoid this, 
it is necessary to make an independent assumption that would rule out 
some or all of the interactions (28.1.4)-(28.1.5). 
Note that it is not necessary to rule out all of the interactions (28.1.4) 
and (28.1.5). For instance, suppose that we assume only that baryon 
number is conserved, with conventional baryon number assignments: the 
Ui and Di left-chiral superfields are assigned baryon number +1/3; the 
[Ji and fji are assigned baryon number -1/3; and the Li, Ei, H 1, and 
H2 all are assigned baryon number 0. This would allow the interactions 
(28.1.4) while forbidding the interactions (28.1.5). Despite appearances, 
the interactions (28.1.4) alone do not violate the conservation of lepton 
number, provided the scalar components of the superfields are assigned 
appropriate lepton numbers. This can be done by assigning lepton number 
0 to the Ni and Ei superfields, lepton number -1 to the Ui, Di, [h and 
jji superfields, lepton number -2 to the Ei superfields, lepton number 0 
to the H1 and H2 superfields, and lepton numbers -1 and +1 to fh and 
(}R, respectively. (Recall that such symmetries, under which (} transforms 
non-trivially, are known as R-symmetries.) Then all quarks and leptons 
have conventional lepton numbers: the fermion components ViL and eiL, 
which are the coefficients of (}L in Ni and Eh have the lepton numbers 
0 + 1 = + 1; the fermion components eiR of the Ei superfields have lepton 

28.1 Superjields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
183 
numbers -2+ 1 = -1, and the quarks and antiquarks have lepton numbers 
-1 + 1 = 0. The higgsinos (the fermion components of Ht and H2) have 
lepton numbers 0 + 1 = + 1. On the other hand, the scalar components of 
the superfields have the same lepton numbers as the superfields themselves, 
which are unconventional. Further, the §"-term of a left-chiral superfield is 
the coefficient of Oi, so the interactions in Eq. (28.1.4) have lepton numbers 
-1 +0-1 +2 = 0 and 0+0-2 +2 = 0; the H 1 interactions (28.1.2) have 
lepton number -1 + 0- 1 + 2 = 0 and 0 + 0-2 + 2 = 0, respectively; 
and the H2 interaction (28.1.3) has lepton number -1 + 0- 1 + 2 = 0; 
so none of these interactions violate the conservation of lepton number. 
Also, the scalar components of H1 and H2 have lepton number 0, so 
their vacuum expectation values also do not violate the conservation of 
lepton number. With this assignment of lepton numbers, lepton number 
conservation rules out any renormalizable interactions that would violate 
baryon number conservation: the interaction (28.1.5) has lepton number 
-1- 1 -1 + 2 = -1, and so is forbidden. 
The interactions (28.1.4) would allow an alternative mechanism for 
breaking SU(2) x U(1) and giving mass to the charged leptons and charge 
-ej3 quarks: the scalar components of the neutrino superfields N; might 
have non-vanishing vacuu~ expectation values. (With the lepton number 
assignments of the previous paragraph this expectation value would not 
violate lepton number conservation, because these scalar components have 
the lepton number of the Ni superfields, which is zero.) But we cannot 
rely on this mechanism to let us do without the H 1 superfields altogether, 
because we still need the H2 interactions (28.1.3) to give mass to the charge 
+2ej3 quarks and, as we have seen, the cancellation of anomalies requires 
equal numbers of Ht and H2 superfields. 
It is usually assumed instead that some symmetries forbid both interac-
tions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5). Obviously, these symmetries could be baryon 
and lepton number conservation, with conventional assignments of these 
numbers: Ui. D1 having baryon number B = 1/3 and lepton number 
L = 0, [Ji and D; having baryon number B = -1/3 and lepton number 
0, N; and Ei having lepton number L = + 1 and baryon number 0, E; 
having lepton number -1 and baryon number 0, and Hp, Hi and H:J", H~ 
and (JL and (JR all having baryon and lepton numbers 0. The same results 
apply if we only assume the conservation of certain linear combinations of 
baryon and lepton number, such as the anomaly-free combination B- L 
discussed in Section 22.4. 
There are widespread doubts about whether it is possible to have exact 
continuous global symmetries, because in string theory the existence of 
any exact continuous symmetry would imply the existence of a massless 
spin 1 particle coupled to the symmetry current, so that the symmetry 
would have to be local, not global.1b But the interactions (28.1.4) and 

184 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
(28.1.5) may also be banned by assuming a discrete global symmetry, 
known as the conservation of R parity.2 The R parity is defined to be + 1 
for quarks, leptons, gauge bosons, and Higgs scalars, and -1 for their 
superpartners. This R parity is equal to 
ITR = (-1)F (-1)3(B-L)' 
(28.1.6) 
where ( -1 )F is the fermion parity, which is + 1 for all bosons and -1 
for all fermions. Fermion parity is the same sign as is produced by a 
2n rotation, and is therefore always conserved, so if B- L is conserved 
then so is R parity.** 
It is possible that R parity may be conserved 
even if B- L is not, but in fact the interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5) are 
forbidden by R parity conservation, so as far as renormalizable interactions 
are concerned R parity conservation implies the conservation of both 
baryon and lepton number. This is not true of the non-renormalizable 
supersymmetric interactions that are presumably produced by physical 
processes at very high energies. The baryon- and lepton-non-conserving 
processes produced by such interactions are discussed in Section 28.7. 
All of the new 'sparticles' (squarks, sleptons, gauginos, and higgsinos) 
that are required by supersymmetry theories have negative R parity, so 
if R parity is exact and unbroken then the lightest of the new particles 
required by supersymmetry must be absolutely stable. All of the other new 
particles will then undergo a chain of decays, ultimately yielding ordinary 
particles and the lightest new particle. Much of the phenomenology of 
various supersymmetry models is governed by the choice of which of the 
new particles is the lightest. 
With supersymmetry and either R parity or B - L conserved, the most 
general renormalizable Lagrangian for the superfields discussed above 
consists of the usual gauge-invariant kinematic part for the chiral super-
fields, given by a sum of terms of the form (<D. exp(-V)<l> )D for each of the 
quark, lepton, and Higgs chiral superfields, plus the usual gauge-invariant 
kinematic term for the gauge superfi.elds, given by a sum of terms of the 
form t:ap(Wa Wp)§ for each of the SU(3), SU(2), and U(1) field strength 
superfields, plus the supersytpmetric Yukawa couplings, given by a lin-
ear combination of the interactions (28.1.2), (28.1.3), and a new ~-term 
•• The value of (-1)3(B-L) is -1 for quark and lepton super:fields and +1 for all other 
superfields, so the conservation of R parity is equivalent to invariance under a 
transformation in which all quark and lepton superfields change sign with no change 
in other superfields. This invariance principle was introduced in Reference 3 in order 
to rule out the interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5). 

28.1 Superjields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
185 
coupling Ht and H2: 
(28.1.7) 
As we will see in Section 28.3, more terms will have to be added to the 
Lagrangian in order to account for supersymmetry breaking. 
The coefficient Jl. in Eq. (28.1.7) has the dimensions of mass, and is 
the only dimensional parameter that enters in the supersymmetric version 
of the standard model Lagrangian. It is somewhat disappointing to find 
that this term is still allowed, because it revives the hierarchy problem: 
why is Jl. not of order 1016 to 1018 GeV? The JJ.-term in Eq. (28.1.7) 
can be avoided if we assume that lepton number is conserved, with the 
unconventional lepton number assignments discussed above that would 
allow the interactions (28.1.4) but not the interactions (28.1.5). In this 
case, the JJ.-term carries lepton number +2 and is therefore also forbid-
den. This term can also be forbidden if we assume a U ( 1) 'Peccei-Quinn 
symmetry,'4 for which the superfields Ht and Hz carry equal quantum 
numbers, say + 1, while fh and (JR are neutral. The interactions (28.1.2) 
and (28.1.3) which give mass to the quarks and leptons are then allowed if, 
for instance, we give Peccei-Quinn quantum numbers -1 to the left-chiral 
superfields of antisquarks and antisleptons while the left-chiral superfields 
of squarks and sleptons are taken to be neutral. This choice then also 
forbids the dangerous interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5). Unfortunately, as 
we will see in Section 28.4, the JJ.-term in Eq. (28.1.7) seems to be needed 
for phenomenological reasons. The theories of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking discussed in Section 31.7 provide a natural mechanism 
for producing a wterm of an acceptable magnitude. 
We can obtain a crude upper bound on the masses of the new parti-
cles by assuming that supersymmetry does solve the hierarchy problem 
discussed at the beginning of this chapter. In accord with the theorem 
of Section 27.6, if supersymmetry were unbroken the contribution to the 
mass of the scalar component of Ht or H2 from one-loop diagrams with 
an intermediate quark, lepton, W or Z loop would be cancelled by the 
corresponding one-loop diagram with an intermediate squark, slepton, 
wino, or bino. Therefore with supersymmetry broken the contribution 
bmJt of such diagrams to the squared masses of the H 1 and Hz scalars is 
a sum of terms of order (~; /8n2)am;, where ~s is the Yukawa or gauge 
coupling of the Higgs scalar to supermultiplet s, and am; is the mass-
squared splitting within the supermultiplet To avoid having to fine-tune 

186 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
these corrections, we need Jmi not much larger than the coefficient of 
order (300 GeV)2 of the term in the standard model Lagrangian density 
that gives the observed S U(2) x U(1) breaking in the tree approximation, 
so we will assume that Jm1I < (1 TeV)2. For instance, the top quark and 
squark have couplings to Hz of order unity, so we expect that the splittings 
ll.m2 should be less than about 8n2 TeV2, and hence the masses of the top 
squarks should be less than about 10 Te V. We will see in Section 28.4 that 
the rates of flavor-changing processes can be brought within experimental 
upper bounds by taking the masses of the squarks to be nearly equal, in 
which case this can be taken as a rough upper limit on the masses of all 
the squarks. (However it is possible that the rates of these processes may 
be suppressed instead by very large masses of the first two generations of 
squarks, while the mass of the top squark is below the 10 TeV naturalness 
bound.4a) The limits set by this sort of argument on the masses of other 
particles with R = -1 are somewhat weaker, but at least in the popular 
class of models discussed in Section 28.6, none of the masses of these 
particles are expected to be much greater than the squark masses, so 10 
Te V can be taken as an upper bound on all of them. On the other hand, 
the fact that none of these particles have been observed only indicates 
that their masses are probably greater than about 100 GeV, so there is an 
ample mass range in which they may yet be found. 
* * * 
If R parity conservation or some other conservation law makes the 
lightest of the new particles predicted by supersymmetry stable, then some 
of these particles may be left from the early universe. The number density 
of these relics can be estimated using techniques that were originally 
applied to the cosmic density of massive neutrinos.4b To give one example 
of this sort of calculation, we shall show that for a broad range of plausible 
masses, the new stable particle of supersymmetry theories cannot be a 
charged and uncolored particle, like a charged slepton, wino, or higgsino.4c 
Once the cosmic temperature T (in energy units, with the Boltzmann 
constant set equal to unity) drops below the mass m of any stable charged 
untrapped particle, their number nR3 in a volume R3 that expands with 
the universe is decreased by annihilation at a rate per particle equal to 
va-n, where va- is the mean value of the product of the relative velocity 
and the annihilation cross-section. That is, 
d(nR3) 
-
2R3 
dt 
=-va-n 
, 
so that 
--= -
+ 
-dt 
1 
( 1 ) 1t VG" 
nR3 
nR3 o 
to R3 
' 
(28.1.8) 

28.1 Superfields, Anomalies, and Conservation Laws 
187 
where 0 labels the epoch at which T ~ m The annihilation process 
is exothermic, so va approaches a constant for v < 1. 
Also, in a 
radiation-dominated phase of the cosmic expansion R oc t112, so the 
integral converges, and gives 
(n~3 ) r~oo = (n~3 ) 0 + V<T 1
0
00 
RJ (t~:0)3/2 
= (-1-) + 2ooto 
nR3 o 
RJ · 
(28.1.9) 
The density nB of baryon number (baryons minus antibaryons) goes as 
R-3, so this can be rewritten as a formula for the present ratio of new 
particles to baryons: 
(n/nB)oo = [(nB/n)o + 2 va nBo to] -I . 
(28.1.10) 
We expect that the ratio (n/nB)o at the time that T drops to a value ~ m 
is roughly of order unity, and since in any realistic theory the present ratio 
(n/nB)oo must be much less than unity, we can neglect the first term in the 
denominator on the right-hand side of Eq. (28.1.10), and write instead 
1 
(n/nB)oo ~ =---
va nBo to 
(28.1.11) 
The precise value of V<T depends on the particle spin and its interactions; 
keeping track only of factors of 2n, the particle mass m, and the electric 
charge, we can estimate it generally to be of order 
e4 .k' 
.k' 
-
10-3 
V<T~-- ~ 
-
2nm2 
m2 ' 
(28.1.12) 
where .k' is the number of charged particle spin states with mass less than 
m,. into which this particle may annihilate. Also, the age of the universe 
at a temperature To~ m is to~ m4jmpL, where mpL ~ 1018 GeV, and the 
density of baryon number is about w-9 times the photon number density, 
which is of order T 3, so that nBo ~ 10-9m3• Putting this together, we find 
the present ratio of the new charged particles to baryons: 
. ( I ) 
1012 
m 
10-6 m(GeV) 
n nB oo ~ 
--- ~ 
. 
mpL.k' 
.k' 
(28.1.13) 
These new charged particles would experience the same condensations into 
galaxies, stars, and planets as ordinary baryons, so this would be the ratio 
observed today on earth. But experiments4d that apply mass spectroscopy 
to samples of water that have been strongly enriched in heavy water-like 
molecules by electrolysis have set limits of about 10-21n8 on the number 
density of new charged particles with 6 Ge V < m < 330 Ge V in terrestrial 
matter. Thus, even if .k' is as large as 1000, these measurements decisively 
rule out the existence of any new charged untrapped particles in this 

188 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
mass range in the numbers that would have been left over from the early 
universe. 
On the other hand, neutral untrapped particles would be left in inter-
galactic space. Such particles might well provide the 'missing mass,' that 
seems to be necessary to account for the gravitational field that governs 
the motion of galaxies in clusters of galaxies. One of these possible neutral 
particles is the gravitino, whose cosmological abundance is discussed in 
Section 28.3. Ellis et al.4c have extended cosmological considerations to 
all the new particles required by supersymmetry. 
28.2 
Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification 
We shall have to defer a detailed assessment of supersymmetric models 
of particle physics until we are ready to consider how supersymmetry is 
broken. In this section we will consider the quantitative application of 
supersymmetry in one context in which the mechanism for the breakdown 
of supersymmetry is relatively unimportant, and in which supersymmetry 
has scored what so far is its greatest empirical success. 
If the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge group of the strong and electroweak 
interactions is embedded in a simple group G that has the known quarks 
and leptons (plus perhaps someS U(3) x S U(2) x U(1)-neutral fermions) as 
a representation, then, as described in Section 21.5, at energies at or above 
the scale Mx at which G is spontaneously broken, the SU(3) xSU(2) x U(1) 
coupling constants will be related by 
5 ,2 
g; = g2 = 
; 
at energies > Mx. 
(28.2.1) 
At energies far below Mx, these couplings are seriously affected by renor-
malization corrections. If measured at a scale Jl < Mx, the couplings 
will have values g;(Jl.), g2(Jl.), g'\Jl.), governed by one-loop renormalization 
group equations 
ll :Jl g' (Jl) = Pt ( g' (Jl)) • 
Jl :Jl g(ll) = Pz ( g(ll)) , 
Jl :Jl gs(Jl) = P3 ( gs(Jl)) , 
' 
(28.2.2) 
with initial conditions at Mx satisfying Eq. (28.2.1). In the original use5 
of these renormalization group equations, discussed in Section 21.5, the 
beta functions were calculated in one-loop order to be 
5n g13 
P -
g 
1 -
36n2 ' 
(28.2.3) 
Pz = L (-.!..!:. + ng) 
4n2 
6 
3 
' 
(28.2.4) 

28.2 Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification 
189 
(28.2.5) 
where ng is the number of generations of quarks and leptons and the 
relatively small contributions of scalar fields are here neglected. Since Mx 
will turn out to be many orders of magnitude larger than the energies 
accessible with today's accelerators, it seems reasonable to suppose that 
supersymmetry is unbroken over most of the range: below Mx, in which 
case all of the new fields discussed in the previous section need to be 
included in calculations of the beta functions in Eq. (28.2.1). These 
new fields introduce three major changes in the calculations of the beta 
functions: 
1. For every gauge boson, there is a Majorana gaugino with the same 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) quantum numbers. Eq. (17.5.41) shows that the 
ratio of the contribution to the beta function for any gauge coupling of 
a Dirac fermion that furnishes a contribution of the gauge group with 
generators tA to the contribution of the corresponding gauge boson is 
-4Czj11C1, where according to Eqs. (17.5.33) and (17.5.34) the ratio of 
Ct and C2 is given by: 
L CcABCDBA = -(Ct/C2)Tr(tctv). 
(28.2.6) 
AB 
For the adjoint representation, (tc)AB = i CABC, so Ct = c2, and so a 
Dirac fermion in the adjoint representation makes a contribution that is 
-4/11 that of the gauge bosons. But the gauginos are Majorana fennions, 
so their contribution is -2/11 that of the gauge boson. Thus the term 
11/6 and 11/4 in Eqs. (28.2.4) and (28.2.5) are reduced by a factor 9/11 
to 9/6 and 9/4, respectively. 
2. For every left-handed quark, lepton, antiquark, or antilepton field, there 
is a complex scalar field with the same SU(3) x S U(2) x U(1) quantum 
numbers. Following the same method as in Section 17.5, it is not hard 
to calculate that the contribution of a complex scalar field belonging to a 
representation of a gauge group with generators tA to the beta function 
for the gauge coupling gi is 
g[C2i 
[.Bi(gi)]scalar = 48
1t2 , 
(28.2.7) 
where Tr(tAtB) = g[C2ibAB· This is 1/4 the contribution of a Dirac spinor 
Jlield in the same representation, given by Eq. (18.7.2), and hence 1/2 
1the contribution of each left-handed spinor field (including the complex 
conjugates of the right-handed components of the Dirac fields). Thus the 
coefficients of ng in Eqs. (28.2.3H28.2.5) should be increased by a factor 
3/2. 

190 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
3. The decrease by a factor 9 I 11 of the negative gauge boson terms in the 
beta function and the increase by a factor 3/2 of the positive squark and 
slepton tenns both lead to a general decrease in the rate at which the three 
gauge coupling constants diverge below Mx from the ratios (28.2.1). This 
will increase our estimate of Mx, but, as we shall see, in itself it would have 
no affect on the prediction of the electroweak: mixing parameter sin2 8. But 
these changes do enhance the relative contribution of the Higgs scalars, 
which was neglected in Eqs. (28.2.3)-(28.2.5), and which is now also 
accompanied with the larger contribution of the accompanying higgsinos. 
With ns of the superfields (Hf, H!) or (H:J, H~) discussed in the previous 
section, the constant C2i in Eq. (28.2.7) is [(1/2)2 + (-1/2)2Jns = n8j2 for 
SU(2), and is 2n8(+1/2? = n5j2 for U(1). According to Eq. (28.2.7), the 
scalar components of these superfields make a contribution to p 1 equal 
to n5g'3 j96n2 and a contribution to P2 also equal to n8g3 j96n2. As we 
have seen, the Majorana higgsinos contribute twice as much to the beta 
functions as complex scalars with the same quantum numbers, so the 
superfields (H?, H!) or (Hi, H~) make a total contribution to Pt and 
Pz that is 3/2 the contribution of the Higgs scalars, and hence equal to 
nsg'3 j32n2 and n8g3 j32n2, respectively. 
Making all these changes in the beta functions, we now have 
g'
3 (5ng 
ns) 
Pt = 4n2 6 + 8 ' 
(28.2.8) 
_ g
3 
( 
9 
ng 
ns) 
p2 -
4n2 -6 + 2 + 8 ' 
(28.2.9) 
_ gi ( 9 
ng) 
p3 -
4n2 -4 + 2 
· 
(28.2.10) 
The solutions of the renormalization group equations (28.2.2) are then 
_1_ = 
1 
+ _1_ (5ng + ns) In (Mx) 
2 
2 
) 
2 2 
6 
' 
(28.2.11) 
g' (Jt) 
g' (Mx 
n 
8 
Jl 
g2~Jl) = g2(~x) + 2~2 ( -~ + i + ~) In ( ~x) , (28.2.12) 
_1 = 
1 ,+ ~1 (-~ + ng) In (Mx) 
2( ) 
2 
) 
2 2 
. 
(28.2.13) 
gs Jl 
gs(Mx 
1t 
4 
2 
Jl 
It is convenient to take Jl = mz, so that SU(2) x U(1) can be regarded 
as unbroken over almost all of the range of energies in which we use 
the formulas (28.2.11)-(28.2.13). Using Eq. (28.2.1), the difference between 
Eqs. (28.2.12) and (28.2.13) gives 
1 
_ 
1 
=~1 (~+ns) In(Mx) 
g2(mz) 
gHmz) 
2n2 
4 
8 
mz 
' 
(28.2.14) 

28.2 Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification 
191 
Table 28.1. 
Values of the electroweak mixing parameter sin2 8 and unification 
mass Mx given by Eqs. (28.2.17) and (28.2.18), as functions of the number ns of 
left-chiral superfield doublets (H?, HI) or (Hi, H~). 
0 
2 
4 
0.203 
0.231 
0.253 
Mx (GeV). 
8.7 X 1017 
2.2 X 1016 
1.1 X 1015 
while the difference between Eq. (28.2.12) and 3/5 of Eq. (28.2.11) gives 
(28.2.15) 
Eq. (21.3.19) allows us to express the electroweak couplings in terms of 
the electro weak mixing angle (J and the positron charge e: 
g(mz) = -e(mz)/sin(J, 
g'(mz) = -e(mz)Jcos(J. 
(28.2.16) 
We can then solve for the unknowns ln(Mx Jmz) and sin2 (J in terms of 
input parameters e(mz) and gs(mz): 
. 2 (J _ 18 + 3ns + (e2(mz )/g;(mz ))(60- 2ns) 
Stn 
-
108 + 6ns 
, 
(28.2.17) 
ln (Mx) = ( 
8n
2 
) (1- (8e
2(mz)J3g;(mz))) 
mz 
e2(mz) 
18 + ns 
(28.2.18) 
For ns = 0 Eq. (28.2.17) gives the same result (21.5.15) for sin2 (J as was 
originally calculated (ignoring the small contribution of Higgs scalars) 
in non-supersymmetric theories, but the value (28.2.18) of ln(Mx/mz) is 
larger than the original result (21.5.16) by a factor 11/9, which as we have 
seen arises from gaugino contributions to the beta functions. 
Using the same input parameters i?(mz )j4n = (128)-1, g;(mz )/4n = 
0.118, mz = 91.19 GeV as in Section 21.5 now gives the numerical results 
shown in Table 28.1. As discussed in the previous section, the necessity of 
cancelling anomalies in the electroweak currents requires equal numbers 
of (HP, H}) and (H:J, H~) doublets, so we consider only even values of 
the number ns of these superfields. 
Remarkably, the value ns = 2 for the simplest plausible theory yields a 
value6 sin2 (J = 0.231 which is in perfect agreement with the experimentally 

192 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
observed value, sin2 8 = 0.23. The value of Mx is 20 times greater7 
than calculated in this way in non-supersymmetric theories, leading to a 
decrease by a factor 20-4 in the rate for proton decay processes like p __.. 
n° + e+, thus removing a conflict with the experimental non-observation of 
such processes. (Proton decay is discussed in more detail in Section 28.7.) 
This increase in the value of Mx brings it closer to the energy scale :::::::; 1018 
GeV at which gravitation has the same strength as other interactions. It 
may be that this remaining gap may be filled by a change in gravitational 
interactions at very high energies.7a 
A value ns = 4 would give a value for sin2 8 in serious disagreement 
with experiment, and a value of Mx low enough to revive the conflict 
with expectations for proton decay. This makes a strong case for having 
just one of each superfield (H?, Hl) and (Hi, H~). 
Unlike the calculated values of sin2 8 and Mx, the calculated value of 
the common gauge coupling (28.2.1) at Mx does depend on the number 
of generations as well as the number of scalar doublets. With ng = 3 and 
ns = 2 and our previous input parameters, Eq. (28.2.13) gives 
g1(Mx) 
gt(Mx) 
1 
4n 
4n 
(28.2.19) 
28.3 
Where is Supersymmetry Broken? 
Supersymmetry if valid at all is certainly not apparent in the menu of 
known particles, so any consideration of the implications of supersym-
metry at ordinary energies requires us to make some assumption about 
the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking. It would be simplest to sup-
pose that supersymmetry is broken like SU(2) x U(1), by effects occurring 
in the tree approximation of the supersymmetric standard model. This 
possibility may be definitely ruled out. 
One argument against a tree-approximation breakdown of supersym-
metry is based on the mass sum rule (27.5.11), which holds separately 
for each value of the unbroken conserved quantities color and electric 
charge. In the color-triplet sector with electric charge -e/3 the only 
known fermions are the d, s, and b quarks, for which 
~+m; +m~ ~ (5 GeV)2 • 
(28.3.1) 
According to the sum rule, if there are no other fermions with this color 
and charge, then the sum of all squared masses for bosons (counting 
each spin state separately) with the same color and charge must equal 
about 2(5 GeV)2. 
In particular, each of the squarks with this color 
and charge must have a mass no greater than 7 GeV. The existence of 

28.3 Where is Super symmetry Broken? 
193 
such light squarks is definitely ruled out experimentally; they would have 
shown up, for instance, as a contribution to the rate for electron-positron 
annihilation into hadrons at energies where this process has been studied 
very thoroughly. 
This argument could be invalidated if there were a heavy fourth gen-
eration of quarks. There is another argument, due to Dimopoulos and 
Georgi, 3 which would apply however many heavy quarks there are and 
which yields an even stronger upper bound on the mass of the lightest 
squark. The unbroken conservation of charge and color tells us that the 
only non-zero D Ao-terms in the supersymmetric standard model are for 
the generators y of U(l) and t3 of S U(2), which we shall call D1 and Dz, 
respectively. The values of these generators are y = -g' /6 and t3 = +g/2 
for the left-handed quarks of charge 2ej3; y = -g' /6 and t3 = -g/2 
for the left-handed quarks of charge -e/3; y = 2g' j3 and t3 = 0 for the 
right-handed quarks of charge 2e/3; and y = -g' /3 and t3 = 0 for the 
right-handed quarks of charge -ej3. Also, the squark fields are color-
triplets, and therefore cannot have vacuum expectation values. According 
to Eq. (27.5.4), the mass-squared matrix of the charge 2ej3 color-triplet 
(not antitriplet) squarks is 
M2 
-
ou- [ 
.Auvil u - g' Dtf6 + gDz/2 
!Fu 
:F'" 
l 
u 
' (28.3.2) 
At uvlt"u + 2g' Dt/3 
while the mass-squared matrix of the charge -e/3 color-triplet squarks is 
2 
_ 
[ v~t;v~t D - g' Dt /6 - gD2/2 
!F; l 
MoD -
. 
(28.3.3) 
!F D 
AI Dvll~ - g' Dt/3 
Also, Eq. (27.5.6) gives the mass-squared matrices of the quarks of charge 
2e/3 and -e/3 here as just .A"u.Au and .A~AID, respectively, with no 
mixing with the gauginos. 
Now let Vu and vd be the normalized eigenvectors of the quark mass-
squared matrices .A"u.Au and vlt~AID corresponding to the quarks u and 
d of lowest mass, and consider the expectation values of the corresponding 
squark mass-squared matrices 
[ 0 ] t 
2 
[ 0 ] 
2 
2g' Dt 
v= 
Mou 
v= 
= mu + -3- ' 
(28.3.4) 
[ 0 ] t 
2 
[ 0 ] 
2 
g' Dt 
v,i 
MoD 
vj 
= md- -3-. 
(28.3.5) 
These expectation values are weighted averages of the squared masses of 
the squarks of charge 2ej3 and -ej3, respectively, so at least one squark 
of charge 2ej3 must have a squared mass less than ~ + 2g'Dtf3, and 

194 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
at least one squark of charge -e/3 must have a squared mass less than 
mJ- g' Dtf3. Thus, depending on the sign of Dt, there must be either a 
squark of charge 2ej3 lighter than the u quark, or a squark of charge -e/3 
lighter than the d quark. 
Needless to say, the existence of a charged color-triplet scalar this light 
would radically change strong-interaction phenomenology. Like the u and 
d quarks, this colored scalar would appear as an ingredient of hadrons 
with a "constituent' mass of a few hundred MeV, which is certainly not 
seen. Since this scalar is electrically charged, it would also be created in 
pairs in e+ -e- annihilation at energies above a few hundred MeV, making 
a contribution to the annihilation cross-section that would destroy the 
excellent agreement between theory and experiment for this cross-section. 
Even worse, since the u and d quarks are so light, and Dt is expected to be 
of the order of the supersymmetry-breaking scale, Eqs. (28.3.4) and (28.3.5) 
indicate that one of the squarks would have a negative squared mass, 
meaning that this squark field would have to develop a non-vanishing 
expectation value, breaking both color and charge conservation. We are 
forced to reject the simple picture of supersymmetry broken spontaneously 
in the tree approximation in a supersymmetric version of the standard 
model. 
One way out of this conclusion would be to add another U(l) gauge 
superfield to the theory. If all the quark superfields carry the same value g 
of this new U(1) generator, then the corresponding D-term b would make 
an additive contribution gD to the right-hand sides of both Eqs. (28.3.4) 
and (28.3.5). If this term were sufficiently large, then it could give a 
large positive value to all of the squark squared masses, avoiding all th~~ 
problems mentioned above. But there is no sign of such a new neutral 
gauge boson at accessible energies, and in any case we would still have an 
upper bound of 7 GeV on the masses of all the squarks of charge -e/3. 
It is not necessarily a bad thing that we have to look for the break-
ing of supersymmetry elsewhere than in the tree approximation of the 
supersymmetric standard model. If supersymmetry were broken in this 
approximation, then the characteristic mass that sets the scale of super-
symmetry breaking would be some mass parameter in the Lagrangian, 
which would in tum set the scale of all other masses in the standard 
model. We would then still 'be confronted with the hierarchy problem: 
why is this mass scale so much less than 1016-1018 GeV? 
There is one known way to explain such large mass ratios. If supersym-
metry is not spontaneously broken in the tree approximation in whatever 
field theory unifies all the interactions at some high mass scale Mx, then as 
shown in Section 27.6, it will not be broken in any order of perturbation 
theory. But it can be broken by non-perturbative effects. In particular, 
if there is some gauge field with an asymptotically free gauge coupling 

28.3 Where is Supersymmetry Broken? 
195 
C§(Jl) at renormalization scale p., and if C§1(Jl) 18n2 is substantially less than 
unity for Jl ~ Mx, then as discussed in Section 18.3, this gauge interaction 
will become strong at an energy of order Ms = Mx exp( -8n2b IC§2(Mx )), 
where b is a number of order unity. It is not necessary for ·;§2(Mx )/8n2 
to be very small in order to have Ms many orders of magnitude less than 
Mx. We will see in Section 29.4 that supersymmetry can indeed be broken 
in just this way, by a gauge coupling that has become strong at some 
energy Ms < Mx. Indeed, this is just what happens to chiral symmetry in 
quantum chromodynamics; there is no mystery why the proton mass (or 
at least its main part, due to the dynamical breakdown of chiral symmetry, 
and not to the tiny masses of the u and d quarks) is so much smaller 
than the unification scale Mx. Alternatively, the forces that are strong 
at energy Ms may produce a potential for scalar fields, whose vacuum 
expectation value then breaks supersymmetry. 
There are no signs of any new strong interaction of the known quarks 
and leptons, so we have to assume that the observed particles of the 
standard model are neutral with respect to th1e strong force that breaks 
supersymmetry. Supersymmetry breaking therefore occurs in a 'hidden 
sector' of particles that do feel this new strong force. The remaining ques-
tion, then, is what is the mechanism by which supersymmetry breaking in 
this hidden sector is communicated to the known particles of the standard 
model? As we shall see, most of our expectations for the phenomenologi-
cal implications of supersymmetry depend on the answer to this question, 
rather than on the details of the breakdown of supersymmetry itself. 
Of course, the mechanism for communicating supersymmetry breaking 
to observed particles must be some sort of interaction that is felt by these 
particles. There are two leading candidates. One mechanism is provided by 
the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge interactions themselves, to be discussed 
in Section 28.6. The other is gravitation, or rather the auxiliary fields that 
are superpartners of the gravitational field, to be discussed in Sections 
31.4 and 31.7. 
Without going into details here, we can make a crude estimate of 
the supersymmetry-breaking scale Ms for these two possibilities. For 
gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, we expect that the mass split-
ting between the observed quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons and their 
superpartners would be of order g; I 16n1 or g'2 I 16n2 or g2 I 16n1 (where 
g8 , g, and g' are the SU(3), SU(2), and U(l) gauge couplings), depending 
on which quantum numbers are carried by the supermultiplet in question. 
(This !,'lless is verified in Section 28.6.) Hence if the squarks, sleptons, 
and gauginos have masses in the range of 100 GeV to 10 TeV, as argued 
at the end of Section 28.1, then the supersymmetry-breaking scale Ms 
would be higher by two or three orders of magnitude -
say, of order 100 
TeV. On the other hand, if it is gravitation that serves as the mediator of 

196 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
supersymmetry breaking, then on dimensional grounds we would expect 
the mass splittings Am between the observed particles and their super-
partners to be of order .jGM§, or perhaps of order GM~. (Results of 
both sorts will be encountered in models described in Section 31.7.) If the 
squarks, sleptons, and gauginos have masses in the range of 100 GeV to 
10 TeV, then Ms would be of order 1011 GeV for Am::::::: .jGM§, or 1013 
GeV for Am:::::: GM~. 
The large difference in estimates of the supersymmetry-breaking scale 
Ms for gauge- and gravitation-mediated supersymmetry breaking makes 
an important difference in particle phenomenology and cosmology. As 
already mentioned several times, supersymmetry dictates that the graviton 
must have a partner of spin 3/2, the gravitino. When supersymmetry is 
spontaneously broken at a scale Ms, the gravitino acquires a mass mg of 
order .jGM§. (A precise formula will be given in Section 31.3.) For gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, this is very small; if Ms ::::::: 100 TeV 
then mg ::::::: 1 eV, so the gravitino would be by far the lightest of the new 
particles required by supersymmetry -
that is, the lightest particle with 
negative R parity (28.1.6). On the other hand, for gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking the gravitino mass is just of the same order of 
magnitude ,JG M§ as the mass splitting between known particles and their 
superpartners, so the gravitino would have roughly the same mass as the 
squarks, sleptons, and gauginos. The gravitino then might or might not 
be the lightest particle with negative R parity, but its interactions with 
known particles and their superpartners in this case are of gravitational 
strength, so that gravitinos would play no direct role in experiments on 
elementary particles. 
* * * 
There are limits on the number of gravitinos that could survive from the 
big bang, which set useful constraints on the scale Ms of supersymmetry 
breaking. At some point in the distant past the temperature T was 
presumably high enough so that even purely gravitational interactions 
would have kept gravitinos in thermal equilibrium with other particles, 
in which case the number density of gravitinos would have been of the 
order of T 3, roughly the same as the number density of photons. (We 
are using units in which the' Boltzmann constant kB as well as 1i and c 
are equal to unity.) If gravitinos do not annihilate or decay, then the 
expansion of the universe will lower their number density in the same 
way as the number density of photons, so even after the gravitinos go 
out of equilibrium they would be present in numbers comparable to those 
of photons. More precisely, since the photons but not the gravitinos are 
heated by the annihilation of other particles, the number density ngo of 
gravitinos at present would be one or two orders of magnitude less than 

28.3 Where is Supersymmetry Broken? 
197 
the number density n,.o of photons in the cosmic microwave radiation 
background. In order for the mass density mgngo of the gravitinos not to 
exceed the upper bound on the cosmic mass density set by the observed 
value of the Hubble constant, mg would have to be less8 than about 1 
keY. As we have seen, this limit is well satisfied in theories of gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, where the gravitino is too light for 
cosmic gravitinos to contribute appreciably to the mass density of the 
universe. Since some of the fields that break supersymmetry in these 
theories must interact at least indirectly with the known quark, lepton, 
and gauge fields in order for the known particles to show the effects of 
supersymmetry breaking, the interactions of the gravitino with the known 
particles and their superpartners are suppressed only by powers of gauge 
and Yukawa coupling constants, so all the superpartners of the quarks, 
leptons, and gauge bosons would decay quickly into these known particles 
and gravitinos. Thus these particles also do not provide candidates in 
these models for the 'missing mass' sought by cosmologists. (It is possible 
that conservation laws could keep some particles of the supersymmetry-
breaking sector stable, in which case they could conceivably serve as the 
missing mass.) 
On the other band, for supersymmetry breaking that is gravitationally 
mediated, gravitinos are heavy enough to be unstable (though gravitino 
annihilation is still negligible), so the above limit need not apply.9 We will 
see in Section 31.3 that the coupling of the gravitino to other fields is 
proportional to JG, so on dimensional grounds the decay rate r g of a 
gravitino at rest is roughly of the order of Gm~. This is to be compared 
with the rate of expansion of the universe, which at temperature T is of 
order .jGT4. (We are here ignoring factors of order 10--100, including 
those involving non-gravitational coupling constants and the number of 
particle species.) When the cosmic temperature drops to the value T l:::::l mg 
at which gravitinos become non-relativistic, the ratio of their decay rate 
to the expansion rate is of order .JGmg = mg/mPtanck ~ 1, so gravitino 
decay becomes significant only after this time, when the gravitinos are 
highly non-relativistic. As we have seen, their number density will be of 
order T 3, so their energy density will then be of order mg T 3, which is 
greater than the energy density of order T 4 of the photons and other 
particles in thermal equilibrium at temperature T, and therefore makes 
the dominant contribution to the cosmic gravitational field that governs 
the rate of expansion of the universe. The expansion rate under these 
conditions is therefore of order J 
Gmg T 3, and gravitino decay becomes 
significant when this equals the gravitino decay rate of order Gm~, and 
therefore at a temperature 
T ~ 6 t;Jm5/3 
g,..., 
g 
. 

198 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
As we have seen, if these gravitinos did not decay before the present then 
their mass had better be less than 1 keY, but they can lead to cosmological 
difficulties even if they did decay before now. After they decay, their energy 
must go into the energy of photons and other relativistic particles, so the 
temperature r; after decay is related to the temperature Tg calculated 
above by the energy conservation condition mg r; ~ T~4, and hence 
T' ,..., Gl/4m3/2 
g..... 
g 
. 
In particular, since Tg <t:: mg, we have r; ;::}> Tg. If Tg were less than 
the temperature Tn ~ 0.1 MeV at which cosmological nucleosynthesis 
can occur, then gravitinos would still be abundant before nucleosynthesis, 
giving a higher energy density and hence a faster expansion, so that there 
would be less time for free neutrons to decay before being incorporated 
into complex nuclei, and hence more helium would be produced when 
nucleosynthesis occurs. Also, the ratio of the photon and baryon densi-
ties would have been subsequently increased by gravitino decay, so this 
ratio at the time of nucleosynthesis would have been considerably less 
than is usually estimated from the present cosmic microwave background 
temperature, and so nuclear reactions would have incorporated neutrons 
more completely into helium, and less deuterium would be left today. 
The present agreement between theory and observation for the cosmic 
helium and deuterium abundances would thus be destroyed. This problem 
is avoided if Tg > 0.1 MeV, but it can also be avoided under the much 
weaker condition that r; > 0.4 MeV, because then after the gravitinos 
decay the temperature would have been high enough to break up the 
excess helium and give cosmological nucleosynthesis a fresh start as the 
universe recools. This condition requires that mg > 10 TeV, which is just 
barely consistent with the upper bound derived in Section 28.1 on the 
masses of the superpartners of the known quarks, leptons, and gauge 
bosons, which for gravitationally mediated supersymmetry breaking are 
of order mg. This limit on mg corresponds to a supersymmetry-breaking 
scale Ms > 1011 GeV for mg::::::: .jGM~ or Ms > 1013 GeV for mg::::::: GM§. 
28.4 
The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
In the previous section we identified two different ways that th<~ breakdown 
of supersymmetry at a high energy scale Ms could be communicated to 
the known quarks and leptons: through gauge or gravitational superfields. 
The supersymmetry-breaking terms in the resulting low-energy effective 
Lagrangian will then be suppressed by powers of gauge couplings or the 
Newton constant. Most of these terms will therefore be rather small, 

28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
199 
with the exception that, along with factors of gauge couplings or the 
Newton constant. on dimensional grounds the mass terms and other 
superrenormalizable terms in the effective Lagrangian will be proportional 
to one or more factors of the supersymmetry-breaking scale Ms, which 
is quite large compared with known particle masses. We can conclude 
then that, to a fair approximation for gauge-mediated supersymmetry 
breaking and a very good approximation for gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking, the main effect of supersymmetry breaking will 
be in the superrenormalizable terms of the effective Lagrangian of the 
supersymmetric standard model. This version of the standard model, lO 
which is supersymmetric except for superrenormalizable terms, is usually 
known as the minimal supersymmetric standard model. 
With R parity or B-L conserved, the most general superrenormalizable 
Lagrangian density allowed by S U ( 3) x S U (2) x U ( 1) gauge symmetry takes 
the form 
~ 2L( t ) ""' 2E(_t_) 
- ~ 
MiJ 
.fl'i .!l'J -
L MiJ 
t!i tff1 
ij 
ij 
-( AJ mgtuino AJ) - ( 'h mwino 22) - (21 mbino lt) 
"'"'D D( T 
)-
"'"'E E( 
T 
)-
-
~AiJhij !li e.1t'1 !?J1- ~Aijhij .fl'i e.tt't 81 
ij 
ij 
-LAg hg ( !2[ e.1t'2 )dlij- L ce h8 ( !2[ Yfi)?;j 
ij 
ij 
-2::: c5 h5( 2[ Yfi)81- I: cg hg ( !2[ Yfi)dli1 
ij 
ij 
-B.tt( Yfi efft) + H.c. 
(28.4.1) 
Script letters are used here to denote the scalar components of left-
crural superfields. Sums over SU(2) and color indices are understood, as 
necessary for invariance under SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l), with e the usual 
antisymmetric 2 x 2 matrix ia2. All coefficients may be complex, and the 
gaugino masses may involve terms proportional to the }'s as well as the 
unit matrix. 
We follow the custom here of writing the coefficients of the terms 
involving scalar fields but not their adjoints as equal to the coefficients of 
the corresponding supersymmetric JF" -terms in Eq. (28.1.7) times factors 
A8, A~, A~, and B. This is motivated by the consideration that the 
smallness of the Yukawa couplings of the light quarks in Eq. (28.1. 7) 
reflects a number of approximate chiral symmetries that if extended to the 

200 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
whole supermultiplet would also make the corresponding trilinear terms 
in Eq. (28.4.1) small, while the appearance of the JL-term in Eq. (28.1.7) 
violates a possible Peccei-Quinn4 symmetry that if approximately valid 
would make both Jl and BJl small. Similar considerations suggest the form 
in which we write the coefficients of the terms that involve both scalars 
and their complex conjugates. Also, in Section 31.4 we will describe 
contributions to Ah and Bp. that really are proportional to h and p., 
respectively. However, here we are leaving it an open question whether 
the Ah, Ch, and Bp. coefficients in Eq. (28.4.1) are necessarily small when 
the corresponding h and p. coefficients in Eq. (28.1.7) are small. 
The Ch-terms in Eq. (28.4.1) have generally been omitted in discussions 
of the minimal supersymmetric standard model. This is partly because, as 
discussed in Section 27.7, terms like these that involve the Q>-components 
of left-chiral scalar superfields and also their complex conjugates can 
potentially produce quadratic divergences and thereby raise fine-tuning 
problems. But we saw in Section 27.7 that the quadratic divergences occur 
only in 'tadpole' graphs in which a scalar field line disappears into the 
vacuum, and in the minimum supersymmetric standard model there are no 
scalars that are neutral under all gauge symmetries, and hence no scalar 
tadpoles. The Ch-terms are absent in the theories of gravitationally medi-
ated supersymmetry breaking discussed in Section 31.6, and small in the 
theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking described in Section 
28.6, but there is no reason to suppose that this will always be the case. 
Even though they are not supersymmetric, superrenormalizable in-
teractions like those in Eq. (28.4.1) are shown in Section 27.7 to not 
produce supersymmetry-violating ultraviolet-divergent corrections to the 
coefficients of the supersymmetric d = 4 interactions. The condition of 
supersymmetry that is imposed on the dimensionless couplings of the min-
imal supersymmetric standard model therefore does not get in the way of 
the cancellation of ultraviolet divergences by renormalization of coupling 
constants. It was this property, rather than any theory of supersymmetry 
breaking in a high energy hidden sector, that motivated the introduction 
of the minimal supersymmetric standard model in Reference 10. 
The best reason today for studying the implications of the supersym-
metric standard model is that, as already mentioned, theories in which 
supersymmetry is spontaneously broken at a high energy scale are natu-
rally described by the minimal supersymmetric standard model at much 
lower energies. We can explore the phenomenological implications of the 
supersymmetric standard model, and be reasonably confident that the re-
sults will be relevant whatever detailed model of supersymmetry breaking 
and its mediation turns out to be correct. 
Even without the Ch-terms, if all of the other coefficients in the 
Lagrangian are constrained only by gauge symmetries and R parity 

28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
201 
conservation, the minimal supersymmetric standard model will contain 
over 100 free parameters.l1 Here 'minimal' means nothing more than that 
the theory contains only a minimal menu of superfields. Sometimes the 
term 'minimal supersymmetric standard model' is reserved for models 
that also satisfy restrictions on the coefficients of the superrenormaliz-
able terms, motivated either by some underlying theory or by empirical 
constraints. For instance, the minimal supersymmetric standard model is 
sometimes optimistically assumed to satisfy the universality conditions 
M~Q = Mf/'J = Mt/1 = M5L = M5E = M2Jii, 
mgtuino = mwino = mbino, 
(28.4.2) 
A8 = A5 = A~ = A , 
ce = cfl = cH = 0 . 
Often these conditions are imposed at the scale Mx ~ 1016 GeV of 
coupling constant unification, with corrections produced only by the 
renormalization group flow to lower energies. We will not be making 
such assumptions here. 
In analyzing the phenomenological implications of the minimal super-
symmetric standard model, we must deal not only with the search for 
new particles, but also with two classes of severe empirical constraint 
on processes involving known particles: the experimental upper bounds 
on various flavor non-conserving processes, and on various modes of CP 
non-conservation. 
Flavor Changing Processes 
We saw in Section 21.3 that there is an automatic suppression of flavor-
changing processes like K 0-K.0 oscillations and K 0 -+ p,+ J.C in the non-
supersymmetric standard model This is due to the feature of this theory, 
that it is only the mass splittings of the quarks that prevent them from 
being defined so that each flavor is separately conserved, so the amplitude 
of these flavor-changing process must be proportional to several factors 
of small quark masses. Also, in this theory lepton flavor is automatically 
conserved, so that processes like p. -+ ey are absolutely forbidden. These 
satisfactory results are put at risk by the presence of squarks and sleptons 
in supersymmetric extensions of the standard model, because there is in 
general no reason to expect that the squark and slepton mass matrices will 
be diagonal in the same basis as the quark and lepton mass matrices. This 
does not introduce flavor changing in the interaction of these particles 
with gauge bosons, which are flavor-independent, but it can produce 
flavor-changing transitions in which squarks or sleptons tum into quarks 
or leptons with the emission or absorption of gauginos. Of course, there 

202 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
'lh 'D2 
'1)3 
--~--r - - ~- -- __ _,_ __ 
--+-----.Jo'- - - - ~ - - ----~-
'1)1 
'1)2 '1)3 
Figure 28.1. A one-loop diagram that can contribute to the AS = 2 effective 
interaction (si..y#dL)(dLypsL) in the supersymmetric standard model. Here solid 
lines are quarks; dashed lines are squarks; and combined solid and wavy lines 
are gluinos. 
is no problem if the squarks and sleptons are degenerate, in which case 
their mass matrices are diagonal in any basis. 
The most stringent limits on squark mass splittings and/or mixing 
angles are set by measurements of K 0-k.0 transitions. 12 These transitions 
are produced by operators in the effective low-energy Lagrangian density 
like (sLy"dL)(dLyl'sL), which can be produced by diagrams like Figure 
28.1. The superpartners of the quarks dL and SL are in general linear 
combinations 2:; Vd;!?iJ; and 2:; Vsi!?iJi of squarks !?i)i of definite mass, where 
Vji is a 3 x 3 unitary matrix, so the two squark propagators in this diagram 
contribute a factor 
L 
vdi vs~ 
""' 
Vdj Vsj 
i k2 + Mf - ie x 7 k1 + MJ - ie ' 
where k is the four-momentum circulating in the loop. Because Vji is 
unitary, this vanishes if the three squark masses Mi are all equal. If the 
squark square masses differ from some common value M;quark by relatively 
small amounts AM[, then this becomes 
( k1 + M21 
-
. ) 4 (z= Vdi Vs~AM'f) 2 
squark 
Je 
i 
The amplitude for dLSL --+- sLdL has dimensionality mass-2, so after 
multiplying by the gluino propagators and four factors of the strong 
coupling g5, and integrating over k, we must get an amplitude proportional 
to 
(28.4.3) 

28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
203 
whem M is ·the larger of Msquark and mgtuino· This may be compared with 
the r<~sult for this amplitude in the non-supersymmetric standard model, 
which is produced by W exchange, as shown in Figure 28.2. Ignoring the 
third generation of quarks, which has only small transition amplitudes to 
the first two generations, the amplitudes for d ---+- u, d ---+- c, s --+ u and 
s ---+- c by w- emission are, respectively, cos Be, -sin Be, sin Be, and cos Be, 
where Be is the Cabibbo angle defined in Section 21.3. Hence in place of 
the squark propagators here we have the quark propagators 
. 
( i/,f+mu . 
il,f+me ) 
sm Be cos Be k2 
2 
. -
k2 
2 
. 
, 
+ mu - u; 
+ me -
l€" 
and in place of the strong coupling g.s here we have the SU(2) coupling 
g. Thus in the non-supersymmetric standard model the amplitude for 
dLsL ~ sLdL is proportional to 
g4 sin2 Be cos2 Be ( 
)2 
4 
me-mu' 
mw 
(28.4.4) 
with a proportionality coefficient of the same order as that in Eq. (28.4.3). 
With a plausible guess on how to calculate the K 0-k.0 transition amplitude 
from the amplitude for dLsL -+ sLdL, the amplitude corresponding to 
Figure 28.2 is known to give a result in good agreement with experiment. 
(Indeed, Gaillard and Lee13 used this calculation to predict that me~ 1.5 
GeV, before the c quark was discovered.) It therefore seems reasonable 
to require that the squark exchange result (28.4.3) should be less than the 
quark exchange result (28.4.4). This yields the condition 
2 
2 
-
" 
V,.AMi 
g sin Be cosBe (me- mu)M 
L... vdi .si ---=-z- < 
2 
2 
· 
i 
M 
gs 
mw 
Taking g2 /4n = 0.036, g;/4n = 0.118, sin Be = 0.22, mw -
me = 1.5 Ge V, and mu <:: me, we find 
~ 
.AMl 
-3 
-
00 
L.J vdi Ysi~ < 1.5 X 10 
X (M/1 
GeV). 
i 
M 
(28.4.5) 
80.4 GeV, 
(28.4.6) 
The squark masses are unlikely to be much less than mgtuino. so we can 
conclude that either the squark masses are split by no more than about 
one part in 103, or the non-diagonal terms of the mixing matrix Vii are less 
than about 10-3, or the squarks are heavier than about 10 Te V, or we have 
some combination of nearly degenerate squarks, nearly zero mixing angles, 
and heavy squarks. In itself, this result only constrains the superpartners 
~i of the left-handed quarks of charge -e/3, but similar limits on the 
masses and mixing angles of the ~i squarks can be obtained by considering 
the amplitude for dRSR ---+- sRdR. We can also obtain somewhat weaker 

204 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
Figure 28.2. 
A one-loop diagram that can contribute to the AS = 2 effective 
interaction (s[.yPdL)(d£YpSL) in both the supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric 
standard models. Here solid lines are quarks and wavy lines are w± bosons. 
limits on the masses and mixing angles of the %'i squarks by considering 
the amplitudes produced by wino exchange rather than gluino exchange. 
It should be noted, however, that these arguments put no constraints 
on the differences between the masses of squarks of different charge, or 
on the differences between the masses of the superpartners f2i and j,i of 
left-handed quarks and antiquarks. 
Just as for the squarks, the sleptons of definite mass are expected to 
be non-diagonal linear combinations of the superpartners of the leptons. 
This leads to the decay process p. ___.. e + y through diagrams like Figure 
28.3. The experimental upper bound 4.9 x 10-11 on the branching ratio of 
this process then sets a limit of about lo-3 on the fractional mass splitting 
of sleptons of the same charge but different generations for generic mixing 
angles, or on the mixing angles for non-degenerate sleptons.14 
Attempts have been made to explain the degeneracy of the squarks 
and sleptons in terms of a gauge symmetry connecting the different 
generations.14a In Section 28.6 we will describe an approach to super-
symmetry breaking in which this degeneracy appears without needing to 
impose such symmetries. 
CP violation 
The second important class of constraint provided by experimental infor-
mation about known particles has to do with CP-violating effects, such 
as the electric dipole moments of the neutron and electron.15 In Section 
21.3 we saw that these effects are rather weak in the non-supersymmetric 
standard model with only one scalar doublet, apart from a potential 
problem with the parameter 8 of quantum chromodynamics, discussed in 

28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
205 
bino, wino
0 
) 
) 
e 
y 
Figure 28.3. One-loop diagrams for the process JL __. e + y. Here solid lines are 
leptons; dashed lines are sleptons; combined solid and wavy lines are gauginos; 
and wavy lines are photons. 
Section 23.6. This is because all CP-violating phases in the mass matrix 
of quarks and leptons and their interaction with gauge bosons could be 
absorbed into the definition of the quark and lepton fields if there were 
only two generations of quarks and leptons, and although there is a third 
generation, its mixing with the first two generations is (for mysterious 
reasons) quite weak. (This argument does not apply to processes that 
directly involve quarks of the third generation, such as B0-B0 mixing, to 
be measured in the planned 'B factories.') The electric dipole moment of 
the neutron in this simple non-supersymmetric version of the standard 
model is consequently expected 16 to be less than about 1 o-30 e em, well 
below the experimental upper bound, 6.3 X 10-26 e em. 16a 
In contrast, the over 100 parameters of the minimum supersymmetric 
standard model in its most general form involve dozens of CP-violating 
relative phases. After integrating out the heavy superpartners of the 
known particles, these phases produce a number of CP-violating effec-
tive interactions to be added to the Lagrangian of the standard model. 
Those of minimum dimensionality, which on dimensional grounds are 
likely to be the most important, include electric dipole moments of the 
quarks and leptons, 17 similar CP-violating 'chromoelectric' dipole moments 

206 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
----,~-.Jio------~---------+---
U,1> 
U,1> 
UR,dR 
Figure 28.4. A one-loop diagram for the chromoelectric dipole moment of the u 
or d quarks. Here solid lines are quarks; dashed lines are squarks; combined solid 
and wavy lines are gluinos; and the wavy line is a gluon. The X represents the 
insertion of a bilinear interaction arising from a trilinear scalar field interaction 
combined with the spontaneous breakdown of SU(2) x U(l). There are also 
diagrams in which the gluon line is attached to one of the internal squark lines 
instead of to the gluino line. 
contributing to the interactions of gluons with quarks, 18 a CP-violating 
purely gluonic interaction, 19 and a CP-violating interaction of the lightest 
Higgs scalar with leptons.20 
To take one example, consider the quark chromoelectric dipole mo-
ments, which in some models make the largest contribution to the electric 
dipole moment of the neutron. The CP-violating chromoelectric dipole 
mo~ent operator is (qys[YI', Yv]A.a q)fr (where q is a u or d color-triplet 
quark field, f~v is the S U(3) field-strength tensor, and A.a are the 3 x 3 
generators of SU(3)). Since }'s[yl', Yv] has matrix elements only between 
iiL and qR or between iiR and qL, in order for a one-loop graphs to 
contribute to the chromoelectric dipole moment an external left-handed u 
or d quark line must emit an internal gluino line and tum into a d/1 or qfl 
squark line, which next turns into a <¥f• or ~· squark line, and then into a 
right-handed u or d quark line by absorbing the internal gluino line, with 
the external gluon line attached either to the internal gluino line or to one 
of the internal squark lines. (See Figure 28.4.) 
To calculate this, we need to know the mixing of the scalar compo-
nents dl/i (or qfli) of the left-<;:hiral quark superfields Qi with the complex 
conjugates ~j (or ~j) of the sc..alar components of the left-chiral anti-
quark superfields Uj (or Dj), produced by the spontaneous breakdown of 
SU(2) x U(l), and represented by the X in Figure 28.4. Part of this mix-
ing arises from a contribution of the supersymmetric ~-term interaction 
(28.1.7) to the last term in Eq. (26.4.7): 
!l' ll.;tf = -! :L h~dl!i<it.r + ~'*il
2 -I L:: h~q)i~j + #£'~1
2
. 
(28.4.7) 
ij 
ij 

28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model 
207 
There is also a contribution from the A- and C-terms in Eq. (28.4.1): 
2~~ =- LlzB!?iYi.@i[ -A~ Je? + ce ~·] 
ij 
- L:hgoui~i[Ag .?'li + cg Jti•]- H.c. 
(28.4.8) 
ij 
Replacing the neutral Higgs scalar fields with their expectation values 
gives the quadratic terms 
2 ~~ = -2 Re L mgoui~i (I'• cot P + Ag + cS cot P) 
ij 
-2Re 2)nfl!?iJi.@i(1'• (tanp)* +A~- ce (tanp)*), (28.4.9) 
ij 
where mg = (~)hg and m8 = -{.7f?)h~ are the mass matrices of the 
quarks of charge 2ej3 and -e/3, and 
tanp = {~)/(£?}*. 
(28.4.10) 
Neglecting Cabibbo mixing, and for definiteness taking the As and Cs 
diagonal, Figure 28.4 makes contributions to the chromoelectric dipole 
moment of the u and d quarks of the form 
3 
d~e = 1 !~2 Im [ mu A~I ( mw, m<if, m~~uino)] , 
(28.4.11) 
3 
dde = 1 !~2 Im [ md Adi ( m!?), m_@, m~~uino)] , 
(28.4.12) 
where 
A~= (I'*+ Cu)cotp +Au, 
Ad= (I'*- Cd)(tanPr +Ad, 
(28.4.13) 
and I is a complicated dimensionless function of its arguments arising 
from the integration over the virtual four-momentum. For m~ =:::: m~ and 
the gluino field defined to make mgluino as well as m~ real, the function I 
takes the form 
( 
2 
) 
-3 
mgluino 
I (m~, m~, mgluino) = mgluino J 
n2; _ rr2 . 
' 
~ 
glumo 
(28.4.14) 
(28.4.15) 
The hard part of this sort of calculation always lies in estimating the 
contribution of an operator like the chromoelectric dipole interaction 
to hadronic matrix elements such as the electric dipole moment of the 
neutron. We can anticipate that there will be renormalization group 

208 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
corrections required because this operator is to be used at energies of 
the order of the neutron mass, rather than the masses of the squarks 
and gluino. More important is simply getting dimensional factors and 
factors of 4n right. For this purpose, it is usual to use a counting rule22 
known as 'naive dimensional analysis.' A connected graph with V; vertices 
of type i and I internal lines will have a number L of loops given by 
L = I - L; V; + 1. If there are Ni lines attached to a vertex of type i and 
N external lines of the whole graph, then 2I + N = L;; V;Ni> so 
N 
(N· ) 
L=l-l+~V; j-1 . 
I 
We expect a factor of order 1f16n2 for each loop, so the coefficient of 
an operator {!) in the low-energy effective Lagrangian with N field factors 
will contain an over-all factor 
(4n)N-2 rr(4n)(2-N;)Vt . 
i 
If the operator (9 has dimensionality d and the interactions m; of type i 
have dimensionality d;, then the coefficient of(!) will have dimensionality 
4-d- 2::;( 4-d;), so this coefficient will also have a factor M 4-d Il; Md1- 4, 
where M is some scale that is typical of hadronic physics, such as the 
nucleon mass or the energy 2nF7t ~ 1200 MeV, where the low-energy 
expansions discussed in Section 19.5 begin to break down. Finally, the 
contribution to the coefficient of (9 from some graph will of course be 
proportional to the couplings of all the operators m; associated with the 
vertices in the graph. These remarks can be conveniently summarized 
by defining a 'reduced coupling': the reduced coupling associated with 
any operator m; having N; field factors, dimensionality d;, and coupling 
constant gi is 
(28.4.16) 
The above estimates suggest the rule of naive dimensional analysis: the 
reduced coupling of any operator (9 in the effective hadronic Lagrangian is 
roughly equal to the product of the reduced couplings of the interactions 
that contribute to this effective coupling. 
The neutron electric dipole mllment is the coefficient of an operator with 
one photon and two neutron fields and dimensionality 5, so its reduced 
coupling is M d~f 4n. Likewise, the quark chromoelectric magnetic moment 
has reduced coupling M d~e f 4n. In addition to one factor of this reduced 
coupling, the reduced coupling of the neutron electric dipole operator 
must have a factor of the reduced coupling ej4n of the electromagnetic 
coupling and an indeterminate number of factors of the reduced strong 
coupling g3 / 4n, which at the low-energy scale M are not very different 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
209 
from unity and will be ignored. Taking the d quark contribution as 
representative of the contributions of both u and d quarks, the result then 
is that 
d~ ~ e::e ~ e (!~)
3 
Im [mdAd]I(m!!J,m~,mgtuino). 
(28.4.17) 
Further simplifying by setting mgtuino ~ m!!l ~ m~, so that J = 7/18, and 
taking g; f 4n at the scale of squark and gluino masses to have the same 
value 0.12 as at mz, and lmdl ~ 7 MeV, we have then 
Id
e I,.... 0 5 
10_23 
IAdli sinq>j x (100GeVP 
n _, . 
X 
ecm 
3 
, 
mgluino 
(28.4.18) 
where q> is the phase of Ad, with the convention that the gluino, quark, 
and squark masses are taken real. The contribution of the electric dipole 
moment of the quark is somewhat larger, while the contribution of the 
purely gluonic CP-odd operator is considerably smaller.23 
To avoid conflict with the experimental upper bound of 0.97 x w-25 e 
em. either the phases ·associated with CP violation in the supersymmetric 
standard model must be less than about 10-2, or some of the new particles 
of this model must be heavier than about 1 TeV. Similar conclusions have 
been reached from calculations of the electric dipole moments of atoms 
and molecules.23 Even more stringent conditions on CP-violating phases 
have been derived24 by considering the contribution of Figure 28.1 to 
the one precisely measured CP-violating effect, the imaginary part of the 
amplitude for K 0-K.0 oscillation. 
28.5 
The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
Despite the large number of parameters of the supersymmetric standard 
model, in some contexts it is surprisingly predictive. This is true in 
particular when we consider the scalar fields whose vacuum expectation 
values spontaneously break the SU(2) x U(1) gauge symmetry. In this 
section we will consider these scalars, along with other fields of zero 
baryon and lepton number: neutral scalars odd under charge conjugation, 
charged scalars, and the fermionic superpartners of these scalars and of 
the w± and z 0. 
It is a crucial requirement for supersymmetric versions of the standard 
model that they should contain scalar doublet 'Higgs' superfields with the 
right mass and interaction parameters to account for the breakdown of the 
S U(2) x U(1) gauge group of the electromagnetic and weak interactions. 
We saw in Section 28.1 that at least two left-chiral scalar doublets are 
needed to give mass to the quarks of both charge 2e/3 and -e/3 and 

210 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
the charged leptons, while we found in Section 28.2 that two doublets are 
just what is needed to bring the SU(3), SU(2), and U(l) gauge couplings 
together at some yery high energy. We have therefore assumed that there 
are two left-chiral scalar S U(2) doublets 
Hz= ( ~~). 
(28.5.1) 
These have SU(2) and U(l) D-terms (27.4.7) given (assuming zero Fayet-
Iliopoulos constant ~U(t)) by 
jj = !(.?f!i.?ft) + ~(.1t1i.?f2), 
(28.5.2) 
g' 
g' 
Dy = 2 ( .?l'J .1ft) - 2 ( .1f1.1fz) , 
(28.5.3) 
where .1f 1,2 are the scalar components of the superfield doublets H1,2 
and -r7 are the Pauli matrices, with ~ = 1. As shown in Eq. (27.4.9), in 
renormalizable theories this gives the D-term contribution to the scalar 
field potential 
Vn = !jj2 + !D2 
2 
2 
y 
= g: [ ( Jf'j t .lf't) + ( Jf'1 t.lf'2) r 
+ g: [ ( Jf'r.lf',)- ( Jf'~Jf'2) r 
This can be put in a more convenient form by using the relation 
(i)it · (i)kj = 2oijokt - bitOkj . 
(28.5.4) 
(28.5.5) 
(To prove this, use rotational invariance to show that bijokt may be 
expressed as a linear combination of (i)it · (i)kj and OitOkj. and calculate 
the coefficients by taking traces on the indices i,j and i,t.) In this way, 
we may rewrite the D-term part of the scalar field potential as 
(28.5.6) 
As mentioned in Section 28.1, there is just one possible renormalizable 
term in the superpotential for these two left-chiral doublets, of the form 
(28.5.7) 
where p. is a constant with the dimensions of a mass and e is the anti-
symmetric matrix i-r2. According to Eq. (27.4.9), this gives an additional 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
211 
contribution to the scalar field potential 
Vp = Llaj(:Yt't,.Ye2)12 + L'af(.Ye~,.Ye2)'2 
r 
a .Ye lr 
r 
a .Ye 2r 
~ 11"12 [ ( Jf')Jt',) + ( Jf'~Jf' 2)] . 
(28.5.8) 
For p. =/= 0 the potential V D + VJJ evidently has a mllllmum value of 
zero, reached at the unique point .Ye 1 = .Ye 2 = 0. 
With just these 
terms in the potential, SU(2) x U(1) as well as supersymmetry is not 
spontaneously broken. (The case p. = 0 is not much better; there is 
a continuous infinity of vacuum states with supersymmetry unbroken 
and with SU(2) x U(l) broken down to electromagnetic gauge invariance 
with all possible strengths, including zero.) This is one more example 
of the general difficulty, already seen in Section 28.3, of formulating 
realistic theories in which supersymmetry is spontaneously broken within 
the standard model. 
Under the assumption of the previous section that supersymmetry is 
violated in the effective Lagrangian only by superrenormalizable terms, 
the most general such supersymmetry-breaking term involving the scalar 
doublets is of the form 
Vm=mi(.Yei.Yel) +m~(.Yei.Ye2) +Re {Bp.(.YeTe.Ye2)}, 
where mi and~ are real parameters (not necessarily positive) and Bp. is 
a parameter of arbitrary phase. We will adjust the over-all phase of the 
superfields H1 and H2 so that Bp. is real and positive, and so 
Vm =mj(.Ye!.Yet) +m~ (.Yei.Ye2) +Bp.Re(.YeTe.Ye2). 
(28.5.9) 
The total scalar potential in the tree approximation is then 
V = VD + VJJ + Vm 
g2 
2 g2 + g'2 [ 
]2 
=2(.Yei.Ye2) + 
8 
(.Ye!.Yel)-(.Yei.Ye2) 
+(mj + IP.I2) ( :Yt'!.Yet) + (m~ + IP.e) ( .Yei.Ye2) 
+ Bp. Re ( .YeTe:Yt'2) . 
(28.5.10) 
Note in particular that p.2, mj, and ~ only appear in the combinations 
mj + lp.f and ~ + IP.I2. 
There is one condition on the supersymmetry-breaking parameters mf, 
derived from the requirement that the potential should be bounded below. 
For scalar fields going to infinity in generic directions, the potential is 

212 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
dominated by the quartic terms VD, which are positive. There are special 
directions in which VD vanishes: those for which (up to an SU(2) x U(1) 
gauge transformation) 
with ¢ an arbitrary complex quantity. For such directions, V = (21.ul2 + 
m~ -t-m~)I¢1
2 -B~t¢
2
, so (since B~t has been defined to be positive) in order 
for this not to go to -OJ as ¢ --t- -t-OJ, it is necessary that 
21~tl
2 + mf + m~ > B~t. 
(28.5.11) 
We wish to look for a minimum of the potential at which electromag-
netic gauge invariance is not broken, so let us consider the behavior of 
the potential as a function of the neutral scalar fields, with the charged 
scalar fields set equal to zero. In this case Eq. (28.5.10) gives the potential 
of the neutral scalars as 
g2 + 
12 
2 
2 2 
2 
vN = 
8 g [!-*'?1 -1-*'~1 J + (mt + l~tl2) 1-*'?1 
+(m~ + l~tf) 1-*'~1
2
- B~tRe ( £?~) . 
(28.5.12) 
To find a stationary point, we expand yN around the constant values 
.Yf? =vi> writing 
(28.5.13) 
To second order in the cp;, Eq. (28.5.12) gives 
N 
g2-t-gt2(j 2 
12)[ 
• 
•) 
2 
2] 
Vquad= 
4 
Vtl -1v2 
2Re(vlcpl-V2CfJ2 +ICfJtl -jcp2l 
2 + 12 
2 
+g 2 g [Re(vicpt-vicp2)] +(mr+l~ti
2)(2Revicpt +ICfJ1I 2) 
+(~ + l~tl
2
) ( 2Revicp2 + ICfJ2I2) -
B~t Re (v1 CfJ2 + V2CfJl + CfJl (/)2) 
+constant. 
(28.5.14) 
For the v; to be equilibrium,values of the fields, the terms of first order in 
the cp; must vanish 
2 + 12 
1 
( mf + i~ti
2)vi + g 4 g (!vtl2 -lv212)v;- 2,B~tv2 = 0, (28.5.15) 
2 + 12 
1 
( m~ + i~ti
2)vi + g 4 g (1v2i2 -lvti2)vi- 2B~t Vt = 0. (28.5.16) 
Without changing the over-all phase of the cp;, we may adjust their relative 
phases so that Vt is real. Then Eqs. (28.5.15) and (28.5.16) show that v2 is 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
213 
also real, so that these equations become 
( 
2 
2) 
g2 + gt2 ( 2 
2) 
1 
11rj + l,uj 
Vt + 
4 
Vt - V1 VL- 2,B,UV1 = 0, 
(28.5.17) 
2 + 11 
1 
( 2 
2) 
g 
g ( 2 
2) 
m2 + l,ul 
v1 + 
4 
v2 - v1 v1- 2B,u Vt = 0. 
(28.5.18) 
These conditions may be used to express the mass parameters in the 
potential in terms of the convenient quantities 
tan fJ = v2/v1 , 
m~ = Hg2 + g'2)(vf +vi), 
and 
(28.5.19) 
(28.5.20) 
(28.5.21) 
(The parameter mz is the mass of the Z vector boson.* We will soon 
see that rnA is the mass of one of the physical scalars.) Multiplying 
Eqs. (28.5.17) and (28.5.18), respectively, by v1 and v1 and taking the sum 
and difference gives 
B,u = m~ sin 2/J , 
(28.5.22) 
and 
2 
2 
( 
2 
2) 
2fl 
m1 - m2 = -
rnA + mz cos P , 
(28.5.23) 
which with Eq. (28.5.21) yields 
m1+l,ul2 = !m~- Hm~+~)cos2{J, m~+l,ul
2 = ~m~+ H~+m~)cos2{J. 
(28.5.24) 
With linear terms cancelling, the quadratic part (28.5.14) of the neutral 
scalar potential may then be written 
2 + gt2 
2 + t2 
2 
V~ad=g 4 
(vf-vi)(lcpti2-I(P212]+g 2 g (Re(vttpt-V2tp2)] 
+(mt + l,ul2) lcptl2 + (~ + l,ul2) lcp2f- B,u Re ( tp1tp2) +constant 
= !m~ cos 2{J (1cptl2 -lcp2l2] + m~ [Re (cos /Jtpt - sinPq>2)t 
+tm~(lcptl
2 + lcp2l2)- i(m~ +m~)cos2fi(lcptl
2 -lcp212] 
-m~ sin 2/J Re ( tpt tp2) +constant . 
(28.5.25) 
• There is a difference of a factor of 2 between the formulas form~ given by Eqs. (28.5.20) 
and (21.3.30), due to the fact that the scalar fields are normalized differently here and 
in Section 21.3. 

214 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
We see from Eq. (28.5.25) that the real and imaginary parts of the fPi 
are decoupled (This is because the potential (28.5.12) is invariant under 
a charge conjugation or CP transformation fPi ~ cpi .) The mass-squared 
matrix of the imaginary parts of the fPi is 
M2 
-
lmf(J- ( 
~m~ (1 -cos2p) 
tm~ sin2P 
~m~ sin2p 
) 
!m~ (1 +cos 2P) 
(28.5.26) 
The determinant vanishes, so one eigenvalue is zero, and the other equals 
the trace, which is just m~. The zero-mass scalar is of course the neutral 
Goldstone boson associated with the spontaneous breakdown of S U(2) x 
U(1) to electromagnetic gauge invariance, and as discussed in Chapter 21 
it is eliminated by the Higgs mechanism. As promised, mA is the mass of 
one of the physical scalars, the non-Goldstone boson with C negative. This 
shows that for the field value cp; = Vi to be at least a local minimum of 
the potential, the parameter m~ defined by Eq. (28.5.21) must be positive. 
The condition (28.5.11) for good behavior at large field strengths shows 
that Eq. (28.5.22) has a solution here for P in the range 0 < p < n/2. 
In particular, if Bp, = 0 and 0 < p < n/2, then Eq. (28.5.22) shows that 
mA = 0. In this case, the particle A is the Goldstone boson of a U(1) 
Peccei-Quinn symmetry4 of the potential (28.5.12) under an equal phase 
change of .if? and Jt'~, which for Vt =I= 0 and v2 =I= 0 is spontaneously 
broken without leaving any combination of this and the electroweak U(l) 
symmetry unbroken. This is the original version of the axion,25 which 
as we saw in Section 23.6 acquires only a small mass from the Yukawa 
interactions of the scalars with the quarks and is experimentally ruled out. 
Thus we can conclude that Bp, definitely does not vanish. 
The elements of the mass-squared matrix for the real scalars are given 
by Eq. (28.5.25) as 
(Mief/J)ll = tm~(1- cos2p) + ±m~(1 +cos2p), 
(Mief/J)t2 = (Mief/Jht = -Hm~ +m~)sin2P, 
(Mief/Jh2 = 
}m~~1 +cos2P)+ !m~(1-cos2P). 
Solving the secular equation gives the eigenvalues 
(28.5.27) 
mii = ~ [m~ + m~ + J(m~ + m~ )2- 4m~m~ cos2 2p] , (28.5.28) 
m~ = ~ [m~ + m~- J(~ + m~)2 - 4m~m~ cos2 2P) . (28.5.29) 
To calculate the masses of the charged scalars, we evaluate the potential 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
215 
V with the neutral scalars set equal to their vacuum expectation values: 
Jl'1 = ( ; 1 ) , 
Jt'2 = ( ~ 
) . 
(28.5.30) 
Using this in Eq. (28.5.10) then gives the quadratic part of the charged 
scalar potential 
2 
2 
2+ f2 
V~ =; lv2(.71'1)* +v1Jt'tl + g 4 g (vr -vi)(1.71'112 -1Jt'f12) 
+(mi + l,ul2)!.71'112 + (m~ + l,ui2)1Jt'fl2 + B,uJI'I Jt'f . (28.5.31) 
Using Eqs. (28.5.22) and (28.5.24), this may be written 
V~ad = ~(miv + m~)[l-*'11
2(1-cos2p) + IJt'fl2(1 +cos2P) 
+2 sin2P.71'1 Jt'f] , 
(28.5.32) 
where mw is the charged gauge boson mass: 
mtv = ~g
2 (!vtl
2 + lv2l2). 
(28.5.33) 
The charged scal~r mass matrix is then 
M2 = ~(,m 
m2) ( 1-_cos2p 
c 
2 
w + 
A 
sm2P 
sin2P 
) 
1 +cos2P 
· 
(28.5.34) 
This has determinant zero, so it has one eigenvalue equal to zero and the 
other eigenvalue equal to the trace 
2 
2 
2 
me= mw +m:A. 
(28.5.35) 
The zero-mass charged scalar is of course the other Goldstone boson 
associated with the spontaneous breakdown of SU(2) x U(1), and like 
the neutral Goldstone boson found earlier it is eliminated by the Higgs 
mechanism. 
Even without knowing the parameters mA and p, these results tell us 
a lot about the relative magnitudes of the scalar boson masses. We can 
rewrite Eqs. (28.5.28) and (28.5.29) in the form 
mii = ~ [m~ + m~ + .j(m~- m~)2 + 4m~m~ sin2 2P], (28.5.36) 
m~ = ~ [m~ + m~- .j(m~- m~)2 + 4m~m~ sin2 2p] . (28.5.37) 
We see that the heavier neutral scalar mass mn is larger than the larger 
of mz and mA, while the lighter neutral scalar mass mh is smaller than the 
smaller of mz and mA. If the large ratio of top to bottom quark masses 
is due to a large ratio v2jv1 = tan p of scalar field vacuum expectation 
values, rather than a large ratio of Yukawa couplings, then we expect 

216 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
p to be near n/2, in which case these inequalities become approximate 
equalities. Further, Eq. (28.5.35) shows that the charged scalar mass is 
greater than both mA and mw. 
These results are quantitatively modified by various radiative corrections 
within the standard model (as opposed to radiative effects that produce 
the input parameters mt in theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry 
breaking). The most important corrections arise from the presence in the 
scalar potential V of terms arising from graphs consisting of a single loop 
of top or bottom quarks interacting any number of times with external 
scalar field lines. This is because the top and bottom quarks have by 
far the strongest couplings to Jt' 2 and Jt' 1, respectively. (It is prudent 
to include bottom as well as top quark loops here because, as mentioned 
above, the larger mass of the top quark may be due to a large ratio v2/v1, 
rather than to a large ratio of Yukawa couplings, but even in this case we 
will see that the dominant corrections are due to top quark loops.) 
Let us first consider the neutral scalars, at least one of which would 
be lighter than the Z boson in the absence of radiative corrections. The 
effect of these top and bottom loops is to contribute a term of form 
Ur(IJt112) + Ub(IJt112) to vN. We will absorb any terms in Ub or Ur that 
are linear in 1.#'?12 - vr or 1.#'~1
2 - vi into the input parameters my and 
m~, so that 
Uf,(vf) = u;(v~) = 0 . 
(28.5.38) 
Our earlier results (28.5.24) and (28.5.22) for my + l,ul2, mi + l,ul 2 and B,u 
are then unchanged. Also, the mass matrix for the C-odd neutral scalars 
is still given by Eq. (28.5.26). On the other hand, the elements of the 
mass-squared matrix for the C-even neutral scalars are now given by 
(Miecp)u = ~m~(1- cos 2P) + !~(1 +cos 2P) + L\b, 
( Mie cph2 = (Mie <~'ht = -
Hm~ + m~) sin 2p , 
(28.5.39) 
(Miecph2 = ~m~(l +cos2P)+ !m~(l-cos2p) +8r, 
where 
(28.5.40) 
The solutions of the secular equation are then 
~ = Hm~ +mh<HA. 
+ 
( (m~ - m~) cos 2P + 8t - L\b) 
2 
+ ( m~ + m~) 
2 
sin2 2p , 
(28.5.41) 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
217 
2 
1 [ 2 
2 
mh = 2 mA +mz +~t+~b 
(<m~ -m~)cos2P+~r-~br + (m~ +m~)
2 
sin22p 
(28.5.42) 
In considering searches for these particles, it is important to note that the 
light Higgs mass mh increases as the unknown mass mA increases, reaching 
a finite upper bound for mA -+ CXJ 
mh < mh(mA -+ CXJ) = m~ cos2 2p + ~t sin2 P + ~b cos2 P . 
(28.5.43) 
To calculate ~b and ~r, we recall from Section 16.2 that the potentials 
Ub and Ur are given by 
(28.5.44) 
(28.5.45) 
where A.r = mt!v2 and Ab = mb/Vt are the Yukawa couplings of the top and 
bottom quarks; Mst and Msb are the masses of the stop and sbottom (the 
scalar superpartners of the top and bottom quarks); these masses and the 
terms -3/2 inside the square brackets are chosen to satisfy the condition 
that supersymmetry-breaking corrections due to stop and sbottom loops 
would cancel the corrections due to top and bottom loops if the masses 
were equal; and the 'linear terms' are linear in l.n-il2 or 1~1
2
, with 
coefficients adjusted to satisfy Eq. (28.5.38). (The factor 3 takes account 
of the three quark colors.) Then Eq. (28.5.40) gives 
~b = -~ 
IA.bl4v21n (AbVf) = 3.)2 mt Gp In (M1b) , 
4n:2 
1 
M2 
2n:2 cos2 p 
m2 
sb 
b 
(28.5.46) 
L\ = -~IA.J4v2ln (A.rvi) = 3.J2miGF In (M~) 
t 
4 2 t 
2 
M2 
2 2 · 2p 
2 
• 
1t 
st 
1t sm 
mt 
(28.5.47) 
where Gp = 1.17 x 10-5 Gev-2 is the Fermi coupling constant, given by 
Eq. (21.3.34) as Gp = g2 j4.J2miv. Taking mb = 4.3 GeV, mr = 180 GeV, 
Mst -
Msb '""" 1 TeV, and mz = 91.2 GeV gives ~b - 1.1 x 10-
6 m~/ cos2 P 
and ~r- 1.1 m~/ sin2 p. We see that even if tanp is as large as mtfmb, the 
top-quark correction ~t will still be much larger than ~b-

218 
28 Supersyrnrnetric Standard Models 
The effect of Ar is to increase both rnH and rnh. Taking this and other 
radiative corrections into account,26 for tanp > 10 the upper bound 
(28.5.43) on the lightest neutral scalar mass is raised by radiative correc-
tions from just below mz to between 100 GeV and 110 GeV for stop 
masses between 300 GeV and 1 TeV. For comparison, an experimental 
lower bound27 of 62.5 Ge V on rnh, rnH, and rnA is set by the absence of an 
hA or HA final state in e+ e- collisions at 130 to 172 Ge V. Also, calcula-
tions of radiative corrections involving Higgs scalars are consistent with 
precision measurements of electroweak phenomena for rnh in the range27a 
of 27 to 140 GeV. 
Radiative corrections are less important for the charged scalars. Since 
the attachment of charged scalar lines allows transitions between top and 
bottom quarks, the correction to the scalar field potential here takes a 
more general form, constrained by SU(2) x U(1) to be 
AV = U(ffiffz, fflfft, ffifft, fflffz, fffeff2). 
(28.5.48) 
(Quark loops do not actually produce any dependence on ffTeff 2.) Every 
appearance of a ff 1 or ff 2 doublet is accompanied with a factor Ab or 2r. 
respectively, so terms involving ff 1 will be suppressed, as we have already 
seen in calculating the neutral scalar masses. To a good approximation, 
then, the correction to the effective potential is of the form 
AV ~ U(ffiff2, 0, 0, 0) = U(lvz + 1P2I2 + lff2f, 0, 0, 0). (28.5.49) 
By going back to the case where the charged fields vanish, we see that the 
function U must be just the same as what was earlier called Ur. Any temls 
in U of first order in an expansion in powers of lv2 + 1P2I2 + lff212 -
v~ 
would simply serve to redefine the constant rn~, and are eliminated by the 
convention (28.5.38). Terms in U of second order in lv2+1P2I
2 +Iff21
2 -v~ 
are genuine radiative corrections, but although they contain terms of 
second order in lrpzl2 which do affect the neutral scalar masses, they 
contain no terms of second order in lff2e which could shift the non-
Goldstone charged scalar mass. Fortunately, radiative corrections are not 
needed to avoid a conflict with experiment, because in the absence of an 
upper bound on rnA there is no theoretical upper bound on the charged 
scalar mass (28.5.35). An experimental lower bound28 me > 59 GeV is 
provided by the non-observation of the process e+e- --+ ff+ ff- at 181 to 
184 GeV. There is a much more stringent lower bound on me provided by 
the rate of the process b--+ sy (measured in decays like B--+ K•y), which 
can occur by transitions to an intermediate ff-u or ff-c :state, with the 
photon radiated from the virtual quark or ff-. The pres~~nt agreement 
between theory and experiment for this process sets a lower bound29 of 
about 150 GeV on me (and higher for tanp < 1). Using Eq. (28.5.35), this 
gives an important lower bound rnA > 125 GeV. 

28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number 
219 
There are two conditions on the masses mf that must be satisfied 
by any model of supersymmetry breaking in order to give a successful 
account of electroweak symmetry breaking. One of them is provided by 
the requirement that the potential is bounded below, which as we have 
seen requires that 
2l,ul 2 + mf + m~ > B,u . 
Since B ,u is defined to be positive, this ensures that the C-odd neutral 
scalar squared mass (28.5.21) is positive. The other condition is provided 
by Eqs. (28.5.22) and (28.5.24), which for arbitrary values of p require that 
4(mf + l.uf) (m~ + l.uf) < (B,u)2 . 
(28.5.50) 
We can easily se·e from Eq. (28.5.10) that this condition ensures that the 
matrix of second derivatives of the potential has a negative eigenvalue at 
.tft = .tf2 = 0, so this SU(2) x U(1)-invariant point is one of unstable 
equilibrium, and therefore SU(2) x U(1) must be spontaneously broken. 
If p is very near n/2, then Eq. (28.5.24) tells us that this condition is 
satisfied by having mf + l,ul2 positive and ~ + l,ul2 negative. As we will 
see in the next section, the renormalization group flow of the parameters 
in the scalar field Lagrangian provides a mechanism for driving~+ l,ul2 
negative. 
Even with a minimal set of superfields, in supersymmetry theories there 
are several pairs of particles with different SU(2) x U(1) transformation 
properties, but the same charge, color, and baryon and lepton number, 
which become mixed when SU(2) x U(1) is spontaneously broken. We 
have already seen an example of this in the previous section, in which we 
had to deal with the mixing of the scalar superpartners of the left-handed 
quarks with the complex conjugates of the scalar superpartners of the 
left-handed antiquarks. A similar mixing occurs between the higgsinos 
and gauginos, both charged and neutral; the particles of definite mass 
are not higgsinos or gauginos, but mixtures known as charginos and 
neutralinos. Let us consider the charginos, which provide a useful bound 
on ,u. According to Eq. (27.4.8), there are off-diagonal supersymmetric 
mass terms in the Lagrangian density 
-Re [.u(h!lehii) +iJ2mwcosP(w£Tt:hiL) +i.J2mwsinP(wtTt:h1L)] , 
To this, we should add a term for the wino mass generated by gauge 
interactions with the supersymmetry-breaking sector 
--mwm0 Re (wtTt:w£). 
The squared chargino masses are then the eigenvalues of the matrix 

220 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
.Ab.Ac, where 
.A 
( 
mwino 
i..fim~ sinp ) . 
c = 
i-./2mw cos P 
,_ 
(28.5.51) 
These two eigenvalues are 
~•gino = ~ [,;..,. + zm>w + 11'12 ± ((,;..,. -11'12
)
2 + 4m1,. cos
2 2P 
+4mi,(,2wino + 11'12 - 211lwinoRe I' sin 2p)) 
112]. 
(28.5.52) 
We expect the wino mass fnwino to be much larger than mw. If it is also 
much larger than jp,j, then the heavier chargino is mostly a wino, with 
mass mwino. while the lightest chargino is mostly a higgsino, with mass 
)p,l. In any case, )p,l is greater than the lightest chargino mass, which the 
non-appearance of gauginos in e+ -e- annihilation tells us is greater than 
about 60 GeV, and probably greater than mw. The search for neutralinos 
in e+ -e- annihilation has set a lower bound of 27 GeV on the mass of 
the lightest neutralino.29a 
28.6 
Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
In this section we will consider the possibility that the breakdown of super-
symmetry is transmitted to the known particles through interactions of the 
ordinary SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1). gauge bosons and their superpartners.30 
It is assumed here that supersymmetry is dynamically broken in a sec-
tor of superfields, not including the superfields of the observed quarks 
and leptons, and that some of the chiral superfields in the symmetry-
breaking sector, known. as the messenger superfields, have non-vanishing 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) quantum numbers. In order for the messenger 
particles to be able to get large (say, of order 1 TeV) masses without 
breaking SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l), it is necessary for them to furnish a 
real (or pseudoreal) representation of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1), which au-
tomatically also means that they do not introduce any new anomalies. 
Although most treatments of' gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking in 
the literature also make specific assumptions about the interactions of the 
messenger superfields with the other superfields responsible for supersym-
metry breaking, the most important predictions of this class of theories in 
fact do not depend on these assumptions. We shall therefore put off as-
suming anything about the interactions of the messenger superfields with 
the other superfields of the symmetry-breaking sector. We will, however, 
make another assumption about the SU(3) xSU(2)x U(1) properties of the 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
221 
n 
Figure 28.5. A diagram of the sort that introduces a breakdown of supersym-
metry into the propagator of the gauge superfields. Here wavy lines are any 
component fields of the gauge superfields; solid lines are component fields 
of the messenger superfields; and dotted lines are component fields of the 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-neutral superfields of the supersymmetry-breaking sector. 
messenger super:fields, which has a strong phenomenological motivation. 
In order for the messenger particles not to interfere with the unification 
of couplings discussed in Section 28.2, we assume that they have the same 
ratios for the total traces of all squared SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauge 
generators as the ordinary quarks and leptons. This condition will auto-
matically be satisfied if the messenger superfields (together perhaps with 
some SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-neutral chiral super:fields) furnish a complete 
representation of some simple group G that contains SU(3) xSU(2) x U(l), 
of which the quarks and leptons (again, together perhaps with some 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-neutral chiral super:fields) also form a complete 
representation. (For instance, these left-chiral superfields might form N 
SU(2) singlet SU(3) triplets with charge e/3 and N SU(2) doublet SU(3) 
singlets with charges 0 and -e, which together form N representations 5 
of S U(S), together with an equal number of left-chiral super:fields in the 
complex-conjugate representations of S U(3) x SU(2) x U(l), which form 
N representations 5.) However, for our present purposes we will neither 
need to assume that G is an actual symmetry group of the theory, nor 
adopt any particular choice of G or of the representations furnished by 
the messenger particles. 
This interaction of the messenger super:fields both with the other chiral 
andjor gauge super:fields of the supersymmetry-breaking sector and with 
the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(ll) gauge superfields can be expected to produce 
a breakdown of supersymmetry in the propagators of the component 
fields of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauge super:fields. To lowest order 
in the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) couplings, the leading contribution to the 
propagators comes from the diagram shown in Figure 28.5, in which a 
pair of gauge, gaugino, or auxiliary D-field lines is attached to a loop 

222 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
of messenger fields, which also may have any number of interactions 
with SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-neutral fields of the supersymmetry-break.ing 
sector. The supersymmetry-breaking corrections Aic to the propagators of 
the gauge superfields (with i = 1, 2, 3 for SU(3), SU(2), and U(1), and 
c = V, A., D labelling the different components of each gauge superfield) 
therefore have the forms 
A3c(q) = (g;/16n2) :E T3nflcn(q), 
n 
(28.6.1) 
n 
n 
where n labels the different messenger superfields; flcn(q) are more-or-
less complicated functions of the four-momentum q; T3n and T2n are the 
traces of the squares of any generator of SU(3) and SU(2), respectively, in 
the representations furnished by the nth messenger superfield (normalized 
so that in the defining representations T3 = T2 = 1/2); and Ttn is the 
sum of the squares of the electroweak hypercharges of the nth messenger 
superfield. One immediate consequence is that the gauginos acquire masses 
of the same form:* 
n 
(28.6.2) 
n 
n 
where the Mgn are masses that characterize the different messenger su-
perfields. As already mentioned, in order to preserve the unification of 
couplings at very high energy we assume that the sums of the Tn have the 
same ratios as for the observed quarks and leptons: 
(28.6.3) 
n 
n 
n 
The breakdown of supersymmetry in these propagators is then com-
municated to the squarks and s~eptons of the supersymmetric stan-
dard model through the diagrams shown in Figure 28.6, in which an 
• Recall that the bino is the superpartner of the U(l) gauge field Bp that appears in 
the Lagrangian of the standard model. We are not yet taking SU(2) x U(l) breaking 
into account, so the gaugino, squark, and slepton masses calculated here should be 
understood as parameters appearing in the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-ir1variant effective 
Lagrangian of the standard mode. 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
223 
-------~ -------
Figure 28.6. Diagrams that communicate supersyrnmetry breaking to the squarks 
and sleptons. Here dashed lines are squarks or sleptons; wavy lines are SU(3) x 
SU(2)x U(l) gauge bosons or auxiliary D fields; solid lines are quarks or leptons; 
combined solid and wavy lines are SU(3)xSU(2)x U(l) gauginos; and the squares 
represent insertions of the supersymmetry-break:ing propagator correction shown 
in Figure 28.5. 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge boson or gaugino or auxiliary D field is 
emitted and reabsorbed by the squark or slepton. We are calculating the 
effective low-energy theory in which S U(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-breaking is not 
yet taken into account, so there is no mixing among the S U(3), SU(2), 
and U(1) propagators, and each propagator acts like. a unit matrix on the 
gauge indices. Thus the squared mass given to any squark or slepton will 
be proportional to a sum over the squares of all the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) 
generators (including coupling constants) in the representation furnished 
by that squark or slepton. The sums of the squared SU(2) and SU(3) 
generators in the defining representations are 
where qa are the Pauli isospin matrices (5.4.18) and A.a: are the Gell-Mann 
matrices (19.7.2). For U(1) the generator is just the weak hypercharge 
(21.3. 7), including a factor g'. The squared squark and slepton masses 
therefore have the forms 
[
4 ( 
2 )
2 
3 ( 
2 )
2 
1 2 ( 
12 )
2 
] 
M~=2~M;n 3 ~~~2 
T3n+4 
l~n2 
T2n+(6) t!n2 
T1n 
[ 
4 ( 
2 ) 
2 
2 2 ( 
!2 ) 2 
] 
Mb = 2~M; :3 
1!~2 
T3n + (3) 
1!n2 
Ttn 
, 
[
4 ( 
2 ) 
2 
1 2 ( 
12 ) 2 
] 
M_& = 2 ~M! 3 l~~2 
T3n + ( -3) 
1!n2 
Ttn 
, 
(28.6.4) 

224 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
[3 ( 2 ) 
2 
1) 2 ( 
12 ) 2 
] 
Mz = 2 ~ 
M}n 4 l~n2 
T2n + (2 
l!n2 
Ttn 
' 
Mj = 2 ~ 
M~ ( 1~2 ) 
2 
T1. , 
where Q, U, l>, L, and E are the scalar superpartners of the left-handed 
quark doublets, the left-handed antiquarks of charge -2e/3 and +e/3, the 
left-handed lepton doublets, and the left-handed charged antileptons, and 
Msn are some new masses that characterize the nth messenger super:fields. 
(The factor 2 is extracted from M'ffn for future convenience.) The squark 
and slepton masses that are produced in this way are automatically the 
same in all three generations, thus avoiding the problem with flavor-
changing processes discussed in Section 28.4. 
We expect all Mgn and Msn to be roughly of the same order of magni-
tude, so that the gluino and squarks will have comparable masses, while 
the wino, bino, and sleptons will be much lighter, with masses suppressed 
by squares of electroweak coupling constants. 
We can go considerably further than this with some reasonable dynam-
ical assumptions. Suppose that the effects of supersymmetry breaking on 
the messenger super:fields may be modeled by including these super:fields 
along with a set of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-neutral chiral superfields Sn (not 
necessarily all distinct) in a superpotential 
f( <1>, <1>, S) = L AnSn <I>n<I>n , 
(28.6.5) 
n 
where <I>n and <I>n are left-chiral messenger super:fields in complex-conjugate 
representations of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) and A.n are a set of coupling 
coefficients. (Here and below we suppress the S U(3) x S U(2) indices that 
are summed over in calculating scalar products like <I>n<I>n.) The super:fields 
Sn are supposed to have non-vanishing vacuum expectation values f/ n and 
:F n for their scalar and auxiliary components, respectively. It is the non-
zero values of :F n that in these models introduce supersymmetry breaking 
in the masses of the <I>n and <I>n particles. Section 26.4 shows that, with 
gauge couplings neglected, the squared masses of the spinor components 
of <I>n (and <I>n) are the eigenvalues of the matrix ..lt~..lt n, with ..It n defined 
by Eq. (26.4.11), which gives 
Ji = ( 
0 
An!/n ) 
...nn 
AnYn 
0 
' 
so that the messenger fermions have masses IA.n!/ nl· To 11nd the mass 
terms for the scalar components l/Jn and 'Cbn of the <I>n and «i)n super:fields, 
we note that integrating out the auxiliary fields of the <I>n and <I>n yields a 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
225 
potential 
to which we now must add the contribution of the auxiliary component 
of the Sn, given by the second term of Eq. (26.4.4) as: 
2Re ,L: [A.nffn of(::·Y)l = 2Re ,L: [~n A.n¢nlPn] . 
n 
n 
n 
The complex scalar fields of definite mass are then (¢n + e-ia.n{pn)/ Ji, 
where lln is the phase of A.nffm with squared masses IA.n.S'-'n\2 + llnffnl· 
(Note that this pattern, of a pair of complex scalars with squared masses 
equidistant above and below a Majorana fermion squared mass, is just 
what we would expect from the sum rule (27.5.11).) Since these squared 
masses must be positive, it follows that 
(28.6.6) 
The gaugino masses in models based on Eq. (28.6.5) are given by 
diagrams of the form shown in Figure 28.5, but now with just a single 
loop, not including what are shown as dotted lines in Figure 28.5. A 
detailed calculation gives the coefficients Mgn in Eq. (28.6.2) as31 
where 
g(x) = 2~2 [<1 + x) ln(1 + x) + (1- x) ln(1- x)] 
x2 
x4 
x6 
=1+-+-+-+· .. 
6 
15 
28 
. 
(28.6.7) 
(28.6.8) 
The masses of the squarks and sleptons are given by the diagrams of Figure 
28.6, which now involve just two loops. Another detailed calculation gives 
the mass parameters M;n in Eq. (28.6.4) as31 
(28.6.9) 
where 
f(x) = 
1 ~x [ln(1 +x)- 2Liz ( 1 :x) +~Liz ( 1 ~x)] + x-+ -x 
1 
2 
11 
4 
319 
6 
= 1 + 36x - 450x - 11760x + ... ' 
(28.6.10) 

226 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
with Lh the dilogarithm 
. ( ) 
lox In( 1 - t) d 
L12 X =-
t. 
0 
t 
(28.6.11) 
In particular, if (as is usually assumed) the various Sn are all the same, 
and if lffl < IJ.niiY'I2 for all n, then f and g in Eqs. (28.6.9) and (28.6.7) 
may be set equal to 1, so that 
Mgn = Msn = lffi/IY'I - M. 
(28.6.12) 
Using Eq. (28.6.3), we can express the gaugino masses (28.6.2) as 
mwino = (g2 /16n2)T M, 
mbino = (5/3)(g'2/16n2)TM, 
(28.6.13) 
mgtuino = (g; /16n2) T M , 
while the squared squark and slepton masses (28.6.4) become 
(28.6.14) 
There is no special reason to expect that lffl < f).n9'12• but this assump-
tion is not actually very restrictive, because Eq. (28.6.6) already requires 
that lffl ~ fJ.nfl9'f2, and it turns out that the functions f(x) and g(x) do 
not differ much from unity for x < 1 unless x is very close to 1. 
The extreme simplicity of the results (28.6.13) and (28.6.14) has been 
explained by Giudice and Rattazzi32 by using Seiberg's arguments of 
holomorphy,33 described in Section 27.6. Suppose we introduce a super-
potential for the messenger super:fields like (28.6.5), but with a single 
external singlet superfield S : 
f(S, $) = S L An q)n<f>n · 
(28.6.15) 
n 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
227 
Among other effects the kinematic term for the gauge superfield Vi (with 
i = 3, 2, 1 for SU(3), SU(2), and U(1)) in the Wilsonian effective La-
grangian at a renormalization scale f.l will now take the form 
2gauge,p = Re [l;Nt(S,f.l) 'L (Wii~Eap WiLp)] 
, 
1 
ap 
F 
(28.6.16) 
with some functions N;(S,f.l) replacing the factors 1/2gf(f.l) in Eq. (27.3.22). 
(The 9-term is dropped here because it has no effect in perturbation theory. 
A sum is implied over indices on Wil.ot that label different members of 
the adjoint representations of S U(3) and S U(2), which are not explicitly 
shown.) The gauge coupling constant is now given by setting the superfield 
S equal to the expectation value f/ of its scalar component 
(28.6.17) 
Also, recalling that WiLa = AiLoc + 0(9) and using Eq. (27.2.11), the terms 
in the Lagrangian density (28.6.16) of second order in the gaugino fields 
are, up to derivative terms, 
-2 I: Re [Ni(!/,f.l)(J:iR ~AiR) + [Ni(S,f.l)lF( AXEAiL)] 
i 
This gives the gaugino masses 
(28.6.18) 
Now let us consider the behavior of N;( [I', f.l) as a function of a real positive 
Y, with the phases of the messenger super:fields adjusted so that all An 
are real and positive. Suppose we fix the values of the gauge couplings 
g;(f.l) at some scale f.l = K above all the messenger particle masses. Taking 
account of the change in the constants hi in the renormalization group 
equations J.Ulgi(f.l)fdf.l = big[ as f.l passes through the various messenger 
masses, the solution of this equation when f.l is below all the messenger 
particle masses takes the form 
- 1-
= - 1-- 2b~o) In (Ml) - 2b~t) In (M2 ) -
· · ·- 2b~N) In(_!!:__) 
g[(f.l) 
gf(K) 
I 
K 
I 
Mt 
I 
MN 
' 
where we label the messenger particles so that their masses Mn = An!/ 
satisfy 
Mt > M2 > ... > MN ' 
and b~n) is calculated taking account only of particles with masses less 
than Mn. Since all Mn are proportional to .9, we see that Ni(f/, f.l) has the 

228 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
!/ dependence 
N;(Y', /1) = -bf"essenger In!/+ !/'-independent terms, 
(28.6.19) 
where b~essenger = b~o) - b}N) is the contribution to b; of all the messenger 
superfields. According to Eq. (27.9.45) (with Cil = 0 and C{z = Cf2 = 
Ln T;n), this is 
bmessenger 
1 
" 
T 
i 
= 16n:2 ~ in . 
(28.6.20) 
Since N;(S,/1) is required by supersymmetry to be a holomorphic function 
of S, we see that 
N;(S, 11) = - 16
1 
2 2...: Tin ln S + S -independent terms . 
n: 
n 
(28.6.21) 
Expanding around S = !/, to first order in :F we have [ln !/]y = JF /9' 
and so Eq. (28.6.18) gives the gaugino masses 
-
&f(/1) " 
I!#' I 
mg;(/1) -
16n2 ~ 
Tin 9' . 
(28.6.22) 
Using Eq. (28.6.3), we see that this is the same as our previous result 
(28.6.13). Eq. (28.6.14) for the squark and slepton masses was obtained by 
Giudice and Rattazzi in a similar way, by studying the kinematic terms 
for the quark and lepton superfields instead of the gauge superfields. 
Incidentally, Eqs. (28.6.13) and (28.6.14) could be obtained (in general 
with different values of M in Eq. (28.6.13) and Eq. (28.6.14)) without a 
specific dynamical assumption like Eq. (28.6.5), if we supposed that the 
supersym.metry-breaking sector respected invariance under some grand 
unified group G that had both the known quarks and leptons and the 
messenger fields as complete representations. In this case the coefficients 
Mgn and M 3n in Eqs. (28.6.2) and (28.6.4) would have values Mg(d) and 
M3( d), respectively, that depend only on the irreducible representation d 
of G to which the nth messenger fields belong. The sums of T;n over n 
belonging to any irreducible representation d of G have the same ratios 
as the sums in Eq. (28.6.3), -so Lned T;n = k; T(d), where k3 = kz = 1, 
kt = 5/3, and therefore 
LT;nMgn = LMg(d) LTin = k;Mg, 
n 
d 
ned 
where Mg = Ld Mg(d)T(d). Likewise 
L 
T;nM~ = L M;(d) L 
T;n = k;M; , 
n 
d 
ned 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
229 
where Mi = Ld M;(d)T(d). Eqs. (28.6.2) and (28.6.4) would then yield 
Eqs. (28.6.13) and (28.6.14), except with Mg in place of T M and MI in 
place of 2T M2• But the assumption that Mgn and Msn respect invariance 
under G is implausible if the messenger mass scale is far below the grand 
unified scale, since whatever we assume about a grand unified gauge 
group, the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge interactions would make coupling 
constants like .:l.n run differently for <Dn with different SU(3) xSU(2) x U(1) 
quantum numbers in the same representation of the grand unified group. 
These results are subject to various radiative corrections, of which the 
most important is that we must use values of gs. g, and g' renormalized at 
a scale comparable to the mass being calculated. Indeed, the gaugino mass 
ratios given in Eq. (28.6.13) could also be derived under quite different 
assumptions: that all gaugino masses are equal at the grand unification 
scale where the coupling constants are related by g; = g2 = 5g'2 /3 and 
become different at lower energies as described by the renormalization 
group equations. 
For an illustrative example of numerical results, suppose that the mes-
senger superfields forin an SU(2) singlet SU(3) triplet with charge e/3 
and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet with charges 0 and -e, together 
with left-chiral superfields in the complex-conjugate representations of 
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l). Then, as already mentioned, Eq. (28.6.3) is satisfied 
with T = 2 x 1/2 = 1, so by using the correct values of the gauge cou-
plings, the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons, wino, E sleptons, and 
bino are calculated to be in the ratios34 11.6 :: 7.0 :: 2.5 :: 2 :: 1.1 :: 1.0. 
In larger representations of G we could have T ::> 1, in which case the 
gluino would be the heaviest of these particles, and the sleptons the lightest 
ones. 
There are also radiative corrections aside from the running of the gauge 
couplings. According to one calculation,34 in the model with an SU(2) 
singlet SU(3) triplet with charge e/3 and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet 
with charges 0 and -e, together with left-chiral superfields in the complex-
conjugate representations of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1), radiative corrections 
give the ratios of the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons, wino, E 
sleptons, and bino as 9.3 :: 6.4 :: 2.6 :: 1.9 :: 1.35 :: 1.0. 
As we saw in the previous section, the wino and bino may mix with 
the charged and neutral higgsinos, so the wino and bino masses that 
have been calculated here must be regarded as inputs to a calculation of 
physical masses of mixtures known as charginos and neutralinos, rather 
than physical masses themselves. 
Now we shall consider the masses of the Higgs scalars in these models. 
If we were to consider only the two-loop diagrams by which these scalars 
get masses through gauge interactions with the supersymmetry-break.ing 
sector, then since (apart from signs) they have the same SU(3) x SU(2) x 

230 
28 Super symmetric Standard Models 
U(l) quantum numbers as the left-handed lepton doublets, their masses 
would be given by a formula like the fourth of Eqs. (28.6.4) 
[mih loop = [~bloop = Mi 
=~M~[H1::2r T2.+Gr(1~2r T,.r (28.6.23) 
If this were the whole story, then it would be impossible to meet the 
condition for SU(2) x U(l) breaking found in the previous section that 
(unless tan p is very close to unity) one of mf + 1Jll2 and m~ + l.ul2 must 
be negative. Fortunately, the large masses of the top quark and squark 
produce a negative contribution to m~ that leads naturally to a sponta-
neous breakdown of electroweak symmetry. The couplings of the Higgs 
doublets to the third-generation quark super:fields are described by the 
su perpotential 
hro gen = Ab ( H{eQ) B +At ( H{eQ) T, 
(28.6.24) 
where Q is the S U(2) quark doublet left-chiral superfield (T, B), while T 
and B are the left-chiral super:fields of the left-handed top and bottom 
antiquarks, and At and Ab are the Yukawa couplings, related to the t and 
b quark masses by mr = ArV2 and mb = Abv1. The last term of Eq. (26.4. 7) 
then gives the terms in the potential involving an interaction between the 
squark fields and Higgs fields as 
Vsq H = \Ab.Yf}£i + At.Ytgsf + \Ab£?£i + At.Yfiff\
2 
+IAbn.Yf?tM- Jf} §I + 1
Atn JtttM _ ~§
1
2
• 
(28.6.25) 
where script letters denote the scalar field components of superfields. The 
squark loop contributions to the potential of Jf 1 and £2 are then 
v;{uark loop = 3(Y'Y'*) [ 2IAbl2( £! Jt 1) + 21Arf( Jti£2) J , 
(28.6.26) 
where (Y' Y'*) is the vacuum expectation value of the product of any 
one of the squark fields and its complex conjugate at the same spacetime 
point. (In taking this to be the same for all squark types, we are here 
using Eq. (28.6.4), which tells us that the squark masses MQ do not vary 
much among ff, tM, ff, and £i squarks. The factor 3 in Eq. (28.6.26) takes 
account of the three colors of each squark type.) The vacuum expectation 
value (Y' Y'*) is given in lowest order by 
. 
d4 
(Y' Y'*) = (Y'(x) Y'*(x))VAC = ( -l)4 J 
p2 
; 
. . 
2n: 
+MQ-ze 
(28.6.27) 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
231 
This of course is divergent, but the contribution to supersymmetry-
breaking coefficients would be cancelled by quark loops if the squarks 
had the zero bare mass of the quarks, so the effect of quark loops is to 
subtract from (28.6.27) the same expression with MQ replaced with zero, 
which with a Wick rotation becomes 
We have inserted an ultraviolet cut-off at the messenger mass M, because 
at momenta above M the squark mass must be replaced with a momentum-
dependent mass, which goes to the supersymmetric value zero at very high 
momenta. Making this substitution in Eq. (28.6.26) gives a net contribution 
to the potential due to squark and quark loops: 
(Vm)Jioop =~:~In ( ~i) [21-1•12(£/£,) +21lr1
2(£1£2)]. 
(28.6.28) 
(This is a three-loop contribution, because the squared squark masses are 
given by two-loop diagrams. There are also terms in the potential that are 
quadratic in both the Higgs and squark super:fields, arising from products 
of the Higgs and squark terms in the squares of the SU(2) x U(1) gauge 
field D-components. These do not make a three-loop contribution to the 
Higgs masses because the sum of each SU(2) x U(1) quantum number of 
the squarks vanishes, so that their contributions to the SU(2) x U(1) gauge 
field D-components have zero vacuum expectation value.) Comparing Eq. 
(28.6.28) with Eq. (28.5.9) and adding the two-loop contribution (28.6.23) 
to the masses, we see then that 
(28.6.29) 
(28.6.30) 
Using Eq. (28.6.14) and 12tl = mt!v2 = mt(2jiGp)112jsinp, we may write. 

232 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
(28.6.30) as 
[
3 ( 
2 ) 
2 
5 ( 
12 ) 
2 
m3_ ~ 2T M2 4 1!n2 
+ 12 
1!n2 
_ .JiGFmf ( g; ) \n ( 
3 
) ] 
n2 sin2 fJ 
16n2 
8T(gf/16n2) 
· 
(28.6.31) 
ForT= 1, g;/4n = 0.118, g2 j4n = 0.0340, g'2 j4n = 0.0101, and mt = 180 
GeV, this is 
2 "' M2 [1 -
3.06] 
'"2-
L 
·2p • 
sm 
(28.6.32) 
which is negative for all values of {J, thus providing a natural mechanism 
for the spontaneous breaking of the electroweak gauge symmetry. Also, 
Ml = (0.91 x 10--4)M2j8n2. Unless tan{J is huge, we have I.A.bl <: !A.t!. so 
Eq. (28.6.27) gives 
mi ~ Mi . 
(28.6.33) 
The aspect of electroweak phenomenology for which the predictions of 
gauge-mediated supersymmetry models are most uncertain and unsatis-
factory has to do with the parameter f.l in the supersymmetry-preserving 
term J.t[(HJ eH2)]§" and the related supersymmetry-breaking term B Jl in 
the Lagrangian density. These are related because the interactions of 
the Higgs superfields with the gauge, lepton, and quark superfields are 
invariant under a symmetry 
Ht- lffPHt, 
Q- e-iqJQ' 
n-n, 
H2- eifPH2, 
vi-vi. 
u-a. 
(28.6.34) 
which in the absence of a superpotential term J.t(H[ eH2) would forbid 
radiative corrections from producing a term B f.l Re ( .Yt'T e.Yt' 2) in the scalar 
field potential. 
It is not possible for BJ.t to vanish because then Eq. (28.5.22) and the 
fact that (as we have seen) mA i= 0 would imply that sin 2{1 = 0, or in other 
words either v1 = 0 or v2 = 0, which would imply that either all the charge 
-ej3 quarks and charged leptons are massless or all the charge +2e/3 
quarks are massless. (If BJ.t = 0 and f.l = 0 then this problem persists to all 
orders, because the appearance of non-zero vacuum expectation values for 
both v1 and v2 would imply that symmetry under any combination of the 
transformation (28.6.34) and electroweak U(l) gauge transformations is 
spontaneously broken, so the C-odd neutral scalar would be a Goldstone 
boson with mA = 0.) It is natural to try to account for a non-zero value 

28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 
233 
of B J.l as a radiative correction in a theory in which symmetry under the 
transformation (28.6.34) is explicitly broken by a supersymmetric term 
J.l[(H( eH2)]~ in the Lagrangian density. This gives a very small value 
of B}.l at the messenger scale,34 although renormalization group effects 
greatly increase BJ.l at lower energies. According to Eq. (28.5.22), a 
relatively small BJ.l would fit well with the idea that the large mass of 
the top quark arises from a large value of tan p. In any case, as already 
mentioned, the experimental lower bound on the chargino mass tells us 
that IJ.ll is at least about 60 Ge V. 
The trouble is that the appearance of a non-zero value of J.l resurrects 
the hierarchy problem that supersymmetry was supposed to solve: instead 
of asking why the Higgs mass terms in the Lagrangian density are so 
much smaller than the Planck mass or the mass at which gauge couplings 
are unified, we now have to ask why J.l is this small? 
The hierarchy problem would be put to rest if the Higgs superfields 
interact with the supersymmetry-breaking sector in such a way that a 
term J.l[(H[eH2)]~ is forbidden by some symmetry, but appears when that 
symmetry is spontaneously broken. A massless Goldstone boson may be 
avoided if the symmetry is discrete rather than continuous. The simplest 
possibility is simply to extend the symmetry transformation (28.6.34) to 
include a transformation 
s ~ e-2iqls' 
which would allow a term in the superpotential of the form 
XS(ff[eff2). 
We can avoid a continuous symmetry by also including a term S3 in the 
superpotential, so that the Lagrangian is invariant only under transforma-
tions with cp a multiple of 2n /3, which is still enough to forbid a non-zero 
bare value of J.l· In this case the appearance of non-zero vacuum values 
Sf' and !F for the scalar and auxiliary components of S yields 
B J.l = !) .. ' !FI ' 
J.l = !) .. 'Sf' I . 
This would result in B having a very large I.A.')-independent value M, given 
by (28.6.12), which is greater by a factor of order (gtf16n)-1 ~ 100 than 
the squark or gluino masses. But then, since Eqs. (28.6.32) and (28.6.33) 
give mr + ~ < 0, the stability condition (28.5.11) would require that 
IJ.ll > M /2, and hence Eq. (28.5.22) would require that rnA is also much 
greater than the squark and slepton masses. This is ruled out by the 
relation (28.5.23) and the estimates (28.6.33) and (28.6.32) of mi and ~ 
unless tan p is very close to unity. 
We will see in Section 31.6 that theories of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking naturally yield acceptable values of BJ.l and J.l. Such 

234 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
theories are characterized by a very high energy scale of supersymmetry 
breaking, in various versions of order either 1011 GeV or 1013 GeV. There 
have been several suggestions35 on ways to obtain acceptable values of 
B Jl and Jl in theories in which supersymmetry is broken at relatively low 
energy, such as theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, but 
none of them is particularly compelling. Also, since we do not know 
where Jl comes from, we do not have any reason to suppose that it is 
real, so theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking are at risk of 
yielding too much CP violation, just as in the more general framework of 
Section 28.4. 
Like the scalar squared masses my and m~, the parameters Aii and 
Cii in Eq. (28.4.1) are given by two-loop diagrams. However, they have 
the dimensions of mass rather than mass squared, and they are much less 
than the scalar and gaugino masses, so they make a relatively unimportant 
contribution to supersymmetry breaking. 
As in any model with supersymmetry broken at energies much less 
than 1010 GeV, the lightest R-odd particle in all models based on gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking is the gra vitino. As we will see in 
Section 31.3, the gravitino mass is of the order of .JG times the squared 
energy F characteristic of supersymmetry breaking, defined so that the 
vacuum energy is F2j2. Where supersymmetry is broken by the :F-
terms :Fna of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-neutral chiral superfields Sn, we 
have F2 = En IfF nal2• If there are no large dimensionless quantities in 
the Lagrangian for the Sn. then squark masses in this model are of the 
order of g'f JF j16n2 ~ 10-2 JF, so in order for this to be less than the 
naturalness bound of 104 GeV, we must have JF < 106 GeV, which gives 
a gravitino mass less than 1 keV. Gravitational couplings are so weak at 
accessible energies that it is only the helicity +1/2 states of the gravitino 
that can actually be produced, and these behave just like goldstino states. 
As shown by Eq. (27.5.12), in the models discussed here the goldstino 
field appears with coefficient i.Ji:F n in the fermionic component v>n of 
Sn. Goldstinos are emitted in the decay of the R-odd sparticles into the 
corresponding R-even particles of the standard model through radiative 
corrections, with goldstinos emerging from vertices connecting internal 
v>n and !/ n lines. According to Eq. (29.2.10), the goldstino emission 
amplitudes are inversely proportional to F, which makes these decays 
comparatively slow, although perhaps fast enough to be observed. 
Because the decay of R-odd particles into goldstinos is slow, it is 
phenomenologically important in these models to identify the next-to-
lightest R-odd particle, into which all the heavier R-odd particles will decay 
before it in turn decays into a goldstino. As we have seen, the next-to-
lightest R-odd particle is usually a slepton, wino, or bino. (It is possible in 
models with a messeng1er superfield having the same SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) 

28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation 
235 
quantum numbers as the Higgs doublets that the mixing between these 
superfields would lower the mass of the doublet messengers so much that 
the lightest R-odd particle would be the gluino. 350) Detailed calculations 
including the effects of S U (2) x U ( 1) breaking indicate that here is a large 
region of parameter space in which the next-to-lightest R-odd particle is 
one of the two tau sleptons. 35b 
28.7 
Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation 
The extra particles in supersymmetric models provide several new mech-
anisms for baryon and lepton non-conservation. We saw in Section 28.1 
that there are various baryon- and lepton-number non-conserving super-
symmetric operators (28.1.2) and (28.1.3) of dimensionality four that can 
be included in a renormalizable SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant theory 
and that would lead to processes like proton decay at a catastrophic 
rate. These terms can be excluded from the Lagrangian by imposing 
R parity conservation (or, equivalently, invariance under a change of 
sign of all quark and lepton chiral superfields) but this does not exclude 
various SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-invariant but baryon- and lepton-number 
non-conserving operators of dimensionality d > 4. As discussed in Sec-
tion 21.3, if there is an underlying mechanism for baryon and lepton 
non-conservation characterized by some high mass scale M, then these 
operators will appear in the effective Lagrangian of the standard model 
with coefficients proportional to M 4-d. With only the fields of the non-
supersymmetric standard model, operators that can violate baryon con-
servation have a minimum dimensionality six,36 and thus give baryon 
non-conserving amplitudes proportional to M-2. The new fields required 
by supersymmetry lead to two important changes in estimates of baryon 
non-conserving processes like proton and bound neutron decay. As we 
saw in Section 28.2, the change in the renormalization group equations 
gives larger estimates of M, which decreases the effect of the dimension 
six operators. At the same time, these new fields allow the construction of 
new operators of dimensionality five, which give baryon non-conserving 
amplitudes proportional to M-1 and are therefore likely to make the 
dominant contribution to proton and bound neutron decay.37 
The supersymmetric operators of dimensionality five that can be formed 
out of chiral superfields (gemerically called <!>) are of the forms (<I>.~)D 
and (<I>~<I>)F, and their complex conjugates. 
(We do not consider 
operators that include derivatives or gauge fields, because they do not 
offer any additional possibility of baryon or lepton non-conservation.) In 
the notation of Section 28.1, the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l)-invariant operators 

236 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
Figure 28.7. 
A diagram that can produce a four~fermion interaction among 
quarks and/ or leptons that violates baryon and lepton number conservation. 
Here solid lines are quarks and/ or leptons; dashed lines are squarks and/ or 
sleptons; the combined solid and wavy line is a gaugino; and the dot is a vertex 
arising directly from the §"-term interactions (28.7.3). 
of dimensionality five that also conserve R parity are 
(LLH2H2):F , 
(28.7.1) 
(LEHi)D' (QDHi)D' (QUHi)D' (QQUD):F I 
(QULE):F' (28.7.2) 
and 
(QQQL)y, 
(28.7.3) 
with obvious contraction of indices as dictated by S U(3) and S U(2) con~ 
servation. The interaction (28.7.1) is the supersymmetric version of the 
dimensionality five operator which would provide small neutrino masses 
in some theories.38 The interactions (28.7.2) only provide small corrections 
to processes that already occur in the renormalizable terms of the super-
symmetric standard model. It is the interactions (28.7.3) that provide new 
mechanisms for baryon as well as lepton non~conservation. 
According to Eq. (26.4.4 ), the quarks and leptons enter in the inter-
actions (28.7.3) through terms involving a pair of quark and/or lepton 
fields and a pair of squark and/ or slepton fields. In order to gener-
ate reactions among quarks and leptons alone, it is necessary for the 
pair of squarks andjor sleptons to be converted into a pair of quarks 
and/or leptons by exchanging a gaugino in the one-loop diagram shown 
in Figure 28.7. This will produce effective four-fermion qqqt interac-
tions with d = 6 among three quarks and a lepton. The coupling g6 
of these interactions will be proportional to the square of the gauge 
coupling g or g' or g8 of the gaugino, to the supersymmetry-breaking 
mass of the gaugino, to the inverse square of the larger of the gaugino 
and squark or slepton masses (which is needed to give a coupling of 
the right dimensionality), and to a factor of order 1/8n2 from the loop 
integration. 

28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non~Conservation 
237 
It might be thought that the greater strength of the gluino coupling 
would make gluino exchange the dominant contribution to g6• (Indeed, in 
gauge-mediated supersymmetry-breaking theories, for moderate values of 
the trace (28.6.3) and with g ~ g', Eqs. (28.6.13H28.6.14) give 
2 
m 
"""'m 
"' gs M 
gluino ,...., 
squark ,...., 161t'2 
• , 
-
2 
g 
mwino ~ mslepton ~ mbino ~ 161t'2 M • • 
where M. is a mass characterizing the messenger sector. Therefore in 
such theories individual gluino exchange diagrams give contributions 
proportional to g; jmgiuino, while wino or bino exchange (or, more pre~ 
cisely, chargino or neutralino exchange) makes a contribution propor-
tional to g
2mwino/m~uark• which is smaller by a fac~or roughly equal to 
mwinog2/mgtuinogi' P:j g 4/ g:.) However, there is a cancellation among the 
diagrams for gluino exchange that strongly suppresses their contribution. 
This was originally shown using a Fierz identity among four-fermion 
operators,39 but the same result can be obtained with no equations at 
all To conserve color, the coefficients of the operators (QQQL)F and 
(UUDE)F must be totally antisymmetric in the colors of the three quark 
or antiquark superfields, and since these superfields are bosonic, they must 
then also be antisymmetric in their flavors as well. Gluino interactions 
are flavor-independent, so if we can neglect the flavor dependence of the 
squark masses then the coefficients of the four-fermion d = 6 operators 
will also be totally antisymmetric in flavor as well as color. Fermi statis-
tics then requires the coefficients of these operators to be also totally 
antisymmetric in the spin indices of the quark or antiquark fields. But 
the three quark or antiquark fields in the d = 6 operators derived by 
gaugino exchange from QQQLF or (UUDE)F are all left-handed and 
therefore have only two independent spin indices, so no coefficient can be 
antisymrnetric in all three spins. The contribution of gluino exchange to 
the d = 6 operators would therefore vanish if the squark masses were all 
equal and so this contribution is suppressed by the fractional differences 
among the masses of the different squarks. According to Eq. (28.6.4), in 
theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking the fractional differ-
ences between the [J and i> squark masses are of order g'4/ g:, so gluino 
exchange between the antisquarks in the (UUDE)F operator generates a 
dimension six four-fermion operator with a coefficient of the same order as 
that generated by bino exchange. However, since gluinos conserve flavor 
this operator like the ( [J [J DE )F operator must be totally antisymmetric 
in antiquark flavors, so that it must involve c or t quarks and therefore 
cannot contribute directly to proton or bound neutron decay. On the other 
hand, Eq. (28.6.4) indicates that the fractional mass differences among the 

238 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
Q quarks of different flavors is much less than of order g4j gi, so that 
gluino exchange between the squarks in the (QQQL)90 operator makes 
a contribution to g5 that is much smaller than wino or bino exchange. 
We conclude that at least in the theories of gauge~mediated supersym~ 
metry breaking, gluino exchange makes a smaller contribution to proton 
or bound neutron decay than wino or bino exchange. In other models 
gluino exchange may make a contribution comparable to that of other 
processes. 40 
For g ~ g1 and lflwino ~ mbino. the contribution of wino or bino exchange 
to the dimension six operators is of order 
,._, g2 gs lnwino 
g6 '"'"' 8 2 2 
' 
(28.7.4) 
1l: msquark 
where g5 is a typical value of the couplings of the effective d = 5 interac~ 
tions (28.7.3). If the wino and squark masses have the same ratio (g2/g;) 
as in theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, then this gives 
g4 gs 
g6 ~ 
2 2 
. 
(28.7.5) 
8n gs msquark 
The four-fermion qqqt ~terms of dimensionality six in the effective La-
grangian are the same as those that had been supposed to generate 
processes like proton decay in non-supersymmetric theories.36 They pro-
duce proton and bound neutron decay at a rate which on dimensional 
grounds must be of the form 
· 
rN = CN mFr gg, 
(28.7.6) 
where CN is a pure number that must be calculated by non-perturbative 
calculations in quantum chromodynamics. Much work has gone into these 
calculations, with results41 generally in the range CN ~ 3 x 10-3± 0·7. 
To estimate gs, we note that it is not possible to produce :F -terms like 
(28.7.3) that involve only left-chiral superfields by the tree-approximation 
exchange of gauge supermultiplets, which always interact with both left-
chiral superfields and their right-chiral complex conjugates. Thus the 
interactions (28.7.3) arise in the tree approximation only from the ex-
change of particles of chiral superfields, and therefore gs is of the order 
of g}/M}, where gr is a typical baryon and lepton non-conserving cou-
pling of some superheavy left-chiral superfield of mass Mr to the quark 
and lepton superfields. To produce the interactions (28. 7.3), these super-
heavy particles must be color triplets or antitriplets, and S U(2) triplets 
or singlets. Whatever gauge group unifies the strong and electroweak 
interactions presumably dictates some relation between the interactions of 
the superheavy color triplet T and the familiar color singlet Ht and H2. 
Then gr will be of the same order as the Yukawa coupling constants in 

28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation 
239 
the interactions (28.1.2) and (28.1.3) that give mass to the known quarks 
and leptons, and which are equal to quark or lepton masses divided by 
the vacuum expectation values of order a;112 ~ 300 GeV of .J'l1. or Jt1. 
We therefore take 
GFmJ 
gs ~ Mr , 
(28.7.7) 
where mf is some typical quark or lepton mass. We have seen that 
the dimension five operators are antisymmetric in quark flavors, so as a 
compromise between the masses of the s quark and the u or d quarks, 
we will take m! = 30 MeV. Combining Eqs. (28}7.5H28.7.7) and taking 
Mr = 2 x 101 GeV (as suggested by the results of Section 28.2), CN = 
0.003, gif4n = 0.118, g2j4n = 1/(0.23 X 137), and fnsquark = 1 TeV, we find 
a proton (or bound neutron) lifetime rri of about 2 X 1031 years.42 This is 
not very different from experimental lower bounds on the partial lifetimes 
of what are expected to be the leading modes of proton decay, variously 
quoted as ranging from 1031 to 5 x 1032 years. At the time of writing 
the most stringent bounds are set by the non-observation of proton decay 
in the large Super Kamiokande neutrino detector in Japan :42a the partial 
lifetimes for the decays p- e+n° and p- vK+ are greater than 2.1 x 1033 
years and 5.5 x 1032 years, respectively. There is an uncertainty of a factor 
of at least 100 in the above estimate of the theoretical lifetime from the 
uncertainty in the squark mass alone, so it is too soon to say that there 
is any discrepancy between experiment and theoretical expectations. On 
the other hand, supersymmetry raises the possibility that baryon non-
conservation may be discovered soon. 
We can also say a little on general grounds about the expected branching 
ratios for various proton and bound neutron decay modes. As we have 
mentioned, the dimension five operators (28.7.3) must be totally anti-
symmetric in the flavor of the quark superfields, so the only operators 
that concern us here are of the forms (U;DjDkNt):F, (DiUjUkEt):F, and 
(DlljUkEt):F, where i,j,k,t are generation indices, and in each case j =I= k. 
The exchange of neutral winos or binos then produces d = 6 four-fermion 
operators of the forms u;djdk Vt, diuiuket, and d;ujilket, with j =I= k and i 
and t arbitrary, while charged wino exchange produces the same four-
fermion operators with i =I= j and k and t arbitrary. The only quarks light 
enough to be involved in proton decay are u, s, and d; ignoring all the 
others and the small mixing angles in the third generation, we have 
U1 = u ' 
d1 = d cos Be + s sin Be ' 
d2 = -d sin Be + s cos Be ' 
where Be is the Cabibbo angle, while u2, u3, and d3 can be ignored. 
The four-fermion operators that can be produced by wino or bino ex-
change and can contribute to proton or bound neutron decay thus are 

240 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
udsvt cos(28c), uddvt sin(28c), uuset cosec, and uudetsin8c, plus oth-
ers with quarks and leptons replaced with antiquarks and antileptons. 
All other things being equal, the dominant decay modes are therefore 
p ---+ K+v, n ---+ K 0v, p ---+ K 0e+, and p ---+ K 0J1+, while the rates for the 
decay modes p ---+ n+v, n ---+ n°v, p ---+ n° e+, p ---+ n° J.l+, and n ---+ n-e+ are 
suppressed by factors sin2 Be = 0.05, though also enhanced somewhat by 
the greater phase space available. 
These considerations do not lead to definite predictions of branching 
ratios, because in addition to all the factors mentioned above, the coef-
ficients generically called gs of the operators (28.7.3) may have a strong 
dependence on the superfield flavors appearing in these operators. To 
go further, one needs a specific theory for the generation of the dimen-
sion five operators. Most of the authors of Reference 42 concluded on 
the basis of a supersymrnetric version of SU(5) theories that proton and 
bound neutron decay would be dominated by the processes p ---+ K+v 
and n---+ K 0v, but for a model based on S0(10) charged lepton modes 
can become prominent.43 Also, in some models higgsino exchange can 
compete with wino and bino exchange,44 increasing the rate of p---+ K+v. 
It seems a good idea in searches for baryon non-conservation to keep an 
open mind as to the decay modes to be expected in proton or bound 
neutron decay. 
Of course, it is possible that all of these baryon non-conserving processes 
are prohibited by some sort of conservation law. As mentioned in Section 
28.1, string theory argues against baryon conservation being a fundamental 
global continuous symmetry, but the baryon non-conserving operators 
(28.7.3) may be forbidden by a ?l3 multiplicative symmetry known as 
baryon parity,45 under which the Q superfield is neutral; the H2 and 
iJ superfields are multiplied by the phase exp(in/3), and the L, Ht, fl, 
and E superfields are multiplied by the opposite phase exp(-in/3). This 
symmetry is designed to allow the fundamental Yukawa couplings (28.1.2) 
and (28.1.3) as well as the J.l-term (28.5.7) and the lepton non-conserving 
terms (28.1.4) and (28.7.1), but it rules out the dimension four baryon non-
conserving term (28.1.5) and the dimension five baryon non-conserving 
terms (28.7.3). This symmetry is spontaneously broken by the appearance 
of vacuum expectation values of Jt1 and J'ti (and perhaps the sneutrino 
fields %), and with no conservation law for R parity, there would be 
nothing to keep the lightest supersymmetric particle stable. 
Problems 
1. Suppose that the interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5) were actually 
present in the Lagrangian of a supersymmetric version of the 

References 
241 
standard model. Make a rough estimate of how heavy the squarks 
and sleptons would have to be to avoid a conflict with experimental 
bounds on the proton lifetime. 
2. Suppose that the typical mass m of the gauginos, higgsinos, squarks 
and sleptons is very much larger than mz. Give the renormalization 
group equations for the running gauge couplings at energies both 
above and below m. Use the results, together with the unification 
assumption employed in Section 28.2, to give formulas for sin2 8 and 
the unification scale M in terms of m, mz, e(mz ), gs(mz ), and ns. 
How large could m be without violating experimental bounds on 
sin2 8 and M? 
3. Give formulas for the couplings of the quarks and leptons to the 
lightest CP-even neutral scalar particle in the minimum supersym-
metric standard model in terms of the parameters mA, mz, p, GF, 
and the quark and lepton masses. 
4. Use holomorphy arguments to derive the one-loop formula for the 
gluino mass in a theory of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, 
in which the messenger superfields <I>n and <I>n get their masses 
from a term Ln .A..nSn(<I>n<I>n) in the superpotential, in terms of the 
expectation values !/ n and fF n of the 4>- and iF -components of the 
singlet superfields Sn, in the limit where l~nl ~ I.A..niiYnl2. 
5. Taking account of the possibility of a small flavor dependence 
of squark masses, estimate the gluino exchange contribution to 
baryon and lepton non-conserving four-fermion interactions among 
the quarks and leptons. Set an upper bound on these contributions, 
using the bound on squark mass splittings from the rate of K 0 -. ~ 
conversiOn. 
References 
1. We will not consider here the possibility of unification at much 
lower energies raised by I. Antoniadis, Phys. Lett. B246, 377 
(1990); J. Lykken, Phys. Rev. D54, 3693 (1996), and revived by 
N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
8429,263 (1998); I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, 
and G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. Lett. 8436, 257 (1998). 
1a. S. Weinberg, in Proceedings of the XVII International Conference 
on High Energy Physics, London, 1974, J. R. Smith, ed. (Rutherford 
Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, England, 1974); S. Weinberg, Phys. 

242 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
Rev. Dl3, 974 (1976); E. Gildener and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 
D13, 3333 (1976). 
lb. T. Banks and L. Dixon, Nucl. Phys. B307, 93 (1988). For a detailed 
treatment, see J. Polchinski, String Theory (Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1998): Chapter 18. 
2. Additive R-conservation laws were introduced by A. Salam and J. 
Strathdee, Nucl. Phys. B87, 85 (1975); P. Fayet, Nucl. Phys. B90, 
104 (1975), reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed., (North Hol-
land/World Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). The R parity 
can be defined in terms of an R quantum number as exp(inR), 
and may be conserved multiplicatively even if R is not conserved 
additively; see G. Farrar and P. Fayet, Phys. Lett. 76B, 575 (1978); 
P. Fayet, in Unification of the Fundamental Particle Interactions, S. 
Ferrara, J. Ellis, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, eds. (Plenum, New 
York, 1980); S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Lett. 
112B, 133 (1982); G. Farrar and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D27, 1731 
(1983), reprinted in Supersymmetry. 
3. S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B193, 150 (1981), 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. 
4. R. D. Peccei and H. Quinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1440 (1977); Phys. 
Rev. Dl6, 1791 (1977). 
4a. S. Dimopoulos and G. F. Giudice, Phys. Lett. B357, 573 (1995); A. 
Pomerol and D. Tommasini, Nucl. Phys. B466, 3 (1996); G. Dvali 
and A. Pomerol, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3728 (1996); Nucl. Phys. B522, 
3 (1998); A. G. Cohen, D. B. Kaplan, and A. E. Nelson, Phys. 
Lett. B388, 588 (1996); R. N. Mohapatra and A. Riotto, Phys. 
Rev. D55, 1 (1997); R.-J. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B402, 101 (1997); 
H-P. Nilles and N. Polonsky, Phys. Lett. B412, 69 (1997); D. E. 
Kaplan, F. Lepeintre, A. Masiero, A. E. Nelson, and A. Riotto, 
hep-ph/98064 30, to be published; J. Hisano, K. Kurosawa, and Y. 
Nomura, Phys. Lett. B445, 316 (1999). This pattern of masses can 
arise naturally from radiative corrections; see J. L. Feng, C. Kolda, 
and N. Polonsky, Nucl. Phys. B546, 3 (1999); J. Bagger, J. L. Feng. 
and N. Polonsky, hep-ph/9905292, to be published. 
4b. B. W. Lee and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 165 (1977); D. 
A. Dicus, E. W. Kolb, and V. L. Teplitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 168 
(1977). 
4c. 
S. Wolfram, Phys. Lett. 82B, 65 (1979); J. Ellis, J. S. Hagelin, D. 
V. Nanopoulos, K. Olive, and M. Srednicki, Nucl. Phys. B238, 453 
(1984). 
4d. P. F. Smith and J. R. J. Bennett, Nucl. Phys. Bl49, 525 (1979). 

References 
243 
5. 
H. Georgi, H. R. Quinn, and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 451 
(1974). 
6. 
S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; J. Ellis, S. Kelley, and D. 
V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B260, 131 (1991); U. Amaldi, W. de 
Boer, and H. Furstmann, Phys. Lett. B260, 447 (1991); C. Giunti, 
C. W. Kim and U. W. Lee, Mod. Phys. Lett. 16, 1745 (1991); P. 
Langacker and M.~X. Luo, Phys. Rev. D44, 817 (1991). For other 
references and more recent analyses of the data, see P. Langacker 
and N. Polonsky, Phys. Rev. D47, 4028 (1993); D49, 1454 (1994); 
L. J. Hall and U. Sarid, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2673 (1993). 
7. 
S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D24, 1681 
(1981), reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. 
7a. P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460, 506 (1996); ibid. B475, 
94 (1996); E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B471, 135 (1996); P. Horava, Phys. 
Rev. D54, 7561 (1996). 
8. 
H. Pagels and J. R. Primack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 223 (1982). 
9. 
S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1303 (1983). 
10. S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; N. Sakai, Z. Phys. C 11, 153 
(1981). For reviews, see H. E. Haber and G. L. Kane, Phys. Re-
ports 117, 75 (1985); J. A. Bagger, in QCD and Beyond: Proceedings 
of the Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle 
Physics, University of Colorado, June 1995, D. E. Soper, ed. (World 
Scientific;, Singapore, 1996); V. Barger, in Fundamental Particles 
and Interactions: Proceedings of the FCP Workshop on Fundamen-
tal Particles and Interactions, Vanderbilt University, May 1997, R. 
S. Panvini, T. J. Weiler, eds. (American Institute of Physics, Wood-
bury, NY, 1998); J. F. Gunion, in Quantum Effects in the MSSM 
- Proceedings of the International Workshop on Quantum Effects in 
the MSSM, Barcelona, September 1997, J. Sola, ed. (World Scientific 
Publishing, Singapore, 1998); S. Dawson, in Proceedings of the 1997 
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute on Supersymmetry, Supergrav~ 
ity, and Supercolliders, J. Bagger, ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 
1998); S. P. Martin, iin Perspectives on Supersymmetry, G. L. Kane, 
ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998); K. R. Dienes and C. Kolda, 
in Perspectives on Supersymmetry, ibid. 
11. 
S. Dimopoulos and D. Sutter, Nucl. Phys. Bl94, 65 (1995); H. 
Haber, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 62, 469 (1998). 
12. 
S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; J. Ellis and D. V. Nanopou-
los, Phys. Lett. HOB, 44 (1982); J. F. Donoghue, H-P. Nilles, and 
D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. 128B, 55 (1983). For strong-interaction cor~ 
rections to these calculations, see J. A. Bagger, K. T. Matchev, and 

244 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
R.-J. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B412, 77 (1997). Conditions under which 
limits on flavor changing processes do not constrain squark masses 
are discussed by R. Barbieri and R. Gatto, Phys. Lett. llOB, 211 
(1981); Y. Nir and N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B309. 337 (1993). For a 
detailed review, see F. Gabbiani, E. Gabrielli, A. Masiero, and L. 
Silvestrini, Nucl. Phys. B477, 321 (1996). 
13. M. K. Gaillard and B. W. Lee, Phys. Rev. DlO, 897 (1974). 
14. J. Ellis and D. V. Nanopoulos, Ref. 12. Detailed results are given 
by F. Gabbiani and A. Masiero, Nucl. Phys. B322, 235 (1989); J. 
S. Hagelin, S. Kelley, and T. Tanaka, Nucl. Phys. B415, 293 (1994). 
The most complete treatment is by D. Sutter, Stanford University 
Ph. D. thesis (unpublished) and S. Dimopoulos and D. Sutter, Ref. 
11. 
14a. M. Dine, R. Leigh, and A. Kagan, Phys. Rev. D48, 4269 (1993). 
15. For more recent reviews, see Y. Grossman, Y. Nir, and R. Rattazzi, 
in Heavy Flavours II, A. J. Buras and M. Lindner, eds. (World 
Scientific, Singapore, 1998); A. Masiero and L. Silvestrini, in Per-
spectives on Supersymmetry, Ref. 10. 
16. J. Ellis and M. K. Gaillard, Nucl. Phys. Bl50, 141 (1979); D. V. 
Nanopoulos, A. Yildiz, and P. H. Cox, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 127, 126 
(1980); M. B. Gavela, A. Le Yaouanc, L. Oliver, 0. Pene, J.-C. 
Raynal, and T. N. Pham, Phys. Lett. 109B, 215 (1982); B. H. J. 
McKellar, S. R. Choudhury, X-G. He, and S. Pakvasa, Phys. Lett. 
Bl97, 556 (1987). 
16a. P. G. Harris et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 904 (1999). 
17. J. Ellis, S. Ferrara, and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. 114B, 231 
(1982); J. Polchinski and M. B. Wise, Phys. Lett. 125B, 393 (1983); 
M. Dugan, B. Grinstein, and L. Hall, Nucl. Phys. B255, 413 (1985). 
18. R. Arnowitt, J. Lopez, and D. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rev. D42, 2423 
(1990); R. Arnowitt, M. Duff, and K. Stelle, Phys. Rev. D43, 3085 
(1991); Y. Kizuri and N. Oshimo, Phys. Rev. D45, 1806 (1992). 
19. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2333 (1989); D. Dicus, Phys. Rev. 
D41, 999 (1990); J. Oai, H. Dykstra, R. G. Leigh, S. Paban, and D. 
A. Dicus, Phys. Lett. B237, 216 (1990); E. Braaten, C. S. Li, and 
T. C. Yuan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1709 (1990); A. De Rujula, M. B. 
Gavela, 0. Pene, and F. J. Vegas, Phys. Lett. B245, 640 (1990); R. 
Arnowitt, M. J. Duff, and K. S. Stelle, Ref. 18; T. Ibrahim and P. 
Nath, Phys. Lett. 148B, 98 (1998). 
20. K. S. Babu, C. Kolda, J. March-Russell, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. 
D59, 016004 (1999). 

References 
245 
21. 
R. Arnowitt, M. J. Duff, and K. S. Stelle, Ref. 18. In terms of the 
functions J 1 and h in this reference, the function J here is taken 
as 211 + jJ2, under the assumption that the graphs with the gluon 
attached to the squark or gluino lines add constructively. 
22. H. Georgi and L. Randall, Nucl. Phys. B276, 241 (1980); A. 
Manohar and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B238, 189 (1984); S. Wein~ 
berg, Ref. 19. 
23. W. Fischler, S. Paban, and S. Thomas, Phys. Lett. B 289, 373 (1992). 
24. J. Ellis and D. V. Nanopoulos, Ref. 12; F. Gabbiani and A. Masiero, 
Ref. 14; F. Dine, A. Kagan, and S. Samuel, Phys. Lett. B243 250 
(1990); F. Gabbiani, E. Gabrielli, A Masiero, and L. Silvestrini, 
Ref. 12. 
25. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 223 (1978); F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 40, 279 (1978). 
26. A. Brignole, J. Ellis, G. Ridolfi, and F. Zwirner, Phys. Lett. B271, 
123 (1991); M. ·Carena, M. Quiros, and C. E. M. Wagner, Nucl. 
Phys. B461, 407 (1996); S. Heinemayer, W. Hollik, and G. Wei~ 
glein, hep~ph/9812472, hep~ph/9903404, hep~ph/9903504, to be 
published. The numerical results for mh cited here are taken from 
calculations quoted by S. Dawson, Ref. 10. 
27. R. Barate et al. (ALEPH collaboration), Phys. Lett. B412, 173 
(1997). 
27a. M. Grunewald and D. Karlen, in Proceedings of the XXIX Inter-
national Conference on High Energy Nuclear Physics, A. Astbury, 
D. Axen, and J. Robinson, eds. (TRIUMF, Vancouver, 1999). 
28. R. Barate et al. (ALEPH collaboration), 1999 CERN preprint EP~ 
99-011, to be published in Phys. Lett. A lower bound of 54.5 GeV 
had been obtained earlier from experiments on e+ -e- annihilation 
at 130 to 172 GeV by P. Abreu et al. (DELPHI collaboration), 
Phys. Lett. 8420, 140 (1998). 
29. A. J. Buras, M. Misiak, M. Miinz, and S. Pokorski, Nucl. Phys. 
B424, 374 ( 1994 ). 
29a. R. Barate et al. (ALEPH collaboration), 1999 CERN preprint 
EP-99-014, to be published in Eur. Phys. J. 
30. M. Dine, W. Fischler, and M. Srednicki, Nucl. Phys. 18189, 575 
(1981); S. Dimopoulos and S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. Bl92, 353 (1982); 
M. Dine and W Fischler, Phys. Lett. llOB, 227 (1982); Nucl. Phys. 
B204, 346 (1982); C. Nappi and B. Ovrut, Phys. Lett. 113B, 175 
(1982); L. Alvarez-Gaume, M. Claudson, and M. Wise, Nucl. Phys. 

246 
28 Supersymmetric Standard Models 
B207, 96 (1982); S. Dimopoulos and S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B219, 
479 (1983). This class of models was revived by M. Dine and A E. 
Nelson, Phys. Rev. D48, 1277 (1993); D51, 1362 (1995); J. Bagger, 
Ref. 10; M. Dine, A. Nelson, andY. Shirman, Phys. Rev. D5l, 1362 
(1995); M. Dine, A. Nelson, Y. Nir, andY. Shirman, Phys. Rev. D53, 
2658 (1996). For reviews, see C. Kolda, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 62, 
266 (1998); G. F. Giudice and R. Rattazzi, hep-ph/9801271, to be 
published in Phys. Rep; S. L. Dubovsky, D. S. Gorbunov, and S. 
V. Troitsky, hep-ph/9905466, to be published. The phenomenology 
of these models is described by S. Dimopoulos, S. Thomas, and J. 
D. Wells, Nucl. Phys. B488, 39 (1997). 
31. S. Dimopoulos, G. F. Giudice, and A. Pomerol, Phys. Lett. 389B, 
37 (1997); S. P. Martin, Phys. Rev. D55, 3177 (1997). 
32. G. F. Giudice and R. Rattazi, Nucl. Phys. B5ll, 25 (1998). This 
work has been extended by N. Arkani-Hamed, G. F. Giudice, M. 
A. Luty, and R. Rattazz~ Phys. Rev. D58, 115005 (1998). 
33. N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993). 
34. K. S. Babu, C. Kolda, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3070 
(1996). 
35. J. E. Kim and H-P. Nilles, Phys. Lett. 138B, 150 (1984); .J. Ellis, J. 
F. Gunion, H. E. Haber, L. Roszkowski, and F. Zwirner, Phys. Rev. 
D39, 844 (1989); E. J. Chun, J. E. Kim, and H-P. Nilles, Nucl. Phys. 
B370, 105 (1992); M. Dine and A. E. Nelson, Ref. 30; M. Dine, A. 
E. Nelson, Y. Nir, andY. Shirman, Ref. 30; G. Dvali, G. F. Giudice, 
and A. Pomerol, Nucl. Phys. B478, 31 (1996); S. Dimopoulos, G. 
Dvali, and R. Rattazzi, Phys. Lett. 413B, 336 (1997); H-P. Nilles 
and N. Polonsky, Nucl. Phys. B484, 33 (1997); G. Cleaver, M. 
Cvetic, J. R. Espinosa, L. Everett, and P. Langacker, Phys. Rev. 
D57, 2701 (1998); P. Langacker, N. Polonsky, and J. Wang, hep-
ph/9905252, to be published; J. E. Kim, hep-ph/9901204, to be 
published. 
35a. S. Raby, Phys. Lett. B422, 158 (1998). 
35b. D. A. Dicus, B. Dutta, and S. Nandi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3055 
(1997); Phys. Rev. D56, 5748 (1997). 
36. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1566 (1979); F. Wilczek and A. 
Zee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1571 (1979). 
· 
37. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D26, 287 (1982); N. Sakai and T. Yanagida, 
Nucl. Phys. Bl97, 533 (1982). These articles are reprinted in Super-
symmetry, Ref. 2. 
38. S. Weinberg, Ref. 36. 

References 
247 
39. J. Ellis, J. S. Hagelin, D. V. Nanopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Phys. 
Lett. 124B, 484 (1983); V. M. Belyaev and M. I. Vysotsky, Phys. 
Lett. 127B, 215 (1983). 
40. V. Lucas and S. Raby, Phys. Rev. D55, 6986 (1997). 
41. This estimate is taken from a compilation of non-supersymmetric 
calculations of the total two-body decay proton decay rate in terms 
of the superheavy gauge boson masses Mx by P. Langacker, in 
Proceedings of the 1983 Annual Meeting of the Division of Particles 
and Fields of the American Physical Society (American Institute of 
Physics, New York, 1983): 251. To express the result in terms of 
g6, I have assumed that, in effect, the coupling g6 that was used 
in these calculations was given by g6 = g2(Mx)IM}, where g(Mx) 
has the value appropriate to non-supersymmetric theories, with 
g2( Mx) I 4n :::::: 1 I 41. 
42. For more detailed (mostly model-dependent) calculations, including 
renormalization group corrections to gs, see S. Dimopoulos, S. 
Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Lett. 112B, 133 (1982); J. Ellis, D. 
V. Nanopoulos, and S. Rudaz, Nucl. Phys. B202, 43 (1982); W. 
Lang, Nucl. Phys. B203, 277 (1982); J. Ellis, J. S. Hagelin, D. V. 
N anopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Ref. 39; V. M. Belyaev and M. I. 
Vysotsky, Ref. 39; L. E. Ibiiiez and C. Mufioz, Nucl. Phys. B245, 
425 (1984); P. Nath, A. H. Chamseddine, and R. Amowitt, Phys. 
Rev. D32, 2385 (1985); J. Hisano, H. Murayama, and T. Yanagida, 
Nucl. Phys. B402, 46 (1993); V. Lucas and S. Raby, Ref. 40. For 
a review, see P. Nath and R. Amowitt, Phys. Atom. Nucl. 61, 975 
(1997). 
42a. M. Takita et al., in Proceedings of the XXIX International Confer-
ence on High Energy Nuclear Physics, Ref. 27a. 
43. K. S. Babu, J. C. Pati, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Lett. 423B, 337 (1998). 
44. V. Lucas and S. Raby, Ref. 40; T. Goto and T. Nihei, Phys. Rev. 
D59, 115009 (1999). 
45. L. Ibanez and G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B368, 3 (1991). 

29 
Beyond Perturbation Theory 
Most of the implications of supersymmetry discussed so far have been 
inferred with the use of perturbation theory. In this chapter we shall 
consider some results that apply even when non-perturbative effects are 
taken into account. 
29.1 
General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
Supersymmetry is not observed in the spectrum of known particles, so 
it must be broken. We saw in the previous chapter that supersymmetry 
breaking in the tree approximation of the standard model is experimen-
tally ruled out, and that the large disparity between the electroweak 
breaking scale and the Planck or grand unification scales suggests that 
supersymmetry is likely to be broken when some running gauge coupling 
becomes strong. It is therefore essential for us to explore spontaneous 
supersymmetry breaking without using perturbation theory. 
We saw in Section 26.7 that the supersymmetry of the action implies the 
existence of a supersymmetry current Sll(x). This current is a Majorana 
spinor in the sense of Eq. (26.A.1): 
(29.1.1) 
it is conserved, 
(29.1.2) 
and the integral of its time component is the supersymmetry ge~nerator 
(29.1.3) 
for which the commutator of -i(aQ) with any operator gives the change 
of that operator under a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal 
Majorana spinor parameter rx. 
248 

29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
249 
The arguments that led to these results relied on the supersymmetry 
of the action; nothing depended on whether or not su persymmetry is 
spontaneously broken, except perhaps for the assumption' that the integral 
(29.1.3) exists. In fact this assumption may be violated in theories with 
massless fermions, which can have long range effects (or, equivalently, 
poles at zero four~momentum) that would make this integral not converge. 
We will see here that such massless fermions are necessary consequences of 
supersymmetry breaking. In order to avoid the issue of the convergence of 
this integral even in theories with massless fermions, it is very convenient 
to work in a space of finite volume V. We can do this while maintaining 
translation invariance by imposing periodic boundary conditions: all fields 
are assumed to be unaffected by translations of any spatial coordinate xi 
by an amount V 113• 
The existence of an operator Qo: that induces supersymmetric transfor~ 
mations on quantum fields would allow us to derive all the consequences of 
supersymmetry, provided that there exists a supersymmetric vacuum state 
IVAC) of zero three-momentum from which multiparticle states may be 
constructed by acting with field operators. But if IVAC) is supersymmetric 
in the sense that Qo:]VAC) = 0, then it follows from the anticommutation 
relation (25.2.36) that this state has zero energy as well as zero momen-
tum. Conversely, by taking the vacuum expectation value of the positive 
operator (returning for a moment to two-component notation) {Qa, Q;}, 
we see that if the vacuum has zero energy then it must be annihilated 
by Qa and Q:, and hence be supersymmetric, while if it is not supersym-
metric then its energy must be positive-definite. The question of whether 
supersymmetry is or is not spontaneously broken is thus entirely a question 
of whether the vacuum has a positive-definite or a zero energy. 
The same reasoning led Witten to the conclusion that extended super-
symmetry with N > 1 two-component spinor generators Qar and their 
adjoints cannot be spontaneously broken to extended supersymmetry 
with fewer generators or to simple supersymmetry, because if any one of 
the generators does not annihilate the vacuum then the vacuum energy 
cannot vanish, and it follows from this that none of the generators can 
annihilate the vacuum.1 Usually the energy of the vacuum state appears 
as an ill-defined additive constant in the energies of all states, but here this 
constant is given a meaning by the appearance of the energy-momentum 
four-vector in the anticommutation relations of supersymmetry. One of 
the advantages of working in a finite volume is that it makes it meaningful 
to talk about the total energy of the vacuum. 
Hughes, Liu, and Polchinski have pointed out that there are theories 
that exhibit a sort of partly broken supersymmetry. 1a These theories do 
not have a supersymmetry algebra of the sort described in Chapter 25. 
Instead, they have ·an algebra of currents, based on anticommutation 

250 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
relations like Eq. (26.7.45): 
J 
d3x { s~IX(x)' S:fl(y)} = -2ibrsYve.uv(y) + 2iy~'Crs' 
where e.uv is an energy-momentum tensor satisfying the conservation 
condition o,ue~'v = 0, and Crs is a new ingredient, a constant. For N = 1 
this constant could be regarded as a term -17~'v C in E>Pv, but this is not 
possible for extended supersymmetry unless Crs oc brs. which need not be 
the case. This algebra is not ruled out by the Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius 
theorem proved in Section 25.2 because it could not be a symmetry of 
the S-matrix. It is true that spontaneously broken symmetries are never 
symmetries of the S-matrix, but they are usually assumed to be based 
on algebras or superalgebras that could be symmetries of the S-matrix 
in some phases of some theories. With Crs not proportional to brs, the 
superalgebra of currents is one that could not generate a symmetry of 
the S-matrix in any phase of any theory. Here we will only consider 
superalgebras of the sort described in Chapter 25, to which Witten's 
argument does apply. 
Another advantage of working in a finite volume is that all states 
become discrete and normalizable. An immediate consequence of the 
fact that Qa commutes with P.u is that any state of non-zero energy is 
paired with another state of the same energy and momentum but opposite 
statistics. To see this, note that for any three-momentum p we may find a 
two-component spinor Ua such that Eab u:aab ·pub = 0 and Ea lual2 = 1. 
(For pin the 3-direction, take u ;;;= (1, 1)/ J2. For pin any other direction, 
apply to this u the spin 1/2 representation of the rotation that takes 
the 3-direction into the direction of p.) Then, within the space with 
four-momentum pll, the anticommutation relations (25.2.31) and (25.2.32) 
give 
(29.1.4) 
where Q(p) is the Hermitian linear combination of supersymmetry gener-
ators: 
Q(p) . L:uaQa + I:u:Q:. 
(29.1.5) 
a 
a 
Acting with Q(p) on any normalized state IX) with four-momentum pP 
and p0 > 0, we get another normalized state I y) = Q(p )IX) In with 
opposite statistics and the same four-momentum. Furthermore, IX) is 
the only state related to IY) in this way, because if IY) = Q(p)IX)/# 
then, according to Eq. (29.1.4), IX) = Q(p)IY)jyJJO. The multiplicity of 
supersymmetry generators and of spin states will usually cause these: pairs 
of fermionic and bosonic states to be joined by other pairs, all with the 

29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
251 
same four-momentum, but for the moment it is enough to know that all 
states of non-zero energy may at least be grouped in these pairs. 
When supersymmetry is broken we do not expect states with a definite 
number of particles to form supermultiplets with other states of opposite 
statistics and with the same four-momentum and the same number of 
particles. The pairing of states then requires the existence of a massless 
fermion, so that an n-particle state can be paired with a state of the 
same energy and momentum but opposite statistics, consisting of the 
same n particles together with a massless fermion of zero energy and 
momentum. This massless fermion is known as a goldstino. To be more 
precise, any n-particle state is accompanied with two states of the same 
energy and momentum and opposite statistics, containing an additional 
zero-momentum goldstino of spin up or down, and with another state 
of the same energy and momentum and the same statistics, containing 
two additional zero-momentum goldstinos of opposite spin. In particular, 
when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken the vacuum state has non-
zero energy, so it must be paired with a fermionic state of the same energy 
and zero momentum; more precisely, the vacuum and the state containing 
two zero-momentum goldstinos are paired with the two states of a single 
zero-momentum goldstino. It is only when supersymmetry is unbroken 
that there is a state of zero energy, the vacuum, that can be unpaired. 
The pairing of states of non-zero energy provides a valuable diagnostic 
tool that can in some cases tell us that supersymmetry is not spontaneously 
broken, even where perturbation theory is not adequate to answer this 
question. When all interactions are weak, we can rely on perturbation 
theory to give us a qualitative picture of the spectrum. If it turns out that 
in the tree approximation there are n vacuum states with zero energy, and 
no massless fennions, then we can be confident that for weak coupling 
there are no zero-energy fermionic states with which we could pair the n 
vacuum states, so these unpaired states would have to have precisely zero 
energy. Then, as we increase the strength of the couplings or vary the 
parameters of the theory in any other way, states may move from positive 
to zero energy or vice-versa, but they will generally not suddenly appear 
or disappear. (There is an exception for changes in the parameters that 
change the asymptotic behavior of the Lagrangian for large fields; as we 
will shortly see, this can produce or destroy states.) Because each state of 
non-zero energy is always paired with another of opposite statistics, they 
can only make the transition from zero to non-zero energy or vice-versa in 
such pairs, so the number of bosonic zero-energy states minus the number 
of fermionic zero-energy states does not change as the parameters of the 
theory are varied, as long as the large-field behavior of the Lagrangian is 
not changed. This difference is known as the Witten index.2 Formally, this 
index is Tr ( -1 )F, where F is the fermion number; the pairing of states 

252 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
discussed earlier insures that this trace can receive no contribution from 
states of non-zero energy. If the Witten index is non-zero then there must 
be some states of zero energy, and so supersymmetry cannot be broken. In 
particular, in a theory where the tree approximation gives n zero-energy 
vacuum states and no zero-energy fermions, the Witten index is n for weak 
coupling, where the tree approximation can be trusted to give a qualitative 
picture of the spectrum, and the index remains equal to n as the strength 
of the coupling is increased, so we can be certain that higher-order effects 
or even non-perturbative effects do not break supersymmetry. 
As an example of the use of the Witten index, consider the Wess-Zumino 
theory of a single chiral superfield with a cubic polynomial superpotential 
of the form (26.4.16): 
f(r/>) = !m2r/J2 + igr/>3 , 
where rjJ is the complex scalar field component of the superfield. We saw 
in Section 26.4 that this model does not exhibit supersymmetry breaking 
in the tree approximation, but what about higher orders of perturbation 
theory, and what about non-perturbative effects? Perturbation theory 
gives a good approximation to the energy spectrum when m is large and 
g is small; it tells us that in this case there are two bosonic states near 
zero energy, corresponding to the solutions rjJ = 0 and rjJ = -2m2 I g of 
the equation 8f(r/J)/8r/J = 0, and no fermionic states near zero energy; 
the lowest-energy fermionic state is a zero-momentum one-fermion state 
of energy near lml. In typical scalar field theories we would not expect 
the two bosonic states to have precisely zero energy; even though each 
has zero energy in the tree approximation, higher-order effects (including 
tunneling through the barrier between rjJ = 0 and rjJ = -2m2 j g) would be 
expected to mix them and shift their energies away from zero. (It is only 
in the limit of infinite volume that this barrier becomes impassable.) But 
in supersymmetric theories these states must have precisely zero energy, 
because there is no low-energy fermion state with which they could be 
paired. Thus for m large and g small the Witten index is 2. Because 
the Witten index is invariant under changes in the parameters of the 
theory, the Witten index remains equal to 2 even when g is large, where 
perturbation theory breaks down, and even when m vanishes, where the 
two potential wells merge. (It is not easy to calculate the Witten index 
directly in this case, 'because of the presence in the tree approximation of 
massless bosons as well as massless fermions.) Since the Witten index is 
not zero, supersymmetry remains strictly unbroken in the Wess-Zumino 
model, whatever the values of its parameters. 
The same arguments can generally be used in theories with several 
chiral scalar superfields to show that the Witten index is positive, and that 
supersymmetry is therefore not spontaneously broken. The O'Raifeartaigh 

29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
253 
models discussed in Section 26.5 are an exception, because there are fiat 
directions in which the potential remains constant as the fields go to 
infinity, rather than growing as some power of the fields. These models 
provide a good illustration of the fact that although the Witten index 
must be zero for supersymmetry to be broken, a zero Witten index does 
not necessarily imply that supersymmetry is broken. For instance, if we 
write the superpotential used as an illustration in Section 26.5 in terms of 
canonically normalized superfields, then it takes the form 
f(X, Yt, Y2) = mYt(X- a)+ gY2X2 , 
with arbitrary parameters m, g, and a. The potential is then 
U(x,y1, Y2) = lgl21xl4 + lml21x- al2 + lmyt + 2gxy2l2 , 
with lower-case letters denoting the scalar components of the left-chiral 
superfields. For m and a non-zero and g small, perturbation theory gives 
a good estimate of the spectrum, and tells us that there is a minimum of 
the potential near x = a- 21gl21al4/lml2 with my1 + 2xy2 = 0, at which 
the vacuum energy is approximately equal to lgat12V. Since this energy 
appears as an additive constant in all states, there are no zero-energy 
states, and the Witten index vanishes. The matrix .A of second derivatives 
of the superpotential (with rows and columns labelled in the order x, Yt, 
Y2) is here 
( 
2gy2 m 2gx ) 
.A= 
m 
0 
0 
. 
2gx 
0 
0 
This has an eigenvector (0, 2gx, -m) with eigenvalue zero, so there is a 
massless fermion here; this is the goldstino associated with the breaking of 
supersymmetry. The fermionic state degenerate with the vacuum consists 
of a single goldstino of zero energy and momentum. (Once again, there 
are two vacuum-energy fermionic states, with opposite orientations for 
the goldstino spin, and two vacuum-energy bosonic states: the vacuum, 
and a state containing two goldstinos with opposite spin.) Now, as a--+ 0 
supersymmetry may become unbroken (and we shall see later that it does), 
but the Witten index must remain 0; in this case the massless fermion is 
no longer a goldstino, but continuity demands that its mass remains zero, 
so it remains paired with the vacuum state. This of course is a general 
feature of theories in which supersymmetry is restored at isolated values 
of the parameters; continuity demands that the massless fermion that 
plays the role of the goldstino when supersynunetry is broken remains 
massless (though no longer a goldstino) at the value of the parameters 
where supersymmetry is restored, so that the vacuum remains paired with 
the massless fermion state, and the Witten index remains zero. 

254 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
This model provides a good illustration of why we had to qualify 
the statement that the Witten index does not change when we vary 
the parameters of a supersymmetric theory, with the proviso that the 
parameters must not be changed in such a way as to alter the asymptotic 
behavior of the Lagrangian density for large fields. Suppose we un:flatten 
the fiat direction in this model by adding a small term to the superpotential, 
so that it now reads 
where e is a small mass parameter. Now there are two solutions of the 
conditions for supersymmetry to be preserved: 
0- 8f- 8f -
8f 
-
ax -
ayl -
8y2 . 
At these solutions, x is at one of the roots of the quadratic equation 
2g2x2 + m(x- a)= 0, while Yt and Y2 are of order 1/e: Yt = -m(x- a)je 
and y2 = -gx2 I e. We see that the reason that the Witten index can 
change from 0 to 2 when we turn on the small parameter e is that two 
new minima of the potential come in from infinite field values. 
In deciding whether or not supersymmetry is broken in theories with a 
vanishing Witten index, it is often useful to use conservation laws to limit 
the pairings that may occur, and to define a new sort of index. If K is a 
quantum operator that commutes with the supersymmetry generators Qo: 
(and hence :;tlso with the Hamiltonian), then all states of non-zero energy 
that have a definite value forK are paired with states of opposite statistics 
and the same energy and momentum and the same value of K. Also, not 
only is the Witten index Tr(-1t independent of the parameters of the 
theory (as long as they are not varied in a way that varies the large-
field asymptotic behavior of the Lagrangian) -
so also is the weighted 
Witten index, given by Trg(K)(-1l. where g(K) is an arbitrary function 
of the conserved quantity. To use the conservation law in this way, 
it is not necessary that it be unbroken when the volume V becomes 
infinite; it is only necessary that K commute with the supersymmetry 
generators. 
In diagnosing the possibilities of supersymmetry breaking, it is some-
times helpful to work wiith a linear combination of weighted Witten indices 
for a number of different conserved quantities. In particular, consider the 
quantity 
W 6 = L Tr { h ( -1 )F} , 
(29.1.6) 
hEG 

29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking 
255 
with the sum running over all elements of some symmetry group G. (For 
compact continuous groups, this sum should be interpreted as an integral 
over the group volume, with a suitable invariant measure.) Within any 
irreducible representation other than the identity, the 'characters' Tr h add 
up to zero when summed over a finite or compact group, so 
WG = LN(f)(-1)1, 
f 
(29.1.7) 
where N(f) is the number of times that the identity representation of G 
appears among states with fermion number f. In other words, WG is just 
the Witten index, but evaluated using only G-invariant states. As long as 
G is conserved, W G remains independent of the parameters of the theory, 
and if non-zero indicates that supersymmetry is unbroken. 
Conservation laws will be used in this way in Section 29.4 to study the 
spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry in gauge theories, but a simpler 
(though academic) example is provided by the O'Raifeartaigh-style model 
discussed earlier, only now with the parameter a set equal to zero. The 
superpotential here is 
(29.1.8) 
yielding a tree-approximation potential 
(29.1.9) 
We know that the Witten index vanishes here, because we have seen that 
it vanished for a =(::. 0, but is supersymmetry broken? With a = 0, there 
are now field values with x = Yl = 0 where the potential vanishes in 
the tree approximation, but how can we tell whether effects of higher 
ordering or even non-perturbative ,effects give the corresponding states a 
small energy? To answer this, we note that this superpotential (and hence 
the Lagrangian density) is invariant under a discrete symmetry K, under 
which the superfields are transformed by 
KXK-1 = iX ' 
KY2K-1 = -Y2. 
(29.1.10) 
(Note that this symmetry is violated by the term -rna Yt in the original 
superpotential, so none of the results obtained using K will apply to 
that superpotential.) Since the potential vanishes for x = Yl = 0 and Yz 
arbitrary, for small g we may use perturbation theory to tell us that for 
each y2 there is a bosonic vacuum state near zero energy. For Yz = 0 this 
vacuum is even under K. For any non-zero value of IY21 we can take linear 
combinations of the two zero-energy states with yz = +iyzl, of which one 

256 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
will be even under K and the other odd. As we have seen, there is also 
a massless fermion here, the fermionic component of Y2, but this fermion 
is odd under K, so it cannot be paired with the even vacuum states. The 
only other fermions in the theory have tree-approximation masses lml, so 
for small g they can't be paired with the even vacuum states either. We 
conclude then that for small g the even vacuum states must have precisely 
zero energy, and supersymmetry is unbroken. It is not easy to calculate 
the weighted Witten index here, because there are an infinite number of 
bosonic zero-energy states that are even under K, consisting of either 
zero or two Y2-fermions with zero momentum plus any even number of 
zero-momentum Y2 bosons, but it is clear that Tr K ( -l > 0, and since 
this is independent of g (as long as g =f 0), supersymmetry cannot be 
broken for any finite g. 
29.2 
Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
We now tum to sum rules that yield exact quantitative relations between 
the vacuum energy and parameters describing the strength of supersym-
metry breaking. 
Let us again start by assuming that the world is placed in a box of 
volume V, with periodic boundary conditions to preserve translation in-
variance. The vacuum expectation value of the anticommutation relations 
(25.2.36) may then be expressed as a sum over discrete states IX, Box): 
E (vAcjQ«jx, Box)(vAcjQ111x, Box)· 
X 
+ L (vAC!QpjX,Box)(vAcjQ;jx,Box)* 
X 
(29.2.1) 
with the label 'Box' indicating that the states are normalized to have 
Kronecker deltas rather than delta functions as their scalar products. 
Setting p = ex, summing over rx and using Eq. (25.2.37) gives 
2 
L (vAcjQ«jx, Box) 
= 4 (vAcjP0jvAc) . 
X,a 
(29.2.2) 
Because Qa commutes with the four-momentum, it is only states with zero 
three-momentum and the same energy as the vacuum that can contribute 

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
257 
to this sum. To find the volume dependence of the matrix elements 
that do contribute in Eq. (29.2.2), we note that a box-normalized state 
IX, Box) containing Nx particles is related according to Eq. (3.4.3) to the 
corresponding continuum-normalized state IX) by 
(29.2.3) 
For states with Px = 0, the spatial integral of the supersymmetry current 
time-component S2 gives another factor of V, so we conclude that for 
box-normalized states with Px = 0 
(29.2.4) 
Since invariance under 2n-rotations does not allow X to be a zero-particle 
state, the dominant terms in Eq. (29.2.2) when V---+ oo will be those from 
one-particle states. In this limit, Eq. (29.2.2) becomes 
(2n)3 :L (o)j(vAcjs2(o)jx) j
2 
= 4 PvAc, 
X,a. 
(29.2.5) 
where PvAc is the vacuum energy density 
(29.2.6) 
and the superscript (0) indicates that the sum in Eq. (29.2.5) runs only 
over one-particle states with zero four-momentum. These of course are 
the two helicity states of the goldstino. 
We see again from Eq. (29.2.5) that if the vacuum energy density 
does not vanish then the vacuum is not invariant under supersymmetry 
transformations, but is rather transformed into one-goldstino states. Con-
versely, Eq. (29.2.2) shows that if the vacuum is not invariant under 
supersymmetry then according to Eq. (29.2.2) its energy in a finite box 
cannot vanish, although it is conceivable that supersymmetry transforma-
tions might take the vacuum only into multiparticle states, in which case 
the vacuum energy density would vanish in the limit of large volume. 
To evaluate the one-goldstino contribution in Eq. (29.2.5), we use 
Lorentz invariance to write the matrix element of the supersymmetry cur-
rent between the vacuum and a one-goldstino state lp, a), with momentum 

258 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
p and helicity )., in the form* 
(YAC[S"(OJ[p, ~; = (21tr'l2 [ c 
~ Ys) (y"F+ iJ>"F') 
+ C 
~ 1') (y"F" + iJ>"F'")] u(p, ~), (29.2.7) 
where u(p, ).) are the coefficient functions for a massless Dirac field intro-
duced in Section 5.5, and F and F' are unknown constants. The matrix 
element (29.2.7) satisfies a conservation condition P.u(YACIS~'(O),p,J.) = 0 
because u(p, ).) satisfies the momentum-space Dirac equation (5.5.42) for 
zero mass, and pi' is on the light-cone. The sum over helicities gives 
L u(p, J.) u(p, J.) = -i pj2p0 • 
A. 
(The Dirac spinor u(p, ).) for a massless particle of momentum p and spin 
..l is not well defined for p --+ 0, but there is no problem if we regard the 
sum over X in Eq. (29.2.5) as a sum over helicities for a small momentum 
p of fixed direction.) After a straightforward calculation, we then have 
4 
=T {(Fl+ys +F*l-ys) 0 -ip{J( o)t(p•l+ys +Fl-ys)} 
{JVAC 
r 
2 
2 
y 2p0 y 
2 
2 
' 
and therefore 
PvAC = IFI2/2 . 
(29.2.8) 
An alternative proof of this formula will be given at the end of this section. 
• Lorentz invariance alone would yield this formula with independent coefficients FL, 
F[. and FR. F~ for the matrices proportional to (1 + y5)/2 and (1- y5)/2, respectively. 
It is CPT invariance that imposes the relations FR =Fl. and F~ = F'~. To see this, we 
must use the CPT-transformation properties of the supersymmetry current 
CPT S"(x)(CPT)-1 = -y5S"(-x)" = -fJeS"(-x) 
(see Section 5.8) and of the one-particle states 
CPTip, il} = x.dp, -it} 
with Xl a phase factor that depends on how w~: define the relative phases of the helicity 
states. We also need the reality properties of the coefficient functions u(p, A.). These are 
related to those of the one-particle states by the definition 
(VACIIPREN(x)lp,il} = (27t}"~
312 exp(ip · x) u(p, ii.), 
where 'PREN(x) is a renormalized Majorana field, with CPT-transformation property 
CPT 'PREN(x) (CPT)-1 = Ys'PREN(-x)" = fJ e 'PREN(-x). 
which yields u(p,A.) = X~ fJ eu*(p, -ii.). 
Putting this together with the CPT-trans-
formation properties of the supersymmetry current and one-particle states yields the 
relations F R = Fl. and F~ = F'~. 

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
259 
The parameter F plays much the same role in the interactions of soft 
goldstinos as does the parameter Frr. (introduced in Section 19.4) in the 
interactions of soft pions. The matrix element of the supersymmetry 
current between any two states X and Y may be split into terms that 
have a one-goldstino pole at p~-' = 0 in the momentum transfer p = Px-py 
and terms that do not have this pole 
(XIS"(O)IY)- { c 
~
1') [y"F + ip"F'] + c 
~
1') [y"F' +ipl'r]} 
X ( ~~) M(X---+ Y +g)+ (XIS~-'(O)IY)no pole, (29.2.9) 
where uM(X -+ Y + g) is the amplitude for emitting a goldstino with 
four-momentum p and Dirac wave function u, and the subscript 'no pole' 
denotes the terms in the matrix element that do not have the one-goldstino 
pole in the four-momentum p. The conservation of the current S~-' tells 
us that this vanishes if contracted with pi-', so in the limit pJI. ---+ 0 the 
goldstino emission amplitude is** 
M(X-+ Y +g)-+ -i { ( 1 ;;s) + ( \~?
5 )} p~-'(XIS~-'(O)IY)no pole. 
(29.2.10) 
There is another sum rule that provides an alternative proof of the 
existence of goldstinos when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, and 
that also relates the parameter f and the vacuum energy density to the 
D-terms and !F -terms that characterize the strength of supersymmetry 
breaking. (This use of a sum rule is analogous to the second proof in 
Section 19.2 of the existence of Goldstone bosons when ordinary symme-
tries are spontaneously broken.) To derive this sum rule, we will now give 
up the device of a finite volume, and instead avoid the question of the 
convergence of the integral (29.1.3) by working with a local consequence 
of the supersymmetry of the action 
[ (s0(x, t) ex), x(y, t)] = [ (a S0(x, t)), x(y, t)J = i <53(x- y) <>x(x, t) + .. · , 
(29.2.11) 
•• The amplitude (XIS~'(O)IY)no pole may have poles that go as 1/p · k as pi' ~ 0; they 
would not arise from the goldstino propagator, which is explicitly excluded in this 
matrix element, but rather from other particle propagators produced by the insertion 
of the supersymmetry current in external lines of momentum k of the process X ~ Y. 
In the limit pi' ~ 0, the contribution of these poles in Eq. (29.2.10) would dominate the 
amplitudes for emission or absorption of soft goldstinos. But for such poles to arise, 
the goldstino would have to be emitted in a transition between a pair of degenerate 
particles of opposite statistics, which are not likely to appear in theories in which 
supersymmetry is spontaneously broken. The interactions of soft goldstinos differ in 
this respect from the interactions of soft pions, photons, or gravitons. 

260 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
where x(x) is an arbitrary fermionic or bosonic field, bx(x) is the change 
in x(x) induced by the supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal 
parameter (X that leaves the action invariant, and the dots denote terms 
involving derivatives of b3(x- y). Let us consider the vacuum expectation 
value of the anticommutator of an arbitrary left-handed spinor field 
tpL(x) with the covariant conjugate S~'(y) of the supersymmetry current. 
By summing over a complete set IX) of intermediate states (including 
integration over particle momenta), this vacuum expectation value may 
be put in the form 
(vAcl{tpu(x).Sp(Y)}IvAc)= j tfpeip·(x-y> [~p(P)+~p(-p)]. 
(29.2.12) 
where 
~p(p) = L.:b4(p- Px)(VAC!tpu(O)jx) (xi.Sff(O)IVAC), 
(29.2.13) 
X 
G~p(P) = L.:b4(p- Px)(vAc!s;co>jx) (xltpr.a(O)IvAc). 
(29.2.14) 
X 
Lorentz invariance requires that the matrices G~'(p) and G~'(p) must take 
the forms: 
G"(p) = 8(po) c 
~ Y> ) [ y" G(t l(-Pz )+ h''G(2)(-Pz) 
+pl'd3l( -J>')+ h"G(4l( -p2) l 
(29.2.15) 
and 
Gl'(p) = 8(po) c 
~ Y> ) [ y"G(l l( -pz) + }ipi'G(2)(-p>) 
+P"G(3>(-p2)+ py•G(4>(-p2)]. 
(29.2.16) 
The right-hand sides of Eqs.-(29.2.15) and (29.2.16) are unaffected if we 
replace -p2 with m2, multiply by a factor b(p2 + m2), and integrate over 
m2. In this way, Eq. (29.2.12) becomes 
(2" )-3 ( VACI {'I' L(x), S•(y)} lvAC) = C 
~ 1') [ 
dm2 [y"G(1 >(,.Z) 
_ ~i!" d 2l( ,.Z )- ;a•G3l ( ,.Z) - i ~y" d 4l( ,.Z)] <4 ( x - y, m) 

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
261 
+ ( 1 ~ Ys) J."' dn? [y•(J(1l(m2) _ fiJI'i'f.2l(m2) _ ;a•G<'l(m2) 
-i j1y' G< •> ( m")] 4(y - x, m) , 
(29 .2.17] 
where A+(x, m) is the standard function 
A+(x,m) = (2n:)-3 j tfp O(p0)b(p2 + m2) exp(ip · x). 
(29.2.18) 
Causality requires that the anticommutator on the left-hand side of 
Eq. (29.2.17) should vanish for spacelike separations x- y. For such 
separations, A+(x- y, m) is an even function of x- y, so Eq. (29.2.17) 
vanishes for all spacelike separations if and only if 
G(l)(m2) = -G<1>(m2), 
G<2>(m2) = -G(2)(m2), 
G(3>(m2) = +G<J>(m2)' 
G<4>(m2) = +G(4)(m2)' 
(29.2.19) 
so that for general x- y, Eq. (29.2.17) now reads 
(2" )-3 ( VACI { 'l'dx), S•(y)} JvAC) = f dn? [ G<1l(m")y' - d 2l(m") ;iJI' 
-iG(3l(m2)a•- iG<4>(m2) j1y'] 8(x- y,m) C 
~ 1') , 
(29.2.20) 
where, as usual, 
A(x- y,m) = ~(x- y,m) -A+(Y -x,m). 
(29.2.21) 
We next impose the supersymmetry current conservation condition (29.1.2), 
which (because DA = m2A) yields 
G(1)(m2) = m2G{2)(m2) , 
m2G(3)(m2) = -m2d 4)(m2) . 
(29.2.22) 
Finally, we must relate these spectral functions to the breaking of super-
symmetry. Recall that for x0 = y0, 
A(x- y,O,m) = 0, 
A(x- y, O,m) = -ib3(x- y). 
Setting x0 = y0 = t and p. = 0 in Eq. (29.2.20) thus yields 
(vAcj{ll'dx,t), S0(y,t)}IVAC) = (2n:)3b\x-y) ( 1 ~ }'
5
) 
x fooo dm2 [ d 3)(m2) + G(4)(m2)] • 
(29.2.23) 
Contracting on the right with an infinitesimal Majorana fermionic super-
symmetry transformation parameter tX and using Eq. (29.2.11) then gives 
i( blpL )VAC = (2n:)3 ( 1 ~ }'5 ) tX fooo dm2 [ d 3)(m2) + d 4)(m2) J . (29.2.24) 

262 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
But Eq. (29.2.22) shows that the integrand of the integral over m2 in 
Eq. (29.2.24) vanishes, except perhaps at m2 = 0, so we can conclude that 
d3l(m2) + G(4l(m2) = <5(m2)1§, 
(29.2.25) 
with a constant coefficient I§ given by 
if btpL) 
= (2n)31§1XL. 
\ 
VAC 
(29.2.26) 
As we saw in Sections 26.4 and 27.4, a breakdown of supersymmetry is 
signaled by the appearance of vacuum expectation values of the changes 
btp under supersymmetry transformations of one or more spinor fields tp. 
Eqs. (29.2.25) and (29.2.26) show that for any such spinor field, the spectral 
function G(3l(m2) + G<4l(m2) has a delta function singularity at m2 = 0, 
which could only arise from the appearance of a massless one-particle 
state jg) in the sums over states in Eqs. (29.2.13) and/or (29.2.14). For 
the matrix elements (VACjtpjg) or (gjtpjVAC) not to vanish, this massless 
particle must have spin 1/2. This is the goldstino. 
Now let's calculate the contribution of a one-goldstino state IP, A.) with 
momentum p and helicity A. to the spectral functions G(il(m2). Lorentz 
invariance tells us that the matrix element of a general fermion field (not 
just the renormalized goldstino field) in Eq. (29.2.13) takes the form t 
{vACjtp(O)Ip,A.) = (2n~312 [N(
1 ~
115 ) +N* (
1
~1'
5
)] u(p,A.), 
(29.2.27) 
where N is a constant, characterizing the particular fermion field. Also, 
the delta function in Eq. (29.2.13) is 
<54(p _ Pg) = 2po<5(p2)0(po)<53(p _ Pg). 
Together with Eq. (29.2.7), this yields 
[~p(P)L = (2~)3 (1 ~Ys) O(po)<5(p2) 1[y~'F + ipPF']' 
with the subscript 1 indicating the one-goldstino contribution. Comparing 
this with Eq. (29.2.15) shows that 
[ d 2l(m2)] 
1 = i(2n)-3 NF!J(m2), 
[ G(l)(m2)L = [ d3l(m2) L = 0. 
[ d 4)(m2)L = (2n)-3 NF<5(m2), 
(29.2.28) 
t Again, Lorentz invariance would allow independent coefficients NL and NR for (1 +y5) 
and (l-y5), respectively. Using the CPT transformation of the one-particle state and the 
reality property of the coefficient functions diiscussed in the first footnote of this section, 
and the CPT transformation of a general fermion field, CPT1p(x)(CPT)-1 = pe1p(-x), 
we find that NL = N~. 

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
263 
Thus Eqs. (29.2.25) and (29.2.26) yield 
i(i5VJL) 
= NFrxL . 
(29.2.29) 
VAC 
Evidently if the change in any fermion field under a supersymmetry 
transformation has a non-zero vacuum expectation value then the N-
factor for that field cannot vanish, so there must be a one-goldstino state 
that contributes to these spectral functions. 
To be a little more specific, recall that the fermionic components V'Ln of 
a left-chiral scalar superfield <f)Ln obey the supersymmetry transformation 
rule (26.3.15): 
(29.2.30) 
while Eq. (27.3.5) gives the supersymmetry transformation of the gaugino 
fields as 
(29.2.31) 
Hence the N -factors in the matrix elements of the VJn and A. A between the 
vacuum and a one-goldstino state are given by 
Nn = iF-
1 ~(:Fn)VAC, 
NA = -F-1(DA)VAC. 
(29.2.32) 
Let us see how the results (29.2.32) arise in the tree approximation. For 
a renormalizable theory of gauge and chiral superfields, Eq. (27.4.30) gives 
the left-handed part of the fermion mass matrix as 
Mnm = (:;~~:) ) 
, 
n 
m 
rfo=rfoo 
MnA =MAn= i~(tArfJo):, 
1v.rAB = o. 
The vacuum fields ¢nO are at a minimum of the potential 
Eq. (27.4.9), so 
0= (
8
:;~)) 0 =-~Mnm~M>+~(¢btA)nDAo, 
where the !Fs and Ds are given by Eqs. (27.4.6) and (27.4.7) 
!Fn = -(8f(rjJ)/84Jn) •, 
nm 
(29.2.33) 
given by 
(29.2.34) 
and the subscript 0 indicates that we are to set ¢n = ¢nO· Furthermore, 
the gauge in variance of the superpotential requires that 
(29.2.35) 

264 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
for all values of f/J. Therefore the left-handed quark mass matrix M has 
an eigenvector v with Mv = 0, where 
VA= iDAo. 
(29.2.36) 
Thus in the tree approximation, if we expand the left-handed fermion fields 
in renormalized fields for particles of definite mass, then the coefficients 
of the gravitino field in tpLn and in ...1.AL are proportional to .j2JFn0 and 
iD AO, respectively, in agreement with Eq. (29.2.32). 
If we normalize the spin or fields tp Ln and ...1.A so that the matrix con-
necting these fields to the renormalized fields of particles of definite mass 
is unitary, then 
I: 1Nnl2 +I: INAI2 = 1, 
(29.2.37) 
n 
A 
so Eq. (29.2.32) gives the non-perturbative result 
(29.2.38) 
The result (29.2.38) for 1£12 allows us to express the vacuum expectation 
density (29.2.8) in terms of the vacuum expectation values of auxiliary 
fields 
(29.2.39) 
This is the non-perturbative generalization of the zeroth-order result 
(27.4.9). It confirms a result used in Section 27.6, that the conditions 
(Fn) = (DA) = 0 are sufficient as well as necessary for supersymmetry to 
be unbroken. 
* * * 
It is instructive to see how Eq. (29.2.8) can be derived without the device 
of a finite volume. For this purpose, consider the vacuum expectation value 
of the anticommutator of two" supersymmetry currents. By using Lorentz 
invariance and the vanishing of anticommutators at spacelike separations 
in the same way as in the previous section, we find 
(VACI{s~t(x), Sv(y)}IVAC) = -i J 
dm2 [H<
1)(m
2)y~tav +H(2)(m2)·/8Jl 
+H{3)(m2) ¢o~tav +H(4)(m2) ¢rr~-'v +H(5)(m2)cJlv1pa;.yp]L\(x- y,m2) 
+. . . 
(29.2.40) 

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules 
265 
where 
j dX ~~f(p- Px)(VACISt(O)jx)(xlsp(O)[VAC) = H<O(-p2)yllpv 
+ H(2)( -p2)yv pi'_ W3)(-p2) ppl'pv + H(4)(-p2) ptfllv 
+ H(5)( -p2)ellvlpPA.}'p + · · · , 
(29.2.41) 
and the dots in Eqs. (29.2.40) and (29.2.41) denote a linear combination 
of the other independent Dirac covariant matrices 1, }'s, }'s}'a, and [Ya. yd, 
which will not concern us here. The Majorana nature of the currents 
together with Eq. (26.A.20) tell us that the spectral functions H(i) are all 
real, and the conservation of the supersymmetry currents dictate that 
H(1)(m2) = H(2)(m2) =-mi. H(3)(m2)- H(4)(m2), 
(29.2.42) 
and 
(29.2.43) 
Setting 11 = v = 0 and x0 = l in Eq. (29.2.40), integrating over x, and 
using Eq. (29.2.42) then gives 
(vAci{Q, S0(0)}1VAC) = (2tt)3{J j dm2 [H(1)(m2)+H(2)(m2) 
+m2 H(3)(m2) + H(4)(m2)] + · · · = (2tt)3 fJ j dm2 H(1)(m2) + · · · . (29.2.44) 
To evaluate this anticomm.utator, we first write it as 
(29.2.45) 
where TPv(x) is some tensor operator and the dots again denote some lin-
ear combination of the other independent Dirac covariants. The Majorana 
character of Q and Sll tells us that TPv(x) is Hermitian; the conservation 
of the supersymmetry current tells us that it is conserved, in the sense that 
Ov TJlV = 0, 
(29.2.46) 
and the anticommutation relation (25.2.36) tells us that 
j d3x Tllo(x) = pll. 
(29.2.47) 
These properties allow us to identify ypv as the energy-momentum tensor. 
It is not in general equal to the symmetric energy-momentum tensor (8)/lv 
discussed in Section 7.4, but Eq. (29.2.47) shows that the energy density T 00 
can differ from ®00 only by spatial derivative terms that cannot contribute 
in states of zero -thre1e-momentum, so the vacuum energy density is given 
by 
(29.2.48) 

266 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
Thus Eqs. (29.2.44) and (29.2.45) yield 
2pvAc = (2n)3 j dm2 H(1)(m2). 
(29.2.49) 
But Eq. (29.2.43) tells us that n<1)(m2) vanishes except perhaps at m2 = 0, 
so 
(29.2.50) 
Thus we see again that a non-vanishing vacuum energy density entails 
the existence of a massless fermion, the goldstino. Using Eq. (29.2.7), 
a straightforward calculation of the one-goldstino contribution to the 
spectral functions yields 
H(1)(m2) = (2n)-3c5(m2) IFI2 • 
(29.2.51) 
Comparing this with Eq. (29.2.50) gives our previous result (29.2.8) for 
the vacuum energy density. 
29.3 
Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
We saw in Section 27.6 that the superpotential in general supersymmetric 
theories of gauge and chiral superfields is not renormalized to any finite 
order of perturbation theory, so that if supersymmetry is not broken in 
the tree approximation then it can only be broken by non-perturbative 
corrections to the Wilsonian effective Lagrangian. We now take up a 
general analysis of these corrections. These were thoroughly studied in a 
series of papers by Affieck, Davis, Dine, and Seiberg in the early 1980s,3 
with special attention to the case of supersymmetric versions of quantum 
chromodynamics with arbitrary numbers of colors and flavors. Here we 
will present a somewhat simplified analysis of general supersymmetric 
gauge theories, based on the more recent holomorphy arguments of 
Seiberg4 already used in Section 27.7. 
To study non-perturbative effects, we shall here again consider a general 
renormalizable supersymmetric theory, but now including a possible {}-
term in the Lagrangian density 
!£ = [~t .-v ~JD + 2Re [!(~l].., + Re [ s:; ~ 
eap W.wc WAJiLL ' 
(29.3.1) 
where the superpotential f(<J>) is a gauge-invariant cubic polynomial in 
the left-chiral superfields and -r is the parameter (27.3.23): 
4ni 
(} 
"t' = -2 + -2 . 
(29.3.2) 
g 
1t 

29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
267 
As in Section 27.6, we introduce a pair of gauge-invariant left-chiral 
external superfields, now called Y and T, and replace the Lagrangian 
density with 
Sf# = [ <J>l .-v <~>] D + 2 Re [ Y f(<l>)],.. + Re [ S~i ~ 
<.p W.wc WA~L L . 
(29.3.3) 
This becomes the same as (29.3.1) when we set the spinor and auxiliary 
components of Y and T equal to zero, and take their scalar components 
as y = 1 and t = -r, respectively. Non-perturbative effects will in general 
invalidate both of the two symmetries on which the analysis of Section 
27.6 was based. The translation operation, which in our present notation 
is T -+ T + c; with real ~. is not a symmetry because :LA Ewpaf~v f~a can 
have a non-vanishing integral over spacetime. The original R invariance 
(with T and Y having R values 0 and +2) is not a symmetry because 
the anomaly discussed in Chapter 22 gives the R-current a non-vanishing 
divergence. With fh and (JR having R = +1 and R = -1, respectively, and 
VA and <lln R-neutral, the fermion fields AAL and tpnL have R = +1 and 
R = -1, respectively, so Eq. (22.2.26) here gives 
o~Jk =- 32
1n2 ( Ct- c2) ~E~vpaf~v ~~(1. 
(29.3.4) 
where C1 and C2 are the constants defined in Eqs. (17.5.33) and (17.5.34): 
L CAcDCBcD = cl c5AB' 
Tr{tAtB} = c2 c5AB' 
(29.3.5) 
CD 
with the trace taken over all species of left-chiral superfield. • For instance, 
in the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics 
studied in Reference 3, with gauge group SU(Nc) and N1 pairs of left-
chiral quark superfields Qn and Qn in the defining representation and its 
complex conjugate, these constants have values given by Eq. (17.5.35) 
(with nt = 2Nt) as 
Although T translation and R invariance are invalidated by non-
perturbative effects, there is a remaining symmetry which is almost as 
• A factor 32 instead of 16 appears in the denominator in Eq. (29.3.4) because gauginos 
do not have distinct antiparticles, and we are now counting antiparticles separately 
from particles in taking the trace in Eq. (29.3.5). Also, we are now adopting the 
convention, described at the end of Section 27.3, of inclnding a gange coupling factor 
in the gauge fields and not in structure constants and the matrix generators tA. The 
gauge generators are thus normalized so that for tA, t8, and tc in the.standard SU(2) 
subalgebra of the gauge· algebra, the structure constant is CABC = eABC· 

268 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
powerful. Consider a general R transformation 
. 
2" 
fh -+ e''Pfh, W-+ 4>, VA ---+- VA, Y -+ e zrpy , 
(29.3.6) 
with arbitrary real qJ. This leaves the T ·independent terms of the La· 
grangian density (29.3.3) invariant, but according to Eq. (29.3.4), quantum 
effects violate this symmetry, just as if there were a term A!£ in the 
Lagrangian density with a transformation 
A!£ -+ A!£ - 32
1n2 ( Ct - C2) ~ 
c iJvpuf~v f~u qJ • 
Recalling Eq. (27.3.18), this is cancelled if we give T a transformation 
T ---+- T + (Ct - C2)qJjn. 
(29.3.7) 
Because WAaL has R = 2, the whole theory including non·perturbative ef-
fects is invariant under the combined transformations (29.3.6) and (29.3.7). 
In particular, the superfield exp (2inT), which for T = 't is periodic in (}, 
has R = 2(Ct- C2). 
We again introduce an ultraviolet cut-off, and consider the effective 
'Wilsonian' Lagrangian 
co# = [ ..A,(<Il wt y T yt y yt qJ .. ·)] 
..z;A. 
..l41',_ 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
D 
+2 Re [8T. L: EafJ WALa W AL(J + Bl;.(<l>, WL, T, Y)l , (29.3.8) 
nJ AafJ 
§ 
with d.t and Bl.t both gauge·invariant functions of the displayed argu· 
ments. The term proportional to T has been separated from the function 
Bl;, in order that the translation (29.3.7) ofT should continue to cancel the 
anomaly in the R transformation (29.3.6). Invariance under the combined 
transformation (29.3.6), (29.3.7) then tells us that terms in the function 
Bl;. must be proportional to powers of exp(2inT), which have definite R 
values. 
Furthermore, it is only positive powers of exp (2inT) that may appear in 
Bl;.. According to Eq. (27.3.24), it is only instantons with positive winding 
number v > 0 that can make contributions to the effective Lagrangian 
that are holomorphic in T rather than T*, and these give rise to factors 
exp (2inv T). More generally, for T = -r any power exp (2ian T) will depend 
on the gauge coupling through a factor exp( -8n2ajg2), so that a must 
be positive in order for non·perturbative effects to be suppressed for 
small g. In consequence, non-perturbative effects enter in !Rf through 
operators exp(2inaT) that have positive~definite, zero, or negative-definite 
values of R, depending on whether C1 > C2, Ct = C2, or Ct < C2. 
(In the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics 

29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
269 
described above, this corresponds to Nc > Nf, Nc = Nf, and Nc < Nf, 
respectively.) We shall now consider each of these cases. 
Here the powers exp (2ian:T) with a> 0 have positive-definite values of R, 
given by Eq. (29.3.7) as R = 2(C1 - C2)a. Lorentz invariance tells us that 
if any term in 81;. contains a factor WAIXL• then it must contain at least two 
of them, so the only ways to construct terms in 81;. with R = 2 is to have 
two W s and no dependence on Y or T, or one Y and no dependence on 
W or T, or one factor of exp(2in:T /(Ct- C2)) and no dependence on W 
or Y: 
81;. = Y f;.(<D) + "L: Eap WAo:L WBtlB t.uB(cb) + exp (c
2
i:~ ) 
v;.(<I>). 
o:pAB 
1 
2 
(29.3.9) 
Because j;.(<D) does not depend on Y or T, it can only be the tree-
approximation superpotential 
f;.(<D) = f(tl>)' 
(29.3.10) 
just as in perturbation theory. Likewise, because t .uB(<D) does not depend 
on Y or T it must have equal numbers of <Ds and <Dts, so since it does 
not depend on <Dt it cannot depend on <D either. Gauge invariance then 
requires (for a simple gauge group) that t..l.AB(<D) is proportional to c5AB, 
and since it does not depend on T or Y, the power-counting argument 
of Section 27.6 shows that the coefficient of c5AB can only be the one-loop 
contribution to the running inverse-square Wilsonian gauge coupling. 
To be more explicit about the running gauge coupling, recall that in 
non-supersymmetric gauge theories with fermions, Eq. (18. 7.2) gives the 
one-loop renormalization group equation as 
dg;. 
3 
A.df = bg;_ • 
(29.3.11) 
with 
b = --1- (gc1- ~c2) 
4n:2 
12 
6 
' 
(29.3.12) 
with the coefficient of C2 taken as -1/6 rather than -1/3 because we 
are now counting the left-chiral states of antifermions separately from the 
left-chiral states of particles. As we have seen in Section 28.2, the effect of 
gauginos is to multiply the Ct-term by a factor 9 I 11, while the effect of 
the scalar components of the left-chiral superfields (such as squarks and 
sleptons) is to multiply the C2-term by a factor 3/2, so in supersymmetric 

270 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
theories Eq. (29.3.12) becomes instead 
1 
b = - 161t2 (3Ct - C2) . 
(29.3.13) 
The solution of Eq. (29.3.11) for the running gauge coupling is then 
-2 
-2 
3Ct - c2 
( A. ) 
g1 
= g 
+ 
S1t2 
In K 
, 
. 
(29.3.14) 
where K is an ultraviolet cut-off, introduced to give meaning to the 
otherwise ultraviolet-divergent bare gauge coupling g. 
To summarize the results so far, setting T = t and Y = 1, the Wilsonian 
effective Lagrangian for Ct > C2 takes the form 
Sf~= [.x~1 (4>, Cllt, V, t, t•, !?fi · ")]D + 2 Re [st.t. 'L:eap WAaL WApL] 
1tl Aap 
§" 
where 
+2 Re [f(ct>)]:F + exp ( C~i:t~
2
) [v.t(Cil)]:F , 
(29.3.15) 
41ti 
() 
't'.t=--y+-2 . 
g1 
1t 
(29.3.16) 
We have been able to replace t with t.t in the exponential in the last 
term in Eq. (29.3.15), because the difference is a constant times In A., which 
yields a power of A. that can be absorbed into the definition of v A.· 
Non-perturbative effects have now been isolated in the last term in 
Eq. (29.3.15). This term can be generated by instantons of winding 
number v > 0 if C1- C2 = 1/v. (In general Ct- C2 is a rational number. 
For the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics, 
Ct- C2 = Nc- Nt is an integer, so the condition Ct- C2 = 1/v requires 
that Nc = Nt- 1, and then only v = 1 instantons contribute. Detailed 
calculations5 in this model show that instantons actually do make such 
contributions.) Whether or not it is instantons that generate the non-
perturbative contribution v.t(Cil), we can determine its form by considering 
the non-anomalous symmetries of the theory. 
Since this function is 
independent of Y, it can be evaluated as if Y = 0, so it shares all the 
non-anomalous symmetries of the first term in Eq. (29.3.1). These include 
the gauge symmetry itself and a global symmetry under TiaSU(n(d)), 
where d labels the different irreducible representations of the gauge group 
furnished by the left-chiral superfields, and n(d) is the number of times 
representation d occurs. (For instance, in generalized supersymmetric 
quantum chromodynamics d takes two values, labelling the Nc and Nc 
representations of SU(Nc), and n(Nc) = n(Nc) = Nj.) Let us label the 
Clls as 4>~~, where a is a gauge index, and i is a 'flavor' index, labelling 

29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
271 
the n(d) different ct>s that transform under the gauge group according to 
the representation d. The only way to construct a function of the ct>s 
that is invariant under the global symmetry group TidSU(n(d)) is as a 
product of ct>s, with the n(d) flavor indices contracted for each d with 
the antisymmetric SU(n(d)) tensor ei1 ... i,<dl' and with the gauge indices 
contracted with constant tensors of the gauge group. (For instance, 
for generalized supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics, V,t must be a 
function of the sole invariant 
D = Detij L QaiQaj , 
a 
which is non-zero only for Nc > Nt.) 
In addition to the anomaly-free SU(n(d)) flavor symmetries, there is also 
a Ud(1) symmetry for each of the irreducible representations d furnished 
by the ct>s, with all 4>~~ for a given d undergoing the transformation 
(29.3.17) 
This symmetry is anomalous, with the effects of the anomaly the same as 
if the Lagrangian underwent the change 
~ 
n(d)C2d "" 
J.'V pu · 
fl'--+ fl'- ~ 32 2 
~eJ.'vpufA fA (/Jd' 
d 
n 
A 
(29.3.18) 
where c2d is the contribution to c2 of any one left-chiral scalar superfield 
belonging to the irreducible representation d of the gauge group. The 
symmetry is restored if we give T the transformation property 
(29.3.19) 
Since v,t(ci>) is accompanied in Eq. (29.3.9) by a factor exp(2inT /( Ct -C2)), 
which undergoes the transformation 
( 2inT ) ---+IT 
(+2in(d)C2dfPd) 
( 2inT ) 
(29 3 ZO) 
exp C 
C 
exp 
C 
C 
exp C 
C 
' 
. . 
1-
2 
d 
1-
2 
1-
2 
we conclude that for each representation d of the gauge group furnished 
by the left-chiral scalars, v,t(4>) must be a homogeneous function of the 
4>~~) of negative order -2n(d)C2d/(Ct - C2). (For instance, in generalized 
supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics we have two irreducible repre-
sentations of SU(Nc), the defining and antidefining representations, each 
with n(d) = Nt and c2d = 1/2, so VA, is a homogeneous function of order 
-N1 j(Nc- Nt) in the Q belonging to the defining representation and of 
the same order in the Q belonging to the antidefining representation. Thus 
it must be proportional to n-l/(Nc-Nf), where D is the determinant intro-
duced earlier.) In general c2 = Ed n(d)C2d. so V,t(ci>) is a homogeneous 
function of all the Cl>s, of order -2C2/(C1- C2). 

272 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
This result satisfies an important consistency check. Recall from Section 
27.4 that any superpotential has dimensionality +3 (counting powers of 
mass. with 1i = c = 1). while the scalar superfields <I> like ordinary scalar 
fields have dimensionality +1. so the <1>-dependent part of v;. must appear 
with a coefficient of dimensionality 
3 + 2Cz 
_ 3Ct - Cz 
Ct- Cz 
Ct- Cz . 
This coefficient does not depend on the gauge coupling or on any of the 
couplings or masses in the superpotential, and because we have replaced 
the bare coupling g with g;. in the second term of Eq. (29.3.11) it cannot 
depend on the ultraviolet cut-off K used to define g either, so it can only 
depend on A.. Therefore 
(29.3.21) 
where H{<l>) is a homogeneous function of order -2n(d)Cza/(Ct- C2) in 
the <l>s that belong to each representation d of the gauge group and is 
independent of any parameters of the theory. We can rewrite Eq. (29.3.14) 
in the form 
(29.3.22) 
where A is an energy parameter that characterizes the running gauge 
coupling, like the A~ 200 MeV of quantum chromodynamics. Thus the 
last term in Eq. (29.3.15) is 
exp ( 2inr;. ) v;.{<l>) = exp ( 
i(J 
) A(3Ct-C2)/(Ct-Cz) H(<l>). 
Ct- Cz 
Ct- Cz 
(29.3.23) 
The whole effective superpotential, including the non-perturbative contribu-
tion ( 29.3.23 ), is therefore independent of the floating cut-off A. 
The function H(<l>) is homogeneous and of negative order in <1>, so in 
the absence of a bare superpotential the potential is positive-definite at 
finite values of the scalar fields and vanishes only at infinite field values. 
In such a theory, there is no stable vacuum state, and the question of 
supersymm.etry breaking is moot. The vacuum may be stabilized by adding 
a suitable bare superpotential. For instance, in generalized supersymmetric 
quantum chromodynamics with Nf < Nc the only renormalizable bare 
superpotential is a sum of mass terms 
f(Q, Q) = L m;jQai Qaj · 
(29.3.24) 
ija 
To seek a supersymmetric vacuum state, we need first of all to find what 

29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
273 
scalar components qai and 7lm satisfy Eq. (27.4.11), which here reads 
L q:n(tA)abqbi- 'L:7l:i(tA)ab7lbi = 0, 
(29.3.25) 
. abi 
abi 
for all generators tA of SU(Nc)· The gauge interactions (but not the 
superpotential) are invariant under simultaneous SU(Nc) transformations 
on the color indices a of both qa; and q ai; under independent S U( N 1) and 
SU(Nf) transformations on the flavor indices i of qai and 7lai• respectively, 
and under a U(l) transformation of both qai and 7lai by opposite phases. 
Using these symmetries, it is possible to put the general solution of these 
conditions in the form 
(29.3.26) 
where the u; are complex numbers with the same phase. (Here is the 
proof. The SU(Nc) generators tA span the space of all traceless Hermitian 
matrices, so Eq. (29.3.25) is equivalent to the requirement that 
(29.3.27) 
for some constant k. By a combined color and flavor transformation 
q-+ UqV with U and V unitary and unimodular, we can put the matrix 
q in the diagonal form (29.3.26), and by a unimodular change of phase of 
the diagonal elements we can arrange that they all have the same phase. 
Then Eq. (29.3.27) becomes 
""""-•.- . = { 
( u~- k )bah 
7qazqbz 
-kbab 
The conditions for a > N 1 show that k < 0. If k were non-zero, then the 
qai would furnish Nc non-zero orthogonal vectors with Nt components, 
which is impossible for Nt < Nc, so k = 0. We can then put the qai in the 
diagonal form (29.3.26) by a series of uniitary flavor transformations: first 
rotate 7lu into the !-direction; then keeping the !-direction fixed, rotate 
in the space perpendicular to this direction to put q2; in the 2-direction; 
and so on; and then perform a unimodular phase transformation so that 
all diagonal elements have the same phase. Eq. (29.3.27) then shows that 
the absolute values of the diagonal elements of qai and 7lai are equal, and 
by a non-anomalous opposite phase change of qai and llai we can arrange 
that their common phases are equal, as was to be proved.) 
The function H in Eq. (29.3.23) is here 
_ 
[ 
" 
_ 
]-1/(Nc-Nf) 
[II ]-2/(Nc-Nf) 
H(q, q) = ..F Detij ~ 
qaiqaj 
= ..F 
u; 
, (29.3.28) 
a 
i 

274 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
where J is a purely numerical constant. (Detailed calculations show that 
J = 2 for Nt = 2 and Nc = 3.) Adding the terms (29.3.23) and (29.3.24), 
the complete effective superpotential is now 
_ 
[II ]-2/(Nc-Nt) 
"'"' 
2 
ftotal(q,q) = f 
Ui 
+ L.J miui , 
(29.3.29) 
i 
i 
where 
f = J exp ( 
ifJ 
) A(3Nc-Nt)/(Nc-Nf) 
Nc-Nf 
(29.3.30) 
and the mi are the diagonal elements of the mass matrix that results 
when the original mass matrix is subjected to the SU(Nf) x SU(Nf) 
transformation used to put the scalars in the form (29.3.26). The condition 
(27.4.10), that ftotai(q,q) should be stationary, has the solution 
2- 1 ( 
f 
) 1-Nt/Nc ( 
·) -1/Nc 
ui--
IImJ 
. 
m1 
Nc-Nf 
j 
(29.3.31) 
Because we have put the scalar fields in a basis in which the Uj have a 
common phase, the mi must also have a common phase in this basis. 
But the common phase of the uf is not unique -
the 1/ Nc powers 
in Eq. (29.3.31) tell us that the solution is undetermined by a factor 
exp(2inn/ Nc), with n an integer ranging from 0 to Nc - 1. (The two 
signs of ui for a given uf are physically equivalent, because the whole 
theory is invariant under a non-anomalous symmetry with qai ~ e1n qai 
and qai ~ e-inqai.) The fact that there are Nc physically inequivalent 
solutions will tum up again in our discussion of the Witten index in the 
next section. 
This case is of some interest because, as we saw in Eq. (27.9.3), the 
simplest N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, when written in terms 
of N = 1 superfields, contains_a single left-chiral superfield in the adjoint 
representation, for which .. of course C2 =Ct. 
For C2 = Ct the function exp(2in T) has R = 0, so that its appearance 
in !.tf is not restricted by R invariance. The general form of the F-term 
•• Note that here C2 refers to the representation of the gauge group furnished by the 
chiral super:fields, so it is the same as the quantity q in Section 27.9, which refers to 
the representation furnished by complex scalars, but half of c{, which refers to the 
representation furnished by all spinor fields, including the gauginos. 

29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential 
275 
in 21 is given here by Eq. (29.3.9), but with the last term absent: 
flA;. = Yf;.(<I>,exp(2i:n:T))+ L etxpWAaLWBpBt.uB(<I>,exp(2i:n:T)). 
txPAB 
(29.3.32) 
Because/;.. may depend on T, we cannot now conclude that it is equal 
to the bare superpotential, but only that it depends linearly on whatever 
coupling coefficients and masses appear linearly in the bare superpoten-
tial. In particular, if there is no superpotential to begin with, then none is 
generated by non-perturbative effects. 
To go further, we need to make use of the anomalous chiral symmetry 
under a U(l) transformation of all the <I>n. In order for the whole theory 
to be invariant under this symmetry, it is necessary to introduce a separate 
extemalleft-chiral superfield Y, for the terms in the bare superpotential 
of order r in the <I>n. Then the theory is invariant under the combined 
transformations 
T -+ T + CzqJ/:n:, 
(29.3.33) 
This symmetry tells us that a term in flA;. that is of order .JV, in the coeffi-
cients of the term in the superpotential of order r in <I> and proportional 
to exp(2ai:n:T) must be of an order .;V ~in <I>, given by 
..!V ~ = L r ..!V r - 2Cza . 
(29.3.34) 
r 
The coefficients t.uB of the terms in flA;. that are quadratic in W 
are shown in Eq. (29.3.32) to be independent of the parameters in the 
superpotential for C1 = Cz, so in this case Eq. (29.3.34) becomes 
.JV ~ = -2Cza. 
(29.3.35) 
Thus there can be no terms in t.uB of positive order in the <I>,, and any 
term in t .UB that is independent of the <I>, must be independent of T. 
Thes€~ <1>-independent terms in t.uB are therefore again just the one-loop 
contribution to the running coupling parameter r ;.. 
The effeGtive superpotential is shown by Eq. (29.3.32) to be linear in the 
parameters in the superpotential, so all of its terms have just one .;V, = 1 
and the others zero. For such a term Eq. (29.3.34) gives 
.;V ~ = r - 2Cza . 
(29.3.36) 
A term in the effective superpotential with .;V ~powers of <I> can therefore 
only arise from terms in the bare superpotential with r > .JV ~ powers 
of <I>. The terms with r = .;V ~ have a = 0, so they are given by the 
tree approximation as just the bare superpotential. The only other terms 
are non-perturbative corrections with r > .;V ~· Such a non-perturbative 

276 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
term, of a given order in the <l>s, can only arise from terms in the bare 
superpotential of higher order in the <l>s. 
Here the R value 2(Ct- C2) of exp(2inT) is negative, so positive powers 
of exp(2inT) can compensate for the positive R values of Y and Wch and 
!111 may therefore contain terms of arbitrary order in Y and W(X. Using 
the chiral symmetry condition (29.3.34) and the R invariance condition 
2 = % w + 2 L %, - 2a(C2- Ct), 
(29.3.37) 
r 
we can, however, set limits on the structure of terms of a given order % ~ 
in the <l>s. Eqs. (29.3.34) and (29.3.37) have a trivial solution with%, = 1 
for r = % ~. % r = 0 for other values of r, and a = % w = 0; this solution 
just represents the presence in !11 .1. of the original bare superpotential, with 
no radiative corrections. If there is no superpotential to begin with, 
then %, = 0 for all r, so Eq. (29.3.35) does not allow any terms in the 
Wilsonian Lagrangian with % w = 0, and so no superpotential can be 
generated. (In the supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics 
this conclusion is usually derived by noting that there is no possible term in 
the superpotential that would be consistent with all symmetries, but as we 
have now seen, the conclusion is much more general.) For renormalizable 
asymptotically free theories there is a useful limit on the structure of <1>-
independent terms in !11 A.· The condition of renormalizability tells us that 
%, = 0 for r > 3, so by subtracting 2/3 of Eq. (29.3.34) from Eq. (29.3.37) 
we find 
(29.3.38) 
Asymptotic freedom requires that 3Ct > C2, so for % ~ = 0 (or % ~ > 0) 
each term on the right-hand side is positive. It follows that we can have 
no <!~-independent terms of higher than second order in W, and these 
terms are also independent of T, so they again represent the one-loop 
contribution to the running coupling parameter r.1.. But for Ct < C2 there 
is no general prohibition against terms of second or higher order in W 
and negative order in <1>. 
29.4 
Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
We now turn to a question of great physical interest: in what gauge 
theories is supersymmetry spontaneously broken? 

29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
277 
Let us start with an Abelian gauge theory, the supersyrnmetric version of 
quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5. This is a U(1) gauge 
theory with two chiral superfields <I>± carrying U(1) quantum numbers 
+e, and superpotential /(<1>) = m<l>+<l>_. We saw in Section 27.5 that 
supersymmetry is broken in the tree approximation if we include a Fayet-
Iliopoulos term e [V]D in the Lagrangian density, so the Witten index is 
zero for e =f. 0 and small e, and hence also for all values of e and e. 
including e = 0. Is supersymmetry unbroken fore= 0? It is unbroken in 
the tree approximation, but how can we tell if higher-order corrections or 
non-perturbative effects give the vacuum a finite energy in this case? 
To answer this we shall use a symmetry principle of the theory for 
e = 0, in the way that was described in general terms in Section 29.1. The 
symmetry here is charge conjugation: the whole Lagrangian density is 
invariant under the charge conjugation transformation of the chiral and 
gauge superfields: 
c<I>±c-1 = <~>+ , 
cvc-1 =-v. 
(29.4.1) 
There is a massless fermion in the tree approximation, the photino, but if 
we take the vacuum to be even under C then the one-photino state is odd 
under C, so these states are not related to each other by multiplication with 
the supersymmetry generator. The chiral fermion here has mass m in the 
tree approximation, so for small e it is not paired with the vacuum either. 
With no fermionic state available to pair with, the vacuum state must 
have strictly zero energy, at least fore small enough so that perturbation 
theory gives a good qualitative picture of the spectrum. As we saw in 
Section 29.1, the zero energy of the vacuum implies that supersymmetry 
is not broken Likewise, the photino must be strictly massless, since it has 
no bosonic state with which to pair. 
Now, what about values of e that are so large that perturbation theory 
cannot be trusted at all? The Witten index itself is no help here, because 
it vanishes. Instead, let us consider the weighted Witten index, TrC(-1l. 
We have seen that for small e and e = 0 the vacuum has zero energy, and 
there are also two zero-energy states containing a zero-momentum photino 
of spin up or down, and a bosonic zero-energy state containing two zero-
momentum photinos of opposite spin The vacuum makes a contribution 
+1 to TrC{ -1)F; the two one-photino states make a contribution +2 
(because both C and (-1l are -1); and the two-photino state makes a 
contribution +1, giving a weighted Witten index TrG(-1l = 4. This is 
independent of the value of e, so even for strong couplings the weighted 
Witten index is 4, and so supersymmetry is not broken. 
There is a complication here.2 In counting zero-momentum states in the 
tree approximation, we have not considered the zero-momentum compo-
nents of the gauge field V~'(x). A constant term in Vo(x) is no problem, 

278 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
because it can be removed by a gauge transformation 
V~(x)--+ V~(x) + o~A(x) ~ 
(29.4.2) 
with gauge parameter A(x) proportional to x0. On the other hand, we 
cannot simply remove a constant term in V1(x), because this would require 
a gauge transformation with A(x) proportional to xi, which would conflict 
with the assumed periodicity of the fields under translations by the box 
dimension L - v 113. In the particular model under consideration here all 
fields have charges +e or zero, so this periodicity is preserved if we limit 
ourselves to a lattice of gauge transformations with 
2n """" 
. 
A(x) =- L.Jtix
1
, 
eL . 
(29.4.3) 
I 
where ti are three positive or negative integers. Therefore although we 
cannot remove the zero-momentum components of Vi(x) by a gauge 
transformation, we can freely shift them by amounts 2nti/eL. The tree-
approximation Lagrangian (not Lagrangian density) for the xi-independent 
part of v~ in a gauge with Vo = 0 is simply -!L3 L;(ooVi)2, so the 
Hamiltonian is +! L -J l:i( ni)2, where ni is the canonical conjugate to Vi: 
ni = L3oo Vi· The wave function 'P(V) for this field is then just like that 
of a free particle of unit mass in three dimensions, in a box of linear 
dimensions 2njeL with periodic boundary conditions. The wave functions 
of definite energy are proportional to exp(ik · V), with energy k2/2L3, and 
ki = eLti, with ti integers. There is a unique zero-energy state of this field, 
with ki = 0 and with a normalized wave function equal to the constant 
( eL/2n )312• Because this state is unique, our counting of zero-energy states 
is unaffected by the gauge degree of freedom, and the weighted Witten 
index is indeed 4. 
Now let us consider the theory of a simple non-Abelian gauge super:field, 
without chiral super:fields. Witten's 1982 paperl on the Witten index 
presented an argument that for such theories this index is r+1 (or possibly 
-r -1), where r is the rank of the gauge group, the maximum number of 
commuting generators. In 1997 he found a correction to this calculation,6 
with the result that for the classical unitary, orthogonal, and symplectic 
groups the index is a Casimir invariant C1. which for the unitary and 
symplectic groups is indeed equal to r + 1, but for the orthogonal groups 
O(N) with N > 7 and the exceptional groups takes a different value. In 
general, this Casimir invariant is defined by Eq. (17.5.33): 
LCAcDCBcD = g2CthAB, 
CD 
(29.4.4) 
where g is a coupling constant, whose definition can be made unambiguous 
by specifying that when the generators tA, tB, and tc are restricted to the 

29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
279 
three generators of the 'standard' S U(2) subalgebra that was used in the 
calculation of instanton effects in Section 23.5, the structure constant is 
simply gt"ABC. For the classical groups, we have 
SU(N) 
SO(N) for N > 3 
USp(2N) 
(29.4.5) 
For SU(N) the rank is r = N- 1, while for' USp(2N) it is r = N, so in 
both cases r + 1 = C1• But SO(N) with N > 6 has rank r = (N- 1)12 = 
(Ct + 1)12 for N odd and r = N 12 = (Ct +2)12 for N even, and the index 
is C1, not r + 1. Of course, this does not affect the main conclusion that, 
since the Witten index is not zero, supersymmetry is not spontaneously 
broken. Kac and Smilga showed in 1999 that the index is also equal to 
Ct for exceptional groups? We shall calculate the Witten index here only 
for SU(N) and USp(2N) supersymmetric gauge theories with no chiral 
superfields, but in the course of this calculation we will also see why the 
orthogonal and exceptional groups present special difficulties. 
The general strategy of this calculation is the same as for the Abelian 
theories considered previously. We first examine the states of zero energy, 
to see if there are any that cannot be paired by action of the supersymmetry 
generator. If there are, then as long as the coupling is weak enough so that 
the tree approximation gives a good qualitative picture of the spectrum, 
we know that these unpaired states really have precisely zero energy. 
We can then find some non-zero weighted Witten index, which will be 
constant even for stronger couplings, and conclude that supersymmetry is 
not broken for any coupling strength. 
There is another complication here, that did not enter in the earlier 
example of an Abelian theory with charged chiral superfields. As usually 
formulated, general renormalizable theories of gauge bosons and gauginos 
with no chiral superfields do not contain any dimensionless parameters at 
all, so that there is no coupling parameter that can be adjusted to make the 
couplings weak. Instead we have a running coupling constant, depending 
oh the ratio of the energy to a characteristic energy scale A, like the scale 
A ~ 200 MeV for quantum chromodynamics discussed in Section 18.7. 
For non-Abelian theories the gauge coupling constant becomes strong at 
energies below A, however weak it may be at higher energies. But here 
we are working in a box of volume L3, which provides an infrared cut-off 
at an energy ~ 1 I L, that is normally lacking in theories with unbroken 
gauge symmetries. When we speak of a weakly coupled gauge theory, 
it should be understood that we mean one with a coupling that is small 
down to energies of order 1 I L. In this case, it is essential to be able to 
argue that supersymmetry is broken for strong as well as weak couplings, 

280 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
in order to be able to draw any conclusions at all about the realistic limit 
of infinite volume. 
We will work in temporal gauge, where V~ = 0. The Lagrangian density 
(27.3.1) is then 
2' = -i L:!~ij- LL)ooVAi)2 - LE (1A(J'>A.)A) + 4 L:D~, (29.4.6) 
Aij 
A 
A 
, A 
where, in temporal gauge, 
!Aij = Oj VAj- OjVAi + L CABC VBiVCj' 
BC 
(D;A.)A = OjAA + L CABC VBiAC' 
BC 
(29.4.7) 
(29.4.8) 
(29.4.9) 
(As usual, the gauge coupling constant or constants are included as factors 
in the structure constants CABC·) Without chiral superfields, there is no 
other dependence on the auxiliary field D A; since it enters quadratically, 
it may be put equal to the value at which the Lagrangian is stationary, 
D A = 0, and ignored from now on. Retaining only the x-independent 
modes, the effective Lagrangian becomes 
Jd3x 2' = L3 [- -4
1 L (2: CABC VB;Vcj)
2
-
-2
1 :L)ooVAi)2 
Aij 
BC 
Ai 
--2
1 L CABc(1A Yi VBiA.c)-! L:1Ay0ooA.Al· (29.4.10) 
ABCi 
A 
The Hamiltonian is then 
1 
2 
L3 
2 L3 
_ 
H = 2£3 L:nAi+-4 L c~=CABCVBiVcj) +-2 L CABc(AAYiVBiAC)' 
Ai 
Aij 
BC 
ABCi 
(29.4.11) 
where 1tAi = L3oo VAi is the canonical conjugate to VAi· 
The gauge field configurations with zero energy in the tree approxima-
tion are those for which I:Bc CABC VBi Vcj = 0 for all A, i, and j. This 
condition is always satisfied if VBi vanishes for all i except where tB is 
in a Cartan subalgebra of the _gauge Lie algebra. • For the unitary and 
• A Cartan subalgebra is any subalgebra spanned by r-independent generators (s~ that 
commute with one another, that is, for which CA.s~!M vanishes for all tA when t.s~ and 
t,. are in the Cartan subalgebra, where r is the rank. the maximum number of such 
generators. For instance, for the S U(3} symmetry of strong interactions discussed in 
Section 19.7, the rank is r = 2, and the Cartan subalgebra can be taken to consist 
of the third component of isospin t 3 and the hypercharge t8, which act on the light 
quarks with the commuting matrices denoted ;.3 and A.8 in Eq. (19.7.2). 

29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
281 
symplectic groups and their direct products this is the only way that it 
can be satisfied. The same is true for the orthogonal gauge algebras O(N) 
with N < 6, which are all equivalent to symplectic andjor unitary Lie 
algebras (see the Appendix to Chapter 15), but not for orthogonal gauge 
algebras O(N) with N > 7, which is why Witten's original calculation 
needed correction for this case. 
In the rest of this calculation we will only consider gauge algebras like 
the symplectic and unitary algebras for which the condition of zero energy 
in the tree approximation does require the V Bi to vanish for all i except 
where tB is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra. With all 
VAi = 0 except for the V di for which ts~ is in the Cartan subalgebra, the 
zero-energy modes of the fermion field are those also with A.A = 0, except 
for the A.s~ for which ts~ is in the Cartan subalgebra. 
Now we must count these states. The eigenvalues of the ts~ in any 
representation of a semi-simple Lie algebra are quantized, so by gauge 
transformations all values of the non-zero gauge fields V di are equivalent 
to values in a finite box with periodic boundary conditions. The quanti-
zation of these modes is just like that carried out for the gauge field in 
the U(1) model considered above, so the zero-energy state of these fields 
is again unique, with a constant wave function in the box. 
The multiplicity of states with zero energy in the tree approximation 
comes entirely from the fermion degrees of freedom. It is convenient 
to use a two-component notation, in which instead of a four-component 
Majorana field A.s~ a for each generator of the Cartan subalgebra, we 
have two left-handed fields A.s~ La with a=+ 1/2, and their right-handed 
Hermitian adjoints -t:, La· 
These gaugino fields satisfy the canonical 
anticommutation relations 
{-ts~ La, A.;,Lb} = {JdfM{Jab 
and 
{Ad La, AfM Lb} = { -t:, La, A~Lb} = 0 · 
By operating on an arbitrary state vector with as many factors of A.s~ La as 
necessary, we can construct a state vector 10} which is annihilated by all 
A.s~ La· The general zero-energy state vector is then a linear combination 
of products of the A.:, La acting on 10}. 
To see which of these states may be paired with each other by the action 
of the supersymmetry generator, we must take account of a symmetry of 
the theory. The zero-energy condition, that the gauge and gaugino fields 
lie only in directions corresponding to the Cartan subalgebra, is invariant 
under the subgroup of the original gauge group consisting of elements h 
that leaves this subalgebra invariant, that is, for which h-
1 ts~h is a linear 
combination of the tfM. These form a finite group, known as the Weyl 

282 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
group. For instance, in the defining representation of SU(N) the Weyl 
group consists of permutations of the N coordinate axes, together with 
multiplication by a phase needed to make the transformations unimodular. 
These can be represented by products of the finite gauge transformations 
W(i, j) = exp(ina(ij)/2) = ia(ij) with i + j that permute the ith and 
jth coordinate axes, where a(ij) is the U(N) generator with [a(ijWj = 
[a(ij)]j1 = 1, and with all other elements zero. These transformations 
induce orthogonal transformations in the space spanned by the diagonal 
traceless Hermitian matrices td that generate the Cartan subalgebra in 
the adjoint representation. For instance, for the group SU(2) we can take 
the Cartan subalgebra to consist of just t3, and the Weyl group then 
consists of the unit element and a single non-trivial gauge transformation 
W(1,2) = ia(1,2) = iat. for which w-1t3W = -t3. For SU(3) the 
Cartan subalgebra has the two generators AJ and Ag, and the Weyl group 
consists of the six gauge transformations 1, W(1,2), W(2, 3), W{1, 3), 
W{1,2)W{2,3), and W(2,3)W(1,2), which generate rotations by multiples 
of 60° in the space spanned by t3 and tg. 
Assuming the vacuum to be invariant under the Weyl group, it can 
be paired by action of the supersymmetry generators only with other 
states that are invariant under the Weyl group:• This may or may not 
include the previously constructed zero-energy state 10). The condition 
that the state 10) be annihilated by all Ad La is obviously invariant under 
the Weyl group, so if it is unique this state must furnish a one-dimensional 
representation of the Weyl group. The Weyl group always acts on the 
generators of the Cartan subalgebra by orthogonal transformations, so 
there are two such representations: the invariant representation, in which 
each Weyl transformation is represented by unity, and the pseudoinvariant 
representation, in which each Weyl transformation is represented by the 
determinant of its action on the generators of the Cartan subalgebra. 
Let us first consider the case where 10) is invariant under the Weyl group. 
Obviously no linear combination of the one-fermion states A;_. LaiO) can 
be invariant under the Weyl group. There is just one Weyl-invariant linear 
combination of the two-fermion states; it is of the form UIO), where 
U = L eab A;_. La A;_. Lb . 
(29.4.12) 
ab,fl 
(The spin indices a and bare contracted with the antisymmetric tensor eab 
defined by Eq. (25.2.9), because the anticommutation relations make the 
•• Witten remarked that physical states are necessarily Weyl-invariant, but we will 
not need to go into this here, because the Weyl invariance of the vacuum and of 
the supersymmetry generators means that only Weyl-invariant states are relevant to 
spontaneous supersymmetry breaking. 

29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
283 
product ;.::,. La;,._:.. Lb antisymmetric in a and b.) There are various Weyl-
invariant linear combinations of products of three or more generators of 
the Cartan subalgebra, but the anticommutation of the ;._:..La makes all of 
them vanish t except for powers of U. Also, in the product of more than 
r of the Us some of the;,._:.. La would have to appear twice, so ur+l = 0. 
We conclude then that the Weyl-invariant states are limited to the r + 1 
states 
(29.4.13) 
These are all bosonic states, and there are no fermionic states with zero 
energy in the tree approximation with which they could be paired, so for 
sufficiently weak coupling these states must have precisely zero energy, and 
supersymmetry is unbroken. Also, the Weyl-invariant Witten index here is 
r + 1, and this is independent of the coupling strength, so supersymmetry 
is not spontaneously broken whatever the strength of the gauge coupling. 
In the case where the state 10) is pseudoinvariant, the only Weyl-
invariant states are of the form 
I: E.rf,fM,···A:,. La AaLb .. ·10) ' 
(29.4.14) 
d,fM,··· 
t To see this for S U(N), note that each generator t-"' of its Cartan subalgebra may 
be written as a linear combination t-"' = E, c-"'; Ti of generators Ti of the Cartan 
subalgebra of U(N), with the only non-zero element of each T1 being (Ti)1
1 = 1 (with 
indices not summed). In order for the t-"' to be traceless, we must have 2:::1 c-"'i = 0. 
Since the fields ..t.:,. La transform under the Weyl group like the t.91, it follows that for 
a function I:-"_. ... d-"'_. ... ..l.~ Lo..l.:WLb • • · to be Weyl-in variant, the coefficients dd.st··· must 
take the form 
d-"'.st··· = I: 
c.911 C.stJ · • • D1y , 
ij-·· 
wh•~re the D11 ... are invariant tensors, in the sense that for any vectors u;, vb etc., 
the function D(u, v, •. . ) = 2:11 ... Du ... u1 v1 ... is invariant under permutations of the 
coordinate axes. The most general such function is a linear combination of products 
of the function 
S(x, y, z, ... ) = L x1y1z, · · · , 
with arguments x, y, z, ... taken as various subsets of the u, v, etc. But because 
2:::1 c-"'1 = 0, in our case the sum of the components of each vector vanishes, so D(u) = 
S(u) = 0; D(u,v) is proportional to S(u,v); D(u,v,w) is proportional to S(u,v,w); 
D(u,v,w,x) is a linear combination of S(u,v,w,x), S(u,v)S(w,x), S(u,w)S(v,x), and 
S(u, x)S(v, w); and so on. The important point is that, even though the function 
D(u, v, ... ) may not be symmetric in its arguments (because different products of Ss 
may appear with different coefficients), the functions S(u, v, .. . ) are symmetric. In our 
case, the vectors are the anticommuting quantities u(a); = E-"' A.~ L.ac-"';, for which the 
only non-vanishing S function is S(u(l/2),u(-1/2)). With a suitable normalization of 
the generators, this is the operator U. 

284 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
where e s~, ~. ... is the totally antisymmetric tensor of rank r. 
This is 
completely symmetric among the a, b, .. . , so each state is characterized by 
the number of these indices that are +1/2 rather than -1/2, a number 
that can take any value from 0 tor, so the number of independent states 
is r + 1. Depending on whether r is even or odd, these states are either all 
bosonic or all fermionic, so the Witten index here is +(r + 1), and again 
supersymmetry is not spontaneously broken. 
There is an interesting relation between the value of the Witten index 
obtained here and ideas of how certain global symmetries become broken. 
The Lagrangian for a supersymmetric gauge theory is invariant under the 
transformations of a global U(1) 'R~symmetry,' which change the left~ and 
right~handed parts of the gaugino fields by opposite phases: 
(29.4.15) 
with cp an arbitrary real constant phase. The conservation of the current 
J~ associated with this symmetry is violated by an anomaly 
allJ~ =- 32
1 
2 L 
CAcD CBcD f~v tr eJlVpU' 
1C 
ABCD 
(29.4.16) 
where as usual ellvpu is the totally antisymmetric quantity with e0123 = 1. 
(This is obtained from Eq. (22.2.24) by taking the gauge group generators 
tA as (tA)Bc = -iCABC· because the gauginos are in the adjoint represen-
tation of the gauge group, and by multiplying the anomaly with a factor 
1/2, because the gauginos do not have distinct antiparticles.) With the 
definition of the gauge coupling specified above, Eq. (23.5.20) gives the 
integral of the product of field strengths in the anomaly as 
ellvpu j tfx Lf~v /~
11 = 64n 2v jg2 , 
A 
(29.4.17) 
where the 'winding number' v is an integer characterizing the topological 
class to which the gauge field belongs. Putting together Eqs. (29.4.4), 
(29.4.16), and (29.4.17), we see that an instanton of winding number v 
induces a change in R = J d3 x J~ given by 
~R = j tfx ollJ~ = -2vC1 . 
(29.4.18) 
That is, the effective action contains terms o:::Aab AALaAALbeabf1 and its 
integer powers that, instead of being invariant under the R~symmetry 
transformations (29.4.15), are transformed by integer powers of the phase 
exp(2icpCt ). Thus instantons invalidate invariance under the general U(1) 
R~transformation (29.4.15), reducing it to the group Zzc1 of transforma-
tions (29.4.15) with cp an integer multiple of n/C1. We might expect 
that the growth of the gauge coupling at low energy would lead (as in 

29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 
285 
quantum chromodynamics) to the appearance of vacuum expectation val-
ues for gaugino bilinears, which would mean that the discrete symmetry 
group Zzc1 is spontaneously broken to its Zz subgroup, generated by a 
simple sign change of the gaugino multiplet. Then there would be C1 
zero-energy states In}, given by acting on any one vacuum state IX) with 
the elements exp(innR/C1) of Zzc~' with n running only over the values 
0, 1, ... , Ct - 1 because we treat as equivalent any pair of states that 
differ only by action of the generator exp(inR) of Z 2• Since IX) can only 
be a linear combination of states with even values of R, we can form 
C1 states with all values 9t = 0, 2, ... , 2Ct - 2 of R by taking the linear 
combinations 
~ 
exp (in~~) In) . 
In particular, for SU(N) and USp(2N) these states are the same as the 
Weyl-invariant states encountered in the calculation of the Witten index 
in the case where the state 10) is R-invariant, and Weyl-invariant rather 
than pseudoinvariant. The operator U defined by Eq. (29.4.12) has R = 2, 
so there are r + 1 = Ct states uniO) with R = 2n running from zero to 
2r = 2Cl- 2. More generally, the presence of C1 zero-energy states with 
the same statistics helps to explain why the Witten index is equal to +C1 
for the exceptional and orthogonal as well as the unitary and symplectic 
groups. 
The fact that the Witten index is non-vanishing for all pure gauge 
supersymmetric theories means that to find examples of spontaneous 
supersymmetry breaking we must add chiral superfields to the theory. 
It does not help to add massive chiral superfields to the theory, since 
for weak coupling the introduction of massive fields does not change 
the menu of zero-energy states. We have already seen an example of 
this: the work of Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg reviewed in Section 29.3 
showed that an SU(Nc) gauge theory with Nt < Nc left-chiral superfields 
Qai in the defining representation of S U(Nc) and an equal number of 
left-chiral superfields Qat in the complex conjugate representation, with 
a mass term ""£aij muQaiQai• has Nc zero-energy bosonic states and no 
zero-energy fermionic states. (This is one case where the Witten index is 
not left unchanged when a mass term vanishes, because this mass term 
is the term in the superpotential of highest order in the superfields, so 
that a vanishing mass changes the behavior of the superpotential for large 
superfields. In fact, Eq. (29.3.31) shows that as the masses go to zero the 
scalar field values in the state of zero energy go to infinity.) 
On the other hand, there is no difficulty in finding theories with left-
chiral superfields subject to a symmetry that keeps them massless, in 
which supersymmetry is dynamically broken. For instance, consider an 

286 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
SU(Nc) gauge theory with Nt left-chiral superfields Qai and Nt left-chiral 
superfields Qai again in the Nc and N c representations of the gauge group, 
but now also with Nt left-chiral superfields L; that are neutral under the 
gauge group SU(Nc). Assume a global (or weakly coupled local) SU(Nt) 
symmetry, acting on the 'fiavor' i indices of the Qs and the Ls but not 
the Qs, which among other things forbids a mass term linking the Qs and 
Qs. We take Qat and L; in the representations N 1 and N 1 of S U ( N 1 ), 
respectively, while the Qs are taken to be SU(Nt) singlets. The only 
renormalizable superpotential is then of the form 
f(Q, Q, L) = L ~jQajQatLi, 
(29.4.19) 
ija 
where the ~i are a set of coupling constants, which by an SU(Nt) 
rotation may be chosen to have only one non-vanishing component, say 
the one with j = N1, which can also be chosen to be positive. (This is a 
generalization of a model treated by Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg, 8 in which 
they took Nc = 3 and Nf = 2.) The gauge-neutral superfields Lt have no 
effect on the non-perturbative terms in the effective superpotential, so we 
can use the result of Section 29.3, that for Nc > Nt the gauge interactions 
yield a total effective superpotential 
_ 
"""' 
-
[ 
'""-
]-lj(Nc-NJ) 
ftotal{Q, Q, L) = L 
~jQajQaiLi + .7f Detij L QajQai 
, 
ija 
a 
. 
(29.4.20) 
with % a constant. In order for supersymmetry to be unbroken it is 
necessary (though not sufficient) that the scalar components qaj. 7lai• and 
t; of the chiral superfields satisfy the condition aftotal(q,q,t)jat; = 0, so 
that, for all i, 
L ~ 
j 7J.aj qai = 0 · 
ja 
(29.4.21) 
But this tells us that the matrix .La 7iajqai has a zero eigenvalue, and there-
fore has zero determinant, so this is a singular point of the superpotential 
(29.4.20), at which it is impossible for a f total! aqai or a !total! aqaj to vanish. 
Supersymmetry is therefore necessarily broken in this class of models. 
For instance, Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg8 found the non-vanishing scalar 
components qaj, 7laj• and ti of the superfields Cl>ai. Cl>ai, Li at the minimum 
of the potential in their model with Nc = 3 and Nt = 2 to be at the values 
qu = 7lu = 1.286 (% /2~)
1
1
7
, 
q22 = 7i22 == 1.249 (% /2~)
117
' 
(29.4.22) 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
287 
·-
where the vacuum energy density is 
PvAc = 3.593 (16~
10 I .Jf"4)117 . 
(29.4.23) 
Also, .Jf" = 2A 7 for 8 = 0. 
The fact that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in this case en-
courages us to think that it will be broken by strong gauge forces in a wide 
range of asymptotically free gauge theories, and thus lends legitimacy to 
the speculations about supersymmetry breaking in Section 28.3. 
29.5 
The Seiberg-Witten Solution* 
It often happens that the tree-approximation potential in a supersymmetric 
theory will take the value zero for a continuous range of scalar field values. 
(For one example, see Eq. (29.1.9).) In this case the theory has a number 
of scalar excitations with zero mass in the tree approximation, which 
since supersymmetry is unbroken must be accompanied with suitable 
fermionic superpartners. At low energies the theory will then be described 
by a family of supersymmetric effective Lagrangians, whose members are 
parameterized by one or more moduli, the scalar expectation values in the 
underlying theory. Quantum effects in the underlying theory can modify 
the dependence of the effective Lagrangian on these_ moduli, and even 
alter the topology of the space of moduli.9 
In one of the most striking accomplishments of the 1990s in super-
symmetry theory, Seiberg and Witten10 were able to calculate the exact 
dependence of the low-energy effective Lagrangian on a modular param-
eter in gauge theories with N = 2 supersymmetry. The ideas behind this 
calculation can be made apparent by running through only the simplest 
special case, that of an SU(2) gauge theory with N = 2 supersymmetry 
and no additional matter hypermultiplets. 
We saw in Section 27.9 that the Lagrangian density for this theory is 
given after elimination of the auxiliary fields by 
!l' = 
12 [- ~~)Dp€/J)~ (DP€/J)A- _21 L ( tpA (/)tp)A) 
e 
A 
A 
-2.j2Re LeABC (.~L_etpcL) 4JB-~LfApvf~v 
ABC 
A 
• This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development and may be 
omitted in a first reading. 

288 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
1 ~ (-
) ) l () 
~ 
JJV pu 
* 
-2 7 AA(/>A. A + 64n2eJlvpu L;'fA fA -
V(~.~), 
(29.5.1) 
where A, B, and C now run over the values 1, 2, and 3. We have now 
rescaled all the fields by multiplying each of them by a factor e, so that e 
does not appear in the covariant derivatives: 
(DI'tp)A = a!JtpA +I: €ABC VB!Jtpc' 
(29.5.2) 
BC 
(Dw~)A = ai'A.A + L eABC VB!JAC' 
BC 
(DJJ~)A = aJJ~A +I: eABc VBJJ~C , 
BC 
fAJlv = allVAv -avVAJJ + LeABCVBJJVcv, 
BC 
and the potential is 
V(~, ~·) = 2 I: [I: eABC Re~B 1m ~c]
2 
A 
BC 
(29.5.3) 
(29.5.4) 
(29.5.5) 
(29.5.6) 
This potential takes the value zero for a family of scalar field expectation 
values, which (up to a gauge transformation) may be parameterized as 
~1 = ~2 = 0 , 
~3 = a, 
(29.5.7) 
with a a complex parameter, known as the vacuum modulus. This vacuum 
expectation value gives masses 21al to the vector fields V1JJ and V2JJ, the 
gauginos A.t and A.2, the chiral fermions tp1 and tp2, and the scalars c/>1 and 
~2. leaving V3JJ, A.3, tp3, and ~3 = a all massless. 
Taking account only of these zero-mass modes (and dropping the sub-
script 3), the tree approximation gives the effective low-energy theory as 
simply the free-field theory with Lagrangian density 
!L' <If = :, [ -(a,ar (O"a)- ~ ( w ( ?w)) 
- ~ f ,.,!"' - ~ (I (,l> A)) l + ~" 
2 e,., ,. !"' fP" , 
(29. 5.8) 
with f~'v = aJJ Vv - av Vw Indeed, any renormalizable theory of a single 
gauge boson and its gauge-neutral N = 2 superpartners must be a free-
field theory, because N = 2 supersymmetry does not allow a superpotential 
for this theory. 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
289 
But this is not the whole story. In integrating out the massive degrees of 
freedom in this theory, quantum corrections produce non-renormalizable 
interaction terms in the low-energy effective field theory. We can classify 
the interactions and Feynman diagrams containing them that predominate 
at low energy by the same sort of counting of powers of energy that 
we used in dealing with low-momentum pions and nucleons in Section 
19.5. When we use the effective Lagrangian perturbatively to calculate 
low-energy scattering amplitudes, the number v of powers of energy 
contributed by a connected graph with L loops, If external fermion lines, 
lb internal boson (a or VII) lines, Ia internal auxiliary field lines, and vi 
vertices of each type i, is 
v = 4L + L Vidi - 2h -1 f , 
(29.5.9) 
where di is the number of derivatives in the interaction of type i. (Internal 
auxiliary field lines do not contribute in Eq. (29.5.9) because their propa-
gators are independent of momentum.) These quantities are subject to the 
topological relations 
and 
21b+Eb = L Vibi, 
i 
21t+Et = L Vdi, 
i 
(29.5.10) 
21a+Ea = L Viai, {29.5.11) 
i 
where Eb, Ef, and Ea are the numbers of external boson, fermion, and 
auxiliary field lines, and b;, f;, and a; are the numbers of boson, fermion, 
and auxiliary fields in interactions of type i. We can therefore write the 
number of powers of energy as 
(29.5.12) 
According to Eqs. (26.8.4) and (27.4.42), both the D-term of a function 
of left-chiral scalar N = 1 superfields and their ad joints and the §-term 
of a pair of N = 1 gauge superfields Wo: times an arbitrary function of 
N = 1left-chiral scalar superfields have di + !f; +a; = 2, while adding any 
additional Wcx factors or superderivatives £!J11. would give d;+ !f;+a; > 2, so 
in our case supersymmetry rules out any interactions with d; + !h +a; less 
than 2. The dominant contribution to low-energy scattering amplitudes is 
thus given by the tree approximation (L = 0), calculated with an effective 
Lagrangian containing only terms with di + !h + a; = 2, which takes the 
general form discussed in Section 27.4: 
(29.5.13) 

290 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
Eq. (27.4.42) then gives the Lagrangian in terms of component fields as 
2 = 
82
!<;;.~·) [- ~( w lw) + lj>f- a,aa"a·] 
{ aJK(a,a*)(_) ·} 
1 
{a
3
K(a.~*)(-J.I )a} 
- Re 
aza oa* 
tptpL ff 
- 2 Re 
o2a oa* 
WY Ystp 
J.ia 
1 o
4K(a,a*) (-
) (-
) 
+4 o2a o2a* 
tptpL 
tptpR 
+~Re { (:UL) ( lpfPL) rf':Ja)} - ~ Re { (:UL )j'd~~a)} 
+ Re { T(a)[- ~(1 ?(!- Ysl'-)- ~f,,,f"' 
1 . 
fJ.iVfPU 
1 D2] } 
+-glEJ.Ivpu 
+ 2 
+ fRe { d~~a) [-(lyJ.i/tpL)f1w + 2i(ItpL)D]} . 
(29.5.14) 
In order to implement N = 2 supersymmetry, we now want to impose 
invariance under the discrete R-symmetry transformation (27.9.2): 
tp --+A. • 
A.-+-tp, 
(29.5.15) 
with a and VJL unchanged. The condition that the coefficients of (1p ~tp) 
and (I ~A.) should be equal is 
azK(a,a*) = R T( ) 
:::. a 
e 
a . 
ua a* 
(29.5.16) 
The right-hand side is the sum of a function of a and a function of a*, so 
o4Kjo2ao2a* = 0, and therefore the term quartic in tp, which would have 
had no counterpart for A., is absent. By an integration by parts, the term 
! Re {T(a){I ,lJys.A.)} may be replaced with -~Re {{IyllysA.)oJL T(a)}. The 
condition that the coefficients of (VJYJ.I'}'stp) and (IyJ.IysA.) should be equal is 
then satisfied if 
1 
1 o3K 
4°J.IT = 2a2aaa· 8J.Ia, 
which is also an automatic consequence of Eq. (29.5.16). According to 
Eq. (26.A.7), the terms proportional to fJ.Iv(I[yJ.i, yv]tp) and fJ.Iv(I[yJ.I, yv]ystp) 
are automatically invariant under the transformation (29.5.15), as are also 
the terms proportional to (IA.L}(tptpL) and its adjoint. On the other hand, 
the invariance of the terms proportional to (ltp)D and {Iy5tp)D requires 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
291 
that we extend the transformation (29.5.15) so that 
D -+ - D , 
(29.5.17) 
which also leaves the term !D2 invariant. Finally, Eq. (29.5.16) tells us that 
the coefficients of (tptpL).'F• and (IA.L).'F are equal, so the transformation 
(29.5.15) must also be extended so that 
(29.5.18) 
which also leaves the term 1?12 invariant. We conclude then that the con-
dition (29.5.16) ensures that the whole action derived from Eq. (29.5.14) 
is invariant under the combined transformation (29.5.15), (29.5.17), and 
(29.5.18). Since the Lagrangian is invariant under N = 1 supersymmetry 
with a left-chiral scalar supermultiplet (a, tp, :F) and a gauge supermul-
tiplet (VI', A., D), it is also invariant under a second supersymmetry with 
a left-chiral scalar supermultiplet (a, A, F•) and a gauge supermultiplet 
(VI', -tp, -D). Eq. (29.5.16) is therefore enough to ensure that the action 
obtained from Eq. (29.5.13) or (29.5.14) is invariant (without imposing the 
field equations) under N = 2 supersymmetry. 
The general solution of Eq. (29.5.16) can be expressed as·· 
T( ) = _1 dh(a) 
K( 
*)=I {a*h(a)} 
a 
4 . d 
, 
a,a 
m 
4 
, 
m 
a 
n 
(29.5.19) 
with h a function of a alone. In terms of h, the Lagrangian density 
(29.5.14) now reads 
Z = 4~Im { [~!] [- ~ ('1' ~(I- Ys)'l')- ~ (1 ,(1- y5)A) 
-a,aa•a· + JFI
2 + ~D
2 - ~~ ,..!"' + ~i e,.,,.!"' !'"]} 
1 
{ [d
2hl [ 1 ( 
) 
• 
1 (-
) 
.ji (-
) 
+ 4n Im 
dal 
- 2 tptpL F 
- 2 AAL .'F + T i A.tpL D 
-f (1y"y'u'I'L )f,,]} 
+ l!x 1m { d::\a) (1AL) ( 'I''I'L)} . 
(29.5.20) 
This is invariant under an SU(2) R-symmetry, under which {tp, A.) trans-
forms as a doublet and (ImF, ReF, D/ ../2) as a triplet. The discrete 
•• The factor 1/4ni is included in order to simplify the duality transformation introduced 
below. Seiberg and Witten introduced a function P"(a) (not related to the auxiliary 
field?), known as the prepotential, for which h(a) = d!F(a)jda. 

292 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
transformation (29.5.15), (29.5.17), and (29.5.18) is a finite element of this 
SU(2) group: a rotation of n radians around the 2-axis. 
Comparing Eqs. (29.5.8) and (29.5.20), we see that in the tree approxi-
mation 
h(a)tree = [ :~i + ;n] a. 
(29.5.21) 
The achievement of Seiberg and Witten was to calculate h( a) exactly. 
The first step in this calculation is to recognize that there are various 
linear transformations on a and dh(a)jda that give physically equivalent 
theories. This is because of a remarkable property of the low-energy 
effective theory, related to the duality property discussed briefly in Section 
27.9. To demonstrate this property, let us return to the Lagrangian density 
(29.5.13) expressed in terms of N = 1 superfields, now using the relations 
(29.5.19) required by N = 2 supersymmetry 
ff'etr = 8~Im [<t>*h(<I>)]D- 8~Im [h'(<l>) (wlewL)]jO. 
(29.5.22) 
In path integrals the spinor field-strength superfield W L is constrained 
by the supersymmetric extension (27 .2.20) of the homogeneous Maxwell 
equations: 
Re (§lie W L) = 0 . 
(29.5.23) 
This is usually imposed by requiring that WL take the form (27.2.15) 
(29.5.24) 
where V is an umestricted real superfield. Instead, we can implement 
the condition (29.5.23) by introducing a Lagrange multiplier term in the 
action 
(29.5.25) 
where V is an unrestricted real superfield. (The numerical factor 1/8n 
serves to fix the normalization of V in a way we shall find convenient 
later.) Then in path integrals we can integrate over both V and WL, 
with no restrictions on either except that V is a real superfield and WL 
is a left-handed spinor superfield satisfying the left-chirality condition 
§l Ra: W L,B = 0. Integrating by parts in superspace allows us to write the 
new term in the action as 
(29.5.26) 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
293 
or, using Eq. (26.3.31) and the fact that WL is left-chiral, 
Meff = Re [4~ j tfx [(wlewL)]jO] , 
(29.5.27) 
where W 
L is defined in terms of V by the same relation that previously 
gave W L in terms of V: 
(29.5.28) 
But now we are integrating over WL with no such constraint, with an 
action that is quadratic in W L 
Ieff+Meff=Im j tfx [- 8~h'(~)(WleWL)_:__ 4~ (wlewL)]jO 
+ 8~Im j tfx [~"'h(~)]D. 
(29.5.29) 
This integration is done by setting W L equal to the value where the action 
is stationary in WL: 
WL 
WL =- h'(~) 
and the whole effective action becomes 
(29.5.30) 
jeff=+ 8~Im f tfx [h'(
1
~) (wleWL)]jO + 8~Im f tfx r~·h(~)JD. 
(29.5.31) 
Now, if we define a new left-chiral scalar superfield and a new h function 
then 
iii dh -
d~ dib -
1 
dib d~ - - dd> d~ - -
' 
so the action (29.5.31) may be written as 
(29.5.32) 
(29.5.33) 
letr =- 8~Im j tfx (ii'(ib) (wlewL)]jO + 8~Im j tfx [~*h(ib)]D. 
(29.5.34) 
From the method by which we have derived it, we know that the theory 
based on this effective action is equivalent to the original effective field 
theory, so the N = 2 effective field theory with scalar field value a and h 
function h(a) is physically equivalent to one with scalar field valuet aD = 
t The subscript D stands for 'dual,' and of course has nothing to do with the D-term of 
a superfield. 

294 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
h(a) and hfunction h(av) =-a. This is the version of duality that applies 
in the present context. 
There is another transformation of the function h(<l>) that also yields 
an equivalent Lagrangian (now with no change in <I> or W) and can 
be combined with the transformation (29.5.32) to give a larger group of 
duality transformations. Suppose we shift h(<l>) by a linear term with a 
real coefficient: 
h(<l>)--+ h(<l>) + b<l>' 
(29.5.35) 
where b is a real constant. Then the first term in the effective Lagrangian 
density (29.5.22) is shifted by bim{[<l>*<l>]v}/8n, which vanishes since the 
D-term of <I>*CI> is real. The change in the effective Lagrangian density 
(29.5.22) is therefore given by the shift in the second term 
ff' eff --+ ff' eff -
8~ lm [ ( W leW L) J jO , 
or, according to Eq. (27.2.13), 
ff'eff --+ ff'eff- 8~ [i (l ¢ys..l) + ~ePvpu /pv/pu] 
(29.5.36) 
(29.5.37) 
The first term in the brackets on the right-hand side is a spacetime 
derivative, and therefore does not affect the effective action. The sec-
ond term in the brackets can also be written as a spacetime derivative 
(1/2)op(e11VPU Avfpu) wherever /pv can be written as oi'Av -ovAw However, 
as discussed in Section 23.3, the gauge transformation that we used to put 
¢A in the 3-direction must be singular somewhere, so we cannot write /pv 
everywhere in terms of a single Aw In consequence, physical quantities 
can be affected by a term in the action of the form 
8 J 
d4 
JIVPUf f 
-
64n2 
x e 
pv pu . 
(29.5.38) 
In particular, Witten11 has shown that, in the theory of magnetic mono-
poles described in Section 23.3, the electric charge of a magnetic monopole 
with minimum monopole moment in the presence of such a term is e8 j2n. 
But, as mentioned in Section 27.9, in this theory there are also dyons, 
particles with both magnetic monopole moments and charges given by 
any integer multiple of e, so the whole pattern of monopole and dyon 
charges is periodic in 8 with period 2n. In fact, all physical quantities have 
this periodicity, because the 8 of the low-energy effective theory is inherited 
from the 8 appearing in the Lagrangian density (29.5.1) of the underlying 
theory (note Eq. (29.5.21)), and we have seen in Section 23.5 that all 
physical quantities are periodic in this 8. According to Eq. (29.5.37), the 
transformation (29.5.35) changes 8 by 2nb, and therefore with b equal to 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
295 
an arbitrary positive or negative integer it yields an equivalent effective 
action. 
This sort of transformation is closely related to an exact invariance 
of the underlying theory. The Lagrangian (29.5.1) is invariant under a 
continuous R~symmetry, under which 
lh--+ exp(io:)lh, 
WAL--+ exp(io:)WAL, 
<I> A--+ exp(2io:)<I>A. (29.5.39) 
This symmetry is broken by an anomaly: both A.AL and VJAL have R 
quantum numbers +1, and of course AAR and "PAR have R quantum 
numbers -1, so according to Eqs. (23.5.21) and (23.5.23), the measure in 
the integral over fermion fields changes under the transformation (29.5.39) 
by a factor exp(2io:Nv), where v is an integer, the winding number of the 
vector field configuration, and N is defined by 
1 
Tr (tAtB) = 2NhAB . 
(The factor exp(2io:N v) is the same as given in Section 23.5, even though 
here we have two fields "PA and lA in the same representation of the gauge 
group, because these are Majorana fields, in contrast with the Dirac 
fields used in Section 23.5.) The generators here are (tA)Bc = -iEABC, so 
N = 4, and therefore the measure remains invariant when exp(8io:) = 1. 
In other words, the continuous R-symmetry is broken by instantons to a 
Zs subgroup, generated by the transformation 
"PAL-+- .JiV'AL' 
AAL--+ .jiA.AL' 
¢A--+ i¢A. 
(29.5.40) 
This symmetry then must carry over to the effective low-energy theory. 
However, it does not tell us that the effective Lagrangian (29.5.20) is 
invariant under the discrete transformation (29.5.40), which would require 
that -ih(ia) = h(a) for all a. This condition is satisfied by the tree 
approximation (29.5.21 ), but (as we will see) it is violated even in one-
loop order. The Zs R-symmetry is realized in the effective theory by the 
condition that the effective theory with h function -ih(ia) is equivalent 
to one with h function h(a). That is, -ih(ia) must be related to h(a) by 
some combination of the transformations (29.5.32) and (29.5.35), with b 
an intt~ger. 
We have seen that the physical significance of the theory is left un-
changt~d by two sorts of transformation: the transformation <I>--+ <i> = h(<l>) 
and h(<l>)--+ h(<i>) =-<I>, which can be written as 
(29.5.41) 
and the transformations h(<l>)--+ h(<l>) + b<l>, <I>--+ <1>, which can be written 

296 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
as 
(29.5.42) 
where b is an arbitrary integer. By combining these transformations, we 
can make generalized duality transformations 
(29.5.43) 
where n, m, k, and l are any integers satisfying the condition that the 
matrix in Eq. (29.5.43) should, like those in Eqs. (29.5.41) and (~9.5.42), 
have unit determinant: 
nl-mk=l. 
(29.5.44) 
These transformations therefore form the group SL(2,Z). 
The physical significance of the duality transformation can be brought 
forward by considering the central charge of the N = 2 supersymmetry 
algebra. As shown in Section 25.5, the eigenvalue Z12 of this central charge 
in any one-particle state sets a lower bound M > 12121/2 on the mass 
of the state, a bound that is reached for particles that belong to 'short' 
supermultiplets. We saw in Section 27.9 that Z 12 is given in the underlying 
SU(2) gauge theory with N = 2 supersymmetry by Eq. (27.9.22): 
Z12 = 2/iv [iq- .A], 
where q and .A are the charge and magnetic moment of the particle, and v 
is the vacuum expectation value of the conventionally normalized neutral 
scalar field. In the notation used in the present section, we have absorbed 
a factor e into the normalization of the field a, so here we have 
z12 = 2/ia [iq- .Jt]je. 
(29.5.45) 
This theory contains particles like the massive elementary scalars, spinors, 
and vector bosons, which have charge e and zero magnetic monopole 
moment, so such particles are eigenstates of Z12 with eigenvalue 
Z charged elementary _ 2 ;-;;2 . 
12 
-
y.L.Za. 
(29.5.46) 
As we have seen, the theory with scalar field a and h function h(a) is 
equivalent to one with scalar field na + m h(a) and h function k a+ l h(a). 
Therefore for all integers n and m the theory with scalar field a and h 
function h(a) must also contain a particle that looks like a massive particle 
of chargee and zero magnetic moment in the version of the theory with 
scalar field na + mh(a) and h function ka + lh(a), and that therefore has a 
central charge 
(29.5.47) 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
297 
Comparing this with Eq. (29.5.45), we see that, in the version of this 
theory with scalar field a and h function h(a), this particle appears as one 
with a charge q and a magnetic monopole moment .,It given by 
qfe = n + mRe [h(a)/a], 
.At /e = mlm [h(a)/a] . 
(29.5.48) 
This is a dyon, with both charge and magnetic monopole moment. Note 
that the formula (29.5.48) for the charge of this particle bears out Witten's 
earlier result about the charge of magnetic monopoles: adding a term ba 
to the function h(a) changes the charge of a monopole with m = 1 by an 
amount be = e-1.8 /2n. 
Using the tree-approximation result (29.5.21) for h(a) in Eq. (29.5.48) 
shows that in this approximation the magnetic monopole moments in 
this theory are multiples of a value 4n I e. This is the same as the mag-
netic monopole moment derived in Section 23.3 (recall that the magnetic 
monopole moment g used there is .At /4n), but this is a semi-classical re-
sult, subject to quantum corrections. Note that the duality transformation 
(29.5.41) with n = 0 and m = 1 takes an elementary particle with chargee 
and magnetic monopole moment zero into a non-elementary particle with 
magnetic monopole moment Im [h(a)fa], which in the tree approximation 
is 4nfe. 
The beta function for the electric charge in the underlying N = 2 
supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory is given perturbatively by the one-
loop result Eq. (27.9.50), with the first Casimir invariant taken now as 
C1 = 2e and the number of hypermultiplets set at H = 0: 
r? 
Pperturbative(e) = - 4
1C2 · 
(29.5.49) 
We here take a as the renormalization scale, so the running charge e(a) 
satisfies 
a :a e( a) = p ( e( a)) . 
(29.5.50) 
Using the perturbation theory formula (29.5.49), this gives 
-2 
1 (a) 
[e 
(a)]perturbative = 2
1C2 ln A 
, 
(29.5.51) 
where A is an integration constant. In the formalism we are adopting 
here, with a factor e absorbed into the definition of the gauge field, the 
quantity e-2(a) appears as the coefficient h'(a)/4ni of the term -
ifp.vfP.'~' 
in the low-energy effective Lagrangian (29.5.20), so the function h(a) is 

298 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
given in perturbation theory bytt 
[h(a)]perturbative = ~i [aln (~) -a] = 4nia [£e-2(a)]perturbative- 2~2 ] 
(29.5.52) 
This is a good approximation* for sufficiently large values of jaj, where 
Eq. (29.5.51) gives a small value of e(a). In this case, Eq. (29.5.48) gives 
the magnetic monopole moment of monopoles and dyons as 
.Aperturbative/e = 4nma [[e-2(a)]perturbative- 2~2 ] , 
(29.5.53) 
where m is an arbitrary integer. Note that this is not the same as would be 
found by simply replacing e with the running charge e(a) on the right-hand 
side of the semi-classical formula .A je = 4nmje2• 
For sufficiently large values of lal, Eq. (29.5.52) also satisfies a necessary 
consistency condition: the coefficient Imh'(a)j4n of the kinematic terms 
- HVJ ¢1p), - Hl ¢2), -olla* iJI-'a and -
~~ 1.wfllv must be positive. The same 
condition tells us also that Eq. (29.5.52) cannot be a good approximation 
for all values of a, because it gives a negative value for Imh'(a) for lal 
sufficiently small. 
Eq. (29.5.52) shows that if a is carried counterclockwise around a circle 
with a large value of Ia!, where perturbation theory is valid, then h(a) is 
shifted by -4a. This tells us that h(a) must have one or more singularities 
at finite values of a. 
We can easily rule out the possibility that h(a) has just one singularity, 
because this would make it impossible to satisfy the condition that h'(a) 
should have a positive imaginary part for all non-singular values of a, 
which as we have seen is necessary for the positivity of the coefficients 
of the kinematic terms in the effective Lagrangian. A single singularity 
would have to be at a = 0, because the Zs-symmetry tells us that if h(a) is 
singular at a then it is also singular at ia. The function h(a)- hperturbative(a) 
would then be analytic except at infinity and perhaps at a = 0, but this 
function vanishes as Jal --+ oo, and in particular does not change when 
carried around a circle at large a, so it could at most be a polynomial 
in 1/a, with no constant term. If the polynomial does not vanish, then 
h'(a) goes as some negative power of a as a --+ 0, which would not 
tt The additive constant needed in integrating h'(a) has no effect on the low-energy 
effective action derived from Eq. (29.5.22), because [I[)•]D is a derivative. This constant 
can be fixed by reference to the Z 8-symmetry discussed earlier. Eq. (29.5.52) satisfies 
-ih(ia) = h(a) -1, which is a special case with b = -1 of the transfonnations (29.5.35) 
that leave the physical significance of the theory unchanged. This would not be the 
case if we had added a constant to Eq. (29.5.52). 
:t: There are non-perturbative contributions12 to p(e), arising from instantons, but these 
vanish rapidly for e -
0. 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
299 
have a positive imaginary part, while if the polynomial did vanish then 
h'(a) would be equal to h'perturbative(a), which also does not have positive 
imaginary part for a --+ 0. 
In studying the singularity structure of h(a), it is helpful to keep track of 
duality by treating a and av = h(a) in the same way, expressing them both 
as functions of some complex variable u. Seiberg and Witten took u to 
be the expectation value of the gauge-invariant quantity! LA ¢A cPA· This 
changes sign under the Zs transformations ¢A --+ +i¢ A. and of course 
under this transformation a = ¢3 --+ +ia, so 
a(-u) = +ia(u). 
(29.5.54) 
The sign here has no physical significance because a and -a are related 
by a finite SU(2) gauge transformation. (Where necessary it can be made 
definite by adopting the convention that the upper and lower signs apply 
if Reu > 0 or Reu < 0, respectively.) We can trust perturbation theory 
for large values of lal, so for lui --+ oo 
a--+ ..j2U' 
· 
i [ 
(2u) 
J 
an --+ ;; ..j2U In A 2 
- 2..j2U . 
(29.5.55) 
Note that when u is taken counterclockwise around a circle at a fixed large 
value of lui, the logarithm ln(2u/ A2) is shifted by 2in, while ..j2U changes 
sign, so the changes in a and av are given by a monodromy matrix: 
(29.5.56) 
The functions a(u) and av(u) must therefore have two or more singu-
larities at finite values Un of u, such that the combined effect of going 
counterclockwise around each singularity is the same as (29.5.56). 
Let us consider the possibility that there are just two singularities. (This 
was shown to be the case in the second Seiberg-Witten paper of Reference 
10.) Under the Zg-symmetry that takes aA --+ iaA we have u --+ -u, so 
the 8ingularities must be at a pair of u values uo and -uo. Going from 
a non-singular base point P in the u plane counterclockwise around the 
singularity at +uo all the way back to P should yield an equivalent theory. 
Therefore it must take the form of a duality transformation, in general 
depending on P, in which the vector (a, an) is multiplied with an S L(2, Z) 
monodromy matrix M±, as in Eq. (29.5.43). The counterclockwise contour 
around the circle with fixed large u can be deformed into a contour that 
starts at P and goes counterclockwise back to P around -uo and then 
counterclockwise back to P around +uo. (See Figure 29.1.) Since this 
deformation cannot change the integral, the product of the :rnonodromy 
matrices in this order (reading from right to left) must be ~~qual to the 

300 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
Figure 29.1. Deformation of a contour that circles the complex u plane counter-
clockwise at large lui into a contour that starts at a base point P, circles the 
singularity at u = -uo counterclockwise back to P, and then circles the singularity 
at u = +uo counterclockwise back to P. 
matrix in Eq. (29.5.56): 
M+M- =Moo = ( -;_1 ~1 ) . 
(29.5.57) 
Singularities occur when a and aD take values at which some particle 
has zero mass. For instance, the singularity at a = 0 in the perturbative 
formula (29.5.52) for h(a) occurs because this is the value of a at which 
elementary charged particles become massless in perturbation theory. We 
have already ruled out the possibility of a single singularity at a = 0, so 
the singularities at +uo must arise from the vanishing of the mass of some 
other particles. 
The most striking part of the Seiberg-Witten calculation was their 
realization that these particles are among the non-elementary magnetic 
monopoles ordyons found in the underlying SU(2) supersymmetric theo·ry. 
Semi-classical calculations of the sort done in Section 23.3 show that the 
stable monopoles and dyons have magnetic quantum number m = +1 and 
any integer electric quantum number n, and belong to hypermultiplets, 
each consisting of a pair of Majorana spinors and a pair of complex 
scalars. These are 'short' multiplets, with a mass given by the BPS value, 
which according to Eqs. (27.9.24) and (29.5.47) is 
M = IZ121/2 = -Jll Na + h(a) I, 
(29.5.58) 
where N = +n. The easiest way to calculate what happens when this mass 
goes to zero is to consider the more familiar problem of what happens 
when the mass of a hypermultiplet of ordinary charged particles goes to 
zero, and then use duality to switch to the case of a light monopole. The 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
301 
beta function for the U(l) gauge coupling is given here by Eq. (27.9.45) 
with Ct = 0, c{ = Ci = 2, so 
e3 
{J(e) = + 8n2 . 
The solution of the renormalization group equation is then 
e-2(a) = --1-ln ( 
a 
) 
. 
4n2 
constant 
· 
As we saw in deriving Eq. (29.5.52), this gives 
h'(a) = 4n ie-2(a) =- .!._ ln ( 
a 
) 
n 
constant 
Because this gives a value of el(a) that is positive and small for a-+ 0, this 
would be a reliable result if the theory really contained a hypermultiplet of 
ordinary charged particles whose mass goes to zero in this limit. Instead, 
we are assuming that there is a hypermultiplet of monopoles or dyons 
whose mass goes to zero; to deal with this case, we can apply the duality 
transformation (29.5.43) that takes a into Na + h(a) 
(29.5.59) 
We conclude that when u approaches a point uo where a = Na + h(a) -+ 0, 
we have 
dh( a) -+ _ .!._ In ( 
a ) 
da 
n 
constant 
(29.5.60) 
or, in other words, 
da 
i 1 (h(a) + Na) 
~-----++- n 
d (h(a) + Na) 
n 
constant 
· 
(29.5.61) 
The solution is 
i ( 
) 
(h(u) + Na(u)) 
a(u) = ao +-; h(u) + Na(u) In 
Ao 
, 
(29.5.62) 
where ao and Ao are integration constants. We are also assuming that 
h + Na -+ 0 for u -+ uo. so we can write the leading term as 
h(u) + Na(u)-+ co(u- uo) . 
(29.5.63) 
Thus Eq. (29.5.62) has the leading term 
i co 
(co(u- uo)) 
a(u)-+ ao + n(u-uo)ln 
Ao 
(29.5.64) 
When we take u counterclockwise all the way around a circle surround-
ing uo there is no change in h(a) + Na, but a is shifted by -2(h(a) + Na), 

302 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
so the monodromy matrix for this singularity is 
( 1-2N 
-2 
) 
M+ = 
2N2 
1 +2N 
(29.5.65) 
Likewise, if the singularity at -uo is associated with the vanishing mass 
of a monopole or dyon with magnetic quantum number +'1 (the prime 
distinguishing this sign from that for uo) and electric quantum number n' 
then at this singularity h(u) + N' a(u) -+ 0, and 
i ( 
) 
(h(u) + N'a(u)) 
a -+ ~ + n h(u) + N' a(u) In 
AO 
' 
(29.5.66) 
where N' = +'n' and do and AQ are new integration constants. The leading 
terms are 
h(u) + N' a(u)-+ co(u + uo), 
(29.5.67) 
I 
i cQ ( 
) I ( cQ( u + uo)) 
a-+ao+-u+uo n 
n 
AO 
(29.5.68) 
The monodromy matrix for this singularity is 
( 
1-2N' 
-2 
) 
M_ = 
2N'2 
1 +2N' 
(29.5.69) 
It is straightforward then to see that the condition (29.5.57) on these 
matrices is satisfied if and only if 
N' = N -1. 
(29.5.70) 
It makes no difference what value we take for N, because we can shift it 
by an even integer 2M by going around the circle at infinity M times, and 
we can shift it by unity by reflecting u +-+ -u. Seiberg and Witten chose 
to takeN= 0, so that N' = -1. Then for u-+ uo 
h(u)-+ co(u- uo), 
(29.5.71) 
ic0 
(u -uo) 
a(u) -+ ao + -;-(u- uo) In 
Ao 
, 
(29.5.72) 
and for u-+ -uo 
h(u)- a(u) -+ c0(u + uo), 
(29.5.73) 
ic'0 
(u+uo) 
a(u) -+ ~ + -;-(u + uo) In 
AO 
(29.5.74) 
We now impose the unbroken Zs-symmetry condition (29.5.54). We can 
calculate a(u) for u-+ -uo by writing it as-ia( -u) and using Eq. (29.5.72). 

29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 
303 
Then for u -+ -uo 
( ) 
. +co 1 (-co(u + uo)) 
au -+ -zao -
n 
1t 
Ao 
(29.5.75) 
Comparing this with Eq. (29.5.74), we see that c'0 = i co, so Eq. (29.5.73) 
becomes, for u -+ -uo. 
h(u)- a(u) -+ i co (u + uo). 
(29.5.76) 
The field a is defined to include a factor of the gauge coupling e, which 
can be given any value by an appropriate choice of the renormalization 
point at which e is evaluated. Seiberg and Witten chose to define the 
scale of a and u (keeping u = a2 /2 at infinity) so that uo = 1; that is, 
the singularities are at u = + 1. With this convention, they obtained the 
solutions (defined in the complex plane cut from -1 to +1) 
.jill v;=x 
asw(u) = -
dx 
-1 --2 ' 
1t 
-1 
-X 
(29.5.77) 
i..fiJ." {Bx 
hsw(u) = -
dx 
2 
1 . 
1t 
1 
X 
-
(29.5.78) 
The mathematical methods originally used to obtain these results are 
beyond the scope of this book, but fortunately it is not difficult after the 
fact to check that they are correct. 
First, we can check that asw(u) and hsw(u) have a singular behavior 
near u = +1 of the same form (29.5.71). (29.5.72). (29.5.75), and (29.5.76) 
as the true solution. For u-+ 1, Eq. (29.5.77) gives 
.J2 1
1 
dx 
u - 1 1
1 
dx 
asw(u)-+-
, + --
n 
-1 ,Jx + 1 
2n 
-1 .J(l- x)(u- x) 
4 
u-1 
( 
u-1 
) 
= ..fo + ~ 
ln 
3 + u-2.ft.J1 +u 
4 
u-1 
( 
) 
-+----In 4(u-1) . 
..fo 
2n 
(29.5.79) 
Also, Eq. (29.5.78) gives 
h 
( ) 
i f." d J 
U 
X _ i ( U -
1) 
SWU -+-
X 
---
• 
n 
1 
x-1 
2 
(29.5.80) 
Eqs. (29.5.79) and (29.5.80) agree with our previous results (29.5.71) and 
(29.5.72), with c0 = i and ao = 4/ .ji. Eq. (29.5.77) satisfies the Zs 
reflection property (29.5.54), so asw(u) automatically has the behavior 
(29.5.75) for u -+ -1, and (with due regard to the signs of square roots 
dictated by the cut from u = -1 to u = + 1) it follows directly from 

304 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
Eqs. (29.5.77) and (29.5.78) that hsw(u)- asw(u) is proportional to u + 1 
for u near -1. 
Now since asw(u) and hsw(u) have the same singularity structure: at 
u ~ +1 as a(u) and h(u), they have the same monodromy (Eqs. (29.5.59) 
and (29.5.69) with N = 0 and N' = -1): as u circles the point +1, we 
have 
( 
~!: ) ~ ( ~1 +1 ) ( asw) , 
0 
hsw 
(29.5.81) 
while as u circles the point -1, 
( ~::) ~ ( ~ =~) ( ~:) . 
(29.5.82) 
Let us now consider the quantity 
f(u) = a(u)hsw(u)- asw(u)h(u). 
(29.5.83) 
This is an S L(2, :Z) invariant, so it has trivial monodromy: it returns to 
the same value when u circles either + 1 or -1. The only finite singularities 
in a(u), h(u), asw(u), or hsw(u) are the logarithmic singularities at +1, but 
since f( u) has trivial monodromy it does not have these singularities, and 
it is therefore analytic at all finite points. 
To evaluate the entire function f(u), let's first check that the leading 
terms in the asymptotic behavior of the functions asw(u) and hsw(u) are 
the same as those of a(u) and h(u), respectively. For u ~ oo, Eq. (29.5.77) 
gives 
.JiU 11 
dx 
F1:: 
asw(u)-+-
.J 
= y2u, 
n 
-l 1- x2 
(29.5.84) 
while Eq. (29.5.78) gives 
i.JiU 1" 
dx 
i.Ji 
hsw(u)-+ --
) 
~ -.JUlnu. 
n 
1 
x2 -
1 
n 
(29.5.85) 
This is the same as the leading behavior (29.5.55) of a(u) and h(u). 
This in itself only shows that f(u)ju ln u ~ 0 for u-+ oo. But note that 
the reflection symmetry (29.5.54) for a(u) and its counterpart for asw(u) 
tell us that the next-to-leading terms in both functions are of order .JUju2• 
Also, the next-to-leading terms in h(u) and hsw(u) are of order .JU. It 
follows that we can calculate the leading term in the asymptotic behavior 
of f(u) by setting a(u) = asw(u) = .jiU, so that f(u) = O(u) for u ~ oo. 
Since f(u) is an entire function, this means that f(u) is linear in u. But 
f(u) vanishes at u = +1. where h(u) and hsw(u) are O(u-1), and f(u) also 
vanishes at u = -1, where a(u)- h(u) and asw(u)- hsw(u) are O(u- 1), 

Problems 
so it must vanish everywhere. We conclude then that 
asw(u) = hsw(u) = (u). 
a(u) 
h(u) 
g 
305 
(29.5.86) 
Now we must consider the properties of the function g(u). Because hsw(u) 
and h(u) are analytic at all finite points except u = -1, and asw(u)-hsw(u) 
and a(u)- h(u) are analytic at all finite points except u = +1, it follows 
that g(u) (which can also be written as [asw(u)- hsw(u)]j[a(u)- h(u)]) is 
analytic everywhere. (There are no zeroes of a(u) or h(u) at u f +1, let 
alone zeroes of both, because a zero of a(u) or h(u) would be associated 
with a point where a charged particle or monopole mass vanishes, which 
has been assumed to be not the case for any u f + 1.) Also, the fact that 
the leading terms in the asymptotic behavior for u ~ oo of the functions 
asw(u) and hsw(u) are the same as those of a(u) and h(u), respectively, 
means that g(u) -+ 1 for u -+ oo. It follows then that the entire function 
g(u) must equal unity for all u, and therefore 
a(u) = asw(u), 
h(u) = hsw(u), 
(29.5.87) 
as was to be shown. 
Problems 
1. What is the Witten index of the model in Problem 4 of Chapter 26 for 
a f 0? For a= 0? Can supersymmetry be broken by higher-order 
effects in this model for a = 0? Explain. 
2. Consider the renormalizable supersymmetric theory with SO(Nc) 
gauge symmetry and Nf left-chiral scalar superfields <~»n in the N-
vector representation. What can you say about the structure of 
the non-perturbative Wilsonian Lagrangian density when the bare 
superpotential vanishes? What if there is a bare superpotential 
Ln <I»n~n? 
3. In the theory with Lagrangian density (29.5.22), what is the relation 
between the component fields of the spinor field strength superfield 
WIX and its dual w!X? 
References 
1. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. Bl85, 513 (1981). This article is reprinted 
in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World Scientific, 
Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). 

306 
29 Beyond Perturbation Theory 
1a. J. Hughes and J. Polchinski, Nucl. Phys. B278, 147 (1986); J. Hughes, 
J. Liu, and J. Polchinski, Phys. Lett. B 180, 370 (1986); J. Bagger 
and A Galperin, Phys. Lett. B336, 25 (1994); Phys. Rev. D55, 1091 
(1997); Phys. Lett. B412, 296 (1997); L. Antoniadis, H. Partouche, 
and T. R Taylor, Phys. Lett. B372, 83 (1996); S. Ferrara, L. Gi-
rardello, and M. Porrati, Phys. Lett. B376, 275 (1996). 
2. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B202, 253 (1982). This article is reprinted in 
Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. 
3. A C. Davis, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. 125B, 487 (1983); 
I. Affieck, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1026 (1983); 
Phys. Lett. 137B, 187 (1984), reprinted in Super symmetry, Ref. 1; 
Nucl. Phys. B241, 493 (1984); Nucl. Phys. B52, 1677 (1984); Phys. 
Lett. 140B, 59 ( 1984 ). 
4. N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993). 
5. 
V. A. Novik:ov, M. A. Shifman, A I. Vainshtein, and V. I. Zakharov, 
Nucl. Phys. B229, 381 (1983); Nucl. Phys. B260, 157 (1985); G. C. 
Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. 138B, 195 (1984), reprinted 
in Super symmetry, Ref. 1; S. F. Cordes, Nucl. Phys. B273, 629 
(1986). For a review, see M. A Shifman and A. I. Vainshtein, 
hep-th/9902018, to be published. 
6. E. Witten, J. High Energy Phys. 9802, 006 (1998). 
7. V. G. Kac and A. V. Smilga, hep-th/9902029, to be published. 
8. I. Affieck, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B256, 557 (1985). 
9. N. Seiberg, Phys. Rev. D49, 6857 (1994). 
10. N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B426, 19 (1994); erratum, 
Nucl. Phys. B430, 485 (1994). The extension to an N = 2 theory 
with matter hypermultiplets is given by N. Seiberg and E. Witten, 
Nucl. Phys. B431, 484 (1994). For a review, see: K. Intrilligator and 
N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 45BC, 1 (1996); also published 
in Summer School in High Energy Physics and Cosmology, Trieste, 
1995, E. Gava, ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997), and in QCD 
and Beyond: Proceedings of the Theoretical Advanced Study Institute 
in Elementary Particle Physics, Bouldet Colorado, 1995, D. E. Soper, 
ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1996). 
11. E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 86B, 283 (1979). 
12. N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett. B206, 75 (1988). 

30 
Supergraphs 
The introduction of Feynman graphs in the late 1940s provided the 
enormous advantage of preserving manifest Lorentz invariance at every 
stage of perturbative calculations. For this purpose it was necessary that 
the exchange of all spin states of any virtual particle should be described 
by a single propagator. Fortunately, it has become possible to go a step 
further, and develop a supergraph formalism, in which supersymmetry as 
well as Lorentz invariance is kept manifest at every stage.1 To do so, it 
is necessary to describe the exchange of all the particles described by a 
given superfield by a single superpropagator. 
There is a problem here in that the left-chiral superfields <P over which 
we integrate are subject to a differential constraint, ~R<P = 0. This is 
analogous to the problem in electrodynamics that the field-strength tensor 
is subject to a differential constraint, the homogeneous Maxwell equation. 
In electrodynamics this problem is dealt with by expressing the field-
strength tensor in terms of a vector potential, and doing path integrals 
over the vector potential instead of the field strength tensor. In much the 
same way, here we will impose the left-chiral constraint by expressing left-
chiral superfields in terms of potential superfields, over which we integrate 
in path integrals. In this formalism we encounter problems like those 
produced by gauge invariance in electrodynamics, and deal with them in 
much the same way. 
The most important result to come out of the supergraph formalism 
was the non-renormalization theorem for the superpotential.2 We have 
already proved this theorem in Section 27.6, using a much easier indirect 
technique developed by Seiberg, which can be extended also to describe 
non-perturbative effects. Nevertheless, it is interesting to see how these 
surprising cancellations of renormalization effects occur in actual pertur-
bative calculations. 
307 

308 
30 Supergraphs 
30.1 
Potential Superfields 
Consider a theory of left-chiral superfields <I>n(x, 0) and their complex 
conjugates, but for simplicity without gauge superfields. All of the vacuum 
expectation values of time-ordered products of component fields may be 
calculated from vacuum expectation values of the time-ordered products 
of these superfields. We might try to calculate these from the path-integral 
formula 
( T { <1>., (x, O,), <~>.,(x2,02), · · ·}) ~ j [ g d<l>.(x,O)] exp (il [<I>]) 
X <1>n1(Xt.0d <1>n2(X2,02) · · · , 
(30.1.1) 
where I [<I>] is the action 
1[<1>] = ~~ 
a'x[I:<~>:(x,O)<I>n(x,O)]D +2Re J 
a'x[f(<I>)]~. 
(30.1.2) 
n 
(The factor 1/2 is introduced in the first term, as in Eq. (26.4.3), to give 
the component fields of <I> a conventional normalization.) But we cannot 
simply read off the supergraph Feynman rules from Eq. (30.1.1), because 
the functional integral over the superfields <I>n must be constrained to 
satisfy the left-chiral condition ~R<I>n = 0. 
This is analogous to a similar problem in electrodynamics. As discussed 
in Section 12.3, at energies below the electron mass the interactions of soft 
photons with each other are described by an effective action of the form: 
But we cannot read off the Feynman rules from this formula without 
taking into account the fact that the path integral is constrained by the 
homogeneous Maxwell equations 
iJJ.tfvp + Ov/pJ.t + Op/p.v = 0. 
As everyone knows, we deal with this constraint by introducing a four-
vector potential Ap., with fw = iJp.Av - ovAp, so that the constraint is 
automatically satisfied, and integrate over Ap(x), not /pv(x). 
In the same way, we may adopt a trick already used in Section 26.6 
to derive the field equations for superfields, and introduce a non-chiral 
potential superfield Sn( x, 0), with 
(30.1.3) 

where 
30.1 Potential Superjields 
£Pi= L Ea.p£PRa.£PRp ' 
a.P 
309 
(30.1.4) 
so that Cl>n automatically satisfies the left·chiral constraint, £PRa.CI>n = 0. In 
place of Eq. (30.1.1), we then have the path·integral formula 
(30.1.5) 
In expressing the action (30.1.2) in terms of Sn, we may recall that the 
D·term of a superderivative does not contribute to the action, so we may 
shift the operator (£Pi)" = £Pi acting on s; in the first term of Eq. (30.1.2) 
to act instead on Sn, which gives 
1 [ wf, Sl = H 
a'x [ ~ s,; wi wf, sl + 2 Re j tf x [! ( wf, S) J...- . (30.1.6) 
The £Pi operator in any one of the factors g}JtS in any term in f(g}iS) 
may be taken to act on the whole term, since £P R gives zero when acting 
on any other factor of £PiS in that term. In this way, we may write 
(30.1.7) 
where f(S) is obtained from f(g}i_S) by omitting any one operator £Pk_ in 
each term. For instance, for a single type of superfield, if /(CI>) = I:, c,CI>', 
then 
f(S) = L crS (£Pis)'-1 . 
r 
Using Eqs. (30.1.6), (30.1.7), and (26.3.31), we may put the whole action 
in the form of a D·term 
J[g}iS] = ~ j rfx L [s:£Pi£Pisn]D +2Re j rfx [J(s)Jv. 
(30.1.8) 
n 
Eq. (26.6.5) shows that this may also be written as a superspace integral: 
I[£PiS1 = -~ j rfx j rto 2.:s:£Pi£PiSn- Re j rfx j rtoj(S). 
n 
(30.1.9) 
This is the action we will use in the path-integral derivation of the 
supergraph formaliSm. 

310 
30 Supergraphs 
30.2 
Superpropagators 
Usually the propagator can be obtained directly from the part of the 
action of second order in the fields. If we write this quadratic part for 
a complex field ¢ 1 (where i is a compound index including spacetime 
coordinates as well as spin and species labels) in the form 
lquad[¢] =- LDij¢;¢j, 
(30.2.1) 
ij 
with Dij Hermitian, then as explained in Section 9.4 the propagator is 
simply A= n-1• The problem with this arises when the quadratic part of 
the action is invariant under a (linearized) gauge transformation 
<Pt ---+ <Pt + ~i ' 
(30.2.2) 
for some class of 'vectors' ~. In this case we have 
L:nij~j = o, 
(30.2.3) 
and we clearly cannot invert the 'matrix' Dtj· In electrodynamics the 
problem arises because the Lagrangian density is invariant under a gauge 
transformation A~---+ A~+ o~A. We have this problem here too: since the 
action is actually a functional of ~kSn and not of Sn itself, it is invariant 
under the transformation 
(30.2.4) 
for any super:fields Xn. 
In the electrodynamics of charged particles the problems introduced by 
gauge invariance are typically handled by choosing a gauge, for instance 
by the Faddeev-Popov-de Witt method described in Section 15.5. But the 
problems raised here by invariance under the transformation (30.2.2) are 
much more like the problems of the effective field theory of photons at 
energies below the threshold for producing charged particles, where the 
theory is gauge-invariant simply because the action only involves gauge-
invariant fields. In such theories there is a simpler option. In addition to 
the eigenvector ~~ of Dij with eigenvalue zero (taken for simplicity to be 
in a unique direction) we can find a set of orthonormal eigenvectors Uv; 
with eigenvalues dv =I= 0: 
2:: Dij Uvj = dv Uvj, 
j 
We can introduce a new set of integration variables ¢' and ¢~: 
¢, = ¢' ~i + L ¢~ Uvi. 
(30.2.6) 
v 

30.2 Superpropagators 
311 
The sort of integral encountered in Feynman diagram calculations of 
quantum expectation values may then be written 
J [ J.I dtj>1 dtj>;] exp{ U quad [ t/> l}t/>. · · · t/> b .. · = .I J 
dtj>' d</J" 
x J [ IJ dt/>; d</J; •] exp { -i ~ 
d., It/>; 1
2
} 
[ n + ~ 
tJ>; u,.] 
X [ rJ>' ~b+ ~ 
tJ>;u,b r 
(30.2.7) 
where f is the Jacobian of the transformation (30.2.6). The integral over 
¢' and ¢'* is of course ill defined, because they do not appear in the 
argument of the exponential. But this doesn't matter if the action only 
involves gauge-invariant fields, because then l/Ja, ¢b, etc. will be contracted 
with 'currents' Ja, Jb, etc. for which 
(30.2.8) 
a 
We may thus write Eq. (30.2.7) as 
J [ J.I dt/>1 dtJ>;] exp{ifquad [</> l}t/>a · · · t/>b · · · = 'If J [ IJ dtJ>:dtJ>; •] 
X 
exp{ -i~d,lt/>:1
2 } [~tj>;u,.]· · · [~tj>;u,br 
+~-terms, 
(30.2.9) 
where '~-terms' denotes terms proportional to one or more factors of ~a. 
~b. etc., which vanish when contracted with Js satisfying Eq. (30.2.8), and 
CIJ is the infinite constant f J d¢'. The integral over the¢~ then gives 
J [1J d¢;d¢;] exp{ilquad[¢]}¢a · · · ¢; · · · a: ~ [- illab J · · · 
1 
paunngs 
+~-terms, 
(30.2.10) 
where the sum over pairings is over all ways of pairing indices on the ¢s 
with indices on the ¢ • s, and !lab is the propagator 
• 
A 
= "'"' Uya Uvb 
Uab 
~ d 
· 
v 
v 
(30.2.11) 
Instead of actually evaluating the sum (30.2.11), we can use its defining 
property that 
(30.2.12) 
c 
v 

312 
30 Supergraphs 
with n the projection operator on the space orthogonal to e: 
n2 = rr. 
n e = o. 
(30.2.13) 
The solution of Eq. (30.2.12) is unique only up to e~terms, but these do 
not matter if the fields ¢i appear in the action only in gauge-invariant 
combinations. 
For instance, in electrodynamics, we can write the kinematic part of the 
action as 
lquad[A] = -~ J 
cfx fwd~'v = +~ J 
d4x A~-'(oJ;- Bl'ov)Av. 
The differential operator -OJ~+ ov ol' is not invertible, because it has a 
zero eigenvalue with eigenvectors of the form e~-' = (]I' A. The projection 
matrix onto the space orthogonal to these vectors is 
ll/(x,y) = [J/- o/Jovo-1]J4(x- y)' 
where o-1J 4(x- y) is any solution of the equation o[o-1J4(x- y)] = 
J 4(x- y). The defining equation for the propagator is 
( -oJ; + o~'o..1.)A/(x,y) = IT/(x,y), 
with the solution 
where Ap(x - y) is the usual Feynman propagator (6.2.16), satisfying 
DAp(x- y) = -J4(x- y). (The factor 1/2 in the action does not appear 
in the defining equation for the propagator here because AI' is a real 
:field. The origin of the -ie in the denominator of the Fourier integral in 
Eq. (6.2.16) is explained in the path-integral formalism in Section 9.2.) 
Inspection of the first term in Eq. (30.1.9) shows that the defining 
equation for the superpropagator of the potential superfields is 
!~2 ~2 L\8 (x 8· x 8') = &'J4(x- x')<54(8- 8') s: 
4 
L 
R 
nm 
• ' 
' 
unm , 
(30.2.14) 
where &' is a superspace differential operator satisfying the conditions for 
a projection operator 
(30.2.15) 
and J4(8- 8') is the fermionic delta function introduced in Eq. (26.6.8). 
The solution is 
(30.2.16) 
(It is obvious that &'~R = 0. 
To check that &'2 = &', we need to 
use (26.6.12), which shows that ~~f2i~~ = -160~~.) The solution of 

30.3 Calculations with Supergraphs 
313 
Eq. (30.2.14) is 
As (x (} · x' (}') = --
1 b4(x - x')b4((} -
8')b 
nm • • • 
40 
nm 
1 A 
I 
4 
I 
= 4up(x- x )b ((}- (} )bnm + ~R-terms . 
(30.2.17) 
This is the superpropagator for a line created by a potential super:field 
s;.(x', (}') and destroyed by a potential superfield Sn(x, (}), which we must 
use in evaluating supergraphs for the action (30.1.9). To make contact 
with ordinary propagators, it is also of some interest to consider the 
superpropagator of the line created by a left-chiral superfield <f);,(x', (}1) 
and destroyed by a left-chiral super:field <f)n(x, (}). These chiral superfields 
are obtained by operating on Sn(x, (}) with ~k and on s;.(x', (}') with 
~~~ • = ~'i. so the propagator for the left-chiral superfields is 
A:n(x, (}; x', (}') . ~~k~i,Ap(x- x') b\(J- (}') bnm. 
(30.2.18) 
For instance, the term in the superpropagator of zeroth order in (} and 
(}' is 
[
A0 
, 
, ] 
1 ( a )2( a )2 
, 4 
, 
unm(x, (};X'(} ) 8=8'=0 = 4 aeR 
a(J'L 
Ap(X- X) b ( (} -
(} ) <>nm . 
(30.2.19) 
To evaluate this, we recall Eq. (26.6.8) for the fermionic delta function: 
b4((}- (}') = ~(((JL- (}lJTe((JL- ()LJ) (((JR -· 8'R)Te((JR- (JR)) , 
from which we find (a;aeR)2(a;ae[J2b4((}-(}') = 4. Eq. (30.2.19) therefore 
yields 
[A:,(x, (}; x', (}')] 
= AF(x- X
1
) bnm, 
8=9'=0 
(30.2.20) 
which is just the usual propagator for the scalar components of the 
superfield. 
30.3 
Calculations with Supergraphs 
We now consider how to use the results of the previous sections to calcu-
late the quantum effective action r[s, s·] for a set of classical potential 
superfields Sn(x, (}) and their adjoints. Following the prescription discussed 
in Section 16.1, this may be defined in terms of a sum over all connected 
one-particle-irreducible supergraphs, consisting of vertices to which are at-
tached directed internal and external lines. For each external line of type n 

314 
30 Supergraphs 
ending or beginning in a vertex labelled x, 8, we include a c-number factor 
Sn(x, 8) or s;(x, 8), respectively (but no propagator). A vertex labelled x, 8 
with N incoming or N outgoing lines labelled nt, nz, ... , nN yields a factor 
equal to i times the coefficient of the S1S2 · · · SN term in the superpotential 
f(S) or times the complex conjugate of this coefficient, respectively. An 
internal line of any type coming out of a vertex labelled x, 8 and going into 
a vertex labelled x', 8' yields a propagator factor, given by Eqs. (30.2.10) 
and (30.2.17) as 
(30.3.1) 
In addition, as shown by Eq. (30.1.7), a superderivative ~~ acts on the 
propagators or external line S-factors of all but one of the internal or 
external lines coming into any vertex, and a superderivative ~1 acts on the 
propagators or external-line s· -factors of all but one of the lines coming 
out of any vertex. The product of these factors must be integrated over 
all xs and 8s; the quantum effective action is the sum of these integrals 
for all one-particle-irreducible graphs. 
By integrating by parts in superspace, the ~1 and/ or .@~ operators 
accompanying any one propagator (say, one that connects vertices labelled 
x, 8 and x', 8') may be moved to other propagators or external line factors. 
This leaves the factor contributed by this internal line proportional to a 
factor !54(8-8'). Integrating over 8' then eliminates this delta function, and 
lets us replace 8' with 8 everywhere else. (In cases where several internal 
lines connect the same pair of vertices, we need to use the property of 
fermionic delta functions that [!54(8- 8')]2 = 0.) Continuing in this way, 
we wind up with a single four-dimensional 8 integral, with all ~s acting 
on the external line factors Sn and s;,. That is, though not usually local 
in spatial coordinates, r[S, S*] is local in the fermionic coordinates. 
The structure of this functional is governed by its invariance under 
the 'gauge' transformations (30.2.4). This tells us that every one of the 
external line factors Sn or s; must be acted on by an operator ~~ or 
~i, respectively, with two possible exceptions. The exceptions are that 
a term with only incoming or only outgoing external lines, in which all 
but one of the external line factors Sn or s; are acted on by.@~ or §Yi, 
respectively, and by no other superderivatives, is still invariant under the 
transformation (30.2.4), even though it cannot be expressed as a four-
dimensional 8-integral of a functional only of the <I>n and/or <~>: alone. 
This is because the change in such an amplitude under this transformation 
could only come from the change in the external line factor Sn or s; that is 
not acted on by an operator ~~ or ~1. and this change is eliminated if we 
use integration by parts to move one of the other .@~ or ~1 operators to 
act on it. As we saw in Section 30.1, such a term in r[S,S*] is the §'-term 

30.3 Calculations with Supergraphs 
315 
of a functional of the «>nor of the «>:,and thus makes a correction to the 
superpotential or to its complex conjugate. Aside from these exceptions, 
every term in r[S,S*] may be written as a four-dimensional 8-integral of 
a functional only of the (J)n and/or (f);, and therefore makes a correction 
to the D-term part of the effective· action. 
Also note that a term in the quantum effective action in which all but one 
of the external line factors Sn or s; is acted on by 2}~ or 2}i, respectively, 
and also by additional2}~ or £g'f operators (such as in combinations like 
£g~2}I2}~Sn or 2}'i2}~2}'fs;) may also be written by integration by parts 
as a term in which one of the extra 2}~ or £g1_ acts on the previously 
undifferentiated external line Sn or s; factor. Such a term may therefore 
be expressed as a four-dimensional 8-integral of a functional only of the 
(J)n and/ or (f):, and therefore just makes another correction to the D-term 
part of the action. The only terms in r[S, S*] that cannot be written in 
this way are those that have E incoming external lines and only E- 1 
operators 2}~ operating on the Sn external line factors, or E • incoming 
external lines and only E*- 1 operators 2}1_ operating on the s; external 
line factors. We can therefore tell whether a supergraph can make a 
contribution to the superpotential or its adjoint by simply counting the 
number of 2}~ or 2}I operators contributed by the supergraph to the 
corresponding term in r(S, S*]. 
Let us count these superderivatives. Consider a connected graph with: 
Vn vertices with n lines coming in; v; vertices with n lines going out; I 
internal lines; E external incoming lines; and E* external outgoing lines. 
These numbers are related by 
I +E = L:nVn, 
(30.3.2) 
n 
The total numbers of 2}~ and £g'f operators are then 
NR = 2: Vn(n -1) =I+ E- V = L + V* + E -1, 
(30.3.3) 
n 
and 
NL = L v;(n -1) =I+ E*- v· = L + v + E* -1, 
(30.3.4) 
n 
where V = Ln Vn is the total number of vertices with incoming lines; 
v· = Ln v; is the total number of vertices with outgoing lines; and 
L = I - V - V* + 1 is the number of loops. We see that a graph with any 
loops will have NR > E and NL > E*, so that there are at least enough 
2}i operators to convert all Sn into Cl>n = 2}~Sn and its derivatives, and 
enough 2}I operators to convert all s; into ct>: = 2}'fs; and its derivatives. 
Any graph with loops thus yields only a contribution to the four-dimensional 

316 
30 Supergraphs 
{]-integral -
in other words the D-term -
of a functional of the left-chiral 
superfields cbn and their adjoints. 
The only way to obtain a contribution to an $'-term or its adjoint is 
to have just N R = E - 1 operators PJk or just N L = E* - 1 operators PJf, 
respectively. According to Eqs. (30.3.3) and (30.3.4), such a graph would 
have L = 0 and V* = 0 or V = 0, respectively. In other words, since we 
are considering only one-particle-irreducible graphs, we can only get an 
:IF -term from a graph with a single vertex with incoming lines, and we can 
only get its adjoint from a graph with a single vertex with outgoing lines. 
This contribution is nothing but the integrated 9" -term of the original 
superpotential, or its adjoint. Thus we see again that there is no finite or 
infinite renormalization of :IF -terms to any order of perturbation theory. 
Problems 
1. Use Eq. (30.2.18) to calculate the propagators of the spinor and 
auxiliary components of a chiral superfield. 
2. Consider a supersymmetric theory of a single left-chiral superfield 
cb, with Lagrangian density 
!!' = ~[cb•cb]D +2Re (g($3],.), 
with g an arbitrary complex constant. Use the supergraph formalism 
to calculate the one-loop contribution to the quantum effective action. 
Express the answer as an integral over coordinates and over a single 
Grassman coordinate lJ. 
3. What is the superpropagator for a gauge super:field V(x, lJ) in a 
supersymmetric Abelian gauge theory with kinematic term (27 .3.17)? 
References 
1. A. Salam and J. Strathdee; Phys. Rev. Dll, 1521 (1975); Nucl. Phys. 
B86, 142 (1975); D. M. Capper, Nuovo Cimento 25A, 259 (1975); 
R. Delbourgo, Nuovo Cimento 25A, 646 (1975); D. M. Capper and 
G. Leibrandt, Nucl. Phys. B85, 492 (1975); F. Krause, M. Scheunert, 
J. Honerkamp, and M. Schlindwein, Phys. Lett. 53B, 60 (1974); K. 
Fujikawa and W. Lang, Nucl. Phys. B88, 61 (1975); J. Honerkamp, 
M. Schlindwein, F. Krause, and M. Scheunert, Nucl. Phys. B95, 397 
(1975); S. Ferrara and 0. Piguet, Nucl. Phys. B93, 261 (1975); R. 

References 
317 
Delbourgo. J. Phys. Gl, 800 (1975). This formalism was extended to 
supergravity by Vv. Siegel, Phys. Lett. 84B, 197 (1979). 
2. M. T. Grisaru, W. Siegel, and M. Rocek, Nucl. Phys. Bl59, 429 (1979). 

31 
Supergravity 
Gravity exists, so if there is any truth to supersymmetry then any realistic 
supersymmetry theory must eventually be enlarged to a supersymmetric 
theory of matter and gravitation, known as supergravity. Supersymmetry 
without supergravity is not an option, though it may be a good approxi-
mation at energies far below the Planck scale. 
There are two leading approaches to the construction of the theory 
of supergravity. First, supergravity can be presented as a theory of 
curved superspace.1 This approach is analogous to the development of 
supersymmetric gauge theories in Sections 27.1-27.3; the gravitational 
field appears as a component of a superfield with unphysical as well as 
physical components, like the unphysical C, M, N, and w components 
of the gauge superfield V. 
The task of deriving the full non-linear 
supergravity theory in this way is forbiddingly complicated, and so far 
has not been freed of steps that are apparently arbitrary. At one point or 
another in the derivation, it has been necessary simply to state that some 
set of constraints on the graviton superfield are the proper ones to adopt. 
Here we will follow a second approach that is less elegant but more 
transparent.2 In our discussion here, we begin in Sections 31.1-31.5 with 
the case where the gravitational field is weak,3 analyzing supergravity by 
the same flat-space superfield methods that we used in Chapters 26 and 27 
to study ordinary supersymmetry theories. In this way we can identify the 
physical components of the gravitational superfield (including auxiliary 
fields analogous to the D-component of the gauge superfield V.) The weak-
field approximation will allow us to obtain some of the most important 
consequences of supergravity theory, including the general formula for the 
gravitino mass in Section 31.3 and the results for gaugino masses and the 
A and B parameters given by anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking 
in Section 31.4. 
In Section 31.6 we add terms of higher order in G to the supersym-
metry transformation rules for the physical fields and to the Lagrangian 
that describes their interactions, subject to the condition that the super-
symmetry transformations and general coordinate transformations form 
318 

31.1 The Metric Superfield 
319 
a closed algebra, and that the Lagrangian is invariant under these trans-
formations. This approach is in some respects analogous to the treatment 
of supersymmetric gauge theories in Section 27.8; we work only with the 
physical components of the gravitational super:field, and obtain transfor-
mation rules that involve covariant rather than ordinary derivatives. This 
is the approach that has been used in deriving the most important appli-
cation of supergravity theory beyond the weak-field approximation: the 
derivation of the low-energy effective Lagrangian in theories of gravita-
tionally mediated supersymmetry breaking. This application is the subject 
of Section 31.7. 
31.1 
The Metric Superfield 
Supergravity necessarily involves spinor as well as tensor fields, so we 
will have to describe gravitational fields in. terms of a vierbein (or tetrad) 
e' ,u(x) rather than a metric, which is related to the vierbein by 
g.uv(x) ='lab ea ,u(x) eb v(x) . 
(31.1.1) 
The indices J..l, v, etc. label general coordinates, while indices a, b, etc. 
label coordinates in a locally inertial coordinate system, with 'lab the 
usual diagonal matrix with elements +1, +1, +1, -1. In the vierbein 
formalism, the action must be supposed to be invariant under two different 
sorts of symmetry transformations : general coordinate transformations 
x.U ~ x'.U(x), under which the vierbein ~.u(x) is transformed into e'a.u(x), 
where 
e'a 
' 
axv a 
) 
,u(x) = ox'.U e v(x , 
and local Lorentz transformations, under which 
ea ,u(x) ~ Aab(x) eb ,u(x), 
with Aab(x) an arbitrary real matrix subject to the constraints 
'labAa c(x)Ab d(x) ='led· 
(31.1.2) 
(31.1.3) 
(31.1.4) 
An elementary review of this formalism is given in the appendix to this 
chapter. 
A weak gravitational field is one for which the vierbein is close to the 
unit matrix. In such a field, the vierbein may conveniently be written as 
(31.1.5) 
where cpa ,u(x) is small. As we shall see in Section 31.2, if cpa .u is to be a 
conventionally normalized field, then the constant K should be expressed in 

320 
31 Supergravity 
terms of Newton's constant G by K = JSiG. The closeness of the vierbein 
to the unit matrix is preserved by a small coordinate transformation 
xf.l ~ xf.l + ~f.l(x), 
(31.1.6) 
and also by small local Lorentz transformations 
Aab(x) = bg + COab(x), 
(31.1.7) 
where ~f.l(x) and coab(x) are of the same order as ¢af.l(x), and coab(x) = 
tlacCOcb(x) is constrained by Eq. (31.1.4) to satisfy 
COab(X) = - COba(X) · 
(31.1.8) 
The combined transformations (31.1.2) and (31.1.3) then become 
1 [ 
a~f.l(x) 
] 
¢f.lv(x) ~ 
¢w~(x) + 2K 
OXv + COf.lv(x) 
. 
(31.1.9) 
We are now dropping the distinction between general coordinate indices 
J.t, v, etc. and local Lorentz coordinate indices a, b, etc., and raising and 
lowering all indices with '7f.lv and '7f.lv· In terms of the metric (31.1.1), the 
weak field assumption (31.1.5) becomes 
gf.lv(x) = tlf.lv + 2K hf.lv(x), 
with 
hf.lv(x) = ¢f.lV(x) + ¢vf.l(x) , 
while the transformation law (31.1.9) reads 
h ( ) ~ h ( ) _ _2_ [o~f.l(x) 
o~v(x)] 
f.lV X 
f.lV X 
2K 
OXv + OXf.l 
(31.1.10) 
(31.1.11) 
(31.1.12) 
By use of the supersymmetry algebra we showed in Section 25.4 that the 
graviton has a fermionic superpartner, the gravitino, with helicities +3/2. 
We saw in Section 5.9 that a self-charge-conjugate massless particle with 
helicities + 1 can only have low-energy interactions if described by a real 
field Af.l(x) whose interactions are invariant under a gauge transformation 
Af.l(x)--+ Af.l(x)+of.lA(x). In the same way, a self-charge-conjugate massless 
particle with helicities + 3/2 can only have low-energy interactions if it is 
described by a Majorana field tpf.l(x) with an extra vector index J.t, with 
invariance under a gauge transformation 
(31.1.13) 
where tp(x) is an arbitrary Majorana field.3a We need now to consider 
how fields ¢f.lv(x) and tpf.l(x) with these transformation properties can be 
put into a super:field. 
We found in Section 27.1 that a gauge field Vv(x) can be regarded as the 
Vv-component, defined in Eq. (26.2.10) as the coefficient of i(Bysyvll)/2, of 

31.1 The Metric Superfield 
321 
a real scalar superfield V(x, 8). Similarly, we would like to incorporate the 
vierbein field <P"'v(x) and the gravitino field tp"'(x) into a vector superfield 
Hp(x, 8), known as· the metric superfield. The question is: how are <P"'v(x) 
and tp"'(x) related to the components of this superfield? 
To address this question, note that supersymmetry requires the 'gauge' 
transformations (31.1.9) and (31.1.13) to be special cases of a transforma-
tion of the whole metric superfield 
(31.1.14) 
Furthermore, a weak gravitational field h"'v interacts with an energy-
momentum tensor T~-'v which as we found in Section 26.7 is a linear 
combination of components of a real vector superfield 8~-', so we expect 
the interaction of the whole superfield H"' with matter to take the form 
lint= 2K J 
tf"x [HI-' 8~-']D. 
(31.1.15) 
(Later in this section we will confirm the correctness of the coefficient 2K, 
with 8~-' normalized as in Section 26.7.) The supercurrent 8~-' was shown 
in Section 26.7 to satisfy the conservation conditions 
(31.1.16) 
where X is a real chiral scalar superfield (the sum of a left-chiral scalar 
superfield and its complex conjugate) and PJ is the four-component su-
perderivative (26.2.26). It follows that this interaction is invariant under a 
transformation of the form (31.1.14), with A"' of the form 
(31.1.17) 
where E(x, 8) is a superfield subject to the manifestly supersymmetric 
condition 
(31.1.18) 
This can be seen by recalling from Section 26.7 that the chirality condition 
on X allows us to write it in the form 
(31.1.19) 
with n in general a non-local superfield. From Eq. (31.1.16) we then find 
J 
[e"'(~r"'s)]» =-J 
[(c.@e~-')r"'s)]» =-J 
[(c~x)s)]» 
= + J [n (~p)) (~s)]» = o, 
so that the interaction (31.1.15) is invariant under the transformation 
H"'-+ Hp +(2iy"'E). (We can also obtain the same result without using the 

322 
31 Supergravity 
representation (31.1.19) for X, by noting from Eq. (26.2.25) that the D-term 
of the product of a chiral superfield like X which satisfies Eqs. (26.3.1) 
and (26.3.2) and a linear superfield like (~B) which satisfies Eq. (26.3.45) 
is a spacetime derivative.) 
At the end of this section we shall show that Eqs. (31.1.17) and (31.1.18) 
yield conditions on the components of the superfield A,u: 
yl\ ( ) 
yl\ ( ) _ av,u(x) 
avv(x) _ 2 
avl(x) 
,uv X + v .U X -
a 
+ a 
'l,uv a ). 
' 
Xv 
X,u 
X 
(31.1.20) 
(31.1.21) 
(31.1.22) 
a.u M~(x) = a.u N~(x) = 0, 
(31.1.23) 
with v,u(x) a real vector field, and x(x) a Majorana spinor field. (Here we 
introduce a notation that will be used throughout this chapter; following 
Eq. (26.3.9), the components C5, ms, M 8 , N 8 , V!, )..8 , and D8 of an 
arbitrary superfield S (x, (J) are defined by the expansion 
S(x, (J) = cs(x)- i(8 rs m8(x)) -
~ (8 rs (J )M8 (x)- ~ (e (J )N5(x) 
+~(Om' o) v;(x)- i(Bys o) (e[;!(x) + ~ ~a,S(x)]) 
-i(e ys o)
2 
( D8(x) + ~oC8(x)) . 
(31.1.24) 
Also, V~(x) is the Vv-component of Aw) This leads us to define the fields 
</J,uv(x) = V~(x) -
~'l.uv yH 
2~(x) , 
(31.1.25) 
(31.1.26) 
bq(x) = DHq(X) + !eVJlK<TaKV~(x) + aqapC{!(x). 
(31.1.27) 
(As discussed in Section 31.3, the factor 1/2 introduced on the left-hand 
side of Eq. (31.1.26) will give the :field 1/),u a conventional normaliza-
tion.) From Eqs. (31.1.20) and (31.1.21) it follows that the transformation 
(31.1.14) induces on ¢.uv(x) and tp,u(x) the gauge transformations (31.1.9) 
and (31.1.13), with 
1p = 2x, (31.1.28) 

31.1 The Metric Superfield 
323 
while Eq. (31.1.22) shows that bf.l(x) is invariant. Also, Eq. (31.1.23) shows 
that the transformation (31.1.14) induces shifts of M: (x) and N: (x) that 
leave invariant the fields 
s::;;; iJf.lM:(x), 
(31.1.29) 
Finally, since Cff(x), V~(x) -
V~(x), and w~(x) are unconstrained by 
supersymmetry, the transformation (31.1.14) allows us to make the com-
ponents c: (x), Vt!(x)- vt:z(x) = ¢f.lv-¢vf.l• and w: (x) anything we like. In 
particular, in analogy with the Wess-Zumino gauge for gauge superfields 
discussed in Section 27.1, we can take c: (x), Vt!(x)- vt:z(x) = ¢f.lv- ¢vf.l• 
and w:(x) all to vanish. The :fields hf.lv(x) and tpf.l(x) are identified by 
their transformation properties as the fields of the graviton and grav-
itino, respectively, while bf.l(x), s(x), and p(x) are auxiliary fields4 that 
are important in understanding the coupling of the graviton superfield to 
matter. 
Incidentally, note that the number of independent components of the 
symmetric tensor hw modulo the gauge transformations (31.1.12) is 10 -
4 = 6, which with the auxiliary fields s, p, and bf.l gives a total of 6+6 = 12 
independent physical bosonic fields, while the number of independent 
physical components of the Majorana spinor field 1pf.l modulo the gauge 
transformations (31.1.13) is 16 - 4 = 12. This satisfies the condition, 
discussed at the end of Section 26.2, that in any supermultiplet of fields 
that furnishes a representation of the supersymmetry algebra, there must 
be equal numbers of independent bosonic and fennionic field components. 
Let us now return to the interaction of matter and gravitation. In 
general, the integrated D-term of the product of two superfields @f.l and 
Hf.l is given by Eq. (26.2.25) as 
J 
tf'x [0" H"]D ~ J 
tf'x [- i!"cH• i!"C~ + cH• D~ +DH• C'j 
-(wHIT [A~+ t ~w~J)- ([1HIT +!WHIT ~]w~) 
+MH • M'j + NH• N'j- yH•• V!] . 
(31.1.30) 
Using Eqs. (31.1.25)-(31.1.27), we may express Vt!, A.:, and n: respec-
tively in terms of ¢f.lv• 1pf.l, and bf.l, and find 
Imt = 2K j tfx [ef.l Hf.l]D 
~ 2" J a'x [en • [ oc;> - a,iJP c: + v'j] + b" c'j 

324 
31 Supergravity 
+( OJHq [-A~- ~OJ~+ oqyPOJ:])- ( fjJq OJ~)+ ( fjJq yqyPOJ:) 
+ MHq Mf! + NHq Na 
q 
q 
+ V """ </J,,a.c;> - 4>"' [ v2 - ~"' V9 P P J]. 
(31.1.31) 
We saw in Section 26.7 that the conservation condition (31.1.16) yields 
conditions (26.7.44), (26.7.39), and (26.7.35): 
D~ = -oc~ +ollovc~, 
A~ = -
~OJ;>+ Ov'}'llOJ~ , 
0 _ va _ v:e + 
o:~llcap 
-
/lV 
Y/l 
E /lVpllU 
' 
which respectively tell us that the coefficients in Eq. (31.1.31) of cHq, 
of OJHq, and of the antisymmetric part of ¢!lv all vanish. Also, we may 
write the remaining terms of Eq. (31.1.31) in terms of the supersymmetry 
current (26.7.20), the energy-momentum tensor (26.7.42), the al-current 
(26.7.51): 
Sll = -20J9 1l + 2yP yv OJ;>, 
T 
1 v:f) 
l v:f) + 
y9 A 
pv = -2 pv -
2 V/l 
'7pv 
A. • 
afP = 2 C9 1l, 
and densities .A and % defined by 
M: =ow/It, 
N~ =oil%, 
(31.1.32) 
and given by Eqs. (26.7.33) and (26.7.34) as: 
(31.1.33) 
where X is the real chiral superfield appearing on the right-hand side of 
the conservation equation (31.1.16). (A label 'new' on the supersymmetry 
current will be understood in this chapter.) The first-order interaction 
between matter and the components of the metric superfield is then 
21c j tfx [ E)ll Hll J D = K j tfx [alqbq + tSq tpq - 2.A s- 2% p + T"q hq"] . 
(31.1.34) 
We note that the gravitino field interacts with the supersymmetry current, 
in much the same way as the gravitational field interacts with the energy-
momentum tensor. 
We can now check the constant factor appearing in this interaction.. The 
usual definition of TPv is that the variation of the matter action under a 
change bg!lv in the metric is5 
biM = ~ j tfx .jDet gTil
11 bgpv. 

31.1 The Metric Superfield 
325 
The interaction between matter and a weak gravitational field given by 
Eq. (31.1.10) is then 
K j tfx T 1111(x) h11v(x), 
which agrees with the h11v-1iependent part of Eq. (31.1.34), thus confirming 
the normalization of the interaction (31.1.15). 
* * * 
We shall now check that Eqs. (31.1.17) and (31.1.18) yield the conditions 
(30.1.20H30.1.23). The superfield T = ( ~3) has the components 
C1 = -iTr(ew8 ), 
w 1 = -iys ~C
3 + M 3 - iysN3+ f 8 , 
1 
';:;' 
M = -Tr(eysA.-), 
N1 = iTr(eA.8 ), 
V11
1 = -Tr(eysA.vi=)- ~Tr(eys hv, ~A.
3 ), 
A_ I=- ~ME- iys ~NE- iys(Da + oca)- Ov yEv' 
1 
';:: 
-
D = iTr (e ~A.-)+ zTr (eDw~), 
and the condition (31.1.18) yields 
M 1 = N 1 = D 1 +DC 1 = [)).vI = A 1 + ~(0 1 . 0. 
The vanishing of M 1 and N 1 tells us that A.3 is a linear combination of 
the form 
A.8 e = f 11y11 + g11rsr11 + kpv [y~', ·/J . 
The vanishing of a.tv[ and D1 + DC1 then implies that 
o~~fP = a~~g~~ = o. 
Also, the vanishing of A. 1 + ~co 1 yields 
';:;' 
i 
[11 
.1] 
.... 
n- = 2rs r , "" v; . 
The compo.nents of &11(x, 8) are 
cff = iTr (eysy11ro3 ), 
w~ = i ~y11C
3 + YsYpMa- iy11N 8 + YsYPYil VJ , 
M~ =- Tr(ey11A.3 ), 
N~ = iTr (eysy11i=), 
Vffv = Tr (eyvy11i=) - !Tr(e [Yv, ~] y11 w3 ), 
A.~= Ys ~y11M
3 + i ~y11N
3 - iy11(D2 + DCE.) + Y5Yp0
11V:, 
(31.1.35) 
(31.1.36) 
(31.1.37) 
(31.1.38) 
(31.1.39) 
(31.1.40) 
(31.1.41) 
(31.1.42) 
(31.1.43) 

326 
31 Supergravity 
D: = iTr(e ¢YsY,uA.8 ) + iDTr(E'}'s'}',ums). 
(31.1.44) 
The symmetric part of Eq. (31.1.42) gives condition (31.1.20), with 
: 
v,u =- Tr(ry,um~) +constant. 
(31.1.45) 
A linear combination of Eqs. (31.1.39) and (31.1.43) yields condition 
(31.1.21), with 
x = 2ysM3 + 2i N 3 +constant . 
(31.1.46) 
We then use the antisymmetric part of Eq. (31.1.42), together with 
Eqs. (31.1.37), (31.1.38), and the identities 
[Yv, '}'p]'}',u- [Y,u, Yp]Yv = 211,upYv- 211vp'Y,u + 2iEvp,uA. Ysl, 
ev.U"<T(yv, Y,u] = 2iys[y", y<T] , 
and find the condition (31.1.22). Finally, Eqs. (31.1.40) and (31.1.41) along 
with Eqs. (31.1.35) and (31.1.36) yield the condition (31.1.23). 
31.2 
The Gravitational Action. 
To find a suitable gravitational action, we must construct a superfield that 
is invariant under the generalized gauge transformation H,u ---+- H,u + A,u-
As a starting point, we recall that the field h,u defined by Eq. (31.1.27) is 
invariant under this transformation. By making successive supersymmetry 
transformations we can see that h,u is the C-component of an 'Einstein' 
superfield E,u, whose components are 
cff = h.u, 
E 
3 
1 
v 
CO,u = 2 L,u - lY,uY Lv , 
Mff = o,us, 
Nff = O,uP, 
E -
-~ 
~ 
P 
~ 
()<T bP 
V,uv-
2E,uv + 211,uvE p + 2evf.1Dp 
1E _ 
:l 
v 
E 
,1 
E 
A,u -
u,uY COv -
'f(!),u ' 
D: = Opov hv- Db,u, 
where E,uv is the linearized Einstein tensor 
_1( 
). 
). 
E,uv = 2 o,uolih A.+ Dh,uv- o,uo h;.v 
-ovo1h;.14 -11,uvDh1;. + 11pvo;.iJPhA.p) 
(31.2.1) 
(31.2.2) 
(31.2.3) 
(31.2.4) 
(31.2.5) 
(31.2.6) 
(31.2.7) 

31.2 The Gravitational Action 
327 
and 
Lv _ · vpxp 
01 
= Je 
Ys 'Yp urctpp , 
(31.2.8) 
which will be shown in Section 31.3 to be the left·hand side of the wave 
equation for a free massless field of spi.n 3/2. For instance, by applying 
the supersymmetry transformation rules (26.2.11), (26.2.15), and (26.2.17) 
for cH, V(!, and DH to Eqs. (31.2.1) and (31.1.27) we find 
beE(/ = i ( ays [~A.H (/ - !i eV/lX(/ Ys ')'p OrcA~+ 0(/ o"w:]) . 
Comparison of this with the transformation rule (26.2.11) for cE shows 
that 
wEa =~A.Hq- Fevprca'J's')'pOrcA~ +o(/o"w:. 
We can use Eq. (31.1.26) to express A.ff in terms of tpp and wff: 
1H _ 
p 
01p 
H 
All - tpp- ylly tpp- 'J'pu wP , 
and find that w! may be written in terms of tpq alone 
w: =~tp(/- Oq')'Ptpp -
fievllK(/Ys yll o"tpv. 
Using the identity 
-· 
p 
I" 
a 
p 
'lllv'l'2- rJpJ.Yv- lepJ.vpYsY -
z''YpY eq).vpYsY , 
we :find Eq. (31.2.2) for wff. Continuing in the same way gives the other 
formulas (31.2.3H31.2.6) for the components of Ell and confirms that 
these components make up a real superfield. 
We can now form a quadratic action for the metric superfield that is in· 
variant under both supersymmetry and the extended gauge transformation 
Hll -. Hll +All, by taking the Lagrangian density as 
!i'e = 1(EpHil)D =Eilvhpv- ftjJilLil- j<i+p2-bllbll). 
(31.2.9) 
The factor 4/3 is chosen to give the kinematic Lagrangian for the graviton 
:field a conventional sign and normalization: apart from terms involving 
ollhllv or h2 ;., it is a sum of Klein-Gordon Lagrangians for the components 
of hllv· The normalization of the gravitino field is discussed in the next 
section. 
To see that the first two terms in the final expression in Eq. (31.2.9) are 
invariant under the gauge transformations (31.1.12) and (31.1.13), we note 
that Ell" and Lp are manifestly invariant under these transformations, 
and that the action is symmetric between the two factors of hllv or tpll 
appearing in these terms. The absence in Eq. (31.2.9) of derivatives of s, 
p, and bll shows that these are auxiliary fields. The field equations make 

328 
31 Supergravity 
them vanish for pure gravitation, but not when gravitation is coupled to 
matter. 
Before taking up the coupling of matter and gravitation, let us pause 
to consider what value we should give the normalization constant K 
in Eqs. (31.1.5) and (31.1.10). The Einstein-Hilbert action for a pure 
gravitational field is 
lGR = - 16~G f cfx _.Jg R, 
(31.2.10) 
where G is the Newton constant of gravitation, g(x) is the determinant 
of the metric tensor g,u11(x), and R(x) is the curvature scalar calculated 
from g,uv(x). To calculate lGR for a weak gravitational field with g,u11 = 
'7,uv + 2Kh,uv• we may recall that for arbitrary variations bg,u11(x) in the 
gravitational field6 
blGR = 16~G f cfx _.Jg [R.uv- 4g.uv R] bg,u11 , 
(31.2.11) 
where R~-'
11 (x) is the Ricci tensor calculated from g,u11(x). For a weak field 
with g,u11 = '7,uv + 2Kh,uv. the Ricci tensor is7 
R~-'
11 = K( Dh~-'
11 - B;,B~-'h)..
11 - B;..B
11h)..,u + a.uav h).)..) ' 
so for weak fields 
R~-'" -
lg~-'
11 R = 2KE~-'
11 
2 
' 
and therefore Eq. (31.2.10) gives 
bJGR = 4:~ f cfx £1-'V bh,uv . 
(31.2.12) 
(31.2.13) 
On the other hand, taking account of the symmetry of J d4x E,uv h~-'
11 
between the two factors of hit contains, we have 
b J 
cfx E~-'
11 h,uv = 2 J 
cfx E~-'
11 bh,uv . 
In order for the term E,uv h~-'
11 in Eq. (31.2.9) to give the usual gravitational 
Lagrangian density, it is therefore necessary to take 
K = J8itG. 
(31.2.14) 
Let's now combine the Einstein Lagrangian density (31.2:.9) with the 
interaction (31.1.34) between gravitation and matter and with the matter 
Lagrangian !l' M, to form a total Lagrangian density: 
!l' = !l'M + E,uvhl-'
11 
-
iffi.uL~-' - H? + p2 - h,ubP) 
+2K [~alo-ha + iSo-tpo-- .Its-% p + ! T"o-ha~e] . (31.2.15) 

31.2 The Gravitational Action 
329 
The field equations for the auxiliary fields give 
S = -6K.Aj8, 
p = -6K%j8, 
(31.2.16) 
Using this to eliminate the auxiliary fields, the Lagrangian density (31.2.15) 
now gtves 
!l' =!I'M+ El'vh~'
11 
-
~fjJI'L~' + i12(..1t2 + % 2 -
!9fw~~') 
+ tKSqtpq + KT"qhq~e. 
(31.2.17) 
The sources of the fields tp I' and hl'v are of order K, so we can regard 
these fields as being of this order, which makes all terms in Eq. (31.2.17) 
beyond !l'M of order K2• 
In the vacuum only the scalar fields s and p can have tree-approxima-
tion expectation values, giving the vacuum an energy density, to order 
G: 
(31.2.18) 
The negative sign of the term in the vacuum energy density of first order 
in G is a characteristic difference between theories of supergravity and 
ordinary supersymmetry. 
For instance, in the theory of a single left-chiral superfield Cb with 
superpotential f(Cb), the zeroth-order vacuum energy is -.!l' M vAc = 
ldf(l/J)jd¢12, while Eqs. (31.1.33) and (26.7.27) give 
.A+ i% = -~ [¢d~~)- 3f(¢)] ' 
so to first order in G, the total vacuum energy is 
PVAC = ~d~~)r _:_ 8~G li~~) -3f(<,b)l2, 
(31.2.19) 
where ¢ is the scalar component of Cb. This is for the definition of the 
metric for which the energy-momentum tensor is given by Eq. (26.7.42), 
so that in particular T;..;. vanishes for f = 0. For other definitions the 
vacuum energy would be changed by terms of order 8nGI¢121df(¢)/d¢12. 
However, this ambiguity is unimportant in calculating the minimum value 
of the vacuum energy. Inspection of Eq. (31.2.19) shows that iff(¢) is 
stationary at some point l/Jo, then PvAc has a local minimum for 1¢- l/Jol 
and ldf I d¢1 of first order in G, and at any such point the vacuum energy 
to first order in G is 
PVAC = -24nGif(l/Jo)l2 . 
(31.2.20) 
There is an algebraic reason why vacuum states with unbroken super-
symmetry in supergravity theories cannot have positive energy density. 

330 
31 Supergravity 
The solutions of the Einstein field equations for a uniform non-zero vac-
uum energy density pv take the form of a de Sitter space for pv > 0 and 
anti-de Sitter space for Pv < 0. These spaces may be described as the 
surfaces 
x~ + fl~Jvx~-'xv = R2 , 
(31.2.21) 
in a quasi-Euclidean five-dimensional space with line element 
ds'2 = fl~Jvx~-'xv + dx~ , 
(31.2.22) 
with the upper sign for de Sitter space and the lower sign for anti-de 
Sitter space. The spacetime symmetry of these spaces is no longer the 
Poincare group consisting of translations and Lorentz transformations, 
but instead 0( 4, 1) for de Sitter space and 0(3, 2) for anti-de Sitter space, 
where O(n,m) is the group of linear transformations that leave invariant 
a diagonal metric with n positive and m negative elements on the main 
diagonal. The supersymmetry that is unbroken in theories with a de Sitter 
or anti-de Sitter vacuum state therefore has the simple group 0( 4, 1) or 
0(3, 2), respectively, as its spacetime symmetry. Nahm 1a has cataloged 
all supersymmetries with simple spacetime symmetries. There are simple 
0(3, 2) supersymmetries, as well as N -extended 0(3, 2) supersymmetries, 
but for 0(4, 1) there is only an N = 2 supersymmetry. We have been 
considering N = 1 supergravity theories here, so they can have vacuum 
states with unbroken supersymmetry and pv < 0, which gives 0(3, 2) 
spacetime symmetry, but not with unbroken supersymmetry and pv > 0, 
which would give 0( 4, 1) spacetime symmetry. 
The possibility of vacuum field configurations with negative energy 
density may seem at first sight to threaten the stability of our universe. 
It is common for f(l/J) to have several stationary points, at which it takes 
different values. Even if we fine-tune the parameters in f(l/J) so that f(l/J) 
vanishes at one of these stationary points, accounting for the observed 
nearly flat space of our universe, any other stationary point with a non-
zero value off( q,) will yield a lower vacuum energy, raising the possibility 
of a collapse to a state of negative energy density, with a metric that 
would have to be of the 'anti-de Sitter' form rather than flat. 
Fortunately, the value (31.2.20) is just barely insufficient to compensate 
for the positive energy that has to go into surface tension in making a 
bubble of anti-de Sitter space, 'so that the transition from ordinary flat 
space is not actually favored energetically. Coleman and de Luccia8 have 
applied the equations of general relativity to a bubble of negative internal 
energy density -c and positive surface tension S in a flat space of energy 
density zero, and have shown that any such bubble that does not entail 
gravitational singularities will have positive energy if 
c < 6nGS2 • 
(31.2.23) 

31.2 The Gravitational Action 
331 
The surface tension is the energy per area in the bubble surface, given to 
zeroth order in G by the integral of the energy density through the bubble 
wall: 
=1T+ 
[ldt/>12 
ldf(t/>)12] 
St 
r_ dr 
dr + 
dtj> 
, 
(31.2.24) 
with r _ and r + taken just inside and just outside the bubble wall. This 
can be rewritten as 
where e is an arbitrary phase factor with 1~1 = 1. The integral in the 
second term is trivial: since we assume that tj>(r +)is at a value where f(t/>) 
is stationary and vanishes, while tj>(r_) is at some value t/>o where f(t/>) is 
stationary but non-zero, the integral is 
1~+ dr ~~ d~~) = -f(t/>o). 
To maximize this term, we take ~ = f(t/>o)/lf(t/>o)l, and obtain the 
inequality9 
St > 21f(t/>o)l , 
(31.2.25) 
with equality attained only if (as is usual) there is a solution of the dif-
ferential equation dtf>/dr = -e(df /dtj>)* with the appropriate boundary 
conditions. The inequality (31.2.23) is thus satisfied if the internal en-
ergy density is not less than -24nGif(t/>o)l2, which is precisely the value 
(31.2.20). This calculation leaves open the possibility of an instability of 
flat space due to radiative corrections, but the reader need not worry: it 
has been proved that in supergravity theories in which there is a vacuum 
field configuration with zero vacuum energy, the energy of any disturbance 
in the fields which is limited to a finite region is positive. 10 
* * * 
Eq. (26.7.48) shows that the energy-momentum tensor for a set of 
left-chiral scalar superfields <Dn contains a term 
ATilV = } ( 'lJlV 0 -
i)Jli)V) L lt/>nl2 . 
(31.2.26) 
n 
Integrating by parts, the corresponding interaction KhllvA T JlV makes a 
contribution to the action of the form 
~ J 
~ 4x L I<J>n12( '7/lvo- iJiliJV)hJlv = ~R(l) L lt/>nl2, 
(31.2.27) 
n 
n 

332 
31 Supergravity 
where R<1> is the curvature scalar in linear approximation. 
This is 
added to the usual Einstein-Hilbert action - flR/2K1 (which appears 
in Eq. (31.2.17) as the te:rm E~-'vh~-'
11
) and has the effect of replacing the 
coefficient of this term with 
1 
1 " 
2 
1 ( 
1(,2 " 
2) 
- 22 + 6 L.,..ltPnl =-2K2 1- 3 L.,..ltPnl 
· 
K 
n 
n 
(31.2.28) 
In order to restore the usual constant of gravitation, we can subject the 
metric to a Weyl transformation, replacing the vierbein rfl~-' with 
2 
-a -
a 
1 
K "JA.. j2 
e 1-1 - e 1-1 
- 3 L.,.. o/n 
• 
n 
(31.2.29) 
That is, we replace the metric g~-'11 with 
g,, = ( 1- ~ ~ 
lt/>.1
2
) g,,' 
(31.2.30) 
or for weak fields 
-
K" 
2 
hwv = hl'v - 6 L.,..ltPnl 
'l~Jv · 
n 
(31.2.31) 
The weak field Einstein tensor (31.2. 7) for the new metric is 
-
_ 1 ( 
-A 
-
r 
A_-
-A 
A -
) 
EIJV = 2 a/Jvh A+ DhiJV -al-Ia hAv - ava h.tll- 'l~tvDh ..t + 'l~Jva aphAp 
= EIJV-i (a ~tall -
'l~Jv 0) L I<Pnl
2 
. 
(31.2.32) 
n 
The sum of the Einstein term in the original action and the term (31.2.27) 
is then 
1 
d"x [ h,,E"' + J ~ 
1</>.1' ( q"' o - a• a') h..,] = 1 
d" x [ ii,,E•' 
+ ~ (a,~ 1<1>.1') ( a• p</>.1
2)] , 
(31.2.33) 
so the effective gravitational constant is now actually constant. This 
redefinition of the metric also produces a change in the potential. The 
original Lagrangian density contains a term -e Ln jaf(</l)/a<Pnl 2, which in 
terms of the new vierbein reads 
-e L Jaf(</l)/a<P,.l1 = -e L laf(</l)/a<Pnl 2 
n 
n 
-
2~ ( ~ 
1</>.1') ~ 
ltlf(t/>)/at/>.1
2 
· 

31.3 The Gravitino 
333 
With the new definition of the metric, the potential (31.2.19) is therefore 
replaced with 
=~I 8f(t/J) 12- "2 "".~. 8f(t/J) -
3f(A.) 2 
PVAC 
L 
8
.~, 
3 L- 'f'n 8A-
'f' 
n 
'f'n 
n 
o/n 
+ 21 ( ~ 
1</>.12) ~I a!~~) 12 
(31.2.34) 
The new term does not change the value of PvAc at its stationary point 
to order K2, so no change is needed in our previous discussion of vacuum 
stability. 
31.3 
The Gravitino 
In this section we will use the weak field formalism developed in Sections 
31.1-31.3 to derive some properties of the gravitino. In particular, by 
using an argument of continuity as G -+ 0 we shall obtain a formula for 
the gravitino mass when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken that is 
valid to first order in G but to all orders in all other interactions. (The 
original derivation of this formula will be given in Section 31.6.) 
First we must verify that the term -tiP IiLii in Eq. (31.2.9) is the correct 
free-field Lagrangian for a massless self-charge-conjugate particle of spin 
3/2. The time-honored approach to the construction of suitable free-field 
Lagrangians for particles with spin is to guess at the Lagrangian and then 
check that it gives a physically satisfactory field equation and propagator. 
This has led to some uncertainty for particles of spin 3/2 -
for instance, 
what is usually called the Ranta-Schwinger Lagrangian in papers on 
supersymmetry is not the Lagrangian originally proposed by Rarita and 
Schwinger.l1 Here we shall follow an approach in the spirit of Section 
6.2: we will first derive the propagator from the requirements of Lorentz 
invariance for a massive particle of spin 3/2 and then invert it to find 
the Lagrangian. We work here with massive gravitinos for the sake of 
simplicity and because in the real world we must take account of the 
breakdown of supersymmetry, but we will be able to apply the results 
obtained in this way to the case of massless gravitinos by noting that 
supersymmetry current conservation makes the zero-mass singularities in 
the propagator inconsequential. 
A spinor field 1pll with an extra vector index belongs to the [(!, 0) + 
(0, t)] X (t, n representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group. To 
isolate the ( 1, t) + ( t, 1) parts of the free field, we impose the irreducibility 

334 
31 Supergravity 
condition 
YJ.ttp~-' = 0. 
(31.3.1) 
Rotational invariance and Eq. (31.3.1) tell us that the matrix elements 
of this field between the vacuum and a massive spin 3/2 particle of 
momentum q = 0 and spin z-component swill satisfy the conditions 
(Oitp0(0)1s) = 0 
(31.3.2) 
and 
3/2 I: (Oitpi(O)Is) (Oitpi(O)Isr oc {J'i - tYiYi , 
(31.3.3) 
S=-3/2 
with a coefficient that may depend on the rotationally invariant matrix 
fJ = iy0. With the usual Dirac convention that {J(011f'i(O)Is) = (Oitpi(O)Is) 
(chosen to simplify the space inversion property of the field) and a con-
ventional choice of normalization of the fJ = + 1 component analogous to 
Eq. (5.5.23), Eq. (31.3.3) may be written 
3!2 
. 
. 
( 1 + P) 
L (Oitp
1(0)1s)(Oitp1(0)1s)* = (2n)-3 
- 2-
[{Jij- tYiYj]. 
(31.3.4) 
s=-3/2 
It follows that the momentum-space propagator for a spin 3/2 particle of 
mass mg takes the form 
AJlV 
= 
Pll'~'(q) 
' 
( q) 
q2 + mi - ie 
(31.3.5) 
where Pll
11(q) is a Lorentz-covariant polynomial in the four-vector q, 
subject to the conditions that for q = 0 and q0 = mg, we have 
.. 
( 1 + P) [ 
] 
P'' = 
- 2-
{Jij - tYiYi , 
piO = pOi = pOO = 0 . 
(31.3.6) 
Apart from possible terms that vanish on the mass shell (and whose effect 
therefore would be the same as direct current--current interactions) the 
unique covariant function with this limit is 
P"'(q) = (q"' + q;n ( 
-if+m.)-Hr"- i~) (if+ mg) (y'-i!:). 
(31.3.7) 
(The difference between Eq. (31.3.7) and any other covariant function 
with the limit (31.3.6) would be a covariant function whose components 
all vanish for q = 0 and q0 = mg and hence vanish everywhere on the 
mass shell.) The free-field Lagrangian density is then of the form 
!l' o = -
~ ( 1Pil D~-'v( -io) 1p 
11
) 
, 
(31.3.8) 

31.3 The Gravitino 
where 
A~v(q)Dv,t(q) = bf. 
A tedious but straightforward calculation gives 
Dv,t(q) = -cv~cl }'S Y~ qK -
~mg (Yv, Yl] , 
so that the Lagrangian density (31.3.8) is 
335 
(31.3.9) 
(31.3.10) 
!l! 0 = - !i cv~Kl ( tPv Ys }'~OK 1p J.) + tmg ( tPv [yv, y2] 1p,t) . 
(31.3.11) 
For mg = 0 this result verifies that the term -~tp~L~ in Eq. (31.2.9) is the 
correct conventionally normalized free-field Lagrangian for a massless self-
charge-conjugate particle of spin 3/2. In the limit mg ._ 0 the propagator 
given by Eqs. (31.3.5) and (31.3.7) is singular (which just reflects the 
impossibility shown in Section 5.9 of forming a (1, D + (t, 1) field from 
the creation and annihilation operators for a massless particle of helicity 
+3/2), but the terms in Eq. (31.3.7) for p~v(q) that blow up for mg ._ 0 
are all proportional to q~ and/or qv, and hence give no contribution when 
the current with which 1p~ interacts is conserved. 
As a further check on the validity of the Lagrangian density (31.3.11), 
including the peculiar-looking mass term, we note that it yields a field 
equation 
-i c;vf.UCl }'S y~ OK V'l + tmg (yv' y-t] V'-t = 0. 
Taking the divergence of this equation yields the result that 
[~, yl]1p;. = 0. 
Also, contracting Eq. (31.3.12) with Yv shows that 
YvV'v OC cv~d Ys YvY~ OK 1p,t OC [~, y2] V'l = 0, 
(31.3.12) 
so that the irreducibility condition (31.3.1) is satisfied for free fields (though 
not necessarily when interactions are taken into account). From these two 
results there follows another irreducibility condition 
0;_1pA= H~,y,t}VJA= H~.y,t]VJA=O. 
Using these irreducibility results allows the field equation (31.3.12) to be 
put in the form of a Dirac equation 
(31.3.13) 
which among other things shows that this is the free field of a particle of 
mass mg. 
We will now consider the effects in supergravity theories of a sponta-
neous breakdown of supersymmetry. Broken global supersymmetry entails 

336 
31 Supergravity 
the existence of a massless particle of spin 1/2, the goldstino, but in su-
pergravity theories the goldstino field x can be eliminated by a gauge 
transformation 1J.'~-& .- 1J.'~-&- 8~-&X· Since the gauge is then fixed by the condi-
tion that the goldstino field is eliminated in this way, gauge invariance no 
longer keeps the gravitino massless, and it acquires a mass (to be denoted 
mg from now on), in much the same way as we saw in Section 21.3 that the 
vector bosons w± and Z 0 get masses from the spontaneous breakdown 
of the SU(2) x U(1) gauge symmetry of the electroweak interactions. 
As discussed at the beginning of Chapter 28, if supersymmetry is 
relevant at all to accessible phenomena then the characteristic energy 
scale at which it is broken must be much less than the Planck mass. In 
this case we may use a continuity argument to give a universal formula 
for the gravitino mass mg. According to Eq. (31.1.34), the gravitino field 
1J.'~-& couples to the supersymmetry current S~-' with a coupling constant 
~" = ! .jSitG, so the exchange of a virtual gravitino of four-momentum 
q in a transition A + B -+ C + D contributes to the invariant amplitude a 
term 
M(A + B-+ C +D)= H8nG) {CISIJIA)N A~-'v(q) {DISviB)N, 
(31.3.14) 
where the subscript N indicates that the one-goldstino pole at q
2 = 0 
has been removed from the matrix element of the supersymmetry current. 
For a supersymmetry-breaking scale sufficiently small compared with the 
Planck mass, there will be a range of momentum transfers that are much 
larger than the gravitino mass but much less than the Planck mass. For 
such momenta, the matrix element is dominated by the 1/mi terms in the 
propagator numerator (31.3.7) 
(
-2i~ IJ y) 
M(A + B .- C +D)-+ H8nG) {CISIJIA)N 
3mi~2q 
(DISv IB)N. 
(31.3.15) 
But for sufficiently large Planck mass the coupling of the gravitino becomes 
negligible, and the matrix element must be the same as would have been 
produced by goldstino exchange in a theory without gravitinos. According 
to Eq. (29.2.10), this is 
M(A + B-+ C +D)-+ {CIS~-'I~)N ( q~q) ( q;f) {DISviB)N, (31.3.16) 
where F is the parameter characterizing the strength of supersymmetry 
breaking (here taken real), defined so that the vacuum energy density is 
F2 /2. In order for Eqs. (31.3.15) and (31.3.16) to agree, the gravitino mass 
must have the value 
m = .j4nGF
2 
g 
, 
• 
_, 
(31.3.17) 

31.4 Anomaly-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
337 
This formula is valid only to lowest order in GF2 , but to all orders (and 
even non-perturbatively) in the non-gravitational interactions responsible 
for the spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry. 
It is convenient for some purposes to express mg in terms of the 
expectation values (s) and (p) of the spinless auxiliary gravitational fields. 
Note that for the vacuum state to have zero spacetime curvature, the 
vacuum energy density F2/2 of matter fields must be balanced by the 
negative vacuum energy of gravitation and its interaction with the hidden 
sector fields, which is given in terms of (s) and (p) by Eqs. (31.2.18) and 
(31.2.16) as -(4/3)((s)2 + (p)2), so 
F2/2 = (4/3)((s)2 + (p)2) . 
(31.3.18) 
We can therefore write Eq. (31.3.17) as 
mg = 23K J(s)2 + (p)2. 
(31.3.19) 
It is sometimes convenient to introduce a complex gravitino mass, defined 
as 
(31.3.20) 
whose: absolute magnitude is the physical gravitino mass (31.3.19). 
31.4 
Anomaly-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
In Section 28.3 the possibility was raised that supersymmetry may be 
broken in some sort of hidden sector of superfields that do not carry 
the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) quantum numbers of the standard model, and 
communicated to observable particles gravitationally. In this section we 
will deal with one class of supersymmetry-breaking effects in the mini-
mum supersymmetric standard model, those of first order in K = JSiiG. 
This includes the gaugino masses and the parameters Aij and B in the 
Lagrangian density (28.4.1). Other supersymmetry-breaking effects such 
as squark and slepton squared masses are of second order in K, and will 
be taken up in Section 31.7, when we consider gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking using the general supergravity formalism described in 
Section 31. 6. 
Vve can find the effects of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking to 
first order in K by simply replacing the component fields of the gravi-
tational supermultiplet in the interaction (31.1.34) with their expectation 
values. The only ones of these component fields that .can acquire non-
vanishing vacuum expectation values from the spontaneous breakdown 

338 
31 Supergravity 
of supersymmetry in a hidden sector of matter superfields are the spin-
less auxiliary fields s and p, so with Eq. (31.1.33) this gives a first-order 
supersymmetry-breaking interaction 
}t'(l) = 2K [-Ax (p) + Bx (s)] = 3 lm [ m; (Ax+ iBx)] , 
(31.4.1) 
where ihg is the complex gravitino mass (31.3.20), and Ax and Bx are the 
A- and B-components of the real chiral scale-non-invariance superfield X 
discussed in Section 26.7. 
We showed in Section 26.7 tha~ for a renormalizable theory of left-
crural superfields <~»n with superpotential /(<!»), the X superfield is given 
by 
(31.4.2) 
This can be put in a form that allows an immediate extension to more 
general theories by writing the coupling parameters of the superpotential 
in terms of dimensionless parameters and a parameter .A with the dimen-
sions of mass. Since the superpotential has the dimensions of (mass)3, we 
have 
.~)1 f ( 
<~») 
~ 
<~» a f ( 
<~») = 3 f (<~») 
.M a.A + L-
n a<t» 
. 
n 
n 
(31.4.3) 
Therefore Eq. (31.4.2) may be written 
x = ~ Im [.Aaf(<I»)J 
3 
a.A 
(31.4.4) 
This formula can be generalized to give the contribution to X of the 
scale dependence of any sort of §"-term in the Lagrangian. A term 
2Re lf(€1», W)}y in the Lagrangian makes a contribution to X given by 
the obvious generalization of Eq. (31.4.4): 
X= ~Im [.Aaj~~W)] . 
(31.4.5) 
(There is also a contribution to X from any mass scale dependence in the 
D-terms in the Lagrangian.) Comparing Eq. (31.4.5) with Eqs. (26.3.10) 
and (26.3.13), we see that 
Ax 
.Bx = 2.A _a_ [f(<I» W)] 
= 2.A a f(</1, ..tL) 
+' 
3i a .A 
• 
0=0 
3i 
a .A 
· 
(31.4.6) 
There will then be a supersymmetry-breaking term in the effective La-
grangian of first order in K, given by Eqs. (31.4.1) and (31.4.6) as 
~1) = -lR [-· .Aof(l/J,lL)] 
f 
e rng 
o.A 
(31.4.7) 

31.4 Anomaly-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
339 
Eq. (31.4.7) applies not only for terms in the Lagrangian with explicit 
scale dependence, but also for the scale dependence of coupling constants 
described by the renormalization group_lla This scale dependence arises 
from the quantum mechanical anomaly that gives a non-zero value to the 
trace of the energy-momentum tensor and also to the divergence of the 
R-current, so the observable supersymmetry-breaking effects that arise in 
this way are said to be anomaly-mediated. 
Consider in particular the kinematic term ,.21 gauge for renormalizable 
supersymmetric gauge theories, given by Eqs. (27.3.22) and (27.3.23) as 
1 
,.21 gauge=- 2 2 Re L [ea:p WAa: WAp]jO • 
g 
Aa:p 
(31.4.8) 
This does not depend explicitly on any mass scale, but the coupling 
constant g has the familiar dependence on a renormalization scale .A, 
given by the renormalization group equation 
.Adg(.A) = p (g(v~t)) 
d.A 
. 
Then Eq. (31.4.7) shows that the gauge Lagrangian 
supersymmetry-breaking term in the Lagrangian 
ro(l) 
_
_ p(g)R [ -• ~ , 
, 
] 
..z gauge -
3 
e 
mg L 
Ea:f;lll.ALfi.AALP 
) 
g 
Aa:p 
(31.4.9) 
(31.4.8) yields a 
(31.4.10) 
where AALa: is the left-handed part of the gaugino field, normalized like 
WAa: by multiplication with the gauge coupling g, so that g does not appear 
in the structure constants or the interaction of the gauge superfield with 
quark superfields. Taking account of this normalization convention, the 
gaugino mass equals g2 times the absolute value of the coefficient of 
& LAa:p Ea:pAALa:AALp, or 
(31.4.11) 
In this formula mgaugino and g are cut-off-dependent bare parameters in 
the Lagrangian, governed by Wilsonian renormalization group equations. 
In Section 27.6 we saw that p(g) arises purely from one-loop diagrams, so 
that p(g) = bg3, with b a constant, and therefore 
mgaugino = mg lbl g2 • 
(31.4.12) 
The physical mass of the gaugino differs from Eq. (31.4.12) by corrections 
of higher order in g but, since we know that gauginos must be much 
heavier than the characteristic scale of quantum chromodynamics, these 
corrections are small for the gluino as well as for the wino and bino. 

340 
31 Supergravity 
Supersymmetry does not allow any explicitly scale-dependent !terms in 
the Lagrangian for the gluon and quark superfields, so, with electroweak. 
interactions neglected, Eq. (31.4.12) gives the only contribution of order 
K to the gluino mass. For three quark generations, Eq. (28.2.10) gives 
b = -3g; /16n2. Taking g; /4n = 0.118, Eq. (31.4.12) gives the gluino mass 
as 
3g;mg 
2 8 
o-2 
(31 
3) 
mgtuino = 16n2 = . X 1 
mg . 
.4.1 
On the other hand, there is a scale-dependent interaction in the La-
grangian for the Higgs superfields, produced by the jt-term -jt(HJeHl) in 
Eq. (28.1.7), so there is a term in the Lagrangian given by Eq. (31.4.7) as 
2Re [m;~t(Jt'fe.Yt'l)]. Comparing with the B~t-term in Eq. (28.4.1), we see 
that this gives 
B = -m; . 
(31.4.14) 
With three generations of quarks and lepton superfields and one pair 
of Higgs doublet superfields H1 and H2, Eqs. (28.2.8) and (28.2.9) give 
b = 11/16n2 for the U(1) gauge coupling g' and b = 1/16n2 for the 
SU(2) gauge coupling g. Taking g'2/4n = 0.0102 and g2/4n = 0.0338, 
Eq. (31.4.11) would give masses 8.9 x 10-3mg and 2.7 x w-3mg for the 
bino and wino, respectively. However, the bino and wino masses also re-
ceive contributions of order g12mg/16n2 and g2mg/16n2, respectively, from 
diagrams in which the bino or wino is attached to a higgs-higgsino loop, 
with supersymmetry breaking introduced by the term 2Re [m;fl(Jt'f eJt' 1)] 
in the Lagrangian density. This gives the bino and wino masses11b 
mbmo = ~::f 11-f (~~) , 
(31.4.15) 
mmno = i::~ 1-f ( ~~) , 
(31.4.16) 
where mA is the pseudoscalar particle mass defined by Eq. (28.5.21), and 
f(x) = 2xlnx. 
(31.4.17) 
x-1 
The implications of these results will be considered further in Section 31.7. 
Finally, there is a scale-dependent field-renormalization factor Z, mul-
tiplying the kinematic Lagrangian density [~;e-v ~r]D for any left-chiral 
superfield ~r-
This can be moved from the kinematic D-terms to the 
superpotential .¥-terms by absorbing a factor z/12 in ~,. The Yukawa 
couplings hrsr (such as the ~· hB and h~ in Eq. (28.1.7)) in the tri-
linear superpotential terms Lrst hrst~r~s~t are then multiplied with a 
factor z,-112z;112Zr-112 that depends on the cut-off Jt. According to 

31.5 Local Supersymmetry Transformations 
341 
Eq. (31.4.7), the interaction ,!l'(l) will then make a contribution to the 
Lagrangian density: 
!l'~~awa = -2 LYrstRe [m;hrsttPrtPstPt] , 
(31.4.18) 
rst 
where 
_ 
..~,.a In hrst(.A) 
Yrst = .m 
a.A 
= _!.,~~alnZ,(.A) _ !.AalnZs(.A) _ !.AalnZt(.A) 
2 
a.A 
2 
a.A 
2 
a.A 
(31.4.19) 
We see that the coefficients A5, AB, and A& in Eq. (28.1.7) are given by11b 
N -
- * N -
- * a In h~ 
Aij - mgYij - mg.A a.A ' 
(31.4.20) 
where N = E, D, or U. This gives AB and AB of order g:mg/8n2, while 
A!l. is of order g2m /8n2 or g'2m j8n2 
I) 
g 
g 
• 
31.5 
Local Supersymmetry Transformations 
As a last step before considering the effects of higher order in G on 
supersymmetry transformation rules, we will now complete our discussion 
of the transformation rules of the physical components of the graviton 
superfield H"' and other superfields to lowest order in G. 
Let us first note the form that these transformation rules take when 
expressed in terms of the physical fields h"'v. tp"', b"', s, and p in a 'Wess-
Zumino' gauge in which 
cff = mff = v:V- v[! = o. 
(31.5.1) 
Using the identification (31.1.25)-(31.1.27), (31.1.29), and (31.1.11) of the 
physical fields with components of the superfield H"', together with the 
general transformation rules (26.2.11 H26.2.17) and the 'gauge' conditions 
(3-1.5.1), we find the transformation rules 
bhl-'v = i ( ~ [yl-'tpv + Yvtpl-']) • 
(31.5.2) 
btp"' = [ HYv, y.:t] a.:~.hl-'v + al-'h.:t;,, + 2iys bf.l- ~iY!lYpY5 bP 
+ 2 
2. 
J 
3YI'S- 3lYI-'YsP ct., 
(31.5.3) 
bs = 
t(~Y.:tL.:t), 
(31.5.4) 
bp =- ±t( ~YsY;.L.:t) , 
(31.5.5) 

342 
31 SupergraVI'ty 
bbll = ~i( iX Ys Lll) - F ( iX YsYilY" Lv) , 
where Ll' is given by Eq. (31.2.8): 
(31.5.6) 
Lll = i cil""P Ys Yv 8" tpp · 
This transformation shifts the components Cff, wff, and Vffv -
V~ away 
from zero, by the amounts 
bCff = 0, bw: = Vt!y"cc, 
(31.5.7) 
b[VJ!- Vt!J = ( iX [ywt~- Yvl~]) . 
(31.5.8) 
We can then return to the gauge satisfying Eq. (31.5.1) by making a 
suitable gauge transformation Hll -+ Hll + All, where All is a superfield of 
the form (31.1.17), (31.1.18), with components 
(31.5.9) 
(31.5.10) 
So far, this has been for global supersymmetry transformations, with cc 
an infinitesimal constant Majorana spinor. At least in lowest order, this 
symmetry can be easily extended to local supersymmetry transformations, 
with cc(x) given an arbitrary dependence on xll. According to Eq. (26.7.11), 
under such a transformation the matter action undergoes the change 
(31.5.11) 
Inspection of Eq. (31.2.17) shows that this change in the action is cancelled 
if we add an inhomogeneous term (2/K)o"cc(x) to the right-hand side of 
Eq. (31.5.3), so that the change in the gravitino field is now 
b1pl'(x) = (2/K)OI'ct(x) + [ HY". yl] O,thllv(x) + ol'hl).(X) + 2iys bll(x) 
- FYJIYpYS bP(x) + jyll s(x)- ~ iyl'ys p(x) ]cc(x). 
(31.5.12) 
It is useful to rewrite Eq. (31.5.12) in a form that makes the general-
ization to general coordinates more transparent. First, we note that the 
term ollhl ,tct on the right-hand side of Eq. (31.5.12) may be eliminated by 
replacing the parameter cc(x) with 
· 
& = (Det g)114cc ~ ct + ~Khl,tct. 
(31.5.13) 
Dropping the tilde, to zeroth order in K Eq. (31.5.12) then becomes 
btpll(x) = (2/K)ollcc(x) + [ HY", yl] O).hl'v(x) + 2iys bll(x) 
- ji YllYpY5 bP(x) + jyll s(x)- j i YllY5 p(x)] cc(x) . (31.5.14) 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
343 
We can express this in terms of the covariant derivative of a(x), which in 
general coordinates takes the form 
Dlla(x) = alla(x) + F/ be w:C(x) a(x)' 
(31.5.15) 
where /be is the matrix (5.4.6) representing the generator of Lorentz 
transformations in the Dirac representation 
/be=-~ [l, Yc] , 
(31.5.16) 
and wf:(x) is the spin connection, 
Wbc = eb ec . g.:lv = eb ev g.:tv- rP i ec g.:tv 
(315 17) 
IJ 
A 
V ,IJ 
A OXIJ 
V/l 
A 
p 
• 
• • 
Using the weak field approximations (31.1.5), (31.1.10), and (31.1.11), 
together with the gauge condition tP~Jv = 
tPv~J• and in this approximation 
again ignoring the difference between local Lorentz indices a, b, etc. and 
spacetime indices fl., v, etc., this gives 
D'"'a(x) ~ alla(x) + tK [yv' y;.] o;.hllv(x). 
(31.5.18) 
Thus the local supersymmetry transformation rule (31.5.12) may be written 
b1p1J(x) = (2/K)Dila(x) + [2iys bll(x)- jiy!lYp1'5 bP(x) 
+ jyll s(x)-
~ iyllys p(x)]a(x). 
(31.5.19) 
We see that in Wess-Zumino gauge the derivatives in the supersymmetry 
transformation become covariant derivatives. In this sense, the approach 
outlined here is similar to the de Wit-Freedman approach to supersym-
metric gauge theories, described in Section 27 .8. 
The transformation 1p1J(x) -+ 1p1J(x) + (2/K)olla(x) is a gauge transfor-
mation of the same type as Eq. (31.1.13), so it leaves the zeroth-order 
gravitino action -
~ J d4x(ijJIJ L~-') invariant. The whole action obtained 
from the Lagrangian density (31.2.15) is therefore invariant to order zero 
in K under the local supersymmetry transformations (31.5.2), (31.5.4)-
(31.5.6), (31.5.12) (or (31.5.19)) and matter superfield transformations like 
(26.7.15). We conclude that the combination of gravitation and supersym.-
metry automatically leads to local supersymmetry. 
31.6 
Supergravity to All Orders 
Although the action derived from the Lagrangian density (31.2.15) is 
invariant to zeroth order in K = ~ 
under the local supersymmetry 
transformations constructed in Sections 26.7 and 31.5, it is not invariant 
to first order in "· because the interaction of matter with the gravitational 

344 
31 Supergravity 
supermultiplet introduces terms of order Kin a}lSJl. To make possibile the 
invariance of the full action, we will have to add terms of higher order in 
" to the Lagrangian and to the supersymmetry transformation rul«'s for 
the components of both the matter and the gravitational supermultiplets. 
This can be done by first adding terms of higher order in " to the 
transformation rules, chosen so that these transformations form a closed 
algebra along with local Lorentz transformations and general coordinate 
transformations, and then adding terms to the action to make it invariant 
under all these transformations. 
This is a long and tedious process. Here we shall give only the results, 12 
and then turn in the next section to what has been their most important 
application. The local supersymmetry transformation of the vierbein, 
gravitino field, and auxiliary fields takes the form: 
{JeaJI = K (iXyalpll), 
(31.6.1) 
fJ1pJl = (2/K)DJla + 2 i Ys (bll -
tYJl'YpbP) a+ jyll(s- iysp) a , (31.6.2) 
fJs =! (iXyllLil) + ~ (iX[iysbv -syv -ipysyv]VJv), 
(31.6.3) 
{Jp =-~ ( iXysyllLil) + ~ ( iX [bv + isysyv- pyv]lpv), 
(31.6.4) 
{Jbll = ~ ( iXys (Lil- t'YJ£'Yp LP)) + ~ bv ( iXyvlpll) 
+i ~ ( iPJlYs(s- iysp) a) - i ~cJlv"abv ( iX YsY"VJ
17
) 
• 
(31.6.5) 
Here DJl is again the covariant derivative given by (31.5.15) and (31.5.16): 
(31.6.6) 
but now with the spin connection including terms bilinear in the gravitino 
field 
r.,ab - ea eb 
gA.v 
VJ}l 
-
;. 
v;}l 
+: [ebv (v;Jlyalpv) +eavebp (v;vyJllpp) -eav (v;llllpv)] .(31.6.7) 
Also, Lll is the covariant version of the Ranta-Schwinger operator (31.2.8) 
Lll = .i YsYvDplpacllvpa ' 
y" is defined in terms of the usual Dirac matrices Ya as 
-
a 
YJ£-eJlya, 
and e is here the determinant of the vierbein 
e= JDetg. 
(31.6.8) 
(31.6.9) 
(31.6.10) 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
345 
It is easy to see that these transformation rules reduce in the weak field 
limit to Eqs. (31.5.2), (31.5.19), and (31.5.4H31.5.6). 
The action for pure supergravity that is invariant under these trans-
formations, and that reduces to the form (31.2.9) in the weak field limit, 
lS 
IsuGRA = J 
tfrx [-2:2R- ~ ( 
lj)~ V')- ~ (? + p2 -
b~b~)] , 
(31.6.11) 
where R is the curvature scalar, calculated using the spin connection 
(31.6.7). In the absence of matter, the action would be stationary for 
s = p = b~ = 0, leaving us with the simpler action 
IsuGRA = J 
tfrx [-2: 2R-4 ( 
VJ~' L~)] · 
The transformation of matter fields is also now more complicated. For 
the components of a general scalar supermultiplet, these are 
~c = i ( iX Ys OJ)·, 
(31.6.12) 
~OJ= [-iys pc- M + iysN+ f] a, 
(31.6.13) 
~M =- ( iX [1+ /}OJ]) + 2
3" ( iX [s- iysp + ~Ys 16] OJ) , 
(31.6.14) 
~N = i ( iX ys [1+ /}OJ])+ 
2
~" ( iX [s- iysp + iys 16:1 Ys OJ), (31.6.15) 
~Va = (aya..t) + (a~aOJ) + ~ (a[s- iysp + iys 16] YaOJ), (31.6.16) 
~1=-~[ya,yb]aFab+iDysa, 
(31.6.17) 
~D = i (iXy5 p..t), 
(31.6.18) 
where the covariant derivatives here are 
~aC = ea~ [ a'"'c- i; ( 
ip~ Ys OJ)] , 
(31.6.19) 
-~[a 
1cb[ 
] 
'b 
~aOJ - ea 
~OJ+ &OJ~ Yc' Yb OJ -
I K 
~ Ys OJ 
-~ ( f- iys ~C- M + iysN) tpll] , 
(31.6.20) 
~ al = ea~ [a Ill + ~OJ~b[Yc, Yb] 1 
K 
~ 
] 
+i K b~ Ys 1 + 8 [Yb, yc] tppFbc- 2 rsD tp~ 
, 
(31.6.21) 
F ab = ea~eb v [a~ Vv +~a~ ( 
lj)~ OJ) -
~ ( ip~ Yv 1)] - a-. b, (31.6.22) 

346 
31 Supergravity 
with VJl = e" P. Va. The rule:i for multiplying general scalar multiplets are 
the same as Eqs. (26.2.19)-(26.2.25), except that Op. is everywhere replaced 
with !?Ia, so that the components of a supermultiplet S = S1S2 are 
C = C1C2, 
m = Ct m2 + C2m1 , 
M = C1M2 + C2M1 + &i ( mt ')'s m2) , 
N = C1N2 + C2N1- ~(rot m2), 
ya = C1Vz + C2Vi- !i(wt 'Ys'Yam2), 
A= CtA2 + C2Al -
!yamt!?#aC2- tyam2!?#aCt + F rns ()]2 
+ F .¥2'Ys mt + HNt - iysM1) m2 + !(N2- iysM2) mt , 
D = -!?#aCt !?#aC2 + C1D2 + C2Dt + MtMl + N1N2 
-( mt [A2 + ~ f}m2]) - ( m2 [A.1 + & /}rot]) - Vta Vi . 
(31.6.23) 
(31.6.24) 
(31.6.25) 
(31.6.26) 
(31.6.27) 
(31.6.28) 
(31.6.29) 
Just as in flat space, there are supersymmetric constraints that can 
be imposed on these general supermultiplets. One such constraint is 
reality. Inspection of Eqs. (31.6.12)-(31.6.22) together with Eqs. (26.A.20)-
(26.A.21) shows that if C, M, N, Va, D, m, and A form a supermultiplet S, 
then c•, M .. N•, v;, D", prysm•, and pEysA• are also the components of 
a supermultiplet, called s·. In particular, a real supermultiplet is one with 
S = s•, so that C, M, N, Va, and D are real and m and A. are Majorana 
spinors. 
We can also impose a supersymmetric condition of chirality. Suppose 
we set 
A.= 0, 
D = 0, 
Vv + !K ( V'v m) = ovZ , 
(31.6.30) 
for some field Z. Then Eq. (31.6.22) gives Fab = 0, so Eq. (31.6.17) shows 
that ~A. = 0, while Eq. (31.6.21) gives !?#a.A. = 0, so Eq. (31.6.18) shows 
that ~D = 0. The conditions A.= D = 0 are therefore preserved by local 
supersymmetry transformations. With a little more work one can show 
that 
(31.6.31) 
so the remaining condition, that Vv + !K ( iPv m) is a spacetime gradient, 
is also supersymmetric. A supermultiplet of component fields satisfying 
Eq. (31.6.30) is said to be chiral. Just as in the case of global super-
symmetry, the components of a chiral supermultiplet are conventionally 
renamed as A, B, tp, F, and G, defined by 
C=A, 
m = -iystp, 
M=G, 
N=-F, 
Z = B . (31.6.32) 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
347 
A chiral supermultiplet is real if A, B, F, and G are real and lp is a 
Majorana spinor. Such a real chiral supermultiplet can be written as the 
sum of a left-chiral supermultiplet ell, with components conventionally 
defined by 
.~, = A+iB 
~Y-
J2 ' 
( 1 + Ys) 
l/)L := 
2 
lp' 
F-iG 
.F= J2 ' 
(31.6.33) 
and its complex conjugate, a right-chiral supermultiplet. From these defini-
tions and Eqs. (31.6.12H31.6.15) and (31.6.31) we see that the components 
of a left-chiral supermultiplet have the transformation properties 
~tf> = J2 (~l/)L)' 
~l/)L = J2(~tf>)a.R- KyP. ( ijJp.l/)L)IXR + ..j'UF IXL, 
~§" = J2(~ f}lpL) - 2
3" (~[s-ip- i f6llJJL), 
(31.6.34) 
(31.6.35) 
(31.6.36) 
with !?}atP given by Eqs. (31.6.20) and (31.6.32). The rules for multiply-
ing left-chiral supermultiplets are the same as the corresponding rules 
(26.3.27)--(26.3.29) in the case of global supersymmetry: The product of 
left-chiral supermultiplets Cll1 and Cll2 is a left-chiral supermultiplet denoted 
Cll1 Cll2, with components 
t/>=t/>lt/>2. 
lp L = tPll/J2L + tP2l/JlL , 
§" = tPt §" 2 + t/>2§" 1 -
( lJlfL E l/)2L) · 
(31.6.37) 
(31.6.38) 
(31.6.39) 
Now we must consider how to construct actions that are invariant 
under local supersymmetry transformations as well as general coordinate 
transformations and local Lorentz transformations. Eqs. (31.6.18) and 
(31.6.21) show that the change under a supersymmetry transformation 
of the D-component of a general supermultiplet S is no longer simply a 
spacetime derivative, so the integral of such a D-component is not suitable 
as a term in the action. Instead, from an arbitrary superfield S we can 
form a density whose integral is supersymmetric 
[ D8 - i; ( 
.P"1.Ys.18 ) + ~K [-sN8 + pM8 - b"Vff] 
-i; ( 
w8ys f..) - : Ep.pa~v; ( iPpY~l/Jp.) 
~ 
t (-
( 
)j 
2K
2 
S 
-gc;p.pa w8lJla) iPpY-rl/Jp. 
- 3C !t'suGRA, (31.6.40) 

348 
31 Supergravity 
where .!e suGRA is the supergravity Lagrangian density in Eq. (31.6.11): 
.!esuGRA = - 2: 2 R- ~ (!Pil If) - 4
3e (l + p2 -
bllbll) . 
(31.6.41) 
Likewise, Eqs. (31.6.36) and (31.6.20) show that the change under a super-
symmetry transformation of the ~-component of a left-chiral superfield 
X is not a spacetime derivative, so terms must be added to this 9' -term 
to form a density whose integral is supersymmetric: 
[X]...-= e [Fx + :}2 ( iJ>,.xY"'Pf) + : ( iJ>,.x[r", y']'I',R)q,x 
+2K(s- ip)<f>x] . 
(31.6.42) 
There are some supermultiplets of special physical interest. One is the 
real non-chiral supermultiplet 1 whose only non-zero component is C = 1. 
According to Eq. (31.6.40), this supermultiplet has 
212 
[I]v = -3.!esuGRA, 
(31.6.43) 
so this gives nothing new. 
A more interesting example is provided by a left-chiral supermultiplet I 
whose only non-zero component is¢= 1. According to Eq. (31.6.42), this 
supermultiplet has 
Re [1]...- = e [: ( ;p,[y", y']1p,) + 4Ks] . 
(31.6.44) 
If a term c J tf4x Re (1]90 appears in the Lagrangian density with a real 
coefficient c, then the sum of this term and the supergravity action (31.6.11) 
is stationary with respect to variation of auxiliary fields at 
s = 3cK/2, 
p=bll=O, 
(31.6.45) 
so that after eliminating the auxiliary fields, the action will contain a 
cosmological constant term 
(31.6.46) 
corresponding to a vacuum energy density -3 K2 c?. 
Such a term is 
needed to keep the vacuum state Lorentz-invariant when supersymmetry 
is spontaneously broken; to cancel the positive vacuum energy density 
F2/2 associated with supersymmetry breaking, we must take 
3,? c2 = F2/2. 
(31.6.47) 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
349 
Looking back at Eq. (31.6.44) and comparing with Eq. (31.3.11), we see 
that this gives a gravitino mass13 
mg = Cl<2 = FK = J 
4nG F
2 
.j6 
3 
' 
(31.6.48) 
in agreement with our previous result (31.3.17). 
As an illustration of the use of these formulas that will also provide 
results needed in the next section, let us calculate the bosonic part of the 
Lagrangian density* 
!R = IRsuGRA + HK(Cil, Cll*)]D + 2Re [f(Cil)],, 
(31.6.49) 
where £'suGRA is here the bosonic part of the supergravity Lagrangian 
density (31.6.41), K(Cil, ell*) is a real function of a set of left-chiral super-
multiplets Clln and their complex conjugates, and f(Cil) is a function of the 
Clln alone. The purely bosonic terms in the multiplication rules (31.6.23), 
(31.6.25H31.6.27), and (31.6.29) are the same as in global supersymmetry, 
so we can use either these rules or the superspace formalism of Chapter 26 
to calculate that the supermultiplet K(Cil,Cil*) has the bosonic components 
CK = K(t/J, t/J*), 
(31.6.50) 
MK =-21m~ (oK~~n<jJ*) !Fn) + · · · , 
(31.6.51) 
NK =-2Re ~ 
(oK~~ntfJ")!Fn) +--·, 
(31.6.52) 
K 
"""(oK(t/J, t/J*) 
) 
Vll = 2 Im ~ 
of/Jn 
8~£</Jn + .. · , 
(31.6.53) 
DK - 2 "
02K(t/J, t/J*) (-
llv ;l A. 
:1 A.* 
oc dr.*) · · · (31 6 54) 
-
~ i)A. i)A.* 
g 
U/l'f'n Uv'f'm + ?n;:r m + 
' 
· · 
nm 
'f'n 'f'm 
where the dots indicate terms involving fermion fields. Also, the rules 
(31.6.37)-(31.6.39) for multiplying left-chiral supermultiplets are the same 
as those in global supersymmetry, so we can use either these rules or 
the superfield formalism of Chapter 26 to calculate that the left-chiral 
supermultiplet f(Cil) has the bosonic components 
qJ = f(t/J)' 
(31.6.55) 
dr' = " 
of(t/J) oc +... 
(31 6 56) 
.T 
~ i)A. 
.:r n 
' 
• . 
n 
'f'n 
• Often the term I.e suaRA is omitted, with the supergravity Lagrangian introduced 
instead by including a constant term -3/12 in K(<f>, </>*). We will not follow this 
practice; here, with a conventional normalization of the scalar fields, the term in 
K(<f>,<J>*) of leading order in" is I:,I<Pnl2• 

350 
31 Supergravity 
with dots again indicating terms involving fermions. Inserting these results 
into Eqs. (31.6.40) and (31.6.42} then gives the bosonic terms of the 
Lagrangian density (31.6.49) as 
.Pbo..,ruc ~ h~R- ~ (,> + r- b,b") l [I- ~
2 
K(rJ>, rf)l 
- e ~ 
a2 K ( 4J, 4> *) (gJJV a d. a d.* - :IF :IF* ) 
~ ad. ad.• 
p'f'n V'f'm 
n m 
nm 
'f'n '+'m 
4Ke 
~ 
oK(4J,4J*) ( 
. 
. 
) 
+ - 3-Re "7 
o4Jn 
:!Fn(s + JP) + zfYlop4>n 
+2e Re ( ~ 
0
{~~) F.+ 2K(s- ip)f(r/>)) . 
(31.6.57) 
Now we must eliminate the auxiliary fields by setting them at values 
where the Lagrangian density is stationary.... This gives the auxiliary 
fields 
:!F = ~ L (~-1) aK (-L (~- 1 ) oK (~) • + 3r) 
" 
3N m 
mn a4>;, 
kt 
kt a4>t 
o4Jk 
-I: (~- 1 ) (_!i_). , 
(31.6.58) 
m 
mn 
o4Jm 
(31.6.59) 
(31.6.60) 
where 
(31.6.61) 
•• Though this procedure is generally followed, it is not strictly correct, for even though 
the Lagrangian density is quadratic in the auxiliary fields, the coefficients of the terms 
of second order in the auxiliary fields are not field-independent In consequence, 
in doing the path integration over auxiliary fields we encounter determinants of 
the coefficients of the quadratic terms, which are equivalent to adding terms to the 
Lagrangian proportional to 154(0) = (2n)-4 J tfk 1. Such terms can be eliminated by 
using dimensional regularization. for which J tfk 1 = 0. 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
Using this in Eq. (31.6.57) gives the bosonic Lagrangian 
2'""""'ic =- 2: 2R [ 1-f K ]- e ~ 
(§..,g"' a,q,.a,q,; 
2 
2 
+~ L (~-1) !L aK - 3f 
3N mn 
nm afjJm afjJ; 
351 
3 (1 ~~K/3) Im [~ ::. a,q,.] Im [~ ::. a,q,.] r!" 
-e ~ 
( ~-l)nma~m (::n) • 
(31.6.62) 
As already noted in the weak field case in Section 31.2, the Lagrangian 
density (31.6.62) has the uncomfortable feature that the Einstein-Hilbert 
term -eRj2K2 is multiplied with a factor (1- K1K(fjJ,fjJ*)/3), so that the 
effective gravitational constant varies from point to point in spacetime. 
To remedy this, we perform a Weyl transformation, defining a new metric 
by 
(31.6.63) 
The Einstein Lagrangian density is given in terms of the new metric by 
eg"'R,, = ( 1-f K reg"' ( 
R,., + ~a,Jn ( 1- ~
2
)a, In ( 1-f)) , 
where Rpv is the curvature tensor calculated using a metric gpv in place of 
gpv. and e = .JDet g. A straightforward calculation then gives the bosonic 
Lagrangian (31.6.62) as 
e -pv-
..Poosonic =- lK1g 
Rpv 
[( 
2 
) -1 
2 
-e gPV ~ 
apf/Jnavf/J~ 
1- ~ K 
a:n~~ 
1(2 ( 
~ ) -
2 aK aK ] 
+3 1- JK 
alfJn afjJ~ 
+ e ~ (1- 1(2 K) -2 L ( ~-1) 
at aK - 3f 2 
3N 
3 
mn 
nm afjJm afjJ; 
-e (1- ~ K)-
1 L (~- 1 ) _!L (~)· 
(31.6.64) 
3 
mn 
nmaf/Jm 
a~ 
The Weyl transformation has not only removed the factor (1- ~K/3) 

352 
31 Supergravity 
from the Einstein-Hilbert term; it has also eliminated terms proportional 
to 8pf/>n 8v¢m and 8pf/>: 8vf/>';,.. 
This result may be further simplified by introducing a modified Kahler 
potential d( 4>, 4> *) in place of K ( 4>, 4>* ), which we define by 
We also introduce a new metric on the scalar field space 
82d 
gnm = 8lf>n 84>~ . 
The reciprocals of the new and old metrics are related by 
(31.6.65) 
(31.6.66) 
_ 1 
,2-
[ _1 
K2 
L.mng(n1g;;;f(8d/8lf>n)(8dj8lj>';,.) l 
rj} tk = exp( d/3) gtk + 3 1 -
(K2 /3) L.mn g;;;Ji(8d/ 8lf>n)(8dj 8¢;,.) 
The bosonic Lagrangian density (31.6.64) now takes the simpler form 
(31.6.67) 
where V(lf>, ¢•) is the potential 
V = exp( "'d) [ ~ 
g;;;,! Lm £; - 3 "' 1!1
2
] 
(31.6.68) 
and 
(31.6.69) 
The potential (31.6.68) has an obvious stationary point at field strengths 
satisfying the condition Lm = 0. However, as we found in the weak field 
case, at this point the vacuum energy in general takes the negative value 
-3K21fl2. To have the stationary point Lm = 0 give a solution with flat 
space, it is necessary that both f(l/>) and 8f(4>)/84>n should vanish at these 
field values. Inspection of Eqs. (31.6.58) and (31.6.59) shows that the 
scalar auxiliary fields .1F n. s, and p vanish for such field values, so that 
the vacuum expectation values of the variations (31.6.2) and (31.6.35) of 
the gravitino and chiral spinor fields under global supersymmetry trans-
formations with constant a; vanish. Thus a vacuum field value for which 
f(4>) and 8f(4>)/84>n all vanish is one for which global supersymmetry 
is unbroken in the classical limit. In the next section we shall consider 
vacuum configurations in which supersymmetry is broken. 
We will not show it here, but the additional terms in the bosonic 
Lagrangian required by the inclusion of gauge superfields are unaffected 
by gravitation, aside from an over-all determinantal factor e and metric 

31.6 Supergravity to All Orders 
353 
factors needed to raise and lower indices. After elimination of auxiliary 
fields and a Weyl transformation, the complete bosonic Lagrangian for a 
theory with gauge as well as chiral and gravitational superfields is 
.!l'bosonic/e =- 2
1
2 RP /J- L gnmDIJlf>nDPfj>~- t L RefAB F:vpB!Jv 
K 
~ 
~ 
1 ~ 
1 f 
pA pB pvpcr 
V 
-
8 w m AB 
pv perc 
-
• 
(31.6.70) 
AB 
Here Dp, Fffv• and tA denote the gauge-covariant derivatives, the field-
strength tensors, and the representatives of the gauge generators on the 
chiral scalar superfields, using the notation described in Section 15.1; f AB 
is an independent holomorphic function of the lf>n; all spacetime indices 
are raised and lowered with gpv ; and the potential V now takes the form 
V ~ exp( "'d) [ ~ 
g;;;.} L,L~ - 31c21 !12] 
+~ Re ~ 
J:U\ ( ~ :~ (tAJ-</>m) (it ::k (tB )kl</>1 )' (31.6.71) 
The form (31.6.71) of the bosonic potential is simple enough to make 
it apparent that terms in d that depend only on if>n or only on 4>; may be 
traded for corrections to the superpotential. Specifica11y, if we write 
d(fj>, 4>•) = d(f/>, lj>*) +a( if>)+ a( if>}* , 
f(l/>) = f(l/>) exp ( -K2a(if>)) , 
(31.6.72) 
with a(f/>) an arbitrary holomorphic function satisfying the gauge invari-
ance condition 
then the potential (31.6.71) takes the same form in terms of d and J as it 
did in terms of d and f. With a suitable redefinition of the superpotential, 
we can then eliminate any terms in the power series expansion of d(f/>, fj>*) 
that depend only on 4>n or only on 4>;. With this understanding, the 
leading term in the power series expansion of d(f/>, if>•) (now dropping the 
tilde) is of the form L:nm d~lf>nlf>~. By a suitable linear transformation of 
the superfields, we can then make the matrix dnm equal to J~, so that the 
power series expansion of d(f/>, lj>*) begins 
d(fj>,fj>•) = L lf/>nl 2 + ·" , 
(31.6.73) 
n 
and the power series expansion of the metric (31.6.66) begins 
g~=J~+···. 
(31.6.74) 

354 
31 Supergravity 
Inspection of the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (31.6.67) shows 
that the scalar fields defined in this way are canonically normalized. 
The fermion terms are much more complicated. Here we will quote 
only the terms quadratic in the gaugino fields 
(2) 
-
1 
~ (-
n A. ) 
!£ gaugino/e = -2 Re LJ /AB AA..,- B 
AB 
1 
2 
~~ 1 
(afAB). (-
) 
+2exp(K d/2)Re LJL...Jg;;;,.Lm 
B-J. 
AAAB ,(31.6.75) 
mn AB 
't'n 
with Lm given by Eq. (31.6.69). 
We see that if the gauge fields are 
canonically normalized, then the constant term in the expansion of the 
function fAB in powers of the scalar fields is bAB, and then the gaugino 
fields A.A are also canonically normalized. 
... ... ... 
Instead of moving all the holomorphic terms in d(cp, cp") and their 
complex conjugates into the superpotential, we can use the transformation 
(31.6.72) to make the new superpotentialf(c/J) equal to a constant, which 
can be chosen to be equal to unity, by taking a(cp) = -K-2 1nf(cp). The 
potential then depends only on the function 
(31.6.76) 
and takes the form 
Also, the metric (31.6.66) for the scalar fields may be written 
a2pj 
gnm = Bc/Jn acp~ . 
(31.6.78) 
Although we have not shown it here, the symmetry that allows us to 
replace the Kahler potential and superpotential with the single function 
P}(cp, cp•) also allows us to make this replacement in the whole Lagrangian, 
including all terms involving fermions and gauge fields. 
There is an interesting class of 'no-scale' theories, lJa in which the po-
tential V vanishes for all values of c/Jm· For instance, this is the case for a 
single gauge-neutral chiral scalar superfield, with 
p) = -3K-2 ln ( h(c/J) + h(c/Jr) • 
(31.6.79) 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
355 
where h( 4>) is an arbitrary function of lf>. But there is no known principle 
that would require !}} to take this form. 
31.7 
Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
We now take up again the problem of supersymmetry breaking. As 
discussed at the beginning of Chapter 28, if supersymmetry is to be of use 
in solving the hierarchy problem -
that is, in understanding the large ratio 
of the Planck mass mp1 = 1/..J8nG to the mass scale of observed particles 
-
then supersymmetry must be unbroken at the Planck scale, and broken 
spontaneously only at some much lower mass scale. The only plausible 
mechanism known that would naturally produce a very large ratio of 
mass scales is the non-perturbative effect of asymptotically free gauge 
interactions. If these interactions are moderately weak at the Planck scale 
then their slow growth with decreasing energy will make them become 
strong at a much lower scale A ~ mp1. The known elementary particles 
do not feel such strong forces, so whatever supersymmetry breakdown is 
produced directly or indirectly by these strong gauge interactions must 
be communicated to the observed particles by some interaction in which 
they do participate. 
In Section 28.3 we noted two possible mechanisms for communicating 
the breakdown of supersymmetry to observable particles. One mechanism, 
gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, was discussed in detail in Sec-
tion 28.6. We are now ready to consider the other mechanism, mediation 
of supersymmetry breaking by effects of gravitational strength. 
In the early 1980s, when gravitation was first considered as the mediator 
of supersymmetry breaking,14 it was generally assumed that the super-
potential consisted of two terms: a function f(cJ>) of various left-chiral 
superfields ct>, of an observable sector, including all the superfields of ob-
servable particles, plus a function f(Z) of various left-chiral superfields Zk 
of a hidden sector,15 all of which are neutral under the SU(3)xSU(2)x U(l) 
gauge group of the standard model. Further, the superpotential of the 
hidden sector was assumed to take the form 
f(Z) = e3 F(KZ), 
(31.7.1) 
where E is some mass that is much less than the Planck mass, and F(KZ) 
is a power series in KZ with coefficients of order unity. The assumption 
that the total superpotential should be a sum f(ct>) + f(Z) is somewhat 
arbitrary but, as we shall see, it is not difficult to think of reasons why 
this should be: at least approximately true. A more serious criticism of 
this approach is that it did not offer any hope of solving the hierarchy 

356 
31 Supergravity 
problem; the energy e was simply assumed to be much less than the 
Planck mass. 
After the development of these first models of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking there appeared other models in which the hierarchy 
of energy scales is explained naturally, in terms of the slow growth with 
decreasing energy of a gauge coupling which becomes strong at an energy 
A < mp1• These models come in two versions that are distinguished by 
different assumptions regarding the source of supersymmetry breaking. As 
we shall see, in both versions the squarks and sleptons get supersymmetry-
breaking masses of the order of the gravitino mass mg, but they differ in 
the formula for mg; in the first version mg ~ KA2, while in the second 
version mg ~ K2A3, giving A~ 1011 GeV and A~ 1013 GeV, respectively. 
The two versions will tum out also to differ in the formulas for other soft 
supersymmetry-breaking parameters, including Bp,, the A-parameters, and 
the gaugino masses. 
First Version16 
In this version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking it is assumed 
that the superfields of the theory fall into two sectors: 
Observable Sector: These are the superfields of the minimum supersym-
metric standard model: the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauge superfields to-
gether with the quark, antiquark, lepton, antilepton, and Higgs left-chiral 
superfields which we will generically call cDr. 
Hidden Sector: These are gauge superfields of an asymptotically free 
gauge interaction that becomes strong at an intermediate energy scale A 
with mw < A < mpt, together with left-chiral superfields Zk that feel this 
gauge interaction. 
The Zk must be assumed to be neutral under the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) 
gauge group, since otherwise we would be back in the case of gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking. Also, we know enough about the 
observable sector to be sure that its chiral superfields do not feell the 
gauge interactions of the hidden sector. 
In order naturally to have the renormalizable part of the total supe:rpo-
tential of the form /(Cf>) + f(Z), we can assume that the symmetries that 
survive below the Planck scale include a group GH (which may be part of 
the gauge group of the hidden sector), under which all of the fields of the 
observable sector and none of the fields of the hidden sector are invariant, 
and a group Go (which may be part of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauge 
group of the observable sector), under which all of the fields of the hidden 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
357 
sector and none of the fields of the observable sector are invariant. In this 
case if any observable sector fields .appear in a term of the superpotential 
then there must be at least two of them, and also if any hidden sector fields 
appear in a term of the superpotential then there must be at least two of 
them, so there can be no term in a cubic polynomial superpotential that 
involves both hidden and observable sector fields. This argument leaves 
open the possibility of non-renormalizable terms in the superpotential 
that involve two or more factors of both hidden and observable sector 
superfields, a possibility to which we will return later. Of course, we are 
assuming that the strong interactions of the hidden sector produce ad-
ditional non-perturbative terms in the total hidden sector superpotential 
f(Z), but these too depend only on the hidden sector superfields. 
Assuming then that the superpotential takes the form f(W) + f(Z), 
the potential of the scalar components of these superfields is given by 
Eq. (31.6.71) as 
v = ..,. [ ~ 
g;;, u:. + "'" (f + ]) :; ) u:. + "'"(f + J) ::J 
~ 1 (of 
2 
-
od ) ( aJ 
, 
- ad)· 
+ 2Re ~ 
g,~ 
o4Jr + K (f +f) o4Jr 
OZk + K"" (f +f) OZk 
+L:gkl1 (~1 +J2(f+f) ~d) (~1 +K2(f+1) ~d)• 
kl 
UZk 
UZk 
UZl 
UZl 
-3"'" It+ 112] 
+-2
1 Re l:fiA (L ~d (tA)klzl) (L :d (tB)mnzn)* 
AB 
kl. UZk 
mn uZm 
+~ Re L fiA (L :~ (tA)rs4Js) (L :~ (tB )tu4Ju),. 
AB 
rs 
'f'r 
tu 
'f't 
(31.7.2) 
In writing the terms arising from gauge interactions, we are assuming here 
that there is no mixing of the gauge bosons of the hidden and observable 
sectors- that is, f;A vanishes for any pair of gauge generators tA and 
tB, for which tA acts non-trivially on the 4Jr and tB acts non-trivially on 
the Zk, or vice-versa. 
We are interested in exploring a region of field space where the scalar 
fields Zk of the hidden sector are of order A, the variable part of the 
superpotential1(z) of the hidden sector is of order A3, and, on dimensional 
grounds, o 1 I ozk is of order A 2• We will leave the magnitude of the constant 
part of l open for the moment; as we shall see, we must include a constant 

358 
31 Supergravity 
term in J that is much larger than A 3 in order to cancel the cosmological 
constant. 
We further define the region of field space to be explored as one in 
which the fields rj>, of the observable sector are of order KA 2 because, as 
we shall see, this is the characteristic mass scale arising in the observable 
sector from gravitational effects of supersymmetry breaking in the hidden 
sector. The observable sector superpotential f(r/>) for fields of order KA2 
is assumed to be of order K3A6, and its derivatives 8f(1>)/8rj>, are taken 
to be of order K2A4. 
In consequence of the definition of the superpotential and the scalar 
fields discussed at the end of the previous section, and the symmetry 
G8 x Go assumed above, the modified Kahler potential takes the form• 
d(rj>,rj>" ,z, z") = L 11>rl2 + L lzki2 + 0(K2z"2z2) 
r 
k 
+0(K1z" z3) + O(J2z"3z) + O(J2rj> "2z2) + O(Klrj>*1z*z) 
+O(r2z*2rj>2) + O(T2z*zrj>2) + 0(K1rj>*rj>z1) 
+0(K2z*11>*1>) + O(~rj>"z*rj>z) + O(K2rj>"2rj>2) 
+0(K1rj>*cp3) + O(r2rj>*3rj>) + ... ' 
(31.7.3) 
with dots indicating terms of higher order. The metric (31.6.66) then has 
components 
g,s = brs + O(T2z2) + O(T2z*2) + O(T2z"z) 
+0(~1>1) + O(r2q,*2) + O(x:2q,• 1>) + ... ' 
gkl = bkl + O(T2z2) + 0(K2z*2) + O(T2z"z) 
(31.7.4) 
+O(x:2rp2) + 0(K1rp .. 2) + O(T2rj>"rj>) + · · · , 
(31.7.5) 
g,k = gz, = 0(K1rj>z*) + O(T2rj>z) + O(K1rj>*z") + 0(K1rj>*z) + · · · . (31.7.6) 
(The characteristic energy scale in d is assumed to be 1/ K, because d is the 
modified Kahler potential produced by unknown dynamical effects at the 
Planck scale, in contrast with J, which gets its structure from dynamical 
effects of the strong gauge couplings at scale A.) The g,s and gkl are 
generically of order unity, while the mixed components g,k and gkr are of 
order of x:2(x:A2)A = K3 A3 <: 1. It follows that the same is also true of 
the components of g-1: (g-1 )rs "and (g-1 )kl are generically of order unity, 
while the (g-1 )rk and (g-1 )kr are of order of K3 A3 ~ 1. 
It follows from these estimates that unless cancellations intervene the 
dominant terms in the potential (31.7.2) will be at least of order A4, and 
• By O(I2z"2z2) is meant a term of the form i1 l:klmn Cktmnz;z;zmzn with constant 
coefficients Cklmn of order unity, and likewise for the other terms in Eqs. (31.7.3)-
(31.7.6). 
. 

31.7 GravityMMediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
359 
take the form . 
. -
2 
""" of 
21-ol2 
[V]A4 = L- -;-
- 3K f 
, 
k 
UZk 
(31.7.7) 
with r the constant term in J, which will be needed to cancel the vacuum 
energy. We assume that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in the 
hidden sector, which requires that there is a point z2 at which L:k lo J/ a zk 12 
is at least a local minimum, but not zero. Then in order to cancel the 
vacuum energy to this order, we must take 
0 2 
3~ trl
2 
= ~ (:!.) . 
(31.7.8) 
the superscript 0 on the rightMhand side indicating that the quantity is 
to be evaluated at z = z0. Hence ] 0 must be given an anomalously 
large value, of order A 2/ K. This is a more extreme fine tuning than will 
tum out to be necessary in the second version of gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking but, in the absence of a real understanding of the 
cosmological constant, some fine tuning will be necessary in any theory 
of supersymmetry breaking. 
We can calculate the supersymmetry-breaking parameter Fin our forM 
mula (31.3.17) for the gravitino mass by setting the vacuum energy density 
F2/2 equal to the fiatMspace value L:k l(ofjozk)0 12• The gravitino mass is 
then given by Eqs. (31.3.17) and (31.7.8) as 
-
0 2 
mg = " ~ ~ (a{!:)) 
= ~ li"l . 
(31.7.9) 
This is of the same order ~ KA 2 as the scalar fields of the observable 
sector. 
Now let us tum to the terms in Eq. (31.7.2) that do depend on the 
observable sector scalars ¢r· We are considering field values for which 
the usual supersymmetric term 2::, lof Jo4>rl 2 is of order mi ~ K4A8, so 
we have to collect all ¢..dependent terms in Eq. (31.7.2) of this order or 
greater. Let us look in tum at each of the six lines on the rightMhand side 
of Eq. (31.7.2). 
The leading term in K2(f + f)odjo¢, is K2]0¢;, which like of fo4>r is 
of order ~(A2/K)(KA2 ) = K2A4, while other terms in K2(f + f)od/8¢, are 
much smaller. To leading order we can approximate exp(~d) by unity 
and g;;1 by ~rs. so in this order the first line of Eq. (31.7.2) gives 
I: I of + K2jo¢;12 
r o¢r 

360 
31 Supergravity 
This is of the desired order K4 A 8, so it is not necessary to consider 
higher-order corrections. 
The leading term in g~ 1 is of order K3 A 3 ; the leading term in a 1 I OZk 
is of order A2, while ~(f + f)odfozk is smaller, of order KA3; and 
we have seen that the leading term in of fofj>, + K2(J + f)odfof/Jr is of 
order K2A4, so the term on the second line of Eq. (31.7.2) is of order 
(K3A3)(A2)(K2A4) = K5A9, which may be neglected in comparison with the 
terms in Eq. (31.7.2) of order K4A8. 
The leading terms in the third and fourth lines of Eq. (31.7.2) are of 
order A4, but these are independent of f/>7 • There is a 4> dependence 
coming from the terms on the third line involving f; the leading terms of 
this sort are 2K2Re(f ~kzZ(offozk)*], which are of order K5A9 4:: K4A8, 
and hence may be neglected. Also, there is a 4> dependence arising from 
the terms on the fourth line of Eq. (31.7.2) involving f. The leading terms 
of this sort are 
-6K2Re [ff0"] 
which are of order K2(KA2)3A2/K = K4A8• The factor exp(K2d) contains 
f/J-dependent terms of order K2(KA2f, but these multiply a potential 
whose leading terms (31.7.7) have been adjusted to cancel to order A4, 
so the f/J-dependent terms arising from this source are much less than of 
order K4A8• There is one other type of f/J-dependent term, arising from 
the fjJ-dependent terms in g;;l. According to Eqs. (31.7.4H31.7.6), these 
terms may be written as ~Ukl(f/J, fjJ"), with Ukl a homogeneous quadratic 
polynomial in fj>, and 4>; with coefficients of order unity. These give rise 
to a f/J-dependent term in the third line of Eq. (31.7.2), of the form 
2 
• (a1)
0 (al)o· 
K ~ 
Ukl(f/J, 4> ) OZk 
OZl 
' 
which is of order ~(KA
2 )
2A
4 = K4A8• 
The leading f/J-dependent term in the fifth line of Eq. (31.7.2) arises 
either from K2fjJ2 terms in fA.h· with both ds given by their leading-
order terms, of order z"z, or from terms in one of the ds with two 
factors of K, two factors of fjJ andjor fj>*, and two factors of z and/or 
z., with fAB and the other d- given by their leading-order terms, of 
order 1 and z* z respectively. Both types of f/J-dependent term make a 
contribution of order ~(KA
2fA
4 = K4A8, so higher-order terms may be 
neglected. 
The leading term in the sixth line of Eq. (31.7.2) arises from the leading 
term in !A.A. which is of order unity, and the l~!ading f/J-dependent terms 
in d, which are of order 4> • f/J. This makes a coliltribution to the potential 
of order ( KA 2)4, so here too higher-·order terms may be neglected. 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
361 
The potential (31.7.2) also contains q,-independent terms of order K2A6, 
K4 A 8, and so on. The terms of order K2 A 6 may be cancelled and the terms 
of order K4 A 8 can be given an arbitrary value rc by making a small shift 
of the constant term in f(z) away from the value given by Eq. (31.7.8). 
Putting these results together, to order K4 A 8 ~ mi the potential of the 
observable sector is now 
Vo(r/>, r/>•) =~I a:~~) + .!j"rf>;j2-6.!Re [!(r/>)J""] 
1 
• 
2 
+2 L L q,r(tA)rsq,s 
A 
rs 
+Q(q,,q,•)+CC' 
(31.7.10) 
where Q(q,, q,*) is a quadratic polynomial in q, and for q,• with coefficients 
of order K2A4 ~ m~, which arises from the q,-dependent terms in gkj1 
on the third line of Eq. (31.7.2) and from the q,-dependent terms in fAA 
and d on the fifth line of Eq. (31.7.2). We have normalized the gauge 
superfields so that f AB = b AB when all scalar fields vanish. (There is also 
a q, dependence arising from a q,-dependent shift in the equilibrium value 
of the hidden sector scalars Zk, but this shift is at most of order (KA 2)4/ A3, 
and since (31.7.7) is supposed to be stationary at z = z0 this shift enters 
quadratically in the effective potential of the observable sector fields, and 
may therefore be neglected.) The constant rc may be chosen so that the 
value of this potential at its minimum is zero. 
Finally, let us return to the non-renormalizable terms in the superpo-
tential. As already mentioned, the leading $-dependent terms of this sort 
may be expected to be of order K«1>2Z 2• \Vhen the hidden sector super-
fields Zk are set equal to their equilibrium values z2 these terms become 
a second-order polynomial in the «<>r, with coefficients of order KA 2. Thus 
to leading order, we can take account of these non-renormalizable terms 
by simply including a quadratic polynomial function of the «<>r in the 
superpotential, with coefficients of order KA2 ~mg. 
In this way theories of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking avoid 
the problem of the wterm, discussed in Sections 28.1 and 28.5. Recall 
that the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) symmetry of the standard model allows 
a single superrenormalizable term in the superpotential of the minimal 
supersymmetric standard model, a term f.L(H[eH2). In order to explain 
in a natural way why the coefficient f.L is not of the order of the Planck 
mass, it is necessary to impose some sort of symmetry, like the 'Peccei-
Quinn' symmetry discussed in connection with strong CP violation in 
Section 23.6, under which the product (H[ eH2) is not neutral. But a 
f.L-term with f.L of the· same order mg as other supersymmetry-breaking 

362 
31 Supergravity 
masses was found phenomenologically necessary in Section 28.5. Such a 
term can arise naturally from the breaking of the Peccei-Quinn symmetry 
by the vacuum expectation value of the hidden sector fields,*'" if the 
superpotential contains a non-renormalizable term in which (H[ eH1) 
appears multiplied with two powers of the hidden sector fields Zk. with a 
coefficient of order K. 
We assume then that the effective superpotential f(4>) consists of a 
homogeneous polynomial J<3)(4>) of third order in the fields 4Jr, with 
coefficients very roughly of order unity, plus a J.t-term that takes the form 
of a homogeneous polynomial f(2l(4J) of second order in the fields 4>n 
with coefficients of order mg ~ KA2• The potential (31.7.10) then becomes 
• 
jof(4>)12 
1 
.. 
2 
Vo(4J,4J) = L ~ 
+ 2 L L4>r(tA)rs4>s 
r 
'f'r 
AB 
rs 
-2K2Re [!(2)(4> )f0 "'] + K41J012 L 14>rl2 
r 
+Q(4J, 4>*) + cc. 
(31.7.11) 
The terms on the first line of the right-hand side give a supersymmetric 
potential, while the terms on the second and third lines represent a 
soft breaking of supersymmetry. With fO ~ A2 /K and (of joz)0 ~ A2, 
the dimensional constants in the soft supersymmetry-breaking terms in 
Eq. (31.7.10) are all powers of KA2 ~mg. so that this is where we expect to 
find the expectation values of the observable sector scalar fields, justifying 
our choice of this as the region of field space to explore. 
Setting KA 2 equal to a typical mass ~ 1 Te V in the effective Lagrangian 
of the supersymmetric standard model, we now find A ~ 1011 Ge V. It 
is mildly encouraging that, as discussed in Section 216, the spontaneous 
breakdown of the Peccei-Quinn symmetry at a scal,e A ~ 1011 Ge V is 
just what is needed to resolve the strong CP problem with a symmetry-
breaking scale in the window from 1010 GeV to 1012 GeV allowed by 
astronomical observations. 
Comparing the potential with the scalar field terms in the Lagrangian 
density (28.4.1) of the minimum supersymmetric standard model, we see 
that this version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking predicts that 
supersymmetry is broken Conly by soft scalar mass terms with coefficients 
•• This is known as the Giudice-Masiero mechanism17. It is often described in terms of 
non-renormalizable holomorphic and antiholomorphic terms in the modified Kahler 
potential d but, as discussed at the end of the previous section, any such terms can be 
traded for holomorphic factors in the superpotential. Here we have defined d to not 
contain holomorphic and antiholomorphic terms, and with this definition the ,r.t-term 
can only arise from non-renormalizable terms in the superpotential. 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
363 
(including B J.L) of order mi. To leading order in KA, the coefficients A and 
C of trilinear supersymmetry-breaking terms vanish. 
One serious problem with these results is that there is no reason why 
the quadratic polynomial Q(rj>, q/) in Eq. (31.7.11) should respect the 
degeneracy among squark masses and among slepton masses discussed 
in Section 28.4, that would avoid unobserved flavor-changing processes. 
However, the fourth term in Eq. (31.7.11) for the potential makes an 
additional contribution K4!f0 12 ~ K2A4 to scalar squared masses that is 
the same for all scalars, so the constraints imposed by experimental upper 
bounds on flavor-changing processes might be satisfied if the coefficients in 
Q(rj>,rj>*) (which arise from terms on the third and fifth lines ofEq. (31.7.2)) 
happen to be small compared with K2A 4• 
We would have an interesting relation among the parameters of the min-
imum supersymmetric standard model if it were really true that Q(rj>, rj>") 
could be neglected. Taking the quadratic part j(2) of the superpotential as 
J.L(rJ>fer/>1), the coefficient BJ1. in Eq. (28.4.1) would be given by the second 
term of Eq. (31.7.11) as .BJ.L = -K2J.Lf0*, so 
2 -o 
IBI = K If I = mg , 
in agreement with Eq. (31.4.13). Also, all the squark and slepton masses 
Ms would be given by the third term in Eq. (31.7.11) as K2Lf\ and so we 
would have the new relation 
IBI=Ms. 
(31.7.12) 
With all squark and slepton masses equal, there would be no inconsistency 
with limits on flavor-changing processes. Furthermore, with Q neglected 
there would be only one complex parameter r in the supersymmetry-
breaking part of the potentia] (31.7.11), which can be chosen to be real 
by a redefinition of the over-all phase of the superpotential, so now the 
supersymmetry-breaking part of the potential would introduce no new 
violation of CP invariance. But there is no known reason why Q should 
be small. 
Another serious problem with this version of gravitationally-mediated 
supersymmetry breaking is that it does not yield sufficiently large gaugino 
masses. 18 According to Eq. (31.6.75), the mass matrix of the SU(3) x 
SU(2) x U(1) gauginos is given in the tree approximation by 
mAB = exp(K1dj2)L[g-1]NMLN (aafAB)* , 
(31.7.13) 
NM 
({JM 
where here ({JN runs over all the scalar fields r/>r and Zk on which f AB may 
depend, with gNM and LM given by Eqs. (31.6.66) and (31.6.69). According 
to the estimates we have made here, K1d = O(~A
2 ) < 1; Lk = O(A2) 
while Lr is much smaller; and gj;/ is of order unity. Also, we assume that 

364 
31 Supergravity 
f AB is a term of order unity plus a term of order K2 times a bilinear in 
scalar fields and their complex conjugates, so ofAB/ozk is of order ~A. 
This gives gaugino masses of order A 2 x K2 A. This is much smaller than 
the gravitino mass mg ~ KA2 (which sets the scale of the supersymmetry-
breaking terms in the potential (31.7.11) of the observable sector scalar 
fields) by a factor of order KA ~ w-7, so if the scalar masses produced 
by supersymmetry breaking are of order 1 Te V, then the gaugino masses 
will be of order 100 keY, which is far too low to be consistent with the 
fact that gauginos have not yet been observed. 
There are several ways that this problem might be avoided. One is 
to include gauge-singlet scalar fields among the Zk of the hidden sector, 
which can appear linearly in f AB .19 In this case of AB I o Zk will be of 
order K rather than K 2A, yielding gaugino masses of order KA2, which 
is comparable to the squark and slepton masses. One trouble with this 
approach is that the inclusion of scalars that are neutral with respect to 
all gauge groups would make it no longer natural for the renormalizable 
part of the superpotential to take the form f(r/J) + f(z). 
Even without gauge singlets, there are one-loop contributions to the 
gluino, wino, and bino masses (and to the A-parameters}, calculated in 
Section 31.4. For instance, if we take mg at the largest value ~ 10 TeV 
allowed by the 'naturalness' bound discussed in Section 28.1, then with 
gif4n = 0.118, Eq. (31.4.13) would give a gluino mass 3gimg/16n2 = 280 
GeV, which is certainly high enough to allow the gluino to have escaped 
detection. The bino and wino masses depend on the unknown ratio of 
the ll parameter and the pseudoscalar Higgs mass mA. Taking this ratio 
equal to unity and mg < 10 TeV, Eqs. (31.4.15) and (31.4.16) would give 
mbino = 9g'2mg/16n2 < 73 GeV and mwino = g2mg/16n2 < 27 GeV.19a 
This bound on the wino mass is in conflict with the fact that wino pairs 
have not been seen at LEP in e+ -e- collisions at an energy sufficiently 
high to produce W boson pairs, so that nlwino > mw. In order to avoid 
this contradiction it would be necessary11b either to take mg > 30 TeV, 
which is awkward from the point of view of naturalness, or 1i jm~ > 8. 
In any case, this model has the general consequence that the gauginos are 
much lighter than the squarks and sleptons. 
If the polynomial Q( ,P, rjJ •) can be neglected then, as shown in Section 
31.4, the A-parameters are also given by one-loop corrections. These are of 
order gJmg/16n2 for squarks and g2mg/16n2 or g'2mg/16n2 for sleptons. 
Second Version20 
This version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking has an observ-
able sector with chiral superfields· q>r and a hidden sector with chiral 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
365 
superfields Zk, just as in the first version. The difference is that super-
symmetry is now assumed to be not spontaneously broken in the hidden 
sector. Instead, the gauge couplings of the hidden sector, which become 
strong at an energy A < mpt, produce a non-perturbative superpotential 
for the scalar fields of a third sector of superfields, the modular superfields. 
In various theories such as modem superstring theories there are extra 
dimensions that are not observed because they have been 'rolled up' into 
a tiny compact manifold, with size roughly of the order of K. Typically 
some of the parameters that are needed to describe this compact manifold 
are not fixed in any order of perturbation theory. The values of these pa-
rameters may vary from point to point in four-dimensional spacetime and 
appear at energies far below the Planck scale K-1 as gauge-invariant scalar 
fields Ya, known as modular fields. (The indices a, b, etc. here of course 
have nothing to do with the local Lorentz frame indices used in Section 
31.6.) Assuming that supersymmetry is not broken in the compactification 
of the extra dimensions, these fields must be accompanied by fermionic 
superpartners and auxiliary fields, which together form gauge-invariant 
left-chiral modular superfields Ya and their adjoints.t 
Just below the compactification scale we have a supersymmetric theory 
with a superpotential that can depend on all the superfields, but in which 
K is the only dimensional parameter. The circumstance that the Ya are not 
fixed in perturbation theory typically arises because the compactification 
does not result in any superpotential for the modular superfields Ya alone. 
As we saw in Section 28.1, the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge symmetries 
rule out any terms in the superpotential with just one or two factors of 
observable sector superfields, except for a possible term bilinear in the 
Higgs superfields H 1 and H2. We will again assume that this bilinear 
term in the bare superpotential is either accidentally absent (in which 
case it does not appear in any order of perturbation theory), or is ruled 
out by some symmetry, such as the 'Peccei-Quinn' symmetry discussed in 
connection with strong CP violation in Section 23.6. The gauge symmetry 
of the hidden sector rules out any terms in the superpotential with just 
one factor of the Zk, and we shall assume that either accident or some 
symmetry (.perhaps the same Peccei-Quinn symmetry) also rules out terms 
with two factors of the zk. 
The bare superpotential therefore takes the form 
/bare(lf>, Y,Z) = Lfrst(KY) lf>rlf>slf>t + Lfkim(KY)ZkZIZm + · · · , 
rst 
(31.7.14) 
t Of course, modular fields may exist even under the assumptions of the first version of 
gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking, but because of the smaller value of A in 
that case the couplings of the modular fields are too weak to be of interest there. 

366 
31 Supergravity 
where frst and !klm are power series in their arguments with coefficients 
roughly of order unity, and the dots indicate terms involving n > 3 factors 
of the Ws and Z s, as well as any number of factors of K Ya, suppressed by 
factors proportional to Kn-3. 
We assume that non-perturbative effects in the hidden sector such as 
'gaugino condensation' (the appearance of expectation values of bilinear 
functions of gaugino fields) without themselves breaking supersymmetry 
produce a superpotential for the modular superfields. Since A is the only 
scale in the problem (aside from gravitational effects suppressed by factors 
of ~eA), this superpotential would have to be of the form 
f(Y) = A3 F(KY). 
(31.7.15) 
Such terms can also be produced by expectation values of the scalar 
components of the Z superfields in the Z 3 term in Eq. (31.7.14). At the 
same time, the replacement of the Zk by the expectation values of their 
scalar components in the non-renormalizable terms indicated by dots in 
Eq. (31.7.14) will produce additional c:D-dependent terms in the effective 
superpotential, about which more later. The superpotential (31.7.15) is of 
the form (31.7.1) originally assumed in theories of gravitationally mediated 
supersymmetry breaking, but with e now identified as the intermediate 
scale A at which the gauge interactions of the hidden sector become 
strong. 
It is plausible that the superpotential (31.7.15) can lead to supersym-
metry breaking by the appearance of oF-terms for the modular chiral 
superfields. For the moment, let's ignore the other superfields, leaving the 
justification for later. The potential for the modular scalars is given by 
Eqs. (31.6.68) and (31.6.69) as 
V(y, y') = exp ( ~d(y, y')) [ ~[g-
1 (y, y')]abi..(y )f..(y)'- 3K21[(y )12] , 
(31.7.16) 
where d(y, y*) is the Kahler d function with the scalar components of the 
Zk and Wr neglected, and 
(31.7.17) 
A 
A 
A 
at 
2 A ad 
La=~a +~ef-
8 
. 
Ya 
Ya 
(31.7.18) 
We are assuming here that V has a stationary point, labelled with a 
superscript 0, where L~ =I= 0, so that supersymmetry is broken, but that 
V0 is very small, so that it can b~ cancelled by terms arisin$ from the 
observable sector, leaving us with a fiat spacetime. Since f is of the 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
367 
form (31.7.15) and d equals K-2 times a power series in "Ya and Ky• 
with coefficients of order unity, the whole potential is of the form .,J.A~ 
times a power series in KYa and Ky~, again with coefficients of order unity. 
The orders of magnitude of the various ingredients in the potential are 
therefore 
y~ = O(K-1)' 
L~ = 0(KA3), 
fo = O(A3)' 
g2I, = 0(1). 
With the modular and hidden sector fields fixed at their expectation 
values, the superpotential of the observable sector is now of the form 
f(<I>) = L llrs<I>r<I>s + L grst<I>r<I>s<l>t + · · · , 
(31.7.20) 
rs 
rst 
where g,3, is frst(KYo), which is assumed to be roughly of order unity, plus 
terms suppressed by powers of KA. The dots here denote terms with more 
than three factors of <I> that are suppressed by additional factors of K<l>. 
The coefficient llrs arises from the non-renormalizable terms denoted by 
dots in Eq. (31.7.14); if it comes from a term with n > 1 factors of Zs as 
well as two factors of <I>s, then it has an order of magnitude 
llrs = O(JCI-1An). 
(31.7.21) 
We shall see that the desired order of magnitude of ll is mg = O(~A
3
), 
which would come from a term with n = 3 factors of Z s. 
The supersymmetry breaking in the modular sector will be transmit-
ted to the observable sector by effects of the gravitational field and its 
superpartners. Eq. (3 1.6.68) gives the potential of the observable sector as 
12-JJ[~ o-1 (of 
2 
"o a~) (of 
Kl 
~a~)· 
Vo = e 
~[g 
]rs 
olj>, + x;-(f + f ) olj>, 
olf>s + (f + J ) olf>s 
~ o-1 (of 
2 
w a~) o· 
+2 Re ~[g 
]ra 
olj>, + x;-(f + 1 ) olj>, 
La 
+~[go -'J..t~tr - 3K2It + 1"12] 
1 
"' -to(" a~ 
) ("""'a~ 
). 
+2Re L..JfAB] 
L-f}A. (tA)rs4>s 
L-f}A. (tA)tu4>u 
, 
AB 
rs 
'f'T 
tu 
'f't 
(31.7.22) 
with the superscript zero again indicating that the modular and hidden 
sector scalar fields are fixed at their equilibrium values. (This will be 
reconsidered later.) Note that, although Eq. (31.7.22) involves terms like 
L~ that arise in the modular sector, there are no terms here that refer 
explicitly to the hidden sector. This is because in this version of gravity-
mediated supersyminetry breaking, supersymmetry is assumed not to be 

368 
3 J Super gravity 
broken in this sector, so that L2 = 0, and D~ = 0 for any gauge field that 
interacts with the hidden sector fields. 
We are interested in exploring a region of field space in which the 
observable sector fields are of order K!-A 3, because, as we shall see, this is 
the characteristic mass arilsing in the observable sector from gravitational 
effects of supersymmetry breaking in the hidden sector. According to 
Eq. (31.6.48) and our estimate J<> ~ A 3, this is also the order of magnitude 
of the gra vitino mass m8 : 
m8 ~ K:!A3 . 
In order to calculate the potential for fields of this order, we note that 
the Kahler d function for the observable and modular scalar fields takes 
the form 
d(¢, ¢*, y, y*} = K-2d(Ky, K/) + L ¢,¢;Ars(Ky, Ky*) 
rs 
rs 
rs 
... 
where d, Ars• and Brs are power series in their arguments with coefficients 
of order unity, and the dots indicate terms with n > 2 factors of 4> 
and/or¢*, suppressed by factors Kn-z. According to Eq. (31.6.72), we can 
remove any holomorphic term in d along with its complex conjugate by 
multiplying the total superpotential by a suitable holomorphic factor. In 
particular, by multiplying the total superpotential with a factor exp[K2J0 + 
K2 Ers B~s4>r4>s], we can arrange that the transformed d function has 
jO =0, 
(31.7.24) 
We shall assume that this has been done. Note that, because the total 
superpotential contains a constant term ] 0 of order A3, while B~s was 
of order unity, this transformation generates a term in the superpotential 
that is quadratic in ¢r, making a contribution to its coefficient llrs of order 
K2 A 3, of the same order as 4> and m8 • 
There can be another contribution to this coefficient of the same order 
of magnitude, arising from terms in the superpotential with n > 1 factors 
of Ys as well as two factors of cl>s. Eq. (31.7.21) tells us that, in order 
for the contribution to the llrs coefficients from this also to be of order 
~A
3
, we must have n = 3. We can arrange that this is allowed, while 
terms with two factors of cl>s and n = 2 factors of Y s are forbidden, 
by giving Ht and Hz Peccei-Quinn quantum numbers +1 and the Ys 
quantum numbers -2/3. The breaking of this Peccei-Quinn symmetry by 
the vacuum expectation values of the Yk then produces an axion. 
With llrs of order ~A
3
, both t~e bilinear and trilinear terms in the 
superpotential of the observable sector are of order K6 A9. The usual 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
369 
supersymmetric potential term 2:, 1af I a,prJZ is then of order K8 A 12, so we 
have to collect all terms in Eq. (31.7.22) of this order or greater. 
With rPr of order K2 A3 and Ya fixed at its equilibrium value y~ ~ K-1, 
Eq. (31.7.23) gives 
(31.7.26) 
(31.7.27) 
where the zero superscript again indicates that the Ya are fixed at their 
equilibrium values y~. We will subject the observable-sector superfields 
q>r and the modular superfields Za to separate linear transformations, 
designed so that 
( a2a )o 
ayaayi, 
= bab . 
(31.7.28) 
With the metric (31.7.25H31.7.27) given by the unit matrix plus terms 
that are much less than unity. it is easy to ca1culate the inverse: 
g~s-l = brs + 0(K3A3), 
(31.7.29) 
o-1 
"" 
• ( a
1
Ars )
0 
"" 
( a
1
Brs )
0 
gab 
= bah - ~ 
rPrrPs 
a a • 
- L..J tPrrPs 
a a • 
rs 
Ya Yb 
rs 
Ya Yb 
- "LrJ>;,p; (aa2!;s.)o + 0(K6A6)' 
(31.7.30) 
rs 
Ya Yb 
(31.7.31) 
In particular, our assumption about the form of the functions Ars and Brs 
gives the order-of-magnitude estimates 
so that, for r/>r = O(~A
3
), 
[g0 -l1rs = 0(1), · [g0 -l]ab = 0(1), 
[g0 -t]ra = 0(K3 A3). (31.7.33) 

370 
31 Supergravity 
Further, 
f = O(r/>3) = 0(K6A9)' 
::r = O(r/>2) = 0(K4A6), 
(31.7.34) 
and 
(31.7.35) 
With ] 0 of order A3, the quantities ~{f + f0)odjorj>, in Eq. (31.7.22) are 
dominated by K2]0Q>;, which is of order~ x A3 x K2A3 = K4A6• This is 
of the same order of magnitude as of jorj>, so in leading order we must 
keep both terms: 
a f 
2 
~ od 
of 
2"o 
• 
4 6 
8Q>, + ~(f + 1 ) 8rJ>r ~ 8r/>r + K f r/>r = O(K A ) . 
(31.7.36) 
In this approximation, and with g~s -t replaced by its dominant term b,5 , 
the first term in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) is already of the 
desired order K8 A 12, so we may use these approximations to write 
Pg" _,], (:;, + .2(! + 1"> !~) (::. + "'(f + 1"> !~ )' 
""~ 
1::, + ,2]" q,;r 
(31.7.37) 
The second term in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) is of order 
K3A3 x K4A6 x KA3 = K8A12, so we may evaluate it using only leading 
terms and find 
"""' o-1 
( of 
2 
... o atfJ) "'o• 
2Re ~[g 
]ra 
BQ>, + ~(f + f ) BQ>, 
La 
""-2Re ~ 
q,, ( ~~=·) 
0 
[:;, + .2)0 q,; l t~· . 
(31.7.38) 
The third and fourth terms in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) are 
individually of order ~A
6
, but are assumed nearly to cancel, so non~ 
leading terms must be included in evaluating their contribution to the 
quantity in square brackets. Orie contribution comes from the terms in 
Eq. (31.7.30) for g~-
1 that are of second order in Q> and/or rj>*; this 
contribution is of order K2rj>2 x (KA3)2, which is of order K8A12. Another 
non~cancelling contribution to the potential from the last term in square 
brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) comes from the interference between f and ] 0, 
which makes a contribution of order K2rj>3A3, which is also of order K8A12. 
There is also a constant contribution <l from a possible failure of the last 
two terms in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) to cancel when 4~, = 0; 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
371 
to avoid a large cosmological constant, we shall have to assume that ~ is 
also of order KgA12. (This is an unnatural fine-tuning, which so far has 
been necessary in any theory that avoids a huge cosmological constant.) 
Putting these estimates together, to order Kg A 12 the last two terms in the 
square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) are 
All these terms are of the desired order KgA12, while Eq. (31.7.24) gives 
K2tfJ = 0(~¢2) = 0(K6A6), so we can ignore the factor exp(l¢Jl) in 
Eq. (31.7.22). Finally, the gauge terms on the last line of Eq. (31.7.22) are 
of order ¢4 = 0(KgA12), so these can be evaluated using the leading term 
¢; in atfJ I o¢,. 
Putting this all together, the complete scalar potential of the observable 
sector to order Kg A 12 is 
The potential (31.7.40) of the observable sector scalar fields takes the 
form assumed in the minimal supersymmetric standard models discussed 
in Section 28.4: it is the sum of a supersymmetric term Ysusy and a soft 
supersymmetry-brea.king term V soft 
Yo = Ysusy + Ysoft . 
(31.7.41) 

372 
31 Supergravity 
The supersymmetric term is, as usua~ 
Ysusy = 2::: 1:! 1
2 
+ ~Re 2:::Lf.4J]
0 (L:¢;(tA)rsr/Js) (L:¢;(tB)tu4>u)* 
r 
'f'T 
AB 
rs 
tu 
(31.7.42) 
and the soft supersymmetry breaking term here is 
Ysoft ~ 27¢Re ~ 
( ¢, ::,JO•) + K
4 IJ
01
2 ~ 
l¢,j
2 
-2Re ~q\, (~~;•)" [:;, +K
2
/
0 ql;] L~' 
- ~ [ q~,q~; ( a~:;~b) o + ql,ql, ( a~:;~b ) 
o 
H: q~; ( a~:j~J] t~tg· - 6K2Re (f J• ·) H 
. (31.7.43) 
With f(¢) given by Eq. (31.7.20), this takes the form 
Ysoft = 2:::M?'s¢r¢; +2Re L_N?'sr/Jrr/Js +2Re LArstr/Jrr/Jsr/Jt +~, 
rs 
rs 
rst 
(31.7.44) 
where 
M2 = 4/fAOi2J -2 2R [~"" (c3Asr)o to·]-"" ( 82 Ars ) 0 to tO• 
rs 
K 
rs 
K 
e 1 L...J 
0 • 
a 
L...J 
0 0 • 
a b ' 
a 
Ya 
ab 
Ya Yb 
(31.7.45) 
(31.7.46) 
and 
""[(c3Aur)0 
(c3Aus)
0 
(c3Aut)o 
]"O• 
Arst = - L...J 
~ gust + ~ gurt + ~ gurs La · 
au 
Ya 
. 
Ya 
Ya 
(31.7.47) 
Our previous order-of-magnitude estimates give 
M;s = 0(K4A6), 
N;s = 0(K4A6), 
Arst = 0(K2A3). 
(31.7.48) 
Together with our estimates grst = 0(1) and J.l.rs = O(K2A3) for the 
constants in Ysusy, this shows that if the potential has a stationary point at 
some ¢~ =I= 0, then ¢~ = 0(~ A3), justifying our decision to explore fields of 

31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking 
373 
this order. For an equilibrium value of the ¢r of this order, the equilibrium 
value of the various terms in the potential is 0(¢4) = 0(K8A12), so this 
is the order of magnitude of the constant ~ that is needed to cancel the 
vacuum energy. 
In order for the characteristic mass K2 A3 in the minimal supersymmetric 
standard model to be of order 1 Te V we need A ~ 1013 Ge V. If it is a 
Peccei-Quinn symmetry that forbids a term in the bare superpotential 
with two superfield factors each from the observable and hidden sectors, 
as suggested above, then vacuum expectation values of the hidden sector 
scalars will break this symmetry, with a symmetry-breaking scale (called 
M in Section 23.6) of order 1013 GeV, and an axion mass which is then 
given by Eq. (23.6.26) as of order 10-6 eV. This value for the symmetry-
breaking scale is somewhat above the upper bound of 1012 GeV quoted 
in Section 23.6, but given the uncertainty of cosmological arguments, this 
contradiction is not decisive. 
Before considering further physical implications of these results, let's 
pause to reconsider a short-cut that we took in deriving them. In calculat-
ing the potential for the observable sector scalars ¢r, we fixed the modular 
fields at the equilibrium values y~ that they would have in the absence of 
the observable sector fields ¢r· Instead, we ought to set the modular fields 
at their equilibrium values Ya( ¢) for the actual values of the ¢r, by finding 
the stationary point of the potential 
Ytotai(¢, ¢*,y,y•) = V(y,y*) +Yo(¢,¢*, y,y*), 
(31.7.49) 
and only then seek an equilibrium value for the ¢r· Since Vo is much 
smaller than V for fields of interest, the equilibrium value of Ya can be 
written as 
(31.7.50) 
where y~ is at the minimum of V(y, y*) and 
2" 
2" 
""" a v 
>: 
""" a v 
>: 
• 
avo 
~ 
uyb + ~ 
uyb = -~ 
b ayaaYb 
b ayaayi, 
aya . 
(31.7.51) 
The second derivatives of V are of order~ x (KA3)2 = K4A6, while the 
first derivatives of V o are of order K x K8 A 12 = K9 A 12, so the f> Ya are of 
order K 5A6• The change in the potential due to this ¢-dependent shift 
in the equilibrium values of the Ya is quadratic in the f>ya and f>y;, with 
coefficients given by second derivatives of V with respect to Ya and/or y~, 
and is therefore of order 
(K5A6)2 X,¢ X {KA3)2 = Kl4Al8, 
which is less than the potential we have calculated by a factor (KA)6 < 1. 

374 
31 Supergravity 
Without further assumptions regarding the functions Ars(Y, y'") and 
Brs(y,y'"), we can learn nothing whatever from Eqs. (31.7.45H31.7.47) 
about the precise values of the coefficients M!s• N!s• and Arst in the soft 
supersymmetry-breaking potential (31.7.44). The only definite prediction 
that emerges from these results is that the coefficients CiJ in the soft 
supersymmetry-breaking Lagrangian (28.4.1) are all negligible, as has 
generally been assumed anyway. 
The greatest problem presented by the results (31.7.44H31.7.48) is that 
without further assumptions they do not insure the degeneracy of squark 
masses and of slepton masses that would avoid the quark and lepton 
flavor-changing processes discussed in Section 28.4. The ¢r¢3-terrns in the 
soft supersymmetry-breaking potential (31.7.44) and in the superpotential 
(31.7.20) are not allowed by SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) to depend on anything 
but the Higgs scalars, so they cannot lead to flavor-changing processes. 
The problem therefore arises only from the fact that the coefficients Mi:s 
and Arst in Eq. (31.7.44) may not conserve flavor in the same basis as the 
Yukawa couplings grst· One way to avoid this problem is to assume that for 
some reason the functions Ars(y,y'") happen to depend only weakly on the 
Ya and y~, so that Eq. (31.7.45) gives M!s oc brs and Eq. (31.7.47) makes 
Arst (and hence the AiJ coefficients in Eq. (28.4.1)) anomalously small. 
Another possibility is that, although not slowly varying, for some reason 
the whole function Ars(y,y*) (or at least its first and second derivatives 
at Ya = y~) is proportional to brs· In this case, Eq. (31.7.45) again gives 
M!s oc brs. and now Eq. (31.7.47) gives trilinear couplings Arst oc grsh so 
that the AiJ coefficients in Eq. (28.4.1) would be all equal.21 
We must also check the gaugino masses produced by this version 
of gravitationally mediated supersymmetry breaking. According to Eq. 
(31.6.75), the mass matrix of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) gauginos is given 
in general by 
2 
'" -1) 
(OfAB)• 
mAB = exp(K d/2) L...-[g 
NMLN -;:-
, 
NM 
U({JM 
(31.7.52) 
where CfJN here runs over all the fields on which !AB may depend, with gNM 
and LM given by Eqs. (31.6.66) and (31.6.69). According to the estimates 
we have made here, K2d ~ 1; La,= 0(KA3) for the modular fields Ya and 
is much smaller for the other fields; and g;;i1 ~ bab· Also, we assume that 
fAB is a power series inKy with coefficients of order unity, so ofABfoya 
is of order K. The gaugino masses (31.7.52) are therefore of order K2A\ 
which is the same as the order of magnitude of the scalar masses and 
expectation values, and hence is likely to be large enough to avoid conflict 
with observation. The one-loop corrections considered in Section 31.4 are 
much smaller here, and do not need to be taken into account. 

Appendix 
The Vierbein Formalism 
375 
In summary, the first version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry break-
ing has the advantage of giving an axion mass that is within cosmological 
bounds, while the second version has the advantage of giving the gauginos 
masses that are comparable to the masses of the squarks and sleptons. 
Both versions of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking have an ad-
vantage over theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking: they 
naturally give j.l-terms of the experimentally necessary order of magnitude. 
On the other hand, theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking 
have the advantage of naturally yielding generation-independent squark 
and slepton masses. 
Theories with either version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry break-
ing may naturally entail the existence of slowly decaying superheavy 
particles, which could have interesting astrophysical effects.23 It is plausi-
ble that the gauge interactions of the hidden sector that become strong 
at energy A can bind composite particles with masses of order A. These 
superheavy particles may be long-lived if their decay is forbidden by 
accidental symmetries of the renormalizable part of the hidden sector 
Lagrangian and only occurs through non-renormalizable terms in the 
Lagrangian, which are suppressed by factors of KA. 
Appendix 
The Vierbein Formalism 
The familiar formulation of gravity in terms of a metric tensor gpv is 
adequate for theories with matter fields restricted to scalars, vectors, and 
tensors, but not for supergravity, where spinors are an indispensable ingre-
dient. Unlike vectors and tensors, spinors have a Lorentz transformation 
rule that has no natural generalization to arbitrary coordinate systems. 
Inste:ad, to deal with spinors, we have to introduce systems of coordinates 
ei(x) with a = 0, 1, 2, 3 that are locally inertial at any given point X in 
an arbitrary coordinate system. The Principle of Equivalence tells us that 
gravitation has no effect in these locally inertial coordinates, so the action 
may then ,be expressed in terms of matter fields like spinors, vectors, etc. 
that are defined in these locally inertial frames, as well as the vierbein, 
which arises from the transformation between the locally inertial and 
general coordinates 
ea p(X) = aei(x) I . 
OxJL 
x=X 
(31.Al) 
The action will be invariant under general coordinate transformations 
xJL -+ x'JL and local Lorentz transformations ea -+ e'a = Aab(x)eb with 
Aac(x)Ab d(X)'lab ='led· The definition (31.A.l) of the vierbein shows that, 

376 
31 Supergravity 
under general coordinate transformations x---+ x', it transforms as 
a 
) 
ta ( ') 
iJxv a 
(31 A ) 
e p(x ---+ e Jl x 
= iJx'Jle v(x), 
. .2 
while, under a local Lorentz transformation ~a(x)---+ Aab(x)eh(x), it trans-
forms as 
(31.A.3) 
For instance, theories of pure gravitation may be expressed in terms 
of a field that is invariant under local Lorentz transformations and that 
transforms as a tensor under general coordinate transformations, the 
metric 
gJlV = eaJl; v 'lab . 
(31.A.4) 
Vectors may be regarded either as quantities va that transform as vectors 
under local Lorentz transformations 
(31.A.5) 
but as scalars under general coordinate transformations, or as quantities 
vP that transform as scalars under local Lorentz transformations but as 
vectors under general coordinate transformations, the two being related 
by 
ya = eaJlvJl . 
But the supergravity action also involves spinor fields, which necessarily 
transform like scalars under general coordinate transformations but as 
spinors under local Lorentz transformations 
1p(t(x) ---+ Dap(A(x))1t'p(x) , 
(31.A.6) 
where D(tp(A) is the spinor representation of the homogeneous Lorentz 
group. 
Because the Lorentz transformations in Eqs. (31.A.5) and (31.A.6) de-
pend on the coordinate xP, the spacetime derivative of a quantity like 
va(x) or 1p(t(x) is not just another quantity that transforms in the same 
way under local Lorentz transformations and as a covariant vector un-
der general coordinate transformations. For instance, the derivative of 
Eq. (31.A.6) gives the local Lorentz transformation rule 
Op1f'a ---+ Dap(A) { OpVJp + [v-1(A)iJpD(A)] py VJy} . 
To cancel the second term in the brackets on the right-hand side we 
introduce a connection matrix QJl with the local Lorentz transformation 
property 
(31.A.7) 

Appendix 
The Vierbein Formalism 
377 
and define a covariant derivative 
(3l.A.8) 
which transforms under local Lorentz transformations like tp itself: 
(31.A.9) 
Also, QJL must transform like a covariant vector under general coordinate 
transformations, so that ~ 
JL will give a covariant vector when acting on a 
coordinate scalar. In order that ~"' should give a tensor with one extra 
lower index when acting on a tensor, it must be supplemented with the 
usual affine connection term. For instance, when acting on the gravitino 
field tp JL• the covariant derivative is defined as 
~ptpv = tpv;p + !lp1J'v = Op1J'v- r!vtp.l. + !lptpv . 
(31.A.10) 
Eqs. (31.A.8}-(31.A.l0) apply not only for spinors, but for fields that 
transform under local Lorentz transformations according to arbitrary 
representations D(A) of the Lorentz group. The matrix QJL depends on 
this representation, but in any representation it can be written in the form 
[!lp]rtp(x) = ~ill ab]rtpc:o:b(x), 
(31.A.ll) 
where / ab are the matrices representing the generators of the homo-
geneous Lorentz group in the representation furnished by the fields in 
question: 
i [/ ab' /cd] = t/bc/ ad- rrac/ bd + t/bd/ ca-t/ad/ cb' 
(31.A.12) 
and c:o:f is a representation-independent field known as the spin connection 
that transforms as a covariant vector under general coordinate transfor-
mations. To satisfy the inhomogeneous local Lorentz transformation rule 
(3l.A.7) we can take 
c:oab = gv2ea i . 
JL 
v 
.l.,p. 
(3l.A.l3) 
with the semi··colon again denoting an ordinary covariant derivative, 
constructed usilng the affine connection r!v. (This is antisymmetric in a 
and b because Eq. (31.A.4) gives g11.l.ea 11eh;. = 1'Jab, a quantity with vanishing 
covariant derivative.) This is not the unique spin-connection for which 
Eq. (3l.A.7) is satisfied; to it, we can add any field that is a covariant 
vector under general coordinate transformations and a tensor under local 
Lorentz transformations, a freedom of some importance in supergravity 
theories. 
For any choice of spin connection there is a corresponding curvature 
tensor. From Eq. (31.A 7) it is straightforward to show that the quantity 
8v!lp- 8"'!111 + [!l11,!lp] transforms homogeneously under local Lorentz 

378 
31 Supergravity 
transformations 
8v!lp -
8JLQV + [!lv, Qp] --+ D(A) ( 8v!lp -
8JLQV + [!lv, np]) n-1(A) . 
(31.A.l4) 
Using Eqs. (31.A.ll) and (3l.A.12), this matrix can be expressed as 
(31.A.l5) 
where 
(3l.A.l6) 
From Eq. (3l.A.l4) it follows that Rpvab transforms as a tensor under 
local Lorentz transformations 
(3l.A.l7) 
It also obviously transforms as a tensor under general coordinate trans-
formations 
(31.A.18) 
We can therefore form a coordinate tensor of fourth rank by writing 
R
ab 
a bRrd. 
pv 
=e "e;, pv 
. 
(3l.A.19) 
The tensor RwKA. constructed in this way is the Riemann-Christoffel 
curvature tensor corresponding to the particular spin connection roC:. 
Problems 
1. Derive formulas (31.2.3)-(31.2.6) for components of the Einstein 
superfield. 
2. Suppose that supersymmetry is unbroken. Show how to calculate 
the amplitude for emission of a gravitino of very low energy in a 
general scattering process in terms of the amplitude for this process 
without the gravitino. 
3. Check that the supergravity ·action (31.6.11) is invariant under the 
local supersymmetry transformations (31.6.1H31.6.6) to all orders 
in G. 
4. Calculate the change of the generalized D~component (31.6.40) under 
a general local supersymmetry transformation. 
5. Calculate the fermionic part of the Lagrangian density (31.6.49). 

References 
379 
6. Consider the theory of a single chiral scalar superfield <I> interacting 
with supergravity, with modified Kahler potential d(<l>, <I>*) = <I>* <I> 
and superpotential f(<l>) = M2(<1>+,8), where M and ,Bare constants. 
Find a value of ,B for which the classical field equations have a 
solution with fiat spacetime. What is the value of ¢ for this solution? 
References 
1. P. Nath and R. Arnowitt, Phys. Lett. 56B, 177 (1975); B. Zumino, in 
Proceedings of the Conference on Gauge Theories and Modern Field 
Theories at Northeastern University, 1975, R. Arnowitt and P. Nath, 
eds. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1976). This approach is described 
in detail by J. Wess and J. Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravity, 
2nd edition (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1992). 
2. D. Z. Freedman, P. van Nieuwenhuizen, and S. Ferrara, Phys. Rev. 
Dl3, 3214 (1976}; S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 62B, 335 
(1976); S. Ferrara, J. Scherk, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 37, 1035 (1976); S. Ferrara, F. Gliozzi, J. Scherk, and P. van 
Nieuwenhuizen, Nucl. Phys. B117, 333 (1976). These articles are 
reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World 
Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987). For a clear description of 
this approach, see P. West, Introduction to Supersymmetry and Su-
pergravity, 2nd edition (World Scientific, Singapore, 1990). 
3. S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B134, 301 (1978). 
3a. M. T. Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys. Lett. 67B, 323 (1977). 
4. K. Stelle and P. C. West, Phys. Lett. 74B, 330 (1978); S. Ferrara and 
P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Lett. 74B, 333 (1978). These articles 
are reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. 
5. See, for example, S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, 
New York, 1972), Sec. 12.5. 
6. See, for example, Gravitation and Cosmology, Ref. 5: Eq. (12.4.3). 
7. See, for example, Gravitation and Cosmology, Ref. 5, Section 10.1. 
1a. W. Nahm, Nucl. Phys. B135, 149 (1978). 
8. 
S. Coleman and F. de Luccia, Phys. Rev. D21, 3305 (1980). 
9. 
S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1776 (1982). 
10. S. Deser and C. Teitelboim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 249 (1977); M. 
Grisaru, Phys .. Lett. 73B, 207 (1978); E. Witten, Commun. Math. 
Phys. 80, 381 (1981). 

380 
31 Supergravity 
11. W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 60, 61 (1941). 
lla. L. Randall and R. Sundrum, hep-th/9810155, to be published; G. 
F. Giudice, M. Luty, R. Rattazzi, and H. Murayama, JHEP 12, 
027 (1998); A. Pomerol and R. Rattazzi, hep-ph/9903448, to be 
published; E. Katz, Y. Shadmi, and Y. Shirman, hep-ph/9906296, to 
be published. 
llb. G. F. Giudice, M. Luty, R. Rattazzi, and H. Murayama, Ref. lla. 
12. K. Stelle and P. C. West, Ref. 4; S. Ferrara and P. van Nieuwen-
huizen, Ref. 4; E. Cremmer, B. Julia, J. Scherk, S. Ferrara, L. 
Girardello, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Lett. 79B, 231 (1978); 
Nucl. Phys. B147, 105 (1979) (reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2.); 
E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, and A. Van Proeyen, Phys. 
Lett. 116B, 231 (1982); Nucl. Phys. B212, 413 (1983) (reprinted in 
Supersymmetry, Ref. 2). 
13. S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1433 (1977). This article 
is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. Also see D. Z. Freedman and 
A. Das, Nucl. Phys. B120, 221 (1977); P. K. Townsend, Phys. Rev. 
D 15, 2802 (1977). 
13a. E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas, and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. 
Lett. 133B, 61 (1983). For a review of models based on this idea, see 
A B. Lahanas and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rept. 145, 1 (1987). 
14. H. P. Nilles, Phys. Lett. 115B, 193 (1982); A Chamseddine, R. 
Arnowitt, and P. Nath, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 970 (1982); R. Barbi-
eri, S. Ferrara, and C. A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. 119B, 343 (1982); E. 
Cremmer, P. Fayet, and L. Girardello, Phys. Lett. 122B, 41 (1983); 
L. Ibanez, Phys. Lett. 118B, 73 (1982); H. P. Nilles, M. Srednicki, 
and D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. 120B, 346 (1983); L. Hall, J. Lykken, and 
S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D27, 2359 (1983); L. Alvarez-Gaume, J. 
Polchinski, and M. B. Wise, Nucl. Phys. B221, 495 (1983). The above 
articles are reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. Also see S. Ferrara, 
D. V. Nanopoulos, and C. A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. 12B, 214 (1983); J. 
M. Leon, M. Quiros, and M. Ramon Medrano, Phys. Lett. 127B, 85 
(1983); Phys. Lett. 129B, 61 (1983); N. Ohta, Prog. Theor. Phys. 70, 
542 (1983); P. Nath, R. Arnowitt, and A. Chamseddine, Phys. Lett. 
1218, 33 (1983); J. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Phys. 
Lett. 121B, 123 (1983). For a review, see H. P. Nilles, Phys. Rept. 
110, 1 (1984). 
15. The breakdown of supersymmetry in a supergravity theory with 
an unobserved sector of chiral scalars seems to have been first 
proposed in an unpublished University of Budapest preprint by J. 
Polonyi (1977). 

References 
381 
16. I. Affleck, M. -Dine, and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B256, 557 (1985). 
17. G. F. Giudice and A. Masiero, Phys. Lett. B200, 480 (1988). Also 
see J. A. Casas and C. Munoz, Phys. Lett. B300, 288 (1993); J. E. 
Kim, hep-ph/9901204, to be published. 
18. M. Dine and D. A. Maclntire, Phys. Rev. D46, 2594 (1992). 
19. T. Banks, D. B. Kaplan, and A. Nelson, Phys. Rev. D49, 779 (1994); 
K. I. Izawa and T. Yanagida, Prog. Theor. Phys. 94, 1105 (1995); A. 
Nelson, Phys. Lett. B369, 277 (1996). 
19a. The cosmological implications of a wino that is lighter than the 
bino are discussed by T. Moroi and L. Randall, hep-ph/9906527, to 
be published. 
20. 
V. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, Phys. Lett. B306, 269 (1993); Nucl. 
Phys. B422, 57 (1994). Specific models of this sort have been pro-
posed by P. Binetruy, M. K. Gaillard, and Y·Y Wu, Nucl. Phys. 
B493, 27 (1997); Phys. Lett. B412, 288 (1997). 
21. Theories with extra dimensions in which flavor-changing effects are 
suppressed have been suggested by L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Ref. 
lla. Problems with such theories were pointed out by Z. Chacko, 
M. A Luty, I. Maksymyk, and E. Ponton, hep-ph/9905390, to be 
published. 
22. K. Hamaguchi, K..I. Izawa, Y. Nomura, and T. Yanagida, hep-
ph/9903207, to be published. 

32 
Supersymmetry Algebras 
in Higher Dimensions 
Ever since the ground-breaking work of Kaluza 1 and Klein,2 theorists have 
from time to time tried to formulate a more nearly fundamental physical 
theory in spacetimes of higher than four dimensions. This approach 
was revived in superstring theories, which take their simplest form in 
10 spacetime dimensions.3 More recently, it has been suggested that the 
various versions of string theory may be unified in a theory known as M 
theory, which in one limit is approximately described by supergravity in 
11 spacetime dimensions.4 In this chapter we shall catalog the different 
types of supersymmetry algebra possible in higher dimensions, and use 
them to classify supermultiplets of particles. 
32.1 
General Supersymmetry Algebras 
Our analysis of the general supersymmetry algebra in higher dimensions 
will follow the same logical outline as the work of Haag, Lopuszanski, 
and Sohnius5 on supersymmetry algebras in four spacetime dimensions, 
described in Section 25.2. The proof of the Coleman-Mandula theorem in 
the appendix of Chapter 24 makes it clear that the list of possible bosonic 
symmetry generators is essentially the same in d > 2 spacetime dimensions 
as in four spacetime dimensions: in an S -matrix theory of particles, there 
are only the momentum d-vector P'.t, a Lorentz generator JW = -JVP 
(with J1. and v here running over the values 1, 2, ... , d- 1, 0), and various 
Lorentz scalar 'charges.' (In some theories there are topologically stable 
extended objects such as closed strings, membranes, etc., in addition 
to particles, which make possible other conserved quantities, to which 
we will return in Section 32.3.) The anticommutators of the fermionic 
symmetry generators with each other are bosonic symmetry generators, 
and therefore must be a linear combination of PJL, 
JP'~, and various 
conserved scalars. This puts seyere limits on the Lorentz transformation 
properties of the fermionic generators, and on the superalgebra to which 
they belong. 
382 

32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras 
383 
We will first prove that the general fermionic symmetry generator must 
transform according to the fundamental spinor representations of the 
Lorentz group, which are reviewed in the appendix to this chapter, and 
not in higher spinor representations, such those obtained by adding vector 
indices to a spinor. As we saw in Section 25.2, the proof for d = 4 by 
Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius made use of the isomorphism of S0(4) 
to SU(2) x SU(2), which has no analog in higher dimensions. Here we 
will use an argument of Nahm,6 which is actually somewhat simpler and 
applies in any number of dimensions. 
Since the Lorentz transform of any fermionic symmetry generator is 
another fermionic symmetry generator, the fermionic symmetry generators 
furnish a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group O(d- l,d) 
(or, strictly speaking, of its covering group Spin(d- 1, 1)). Assuming that 
there are at most a finite number of fermionic symmetry generators, they 
must transform according to a finite-dimensional representation of the 
homogeneous Lorentz group. All of these representations can be obtained 
from the finite-dimensional unitary representations of the corresponding 
orthogonal group O(d) (actually Spin(d)) by setting x!- = ix0• So let us 
first consider the transformation of the fermionic generators under O(d). 
For d even or odd, we can find d/2 or (d- 1)/2 Lorentz generators Jdl, 
Jz3, J4s, ... , which all commute with each other, and classify fermionic 
generators Q according to the values O"Jl, a23, ... that they destroy: 
[Jdl, Q] = -adl Q, 
[JzJ, Q] = -azJQ, 
[J45, Q] = -a45Q • .. · · 
(32.1.1) 
Since the finite-dimensional representations of O(d) are all unitary, the as 
are all real. 
Let us focus on one of these quantum numbers, ad1 = w and refer to 
any fermionic or bosonic operator 0 as having weight w if 
[J dl , 0] = -w 0 , 
(32.1.2) 
or, in terms of the Minkowski component Jm = iJdl, 
[Jot , 0] = -iw 0 . 
(32.1.3) 
The reason for concentrating on this particular quantum number is that 
it has the special property of being the same for an operator and its Her-
mitian adjoint. This is because J01 must be represented on Hilbert space 
(though not on field variables or symmetry generators) by a Hermitian 
operator, so that (remembering that w is real) the Hermitian adjoint of 
Eq. (32.1.3) is 
- [Jo1 , 0*] = +iwo· , 
so 0* has the same weight as 0. 
(32.1.4) 

384 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
Now consider the anticommutator {Q, Q"} of any fermionic symmetry 
generator Q with its Hermitian adjoint. According to the Coleman-
Mandula theorem, it is at most a linear combination of P1u Jpv. and 
scalars. To calculate the weights of the components of PJI., we recall the 
commutation relation (2.4.13) 
i[PJI., lpa] = 1'/ppPa- Tf!laPp, 
which shows that Po+ Pt has weight w = + 1, while the other components 
Pz, P3, ... , Pd-1 all have weight zero. In the same way, the commutation 
relation (2.4.12) of the lpv with each other show that Joi + Jli with 
i = 2, 3, ... d- 1 have weight w = + 1, the Jij with both i and j between 
2 and d- 1 have weight zero, ito has weight zero, and of course all 
scalars have weight zero. We conclude then that all bosonic symmetry 
generators have weight +1 or 0 and the anticommutator {Q, Q*} must be 
a linear combination of operators with such weights. If Q has weight w 
then { Q, Q*} has weight 2w, and it is manifestly non-zero for any non-zero 
Q, so each fermionic generator can only have weight +1/2. (Weight zero 
is excluded by the connection between spin and statistics -
fermionic 
operators can only be constructed from odd numbers of operators with 
half-integer weights.) Going back to the Euclidean formalism, since the 
commutators of the particular O(d) generator J01 with all generators Q in a 
representation ofO(d) are given by Eq. (32.1.2) with w = +1/2, and there is 
nothing special about the 01 plane, O(d) invariance requires that the same 
is true for all O(d) generators Jib so that all the as in Eq. (32.1.1) are + 1/2. 
The only irreducible representations of the homogeneous Lorentz group 
with alias equal to +1/2 are the fundamental spinor representations, so 
Q must belong to some direct sum of these representations. 
We can also use this approach to show that the fermionic generators 
Q all commute with the d-momentum P w For this purpose, note that the 
double commutator of a momentum operator Po + Pt of weight + 1 with 
any fermionic generator Q would have weight either +5/2 if Q has weight 
+1/2 or weight +3/2 if Q has weight +1/2, and since we have found 
that there are no fermionic symmetry generators of weight +3/2 or +5/2, 
these double commutators must all vanish: 
[Po± P1. [Po+ P1,Q]] = 0. 
It follows then that 
[Po±Pt,[Po+Pt,{Q,Q*}]] = -2{Q±,QjJ, 
where 
Q± . [Po+ Pt,Q] . 
Now, { Q, Q*} ts at most a linear combination of Js, Ps, and scalar 

32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras 
385 
symmetry generators. The commutators of Po+ P 1 with the Ps and scalar 
symmetry generators vanish, while the commutators of Po + P1 with the 
Js are linear combinations of Ps, which commute with the other Po+ P1, 
so the double commutator [Po+ P1, [Po± P1. { Q, q•}]] must vanish and 
therefore { Q±, Q~} = 0, which implies that Q± = 0. Since all members of 
the representation of the Lorentz group provided by the Qs thus commute 
with Po and P1, Lorentz invariance implies that all Qs commute with all 
P s, as was to be shown. 
There is an important corollary that since the Lorentz generators Jpv 
do not commute with the momentum operators, they cannot appear on 
the right-hand side of the anticommutation relations. For the moment let 
us label the Qs as Qn, where n runs over the labels for the different (not 
necessarily inequivalent) irreducible spinor representations among the Qs, 
now including their adjoints Q*, and also over the index labelling members 
of these representations. The general anticommutation relation is then of 
th<~ form 
(32.1.5) 
where the rhm are c-number coefficients and the Znm are conserved scalar 
symmetry generators, which commute with the PJL and Jpv· We now want 
to show that the Z nm are central charges of the supersymmetry algebra -
that is, that they commute with the Qt and each other as well as with the 
PJL and Jpv and all other symmetry generators. 
To prove this for d > 4, note that for a given Znm to be non-zero, since 
it is a scalar all of the as in Eq. (32.1.1) must be opposite for Qn and Qm. 
Consider another fennionic symmetry generator Qt, for which the crs of 
Eq. (32.1.1) are not all the same as those of either Qn or Qm. (Ford> 4 
there is always such a Qt in each set of Qs forming an irreducible spinor 
representation of O(d).) We apply the super-Jacobi identity 
(32.1.6) 
The anticommutators {Qn, Qt} and {Qt, Qm} are operators that have 
s:ome crs non-zero, so they can only be linear combinations of P s rather 
than Z s, and so must commute with all Qs. This leaves just 
(32.1.7) 
Thus in each set of Qs forming an irreducible spinor representation of 
O(d) there is at least one that commutes with the given Zmn· But Zmn is 
a Lorentz scalar, so it must then commute with all Qs. It follows then 
immediately from Eq. (32.1.5) that they also commute with each other. 
The fermionic generators must form a representation (perhaps trivial) 
of the algebra .91 consisting of all scalar bosonic symmetry generators. 
It follows then by precisely the same argument used in Section 25.2 that 

386 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
the central charges Zmn furnish an invariant Abelian subalgebra of d. 
The Coleman-Mandula theorem tells us that d must be a direct sum 
of a compact semi-simple Lie algebra, which by definition contains no 
invariant Abelian subalgebras, together with U(1) generators, so the Zmn 
must be U(1) generators, which commute with all other bosonic symmetry 
generators, not just with each other. 
To obtain more detailed information about the structure of the anti-
commutation relations (32.1.5), we must be more specific about the 
Lorentz transformation and reality properties of the fermionic symme-
try generators Qn. These are very different for spacetimes of even and odd 
dimensionality. 
Odd Dimensionality 
The appendix to this chapter shows that for odd spacetime dimensions d 
there is just one fundamental spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra, 
by matrices / p.v given in terms of Dirac matrices by Eq. (32.A.2), so we 
must label the fermionic generators as Qo%1", where ex is a 2(d-1)/2-valued 
Dirac index, and r = 1, 2, ... , N labels different spinors in the case of N-
extended supersymmetry. With this notation, the Lorentz transformation 
properties of the Qs imply that 
[lp.v • Qo%1"] = -I)/ 
J'V )ap Qpr, 
(32.1.8) 
p 
so that the anticommutators of these generators have the transformation 
rule 
[lp.v. {Qo%1", Qps}] =- L)/p.v)aa{Qw-, Qps}- L)/p.v)pp{Qo%1", Qps} · 
a 
p 
Recalling the Lorentz transformation rule (2.4.13) for the momentum 
operator P1, we see that the matrix r:s and the operator Zrs in Eq. (32.1.5) 
(with Dirac indices now suppressed) must satisfy the conditions 
/p.v(r;Jrs + (rA.)rs/!v = -i(rp.)rs'7vl + i(rv)rs'7.W., 
(32.1.9) 
/p.vZrs +Zrs/{LV = 0. 
(32.1.10) 
But Eq. (32.A.38) gives f!v = -~-
1 / J'V~. so Eqs. (32.1.9) and (32.1.10) 
may be expressed as the requirement that (r p.)rs~-
1 satisfies the same 
commutation relation (32.A.32) with / w~ as yJl, while Z,s~-
1 commutes 
with / p.v. For odd d the matrices satisfying these conditions are unique 
up to multiplication with constants, so we can conclude that 
r!, ps = i g,s ( yJ. ~)ap 
(32.1.11) 

32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras 
387 
and 
Zarps = <'Ca.pZrs, 
(32.1.12) 
with the factor i inserted in Eq. (32.1.11) for later convenience. With Dirac 
indices suppressed, the anticommutation relations (32.1.5) now read 
{Qr, QI} = igrsoo/-<'CP;. +zrs<'C · 
(32.1.13) 
Both r~ {Js and Zar {Js are symmetric under interchange of rx. and r with 
P and s, while Eqs. (32.A.30) and (32.A.31) (with d = 2n + 1) show that: 
ylre is symmetric and re is symmetric for d = 1 (mod 8); y).<'C is symmetric 
and re is antisymmetric for d = 3 (mod 8); yl<'C is antisymmetric and re 
is antisymmetric for d = 5 (mod 8); and y2<'C is antisymmetric and re is 
symmetric for d = 7 (mod 8). It follows that: g,5 is symmetric and Zrs is 
symmetric for d = 1 (mod 8); grs is symmetric and Zrs is antisymmetric 
for d = 3 (mod 8); grs is antisymmetric and Zrs is antisymmetric for d = 1 
(mod 8); and grs is antisymmetric and Zrs is symmetric ford= 1 (mod 8). 
The complex conjugate of the matrices fpv is given by Eq. (32.A.37). 
By taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (32.1.8), we see that Lp(<'CP)a.pQpr 
has the same Lorentz transformation properties as any Qa.s, and therefore 
must be a linear combination of them 
L(<'CP)a.pQpr = L ffrsQa.s • 
(32.1.14) 
{J 
s 
Taking the Hermitian adjoint of this equation and using Eqs. (32.A.28) 
and (32.A.29) with d = 2n + 1 yields 
f/* f/ = (-1)" · 1 , 
a= (d- l)(d- 3)/8 . 
(32.1.15) 
Ford= 1 (mod 8) and d = 3 (mod 8) the spinor representation of the 
Lorentz algebra is real, and we can choose a basis for the fermionic 
generators such that f/ = 1. In contrast, for d = 5 (mod 8) and d = 7 
(mod 8) the spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra is pseudoreal, 
and it is evidently impossible to choose a basis with f/ oc 1. By taking 
the determinant of Eq. (32.1.15), we see that in this case Det ( -1) > 0, so 
ford= 5 (mod 8) and d = 7 (mod 8) there must be an even number N of 
fermionic generators. In this case we can choose a basis in which f/ = Q, 
where;: n is the real antisymmetric block~diagonal matrix 
!l=(·~ ~ 
~ :::) 
0 0 
e 
· · · 
' 
(32.1.16) 
We can deduce the reality and positivity properties of g,5 and Zrs by 

388 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
using Eq. (32.1.14) to rewrite the anticommutation relation (32.1.13) as 
{Qr, Qt} = i(g.9'T)rs}';.~(~p)T-t p.l. + (z.9'T)rsCC(~p)T-
1
. 
Eqs. (32.A.12), (32.A.16), and (32.A.30) with d = 2n+ 1 show that pT = -P 
and ~~T-1 = ( -1)(d-I)(d+l)/8 .. 1, so 
{Qr, QH = -(-1)(d-1)(d+1)/8 [i(g.9'T)rsY;.PP1 + (zYT)rsP)] . 
(32.1.17) 
Recalling that }'o = ip, we note that the operator matrix -iy;.p P1 is 
positive, and positive-definite aside from the vacuum state. By consid-
ering a state of sufficiently large momentum so that the central charge 
term in Eq. (32.1.17) may be neglected, we conclude that the matrix 
(-1id-1)(d+1)/8g.9'T is positive and Hermitian. Then considering arbitrary 
momenta, we also find that the array of operators (z.9'T)rs is Hermitian. 
(For non-zero central charges there is a lower bound on the mass, analo-
gous to Eq. (25.5.22), which will not be given here.) From the Hermiticity 
of g.9'T we have 
(32.1.18) 
We are now in a position by an appropriate choice of basis to put the 
anticommutation relations in a convenient canonical form. 
For d = 1 (mod 8) we have g and z symmetric and ( -l)a = + 1, so if 
we choose a basis in which!?= 1 then g is real and the individual Zrs are 
Hermitian operators. We may introduce new Qs without changing .9' = 1 
by multiplying the old Qs by any real matrix d, with the result that g is 
changed to dgdT. Since g is a positive matrix ford= 1 (mod 8), by a 
well-known theorem6a we may choose d to make g = 1. 
Ford= 3 (mod 8) we have g symmetric, z antisymmetric, and (-l)a = 
+ 1, so if we choose a basis in which .9' = 1 then g is real and the 
individual Zrs are anti-Hermitian operators. As in the case of d = 1 (mod 
8), we may further adapt the basis so that g = 1. 
Ford= 5 (mod 8) we have g antisymmetric, so, with the choice .9' = 0., 
Eq. (32.1.18) reads g• = -QgO., where Q is the standard antisymmetric 
matrix (32.1.16). Here we may introduce new Qs while keeping .9' = Q 
by multiplying the old ones by any matrix f!4 with !!4* = -!NQ, with the 
effect that g is changed to f!4gf!4T. Since ( -l)a = -1, gQ is positive, and 
so in this way we may arrange that g = -Q. Also, z is antisymmetric and 
zQ is Hermitian, so z• = -QzQ. 
Ford= 7 (mod 8) we again have g antisymmetric, but now (-1)a = +1, 
so by the same method as ford= 5 (mod 8), we may choose a basis in 
which g = +fA. Also, z is now· symmetric and zQ is again Hermitian, so 
now z• = +fAzQ. 

32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras 
389 
Even Dimensionality 
The appendix to this chapter shows that for even spacetime dimensions 
d there are two inequivalent fundamental spinor representations of the 
Lorentz algebra by matrices. /tv given in terms of Dirac matrices by 
Eqs. (32.A.22), (32.A.2), and (32.A.17). Therefore here we must label the 
fermionic generators as Q~, where Of is a 2d/2-valued Dirac index, r labels 
different Qs belonging to equivalent representations of the Lorentz algebra 
in the case of extended supersymmetry, and 
L)Yd+l)llp Qtr = + Q~ , 
(32.1.19) 
p 
where Yd+l = idf2- 1y1 · · · Yd-1 YO· With this notation, the Lorentz transfor-
mation properties of the Qs imply that 
[Jpv' Q~] =-L:<ftv)ap Q~r, 
(32.1.20) 
fJ 
where f;v are the matrices (32.A.22). Taking account ofEq. (32.1.19) and 
the relation ~-lYd+1~ = (-1)df2Yd+1, the same arguments that gave the 
anticommutation relations (32.1.13) for odd d now give 
{Q± Q+(-l)d/2 T} = . ± ( 1 ± Yd+1) 
A. Ul p 
r • 
s 
l grs 
2 
Y "TtJ 
). ' 
(32.1.21) 
{Q± Q±(-1)dfzT}= ±(1±Yd+1)~ 
r , 
s 
Zrs 
2 
· 
(32.1.22) 
Eqs. (32.A.30) and (32.A.31) show that WyA. is symmetric ford= 0 (mod 
8) and d = 2 (mod 8) and antisymmetric for d = 4 (mod 8) and d = 6 
(mod 8), while W is symmetric ford= 0 (mod 8) and d = 6 (mod 8) and 
antisymmetric for d = 2 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8). Hence Eq. (32.1.21) 
requires the symmetry properties 
while Eq. (32.1.22) requires that 
{ 
±(-l)df2 
±-
Zsr 
z,s -
-z-*(-l)df2 
d = 0,2 (mod 8) 
d = 4,6 (mod 8) 
d = 0,6 (mod 8) 
d = 2,4 (mod 8) 
(32.1.23) 
(32.1.24) 
In particular, z± is symmetric for d = 0 (mod 8), g± is symmetric for d = 2 
(mod 8), z± is antisymmetric ford= 4 (mod 8), and g± is antisymmetric 
for d = 6 (mod 8). 
Taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (32.1.20) and using Eq. (32.A.25) 
shows that ~PQ"t has the same Lorentz transformation properties as the 

390 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
operators Qf(-1)d
12 and is therefore a linear combination of them: 
rLJp Q±• = """" a± Q+(-1)d/2 
(32 1 25) 
-w 
r 
L...J J rs 
s 
· 
· · 
s 
Taking the Hermitian adjoint of this equation and using Eqs. (32.A.28) 
and (32.A.29) with d = 2n gives 
g±* gH-)d/2 = (·-1)a · 1, 
a= d(d- 2)/8. 
(32.1.26) 
For d = 0 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8) Eq. (32.1.25) relates one irreducible 
representation to another, and we may choose bases in which g± = 1 
ford= 0 (mod 8) and g± = +1 ford= 4 (mod 8). Ford= 2 (mod 8) 
Eq. (32.1.25) relates real representations to themselves, and we may choose 
bases with g± = 1. For d = 6 (mod 8) Eq. (32.1.25) relates pseudoreal 
representations to themselves; the determinant of Eq. (32.1.26) shows that 
there must be an even number of Q+ and an even number (not necessarily 
the same!) of Q-, and we may choose bases with g± = Q±, where Q± 
are standard real antisymmetric matrices of the form (32.1.16). 
We can deduce the reality and positivity properties of g~ and the reality 
properties of z~ by using Eq. (32.1.25) to rewrite the anticommutation 
relations (32.1.21) and (32.1.22) in the form 
{ Q~, Q~t} = ( 1 ± ;d+1) y;.p pA.r:c(rt:p)T-1 (g±g=FT)rs, 
(32.1.27) 
{Qt, Q~Ft} = (1 ±;d+1) rt:(rt:p?-1(z±g+T)rs. 
(32.1.28) 
We again use the relations r:cr:cT-1 = (-l)d{d+Z)/S, pT = -p, and }'o = iP, 
and conclude that (-1)d(d+Z)f8g±g±T is Hermitian and positive, while 
(z+ g-T)t = z-g+T. For d = 0 (mod 8) we can adopt a basis with 
g± = 1, g± = 1, and z+t = z-; for d = 2 (mod 8) we can adopt a basis 
with g± = 1, g± = -1, and z+t = z-; for d = 4 (mod 8) we can adopt 
a basis with g± = +1, g± = +1, and z+t = -z-; and ford= 6 (mod 8) 
we can adopt a basis with g± = Q±, g± = n±, and (z+n-)t = z-n+. 
To summarize, in appropriate bases the anticommutation relations and 
reality and symmetry conditions are as follows :6b 
d = 0 (mod 8) 
{Q± Q+ T} = . O (1 ± }'d+1) 
A. rLJ p 
r , 
s 
l rs 
2 
}' -w 
A. , 
(32.1.29) 
{Q± Q±T} =z± (1 ±Yd+1) rt: 
r • 
s 
rs 
2 
• 
(32.1.30) 
(32.1.31) 

d = 1 (mod 8) 
d = 2 (mod 8) 
32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras 
• 
Zrs = Zsr = Zrs • 
{Q± Q± T} = _. 0 ( 1 ± Yd+l) ;. 'C p 
r • 
s 
l rs 
2 
'l' 
). ' 
d = 3 (mod 8) 
d = 4 (mod 8) 
{Q± Q+T}= ±(1±Yd+l)rc 
r • 
s 
Zrs 
2 
• 
Z±-
z±"-
z=F 
rs -
-
rs 
-
-
sr • 
• 
Zrs = -Zsr = -Zrs • 
{Qt, Q;T} = +iOrs ( 1 ±;d+l) y;.'C P;., 
{Q± Q±T} = 
± (1 ±Yd+l) rLJ 
r • 
s 
Zrs 
2 
llJ • 
rtpQ±" = +Q+ 
r 
-
r ' 
Z±- z=F"-
z± 
rs-
rs -- sr · 
d = .5 (mod 8) 
Zrs = -Zsr, 
z'" = -QzQ. 
d = 6 (mod 8) 
{Q± Q± T} = . g± ( 1 ± Yd+l) ;. rLJ p 
r • s 
l 
rs 
2 
Y llJ 
). • 
{Q± Q+ T} = 
± ( 1 ± Yd+l) 'C 
r • 
s 
Zrs 
2 
• 
391 
(32.1.32) 
(32.1.33) 
(32.1.34) 
(32.1.35) 
(32.1.36) 
(32.1.37) 
(32.1.38) 
(32.1.39) 
(32.1.40) 
(32.1.41) 
(32.1.42) 
(32.1.43) 
(32.1.44) 
(32.1.45) 

392 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
rep Q~" = Ln~Qt. 
s 
d = 7 (mod 8) 
Zrs = Zsr ~ 
z" = +!lz!l. 
s 
(32.1.46) 
(32.1.47) 
(32.1.48) 
Inspection of these anticommutation relations reveals that in the ab-
sence of central charges they are invariant under groups of linear trans-
formations on the fermionic generators~ of the form Qr-+ Ls VrsQs ford 
odd and Qt -+ Ls V,~Q;'= for d even. In order to preserve the relations 
(32.1.29)-(32.1.48) it is necessary that the Vs should satisfy the conditions: 
d = 0 and d = 4 (mod 8) 
v±v+T = 1, 
v±·=v+. 
d = 1 and d = 3 (mod 8) 
vvT = 1, 
V'' = v. 
d = 2 (mod 8) 
v±v±T = 1, 
v± = v±·. 
d = 5 (mod 8) 
vnvr = n, 
v· = -nvn. 
d = 6 (mod 8) 
v±v±T = 1 ' 
v±· = -n± v±n± . 
d = 7 (mod 8) 
vnvT =!l, 
v· =-nvn. 
These matrices form the groups: 
d = 0 and d = 4 (mod 8) 
U(N) 
d = 1 and d = 3 (mod 8) 
d = 2 (mod 8) 
O(N) 
O(N+) x O(N_J 
d = 5 and d = 7 (mod 8) 
d = 6 (mod 8) 
_ USp (N) 
N even 
USp(N+) x USp(N_) 
N± even 
(32.1.49) 
(32.1.50) 
(32.1.51) 
(32.1.52) 
(32.1.53) 
(32.1.54) 

32.2 Massless Multiplets 
393 
Here N is the number of fundamental spinor representations among the 
Qs for d odd and the number of fundamental spinor representations of 
each chirality among the Qs ford= 0 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8). For 
d = 2 (mod 8) and d = 6 (mod 8) the numbers of fundamental spinor 
representations among the Qs need not be the same for each chirality, and 
so these are denoted N+ and N_. 
32.2 
Massless Multiplets 
We will now consider how the supersymmetry algebras constructed in 
the previous section may be used to construct supermultiplets of massless 
particle states in d > 4 spacetime dimensions. The momentum operator 
P II commutes with all fermionic symmetry generators, so we can work 
in the one-particle subspace of Hilbert space where p11 has a definite 
lightlike eigenvector p~', which may be taken in a direction with p1 = p0 
and all other spatial components of p~' zero. Just as in the case of 
four spacetime dimensions, discussed in Section 2.5, these one-particle 
states are classified according to the finite-dimensional representations 
they provide of the little group, the subgroup of the homogeneous Lorentz 
group that leaves p~' invariant. The little group contains combined boosts 
along directions perpendicular to p and rotations in planes in which p 
lies, such as the transformations (2.5.6) for four spacetime dimensions, 
but these form an invariant Abelian subgroup and therefore in a finite-
dimensional representation must be represented by the unit operator. With 
this subgroup omitted, the reduced little group in d dimensions is O(d-2), 
consisting of rotations in planes orthogonal to p. We therefore classify 
massless particle states according to the representations they provide of 
O(d- 2) and of the automorphism groups desc,ribed at the end of the 
previous section. 
These representations are more complicated than those we have dealt 
with in four spacetime dimensions, where the reduced little group is 0(2) 
and the representations are one-dimensional, characterized by a single 
number, the helicity. Nevertheless it is useful to label the representa-
tions of the reduced little group O(d- 2) with a 'spin,' defined as the 
maximum absolute value of the eigenvalue of any generator Jij in the 
representation. 
It is widely believed that there are no consistent quantum field theories 
involving massless particles with spin greater than 2. It is known7 that 
soft massless particles with spin j > 1/2 can only interact with conserved 
curr1ents carrying spin j. For j = 1 these are the currents of ordinary 
conserved scalars, like electric charge; for j = 3/2 they are the one or 

394 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
more supercurrents associated with supersymmetry; for j = 2 there is a 
single current, the energy-momentum tensor; but for j > 512 there is no 
conserved current with which a soft massless particle could interact. We 
may derive stringent limits on the dimensions in which supersymmetry 
is possible by adopting a prohibition against there being more than one 
type of massless particle of spin 2, or any massless particles whatever of 
spin greater than 2. 
Let us return for a moment to the classification of operators used in 
Section 32.1, according to a weight equal to the value of the O(d) generator 
ht that they destroy. (Recall that J01 = iht-) The fermionic supersym-
metry generators have weights 112 and -112, so the anticommutator of 
any of these generators with its Hermitian adjoint can only have weight 
+ 1 or -1, respectively, and therefore must be respectively proportional to 
the operator P0 + P 1 or P0 - P 1. But we are working in a subspace of 
Hilbert space in which the operator P0 - P 1 vanishes, so in this subspace 
the fermionic supersymmetry generators of weight -112 all vanish. To 
classify the one~particle states we therefore have available just half of the 
supersymmetry generators, the 2n-l generators with weight CTdt = +112. 
We can further divide the remaining supersymmetry generators into two 
classes, those in which cr23 = 112 or cr23 = -112 as well as CTdl = +112. 
Since the operator P0 + P 1 has cr23 = 0, the fermionic supersymmetry gen-
erators of each class anticommute with each other, though not necessarily 
with their adjoints or with generators of the other class. 
Now consider a representation of the little group O(d-2) with spin j, and 
consider any state lA.) that is an eigenstate of h3 with eigenvalue A. > 0 
and is annihilated by all supersymmetry generators with cr23 = -112. 
(Any state that has the maximum eigenvalue j for h3 is of this type, 
but in general there may be other such states.) We may form states 
with J23 = A. - k 12 by acting on !A.) with k fermionic generators having 
cr23 = +112 as well as CTdl = +112. (It can be shown that none of these 
states vanishes, because acting on them with the adjoints of k of these 
fermionic generators gives back the state lA.).) If there is a total of .AI 
fermionic supersymmetry generators of all types, then there are .% I 4 of 
them with cr23 = +112 and CTdl = +112, and since these operators all 
anticommute the number of states formed in this way with h3 =A.- kl2 
will be given by the binomjal coefficient 
(32.2.1) 
which when summed from k = 0 to the maximum value k = .AI I 4 gives 
a total of 2..¥ 14 components. The minimum eigenvalue of h3 obtained in 
this way is A. - ff 18, reached by multiplying the state lA.) by k = .AI I 4 
supersymmetry generators. Taking A. = j, we see that to avoid having 

32.2 Massless Multiplets 
395 
eigenvalues of h3 greater than +2 or less than -2, we must have j < 2 
and j -%/8 > -2, which requires a total number of fermionic generators 
% no greater than 32. 
Further, for % = 32 supersymmetry generators there can be at most 
a single supermultiplet of massless particles formed in this way by acting 
on the state 12} with products of supersymmetry generators having o-23 = 
+1/2 and udl = +1/2. These states have eigenvalues for any generator 
of the little group running in steps of 1/2 from -2 to +2. It is only for 
% < 32 that there can be 'matter' supermultiplets, supermultiplets that 
do not contain the graviton. 
A single fundamental spinor representation in 2n or 2n + 1 dimensions 
has 2n components, so in order to have no more than 32 fermionic 
generators we must have n < 5. The spacetime dimensionality can thus 
be no larger than d = 11 and in this case must have N = 1. Supergravity 
in 11 dimensions is of special interest, because it may be the 'low-energy' 
limit of a fundamental theory known as M theory,4 which is also believed 
to yield various string theories in other limits. We will now work out the 
spin content of N = 1 supersymmetry in d = 11 dimensions in detail, as 
an example of how this can be done by enlightened counting. 
We can construct all the states of the massless multiplet for d = 11 by 
acting on an eigenstate 12) of h3 having eigenvalue 2 with products of 
k = 0, 1, ... , 8 supersymmetry generators having o-23 = + 1/2 and u2n-1 2n = 
+1/2. According to Eq. (32.2.1), we obtain one state each with 123 = ±2, 
eight states each with h3 = +3/2, twenty-eight states each with 123 = +1, 
fifty-six states each with h3 = + 1/2, and seventy states with h3 = 0. 
For d = 11 the spin 2 graviton representation of the little group 0(9) 
is a symmetric traceless tensor with 9 x 10/2- 1 = 44 independent 
components: there is one 2 + i3, 2 + i3 component with h 3 = +2; seven 
2 + i3 , k components with h3 = + 1 ; and twenty-eight k , t components 
with h3 = 0. (Here k and t run over the seven values 4, 5, ... , 10. We do 
not count the 2 + i3, 2 - i3 component because it is related to the k, t 
components by the tracelessness condition in this representation.) 
There is also a single spin 3/2 gra vitino representation. This consists of 
a spinor lpi with an extra nine-vector index i, subject to an irreducibility 
condition L:; YilJJi = 0 which excludes spin 1/2 components, and so has 
9 x 16- 16 = 128 independent components. 
By subtracting the number of components with each value of 123 
contained in the graviton and gravitino states from those formed acting 
on 12) with supersymmetry generators, we see that we need one or more 
additional states having a total of 28 -7 = 21 components with h3 = +1 
and 70 - 28 = 42 components with h3 '= 0. The only representations of 
orthogonal groups that have no eigenvalues of 1ijS other than +1 and 0 

396 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
are the antisymmetric tensors. An antisymmetric tensor T;1 ••• ;p of rank p 
in nine dimensions has 
( ; ) components Tk1···kp with h3 = 0 , 
( p ~ 1 ) components T2±i3k2 ... kp with h3 = +1, 
( p ~ 2 ) components T2+i32-i3k3 ... kp with h3 = 0, 
where kt. ... ,kp run over the seven values 4, 5, ... , 10. For 0(9) the only 
independent antisymmetric tensors are of rank p = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. The 
antisymmetric tensor of rank 4 has 35 components with h 3 = + 1, which 
is more than needed, so it must be excluded. Any combination of p = 0, 
p = 1, and p = 2 tensors with the twenty-one needed components with 
h3 = + 1 would have too many components with J23 = 0 (147 for 21 one-
forms and no two-forms; 120 for 14 one-forms and 1 two-forms; 53 for 7 
one-forms and 2 two-forms; and 66 for no one-forms and 3 two-forms), 
so we must include at least one three-form. The antisymmetric tensor with 
rank p = 3 has just 21 components with h3 = + 1 and 42 components 
with h3 = 0, which is just what is needed. We conclude that the unique 
massless particle multiplet for N = 1 supersymmetry in d = 11 contains a 
graviton, a gravitino, and a particle whose states transform under the little 
group as a single antisymmetric tensor of rank 3. 
There is a richer variety of possibilities for d = 10. Here there are two 
ways to have AI'= 32 generators: the fermionic generators can comprise 
two 16-component Weyl spinors of the same chirality, with an automor-
phism group 0(2), or two of opposite chirality, with no automorphism 
group. For d = 10 it is also possible to have a single Weyl fermionic 
generator, with just AI'= 16 independent components. These three pos-
sibilities play an important role in modem superstring theories -
they 
represent the massless particle spectrum of three kinds of superstring: 
type IIA for 16 generators of each chirality; type IIB for 32 generators of 
the same chirality; and the heterotic superstring for 16 generators of just 
one chirality. 
The type IIA case of d = 10 and opposite chirality is just like the 
case of d = 11, except that the irreducible representations of the little 
group 0(9) for d = 11 break up into separate irreducible representations 
of the little group 0(8) for d = 10. Thus the 0(9) graviton multiplet is 
decomposed into an 0(8) graviton with 8 x 9/2 _:.1 = 35 components, an 
0(8) vector with 8 components, and a scalar with 1 component; the 0(9) 
gravitino multiplet is decomposed into 0(8) gravitinos of each chirality 
with (16 x 8- 16)/2 = 56 components each and 0(8) spinors of each 

3 2.3 p-Branes 
397 
chirality with 8 components each; and the 0(9) three-form is decomposed 
into a 0(8) three-form with 56 components and an 0(8) two-form with 
28 components. 
In the type liB case of d = 10 with N+ = 2 and N_ = 0 we must 
classify states according to the representation of the little group 0(8) and 
a quantum number q that labels the representations of the automorphism 
group 0(2), under which the supersymmetry generators transform as a 
2-vector. Since there is only one graviton, it must have q = 0. Acting 
on these states with a supersymmetry generator gives two gravitinos with 
q = + 1 and 56 components each; acting with another supersymmetry 
generator gives 2 two-form tensors with q = +2 and 28 components each; 
acting with another supersymmetry generator gives 2 Weyl spinors with 
q = + 3 and 8 components each; and acting with another supersymmetry 
generator gives 2 scalars with q = +4 together with a self-dual four-form 
with q = 0 and 35 components. 
In the heterotic case of d = 10 with a single Weyl fermionic genera-
tor there are just % = 16 independent components. In this case there 
is a graviton supermultiplet consisting of a graviton transforming under 
0(8) as a symmetric traceless tensor with 35 independent components; 
a gravitino with 56 independent components; an 0(8) two-form with 28 
independent components; a Weyl spinor with 8 components; and a scalar. 
(This graviton supermultiplet is constructed by acting with supersymmetry 
generators on one state 12), six states 11), and one state 10), giving alto-
gether 8 x 24 = 128 = 35 +56+ 28 + 8 + 1 components.) Here we also have 
the possibility of gauge supermultiplets that contain no particles having 
values greater than 1 or less than -1 for the eigenvalue of any lij. These 
gauge supermultiplets are formed by acting with supersymmetry genera-
tors on a state 11}, and contain one gauge particle belonging to the vector 
representation of 0(8), with 8 components, and one particle transforming 
as a fundamental Weyl spinor of 0(8), also with 8 components. 
32.3 
p-Branes 
In some theories in addition to particles there are stable extended objects, 
either of infinite extent or stabilized by 'wrapping' around a topologically 
non-trivial spacetime. The study of supersymmetry and supergravity in 
higher-dimensional theories of this sort has opened up remarkable oppor-
tunities for the construction of string theories and supersymmetric field 
theories in lower-dimensional spacetime and for the proof of equivalencies 
among these theories,4•8 which are beyond the scope of this book. The fea-
ture of these extended objects that concerns us here is that they can carry 
conserved bosonic quantities other than those allowed by the Coleman-

398 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
Mandula theorem. These new conserved quantities may appear on the 
right-hand side of the anticommutation relations of supersymmetry, along 
with the momentum operator and ordinary conserved quantities.9 
In the cases that have been studied so far, the new conserved bosonic 
quantities are all forms- antisymmetric tensors. For instance, an object 
of spatial dimensionality p (known as a 'p-brane') in a spacetime of 
dimensionality d is described by specifying the d spacetime coordinates 
xll(o-, t) (generally in overlapping patches covering the object) as functions 
of the time t and of a set of p coordinates o-r that parameterize positions 
on this object. If the manifold xll = xll(o-, t) at a given time is topologically 
non-trivial, in the sense that it cannot be continuously deformed to a 
single point, then it may have a non-vanishing value for the topologically 
invariant integral'" 
p 
p 
p 
[lltll2"""J.Ip = J 
do-l dr:? ... do-P L L ... L Erl F2 ···rp 
TJ=l r2=l 
Tp=l 
x 8x~'
1 (o-, t) 8xll2(o-,t) ... 8xllP(o-,t) 
8o-TJ 
80"72 
8o-7P 
• 
(32.3.1) 
The invariance of such integrals under small changes in the functions 
xll(o-, t) shows in particular that they are invariant under spacetime trans-
lations, and hence may appear along with Pll and central charges on 
the right-hand side of the anticommutation relations for the supersym-
metry generators.10 The calculation of the coefficients of such tensors 
on the right-hand side of the anticommutation relations is analogous to 
the Olive-Witten calculation of the scalar central charge Zrs in N = 2 
supersymmetry theories in four spacetime dimensions, discussed in Section 
27.9. We will make no attempt in this section to evaluate these coefficients 
or to survey the other non-topological p-forms that may appear in the 
anticommutation relations, 11 but will simply consider the effects on the 
supersymmetry algebra of including conserved antisymmetric tensors that 
commute with the momentum operators. 
• To see that this integral is topologically invariant, note that the effect of an infinitesimal 
change Jx~'(a, t) in the function x~'(a, t) is to change Jl't1'2 ..... , by the amount 
PPP ,pi 
a[ 
(jflltll2"""P.p = L L L ... L 
dai da2 ... daP aa'• 
f"'"t '2 ... ,, 
II= I r1 =1 r2=l 
rp=J 
x--···--Jx~'"--···-
axllt axll2 
axlln-1 
OX~'•+l 
axllpl 
aa't Oa72 
aa'o-1 
a€17•+1 
aarp 
' 
which vanishes when the integral is. taken over a compact manifold. It also vanishes 
if the integral is over all a, provided Jx~'(a, t) is constrained to vanish rapidly when 
a'~ co. 

32.3 p-Branes 
399 
It is important that this possibility does not affect the key result that 
the supersymmetry generators always belong to the fundamental spinor 
representations of the Lorentz group. This is because a totally antisym-
metric tensor in Euclidean coordinates can have at most one spacetime 
index equal to 1 and at most one spacetime index equal to d, and therefore 
its 'weight' defined by Eq. (32.1.2) can only be + 1 or 0. Just as before, this 
means that the weight of a supersymmetry generator can only be +1/2; 
Lorentz invariance then implies that all the us defined by Eq. (32.1.1) 
are + 1/2, which is only possible if the supersymmetry generators belong 
to a fundamental spinor representation of O(d- 1, 1). Also, because the 
new terms in the anticommutators of supersymmetry generators commute 
with momentum, the same argument that was given in Section 32.1 shows 
again that the supersymmetry generators also commute with momentum. 
Lorentz invariance tells us that for non-zero values of the p·form 
'charges,' the anticommutation relations (32.1.13) and (32.1.21}-(32.1.22) 
can only take the forms (in the same notation as in Section 32.1): 
dodd 
(32.3.2) 
d even 
(32.3.3) 
(32.3.4) 
(Recall that CC appears in the anticommutation relations because /Jv = 
- rc-1 / f.lVCC; the Q"t are supersymmetry generators in the case of even d 
for which Yd+lQi'= = +Qt; and rc--1Yd+lrc = (-1)df2Yd+l·) For even d we 
have 
while for d odd 
e/Jl fJ2"''J.'d~, 
~' 
..• ~' 
a:. '\) 
~' 
... ,, 
. 
I J.tll/12 
I /Jp 
I /Jp+ll /Jp+2 
I ).td • 

400 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
Thus p-branes and d - p branes make the same contributions in Eqs. 
(32.3.1 H32.3.3) for any d, so that we can restrict p to run only over values 
from 0 to d/2 ford even and from 0 to (d- 1)/2 ford odd. 
The symmetry of anticommutators is reflected in symmetry conditions 
on the p-brane central charges zf3 in Eqs. (32.3.2)-(32.3.4). Eqs. (32.A.15) 
and (32.A.30) give 
!fiT= (-1)n(n+l)/2!f/, 
(32.3.5) 
for both d = 2n and d = 2n + 1. These give the antisymmetrized products 
y [#1 y 
~-'2 • · • y f.lp] the symmetry property 
}'[pi Ym ..• Y~tp]ifi = ( -1)Pn(-l)n(n+l)/2 [Y[Jlp'l'f.'p-1 ••. 'l'f.'drc] T 
= (-1)Pn(-1t(n+l)/2(-1)P(p-1)/2 [Y[Jlt }'Jl2 •.. 'l'f.lvl~]T. 
(32.3.6) 
It follows immediately that for odd d, 
zfj~-'2"'Jlp = (-1)Pn(-1)n(n+l)/2(-1)p{p-l)/2z~f.'2"'Jlp' 
(32.3.7) 
while for even d, 
zfJ1'2"'Jlp± = (-1)l'n(-1)n(n+l)/2(-1)l'(p-l)/2z~f.'2'"Jlp(-l)"(-l)P+. 
(32.3.8) 
Consider for instance the important case of N = 1 supersymmetry in 
d = 11 spacetime dimensions, which is one version of the popular M-
theory generalization of string theories. Eq. (32.3.8) shows that the single 
p-form. central charge z~' 1 ~'2 '"Jlp vanishes unless 
- (-1)P(-l)p{p-l)/2 = +1, 
(32.3.9) 
which is satisfied only for p equal to 1, 2, and 5. The value p = 1 is 
realized by the momentum operator itself, which arises from particles as 
well as extended objects. The other possibilities, p = 2 and p = 5, arise 
in theories with 2-branes and 5-branes, respectively. Note that there can 
be no other independent tensor central charges, such as a 1-form arising 
from 1-branes, because the number of independent components in P~' and 
in a 2-form and a 5-form is 
11 + ( ~1 ) + ( 151 ) = 528 ' 
while the number of independent components in an anticommutator of 
two 32-component fundamental spinors is 32 x 33/2 = 528. 
Just as the 0-form electric charge is the source of a 1-form gauge field 
AJl(x), so also a p-form conserv~d quantity zl'tJl2"'Jlp may serve as the source 
of a p + 1-form gauge field AJl1f.'2 ... Jlp-tl of the sort discussed in Section 8.8. 
In fact, such gauge fields do appear in supergravity theories. For instance, 

Appendix 
Spinors in Higher Dimensions 
401 
as remarked in the previous section, the N = 1 supergravity theory in 
d = 11 spacetime dimensions includes a massless particle whose states are 
in the 3-form representation of the 0(9) little group, and therefore must 
be described by a 3-form. gauge field AJlvp(x). The study of solutions of 
this supergravity theory shows that there are two-branes12 that indeed 
do provide sources for AJlvp(x). Also, as noted in Section 8.8, this gauge 
theory is equivalent to one with a (d- p- 2 = 6)-form. gauge field, which 
can have the 5-form. zll1···Jl5 as a source, and there are indeed 5-brane 
solutions which provide such sources for this 6-form. gauge field. 13 The 
N = 1 eleven-dimensional supersymmetry algebra does in fact receive 
contributions from these 2-branes and 5-branes.11 
Appendix 
Spinors in Higher Dimensions 
This appendix describes the fundamental spinor representations of the Lie 
algebra of the Lorentz group O(d- 1, 1) in any number d of spacetime 
dimensions. These are obtained from the corresponding Clifford alge-
bra, consisting of an irreducible set of :finite matrices yJl that satisfy the 
anticommutation relations 
(32.A.1) 
where '7Jlv is diagonal, with elements + 1 on the diagonal except for 
'700 = -1, where x0 is the time-component. From these we can construct 
matrices 
(32.A.2) 
that satisfy the commutation relations (2.4.12) of the Lorentz group gen-
erators 
(32.A.3) 
As we will see, although Eq. (32.A.2) always gives a representation of the 
Lorentz algebra, it is not always an irreducible representation. 
We must now distinguish between the cases of even and odd dimen-
sionality. 
Even Dimensions: d = 2n 
To construct a convenient specific representation for the gamma matrices 
in d = 2n dimensions, we introduce n matrices 
t1u = ~(nu-l + i Y2u) 
u = 1, 2, ... , n , 
(32.A.4) 

402 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
and take }'t. ... , 'Y2n as Hermitian, it being understood that as usual 
Y2n = -iyo . 
(32.A.5) 
These have the anticommutation relations 
(32.A.6) 
We introduce a vector 10) in the representation space of the ys, defined by 
the condition 
a! 10) = 0, 
(32.A.7) 
and define the basis vectors 
ls1 s2 · · · sn) = a~
1 a;z · · · a~"IO) . 
(32.A.8) 
Because a~ = 0, the operator au raises the value of Su to + 1 if Su = 0 and 
annihilates the vector if su = +1 (as well as yielding a sign (-1)s where 
S = Lv<u Sv ), so all Su take only the values 0 and + 1, and the vectors 
therefore span a space of dimensionality 2n. In this basis, the matrices au 
take the form 
au= ( ~
1 
~ ) ® · · · ® ( ~
1 
~ ) ® ( g ~ ) ® 1· · · ® 1, (32.A.9) 
with the last 2 x 2 matrix in the uth place. Taking the Hermitian and 
anti-Hermitian parts then gives the gamma matrices 
( -1 0 ) 
( -1 0 ) 
( 0 1 ) 
Y2u-t = 
o 
1 
® · · · ® 
0 
1 
® 
1 O 
® 1· · · ® 1, (32.A.l0) 
( -1 0 ) 
( -1 0 ) 
( 0 -i ) 
Y2u = 
0 
1 
® · · · ® 
0 
1 
® 
i 
0 
® 1 · · · ® 1. (32.A.11) 
(Note that this does not give the same representation of the gamma 
matrices in four spacetime dimensions as was introduced in Section 5.4, 
and has been used throughout this book.) 
The representation (32.A.10)-(32.A.ll) gives the Euclidean ys the simple 
reality and symmetry properties 
• 
T 
{ 
'}'i 
}'· = '}'· = 
I 
I 
-}'i 
fori odd 
fori even ' 
(32.A.12) 
where i = 1, 2, ... , 2n. This can be expressed as a similarity relation 
r
1 ri~ = (-1)nrT = (-1)nr:, 
where ~ is the matrix 
~ = 'Y2'Y4 •• "1'2n . 
(32.A.13) 
(32.A.14) 

Appendix 
Spinors in Higher Dimensions 
403 
Taking account of the factor -i in Eq. (32.A.5), we can write this in terms 
of Minkowskian components as 
(32.A.15) 
where 
P = Y2n = -iyo . 
(32.A.16) 
In any even dimension we may define a matrix 'Y2n+l that plays a role 
similar to that of Ys in four dimensions. We take 
·n 
Y2n+l = l ')/1')/2 · · · 'l'2n · 
(32.A.17) 
The phase here is chosen so that 
Yin+l = 1 · 
(32.A.18) 
From the anticommutation relations (32.A.l ), it follows immediately that 
Y2n+1 anticommutes with the other gamma matrices 
{Y2n+1, yJ.t} = 0 
for Jl = 1, 2, ... , 2n- 1, 0. 
(32.A.19) 
It is straightforward to check that 'Y2n+1 is real and symmetric 
Yin+l = Yin+l = 'l'~1+l = 'l'2n+1 · 
(32.A.20) 
From Eq. (32.A.19) we see that 'Y2n+l commutes with the generators 
(32.A.2) of the 0(2n- 1, 1) algebra: 
(32.A.21) 
so that the / f-IV cannot furnish an irreducible representation of the algebra 
of 0(2n -
1, 1 ). 
Instead, we may define a pair of 'Weyl' irreducible 
representations by projecting out the subspaces with 'l'2n+l = + 1: 
d± = 
d 
{ 1 ± 'l'2n+l) 
./' {.IV -
./' {.IV 
~ 
2 
• 
(32.A.22) 
From Eq. (32.A.l5) and the relation (C:Cp)- 1Y2n+1CCP = -(-l)nY2n+l we find 
that the complex conjugate and transpose of the Weyl Lorentz generators 
are 
(32.A.23) 
(32.A.24) 
Hence, for n even, the Weyl irreducible representations are equivalent to 
complex conjugates of each other, while for n odd each is equivalent to its 

404 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
own complex conjugate.* For n odd, we still have to decide whether the 
Weyl representations are real, which would mean that there is a matrix !7 
such that 
(32.A.25) 
or pseudoreal, in which case there is no such !/. Using Eq. (32.A.23), the 
condition (32.A.25) may be written as the requirement that g-1 !/*(r'fJ'p)-1 
commutes with all J*v· Since the matrices J$ form an irreducible set, 
this would require that g-1 g•(r'fJ'p)-1 be proportional to the unit matrix 
r'fi'P = cx!/-1 g• , 
(32.A.26) 
with ex some constant. For this to be possible, we must have 
(32.A.27) 
But r'fi'P = Y2Y4 · · · Y2n-2. and since all Yi with i even are imaginary, we have 
(32.A.28) 
where 
a= (n- 1) + (n- 2) + · · · + 1 = n(n- 1)/2. 
(32.A.29) 
Hence the Weyl representations can only be real for n = 1 (mod 4) and 
must be pseudoreal for n = 3 (mod 4). 
We also note for use in Section 32.1 that 
r'fj'T = ( -1)n(n+1)/2r'fj', 
r'fj'-1 = (-l)n{n-1)f2r'fj', 
(32.A.30) 
and therefore Eq. (32.A.13) gives 
(r'flyll)T = (-1t(n-l)/2r'flyll. 
The yll form a vector, in the sense that 
Lf J!V• Yp] = -iy11'lvp + iYv'IIIP • 
and they have normal parity, in the sense that 
P Yo P = +yo , P YiP = -yi for i = 1, ... , 2n - 1 . 
(32.A.31) 
(32.A.32) 
(32.A.33) 
The anticommutation relation (32.A.1) prevents us from constructing new 
tensors by taking symmetric products of ys, but it allows us to construct 
• We say that one representation of the Lorentz algebra by matrices 21'• (such as / I'• 
or /t. or/;..) is the complex conjugate of another representation by matrices ..2"~. if 
2~. = -2; •. The minus sign is included because the matrices that represent elements 
of the Lorentz group in the neighborhood of the identity are of the form 1 + !i w~'' 2 ll•• 
with w~" real infinitesimals. 

Appendix 
Spinors in Higher Dimensions 
405 
antisymmetric tensors of rank up to 2n 
'YlP1YI'2 · • · 'Yilpl, 
(32.A.34) 
where the square brackets indicate antisymmetrization, and p < 2n. Each 
has a number of independent spacetime components given by the binomial 
coefficient ( ~n ) , so the total number of matrices of this type is 
2n L ( 2n) = 22n. 
p=O 
p 
(32.A.35) 
None of these vanishes (as can be seen by calculating their squares) and 
they all have different Lorentz andjor parity transformation rules and are 
therefore linearly independent, so any 2n x 2n matrix may be written as a 
linear combination of the 22n antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34). 
Odd Dimensions: d = 2n + 1 
Now let us consider an odd spacetime dimensionality d = 2n + 1. We 
can easily find a set of 2n + 1 Dirac n x n matrices satisfying the 
anticommutation relations (32.A.l): we simply use the same yl' with 
f.l = 1, 2, ... 2n- 1, 0 as ford= 2n, and add the matrix 1'2n+l defined by 
Eq. (32.A.l7). According to Eqs. (32.A.18) and (32.A.19) these gamma ma-
trices satisfy the anticommutation relations (32.A.l), with f.l and v running 
over the values 1, 2, ... , 2n - 1, 0, 2n + 1, and again ')'o = i'Y2n· 
Unlike the case of even dimensionality, we cannot here find any non-
trivial matrix that commutes with all the Lorentz generators, because 
Eqs. (32.A.17) and (32.A.18) show that the product of the 2n + 1 gamma 
matrices is trivial: 
Y1 Y2 · · · 1'2n1'2n+l = i-n · 1 . 
(32.A.36) 
The Lorentz generators (32.A.2) with f.l and v running over the values 
1, 2, ... , 2n - 1, 0, 2n + 1 therefore furnish an irreducible representation 
of the Lorentz group by themselves. To test their reality properties, 
we note that 1'2n+1 is real and symmetric and satisfies (rcp)-1Y2n+1rcp = 
-(-1)n1'2n+1• so Eq. (32.A.15) applies for f.l = 2n + 1 as well as for 
f.l = 1, 2, ... , 2n- 1, 0. The Lorentz generators therefore satisfy 
J~v = -(rcp)-1 J ~'"rep, 
(32.A.37) 
(32.A.38) 
so in each odd dimension the fundamental spinor representation is either 
real or pseudoreal. Exactly the same argument as in the case where d = 2n 

406 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
tells us that the spinor representations for d = 2n + 1 are again real or 
pseudoreal according to whether the sign (-1)0 in Eq. (32.A.28) is positive 
or negative, and therefore according to Eq. (32.A.29) they are real for 
n = 0 (mod 4) and n = 1 (mod 4) and pseudoreal for n = 2 (mod 4) and 
n = 3 (mod 4). 
We can again construct antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34 ), now of rank p 
up to 2n + 1, but only half of these are independent, because they obey 
relations 
(32.A.39) 
with ell11J2···1J211+1 as usual totally antisymmetric. (For d = 2n no such rela-
tions are possible, because the left- and right-hand sides of Eq. (32.A.39) 
have opposite parity, but this argument does not apply for d = 2n + 1, 
where e/Jim ... iJ211+1 has even spatial parity.) The total number of independent 
matrices of the form (32.A.34) is now given by 
t. e": 
1 
) ~ 2'"' . 
(32.A.40) 
so any 2n x 2n matrix may be written as a linear combination of the n + 1 
independent antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34) with 0 < p < n + 1. 
Finally, we note that for either d = 2n or d = 2n + 1, the O(d- 1, 1) 
Dirac and Lorentz algebras are related to the corresponding O(d) algebras 
by setting 
Y2n = -iyo, 
(32.A.41) 
so that 
{Yi, Yj} = 2o;i, 
(32.A.42) 
and 
(32.A.43) 
with i and j running from 1 to d. It follows from Eq. (32.A.42) that for 
i =/= j, /~ = 1/4, so the eigenvalues of each /;i are limited to +1/2. To 
be more specific, in the fundamental spinor representation the generators 
of the Cartan subalgebra are represented by 
1 [ 
• 
• 
1 
/2u-12u = 2 au, au] = auau- 2 ' 
(32.A.44) 
for which the basis vectors (3~.A.8) are eigenvectors, with 
/2u-12uls1 s2 ... sn) = (su- ~) js1 s2 "'Sn). 
(32.A.45) 

References 
407 
The difference between dimensionalities d = 2n and d = 2n + 1 is that 
for d = 2n we have two fundamental spinor representations in which the 
eigenvalue (-2ut)(-2uz) · · · (-2un) ofYZn+l is constrained to be +1 or -1, 
while for d = 2n + 1 there is one fundamental spinor representation with 
no such limitation on the u u· 
It was the limitation of the eigenvalues of each ,lij to +1/2 that in 
Section 32.1 identified the fundamental spinor representations as the only 
possible representations of the Lorentz algebra that could be furnished 
by fermionic symmetry generators. Indeed, from this condition we could 
have inferred that the O(d) generators may be represented in a basis of 
the form (32.A.8), with Su = Uu + 1/2, and carried out the derivations of 
this appendix in reverse order, using Eqs. (32.A.4H32.A.7) (along with 
Eq. (32.A.17) ford odd) to express the Lorentz generators in terms of a 
set of yf.l. satisfying the anticommutation relations (32.A.1). 
Problems 
1. Classify the massless particle multiplets for each allowed kind of 
supersymmetry in six spacetime dimensions, when all central charges 
vanish. 
2. Suppose that it were possible to have massless particles for all spins 
up to j = 3, but no higher. Taking into account the fact that 
massless particles of spin 2 do exist, what is the maximum spacetime 
dimensionality in which supersymmetry is possible? What is the 
maximum number of supersymmetry generators for each allowed 
value of the spacetime dimensionality? 
3. Consider types IIA and liB supersymmetry in ten spacetime dimen-
sions. Assume that only scalar central charges appear in the extended 
supersymmetry anticommutation relations. Find a lower bound on 
particle masses in terms of these central charges. Describe the 'BPS' 
massive particle multiplets allowed for particles whose masses are at 
this lower bound. 
4. List the possible independent scalar and/ or tensor central charges 
for N = 1 supersymmetry in nine spacetime dimensions. 
References 
1. T. Kaluza, Sitz. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Kl, 966 ( 1921 ). 
2. 0. Klein, Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926); Nature 118, 516 (1926). 

408 
32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions 
3. J. H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B46, 61 (1972); R. C. Brower and K. A. 
Friedman, Phys. Rev. D7, 535 (1972). 
4. The supergravity field theory in 11 spacetime dimensions was for-
mulated by E. Cremmer, B. Julia, and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett. 76B, 
409 (1978). The idea that weakly coupled Type IIA string theories 
in 10 spacetime dimensions have an 11-dimensional origin is due to 
M. J. Duff, P. S. Howe, T. Inami, and K. Stelle, Phys. Lett. Bl91, 
70 (1987). This was shown for strongly coupled Type IIA string 
theories in ten dimensions by P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350, 
184 (1995). Connections between these theories and all the other 
ten-dimensional string theories were then pointed out by E. Witten, 
Nucl. Phys. B445, 85 (1995). 
5. 
R. Haag, J. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257 
(1975). 
6. W. Nahm, Nucl. Phys. Bl35, 149 (1978). 
6a. See, for example, H. W. Turnbull and A. C. Aitkens, An Introduction 
to the Theory of Canonical Matrices (Dover Publications, New York, 
1961). 
6b. A useful summary is given by J. Strathdee, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A2, 
273 (1987). 
7. For these arguments in four spacetime dimensions, see S. Weinberg, 
Phys. Rev. 135, B1049 (1964); Phys. Rev. 138, B988 (1965); R. P. 
Feynman, unpublished; M. T. Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys. 
Lett. 67B, 323 (1977). The arguments in higher spacetime dimensions 
are similiar. 
8. See, for example, J. Hughes, J. Liu, and J. Polchinski, Phys. Lett. 
B180, 370 (1986); E. Bergshoeff, E. Sezgin, P. K. Townsend, Phys. 
Lett. B189, 75 (1987); A. Achucarro, J. M. Evans, P. K. Townsend, 
and D. L. Wiltshire, Phys. Lett. B198, 441 (1987); P. K. Townsend, 
Phys. Lett. B202, 53 (1988); P. K. Townsend, in Particles, Strings, 
and Cosmology: Proceedings of Workshop on Current Problems in 
Particle Theory 19 at Johns Hopkins University, March 1995 (World 
Scientific, Singapore, 1996); J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 
2, 231 (1998). For reviews, see M. J. Duff, R. R. Khuri, and J .• x. 
Lu, Phys. Rep. 259, 213 (1995); A. Giveon and D. Kutasov, 1998 
preprint hep-th/9802067, to be published in Rev. Mod. Phys. 
9. J. W. van Holten and A. Van Proeyen, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 15, 
3763 (1982). 
10. J. A. de Azcitrraga, J. P. Gauntlett, J. M. Izquierdo, and P. K. 
Townsend Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2443 (1989). 

References 
409 
11. D. Sorokin and P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B412, 265 (1997); J. 
P. Gauntlett, J. Gomis, and P. K. Townsend, J. High Energy Phys. 
9801, 003 (1998). 
12. The covariant field equations for these 2-branes were given by E. 
Bergshoeff, E. Sezgin, P. K. Townsend, Ref. 8 and Ann. Phys. (NY) 
185, 330 (1988). The demonstration that these 2-branes are solutions 
of the supergravity field equations that provide sources for the 3-
form gauge field is due to M. J. Duff and K. Stelle, Phys. Lett. 8253, 
113 (1991). 
13. The demonstration that these 5-branes are solutions of the super-
gravity field equations that provide sources for the 6-form gauge field 
was given by R. Gueven, Phys. Lett. 8276, 49 (1992). The covariant 
field equations for these 5-branes were given by M. Aganagic, J. 
Park, C. Popescu, and J. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B496, 191 (1997); P. 
S. Howe and E. Sezgin, Phys. Lett. 8394, 62 (1997); P. Pasti, D. 
Sorokin, and M. Tonin, Phys. Lett. 8398, 41 (1997); P. S. Howe, E. 
Sezgin, and P. C. West, Phys. Lett. 8399, 49 (1997); I. Bandos, K. 
Lechner, A. Nurm.agambetov, lP. Pasti, D. Sorokin, and M. Tonin, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4332 (1997). 


Author Index 
Where page numbers are given in italics, they 
refer to publications cited in lists of references. 
Abreu, P. 245 
Achucarro, A. 408 
AfHeck, I. 266, 285, 286, 306, 381 
Aganagic, M. 409 
Aharonov, Y. 23 
Aitkens, A. C. 408 
Akulov, V. P. 7, 23 
Alvarez-Gaume, L. 245, 380 
Amaldi, U. 243 
Antoniadis, I. 241, 306 
Arkani·Hamed N. 241, 246 
Arnowitt, R. 244, 245, 247, 379, 380 
Astbury, A. 245 
Axen, D. 245 
Babu, K. S. 244, 246, 247 
Bagger, J. 242, 243, 246, 306, 379 
Bais, F. A. 177 
Bandos, I. 409 
Banks, T. 242, 381 
Barate, R. 245 
Barbieri, R. 244, 380 
Barger, V. 243 
Beg, M.A. 23 
Belyaev, V. M. 247 
Bennett, J. R. J. 242 
Berezin, F. A. 86, 112 
Bergshoeff, E. 408, 409 
Bessis, D. 176 
Binetruy, P. 381 
Bogomol'nyi, E. B. 177 
Braaten, E. 244 
Breitenlohner, P. 177 
Brignole, A. 245 
Brink, L. 177 
411 
Brower, R. C. 408 
Buras, A. J. 244, 245 
Capper, D. M. 316 
Carena, M. 245 
Casas, J. A. 381 
Casher, A. 23 
Chacko, Z. 381 
Chamseddine, A. H. 247, 380 
Choudhury, S. R. 244 
Chun, E. J. 246 
Claudson, M. 245 
Cleaver, G. 246 
Cohen, A. G. 242 
Coleman, S. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 
20, 23, 177, 330, 379 
Cordes, S. F. 306 
Cox, P. H. 244 
Cremmer, E. 380, 408 
Cvetic, J. R. 246 
D'Adda, A. 177 
Dai, J. 244 
Das, A. 380 
Davis, A. C. 266, 306 
Dawson, S. 243, 245 
de Azcarraga, J. A. 408 
de Boer, W. 243 
de Luccia, F. 330, 379 
De Rujula, A. 244 
de Wit, B. 158, 159, 177 
Delbourgo, R. 23, 316, 317 
Oeser, S. 112, 379, 380 
Di Vecchia, P. 177 
Dicus, A. 242, 244, 246 

412 
Author Index 
Dienes, K. R. 243 
Dimopoulos, S. 193, 241, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 247 
Dine, M. 176, 244, 245, 246, 266, 285, 
286, 306, 381 
Dixon, L. 242 
Donoghue, J. F. 243 
Dubovsky, S. L. 246 
Duff, M. 244, 245, 408, 409 
Dugan, M. 244 
Dutta, B. 246 
Dvali, G. 241, 242, 246 
Dykstra, H. 244 
Dyson, F. J. 22 
Efthimiou, C. 176 
Ellis, J. 188, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 
247, 380 
Espinosa, J. R. 246 
Evans, J. M. 408 
Everett, L. 246 
Farrar, G. 242 
Fayet, P. 176, 177, 242, 380 
Feng, J. L. 242 
Ferrara, S. 23, 54, 112, 176, 242, 244, 
305, 306, 316, 379, 380 
Feynman, R. P. 408 
Fischler, W. 176, 245 
Freed, D. 112 
Freedman, D. Z. 158, 159, 177, 379, 
380 
Friedman, K. A. 408 
Fujikawa, K. 316 
Furstmann, H. 243 
Gabbiani, F. 244, 245 
Gabrielli, E. 244, 245 
Gaillard, M. K. 203, 244, 381 
Galperin, A. 306 
Gatto, R. 244 
Gauntlett, J. P. 408, 409 
Gava, E. 306 
Gavela, M. B. 244 
Gell-Mann, M. 1, 23, 24, 152 
Georgi, H. 193, 242, 243, 245 
Gervais, J.-L. 5, 23 
Gildener, E. 241 
Girardello, L. 176, 178, 306, 380 
Giudice, G. F. 226, 228, 242, 246, 380, 
381 
Giunti, C. 243 
Giveon, A. 178, 408 
Gliozzi, F. 7, 23, 379 
Gol'fand, Yu. A 7, 23 
Gomis, J. 112, 409 
Gorbunov, D. S. 246 
Goto, T. 247 
Gracia, X. 112 
Green, M. B. 23 
Greene, B. 17 6 
Greenberg 0. W. 23 
Griffiths, P. 112 
Grimm, R. 177 
Grinstein, B. 244 
Grisaru, M. T. 45, 54, 112, 176, 317, 
379, 408 
Grossman, Y. 244 
GrUnewald, M. 245 
Gueven, R. 409 
Gunion, J. F. 243, 246 
Gursey, F. 22 
Haag, R. 24, 25, 53, 54, 382, 383, 408 
Haber, H. E. 243, 246 
Hagelin, J. S. 242, 244, 247 
Hall, L. J. 243, 244, 380 
Halperin, A. 177 
Hamaguchi, K. 381 
Harada, K. 176 
Harris, J. 112 
Harris, P. G. 244 
He, X.-G. 244 
Heinemayer, S. 245 
Hisano, J. 242, 247 
Hollik, W. 245 
Honerkamp, J. 316 
Horava, P. 243 
Horsley, R. 177 
Howe, P. 177, 408, 409 
Hughes, J. 249, 306, 408 
Ibanez, L. E. 247, 380 
Ibrahim, T. 244 

Iliopoulos, J. 112, 176 
Inami, T. 408 
Intrilligator, K. 306 
Ivanov, E. A. 177 
Izawa, K. I. 381 
Izquierdo, J. M. 408 
Julia, B. 177, 380, 408 
Kac, V. G. 279, 306 
Kagan, A. 244, 245 
Kaluza, T. 382, 407 
Kane, G. L. 243 
Kaplan, D. B. 242, 381 
Kaplunovsky, V. 381 
Karlen, D. 245 
Katz, E. 380 
Kelley, S. 243, 244 
Khuri, R. R. 408 
Kim, c. w. 243 
Kim, J. E. 246, 381 
Kizuri, Y. 244 
Klein, 0. 382, 407 
Kolb, E. W. 242 
Kolda, C. 242, 243, 244, 246 
Kounnas, C. 380 
Kovacs, S. 17 8 
Krause, F. 316 
Kurosawa, K. 242 
Kutasov, D. 408 
Lahanas, A B. 380 
Lang, W 247, 316 
Langacker, P. 243, 246, 247 
Le Yaouanc, A. 244 
Lechner, K. 409 
Lee, B. W. 203, 242, 244 
Lee, U. W. 243 
Leibrandt, G. 316 
Leigh, R. 244 
Leon, J. M. 380 
Lepeintre, F. 242 
Levy, M. 112 
L~ C. S. 244 
Likhtman, E. P. 7, 23 
Lindgren, 0. 177 
Lindner, M. 244 
Author Index 
Liu, J. 249, 306, 408 
Lopez, J. 244 
413 
Lopuszanski, J. T. 24, 25, 53, 54, 382, 
383, 408 
Louis, J. 381 
Low 152 
Lu, J.-X. 408 
Lucas, V. 247 
Luo, M.-X. 243 
Luty, M. A. 246, 380, 381 
Lykken, J. 241, 380 
Maclntire, D. A. 381 
Maksymyk, I. 381 
Maldacena, J. 408 
Mandelstam, S. 177 
Mandula, J. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19, 
20, 23 
Manohar, A. 245 
March-Russell, J. 244 
Martin, S. P. 243, 246 
Masiero, A. 242, 244, 245, 381 
Matchev, K. T. 243 
McGlinn, W. D. 23 
McKellar, S. R. 244 
Michel, L. 23 
Misiak, M. 245 
Mohapatra, R. N. 242 
Montonen, C. 174, 177 
Moroi, T. 381 
Munoz, c. 247, 381 
Miinz, M. 245 
Murayama, H. 247, 380 
Nahun, W. 379,383,408 
Nandi, S. 246 
Nanopoulos, D. V. 242, 243, 244, 245, 
247, 380 
Nappi, C. 245 
Nath, P. 244, 247, 379, 380 
Ne'erman, Y. 1, 24 
Nelson, A. E. 242, 246, 381 
Neveu, A. 5, 23, 177 
Nihe~ T. 247 
Nilles, H. P. 176, 242, 243, 246, 380 
Nilsson, B. E. W. 177 
Nir, Y. 244, 245, 246 

414 
Author Index 
Nomura, Y. 242, 381 
Novikov, V. A. 306 
Nunnagambetov, A. 409 
O'Raifeartaigh, L. 23, 83, 112 
Ogievetsky, V.I. 177 
Ohta, N. 380 
Olive, D. 7, 23, 174, 177, 242 
Oliver, L. 244 
Osborn, H. 177, 178 
Oshimo, N. 244 
Ovrut, B. 245 
Paban, S. 244, 245 
Pagels, H. 243 
Pais, A. 22, 23 
Pakvasa, S. 244 
Palumbo, F. 176 
Panvini, R. S. 243 
Park, J. 409 
Parke, S. 177 
Partouche, H. 306 
Pasti, P. 409 
Pati, 1. C. 247 
Peccei, R. D. 242 
Pendleton, H. N. 45, 54, 379, 408 
Pene, 0. 244 
Pham, T. N. 244 
Piguet, 0. 316 
Pokorski, S. 245 
Polchinski, J. 23, 176, 242, 244, 249, 
306,380,408 
Polonsky, N. 242, 243, 246 
Polonyi, J. 380 
Pomerol, A. 242, 246, 380 
Pons, J. 112 
Ponton, E. 381 
Popescu, C. 409 
Porrati, M. 178, 306 
Prasad, M. K. 177 
Primack, J. R. 177, 243 
Quinn, H. 242, 243 
Quiros, M. 245, 380 
Raby, S. 176, 242, 243, 245, 246, 247 
Radicatti, L. A. 22 
Ramon Medrano, M. 380 
Ramond, P. 5, 23 
Randall, L. 245, 380, 381 
Rarita, W. 333, 380 
Rattazzi, R. 226, 228, 244, 246, 380 
Raynal, J.-C. 244 
Ridolfi, G. 245 
Riotto, A. 242 
Robinson, J. 245 
Roeek, M. 176, 177, 317 
Ross, G. 247 
Rossi, G. C. 306 
Roszkowski, L. 246 
Rudaz, S. 247 
Sakai, N. 176, 243, 246 
Sakita, B. 5, 22, 23 
Salam, A. 23, 55, 59, 60, 112, 176, 242, 
316 
Samuel, S. 245 
Sarid, U. 243 
Savoy, C. A 380 
Scherk, J. 7, 23, 177, 379, 380, 408 
Scheunert, M. 316 
Schlindwein, M. 316 
Schwarz, J. H. 5, 23, 177, 408, 409 
Schwinger, J. 177, 333, 380 
Seiberg, N. 148, 176, 177, 226, 244, 
246, 266, 285, 286, 287, 291, 292, 
299,302,303,306,307,381 
Sen, A. 178 
Sezgin, E. 408, 409 
Shadmi, Y. 380 
Shifman, M.A. 306 
Shirman, Y. 245, 246, 380 
Siegel, W. 176, 177, 317 
Silvestrini, L. 244, 245 
Smilga, A. V. 279, 306 
Smith, J. R. 241 
Smith, P. F. 242 
Sohnius, M. 24, 25, 53, 54, 177, 382, 
383, 408 
Sola, J. 243 
Sommerfield, C. M. 177 
Soper, D. E. 243, 306 
Sorokin, D. 409 

Author Index 
415 
Srednicki, M. 242, 245, 380 
Stelle, K. S. 177, 244, 245, 379, 380, 
408, 409 
Strathdee, J. 23, 55, 59, 60, 112, 176, 
242, 316, 408 
Sundrum, R. 380, 381 
Susskind, L. 23, 176 
Sutter, D. 243, 244 
Symanzik, K. 176 
Takita, M. 247 
Tamvakis, K. 246, 247, 380 
Tanaka, T. 244 
Taylor, T. R. 306 
Teitelboim, C. 379 
Teplitz, V. L. 242 
Thomas, S. 245, 246 
Tommasini, D. 242 
Tonin, M. 409 
Townsend, P. K. 177, 380, 408, 409 
Troitsky, S. V. 246 
Turnbull, H. W. 408 
Vafa, C. 178 
Vainshtein, A. I. 306 
van der Waerden 30 
van Holten, J. W. 408 
van Nieuwenhuizen, P. 242, 379, 380 
Van Proeyen, A 380, 408 
Vegas, F. J. 244 
Veneziano, G. 306 
Volkov, D. V. 7, 23 
Vysotsky, M. I. 247 
Wagner, C. E. M. 245 
Wall, K. C. 23 
Wang, J. 246 
Weiglein, G, 245 
Weiler, T. J. 243 
Weinberg, S. 23, 176, 241, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 379, 380, 408 
Wells, J.D. 246 
Wess, J. 6, 7, 8, 23, 59, 83, l12, 176, 
379 
West, P. C. 177, 379, 380, 409 
Wigner, E. P. 1, 10, 22 
Wilczek, F. 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 
247 
Wiltshire, D. L. 408 
Wise, M. B. 244, 245, 380 
Witten, E. 23, 177, 178, 243, 249, 278, 
287, 291, 292, 294, 299, 302, 303, 
305, 306, 408 
Wolfram, S. 242 
Wu, Y.-Y. 381 
Wyler, D. 243, 380 
Yanagida, T. 246, 247, 381 
Yildiz, A. 244 
Yuan, T. C. 244 
Zaffaroni, A. 178 
Zakharov, V. I. 306 
Zee, A. 177, 246 
Zhang, R.-J. 242, 244 
Zumino, B. 6, 7, 8, 23, 54, 59, 83, 106, 
112, 176, 379, 380 
Zwanziger, D. 177 
Zwirner, F. 245, 246 

Subject Index 
Ah terms, 199-201, 234, 341, 363 
anomalies, 45, 101, 147, 181, 267-8, 
294, 339 
anomaly-mediated 
supersymmetry 
breaking, 337--41, 364 
anti-de Sitter space, 330 
auxiliary fields, 59, 78, 119, 133, 145, 
323, 327-8, 350 
axion, see Peccei-Quinn symmetry 
Baker-Hausdorff formula, 115 
baryon and lepton number non-
conservation, 182--4, 235--40 
baryon parity, 240 
P angle, defined, 213 
bino, 180, 222-6, 229, 238, 340, 364 
BJt term, 199-201, 211, 232-3, 363 
BPS states, 52-53, 166, 300 
~-matrix, 108, 402 
Cartan subalgebra, 163, 280 
Casimir constants C1 and C2, 267, 278-
9 
central charges, 30-1, 35-6, 163--5,296, 
385-6, 389-92, 398-401 
also see BPS states 
Ch terms, 199-201, 234, 363, 374 
charginos, 219-20 
chiral superfields, 68-7 4, 346-7 
Coleman-Mandula theorem, 2, 12-21, 
382, 397-8 
collapsed supermultiplet, 48, 51 
complexi:fication of symmetries, 106-7, 
135 
component fields 
of chiral superfields, 68-72 
416 
of general superfields, 61-64 
of metric superfield, 322-3 
conformal symmetry 
in 2 dimensions, 5 
in 4 dimensions, 21-2 
connection matrix r, 114 
cosmic abundances, 186--8 
cosmological constant, 157, 348, 359, 
371 
covariant derivative Dll, 343--4 
CP-non-conservation, 204--9, 234 
CP-odd scalar A, 214 
current superfields, 89-90 
curvature Rllv ab in vierbein formalism, 
378 
D-terms in action, 65, 72, 76-7, 87, 
103--5, 347 
de 
Wit-Freedman 
transformation, 
158-60 
de Sitter space, 330 
Dirac matrices, xx-xxi, 401-7 
dotted indices, xx, 30 
duality, 174-5, 292--4 
dyons, 167,297,300-2 
Einstein-Hilbert action, 328 
Einstein superfield, 326-7 
Einstein tensor, 326, 332 
electric dipole moments, see CP-non~ 
conservation 
electroweak symmetry breaking, 180-
1, 219 
energy-momentum tensor Tllv, 98-99, 
324 

Subject Index 
417 
extended supersymmetry, 36, 45-7, 
160-75 
also see Seiberg-Witten solution 
external field translation symmetry, 
150-1, 268 
F-parameter of broken supersym-
metry, 258-9, 336-7 
!F -terms in action, 72, 77-8, 87, 125-6, 
131, 141-4, 181-2, 185, 348 
Fayet-Iliopoulos terms, 124, 144, 152-
3 
finiteness of N = 4 theories, 174 
fiat directions, 84-5, 154, 163 
flavor-changing processes, 
198-201, 
218 
gauge-mediated supersymmetry break-
ing, 220---35 
gauge superfield Wa, 125-7, 130-1 
gauginos, 119, 143-4, 189, 281, 339, 
363-4, 374-5 
gaugino condensation, 284-5, 366 
also see gluinos, winos, binos 
Geli-Mann-Low equations, see renor-
malization group equations 
generalized 
gauge 
transformations, 
116-7 
generalized supersymmetric quantum 
chromodynamics, 267, 270-4 
gluino, 180, 222-6, 229, 237, 340, 364 
goldstino, 85, 147-8, 234, 251, 256, 259, 
262--4 
graded Lie algebras, 25-9 
also see supersymmetry algebras 
gravitino, 45, 188, 196-8, 234, 320---6, 
333-7, 349, 356, 359, 368 
gravity-mediated 
supersymmetry 
breaking, 355-75 
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem, 
30-40 
heterotic supergravity, 397 
hidden sector, 195, 355-7, 365 
hierarchy problem, 179, 185, 194, 355-
6 
Higgs fields and superfields, 180-1, 
210-9, 226-32 
higgsinos, 181, 183, 190-2 
holomorphy arguments, 150, 226-7, 
266--76 
hypermultiplets, 46-7, 167, 300 
instantons, 131-2, 268, 270, 284, 295 
Jacobi and super-Jacobi identities, 26 
Kahler manifolds, 106-7 
Kahler metric, 105, 350 
modified, 352-3 
Kahler potential, 73, 102-6, 349 
modified, 352-3 
left-chiral superfields, see chiral super-
fields 
lepton number non-conservation, see 
baryon and lepton number non-
conservation 
lepton superfields, 180 
linear superfields, 75, 90 
little group, 393 
local supersymmetry, 93-4, 341-3 
M theory, 382, 395, ~1 
magnetic monopoles, 52, 166-7, 294, 
300-2 
Majorana potential, 10 
Majorana spinors, xvili, 58, 81, 107-11 
masses 
for broken supersymmetry, 145-8, 
193-4 
for unbroken supersymmetry, 136-
40 
sum rule, 147, 192 
also see charginos, gauginos, Higgs 
fields, 
neutralinos, 
sleptons, 
squarks, gravitino 
messenger superfields, 220-2, 224 
metric superfield H11, 319-26 
minimal 
supersymmetric 
standard 
model, 198-240 
modular fields, 287-8, 365 
monodromy, 299-304 

418 
Subject Index 
Montonen--Olive duality, see duality 
,u-term, 185, 210, 220, 232-3, 361, 368 
multiplication rules, 64, 71-72, 346-7 
naive dimensional analysis, 208 
naturalness bounds, 186 
neutralinos, 219-30 
next-to-lightest supersymmetric parti-
cle, 234-5 
non-linear u-models, 106-7 
non-renormalization theorems, 148-
55, 269, 313-{) 
no-scale theories, 354 
on shell symmetries, 79, 169 
O'Raifeartaigh models, 83-5, 252-6 
p branes, 397--401 
parity 
in Wess-Zumino model, 83 
of component fields 66, 74 
of superfields, 66, 74 
of supersymmetry generators, 41--42 
Peccei-Quinn symmetry, 185, 214, 232, 
361-2, 365, 368, 373 
photino, 277 
also see bino and wino 
potential of scalar fields, 79, 84-5, 134, 
144, 163, 352--4, 362, 371-2 
potential superfields, 88-9, 308-9, 359, 
361 
prepotential, 291 
proton decay, see baryon and lepton 
number non-conservation 
quantum chromodynamics, see gen-
eralized supersymmetric quantum 
chromodynamics, gluino, squark 
quark superfields, 180 
R-symmetry, 36-7, 40, 45, 74-5, 84, 
1o1, 171-3,182,267-8,284-5,290-
2, 392 
current 9fll, 1()()-1 
R-parity, 184, 236 
Ranta-Schwinger equation, 
333-5, 
344 
reduced coupling constants, 208 
renormalizability conditions, 76 
renormalization group equations, 149, 
173--4,188-92,269,279,339 
right-chiral superfields, see chiral su-
perfields 
scale non-invariance superfield X, 97, 
324, 338 
Seiberg-Witten solution, 287-305 
short supermultiplets, see BPS states 
S L(2, Z) symmetry, 296 
sleptons, 180,189,223-4,229,363,374 
space inversion, see parity 
sparticles, 43 
also see gauginos, squarks, sleptons, 
higgsinos, charginos, neutralinos 
spin, in higher dimensions, 393, 401-7 
spin connection w:/', 343--4, 377 
squarks, 180,186,189,223-4,229,363, 
374 
strings, 4--7, 175, 183, 240, 365, 382, 
396-7 
SU(4) symmetry, in nuclear physics, 1, 
10 
SU(6) symmetry, in quark model, 1, 
8-12 
sum rules for supersymmetry current, 
256-66 
superconformal symmetry 
in 2 dimensions, 6 
in 4 dimensions, 38-40 
supercurrent E}ll, 90, 96-102, 321, 323-
5 
superderivatives !lJa, defined, 64-5 
superfields, 59-68 
field equations, 96-7 
also see chiral superfields, current 
superfields, linear superfields, po-
tential superfields, gauge super-
fields, Higgs superfields, quark su-
perfields, lepton superfields, mes-
senger superfields, metric super-
field, supercurrent, Einstein super-
field, scale-non-invariance super-
field 

Subject Index 
419 
supergraphs, 307-16 
supergravity, 45, 318-9, 395 
for weak fields, 319--43 
to all orders, 343-55 
also see gravitino, anomaly-mediated 
supersyrnmetry breaking, gravity-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, 
heterotic supergravity, types liA 
and liB supergravity 
supermultiplets 
massive particles in 4 dimensions, 
48-52 
massless particles in 4 dimensions, 
43-7 
massless particles in higher dimen-
sions, 393-7 
superpotential, 73, 82, 149-52, 266-76 
superpropagators, see supergraphs 
superspace, 60 
field equations 87-9 
integrals 86 
also see superfields, superderivatives 
superstrings, see strings 
supersymmetry 
algebras, xx, 29-40, 382-93 
current S~'(x), 90--3, 140-1, 248, 324 
gauge theories, 101-76, 276-87, 353 
generators, see algebras 
history, 1, 4-8 
also see extended supersymmetry, su-
pergravity, minimal supersymmet-
ric standard model 
supersymmetry breaking 
partial breaking, 249-50 
soft breaking, 155-7, 199-201 
spontaneous breaking, 7-8, 80, 134--
6, 153-5, 194--5, 248-56, 276-87 
also see gauge-mediated supersym-
metry breaking, gravity-mediated 
supersymmetry 
breaking, 
anomaly-mediated supersymmetry 
breaking 
surface tension, 330-1 
types IIA and liB supergravity, 396-7 
unconventional symmetries, 1--4 
unification of strong and electroweak 
couplins, 188-92, 221 
unitarity gauge, 136 
vacuum energy density, 33, 249-51, 
257-8, 264-6, 329-31, 333 
vierbein, 319, 375-6 
weight, defined, 383 
Wess-Zumino gauge, 117-9, 159--60 
for supergravity, 323, 341 
Wess-Zumino model, 6-7, 58-9, 82-3, 
252 
Weyl group, 282 
Weyl transformation, 331-3, 351 
Wilsonian Lagrangian, 149-52, 268 
winding number v, 132, 268, 270, 284, 
295 
wino, 180,222-6,229,238,340,364 
Witten index, 251-6, 277-285 
X superfield, see scale-non-invariance 
superfi.eld 
zino, see bino and wino 
Zs symmetry, 295, 298 



