
‘In this trenchant analysis of Europe’s recent economic experience, Hans-Werner Sinn conducts a post-
mortem for the Euro as an ambitious political gambit that has failed to overcome bad incentives and
missing institutions. His forensic investigation uncovers staggering fiscal commitments that have been made
through the conduct of monetary policy and without the explicit recognition or approval of those on whom
the burdens will fall. Sinn issues a call to action, making a compelling case that the most important obstacle
on the path to European stability and prosperity is a system that is illogical and unsustainable. This
excellent book virtually compels a response from those who would substitute hope for facts in their defense
of the Euro and its prospects.’
Alan J. Auerbach, Professor of Economics and Law, University of
California, Berkeley
‘Hans-Werner Sinn has written an exceptional book on the euro crisis—rich in substance and yet
understandable for the layman. It is to be hoped that it not only will be read, but taken to heart by
politicians.’
Ernst Baltensperger, Professor Emeritus of Macroeconomics, University of
Bern
‘Hans-Werner Sinn offers an outstandingly clear overview of the perils posed by excessive sovereign debt
and by the divergence in competitiveness across the EU. The steep increase in the credit that the southern
countries have received from the ECB and the corresponding risk brought upon the assets of the stable
members are rightly emphasised.’
Peter Bernholz, Professor Emeritus of Public Finance, University of Basel
‘Hans-Werner Sinn has emerged as the most prolific and profound economist in Germany, writing on the
euro and indeed much else. This book is a tour de force.’
Jagdish N. Bhagwati, Professor of Economics, Law and International Affairs,
Columbia University, and author of In Defense of Globalization
‘I was riveted. With this book, Sinn has finally written his masterpiece. It is so well written that even non-
economists can easily understand it. It jolts you up without ever veering into hyperbole.’
Friedrich Breyer, Professor of Economics and Public Policy, University of
Konstanz
‘Professor Sinn has again enlightened and provoked us, and offered strong policy medicine. In his view, the
southern tier should temporarily exit the Eurozone, devalue, and establish fiscal order with clear financial
and public balance sheets, hence regaining competitiveness. A ‘new’ EU—restructured as a federal state
with a US-type financial system, tight fiscal constraints on the states, a new ‘target balance’ settlement
system, and interregionally-neutral monetary policy—would then welcome them back on new terms. This
model is contrasted with Sinn’s view of existing policy—forced huge north-to-south capital transfers (‘debt
mutualization’) and a printing-press central bank—which he believes has resulted in recurrent bubbles, the
acceptance of southern tier non-competitiveness, and a history of ‘stumbling from crisis to crisis’. Sinn lays
out all of the relevant issues, and in the process teaches us how Europe got into this pickle. Complex
puzzles are solved, myths exposed, and the arcane explained in non-technical terms. While others will

surely disagree with this analytical and historical perspective, they must now deal with Sinn’s clear
delineation of the relevant issues and explain how they weight and interpret these issues differently. All
readers will gain perspective and learn much from Sinn’s timely effort. The book is a ‘must-read’ for all
who are interested in thinking through the web of difficult questions now facing Europe; I highly
recommend it.’
Robert Haveman, Professor Emeritus of Economics and Public Affairs,
University of Wisconsin-Madison ‘Hans-Werner Sinn is a master at presenting
research findings understandably and yet accurately to a wider readership. An
important book!’
Stefan Homburg, Professor of Public Finance, University of Hannover
‘In his masterly analysis Hans-Werner Sinn unravels the tangled tale of the Euro crisis with remarkable
patience, wisdom and clarity. His painstaking analysis makes it clear that the Eurosystem is unsustainable
without major reforms, and his bold recommendations for how to carry out those reforms deserve to be
taken seriously by everyone.’
Peter W. Howitt, Professor Emeritus of Social Sciences, Brown University
‘Hans-Werner Sinn once again brilliantly manages to explain complex interactions in easily
understandable terms to deliver an important message.’
Otmar Issing, Professor of Economics, Money and International Economic
Relations, University of Frankfurt, and former ECB Chief Economist ‘Sinn
offers a sobering look back combined with a realistic list of options going
forward. A ‘must-read’ for anyone who wants to know where Europe is headed
and what it would take to save the euro.’
Anil K. Kashyap, Professor of Economics and Finance, University of
Chicago
‘Sinn’s forthright acceptance that those who opposed Germany’s adoption of the Euro were right after all,
sets the tough-minded and honest tone of this provocative book, which offers penetrating analysis of what
went wrong—and right—with the system as well as how—and how not—it might be repaired. It is required
reading for all who worry about Europe’s future.’
David Laidler, Professor Emeritus of Economics, University of Western
Ontario
‘ The Euro Trap merits a wide audience. The book has many strengths. It is detailed, but easily read. It
recognizes and agrees that a driving force behind the euro is political—to strengthen Europe and prevent
future wars, so the euro must be strengthened, not abandoned. Most of all, it is honest in showing that the
long euro crisis is not just a financial crisis, as many want us to believe. Differences in costs of production
across Europe prevent recovery. Sinn concludes that to restore competitiveness in the indebted countries
these countries should exit the euro temporarily and depreciate. The author recognizes that making that
adjustment will not be costless or simple, but it is necessary and sufficient to restore growth.’
Allan H. Meltzer, Professor of Political Economy, Carnegie Mellon

University, and Distinguished Visiting Fellow, the Hoover Institution,
Stanford University ‘Hans-Werner Sinn offers a clear, comprehensive analysis
of the euro ‘rescues’. He shows how politicians get mired ever more deeply in
the assumption of liabilities at taxpayers’ expense, although it is already clear
that a large portion of the credits granted will never be repaid. A gripping book
for those who do not blindly swallow political pronouncements, but want to
understand what is actually going on. A must-read for our political
representatives, so that they understand what they are doing.’
Manfred J. M. Neumann, Professor Emeritus and Director of the Institute
for International Economy, University of Bonn ‘ The Euro Trap is a brave
and brilliant analysis of the quagmire that the Eurozone has fallen into. Hans-
Werner Sinn’s lucid and lively description of the monetary transfers from north
to south, and his proposed exit strategies, must be studied carefully by citizens
and policymakers in Europe and around the world.’
William D. Nordhaus, Professor of Economics, Yale University
‘Hans-Werner Sinn has produced perhaps the most important scholarly book on the euro in at least a
decade, one that should be read carefully by all sides of the debate. His aim is to provide balanced
objective insights, not to offer polemic support or criticism. Sinn’s basic thesis is that only by making the
euro system more transparent and more democratic can its potentially very bright future be ensured.’
Kenneth S. Rogoff, Professor of Economics and Public Policy, Harvard
University
‘ The great financial machine is still running, but Hans-Werner Sinn puts me in mind of an exacting, careful
engineer who has detected a design flaw deep in its works that had been overlooked by everyone else. This
is the book of this discovery and it is so thrilling and so full of disquieting detail that I read it in one sitting.’
Frank Schirrmacher, Co-Editor of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
‘Hans-Werner Sinn’s ‘Euro Trap’ starkly lays out the fundamental weaknesses of the Eurosystem. The book
does not limit itself to pointing out the mistaken approach of the euro rescue policies; it also proposes new
strategies to attain long-term stability for the currency union.’
Helmut Schlesinger, former President of the German Bundesbank
‘With his customary energy and directness, Hans-Werner Sinn in this important book rethinks the origins of
the current dangerous weakness in the Eurozone, and considers possible repairs. He sees through the
immediate financial complexity to the deeper underlying problems that have to be resolved. One of these is
that in a monetary union without a common fiscal policy the central bank is driven to de facto fiscal
actions. Another is that the peripheral countries suffer not merely from an overhang of debt but from a
lasting need for real devaluation, with the loss of income it entails. Not everyone will agree with the
remedies Sinn proposes, but then he forces them, if they are serious, to come up with genuine alternatives.
Sinn is a heavyweight.’

Robert M. Solow, Professor Emeritus of Economics, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
‘ The book offers a comprehensive view of the European balance-of-payments crisis and the associated
competitiveness crisis that haunts southern Europe, basing its analysis on a rich body of indisputable, but
so far little or only partially known, empirical facts. This important work lifts a veil from before our eyes.’
Erich W. Streissler, Professor Emeritus of Economics, University of Vienna
‘Hans-Werner Sinn describes what is wrong with the Eurozone in its current form, and that bold reforms
are needed. This book is an important contribution to the Eurozone debate, and a must-read for everyone
who wishes to participate in it.’
Harald Uhlig, Professor in Economics, University of Chicago

THE EURO TRAP

THE EURO TRAP
ON BURSTING BUBBLES , BUDGETS , AND
BELIEFS
HANS-WERNER SINN

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP, United Kingdom Oxford University Press is a department of the
University of Oxford. It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and
education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK
and in certain other countries © Hans-Werner Sinn 2014
The moral rights of the author have been asserted First Edition published in 2014
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University
Press, or as expressly permitted by law, by licence, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should
be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above You must not circulate this
work in any other form and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer Published in the United
States of America by Oxford University Press 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States
of America British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Data available Library of Congress Control
Number: 2014934190
ISBN 978–0–19–870213–9
eISBN 978–0–19–102475–7
Links to third-party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for information only. Oxford
disclaims any responsibility for the materials contained in any third-party website referenced in this work.
All links used in this book were last accessed on 28 February 2014 unless otherwise noted.

For
Meinhard Knoche

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book began as a translation by Julio Saavedra of my German book Die
Target-Falle, which was published in 2012 by Carl Hanser Verlag, Munich.
While the translation of the original German text was excellent, my reworking of
the English manuscript changed the structure of the book entirely. So a new
book emerged. The English text has also been updated to include new policy
topics that have come up since the German original went to press and addresses
a wider audience with different interests. After the refereeing processes, the
book’s figures were updated a second time, most of them including now the full
year 2013.
I received skilled technical support from various people, above all Wolfgang
Meister who helped with the statistics, Christoph Zeiner who constructed the
graphs, and Julio Saavedra who edited the manuscript. Anja Rohwer, Jakob
Eberl, and Christopher Weber helped me to research the literature and performed
various technical tasks. Lisa Giani Contini, Paul Kremmel, Heidi Sherman, and
Justin Tumlinson helped check my English. Jennifer Hinchliffe converted the
manuscript into OUP’s format. I am very grateful for their careful assistance.
Jürgen Stark, Christoph Trebesch, and Timo Wollmershäuser read the entire
manuscript and gave useful comments. I also received helpful remarks on parts
of the book by Philippine Cour-Thimann, Anil Kashyap, Harold James, David
Laidler, and Frank Westermann. I thank them all, as well many others who
allowed me to draw from their wisdom, including Giuseppe Bertola, Beat
Blankart, Michael Burda, Kai Carstensen, Giancarlo Corsetti, Paul De Grauwe,
John Driffill, Achim Dübel, Klaus Engelen, Udo di Fabio, Martin Feldstein,
Carl-Ludwig Holtfrerich, Otmar Issing, Wilhelm Kohler, Kai Konrad, William
Levine, Georg Milbradt, Dietrich Murswiek, Manfred J. M. Neumann, Bernd
Rudolph, Jan Scheithauer, Helmut Schlesinger, Gerlinde Sinn, Jan-Egbert
Sturm, Jens Ulbrich, Akos Valentinyi, Xavier Vives, and Andreas Worms.
Finally, I would like to thank three anonymous referees consulted by the
publisher for their useful comments and those who, after reading the book, gave
OUP the right to publish their endorsements.
Munich, February 2014

CONTENTS
List of Figures
List of Tables
Introduction: The Euro Crisis
1. Wish and Reality
Euro Dynamics
The Euro and Peace
Advantages of the Euro for Trade and Capital Flows
The Path to a Currency Union
The Price of German Reunification?
Transfer and Debt Union
The European Central Bank
2. Bubbles in the Periphery
Importing Capital
The Disappearance of Interest Rate Spreads
The Timing Problem
Relief for Government Budgets
The Lack of Fiscal Discipline
Italy’s Missed Opportunity
The Foreign Debt Problem
Bubbles
Property Prices
Private Wealth
Market or Government Failure?
3. The Other Side of the Coin
Euro Winners and Euro Losers
Capital Exports from the Core to the Periphery
Mass Unemployment in Germany
Agenda 2010

The New Construction Boom
Misunderstanding the Tango
4. The Competitiveness Problem
Why the Current Accounts Improved
Dying Industries
Too Expensive
The Necessary Real Depreciation
Little Progress
How Did Ireland Do It?
The Baltics: Austerity Works
The True Competitors
Caught in the Euro Trap: The Terrors of Deflation
5. The White Knight
The Crash
Help from the Printing Press
Lowering Collateral Standards and Extending Maturities
Moral Hazard
ELA Credit
6. The European Balance-of-Payments Crisis
The Target Balances
Ballooning Target Balances
Why Target Balances are a Measure of Credit
Target Balances as a Public Capital Export
Inside Money, Outside Money, and the Local Printing Press
Crowding out Refinancing Credit in the North
7. Current Accounts, Capital Flight, and Target Balances
Financing Balance-of-Payments Deficits
Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus Living off the Printing Press
Irish Capital Flight
The Flight from Italy and Spain
France in Between
Germany: Exporting for Target Claims

Finland and the Netherlands
Bretton Woods and the European Payment Union
Transfer Roubles
The Swiss Example
How Target-Like Balances Are Settled in the United States
A Fundamental Dichotomy in the Rescue Policies
8. Stumbling Along
The Six Steps of the Crisis
Buying Government Bonds: The SMP
No Risk to Taxpayers?
ESM & Co
Overview of Rescue Funds
The Liability Risk
The OMT Controversy
The Statement of the German Constitutional Court
Banking Union: Bail-in or Bailout?
The Plan
Bailing out the ECB
Undermining the Market Economy and Democracy
9. Rethinking the Eurosystem
Changing Course
Learning from the United States
Hard Budget Constraints
Neutral Money
Unbearable Debt
Restructuring the Debt
A Breathing Currency Union: Between Bretton Woods and the Dollar
The Path Towards Unity
Name Index
Subject Index
Author and Editor Index

LIST OF FIGURES
1.1 Growth in selected countries and regions (2000–2013)
1.2 Unemployment rates in the GIPSIC countries, seasonally adjusted
1.3 Youth unemployment (< 25 years of age) in the GIPSIC countries,
seasonally adjusted
1.4 Protesting against austerity
1.5 Share of exports going to the Eurozone (1999–2012)
1.6 ECB Council voting rights and capital key/exposure 2013
2.1 Capital imports (or the equivalent current account deficits) of the
GIPSIC countries as a share of GDP (1995–2013)
2.2 Ten-year government bond yields (1990–2013)
2.3 Prices of ten-year government bonds
2.4 The interest burden of public debt as a percentage of GDP (1985–
2012/2013)
2.5 Public deficits of selected euro countries
2.6 Total public and private consumption of selected euro countries as a
share of net national income (1995–2013)
2.7 Public debt of the euro countries, 1995 and 2013
2.8 Hypothetical and actual evolution of Italy’s public debt (1995–2013)
2.9 Net foreign asset position and its components (2012)
2.10 Spanish net foreign debt in comparison (2012, € billion)
2.11 Property prices in the Eurozone
2.12 Household wealth (2010)
3.1 Growth of selected euro countries during the crisis (2006–2013, %)
3.2 Growth of selected euro countries before and during the crisis (1995–
2013, %)
3.3 Per capita GDP ranking of euro countries
3.4 The world’s largest capital exporters and a few other countries (1999–
2013)
3.5 Overall net investment as a share of net national income (2003–2007)
3.6 Use of German savings (2003–2007)
3.7 International bank claims vis-à-vis public and private sectors of Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy at the time of the Lehman crisis
3.8 Unemployment rate in Eurozone countries, seasonally adjusted (1995–
2013)

3.9 Capital flows and current account balances in the Eurozone—the
European tango (1995–2013)
4.1 Components of the current accounts, seasonally adjusted (Q1 2002–Q3
2013)
4.2 Net investment income paid by GIPSIC countries to non-residents
4.3 GIPSIC exports, imports, and net interest burden, seasonally adjusted
4.4 Escaping the crisis? Manufacturing output, seasonally adjusted
4.5 Price change from 1995 to 2007 of goods produced in the Eurozone
countries (GDP deflator)
4.6 Spanish wage per worker in construction relative to manufacturing (Q1
1990–Q1 2013)
4.7 Real appreciations and depreciations relative to the respective rest of the
Eurozone (1995–2007)
4.8 Real effective exchange rates (GDP deflator relative to the rest of the
Eurozone)
4.9 Labour income in the public sector and on average (2005–2012)
4.10 Wages in the Baltics (2005–2012)
4.11 Exports and imports in the Baltics, seasonally adjusted (Q1 2002–Q3
2013)
4.12 Wages per hour in manufacturing in the GIPSIC countries in
comparison with eastern EU countries (2012)
5.1 International bank claims vis-à-vis private and public sectors in Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy
6.1 Payment flows in a balance-of-payments equilibrium and a balance-of-
payments crisis
6.2 Cumulative balance-of-payments imbalances in the Eurozone (January
2003—December 2013)
6.3 Target balances by country (peak values August 2012)
6.4 Target balances (grey) and foreign assets, relative to GDP (2012)
6.5 Inside money and outside money of the GIPSIC countries (January 2007
—December 2013)
6.6 The structure of the monetary base and the role of Target balances
(January 2002—December 2013)
6.7 International shifting of refinancing credit as a result of net payment
orders (January 2007—December 2013)
6.8 Crowding out inside money in Germany and Finland
7.1 Net foreign debt, cumulative current account balances, Target liabilities,
and open rescue operations (GIPSIC)
7.2 Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus

7.3 Ireland
7.4 Italy and Spain
7.5 France
7.6 Germany
7.7 Other countries from the northern euro bloc
7.8 Target and ISA balances as a share of GDP in the Eurozone and the
USA, respectively (January 2003–December 2013)
8.1 Eurosystem’s purchases of government bonds under the SMP
8.2 Public credit provided to the GIPSIC countries (December 2013, €
billion)
8.3 Trends in CDS premia for 10-year GIPSIC government bonds
8.4 GIPSIC government and bank debt (December 2013, € billion)
9.1 Full and partial sovereign defaults (1978–2010/2012)

LIST OF TABLES
4.1 Realignment needs in the Eurozone as of Q3 2010 relative to the
Eurozone average
5.1 Changes in the ECB’s refinancing policy (date of implementation)
8.1 International public credit relative to the recipient country’s GDP
(December 2013, %)
8.2 Potential losses for selected euro countries after a GIPSIC default, two
alternative worst-case scenarios (December 2013)
8.3 Maximum potential write-off losses for GIPSIC banks
9.1 Actual and hypothetical public debt-to-GDP ratios (December 2013, %)
9.2 Public credit provided by other governments or multilateral institutions
relative to the recipient country’s actual or hypothetical GDP
(December 2013, %)

INTRODUCTION
The Euro Crisis
The European Union has freed Europeans from the yoke of nationalism and
greatly contributed to freedom and prosperity in the continent. Its stability lies in
the voluntary, mutually advantageous cohesion of its peoples. This stability,
however, is being threatened by the euro crisis, which has given rise to a great
deal of contention and resentment between these peoples and has resurrected
many old ghosts that had long since been presumed dead and buried. As great as
the beneficial effect of the European Union is, just as destructive has been the
impact of the common currency on the cohesion of Europe.
Twenty years ago Europe was brimming with euro enthusiasts, and I was one
of them, unable to understand, or unwilling to hear, the warning voices of older
and more experienced economists. Back then Europe seemed to have arrived at a
stage in its history where a common currency was a logical step towards
preserving peace and promoting greater prosperity on the Old Continent. Sadly,
those high hopes have been brutally dashed. Today the Eurozone is a shambles,
staggering from one crisis to the next. Whilst southern Europe is caught in a
relentless trap of ruined competitiveness, the northern countries find themselves
caught in an unprecedented spiral of rising public debt and liabilities. Only a
masochist could continue to welcome the decision to introduce the euro, writes
Martin Wolf, of the Financial Times.1 The Dutch ex-EU commissioner Frits
Bolkestein, one of the architects of the EU, has argued that the euro project is
doomed and that his country should exit the European Monetary Union.2Jean-
Claude Juncker, ex-President of the Eurogroup, even compared the complacency
of the year 2013 with 1913 when, as he said, no one could have imagined that a
year later a war would break out.3 Although this comparison is largely
overblown, it is certainly true that post-war Europe is currently experiencing an
unprecedented period of aggravation and animosity amongst its peoples, who
feel caught between a rock and a hard place.
The crisis spilled over from US banks to European sovereigns and banks in
2007/2008, triggering the world’s most severe post-war recession to date. This
recession, which was temporarily contained by extensive rescue operations, is
now crushing the real economies of southern European countries.

Unemployment rates in Spain and Greece are edging towards 30%, a level last
seen in the world during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Youth
unemployment rates, meanwhile, have soared to about 60% in these countries.
Even Italy’s has exceeded 40%. Industrial production in Spain, Italy, and Greece
was devastated by a double-dip recession, if not depression, whilst France and
Portugal are doing extremely poorly. Even the Netherlands is suffering from a
bursting property bubble.
True, there are signs of relief. The world economy has recovered, and capital
markets have calmed down since 2012. The general impression conveyed by the
media is that the worst of the crisis is behind us. However, the smouldering fire
of a severe structural crisis in southern European countries is still creeping
underfoot. The recovery is extremely fragile, as it rests largely on the assurances
and guarantees given by the European Central Bank (ECB) and fiscal rescue
programmes rather than on an improvement in the fundamentals. With its
assurances, in particular the Outright Monetary Transactions programme (OMT),
which promises unlimited purchases of government bonds issued by distressed
countries, the ECB has provided free-of-charge insurance to investors buying
government bonds of over-indebted states. This has been a game changer for
markets, bringing calm by shifting the risk of bankruptcy from clever investors
to gullible taxpayers and welfare recipients of the Eurozone’s still-solvent
countries. This mirage of a solution may evaporate as soon as the potential losers
understand the nature of the risk-shifting game. Long-lasting political instability
and mistrust in EU institutions may be the cost of stabilising markets in the short
run.
The shifting of risk from investors to taxpayers may also prove legally
unsustainable: the German Constitutional Court declared in February 2014 that
the OMT violates EU primary law and that the ECB Council has overstepped its
mandate. While the Court has not yet issued a final ruling and has asked the
European Court of Justice for its opinion on a potential modification of the OMT
programme, it seems very unlikely that the ECB will be able to keep investment
risks in check with its assurances.
The societies of southern Europe are also becoming increasingly brittle. While
international rescue programmes, including those of the ECB, have kept people
from starving and open political turmoil under control, Europe is seething with
unrest. Separatist movements in Spain have gained new strength, and trade
unions in Greece have organized increasingly violent strikes. In 2011 Italian
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi initiated secret international negotiations about
an Italian exit from the euro, because Italy had entered the second phase of its
catastrophic double-dip recesssion, which still has it in its grip as of this

writing.4 Now, two-and-a-half years and three prime ministers later, the situation
in Italy is worse than ever. The new Prime Minister Matteo Renzi has announced
revolutionary changes in Italian politics. It remains to be seen whether he can
turn Italy around.
The internal tensions have led politicians and voters to look for scapegoats
abroad. In Italy, Berlusconi’s party Forza Italia blames Germany for its
problems. Demonstrations have increasingly turned against German calls for
austerity in Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus, where Germany is held responsible
for the lamentable state of their public finances and mass unemployment. When
Chancellor Angela Merkel visited Athens in October 2012, the city had to be put
in security lockdown to prevent violence. The euro has turned out to be anything
but a peace project.
The tensions have funnelled voters towards Eurosceptic parties. In Germany,
the alleged euro winner, economics professor Bernd Lucke founded a
surprisingly successful anti-euro party called Alternative for Germany (AfD). In
Greece, a colleague of his from the University of Piraeus, Theodorus
Katsanevas, founded the party Drachme Five Stars on a similar platform, trying
to imitate the success of Italy’s Beppe Grillo, whose anti-euro and anti-
establishment party, Five Stars, came third in the 2013 election, garnering a
quarter of the votes. The French National Front, led by Marine Le Pen, and the
Dutch Freedom Party, led by Geert Wilders, both of which are leading the polls,
have formed an international coalition against the euro. In Greece the socialist
party Syriza, led by Alexis Tsipras, now the party with the strongest support in
Greece, has declared that it will no longer obey any of the austerity measures
imposed by the Troika, made up of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
ECB, and the European Union (EU). Should it come to power, its stance might
result in Greece exiting the euro.
Austerity, however, has not been imposed by policymakers, but by the capital
markets, which have become increasingly nervous about southern Europe’s
ability to sustain its levels of public and private debt. Without the lifeline
provided by the northern states through the ECB and the intergovernmental
rescue operations, public and private debtors in southern Europe would have had
to pay much higher interest rates, and in all likelihood some of them would have
already gone bankrupt. And yet the South’s anger is directed towards the still-
solvent countries of the North, because the public help they provide is
considered insufficient. The northern countries, in turn, are proving increasingly
reluctant to accept further bail-out operations and take on more of the South’s
debt, if only because some are significantly less wealthy than their southern

counterparts, as shown by a recent ECB study.5 Growing tensions between
southern austerity fatigue and northern rescue fatigue are endangering the future
of the European project.
From a Keynesian perspective, southern Europe is just undergoing a recession
that could be overcome by more deficit spending. After all, the greater the
unemployment in the economy, the higher the multipliers. Such a policy would
be plausible if the economies of southern Europe were structurally sound and
only suffering from a temporary shortfall in demand. However, as credit at
market conditions is now too expensive for the crisis-hit countries, the
Keynesian policies would have to be carried out with credit provided or
guaranteed by other states.
What is more, the crisis-hit countries are suffering from a serious
competitiveness problem that would only be exacerbated by further demand
stimuli. The southern countries became too expensive under the inflationary
credit bubble ushered in by the euro. They substantially increased their wages
and prices relative to the northern Eurozone countries just as a number of eastern
European countries joined the EU and became fierce low-wage competitors,
attracting private direct investment and selling conveniently priced goods to
European markets. Spanish and Greek manufacturing wages are more than three
times and more than twice as high as those in Poland, respectively, while Polish
workers and craftsmen are renowned for their skill and diligence. This handicap
can only be overcome over a long period of time, and Keynesian deficit
spending will not be the right tool for the task. To regain competitiveness, the
southern countries will have to become substantially cheaper by inflating less
than their Eurozone competitors, or even by deflating. A depreciation of the euro
would also be useful. However, both require less rather than more public
demand stimulus by way of Keynesian deficit spending.
Demand-and liquidity-creating rescue operations have several side effects:
they buy time for financial investors who want to cut and run, they put at risk the
money of northern European taxpayers who are taken hostage in their stead, and
they reduce the pressure on southern European governments to implement the
painful reforms that could bring about the wage and price adjustments needed to
restore competitiveness. Such operations are mere painkillers that postpone the
administration of the real medicine.
It is true that financial markets can theoretically have multiple equilibria, and
that public debt guarantees under certain conditions might be able to achieve a
better equilibrium that ensures low interest rates and debt sustainability, without
such guarantees ever having to be honoured. I call this the money-in-the-display-
window theory. According to this theory, the money needs only lie in the display

window to elicit a reassuring effect, without it ever having to be actually drawn.
However, there are two reasons why this theory does not seem to apply in the
European case. Firstly, the countries of southern Europe built up huge current
account deficits before the crisis, even when interest rates were low, and the
structural component of those deficits has not yet disappeared. Their difficulties
therefore do not stem from the financial crisis, but have deeper roots.
Secondly, the money in the display window has actually been taken. By the
end of 2013, € 339 billion in rescue funds had been provided by way of
intergovernmental, EU and IMF credit. In addition, the ECB provided a huge
volume of rescue credit that the public knows little or nothing about. The ECB
has not only purchased massive amounts of the crisis-hit countries’ government
bonds, announcing that it will continue buying such bonds in unlimited amounts
if necessary; it has also helped the crisis-hit countries and their foreign creditors
by allowing their national central banks (NCBs) to solve national financing
problems with the printing press, enabling citizens and companies to pay for
imports of goods and redeem their foreign private debt. This help took the form
of so-called Target credit. Target (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross
settlement Express Transfer system) is an acronym for the Eurosystem’s internal
payment settlement system. As will be shown in this book, the combination of
that system with the NCBs’ local refinancing operations has become the
distressed countries’ main rescue facility, outgunning any of the rescue
operations controlled by the parliaments of Europe. At the end of 2013, the
Target credit provided to southern European countries and Ireland stood at € 613
billion, nearly twice the sum of the combined intergovernmental, EU, and IMF
rescue credits. The volume of Target credit has been coming down of late and
will likely decline further as fiscal credit by intergovernmental rescue funds
replaces it.
By offering Target credit, the ECB has turned into an institution that carries
out regional fiscal policies within the currency union, rendering the financing of
particular countries and states largely independent of the capital market. As will
be shown, neither the unlimited Target credit line nor the OMT programme have
counterparts in the policies of the US Federal Reserve System. In the US, the
printing presses cannot be used to provide particular states or regions with credit
at below-market interest rates.
The overriding theme of this book is that, before and during the crisis, the
Eurosystem experienced soft budget constraints. Before the outbreak of the
crisis, too much private capital flowed from North to South, creating the
inflationary bubble that deprived the South of its competitiveness. The excessive
capital flows resulted primarily from the implicit protection that the common

currency represented for investors, who could not imagine any risk of bank or
state insolvencies in countries that had access to the liquidity of the Eurosystem,
being able to print the money needed to redeem the debt if necessary. It also
resulted from the encouragement that investors received from the EU’s banking
and insurance regulation system. This system contradicted the no-bail-out clause
of the Maastricht Treaty which, had it been taken seriously, should have given
investors pause and reduced the capital flows.
After the outbreak of the crisis, public capital was made available via the ECB
to compensate for the dearth of private flows. In 2008, in the aftermath of the
Lehman crisis, this was defensible given the need to avert an immediate collapse
of the European economy. However, rather than attempting to return to the tight
public budget constraints demanded by a market economy, the ECB and the
community of euro states continued their policy of soft budget constraints by
providing a growing amount of public credit at below-market interest rates,
bailing out both the debtors and their creditors in the process. This destroyed one
of the basic pillars of the Maastricht Treaty.
The French, German, and British banking systems, in that order, were heavily
exposed to the crisis countries. They benefited from the bail-out policy insofar as
without it, they might not have been able to recoup their money; but they also
suffered inasmuch as they were unable to earn risk-commensurate interest rates,
since the policy of financial repression forced them to compete with credit from
the local money-printing presses and from public rescue funds aimed at helping
the banks and governments of the debtor countries.
The Hungarian economist János Kornai predicted in 1980 that soft budget
constraints would lead to the demise of the communist economic system.6 The
Eurozone currently runs the risk of sharing this fate. While soft budget
constraints help in the short run and reduce the probability of a collapse of the
system, they remove the incentives to tackle the structural reforms that would
cure the disease. By preserving asset prices and balance sheets, the governments
and the ECB rescue fragile financial institutions in uncompetitive countries, but
at the price of keeping the rates of return on real capital below the level
necessary to trigger new investment, which is the prerequisite for supply-driven
growth. The result of such rescue operations will be Japanese-style secular
stagnation rather than recovery. The economy is not exactly rescued, but merely
shielded from potentially beneficial creative destruction.
It is also doubtful whether Europeans will continue to live in harmony if the
public bail-out policy persists, for such a policy raises creditor–debtor
relationships from the private to the public sphere, where there is no civil law to
settle the disputes, and fuels heated public debates that stir up animosity and

strife. History is full of examples of the problematic relationship between
creditors and debtors, and one such example, during the early years of the United
States of America, will be discussed in the last chapter of this book. The range of
ills that could be triggered by public creditor–debtor relationships is truly
chilling, even if the horrors alluded to by Jean-Claude Juncker never materialize.
The situation is now fairly stuck, and there is a very limited choice of policies
that might preserve the euro without turning Europe into an economy with a
centrally-planned capital market. Still, it is worth trying to prevent the implosion
of the Eurosystem and to uphold the idea of the euro as a European peace
project. To achieve this, however, far more radical reforms are required than
those currently envisaged by politicians.
This book tries to sort through the mess that the euro has created in Europe. It
analyses the factors that led to the crisis, describes the southern countries’ loss of
competitiveness, documents the rescue operations undertaken to date by the
ECB and the community of states, and discusses the few policy options that still
remain open.
Over the course of the book I will explain why I think that the Eurozone
cannot survive in its current form. I will also argue that it would be in the
interest of some euro countries to temporarily exit the euro and devalue their
new currencies in order to regain their competitiveness. This would not only be
easier for them: it also represents the only chance of stabilizing the Eurosystem.
In fact, I am convinced that for Europeans to succeed in creating a common state
they will have to go through a phase of a ‘breathing euro, ’ i.e. a more flexible
currency union that lies somewhere between the dollar and a fixed-exchange-rate
system like the Bretton Woods system that prevailed in the post-war period. In
my opinion, a big debt conference should also be held to clean up the afflicted
private and public balance sheets and relieve the unbearable burden currently
borne by some of the debtor countries. The earlier this conference is held, the
quicker a recovery will be. Such a conference could also reduce the burden
imposed on Europe’s taxpayers, as well as magnify the disciplinary effect for the
future, a factor that is crucial for the functioning of a capitalist market economy.
Despite my fundamental scepticism regarding the functioning of the
Eurosystem in its present form, I refuse to give up my hope for the euro, and
much less my hope for a united Europe. In view of the horrifying events of the
twentieth century, for which my home country bears the greatest responsibility, I
see no alternative to deepening European integration. Indeed, I would go as far
as advocating the creation of a United States of Europe. A common European
state would constitute the binding insurance contract without which it may prove
impossible to achieve a fiscal union and a steadfast mutual risk sharing between

successful and faltering regions to ensure the equality of living standards. I
attempt to outline what a common European state entails, and what it does not,
in the latter part of the book, praising the Swiss Confederation as a useful
example to follow. Whilst I harbour no illusions about the likelihood of this
project being achieved in my lifetime, I find it worthwhile to have a goal that
gives hope and direction to the peoples of Europe.
I am not convinced, however, that there is only one way towards deeper
European integration, and therefore welcome the debate triggered by British
Prime Minister David Cameron when he announced a referendum on EU
membership for Britain.7 It is high time to critically review developments in the
EU over the last twenty years, as the original goals of European integration drift
ever further out of sight. Our leaders continue to argue that the route laid out by
them is the correct path to follow, and that we should simply accelerate our pace
along that path in order to reach our goals. However, the current mess, and the
crushingly high unemployment rates in many European countries in particular,
raise doubts over whether this is the right way to proceed. It may be better to
return to the last fork in the road and try another route. I deplore the politicians
and scholars who offer no other response to this opinion than to label those who
voice it as ‘anti-European’. Clinging to the status quo is no longer a politically or
economically viable option for Europe. Alternative paths forward must be found
if Europe is to prosper in the future. This calls for courage and vision, not simply
more of the same.
Munich, February 2014
Hans-Werner Sinn
1 See M. Wolf, ‘Why the Euro Crisis Is Not Yet Over’, Financial Times, 19 February 2013, available at:
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/74acaf5c-79f2-11e2-9dad-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2QE1xDy8K>.
2 See ‘VVD’er Bolkestein will parallelle munt naast euro’, (Bolkestein wants a parallel currency besides
the 
euro) 
Algemeen 
Dagblad 
online, 
11 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ad.nl/ad/nl/1012/Nederland/article/detail/3423694/2013/04/11/VVD-er- 
Bolkestein-wil-
parallelle-munt-naast-euro.dhtml>.
3 See ‘Jean-Claude Juncker Interview, ‘The Demons Haven’t Been Banished’, Spiegel Online
International, 11 March 2013, available at: <http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/spiegel-interview-
with-luxembourg-prime-minister-juncker-a-888021.html>.
4 See L. Bini-Smaghi, Morire di austeritá: Democrazie europee con le spalle al muro, Il Mulino,
Bologna 2013, especially chapter 3, Indietro no si torna; Translation: Austerity: European Democracies
against the Wall, Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), Brussels 2013, especially chapter 3: No
Turning Back, p. 29.

5 See European Central Bank, ‘The Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey: Results
from 
the 
First 
Wave’, 
Statistics 
Paper 
Series, 
No. 
2, 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecbsp2en.pdf>.
6 J. Kornai, ‘“Hard” and “Soft” Budget Constraint’, Acta Oeconomica 25, 1980, pp. 231–246.
7 See ‘David Cameron’s EU Speech—Full Text’, The Guardian, 23 January 2013, available at:
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/23/david-cameron-eu-speech- referendum>.

CHAPTER 1
Wish and Reality
Euro Dynamics—The Euro and Peace—Advantages of the Euro for Trade and Capital Flows
—The Path to a Currency Union—The Price of German Reunification?—Transfer and Debt
Union—The European Central Bank
Euro Dynamics
When attempting to judge the effects of the euro, it is worth recalling what
Europe’s politicians expected from it and what was announced to the public.
Particularly high expectations were raised regarding the European economy.
Nothing portrays this better than the final declaration of the Lisbon Strategy,
also called the Lisbon Agenda, of March 2000:1
 The Union has today set itself a new strategic goal for the next decade: to become the most
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable
economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion.
The Lisbon Strategy was a large-scale programme to foster innovation and
economic growth, conceived as a complement to the euro and whose effects
should unfold concurrently with the new common currency. The big starting shot
was intended to kindle a new spirit of optimism in Europe and usher in a new
Golden Age for the Old World. The euro had been introduced the previous year
as a transaction unit for banks; its physical introduction was slated for 2002. The
Lisbon Agenda and the euro seemed to signal a period of growth and prosperity.
The optimism was also fuelled by the economic boom that Europe and the
world were enjoying. The countries that now make up the European Union had
grown by 3.9% in the year 2000, a rate considerably higher than the average for
the previous decade. Unemployment, in turn, was decreasing. There was every
reason to believe that even better days were coming. The brave new world of a
common currency would impart an impetus to the Old World that it had not
experienced since the post-war period. ‘The euro will rejuvenate Europe’, said
McKinsey chief Herbert Henzler.2 Bank economists like Kim Schoenholtz
(Salomon Smith Barney) predicted ‘the euro zone is going to enjoy a golden
childhood’ while officials from the European institutions praised the euro as a

‘true accelerator of economic growth’ (Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the
ECB).3 There were many such expressions, and the author must admit that he
shared them.4
Reality ended up being quite different. The boom turned out to be no more
than an Internet bubble that burst as early as 2001, and over the decade
envisioned by the Agenda Europe did not become the world’s most dynamic
region, but rather the world’s lamest laggard. Figure 1.1 shows this very clearly.
From 2000 to 2010, the world economy grew by 43%, while the EU, with barely
17%, exhibited the weakest growth among the large regions, a bit lower than the
US, and that only thanks to the fact that the rapidly growing eastern European
countries were included, which had a lot of catching up to do. Taken by itself,
eastern Europe, including the formerly Communist countries in central Europe,
clocked up a remarkable 45%. The current members of the Eurozone, in
contrast, grew by barely 12% and, except for Japan, were by far the world’s
worst performers, relegated to the very bottom of the scale. China topped the
league, with 171%, and even Sub-Saharan Africa grew by 74%; Latin America
managed 39%. Seldom has the gulf between wish and reality been so great as in
Europe under the euro.

Figure 1.1 Growth in selected countries and regions (2000–2013)
* GDP growth 2000–2010.
** Including the formerly Communist areas in central Europe.
Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, October 2013.
Note: GDP growth rates according to chain-linked volumes at 2005 prices.

And worse was to come. A financial crisis hit the US first in 2006/2007,
spilling over to Europe as early as summer 2007. A year later all Eurozone
countries slumped during the Great Recession that ensued, which eventually had
the whole world in its grip, and many of them slipped into serious trouble. As of
this writing, these countries still have not managed to return to their pre-crisis
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) levels.5
A deep funding crisis, unprecedented in recent history, befell Greece, Ireland,
Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Cyprus (grouped here under the acronym GIPSIC),
triggering huge international rescue operations by the European Central Bank
(ECB), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the European Union (EU), and
the euro member states.6 The rescue efforts, however, acted as mere painkillers,
without visibly improving the underlying structural and competitiveness
problems. As Figure 1.2 shows, 28% of Greeks were unemployed in November
2013. In Spain the unemployment peaked at 27% in February 2013, declining
slightly to 26% by December 2013. Though significantly lower, the
unemployment rates in Ireland (12%), Italy (13%), Portugal (15%) and Cyprus
(18%) are also alarmingly high. While Portugal and Ireland show clear signs of a
genuine trend reversal, the rise of unemployment in Italy, Greece and Cyprus
continues unabated. In Spain, the slight reduction in unemployment seems to
have resulted entirely from rapidly rising emigration of the unemployed.

Figure 1.2 Unemployment rates in the GIPSIC countries, seasonally adjusted
Source: Eurostat, Database, Population and Social Conditions, Labour Market, Employment and
Unemployment.
Youth unemployment is even more alarming. The high level of protection
afforded to workers under permanent contracts keep younger job-seekers outside
the factory gates. As Figure 1.3 shows, by the end of 2013, youth unemployment
for the under-25s stood at 59% in Greece and 54% in Spain. Since these are
seasonally adjusted data, they understate the unadjusted rate of youth
unemployment in winter months, which in Greece stood at 61.4% in November
2013. Youth unemployment in Italy and Portugal, with rates of 42% and 36%
respectively, is less catastrophic, yet alarming enough (see Figure 1.3 below).
Both are about five times as high as Germany’s (7.4%), whose vocational

training scheme helps to make it an exception among the Eurozone countries. At
first glance, it might be assumed that youth unemployment rates are so high
because many young people are still in education. Sadly, this is not the case:
neither the numerator nor the denominator of the youth unemployment rate
includes young people in education. The figure only refers to the people under
twenty-five years of age registered in the labour force. This desperate state of
affairs in southern Europe is a veritable catastrophe. It could give rise to violence
and other uncontrollable developments that may jeopardize the European
project.
Figure 1.3 Youth unemployment (< 25 years of age) in the GIPSIC countries, seasonally adjusted
Source: Eurostat, Database, Population and Social Conditions, Labour Market, Employment and
Unemployment.

In some countries, the economy has been in free fall. In 2011, 2012, and 2013
the Greek economy contracted by 7.1%, 6.4%, and 4.0% respectively. Italy,
Portugal and France are shaking in their boots. Many euro countries are in
recession, and some even in depression. In 2011, the Eurozone’s GDP,
excluding Germany, the Netherlands and Austria, rose by a meagre 1.0%, to
contract by 0.8% in 2012 and by 0.5% in 2013. Even France is having a hard
time getting its unemployment rate under control. At 10.8%, its rate is more than
twice as high as Germany’s (see Chapter 3, Figure 3.8). Youth unemployment in
France, at a rate of 25.6%, is more than three times as high as Germany’s.
Southern Europe’s increasing economic difficulties prompted investors to flee
in droves. Some € 640 billion in liquid assets fled Italy and Spain alone between
mid-2011 and mid-2012, as will be discussed in Chapter 7. Capital flight came
to a halt in September 2012, when the German Constitutional Court rejected the
appeals against Germany’s participation in the permanent rescue programme
ESM (European Stability Mechanism; see Chapter 8) and the ECB announced its
Outright Monetary Transactions programme (OMT), which provided a guarantee
for investors buying government bonds of the Eurozone’s troubled countries.
These measures have stabilized the financial markets, but they have not been
able to stabilize the real economies, as the unemployment and growth figures
show. It is only a matter of time until the next bout of financial turmoil starts.
The Cyprus crisis in the first quarter of 2013 will not be the last to challenge
Europe.
European policymakers stumble from one crisis to the next. When a problem
appears, they take some action to solve or contain it, but after only a few months
of seeming tranquillity a new crisis crops up somewhere else, and again some
measures are taken, without anyone foreseeing where the process will lead in the
end. Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Cyprus have been thrown a lifeline by
intergovernmental rescue programmes, and they, as well as Italy, have received
massive support from the ECB (see Chapter 8 for an overview). None of these
countries currently borrows at market conditions. They all live on funds
provided or guaranteed by other Eurozone countries, which mitigate, with their
taxpayers’ money, the austerity demanded by markets. The crisis rumbles on and
is far from being resolved. It’s all a far cry from the Lisbon Agenda’s wish-list.
Something has definitely gone wrong in Europe.
The Euro and Peace
The euro was not solely about economics.7 The political goals were even more

important. In 1990, Helmut Kohl and François Mitterrand declared that it was
their concern ‘to transform the relations between the member countries into a
genuine political union’.8 Moreover, former French Finance and Prime Minister
Pierre Bérégovoy stated in May 1992 at the French National Assembly, after
signing the Maastricht Treaty:9
Yes, I believe in Europe because I passionately desire peace. Peace on the continent itself.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl justified the introduction of the euro before
the Bundestag on 23 April 1998 by saying:10
The euro strengthens the European Union as a guarantor of peace and freedom.... Today’s
decision—and this is no hyperbole—will largely determine whether future generations in
Germany and the rest of Europe will be able to live in peace and freedom, with social stability and
prosperity.
He added that he was ‘quite certain...that those who today say No to the euro
in a few years will deny that they ever voiced such an opinion’. Other European
politicians, such as Jean-Claude Juncker, 11 also stressed the fact that the euro
was a project for European peace, while Germany’s current chancellor, Angela
Merkel, now proclaims very similar views when defending the rescue
packages.12
But also in this respect did the euro fail to fulfill its promise. The economic
problems of the stricken countries and the scepticism of the capital markets are
fraying nerves and beginning to undermine harmony in the Eurozone. With
every passing summit, the animosity among the member countries has become a
bit more acrimonious. Some feel that they are being pushed against a wall, in
particular some large members like Spain and Italy that had expected to weather
the crisis more or less unscathed. Others fear deep haircuts on bonds they issued
and intend to avoid a financial fiasco through a mutualization of debt. Italy’s
then Prime Minister Mario Monti believed that the tension ‘already bears the
marks of a psychological dissolution of Europe’, and feared that the euro could
become ‘a factor in this drifting apart’.13 And as mentioned in the introduction,
Jean-Claude Juncker recently even compared the year 2013 with the
complacency of 1913, when only few people would have thought it possible that
a year later war would break out.
The high rates of unemployment naturally breed social unrest. Over the past four
years, Europe-wide protests against spending cuts and unemployment have
brought people onto the streets in many countries. Some pictures are shown in
Figure 1.4. In Spain, around fifty cities saw major demonstrations that started in

May 2011 under the heading ‘¡Democracia real ya!’ (True democracy now!). In
Barcelona alone, a demonstration gathered 80, 000 people. Much of the protest
was directed against the eviction of homeowners unable to repay their
mortgages; some homeowners have committed suicide. In September 2012,
about one million people participated in demonstrations in Portugal under the
slogan ‘To the devil with the Troika’, the Troika being the delegation of the
International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European
Commission that reviews compliance with austerity commitments in the crisis-
stricken countries benefiting from public rescue funds. In Greece,
demonstrations are a daily occurrence; they have already claimed a number of
fatalities. In 2011 alone, the unions organized four nationwide strikes against
austerity. Often during demonstrations, public transportation stands still, public
offices remain closed and hospitals reduce their service to emergency cases. In
Italy, 100, 000 people demonstrated in October 2012 against the Monti
government reforms, with the press taking an increasingly aggressive stance
against austerity; a general revolt, however, has not yet taken place. Tensions
reached their first climax during the ‘Day of Action and Solidarity’ against
austerity measures in 23 countries on 14 November 2012.

Figure 1.4 Protesting against austerity
Sources: ‘Protesting against austerity’, © REUTERS/Hugo Correia (top left), © REUTERS/Yannis
Behrakis (top right), © REUTERS/Yannis Behrakis (bottom left), © REUTERS/Yannis Behrakis (bottom
right). Reprinted with permission.
The tensions have also changed the political landscape in Europe. In Italy a
euro-sceptic party lead by Beppe Grillo received 26% of the popular vote off the
cuff, 14 while in Germany a similarly euro-sceptic party founded by economist
Bernd Lucke hopes to repeat Grillo’s success, although the views of the two
parties are diametrically opposed. In Greece the coalition of the moderate parties
Nea Dimokratia, Panellinio Sosialistiko Kinima, and Dimokratiki Aristera, with
a share of 48% of the popular vote in June 2012, garnered only a slight majority
over the Syriza-EKM and other parties that advocate a much more aggressive
rejection of austerity.15 In France, the National Front under Marine Le Pen,
which wants to exit the euro, is rapidly gaining support and might well become

the strongest party overall. In Portugal and Germany, the respective
constitutional courts have established themselves as important players in the
political arena. The Portuguese Constitutional Court rejected a measure to scrap
summer holiday bonuses for public sector workers and pensioners, as well as
cuts to unemployment and sickness benefits, forcing the government to scramble
to devise alternative budget cuts.16 The German Constitutional Court, in turn,
forced the government to demand an addendum to the treaty on the
establishment of the European Stability Mechanism (see Chapter 8) that reduced
the participating states’ joint and several liability to proportional liability.17
Pending appeals may also mean that the Court will limit the Bundesbank’s
ability to participate in certain policy actions or force the German government to
renegotiate the Maastricht Treaty.
As the pictures above show, the tensions have a strong international
dimension, as austerity fatigue and rescue fatigue clash ever more often. The
governments of the South rail against the constraints that the Troika imposes on
them. Germany in particular has become the target of demonstrations. The
governments of the South attack Germany, the main provider of the rescue
funds, for having pushed through a Fiscal Compact that imposes austerity, which
is perceived as causing the unemployment that affects them. And the
governments of the North complain about the South’s wastefulness and lack of
fiscal discipline; they fear that their aid is flowing into a bottomless pit.
The animosity Germany faces in western Europe is stronger than anything the
country has experienced since World War II. Swastikas are being pointed at
Germany in Greece, while the Italian daily Il Giornale sees signs of Germany
trying to establish a Fourth Reich.18 Monti prophesied Italian demonstrations
against Germany should the country fail to help Italy lower the premia on its
sovereign debt.19 The British left-wing weekly magazine New Statesman said
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is ‘the most dangerous German leader since
Hitler’.20
The influential American speculator George Soros, who once brought the
Bank of England to its knees, accused Germany of taking on imperial airs and
prophesied the hate of the masses against it21 if it does not acquiesce to further
rescue operations. In September 2012 he asked Germany to ‘lead or leave’,
22and in April 2013 he urged it to accept Eurobonds or leave.23 Eurobonds ought
to be issued and guaranteed jointly by the euro countries and used to replace the
outstanding government bonds, thus resulting in debt mutualization. Anatole
Kaletsky, an award-winning British journalist, chairman of the board of the
Institute for New Economic Thinking, financed by George Soros, struck the

same note when he said Germany started World War I and World War II, and
now once again poses a great danger for Europe. Isn’t it time for Europe ‘to
stand up to Germany’? he asks his readers.24
These statements and the objections to austerity show that Europe has become
stuck in a fundamental distributional dispute about unresolved debt issues. Since
debtors over-borrowed and now cannot repay, their creditors, fearing write-off
losses, are looking for someone else to foot the bill. From the perspective of
international investors the situation is crystal clear. They lent their money to
Greece, Spain, and other now-troubled countries because they are part of the
Eurozone. If those countries now cannot pay back their debts, other Eurozone
members must stand in for them. Europe is large and strong enough to solve its
own problems. Europe’s strong economies must shoulder their responsibility. It
is unfair of them to try to shirk their duty.
However, the investors overlooked the rules of the Maastricht Treaty. After
all, one of the pillars of this treaty is the no-bailout clause (article 125 of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union), which states that no
Eurozone member state shall be liable for, or assume the commitments of,
another member state:25
The Union shall not be liable for or assume the commitments of central governments, regional,
local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of
any Member State.... A Member State shall not be liable for or assume the commitments of
central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public
law, or public undertakings of another Member State....
The no-bailout clause makes it clear that the euro has not been designed as a
mutual insurance or debt mutualization system. On the contrary, such support
has been explicitly ruled out.
From the outset, some European countries have feared that the euro project
could turn out to be a debt mutualization scheme, and therefore they insisted that
the no-bailout clause be included in the Treaty. Germany, in particular, had
made this a condition for giving up the deutschmark.26 And France, in turn,
objected to Germany’s idea of creating political structures that would serve as
the basis for a federal European State.
Given that at the time of the Maastricht Treaty a vast majority of the German
population objected to the idea of replacing the deutschmark with the euro, 27 the
Kohl government emphasized again and again that the introduction of the new
common currency would not imply debt mutualization or transfer schemes
among the members of the Eurozone. In his great speech on the introduction of
the euro, Kohl asked his audience to pause for a moment and pay close attention

to what he was going to say. He then intoned, twice in a row to lend it gravitas:28
According to the treaty rules, the euro community shall not be liable for the commitments of its
member states and there will be no additional financial transfers.
This rigour and determination is the main reason why the German government
today is so reluctant to acquiesce to extensive rescue operations and debt
mutualization schemes.
That said, the actual rescue operations that have already been undertaken by
the community of states and the ECB, which mitigate the austerity that markets
impose on debtor countries, are huge by any standards. As will be shown later in
this book (see in particular Chapter 8), at the peak of the crisis in August 2012
the community of states and the ECB provided a total of € 1.339 trillion to the
six crisis-stricken countries (GIPSIC), which amounted to € 10, 000 per capita
on average. This is obviously no small contribution. It is one of the ironies of
Europe’s crisis that those who shoulder the rescue programmes and mitigate the
markets’ austerity are not perceived as rescuers, but as oppressors who impose
austerity and withhold some of the rescue sums to which the recipients of the
resources feel entitled. Should the euro break up and the GIPSIC countries
default on their debts, Germany alone would bear a loss of about € 450 billion,
or € 5, 500 per capita, as will be shown in Chapter 8 (Table 8.2). The Dutch and
the Finns would even bear a loss of € 6, 900 per capita. These three countries
currently contribute much to mitigating austerity among the struggling Eurozone
countries.
Kohl’s confidence that the no-bailout clause would be respected was clearly
betrayed during the crisis. Christine Lagarde, a former French finance minister
and now Managing Director of the IMF, bluntly admitted that the rescue
programmes were illegal:29
We violated all the rules because we wanted to close ranks and really rescue the euro zone.
In view of the fact that the credit granted by French banks to the stricken
states was twice as large as a proportion of its GDP than the equivalent lent by
German banks, this position is understandable, 30 but it reveals the willingness,
when it seems expedient, to disregard European laws and treaties written
precisely in order to free decision-makers from the pressures of the practical
necessities of the day.31
At the time the Maastricht Treaty was being discussed, there were more than
enough voices warning against placing too much naïve faith in mere protection
clauses built into the treaty, in the hope that they would be respected in crunch

times. Among those who issued such warnings were former Bundesbank
President Hans Tietmeyer, 32 Nobel Prize winner Milton Friedman, 33 the
previous head of the US Council of Economic Advisors, Martin Feldstein, 34 and
the former president of the London School of Economics, Ralph Dahrendorf,
who found particularly clear words about the euro’s future:35
The currency union is a great error, a risky, reckless and mistaken goal that will not unite Europe,
but divide it.
No less than 155 German economists signed a public appeal in 1998 against
what they considered a premature introduction of the euro.36 Scientific honesty
demands an acknowledgement that they, unfortunately, were right.
Advantages of the Euro for Trade and Capital Flows
All this does not mean that the Eurozone should simply give up the euro, since
what happened, happened. You can bake a cake from many ingredients, but once
you have baked it, you cannot get the ingredients out of the cake, at least not
easily. The Eurozone’s financial systems are so strongly interconnected that a
conversion of debts and liabilities into old currencies is anything but
unproblematic. In addition, the euro has such great symbolic power for the
continent’s further political integration that it can only be hoped that it will be
possible to keep it under reasonable conditions. While Angela Merkel’s
pronouncement that ‘If the euro fails, Europe fails’ is exaggerated, it does
contain a grain of truth. From an economic perspective, the euro is nothing but a
clearing system for the exchange of goods and services. But from a political
perspective it represents a bold phase in the historical integration of Europe, one
that, it is to be hoped, will find a good end.
Reforms and an adjustment of the Eurozone’s size, concentrating on the
countries that function well within the core Eurozone, could be necessary,
despite all the difficulties that such a course would entail. Why this is so and
what such a reform could look like, a reform that could be particularly attractive
for countries leaving the Eurozone temporarily, will be discussed in Chapters 4
and 9.
This process should not be aimed at setting the euro up for disposal, however,
but at saving it. The euro offers a range of advantages from which all members
benefit. In that light, its fathers were right, and this book will not call into
question the northern countries’ permanence in the Eurozone, however
unsparing its appraisal of the monetary union may be. The criticism voiced here

is intended as a basis for reform proposals to strengthen the European idea, not
to undermine it.
A manifestly positive effect of the euro is the lowering of currency transaction
costs, which every tourist perceives immediately as advantageous. In the past,
for every 1, 000 francs in foreign trade, 15 francs were lost to transaction costs.
Business travellers used to have several wallets for the different notes and coins
left over from their trips, in order to use them next time around, and tourists
remember well all that foreign cash they struggled to make sense of. The euro
did away with this hindrance.
Even more important is the disappearance of exchange rate uncertainty. The
continuous oscillations of the exchange rates were a significant obstacle to intra-
European trade. When goods were bought for future delivery, the contract
parties often had no idea what price they had actually agreed. If the currency of
the seller was used, the buyer faced a kind of lottery; if the currency of the buyer
was adopted, the seller didn’t know how much he would eventually receive.
Both could, of course, buy insurance against such exchange risk, but that was
expensive and posed a burden to trade.
The euro protected the Eurozone’s businesses and finances against the
turbulences of flexible exchange rates, which had been a huge problem in the
decades before the new currency was introduced, in particular around 1992 when
the nominally fixed exchange rate was suddenly realigned. However, it also
prevented inflation-prone countries from maintaining their competitiveness by
performing regular devaluations. From the time the Bretton Woods system
collapsed (1973) to the virtual introduction of the euro (1999), the lira devalued
against the deutschmark by 80%, the peseta by 76% and the French franc by
52%.37 In the EMS period (13 March 1979 to 31 December 1998), Italy
devalued thirteen times and revalued once, France devalued six times and Spain
(after accession in 1989), four times.38 France, however, ended the process of
regular devaluations in 1993, when Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet
introduced a ‘franc fort’ policy; ‘franc fort’ means ‘strong franc’, but it was
evidently a play on Frankfurt, the seat of Germany’s Bundesbank. The franc-fort
policy was proclaimed as a competitive dis-inflation policy aimed at avoiding a
depreciation of the French franc against the deutschmark.39 It is still open to
debate how strong the exchange-rate-uncertainty argument is and whether the
devaluations were primarily a burden or a blessing.
The fact that the shares of exports of the large economies that go to the rest of
the Eurozone have been declining, as shown in Figure 1.5, is often cited in this
regard. In 1999, almost 44% of German exports of goods and services went to

the Eurozone; nowadays, the Eurozone accounts for only around 36%. The other
large countries show a similar downward trend, albeit at a higher level. Thus,
after the introduction of the euro, a relative decoupling from the Eurozone has
clearly taken place.
Figure 1.5 Share of exports going to the Eurozone (1999–2012)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, Annual National Accounts, Exports
and Imports by Member States of the EU/third Countries.
The explanation for this phenomenon is not that the euro countries mutually
lost interest in their partners’ goods. The downward trend depicted in the chart is
explained by the dynamic development of other large regions in the world, as
shown in Figure 1.1 above. Since European exports are widely spread around the
world, the Eurozone countries benefited hugely from world dynamism, and so
the exports destined for faster-growing regions inevitably grew faster than
exports to the more sluggish Eurozone.
In addition, it is an open question how intra-European trade would have
developed without the euro. Drawing hasty conclusions is therefore unadvisable.
Even without the euro, the EU’s internal market itself would have provided a
strong impulse to intra-European trade. Free trade is the real motor for

integration and the division of labour in Europe. How much the protection
against exchange rate variations actually contributed is unclear.
Exchange rate turbulence does much more than hinder trade, however. It
disrupts the free movement of capital, since credit contracts, given the long
maturities involved and their low margins relative to the transaction volume, are
particularly vulnerable to exchange rate fluctuations. If the creditor provided a
loan in his home currency, the risk upon maturity lay with the borrower. Many
borrowers in eastern Europe who took on credit denominated in euros or Swiss
francs are burdened now by the relative depreciation of their local currencies,
making it very hard for them to continue servicing their debts at all. This was
exactly the situation among western European countries before the currency
union. If, on the other hand, credit was granted in the currency of the borrower,
the lender couldn’t know what he was getting into. Either way, international
credit relations were disrupted.
The elimination of this type of uncertainty, as will be explained in detail in
Chapter 2, exerted a much stronger influence on events in the Eurozone than the
removal of uncertainty in trade, since it led to a dramatic convergence of interest
rates on credit taken in the respective domestic currencies. Before the euro,
foreign investors demanded premia that reflected the risk of depreciation of the
currency in question until maturity. Soon after the euro was announced these
premia disappeared, ushering in a divergence in economic development across
the Eurozone that largely explains the crisis we are experiencing today.
To some degree, this interest rate convergence was beneficial for Europe as a
whole, since it triggered a useful capital flow from north to south. Presumably
there were investment opportunities with much higher yields to be found in
southern than in northern Europe that investors had previously not dared to grab
because of the exchange rate uncertainty. Thus, growth-enhancing capital flows
were naturally to be expected from the introduction of the euro. To some
observers, including the author, this was the biggest advantage of the common
currency.40 Unfortunately, however, this process gained too much momentum
and went out of control, with accelerating price and wage expectations as the
interest convergence went too far, because investors disregarded the bankruptcy
risks that had replaced some of the former exchange rate risks. How reality
failed to live up to the original beliefs will be discussed extensively in Chapters
2 and 4.
The Path to a Currency Union

Europe’s political establishment had long set its sights on an exchange rate
union. Following the Werner Plan of 1970, Europe’s governments in 1972
agreed to coordinate their exchange rates by intervening so as to make them
move like a ‘snake in a tunnel’. A binding exchange rate relative to a central
exchange rate that floated in relation to the dollar was set for each currency, and
a limiting band was set around it. The corresponding central banks were obliged
to intervene in the currency markets by buying or selling currency in order to
keep their exchange rate within this band. The currency snake was not very
successful. Most countries abandoned it, and in the end only a few currencies
around the deutschmark remained. In 1979 a new attempt to keep the exchange
rates under control was made with the European Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM) proposed by French president Valéry Giscard d’Estaing and German
chancellor Helmut Schmidt. With a varying number of members, it lasted until
the euro was introduced. However, in 1992 it could not withstand the strain
imposed on currency markets by German reunification. Quite a number of
countries devalued their currency relative to the deutschmark in proportions
much higher than foreseen. In addition to intervening in the currency markets,
the central banks of the countries threatened with devaluation had tried to
maintain the exchange rates by raising interest rates, with Sweden even bringing
its own central bank refinancing rate temporarily up to an annualized rate of
500%. However, the speculation of financial investors put such large amounts of
money in motion that the central banks were plainly powerless to stem the tide.
The British pound lost 14% against the deutschmark in 1992, the lira 17%, the
peseta 10%, the Swedish krona 16%, and the Finnish markka 16%.41 Italy then
left the ERM temporarily, and the UK permanently.
The turbulences stoked the wish, in particular in France, to do away with
national currencies, leading in 1989 to the so-called Delors Plan, commissioned
the year before by the European Council.42
The Delors Plan envisioned achieving a currency union in three stages. During
the first stage (starting in January 1990), all barriers to the free movement of
capital among the member states should be removed. In the second stage
(starting in January 1994), the participating countries were to consolidate their
budgets and thus lay the foundation for a stable common currency. The third
stage included fixing the exchange rates and then introducing the euro as the
common currency. The idea was to create a system whose solidly credible
exchange rate would put an end to currency speculation, and the euro appeared
to be the way to accomplish it.
Germany dithered in putting the Delors Plan into practice, because as the

EU’s largest economy, it did not want to subject its monetary policy to the
influence of other countries. It favoured the ‘crowning theory’, according to
which Europe would first need to attain a high level of fiscal integration before
the common currency, as the crowning element, should be introduced. There
were also misgivings regarding the other nations’ commitment to stability as
well as the fear of becoming infected with the southern countries’ inflation bug.
Even Helmut Kohl, who ultimately pushed for the introduction of the euro in
its present form, warned:43
It cannot be said often enough: the political union is the indispensable counterpart to the
economic and monetary union. Recent history...teaches us that the notion that it would be possible
to sustain an economic and monetary union without political union is absurd.
Conversely, the other countries felt constrained by the Bundesbank’s
dominance over their decisions. They were forced to adhere to the Bundesbank’s
interest-rate policy, but given that the Bundesbank crafted its policy to suit its
own economic jurisdiction, it did not sit well with other economies. There were
times, for instance, when higher rates for refinancing credit from the
Bundesbank were necessary in order to put a check on inflation, while in
neighbouring countries an economic slump called for lower rates, and vice versa.
The Bundesbank’s interest rate policy always managed to hold sway on account
of the sheer size of the deutschmark economic area. The other countries saw
themselves forced to adjust their interest rates to those of the Bundesbank in
order to avert capital flight. It is easy to see why countries strove to change this
state of affairs. For this reason, the French President considered the crowning
theory to be nothing more than a delaying tactic of the Germans. ‘The
harmonisation of economic policy will follow by itself’, he replied later to the
question of whether it was possible to have the euro without economic policy
coordination.44
The Price of German Reunification?
The standoff between Germany and its neighbouring countries was not solved
until German reunification was imminent. On the one hand, many Europeans
pleaded for a stronger political binding of a Germany that was expected to
become stronger through reunification. On the other, Germany itself was ready
to compromise in order to make reunification a reality without undue political
resistance. After all, Germany was still not a sovereign country and needed the
formal consent of the World War II’s victorious powers to proceed with

reunification. To be sure, no European country could have realistically hindered
German reunification, since the USA and Russia had already signalled their
consent. US President George H. W. Bush had become a particularly strong
advocate of reunification, and Russian President Mikhail Gorbachev had agreed
to German reunification, given that he could not keep the Soviet Union together
anyway. A French blockade, however, would have jeopardized the French-
German axis and, with it, European integration, which has been one of
Germany’s paramount goals since the end of World War II.
On 4 January 1990, a Franco-German governmental summit decided in favour
of going ahead with the implementation of the Delors Plan, which two years
later, in July 1992, would lead to the Maastricht Treaty.45 With this treaty, the
EU member countries agreed to introduce the euro after a number of
convergence criteria were fulfilled, but no later than 1 January 1999.46
France pushed strongly for the euro, since its central bank had seen itself
forced to follow the monetary policy decisions of the Bundesbank, without being
in a position to exert any influence over such decisions. Mitterrand had at first
actively opposed German reunification, but seemed to have acquiesced in
exchange for Germany’s agreement on introducing the euro. While this deal has
always been denied officially and certainly has no legal standing, given that it is
mentioned in none of the official documents, its implicit nature is all too
obvious.47 The agreement to the 2+4 negotiations, and the European Summit
planned in Maastricht, which would lay a cornerstone for the Economic and
Monetary Union, were announced jointly by Mitterrand and Kohl after their
summit.48
The significance accorded by France to the power of the Bundesbank can be
gleaned from the fact that President Mitterrand dubbed the Deutschmark
‘Germany’s force de frappe’, i.e. its atomic bomb, 49 and from his comment to
his countrymen that the Maastricht Treaty was even better for France than the
Treaty of Versailles—indeed, a ‘Super-Versailles’.50 The influential newspaper
Le Figaro crowed ‘Elle paie aujourd’hui’51 (Today she, Germany, must pay),
using the slogan ‘Le Boche paiera tout’ (The Jerries will pay it all) directed
against Germany when it was forced to sign the Treaty of Versailles, which
brought up the ire of Rudolf Augstein, then chief editor of Der Spiegel,
Germany’s most influential weekly.52 It can hardly be presumed that Le Figaro
divined at the time that Germany would one day have to pay for the EU bailout
packages. Still, embedding Germany in a common currency system was
expected by some of the euro advocates in Latin Europe to lead, one way or
another, to a convergence in living standards and, perhaps, the mutual

assumption of debts.
In exchange for giving up the deutschmark, Kohl tried to steer Europe towards
a political union, but Mitterrand did not agree. Political union found no
consensus in France. President Chirac even said, when the euro was
introduced:53
I will not accept Europe to become a super state or that its institutions be fashioned after those of
the United States.
Thus, Kohl had to be content with the introduction of the euro without any
political concessions from the other euro countries that could have been
construed as leading to deeper political integration.
Transfer and Debt Union
While France and Germany regarded the decision to introduce the euro as a
central step in the process of reconciliation, some of the southern European
countries were compelled by another motivation. They hoped to gain access to
lower interest rates for their sovereign debt, and they regarded the euro as a
vehicle to reach the levels of prosperity enjoyed by the northern European
countries.
Among the southern countries’ populations the expectations of advantages
offered by the euro were even simpler and clearer. As Greek singer Costa
Cordalis colourfully put it, 54
The Greek were salivating for the euro. They wanted for once in their life to own a sleek German
car.
That calls to mind some feelings surrounding German reunification: the call
‘either the D-mark comes to us, or we come to the D-mark’ made by the German
Democratic Republic citizenry before reunification showed just as starkly the
symbolic aspect of the currency. Many politicians saw the euro as a peace
project, while most economists saw it as a technical means to facilitate
transactions, but the true reason why the southern European countries pushed for
it was probably that it was a symbol of new wealth and prosperity.
Some analysts and policy advisers even gave this interpretation a more
concrete meaning by mulling over a transfer union, an equalization transfer
system between regions similar to the one operating in Germany.55
The German government and the Bundesbank naturally inferred as much.
They wanted to exclude the southern European countries, because they were

afraid of the high level of public debt of such countries. The Bundesbank was
not as certain as Helmut Kohl had said in his 1998 speech cited above that there
would be no transfer union. That was the reason behind its insistence in
incorporating into the Maastricht Treaty the condition that, to accede to the euro,
public debt was not to exceed 60% of GDP. In 1991, the year for which data
were known when the Maastricht Treaty was agreed, the debt-to-GDP ratios of
Italy (102%), Greece (92%), Belgium (128%), Ireland (95%), and the
Netherlands (79%) were so far above the 60% limit that it appeared unfeasible
for them to meet this criterion. And indeed they did not manage to fulfil the
accession criterion, just as most of the euro member countries did not. In the
control year 1997, only Finland (56%), France (58%), Luxembourg (7%), and
Great Britain (54%) were below the 60% limit. Seen in this light, legally the
euro project should not have started at that time.
But even then it was clear that Europe’s politicians were inventive when it
came to formulating treaty texts. The Maastricht Treaty contained a fuzzy
remark that the 60% limit could be set aside when at least the deficit ratio was
diminishing and approaching the 3% benchmark, or when it exceeded this value
as an exception and only temporarily.56 Thus, everything was possible after all,
and the southern countries that wanted to join the euro despite their high
indebtedness saw the door opening up. The euro itself was already a firm
project. Paramount was now to be counted among the countries that would adopt
it as a currency. The southern countries and France, which naturally had large
interests in the Mediterranean region, exerted pressure until the Kohl
government relented and accepted an enlarged Eurozone. With hindsight, this
planted the seed for the debt problems affecting Europe today.
There are, however, indications that Kohl himself wanted to leave aside the
60% limit in order to bring Italy in, waving away the concerns of the
Bundesbank and its experts.57 Faced with a choice between exhausting his
energy in a tussle with France and Italy on the one hand, and realizing his dream
of going into history as the father of a united Europe on the other, the decision
for him was not so difficult after all.
It appears that Finance Minister Theo Waigel tried until the last moment to
avert this.58 His position was weakened, however, because the EU had forced
Germany to include the Treuhand obligations in the government debt.59 This led
to a jump in Germany’s debt-to-GDP ratio by eight percentage points, bringing it
to 58%, just a little below the 60% limit, from 1994 to 1995. In 1996, the ratio
reached 60.4%, just surpassing the limit, and in the reference year 1997,
Germany’s ratio was clearly too high, at 61.3%, which would have left the

country out of the euro if the Maastricht criteria for accession had been applied.
However, the whole point of introducing the euro was to deprive the
Bundesbank of its power to set the interest rates in Europe or, to put it
differently, to liberate the countries of western Europe from the Bundesbank’s
diktat. Thus, since the euro without Germany would have been pointless, the
entry criterion was waived. And this, in turn, opened the gates to new entrants.
The overly indebted southern candidate countries and Belgium used the
argument that Germany had been accepted as a euro member to demand access
as well.
German Finance Minister Waigel tried to forestall this by begging the
Bundesbank to revalue part of its undervalued gold reserves in order to receive
higher transfers of Bundesbank profits, which could have helped Germany to
avoid exceeding the debt limit. But the Bundesbank remained stubborn as a
matter of principle.
The European Central Bank
Thus, a new currency was introduced for a large number of European countries,
and the European Central Bank (ECB) became the continent’s most powerful
political institution. The ECB turned out to be the only institution able to protect
the Eurozone against the shock waves created by the financial crisis. But, as will
be shown, in doing so it heavily interfered with the allocation of resources, a
course of action that may have long-lasting implications on the distribution of
wealth and economic activity among regions.
While the idea of making the ECB a centralized institution like the Bank of
England had been discussed, the local preferences of the existing national central
banks (NCBs) put a stop to such aspirations and a much more decentralized
structure was created instead. The local NCBs continued to exist as institutions
owned by their respective sovereigns, with their assets and debts not being
socialized, and they basically retained their economic functions in terms of
carrying out the monetary operations. However, they do have to follow the rules
and conditions set by the ECB Governing Council in Frankfurt, as well as share
their income from monetary policy operations in accordance with their
respective shares in the ECB’s subscribed capital. Thus, the system of central
banks issuing euros is called ‘Eurosystem’. In this book the terms ECB and
Eurosystem will often be used as synonyms, unless clarity requires a distinction.
The national central banks of the EU countries (not only those of the euro
countries) had to contribute to the ECB’s original subscribed capital of € 5.76

billion, capital that was increased to € 10.76 billion at the end of 2010. Adding
the profits resulting from the revaluation of assets such as gold reserves, the
ECB’s equity capital as of December 2013 amounted to € 21.0 billion.60 The
capital allocation key was set according to the relative size of the EU member
countries, calculated as the average of their GDP and population figures.61
Leaving out the capital contributions of the non-euro EU countries, the adjusted
capital key for Germany in 2013 was 27.0%, for France 20.3%, and for Italy
17.9%, while for Greece it was 2.8%, and for Malta, 0.1%, for example. These
adjusted capital keys play a role in many important calculations, such as those
for the distribution of profits and losses that accrue from monetary policy.
The Eurosystem is directed by a Governing Council which delegates everyday
businesses to an Executive Board consisting of six members, including the ECB
president, currently Mario Draghi of Italy. In 2013, the Council itself consisted
of the seventeen presidents of the member NCBs, plus the six members of the
Executive Board. At the beginning of 2014 Latvia joined as the eighteenth
member, being granted an additional Council seat. If the number of euro member
countries exceeds 18, as could soon be the case when Lithuania joins, a rotation
system will apply for membership in the Governing Council so as to limit the
number of its active members.
The NCB presidents are elected for a period of at least five years, the
members of the Executive Board for a period of eight years, and the ECB
President for eight years. While the NCB mandates are renewable, the ECB
mandates are not.
Although the NCB presidents are chosen through domestic political processes,
they are not assumed to act as country representatives, being expected to make
their decisions as pure technocrats for the common good, independent of
political influence. When the Maastricht Treaty was agreed, political
independence was considered one of the fundamental requirements for a well-
functioning monetary system, one that would prevent opportunistic behaviour
geared at serving particular interests.
In this spirit, the voting rights of all NCB presidents were made identical,
regardless of the size of their respective home countries and the share of the
liability their countries assumed. This structure deviated strongly from the way
private corporations are run, and even from the IMF, where countries’ voting
rights are proportional to their paid-in capital and liability. At the ECB, the
representative of Malta has the same voting right as that of France, Germany, or
Italy, even though Malta has barely 1/156th, 1/195th or 1/142th of the respective
populations.

If one considers that the members of the Executive Board, including the ECB
President, also have voting rights, and given that each of the three countries
above (France, Germany, and Italy) traditionally has one representative on the
Board, their respective shares in the voting rights would amount to 8.7%, still
much less than their respective liability shares. In fact, Malta has a per capita
voting right that is seventy-eight times larger than that of France, ninety-eight
times larger than that of Germany, or seventy-one times larger than that of Italy.
Figure 1.6 gives an overview of the relevant figures for all euro countries.

Figure 1.6 ECB Council voting rights and capital key/exposure 2013
Sources: European Central Bank, Organisation, Decision-making Bodies, ECB Council and Capital Key;
European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO–the
annual macro-economic database.
Note: The adjusted capital key (equity share) is the capital key divided by the sum of the capital keys of
those central banks that participate in the Eurosystem and share in the profits and losses from monetary

operations. The Bank of England, for example, owns an equity share in the ECB, but does not participate in
the pooling of profits and losses. The adjusted capital key gives a country’s liability and profit share. The
capital keys, in turn, are determined by the mean of a country’s population and GDP share.
Treating all countries as equal regardless of their size was also justified
inasmuch as the ECB’s only goal according to the Maastricht Treaty is to
maintain price stability. In fact, referring to the European System of Central
Banks (ESCB), article 105 of the Treaty of the European Union states:
The primary objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability.
As all countries presumably fully share this goal, conflicts of interest were not
foreseen, and it seemed reasonable to treat the NCB presidents as technocrats
devoid of a political agenda.
However, as this book will argue, the ECB is, to a large extent, carrying out
local rescue operations to the benefit of troubled countries and their creditors,
becoming the principal bailout institution in the process. By preventing
sovereign and bank bankruptcies, it helps private investors to escape the
consequences of their failed investment decisions. It grants credit to troubled
banks at conditions that are better than those offered by markets and buys
government bonds of troubled countries to stabilize their market prices, acting as
a lender of last resort. All of this has dramatic implications for the distribution of
wealth among the euro countries and for the geographical allocation of capital
investments. Thus, the interpretation of the ECB Council as a mere technocratic
body that limits itself to monetary decisions seems questionable.62
Potential gains and losses from direct redistribution effects are not limited to
the ECB’s equity capital, as one may think. The equity capital of all national
central banks of the Eurozone, including the ECB’s € 21 billion on 31 December
2013, was € 353 billion (including revaluation reserves).63 The true volume of
resources potentially subject to redistribution among countries is much bigger, as
it includes the seignorage income central banks earn through money creation,
that is, by lending out self-created money to commercial banks against interest.
The present value of this seignorage income, which we could label ‘seignorage
capital’, under static conditions is the stock of central bank money (M0) itself. In
December 2013, the Eurosystem’s static seignorage capital was € 1.262 trillion,
or 13% of the Eurozone’s 2013 GDP. Adding the nominal equity capital of €
353 billion gives a total of € 1.615 trillion, or 17% of Eurozone GDP.
If account is taken of the fact that the stock of money balances will grow
apace with the economy and the price level, the seignorage capital attains an
even bigger value.64 According to a Citigroup study, the sum of notional equity

and seignorage capital might even amount to € 3.4 trillion, or 36% of Eurozone
GDP.65 The largest chunk of this sum, about € 2.9 trillion, is seignorage capital.
Managing this capital through the policies of the ECB is not a trivial matter and
cannot simply be subsumed under the innocuous term ‘monetary policy’. A later
chapter in this book will explain in detail, in the context of the so-called Target
balances, why the ECB’s policies have induced massive shifts in the seignorage
capital between the Eurozone’s countries, potentially exerting distributional
effects that go far beyond the realm of monetary policy.
1 See European Parliament, Lisbon European Council 23 and 24 March 2000, Presidency Conclusions,
available at: <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/lis1_en.htm>.
2 See H. Henzler, ‘Zunehmender Druck’, Wirtschaftswoche, No. 26, 20 June 2002, p. 24.
3 See A. Friedman, ‘Without Structural Changes, Experts Cautious on Economic Growth’, The New York
Times, 2 May 1998, available at: <http://www.nytimes.com/1998/05/02/news/02iht-simpact.t.html?
pagewanted=all>; C. Noyer, ‘The Euro: Accelerator of Economic Growth in Europe’, Speech delivered at
the lunch-meeting of Cercle d’Union Interalliée in Paris, 23 June 1999, available at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/1999/html/sp990623_1.en.html>. Furthermore, a panel of
economists chaired by Michael Emerson, then the European Commission’s chief economist, estimated that
the elimination of currency transaction costs alone would boost gross domestic product by between 0.5%
and 1%. See also P. Gumpel, ‘Is the Euro Good for Europe?’, TIME Magazine, 26 September 2004,
available at: <http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,702088-1,00.html>.
4 H.-W. Sinn and R. Koll, ‘The Euro, Interest Rates and European Economic Growth’, CESifo Forum 1,
No. 3, October 2000, pp. 30–31, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Forum300-sl1.pdf>.
5 See B. Eichengreen, ‘The Great Recession and the Great Depression: Reflections and Lessons’, Journal
Economía Chilena 13, 2010, pp. 5–10.
6 Italy does not belong to the group of countries receiving help from the formal rescue funds, but it has
received extensive support from the ECB’s government bond purchase programme (Securities Markets
Programme, SMP). See Figure 8.1 in Chapter 8.
7 For a comprehensive analysis of Europe’s process of monetary cooperation and unification, in
particular from a historical and political perspective, see H. James, Making the European Monetary Union,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge 2012; see also H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die Europäische Fiskalunion’,
Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 13, 2012, pp. 137–178.
8 Letter from H. Kohl and F. Mitterrand to the Irish President C. J. Haughey, Agence Europe, 20 April
1990.
9 See P. Bérégovoy, ‘Adapter la Constitution à Maastricht’, Speech at the French National Assembly, 5
May 1992, Paris, available at: <http://www.beregovoy.org/Discours%20PB/sur_maastricht.htm>.
10 See H. Kohl, Speech at the German Bundestag during the Debate on the Resolution of the German
Federal Government Regarding the Definition of the Participants in the Third Stage of the European

Economic and Monetary Union, 23 April 1998, Berlin, available at: <http://helmut-kohl.kas.de/index.php?
menu_sel=17&menu_sel2=&menu_sel3=&menu_sel4=&msg=1764> (translated by the author).
11 See J.-C. Juncker, The Euro is a New Instrument to Achieve Peace and Stability, Brussels Economic
Forum 2008, available at: <http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/emu10/quotes_ juncker_en.htm>.
12 See A. Merkel, ‘Der Euro—weit mehr als Währung’, Interview by K. Dunz, Deutsche Presseagentur,
9 
November 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesregierung.de/ContentArchiv/DE/Archiv17/Interview/2011/11/2011-11-09-merkel-
dpa.html >.
13 See M. Monti, ‘Spiegel-Gespräch mit Premier Mario Monti’, Interview by F. Ehlers and H. Hoyng,
Der Spiegel, No. 32, 2012, pp. 44–47.
14 See Ministero dell’Interno, Elezioni 2013 Politiche e Regionali del 24 e 25 Febbraio, available at:
<http://elezioni.interno.it/camera/scrutini/20130224/C000000000.htm>.
15 See A. Dabilis, ‘New Coalition Government Fails to Calm Greek Worries’, Southeast European
Times, 
21 
June 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.setimes.com/cocoon/setimes/xhtml/en_GB/features/setimes/features/2012/06/21/feature-01>.
16 See ‘Portugal Constitutional Court Rejects Budget Articles’, BBC News Europe, 6 April 2013,
available at: <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-22048169>.
17 See Federal Constitutional Court, 2 BvR 987/102, BvR 1485/102, BvR 1099/10, press release, No.
55/2011, 7 September 2011, available at: <https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/en/press/bvg11-
055en.html>.
18 See ‘Quarto Reich’, Il Giornale, 3 August 2012, title page.
19 See R. Alexander, ‘Mario Monti wehrt sich gegen Italien-Misstrauen’, Welt Online, 11 January 2012,
available at: <http://www.welt.de/politik/ausland/article13810405/Mario-Monti-wehrt-sich-gegen-Italien-
Misstrauen.html>.
20 See M. Hasan, ‘Angela Merkel’s Mania for Austerity is Destroying Europe’. The issue’s cover title is
‘Europe’s most Dangerous Leader’ (Cover story), New Statesman, 20 June 2012.
21 See G. Soros, ‘Star-Investor prophezeit Hass auf Deutschland’, Interview by M. Müller von
Blumencron, S. Kaiser and G. P. Schmitz, Der Spiegel, 26 June 2012, available at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/interview-mit-george-soros-zu-deutschland-und-zur-euro-krise-a-
841021.html>.
22 See G. Soros, ‘Why Germany Should Lead or Leave’, Project Syndicate, 8 September 2012, available
at: 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/why-germany-should-lead-or-leave-by-george-soros>;
also G. Soros, Financial Turmoil in Europe and the United States, Public Affairs, New York 2012, and G.
Soros, ‘How to Save the European Union from the Euro Crisis’, remarks delivered at the Center for
Financial Studies, Goethe University in Frankfurt, 9 April 2013. For the reply of the author, see H.-W. Sinn,
‘Spiel mit dem Feuer’, Handelsblatt, 25 April 2013, p. 64, and for a debate between both, see also G. Soros
and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Saving the European Union. Are Eurobonds the Answer? A Debate between George
Soros and Hans-Werner Sinn’, CESifo Forum 14, No. 2, June 2013, pp. 41–48, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/forum2-13-special2.pdf>.
23 See G. Soros, ‘Germany’s Choice’, Project Syndicate, 9 April 2013, available at:

<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/a-simple-solution-to-the-euro-crisis-by-george-soros>; also
H.-W. Sinn, ‘Should Germany Exit the Euro?’, Project Syndicate, 23 April 2013, available at:
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/should-germany- exit-the-euro-by-hans-werner-sinn>; G.
Soros and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Soros versus Sinn: The German Question’, Project Syndicate, 6 May 2013,
available at: <http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/soros-versus-sinn--the-german-question>.
24 See A. Kaletsky, ‘Can the Rest of Europe Stand up to Germany?’, Reuters, 20 June 2012, available at:
<http://blogs.reuters.com/anatole-kaletsky/2012/06/20/can-the-rest-of-europe-stand-up-to-germany>.
25 See EU, ‘Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)’, Official Journal of the European
Union C 115/47, 9 May 2008, available at: <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:C:2008:115:0058:0199:en:PDF>.
26 See M. Sauga, S. Simons, and K. Wiegrefe, ‘You Get Unification, We Get the Euro’, Presseurop, 1
October 2010, available at: <http://www.presseurop.eu/en/content/article/ 351531-you-get-unification-we-
get-euro>.
27 According to polls conducted by the institutes Emnid and Ipsos, rejection of the euro in 1996 to 1998
ranged from 49% to 70%, while acceptance reached barely 44% and 26%, respectively; see ‘Ohne D-Mark,
ohne 
Kohl?’, 
Der 
Spiegel, 
No. 
2, 
5 
January 
1998, 
pp. 
22–25, 
available 
at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-7809473.html>; and Bankenverband—Bundesverband Deutscher
Banken, Zehn Jahre Europäische Wirtschafts-und Währungsunion (EWWU), Ergebnisse einer
repräsentativen Meinungsumfrage im Auftrag des Bankenverbands, March 2008, available at:
<http://bankenverband.de/downloads/meinungsumfrage/08-05-05_10%20Jahre%20EWWU-Anlage-
mit.pdf> (accessed 7 February 2014).
28 See H. Kohl, Speech at the German Bundestag, 23 April 1998, Berlin (translated by the author).
29 See B. Carney and A. Jolis, ‘Toward a United States of Europe’, The Wall Street Journal, 17
December 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704034804576025681087342502.html>.
30 See Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2010, p. 16. According to
the BIS, French banks’ exposure to the public sectors of Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain was $ 103.0
billion at the end of March 2010, while that of German banks amounted to $ 66.4 billion. As a share of
2009 GDP, French claims were 95% larger than those of German banks. See also Chapter 7, section on
France.
31 Some lawyers see this as a destruction of one of the constitutional principles of the Maastricht Treaty.
See D. Murswiek, ‘Verfassungsrechtliche Probleme der Euro-Rettung’, lecture given at Munich Seminar,
CESifo and Süddeutsche Zeitung, 30 January 2012.
32 See ‘Die Allianz der Skeptiker’, Der Spiegel, No. 37, 8 September 1997, pp. 22–24.
33 See M. Friedman, ‘Why Europe Can’t Afford the Euro—The Danger of a Common Currency’, The
Times, 19 November 1997.
34 See M. Feldstein, ‘The Political Economy of the European Economic and Monetary Union: Political
Sources of an Economic Liability’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 1997, pp. 23–42.
35 R. Dahrendorf, ‘Alle Eier in einen Korb’, interviewed by T. Darnstädt and R. Leick, Der Spiegel, No.
50/1995, 11 December 1995, pp. 27–33 (translated by the author); also R. Richter, ‘Europäische
Währungsunion: Mehr Kosten als Nutzen, Altar der Einheit’, Wirtschaftswoche, No. 49, 29 November

1991, p. 97; M. J. M. Neumann, ‘Die Mark ist ein Wohlstandsfaktor’, Zeit Online, 16 October 1992,
available at: <http://www.zeit.de/1992/43/die-mark-ist-ein-wohlstandsfaktor>; J. Starbatty, cited by ‘Vier
gegen den Euro’, Der Spiegel, No. 3, 12 January 1998.
36 See manifest of German economics professors against a premature introduction of the euro, ‘Der Euro
kommt zu früh’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 33, 9 February 1998.
37 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistics, Time Series Databases, Macroeconomic Time Series, Time
Series BBK01.WT5006: Devisenkurse der Frankfurter Börse/100 ESP = ...DM Spanien, BBK01; WT5007:
Devisenkurse der Frankfurter Börse1000 ITL = ...DM Italien, BBK01; WT5012: Devisenkurse der
Frankfurter Börse100 FRF = ...DM ab 1960Frankreich.
38 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistisches Beiheft 5 zum Monatsbericht Devisenkursstatistik, January
2000, pp. 45–47.
39 See M. Par Faure, ‘Jean-Claude Trichet, chevalier du franc fort’ (Jean-Claude Trichet, knight of the
franc fort), L’Express, 16 September 1993, available at: <http://www.lexpress.fr/informations/jean-claude-
trichet-chevalier-du-franc-fort_595798.html>.
40 This view was expressed at the time the euro was introduced by H.-W. Sinn and R. Koll, ‘The Euro,
Interest Rates and Economic Growth’, October 2000. For a hindsight criticism of this view see H.-W. Sinn,
Rescuing Europe, CESifo Forum 11, Special Issue, August 2010, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Aug-2010_0.pdf>.
41 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Currency Statistics, January 2000, pp. 6 f.
42 See Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union, Report on Economic and Monetary
Union 
in 
the 
European 
Community, 
1989, 
available 
at:
<http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/publication6161_en.pdf>.
43 See H. Kohl, ‘Regierungserklärung zum Gipfeltreffen der Staats-und Regierungschefs der NATO in
Rom sowie zur EG-Konferenz in Maastricht’, German Bundestag, Plenarprotokoll 12, No. 53, 1991
(translated by the author); O. Issing, who later became the ECB chief economist, agreed to this; see ‘Gut für
Deutschland’, Der Spiegel, No. 3, 15 January 1996, p. 84.
44 J. Chirac, ‘Nur der Euro bringt Fortschritt’, Interview by H. Nathe, H. Oschwald, and M. Weber-
Lamberdière, 
Focus, 
No. 
38, 
15 
September 
1997, 
available 
at:
<http://www.focus.de/politik/ausland/ausland-nur-der-euro-bringt-fortschritt-und150-1-archivdokument-2-
teile_aid_168401.html>. For an early criticism of trying to have a fiscal union without a common currency
see H. Uhlig, ‘One Money, but many Fiscal Policies in Europe: What Are the Consequences?’, in M. Buti
(ed.), Monetary and Fiscal Policies in the EMU, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2003, pp. 29–56.
45 See EU, ‘Treaty on European Union’, Official Journal C 191, 29 July 1992, available at: <http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/en/treaties/dat/11992M/htm/11992M.html>.
46 EU, ‘Treaty on European Union’, 29 July 1992, article 109 littera j paragraph 4.
47 See M. Sauga, S. Simons, and K. Wiegrefe, ‘Der Preis der Einheit’, Der Spiegel, No. 39, 27
September 2010, pp. 34–38.
48 See ‘Gespräch des Bundeskanzlers Kohl mit Staatspräsident Mitterrand, in Latché, 4 January 1990’,
Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik 1998, p. 582 ff.

49 See W. Proissl, ‘Why Germany Fell out of Love with Europe’, Bruegel Essay and Lecture Series, 1
July 2010, available at: <http://www.bruegel.org/publications/publication-detail/publication/417-why-
germany-fell-out-of-love-with-europe>.
50 As testified by Hubertus Dessloch, former Head of the Representation of the Free State of Bavaria to
the European Union, in a letter to the author dated 27 May 2010.
51 See F.-O. Giesbert, ‘De Versailles à Maastricht’ (From Versailles to Maastricht), Le Figaro, 18
September 1992, p. 1.
52 See R. Augstein, ‘Neues vom Turmbau zu Babel’, Der Spiegel, No. 42, 18 October 1993, p. 29.
53 See J. Chirac on 6 March 2002 according to W. Vogel, ‘Frankreichs Europapolitik nach der Wahl’,
Deutsch-Französisches Institut, Aktuelle Frankreichanalysen, No. 18, 2002 (translated by the author).
54 See C. Cordalis in TV talk show Menschen bei Maischberger of 28 February 2012, Topic: ‘The Last
Sirtaki: Greece Bankrupt, Germans Pay Nonetheless?’ (translated by the author).
55 The role of fiscal transfers had already been addressed by the Werner Plan (European Commission,
Report to the Council and the Commission on the Realization by Stages of Economic and Monetary Union
in the Community, 1970); see also T. Mayer, Europe’s Unfinished Currency, Anthem Press, London 2012,
especially chapter 1. In the MacDougall Report (European Commission, MacDougall-Report, Vol I: The
Role of Public Finance in European Integration, and MacDougall-Report, Vol II: Individual Contributions
and Working Papers, 1970) a budget of between five and seven percent of GDP was suggested for transfers
between the member countries. It was argued in a number of places that a redistribution mechanism for the
Eurozone was desirable. See T. Courchene, C. Goodhart, A. Majocchi, W. Moesen, R. Prud’homme, F.
Schneider, S. Smith, B. Spahn, and C. Walsh, ‘Stable Money—Sound Finances’, European Economy 53,
1993; P. Van Rompuy, F. Abraham, and D. Heremans, ‘Economic Federalism and the EMU’, European
Economy, Special Edition, 1, 1991; M. Obstfeld and G. Peri, ‘Regional Nonadjustment and Fiscal Policy:
Lessons for EMU’, NBER Working Paper, No. 6431, June 1999; ‘Maastricht Follies—Fiscal Policy Should
Not Be Constrained Under a Single Currency’, The Economist, 9 April 1998, available at:
<http://www.economist.com/node/159467>; D. Fuceri, ‘Does the EMU Need a Fiscal Transfer
Mechanism?’, Vierteljahreshefte zur Wirtschaftsforschung 73, 2004, pp. 418–428.
56 See EU, ‘Treaty on European Union’, 29 July 1992, article 104 littera c.
57 The Kohl government was well aware of the enormous risks posed by taking in Italy, with its high
indebtedness, as can be seen from the files released upon request of the weekly Der Spiegel. In January
1998, Kohl’s foreign policy adviser Joachim Bitterlich and the state secretary of the Federal Ministry of
Finance, Jürgen Stark, pointed out that Italy’s lower deficit was due primarily to exceptional effects, such as
the disproportionate drop in market interest rates, which provided no guarantee for the permanence of sound
finances. Kohl overruled these concerns. See ‘Kohl kannte Risiken’, MMNews, 6 May 2012, available at:
<http://www.mmnews.de/index.php/wirtschaft/9996-kohl-kannte-euro-risiken>.
58 ‘Theo hat alles gegeben’, Der Spiegel, No. 51, 16 December 1996, available at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-9133850.html>; ‘Kreative Buchführung’, Der Spiegel, No. 41, 7
October 1996, available at: <http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-9102323.html>; M. Reimon, ‘Eurokrise
(nicht 
nur) 
für 
Dummies—Teil 
1’, 
Der 
Standard, 
2 
November 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://derstandard.at/1319181752075/Eurokrise-nicht-nur-fuer-Dummies—Teil-1>; I. Zöttle, ‘Gewaltige
Sprengsätze’, 
Focus, 
No. 
13, 
23 
March 
1998, 
available 
at:
<http://www.focus.de/politik/deutschland/waehrungsunion-gewaltige-sprengsaetze_aid_170413.html>.

59 Treuhand was East Germany’s trust fund for ex-communist firms and its privatization agency.
60 See European Central Bank, Annual Accounts 2013, p. 4.
61 All EU countries, even those not introducing the euro as a currency, became shareholders. Thus, for
example, even the United Kingdom and Denmark, which are the only EU countries that have ‘opt-out’
clauses in the Treaty exempting them from participation, contributed their shares to the capital stock.
However, the countries that have not yet introduced the euro do not vote on monetary policy, are not bound
to carry out the ECB’s monetary policy, and do not participate in the distribution of the Eurosystem income
from money creation. Share ownership is thus primarily notional for the non-euro area EU countries,
without real importance.
62 Nitsch and Badinger show that the ECB’s decisions to set interest rates depending on inflation and the
gap between actual and potential output, according to the so-called Taylor rule, can best be explained by
weighting the national inflation and unemployment data with the respective nationalities’ share in the ECB
personnel rather than using the actual statistical averages. See H. Badinger and V. Nitsch, ‘National
Representation in Multinational Institutions: The Case of the European Central Bank’, CESifo Working
Paper No. 3573, September 2011, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp3573.pdf>.
63 See European Central Bank, Weekly Financial Statements, Consolidated Financial Statement of the
Eurosystem as at 31 December 2013, press release, 8 January 2014.
64 Let M be the monetary base (stock of central bank money), i the (constant) nominal rate of interest
and r the (constant) annual nominal growth rate of the economy, then the present value of the seignorage
revenue of the Eurosystem is M i /(i–r). In the case of non-constant growth rates and interest rates, a
somewhat more sophisticated formal expression results.
65 See W. Buiter and E. Rahbari, ‘Looking into the Deep Pockets of the ECB’, Citi Economics, Global
Economics 
View, 
27 
February 
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://blogs.r.ftdata.co.uk/money-
supply/files/2012/02/citi-Looking-into-the-Deep-Pockets-of-the-ECB.pdf>.

CHAPTER 2
Bubbles in the Periphery
Importing Capital—The Disappearance of Interest Rate Spreads—The Timing Problem—Relief
for Government Budgets—The Lack of Fiscal Discipline—Italy’s Missed Opportunity—The
Foreign Debt Problem—Bubbles—Property Prices—Private Wealth—Market or Government
Failure?
Importing Capital
As mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 1, when the euro was introduced there
was the widespread belief that the new currency would stimulate growth and
prosperity in Europe. After all, the euro would create a true common capital
market by levelling the playing field and providing cheaper credit to countries
that hitherto had had to pay high interest rates, thereby triggering productive
capital flows from the northern to the southern countries that would enhance
European growth by replacing low-yield with high-yield investments.1 While the
growth expectations turned out to be overly optimistic, as Figure 1.1 showed, a
large-scale reallocation of capital in favour of the now-distressed GIPSIC
countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Cyprus) did indeed take place.
This chapter looks at the reallocation process from the viewpoint of the recipient
countries. The next chapter will focus on the capital-exporting countries, and on
Germany in particular.
The GIPSIC countries were all huge capital importers in the years preceding
the outbreak of the crisis, as shown in Figure 2.1. While their aggregate capital
import (contoured line near the centre) was small until the year 2000, it exploded
after 2002 and peaked, at about 6% of their combined GDP, in 2008, the year of
the Lehman Brothers collapse. Subsequently, during the crisis, it was still
substantial, but shrank year by year and eventually turned into a capital export in
2013. Only Cyprus and Greece kept up capital imports, while Ireland turned into
a capital exporter as early as 2010. As will be shown in Chapter 7, the capital
imports during the first years of the crisis were largely explained by various sorts
of public international credit provided to the crisis-hit countries rather than
private capital flows.

Figure 2.1 Capital imports (or the equivalent current account deficits) of the GIPSIC countries as a share of
GDP (1995–2013)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions,
Balance of Payments Statistics by Country; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs,
European Economic Forecast, Autumn 2013; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: Disregarding net errors and omissions in the balance of payments, capital imports are identical in size
to the current account deficits (see also Chapter 6). 2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
The largest capital importers in relative terms were Greece, Portugal and
Cyprus. At the time the Lehman Brothers crisis broke out, capital imports
amounted to more than 12% of GDP, an extremely high level from a historical
perspective. Among the bigger countries, Spain stands out with a peak capital
import of 10% of GDP in 2007. As will be discussed below, Spain was by far the
largest capital importer in absolute terms.

It follows from the definition of the balance of payments that the capital
import of a country is identical to its current account deficit, i.e. basically the
excess of imports and net interest payments to foreigners over exports. Thus, the
curves depicted in Figure 2.1 can be interpreted in two different ways. Capital
flows and current account balances are two sides of the same coin. They are
numerically identical and mutually dependent.2 During a business cycle, exports
and imports of goods go up and down depending on the relative speed of the
domestic economy and that of its external trading partners, leaving in their wake
a capital flow as a residual. This is the usual way of seeing the issue, since
business-cycle phenomena attract by far the most public attention. However,
with upheavals causing investors to rebalance their wealth portfolios, the
causality is reversed. Desired portfolio reallocations become the driving force,
and real economic activity adjusts so as to generate current account imbalances
that make possible the desired portfolio reallocations, which show up as capital
flows. The introduction of the euro induced such a desired portfolio adjustment,
since countries that had hitherto appeared risky in terms of investment now
seemed attractive to international financial and real investors.
The Disappearance of Interest Rate Spreads3
The driving force that caused investors to seek a portfolio restructuring in favour
of the GIPSIC countries was the removal of uncertainty. For one thing, the
exchange-rate uncertainty disappeared with the introduction of the currency
union, and for another the union seemed to signal sufficient stability and mutual
protection to make bankruptcies of states and banks appear more unlikely.
The extent to which investors perceived the euro as reducing investment
uncertainty in southern Europe and Ireland can most clearly be seen in the
retrenchment of interest rates for these countries. Figure 2.2 illustrates the yields
for the ten-year government bonds of the various euro countries. What the figure
shows must also have applied to the interest rates on private credit, for which no
corresponding dataset is available: high spreads in earlier years, a dramatic
convergence of rates as the euro approached, a nearly decade-long phase of
identical rates for most countries, and then a new phase of large spreads during
the current crisis.

Figure 2.2 Ten-year government bond yields (1990–2013)
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, Data Category: Interest Rates, Benchmark Bonds.
Note: The interest rates correspond to average yields for government bonds with ten-year maturity (so-
called Benchmark Bonds). Reuters calculates the yield of a fictitious ten-year bond issued on a given date,
applying the theory of expectations for interest rates to the observed yields of various instruments with
different maturities at that particular date.

Interest spreads always result from the fear of investors that they might lose
their money. Investors charge a premium above the interest rate that would be
demanded for a presumably safe investment to compensate for the risk that the
debt may not be fully repaid. When they reckon with the possibility of losing all
the money invested because of bankruptcy, or if they fear that they will be repaid
with a devalued currency, the rule of thumb is that they calculate the effective
annual rate of interest as the nominal rate agreed in the borrowing contract
minus the annual bankruptcy probability and minus the expected rate of annual
currency devaluation. Thus, for the effective rates of interest to be equal and for
investors to be indifferent between alternative portfolio options, the nominal
rates of interest have to differ by the expected default risk and the expected rate
of currency devaluation. This makes interest rates that look equal actually
different, and rates that look different actually equal, and it ensures that interest
rate differentials (i.e. spreads) reflect the investors’ risk assessment. Interest rate
differentials that reflect investment risks are necessary for the ‘law of one price’,
one of the fundamental efficiency requirements of a market economy, to hold.
Over the period covered by the chart, the German interest rate was the lowest of
all, the other rates differing according to the idiosyncratic risks involved, which
kept the GIPSIC countries all on the higher side. On the left part of the chart the
spreads presumably resulted primarily from the risk of inflation and subsequent
devaluation, while on the right-hand side they resulted primarily from the risk of
default. Other risks may have been present, but presumably to a lesser extent.
Only for the intermediate period of a decade or so investors seemed to have
believed that they would get their money back after lending to the GIPSIC
countries and really earn the rate of interest stipulated in the debt contract.
Before it was clear that the euro would come, private and public debtors in the
southern countries, as well as in Ireland, had to offer very high yields to their
foreign creditors to compensate for potential exchange rate depreciations, most
of the debtors’ currencies having depreciated repeatedly during the previous
decades. In the five-year period between 1991 and late 1995, when the euro was
announced at the Madrid Summit, the ten-year government bond yields of Italy,
Spain, and Portugal were 4.8 percentage points higher on average than those of
Germany. The Greek interest rate hovered above 20%, at least 15 percentage
points above the German one.
The interest burden for private and public debtors was huge. In some
countries, over 10% of GDP was devoted to servicing the interest burden
stemming from the public debt alone. That was the main reason why the
southern countries wanted the euro so badly. The new currency, they thought,
would bring about a lasting reduction in exchange-risk-motivated spreads,

bringing significant relief to the debtor parties.
To be sure, flexible exchange rates always offered the possibility of reducing
the debt burden through inflation and depreciation. Still, the hope was that the
euro would generate more confidence among investors and that the interest
burden would be correspondingly lighter. The money spared thanks to lower
interest payments was to be applied to reducing the principal on the debt and to
steering a course towards credible, long-term stable growth. The vicious circle of
ever higher interest rates and, as a result, ever more financial distress, ever
higher indebtedness and higher interest payments that had plagued these
countries for decades, would be broken once and for all.
The lurking long-term risk of giving up the depreciation option by adopting
the euro was deemed smaller than the immediate advantage of calmer financial
markets and the resulting lowering of the interest burden.
Everything appeared to work just fine initially. Exchange rate uncertainty
disappeared and interest rates converged within just two years of the Madrid
Summit of December 1995, which set the timetable for the introduction of the
euro, and it became clear which countries would participate. Convergence was
completed by May 1998, when the exchange rates of the 11 participating
countries in the first round4 were irrevocably fixed. The formal introduction of
the euro as legal tender between banks due to start on 1 January 1999, as well as
the physical introduction of the currency in January and February 2002, no
longer played any role, because the capital markets had already priced in these
developments. After that point in May 1998, the interest spreads were so low
that they can hardly be made out in the chart. Typically, countries like Italy or
Spain had to offer an interest premium of only 20 basis points, i.e. 0.2%, above
the German benchmark to convince investors to buy their government bonds.
Greek yields sank as well, although somewhat later, as the figure shows, since
Greece’s reference year for fulfilling the accession criteria was 1999. Greece
sneaked into the currency union, as was later shown, by doctoring its budget
deficit figures, 5 joining the Eurosystem in 2001, just in time for the physical
introduction of euro notes and coins. The Greek spreads fell to 35 basis points
(0.35%) and below, which was insignificant compared to the spreads prevalent
before its adoption of the euro.6
Cyprus did not join the Eurozone until 2008, much later than the other
countries, but its accession had been decided on 10 July 2007, and it had been
anticipated even earlier. Its spreads over the German benchmark fell from 2.5
percentage points at the beginning of 2005 to barely 30 basis points, on average,
during the period August–December 2007.

The phase of nearly identical interest rates ended in summer 2007, about a
decade after the convergence began and five years after the physical introduction
of the euro, when the US subprime crisis spilled over to Europe and led to the
collapse of the interbank market.7 It all began with the declaration of German
Industriekreditbank IKB on 30 July 2007 that it had come into a dangerous
situation because of pending write-off losses on assets involving claims in the
US subprime market. A few days later, in early August, BNP Paribas, the
biggest French bank and the second-biggest of the Eurozone, declared that its
hedge funds were having difficulties because of their involvement in the US
subprime market and that it would stop funding them. These announcements sent
shock waves through the financial markets that led to the first crisis of the
interbank market in August 2007. Banks ceased to trust one another and froze
interbank lending. The ECB managed to keep the crisis from spreading by
helping with generous liquidity injections that went largely unnoticed by the
general public. But the seed of scepticism was by then deeply lodged among
investors. In September, Northern Rock, a British bank, faced serious
difficulties, followed a month later by Sachsen LB Europe, a Dublin conduit of a
German state bank, and in January 2008 US investment bank Bear Stearns began
to tumble, leading to its being taken over by JPMorgan Chase in the period
March to May 2008.
With some delay, the banking crisis spread to the government sector when
investors began to fear that banks and countries might not be able to service their
maturing debts. Initially spreads grew only minimally, but when the US
investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed one year later, in September 2008,
the dam burst. The crisis escalated and, with it, the spreads over the German
benchmark for those countries deemed unsafe. A number of rescue operations
and the occasional positive business climate news temporarily halted the growth
of spreads, but in general terms they kept on growing until the summer of 2012.
The Greek interest rate for ten-year government bonds shot up over this period
to a peak of 39%, the Portuguese to 14%, the Irish to 12%, and the Spanish to
7%. The euro seemed to be close to collapsing at that stage.
But then came a further turnaround in the summer of 2012. For one thing, the
ECB announced its Outright Monetary Transactions programme (OMT) on 6
September 2012, with which it basically promised to buy unlimited amounts of
the crisis stricken countries’ government bonds if necessary, putting potential
write-off losses in its books in the process and, in effect, bailing out the
investors.8 This public insurance promise, which the President of the ECB
announced with the words that the ECB will do ‘whatever it takes’,

understandably calmed the markets and reduced the spreads on government
bonds.9 For another, the permanent rescue mechanism ESM finally reached the
necessary quorum of 90% of its capital when the Bundestag ratified it on 29 June
2012 and the German Constitutional Court on 12 September of that year turned
down appeals to stop it.10
Figure 2.3 shows how the crisis and the calming news of the summer of 2012
have affected the prices of outstanding government bonds. The figure is another
way of presenting the information contained in Figure 2.2 for yields, with a
focus on the crisis-stricken countries. The rising spreads that made the
outstanding government bond prices plummet had caused huge wealth losses to
the respective bondholders. By the same token, the interventions of the ECB
have brought about windfall gains, in particular for hedge funds that snapped up
the bonds held by many who had lost hope in the meantime. The recovery of
Irish bonds was a source of huge profits. The ups and downs of asset prices is
the true reason why the financial industry has such a strong interest in the
continuation of the ECB’s rescue policies, and why such policies have huge
redistributive implications for European taxpayers and international investors.

Figure 2.3 Prices of ten-year government bonds
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, Bonds & Convertibles.
Note: The chart shows the market value of ten-year government bonds issued in 2006 (Ireland 2007). After
the Greek haircut in 2012, it shows the market value of the bonds investors received in exchange for the
bonds defaulting relative to the value of the original papers issued in 2006.
The chart shows a discontinuity in the Greek curve in March 2012. That was
the time when a so-called voluntary haircut was imposed on Greek government
bonds, shaving off € 105 billion from private investors’ nominal claims. The
curve shows the market value of an initial investment in Greek government
bonds. Interestingly enough, while the expected haircut had caused the decline in
the value of Greek bonds, the actual haircut in itself did not reduce the market
value of investors’ wealth, since it only acknowledged the discount that the
markets were already applying to such bonds. In fact, since the haircut cleared

the air and reduced the probability of further haircuts in the near future, it more
than doubled the value of the new Greek government bonds in a short period of
time.
After Greece, Cyprus’ banking sector ran into difficulties, culminating in the
default of Laiki Bank in early 2013 and a near default of the Cypriot state,
requiring the freezing of bank accounts and international capital controls lasting
until this writing. Nevertheless, the various rescue operations taken by the ECB
and the community of states have calmed the situation in financial markets.
Politicians are reassuring the public that everything is under control. Perhaps
they are right, perhaps not. But the fact is that they definitely do not have the real
crisis in southern Europe under control, as Chapter 4 will demonstrate. It
continues to smoulder. This is why interest spreads are still sizeable. There is
still a great deal of political uncertainty in the air, despite many wishful
declarations.
Before the euro was announced, investors used to worry that the funds they
had lent in southern Europe would not be repaid in full, and today they are
fretting again. While the reasons may be different—back then the risk of
inflation and devaluation, now the danger of default––the issue is basically the
same. Risk-commensurate yields are always charged to compensate investors for
expected losses. Seen in this light, the euro only managed to concern the
creditworthiness problems of some countries for a number of years, but did not
contribute towards a real solution to the problem. Just like the rust under an old
car’s paint, the problems surfaced again after a while, and have in fact been
exacerbated in the meantime by the enormous build-up of foreign debt.
The Timing Problem
While the convergence of interest rates is an obvious indicator of the forces that
induced the capital flows, it may seem a bit puzzling that the timing of interest
convergence shown in Figure 2.2 does not exactly coincide with the
development and growth of current account deficits shown in Figure 2.1. After
the main convergence of interest rates was completed in early 1998, it took
another two or three years for sizeable capital imports to emerge in the GIPSIC
countries. How can the interest convergence result from desired portfolio shifts
if these portfolio shifts have not yet taken place? What is the causal relationship
between the portfolio rebalancing that the euro introduced, the convergence of
interest rates, and the emergence of current account deficits?
As mentioned above, a capital import is by definition equal to a current

account deficit. Current account balances, however, are subject to much inertia,
reacting only sluggishly to economic incentives. After all, a change in the
balance may involve a change in production structures, trade infrastructure and
even the emergence or disappearance of industries. Thus, the reactions of the
current account limit the capital flows that actually can take place in net terms,
when investors want to rebalance their international asset portfolios. The desire
to rebalance portfolios changes market prices of assets and interest rates
immediately, but it cannot be fulfilled unless the real economies involved react
in a way that generates complementary changes in the demand for foreign credit
and the supply of savings by foreigners, but this usually comes along with
expansions and contractions of the real economies as well as substitution effects
which take time to materialize. This has been thoroughly analysed for the case of
flexible exchange rates, 11 but with fixed exchange rates or within a currency
union things are very similar.
Of course, any limited group of investors can always change their portfolio
structure if they find another group that does the countertrade. If, however,
investors want to bring their capital in net terms to a particular country (without
any public institutions effecting the countertrade), that country’s current account
will have to react by going into deficit. This is because otherwise investors will
not find households, firms and public institutions that are willing to borrow the
funds offered to purchase goods in other countries.
In a currency union, such a deficit may be caused by an internal real
investment boom (e.g. in real estate) resulting from improved credit conditions
that creates jobs and increases incomes, which in turn increase imports. The
reaction of the current account is reinforced by a decline in exports resulting
from the wage increases that the boom brings about and that undermine the
competitiveness of export industries. For several reasons, however, it may take a
few years until the current account shows a noticeable reaction. For one thing,
the emergence of such an investment boom takes time, and, for another, exports
start to decline only when export prices increase, which requires a transmission
of wage increases from the investment industries to the export industries.
Furthermore, even when export prices increase, it is possible that, as is known
from the case of flexible exchange rates, the value of exports initially rises
because prices increase faster and earlier than quantities decline.
Interestingly enough, while the current account starts reacting to a capital
import only with a certain delay, the reverse reaction can be very sudden, for if a
country cannot borrow abroad to finance an import surplus, the goods will
simply not be delivered from abroad.12 Thus, it is as if the current account deficit

hinges on a string of portfolio investment decisions. By pulling the string, it is
possible to close it immediately, but when the string is loosened, the opening
process depends on voluntary decisions within the country that take much longer
to be made and are less certain. Thus, when investors pulled the string in 2007
and the period of equal interest rates ended, the trend increase of the GIPSIC
current account deficits reversed. If there is anything astonishing about the
current account reductions during the present crisis, after the capital markets
refused in 2007/2008 to continue financing current account deficits, it is not how
abruptly the deficit trends have reversed, but how slowly the deficits have been
disappearing. As Figure 2.1 showed, by the end of 2012, fully five years after the
interbank market first broke down, the current account deficit of the GIPSIC
countries had not yet fully disappeared. It only disappeared and turned into a
slight surplus in 2013. Later chapters in this book will show that the sluggishness
in the downward reaction of the current account was due to the provision of
public credit by the ECB and the community of states, which covered these
countries’ financial gaps and financed a substantial portion of their current
account deficits and in some cases outright capital flight.
Relief for Government Budgets
Let us g0 back to the ‘good’ years of the euro. For many acceding countries, the
decision to adopt the euro had primarily to do with a wish to lower their interest
rate burden, and that is what actually occurred. All highly indebted euro
members benefited massively from this relief.
Consider Italy. Before the Madrid Summit, the Italian interest burden on its
public debt had become a problem eliciting growing concern. Relative to GDP,
the country’s interest burden had increased from 8.4% in 1985 to 11.5% in 1995,
putting substantial strain on the government budget.13 The chief reason was the
rapidly growing volume of Italy’s debt, which had jumped from 82% of GDP in
1985 to 125% in 1994. Investors had become increasingly nervous about Italy’s
ability to repay its debt.
The announcement of the euro at the Madrid Summit in 1995 greatly calmed
investors’ fears, bringing down the interest rate the government had to pay on its
bond issuance by 6 percentage points in only two and a half years, as shown in
Figure 2.2. This allowed Italy to roll over its debt at much more favourable
conditions, reducing the interest burden for the government. Five years after the
Madrid Summit, in 2000, Italy no longer had to devote 11.5% of GDP, but only
6.3%, to service its interest payments; ten years later, in 2010, the burden had

sunk to 4.5%. The relative interest burden fell because of rate convergence, but
also due to Italy’s inflation rate, which was still high and inflated nominal GDP.
Figure 2.4 illustrates this advantage.
The situation in Greece was quite similar, as the chart shows. The Greek curve
overlaps with Italy’s over long stretches, revealing a stunning parallelism until
2008. As in Italy, the state greatly benefited from the falling interest rates
brought by the euro. After the outbreak of the crisis, the Greek interest burden
increased sharply, peaking in 2011 to then fall to lower levels. The likely
explanation is the replacement of expensive market credit with cheap public
rescue credit, as will be documented in Chapters 7 and 8, and the Greek default
of early 2012, which reduced the Greek government debt by € 105 billion, or
54% of its GDP.
Figure 2.4 The interest burden of public debt as a percentage of GDP (1985–2012/2013)
Sources: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts; and Government Finance
Statistics, Annual Government Finance Statistics, Government Revenues, Government Expenditures, and
Main Aggregates; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, European Economic Forecast,

Autumn 2013; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, iLibrary, National Accounts,
Main Aggregates; and M. Kloß, R. Lehmann, J. Ragnitz, and G. Untiedt, ‘Auswirkungen veränderter
Transferzahlungen auf die wirtschaftliche Leistungsfähigkeit der ostdeutschen Länder’, ifo Dresden Studien
63, Munich 2012, p. 35.
Note: West Germany comprises the states of the former Federal Republic of Germany (without Berlin).
2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
Unlike Greece, the other crisis countries experienced rising interest burdens
for their government debt during the crisis. That has led many to complain. A
frequently heard argument is that current interest rates are unbearable.
Eurobonds are needed to tap credit jointly and reduce the interest rates. Indeed,
the mutual liability offered by the issuing countries would likely bring yields
back down to tolerable levels. Germany, however, refuses to yield to this
pressure to introduce Eurobonds because it fears that it could end up paying the
sovereign debts of the southern countries, which may well grow even larger if
they continue to be shielded from market sanctions.
The degree to which the complaints are justifiable is open to debate. Firstly,
the current rates are certainly not the rates that markets if left by themselves
would have charged, but rates that have artificially been reduced through various
kinds of intervention of the ECB and the community of states, providing
assurance to investors that they would get their money back. Secondly, the yields
that these countries now deem intolerable were once the norm, even for
Germany, which has always been a low-interest country. Thirdly, as shown in
Figure 2.2, the market rates the countries have paid during the crisis were
typically much lower than before the euro was announced. In fact, as Figure 2.4
shows, their interest burden relative to GDP was in all cases lower than before
the announcement of the euro, even though the debt-to-GDP levels rose sharply.
To be sure, at that time inflation was generally higher, making it possible for a
country to grow out of its debts. GDP expanded through inflation, while debts
were set at nominal values, thus gradually decreasing in size relative to GDP,
provided no new debt was taken on. The yields had a built-in inflation
component, which the investors in government bonds demanded as
compensation for the depreciation their capital would suffer. Still the inflation
component in interest rates had to be included in the budget, even though it was
possible to fund it by borrowing without increasing the debt-to-GDP ratio. The
aspiration to join the euro had also to do with a wish to avoid this inflation
component.
A comparison with West Germany’s burden after reunification can be a useful
indicator for assessing whether or not the burdens involved were tolerable. The
respective (grey) curve in Figure 2.4 shows that the sum of the burden of the

interest on sovereign debt and the West–East transfers that West Germany had to
shoulder hovered at around 6% of GDP, while the interest burden of Italy and
Spain in 2013 lay at only 5.4% and 3.4% of GDP, respectively. Thus, contrary to
what these governments now claim, the present situation is not one of exorbitant
interest burdens resulting from their debt.
In 2012, despite the yawning spreads of 2011 and 2012, the advantage of the
lower interest rates that Italy enjoyed thanks to the euro, relative to a reference
period from 1991 to 1995, was € 96 billion. This was more than the entire value-
added tax revenue of that year, which was € 93 billion.
Italy received kudos for bringing its deficit, against all expectations, down to
the Eurozone accession criterion so quickly. In 1995, its budget deficit was still
7.7% of GDP, but in 1997, the reference year, it had fallen to 2.7%, comfortably
below the 3% cap, making Italy qualify for adopting the euro. However, almost
half (2.3 percentage points) of the 5.0 points in deficit reduction over this period
was brought about by the savings in interest payments. In this sense, the euro
itself largely fulfilled the conditions for Italy’s accession.
The Lack of Fiscal Discipline
The falling interest rates did not just represent a direct cost advantage for the
debtors. They also changed their behaviour, inducing them to relax their efforts
at saving and to take on more debt instead.
To some extent this development had been foreseen when the euro was set up.
This is the reason why at the 1995 Summit in Madrid a stability pact was
envisaged that would put a ceiling on the member countries’ budget deficits. The
December 1996 Summit in Dublin drew up this pact, which was subsequently
ratified, but not before France watered down some of its rules and changed its
name to the Stability and Growth Pact. The member countries committed to
setting up medium-term goals for righting their public finances and promised
that their structural budget deficit, i.e. the deficit adjusted for changes in the
business cycle and temporary measures, would not exceed 1% of GDP.14 A level
of up to 3% for the actual deficit was permitted in the exceptional case of an
economic slump, and more than 3% was allowed to stimulate the economy only
if a country found itself in a recession in which its real GDP dropped by at least
2% within a year. The member countries committed to adopting corrective
budgetary measures if there were signs of deviation from the budget goals, as
well as a prompt elimination of budget deficits.15 If the 3% budget deficit limit
was exceeded, the rules stipulated the levying of sanctions.16

But as in the case of the Maastricht Treaty itself, the rules were not obeyed,
not even those that in 2005 had been watered down by limiting the possibility of
imposing sanctions, after Germany and France violated them. By 2013, the 3%
deficit ceiling had been breached on 148 occasions. 17 Figure 2.5 gives an
overview of the paths that the deficit ratios of the Eurozone’s biggest debtors
have followed over time. As can be seen, the deficit was more often above rather
than below the 3% maximum that the Stability and Growth Pact allowed.
Figure 2.5 Public deficits of selected euro countries

1) Including the assumption of Treuhand debts derived from German reunification.
2) Including the assumption of commercial bank debts.
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Government Finance Statistics, Government Deficit and
Debt; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, European Economic Forecast, Autumn
2013; German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 18, Reihe 1.4; Ifo Institute, Ifo Economic Forecast
2012/2013: Increased Uncertainty Continues to Curb German Economy, 28 June 2012. Note: 2013
European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
Only in 51 of the 148 cases exceeding the 3% limit would have been allowed
on account of a deep-enough recession. In other words, sanctions should have
been levied in 97 cases. According to the original rules that prevailed before
2005, 117 cases should have actually merited sanctions. As it happened, not a
single sanction was ever levied, because the body that was to decide on their
application was the ECOFIN Council, comprised of the economics and finance
ministers of the EU member states, who basically were the perpetrators
themselves. All the holy covenants to exercise discipline turned out to be just so
much hot air.
The countries with the weakest fiscal discipline were Greece and Portugal.
Neither country was ever below the 3% budget deficit mark over the period
considered, although initially both, and Greece even until the onset of the
financial crisis, enjoyed exorbitant growth rates and could definitely not claim
exceptionally bad circumstances. The new credit was used in Greece and
Portugal mainly to pay higher salaries to public employees, and less to improve
the infrastructure. From 2000 to 2008, salaries increased by 80% (nominal) in
Greece and 30% in Portugal. By contrast, over the same period they rose in
Germany by only 10%, less than consumer price inflation (which was 15% in
cumulative terms over the period).18 The number of public employees increased
as well, by 6% in Portugal and 16% in Greece; in Germany, it decreased by 7%
between 2000 and 2008.19
In Portugal and Greece excessive public borrowing also led to a consumption
boom. The aggregate of private and public consumption reached 106% and
103% of the countries’ net national income in 2007, respectively, and rose
further to 111% and 117% during the crisis. While there were other countries
that consumed large fractions of their incomes—in particular Italy, which lately
has been consuming all of its income—Greece and Portugal were the obvious
outliers, as Figure 2.6 shows. Both of these countries used the euro to live
beyond their means.

Figure 2.6 Total public and private consumption of selected euro countries as a share of net national
income (1995–2013)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts (including GDP), GDP and Main
Components—Current Prices, Final Consumption Expenditures; and Income, Saving and Net Lending/
Borrowing, Gross National Income at Market Prices; European Commission, Economic and Financial
Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO – the annual macro-economic database; Ifo Institute
calculations. Note: 2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
While Greece and Portugal were the great outliers among the euro countries,
nearly all of them increased their sovereign debt faster than their GDP. The lure
of low interest rates spread out wide and far. Many countries, including some
that are not shown in Figure 2.5, failed to comply with the deficit ceiling. Figure
2.7 shows how the debt-to-GDP ratios of the countries currently (in 2013) in the
Eurozone evolved from 1995 to 2013. In most countries, debt-to-GDP ratios at
present hover much farther above the 60% ceiling allowed by the Maastricht
Treaty than they did in 1995. Commendable exceptions are Belgium and the

Netherlands. The Belgian success is particularly remarkable when compared
with Italy’s performance. While Belgium started with a ratio of 130% and now
stands at 100%, Italy started at 121% and now stands at 130%.
On average, the debt-to-GDP ratio of the euro countries rose by more than 20
percentage points, from 72% to 96%. In this light, the Eurozone itself shouldn’t
have been allowed into the currency union.
Among the early transgressors was Germany, since its budget deficit, as
Figure 2.5 shows, exceeded the 3% ceiling in the years 2002 through 2005,
without the country being in recession, the only circumstance that would have
provided a justification. In 1995 Germany’s deficit, at 9.5%, had already been
extremely high, but that was due to the inclusion in the budget of the Treuhand
debts that had arisen in earlier years through reunification, a one-time effect.20
Excluding this one-time effect, the deficit would have been 3.1%. The real
problem was with the years 2002 through 2005.
At the time, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder exerted massive pressure to soften
the strictures of the Stability and Growth Pact so that Germany would not have
to pay sanctions. Given that France had also breached the deficit ceiling in 2003
and 2004, both countries practically scuttled the Pact.21 Germany had its
difficulties with the deficit criterion at the time because its revenues had plunged
in the wake of its own euro crisis, as will be discussed in the next chapter, and
the government hesitated over imposing upon the people budget cuts on top of
the painful Agenda 2010 social reforms. However, this does not detract from the
fact that Germany’s breaching of the pact contributed to the deterioration of debt
temperance among the rest of the Eurozone’s members.
Germany’s debt jumped, moreover, by 8.0 percentage points, or € 287 billion,
in 2010 because the country created a bad bank for the toxic assets, primarily of
US origin, accumulated by its Landesbanks and Hypo Real Estate, a spin-off
from Hypovereinsbank that had run into difficulties because of risky
international investment and the absorption of large parts of Hypovereinsbank’s
real-estate portfolio. The creditors of those state-owned banks had a direct claim
on the government (guarantor liability or Gewährträgerhaftung).22 In 1995,
Germany’s debt-to-GDP ratio was 56%; by 2013 it had climbed to 80%.
The French debt-to-GDP ratio jumped from 56% in 1995 to 93% in 2013, as a
result of years of excessive deficits, low growth during the crisis, and various
bank rescue operations, in particular in the context of Dexia, a banking group
that defaulted in 2008.

Figure 2.7 Public debt of the euro countries, 1995 and 2013
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Government Finance Statistics, Government Deficit and
Debt; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators,
AMECO – the annual macro-economic database. Note: 2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn
2013.
Amidst all the widespread moral hazard, a commendably Spartan stance
regarding budget deficits was shown by Ireland and Spain, presently two of the
more notorious crisis victims: during the time when the euro appeared to be
functioning well they did not exceed the ceilings stipulated in the Stability and
Growth Pact, if only because the credit-driven boom they enjoyed boosted

nominal GDP and tax revenues faster than their debt could grow. Spain’s deficit
had exceeded 3% only at the very beginning, until 1998, to drop steadily in the
years thereafter until it turned into a surplus in 2005. By 2007, its surplus
amounted to 2.0% of GDP. Ireland did even better, posting a deficit only in 1995
and 1996; after that, the Irish paid back their debt in almost every single year
until 2007.
The problems for these two countries came when the crisis broke out. Both
developed huge budget deficits and debts, particularly because of the large
bailout operations in favour of their banking systems, but also as the economy
and tax revenue shrank. In 2010 Ireland posted an astronomical deficit, of 30.6%
of GDP, because the government had assumed huge amounts of debt from the
private sector. It also gave guarantees that amounted to 245% of its GDP.23 The
Anglo Irish Bank alone accounted for 16 percentage points of the Irish deficit in
that year. (According to the somewhat mysterious rules of Eurostat, the
assumption of that bank’s debt was counted as a public deficit, whereas the
assumption of the debt of the German Landesbanks and Hypo Real Estate, which
increased the German debt-to-GDP ratio by 8 percentage points, was not.) In
Spain, the debt increased during the crisis primarily as a result of capital
injections into several commercial banks.24
Italy’s Missed Opportunity
The largest among the countries now in trouble is Italy. Following its conduct
under the euro is illuminating, as it helps us to understand the incentives brought
about by the euro. Italy’s history is a story of missed opportunities.
As Figure 2.5 showed, the Italian deficit decreased until the year 2000, but
rose slightly above the 3% threshold over the 2001-2006 period, falling
temporarily below it in 2007 and 2008, to once again exceed it thereafter.
This development is disappointing, because Italy has been one of the biggest
beneficiaries of interest rate convergence. If Italy had kept its primary surplus,
i.e. the surplus of revenue over expenditures that are not related to servicing its
debt, at a constant 4%, the level it achieved in 1995, the interest savings that the
euro made possible would have given the country a budget deficit of 0.5% to 1%
of GDP in the years 2003 to 2011. As it turned out, Italy posted a deficit of 1.6%
to 5.5% instead. Thus, evidently, the interest advantage brought by the euro was
not used to redeem debt, but was consumed by the various governments.
At the beginning all was good intentions. Prime Minister Lamberto Dini, who
had negotiated Italy’s accession, tried to keep his promises, managing initially to

save the interest advantage and, in addition, to increase the primary surplus of
the government budget. As a result, the primary surplus rose from 4.1% to 5.4%
between 1995 and 2000. Italy, at that time, applied its entire interest-rate relief to
repaying its debt, and even saved part of its normal budget. A serious effort was
made towards achieving a lasting budget consolidation.
But the good intentions did not last long. By 2001, just five years and four
prime ministers after Dini, the primary surplus had fallen to 3.1%, and in 2008,
the year before the slump triggered by the financial crisis, it was a paltry 2.5%.
In 2010 it disappeared altogether (0.1%). The primary surplus then rose to 1.1%,
2.5% and 2.3% respectively in 2011, 2012 and 2013, but remained always below
the 1995 level of 4.1%.25 Thus, since 2001 Italy has squandered considerable
parts of the interest advantage the euro brought it rather than using it for debt
redemption. Small wonder then that Italy’s debt-to-GDP ratio today is even
higher than it was in 1995.
This is apparently the problem with democracy. A government commits to
agreements and sticks to its promise of fulfilling them, but its successor dumps
the commitments in favour of pandering to the current needs of voters, instead of
doing something for future generations, perhaps even secretly speculating on its
neighbours’ eventually accepting joint liability for its debts. As long as the hope
held that the ECB would keep interest rates low, taking on debt was always a
more comfortable way to top up the government budget.
If Italy had continued to save the interest it was spared from paying, it would
have wiped out most of its sovereign debt by now. The following calculation
sheds some light on what could have happened if the government had not
squandered the interest advantage brought about by the euro.
Let us assume that Italy’s budget, in the period after 1996, had set aside every
year the same proportion of GDP for interest payments on, and amortization of,
its sovereign debt as it needed in 1995 for interest payments alone (i.e., 11.5%).
In other words, assume Italy would have paid the interest on its outstanding debt
and applied the spared outlays resulting from interest rate convergence to
repaying the debt itself. Under the same conditions, in particular with the same
evolution of its economy, Italy’s debt-to-GDP ratio would have fallen in each
and every year, as depicted in Figure 2.8 by the curve labelled ‘Hypothetical
(nominal)’. At the end of 2013, its sovereign debt would have amounted to only
8% of GDP, or € 117 billion, instead of 133%, or € 2.1 trillion.26 As it turned
out, however, the savings in interest payments were essentially squandered and
were merely used to increase the government’s expenditure.

Figure 2.8 Hypothetical and actual evolution of Italy’s public debt (1995–2013)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts; and Government Finance
Statistics, Annual Government Finance Statistics; and Government Deficit and Debt; European
Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO – the annual
macro-economic database; Ifo Institute calculations; Governo Italiano, Presidenza del Consiglio dei
Ministri, 7. August 2012, available at:<http://www.governo.it/Governo/Governi/governi.html>. Note: 2013
European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013, and Ifo Institute calculations.
Admittedly, this calculation does not take into account the reduction in the
inflation rate that occurred under the euro. Italy’s high inflation had always
facilitated servicing its debt. While the nominal interest burden was high, the
inflationary growth of GDP had kept the debt-to-GDP ratio in check and had
implied that part of the state’s interest payments could be covered with new debt
rather than taxes, without increasing the debt-to-GDP ratio. Adjusting the
interest saving that could have been used for debt redemption for the decline in

the inflation rate relative to the base year (1995), yields the dashed curve in
Figure 2.8 labelled ‘Hypothetical (real)’. It obviously implies a less rapid
reduction in the hypothetical Italian debt-to-GDP ratio. Still, Italy’s debt-to-GDP
ratio would have halved relative to 1995, standing at only 57% by the end of
2013, and Italy would have had no difficulty whatsoever convincing the market
to lend it money at the German interest rate.
Similar calculations could also be made for other countries that are in distress
today. They would typically show that, rather than using the interest saved to
redeem their debt, they kept borrowing to finance their budgets, in some cases
borrowing even more than before. The reduction of interest rates that the euro
brought about both provided the possibility to save and increased the incentive to
borrow, but the latter nearly always proved to be more preponderant. Thus, in
view of today’s crisis, the euro did not help the over-indebted countries to escape
their debt traps, but let them sink even further.
The Foreign Debt Problem
Most Eurozone countries were pushed into higher sovereign debt levels as a
result of the crisis. However, sovereign debt is not necessarily foreign debt, since
domestic investors may have bought government bonds, and foreign debt is not
necessarily sovereign debt, since private households and institutions may also
have borrowed abroad. Thus, the thesis that countries slid into crisis because
they had issued too much public debt is not generally correct: while it does apply
to Greece and Portugal, it does not apply to Ireland and Spain.
Despite their prudent public debt policies, these two latter countries suffer
from a high foreign debt burden, as Figure 2.9 below shows. The figures next to
the bars show the net foreign asset positions in the year 2012 of the countries
then in the Eurozone.27 A negative number shows a net foreign debt position,
and a positive one a net foreign asset position. By the end of 2012, Ireland had a
net foreign debt of 112%, Greece one of 109% and Spain one of 91% of GDP,
all truly alarming levels. They were surpassed only by the debt level of Portugal
(115%). This qualifies the frequent assertion that the GIPSIC countries are
suffering from a sovereign debt crisis. Obviously, the countries’ private
economies also borrowed abroad, and in some cases this was the dominant
factor. The GIPSIC countries are suffering primarily from a foreign debt crisis
rather than a mere sovereign debt crisis.

Figure 2.9 Net foreign asset position and its components (2012)
* CA = cumulative current account balance.
** Change in market value of foreign claims and liabilities for each country.
Sources: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts and Balance of Payments—
International Transactions, Balance-of-Payments Statistics by Country; and International Investment
Positions; Banca d’Italia, Base Informativa Pubblica, Balance of Payments and International Investment
Position; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The figures show the Eurozone countries’ net foreign asset positions as a share of GDP at the end of
2012. They are depicted by the overall length of the country bars. The black areas show the estimated
effective net foreign asset position in 1995, the light grey area the current account imbalances accumulated
from 1996 to 2007, the dark grey areas the current account imbalances accumulated during the crisis (2008–
2012), and the bordered white areas the revaluation effects due to changes in the market value of both assets

and debts between 2008 and 2012. (The revaluation effects between 1996 and 2007 are compounded with
the initial net foreign asset position of 1995 to form what is called the effective initial position.) Bars to the
right measure an increase in assets (or reduction in debts), bars to the left an increase in debts (or reduction
in assets). All bars are expressed as percentages of the countries’ GDP in the year 2012.
The net foreign asset position of a country (sometimes also called net
international investment position) is defined as the sum of all financial claims
held by nationals against foreigners minus the claims that foreigners hold against
residents of the country in question, including real assets and shares of stocks. If
it is negative, one speaks of a net foreign debt position. A net foreign asset
position builds up over time through the accumulation of current account
surpluses; its value is subject to adjustments due to changes in the market value
of the underlying assets.28 Similarly, a net foreign debt position results from
previous current account deficits and its value is also affected by revaluation
effects.
An interesting question concerning the net foreign asset positions concerns the
time when they emerged. Did they build up before the euro was announced, or
during the subsequent period when the interest rates had already converged, or
did they result from the crisis itself? Answering this question is important insofar
as it would shed some light on the debate about whether the interest-rate relief
given to debtor countries would reduce their debt burden through an income
effect, because they could repay their debts more easily, or instead increase it
due to a moral hazard effect, given that lower interest rates provide an incentive
to borrow more (and thus accumulate current account deficits). Figure 2.9 gives
an answer to this question, providing information on a country’s initial foreign
debt or asset position in 1995 before the beginning of interest rate convergence,
and on the accumulation of foreign debt or assets since then, broken down into
the period before and after the outbreak of the crisis. It decomposes the net
foreign asset and debt positions of the euro countries in 2012 into four
components:
1. An effective initial net foreign asset position baselined on the year of the
Madrid Summit, 1995, covering the actual initial book value of foreign
assets and a subsequent statistical revaluation of these assets due to a
decline in the market rate of interest for new debt.29
2. Current account deficits and surpluses as the bubbles built up, from 1996
to 2007, depicted by the light-grey areas.
3. Current account deficits and surpluses during the crisis, from 2008 to
2012, illustrated by the dark grey areas.
4. Revaluation effects on account of a decrease in the market value of long-

maturity debts and claims during the crisis, from 2008 to 2012, illustrated
by the contoured white areas.
The components are indicated by horizontal bars, which add up to the value of
the net foreign asset position of the respective country in 2012. Each component
is expressed in units of the country’s 2012 GDP (not in terms of the GDP of the
respective period). If the sum of the effects is negative (to the left of the zero
line), the country had a net foreign debt by the end of 2012; if it is positive (to
the right of the zero line), it held net foreign assets. The sum of the light-and
dark-grey areas is basically the same as that shown underneath the capital import
curves in Figure 2.1.
To give an example of how to read the graph, consider Spain, whose effective
initial net foreign debt in 1995 amounted to € 390 billion (or 38% of its 2012
GDP), depicted by the black bar. A cumulative current account deficit of € 433
billion in the period from 1996 to 2007 (light-grey bar) augmented this debt in
the ‘good’ years of the euro. During the crisis, from 2008 to 2012, Spain
accumulated a further € 253 billion of net foreign debt through additional current
account deficits (dark-grey bar). Over the same period, the decline in market
value of Spanish debt securities reduced the country’s net foreign debt by € 135
billion, a so-called revaluation effect. Thus, Spain’s ultimate net foreign debt by
the end of 2012 was € 941 billion (= € 390 billion + € 433 billion + € 253 billion
− € 135 billion), or 91% of the country’s 2012 GDP.
The example of Spain shows that the net foreign debt essentially built up not
during the crisis, but between 1996 and 2007, when the interest rates had already
converged. The decline in interest rates brought about by the euro had three
effects on net foreign debt. The first was a positive revaluation effect: the decline
in interest rates increased the market value of the initial stock of government
bonds, which still bore the high pre-summit interest rates. This effect contributed
to pushing the effective initial net foreign debt position upwards.30 The second
effect of the decline in interest rates was in the opposite direction: it reduced the
debt service burden for Spanish debtors, enabling them to roll over and pay back
their external debt much more easily. Sadly, they squandered this opportunity.
The third effect came to dominate the evolution of net foreign debt: the lure to
borrow at low interest rates. During the fat years of the euro, from 1996 to 2007,
Spaniards borrowed even more than in the preceding years, increasing their
external debt via current account deficits by € 433 billion.
This qualifies the view that Spain as a whole practiced debt restraint. Only the
Spanish government sector was parsimonious; the Spanish economy as such was
not. In fact, as will be shown in the next section, the gigantic size of the Spanish

net foreign debt is now by far the Eurozone’s biggest unresolved financial
problem.
Figure 2.9 shows that Greece, Portugal, and Ireland were in a similar situation
to Spain. They all accumulated sizeable foreign debts in relation to their GDP
after the Madrid Summit and before the crisis (light-grey bars), even though they
already had a substantial effective net foreign debt to start with and thus
benefited significantly from the decline in interest rates. The lower interest rates
were an opportunity to repay at least some of their debt without making undue
sacrifices, but they preferred instead to borrow even more.
In addition to the accumulation of foreign debt before the crisis, Portugal and
Greece also accumulated even more foreign debt through current account
deficits during the crisis (dark-grey bars), which exacerbated their debt problem.
Among the GIPSIC countries only Ireland did not add to its debt by
borrowing more in net terms during the crisis. However, despite its high net
foreign debt, Ireland experienced a huge debt revaluation effect when the interest
rates went up, because Irish financial institutions had specialized in maturity
transformation by borrowing short-term and lending out long-term. These
institutions suffered from write-off losses on long-term foreign assets they held,
without being able to benefit from countervailing write-off gains on their short-
term foreign debt.
Spanish, Greek and Portuguese institutions, by contrast, benefited from the
revaluation effects, since the market value of their long-term net foreign debt
declined. In the case of Greece, which came close to a default, the outright debt
relief in spring 2012, of € 105 billion, worked in the same direction.
By the end of 2012 Greece still had a net foreign debt amounting to 109% of
its GDP, Portugal to 115%, Ireland to 112%, and Spain to 91% of their
respective GDP. Without the debt relief and revaluation effects, the net foreign
debt positions of Greece, Portugal and Spain would have been 221%, 135% and
105% respectively. If only the formal Greek debt relief had been subtracted, but
no revaluation effects, the Greek net foreign debt position would have been
167% of GDP.
Cyprus differed from the other crisis countries inasmuch as it did not start off
with net foreign debt, but with sizeable net foreign assets. Cyprus also grabbed
the opportunity to borrow abroad in net terms both before and during the crisis.
In addition, it suffered from a similar revaluation effect as Ireland, presumably
also because of maturity transformation of debt instruments. The Cypriot net
foreign debt position by the end of 2012 was 82%, about the size of Spain’s.
Among the other net debtors, the eastern European members Slovenia, Estonia
and Slovakia stand out. They had all borrowed substantially before the crisis, but

less so during the crisis. Estonia, in particular, borrowed very little after 2007,
and it profited from the devaluation of its debt. Slovenia, in turn, suffered from a
devaluation of its assets, presumably for the same reason as Ireland. By the end
of 2012, Slovenia’s net foreign debt position amounted to 45% of GDP,
Estonia’s to 54%, and Slovakia’s to 64%.
Among the crisis countries, Italy is a noteworthy exception inasmuch as it has
a rather small net foreign debt relative to its GDP. This is surprising, given that
the Italian state did squander the advantage of lower interest rates, as shown
above. Unlike the other countries, Italy did not worsen its net foreign debt
position during the good years from 1996 to 2007, when the interest rates were
low, by borrowing from other countries, and actually lent a small amount instead
(€18 billion). Only during the crisis did Italy’s current account turn negative,
making its net foreign debt position worsen by about as much as it had improved
due to the devaluation of its outstanding debt (contoured white area). By the end
of 2012, Italy’s negative net foreign asset position amounted to only 28% of
GDP, between a third and a quarter of that of the other members of the GIPSIC
group. This was just a bit more than one fifth of Italy’s government debt-to-GDP
ratio. The main explanation for this remarkable fact is that Italy’s foreign debt is
largely private, not public, and that Italian government bonds are typically held
by Italians rather than foreigners. Italians seem to be prudent private and
imprudent public borrowers.
Luxembourg is the champion among those countries whose net foreign asset
position is positive, with net holdings amounting to 169% of GDP. Belgium
holds the second position with net foreign assets of 48% of GDP. Belgium had
significant current account surpluses before the crisis, and during the crisis it
benefited even more because its long-run foreign debt was devalued. In view of
its huge public debt, of about 100% of GDP, this wealth is truly surprising, and
reminiscent of the above characterization of Italians, the only difference being
that private Belgians are not even net foreign borrowers.
Other countries with sizeable net foreign asset positions are Finland and the
Netherlands. Both exported substantial amounts of capital before and after the
outbreak of the crisis. However, they had negative effective net foreign assets to
start with, and their external debt did not lose value during the crisis. Thus, they
rank behind Belgium in terms of their final relative net foreign asset position.
Germany’s net foreign asset position is somewhat smaller in relative terms
than that of the Netherlands and Belgium, but since Germany’s economy is
much bigger than Belgium’s, it is by far the biggest in absolute terms. Germany
accumulated net foreign assets before and during the crisis, but it suffered from a
substantial devaluation of its claims during the crisis, of some 13% of GDP or €

336 billion, as long-term assets held by Germans, such as foreign government
bonds and other securities issued by the crisis countries and the US, suffered
substantial losses in market value. Despite these losses, by the end of 2012
German net foreign wealth amounted to 42% of GDP, or € 1, 107 billion.
Without the revaluation effects, the German net foreign asset position would
have been 54% of GDP, ahead of the Belgian position, which, without the
revaluation effects, would have amounted to 23% of GDP.
Bubbles
Regardless of whether foreign debt was amassed by the public or the private
sector, in all these countries the euro gave rise to an inflationary boom that
deprived them of their competitiveness, an issue whose implications for the
future of the Eurozone will be examined in depth in Chapter 4. The boom
resulted from two effects.
For one thing, the savings in interest payments of private and public debtors
translated into an increase in real disposable income, which stimulated
consumption and stoked inflation. Private debtors were able to consume more,
while the governments had more money available to hire more employees and
raise the salaries of those already on their payrolls, which also stimulated
consumption.
For another, the lower interest rates encouraged more borrowing, which again
had inflationary demand effects. This temptation did not befall only the
governments; private debtors were equally affected. Indeed, in Spain private
debt was clearly dominant, as shown above.
Before the euro was introduced, Spain had not had long-maturity mortgages at
fixed interest rates, as was the norm in Germany.31 Furthermore, interest rates
for construction were extremely high, higher even than the yield on government
debt. For instance, in 1991 the initial interest rate was 17%, 32 which led to little
construction activity. This all changed as soon as the euro was announced in the
Madrid Summit of December 1995. Now that the Spanish banks could borrow at
far lower interest rates in the European interbank market, they gradually offered
builders much more convenient terms33—but certainly not before profiting
themselves mightily from the fat margins. The Spaniards didn’t hesitate to grab
the chance. They took the credit on offer, bought houses and refurbished them,
or built new ones, triggering a colossal construction boom that pulled the entire
economy in its wake.
The external debt that Spain accumulated on account of having the euro

represents the Eurozone’s greatest debt problem at present, simply because
Spain is a big country, with correspondingly large debts. As Figure 2.10 shows,
its debts, at € 941 billion, are only a bit smaller than the net external debt of all
the other stricken countries combined (€ 1, 043 billion). Coincidentally, this
volume is nearly as large as Germany’s total net foreign assets, which amount to
€ 1, 107 billion.
Figure 2.10 Spanish net foreign debt in comparison (2012, € billion)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions,
Balance of Payments Statistics and International Investment Positions; Banca d’Italia, Base Informativa
Pubblica, Balance of Payments and International Investment Position.
The banks and other lenders could have reined in this process, but they also
got carried away by the fever and relaxed their usual due-diligence guidelines. In
mortgage lending terms, the same thing occurred in Spain as in the US. The
banks showered customers with lending offers, pronounced themselves satisfied
with little collateral, and financed a much higher portion of the property price
than is common in other countries, for instance in Germany, where a maximum
of 60% is customary for private mortgages. It was not unusual for banks to lend

up to 130% of the property’s value in order for their customers to splash out on a
sports-utility vehicle with the surplus, as a Barcelona banker once told the
author.
By the end of 2013 the debts of the banks of the six crisis-stricken countries,
including € 3.6 trillion in deposits from their clients, added up to € 8.2 trillion, or
263% of these countries’ combined GDP.34 They arose largely from the granting
of dodgy loans to the private economy and to property developers and buyers,
which came to grief during the crisis. The collective rescue operations
undertaken by the Eurozone countries, which as per the EU summit of July 2012
are to make vast sums also available for rescuing the banks, will try to contain
the spillover effects of write-off losses to other sectors. Chapter 8 will discuss
this in more detail.
The Spanish construction boom had an effect on immigration as well. Labour
was sought after, wages were on the rise, and the number of jobs on offer kept
rising steadily. In the ten years from 1999 to 2008, when the construction boom
came to an abrupt end with the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 6 million
immigrants came to take on Spain, mostly to jobs in construction and in the rest
of the economy. Some 2.3 million of them came from EU countries—primarily
from Romania, which accounted for more than 770, 000––and the rest mostly
from North Africa and Latin America.35 That amounted to a gross immigration
equivalent to 15% of the original population, which is an extremely high
proportion for a single decade. The construction workers now had the money to
spend on other goods, which led to further people finding gainful employment in
the production of such goods. Real GDP in Spain grew by 55% from 1995 to
2007, while the German economy only managed 21% (see also Figure 3.2 in the
following chapter).
The picture in Ireland was quite similar. The real-estate boom was even more
pronounced than in Spain, and massive immigration was one of the results. Over
the same decade, immigration amounted to 20% of the original population in
gross terms and 10% in net terms, i.e. accounting for emigration.36 Ireland grew
even faster than Spain and topped the league in the whole of Europe, with 129%
growth from 1995 to the onset of the crisis in 2007. Its economic output, in other
words, more than doubled. These developments occurred without government
participation, unlike in the Greek and Portuguese cases.
But at the end of the day it was irrelevant whether the cheap credit that fuelled
the boom reached the economy through the private or the public sector, since
one sector profited automatically from the other sector. In Portugal and Greece
the state employees bought and built houses from their credit-financed wage

increases, while in Ireland and Spain the construction workers, developers and
homeowners paid taxes out of their credit-financed incomes. This boosted the
economy and eventually turned into what is known as a bubble: a boom fuelled
by exaggerated optimism that must burst sometime because the country’s
fundamentals no longer correspond to the nominal asset values, sparking fears
among creditors for the safety of their investments.
The economic boom was exactly what one had expected from the euro. It led
to real convergence within the Eurozone, that is, to a catch-up process among the
hitherto poor countries. The boom, however, took on too much momentum and
boosted wages, goods prices and property prices beyond a level sustainable in
the long-term. In making their investment decisions, people projected the
observed trend into an arbitrarily far future, shooting too often far beyond the
mark.
Property Prices
This is particularly true of property prices. When property prices start to go up,
an increasing number of people become more optimistic and believe that they
can still get in on the ground floor in order to profit from the price hike. Prices
then really pick up as a result, and even more people become infected. A process
of self-reinforcing expectations takes hold, with ever higher prices, ever more
real construction projects, a strongly booming domestic economy and steadily
rising wages, which comes to an end when the first construction project finds no
takers, doubts begin to spread, buyers become rare and excess supply in the real-
estate market becomes evident. Prices begin to plummet, new projects are
stopped, construction workers are sacked, demand slumps, and a general
economic crisis sets in that unleashes massive unemployment.
Figure 2.11 shows how quickly property prices rose—and subsequently fell—
in different European countries. Particularly strong price fluctuations were
evident in Ireland and Spain, where the real-estate boom started. From the
Madrid Summit to Lehman Brothers, i.e. in only 13 years, Irish property prices
quadrupled and Spanish prices tripled. Even the Greek and French property
prices were two-and-a-half times higher at the outbreak of the crisis than at the
time the euro was announced.
It is noteworthy that Germany did not partake of the rise and fall in property
prices. Since it was mired in its own euro crisis, property prices fell continuously
until the onset of the worldwide crisis and started to rise only thereafter, thanks
to a new construction boom paradoxically resulting from this very same crisis.

This will be explained in more detail in the next chapter.
The bubble in the crisis-stricken countries was not only in rising property
prices. The general upward trend of goods prices and real income fuelled by the
cheap euro credit also fostered the belief among both public and private debtors
that it was safe to take on more debt. The notion was widespread that it was
possible to grow out of the debts, making leveraging appear fairly risk-free. This
is not as irrational as it seems, since most of the countries now affected by the
crisis grew at blistering rates for an entire decade. The error was to think that this
process would continue indefinitely.
Every stormy growth process must come to an end at some point in time; a
sudden end, when the perception takes hold that the increases in goods prices
and wages resulting from the boom are actually robbing companies of their
competitiveness. By the time doubts about the continuation of the growth trend
set in, it is usually too late. Once goods prices and wages have drifted too far
from their sustainable competitiveness level, it is very difficult to bring them
back down again. Only property prices move freely in both directions.

Figure 2.11 Property prices in the Eurozone
Sources: European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, Economic Concepts—Prices, Output,
Demand and Labour—Prices—Residential Property Price Indicator, Residential Property Price Index
Statistics; German Federal Statistical Office, Genesis Database, Themen, Preise—Agrarpreise, Preise
gewerbl. Produkte, Baupreise—Häuserpreisindex, Preisindex für bestehende Wohngebäude; Central Bank
of Cyprus, Media & Publications—Publications—Surveys—Residential Property Price Indices, Data
Series; Central Bank of Greece, Statistics—Real Estate Market Analysis—Index of Prices of Dwellings
(Historical Series).
Note: For Ireland, quarterly data until Q3 2010; thereafter only monthly data were available. For Germany
data from the German Federal Statistical Office were used for the period until Q3 2011. Later data for this
country stem from the ECB.
By now, nearly all the prices that had exploded in the ‘good’ years of the euro
have come down again, more hesitantly than they increased, but still at a
dramatic pace. The price decline in Ireland was particularly fast. Irish property
prices have fallen by more than 50% since 2006. By contrast, French property
prices have yet to come down. In the first wave of the crisis they declined by

about 10%, but then they stabilized and continued to increase beyond the level
they had at the outset of the crisis. Should the French prices remain as high as
they are despite their explosive rise after the introduction of the euro, this would
be a truly astonishing event in history.
Private Wealth
The boost to economic activity given by the credit inflows that the euro
encouraged not only created jobs and raised income in the southern countries,
but also gave rise to considerable wealth, making these countries richer than the
rest of the Eurozone. This is shown in Figure 2.12, which summarizes the result
of a survey of household wealth conducted by the ECB between late 2008 and
mid-2011, with 2010 as the reference year for most of the countries surveyed.
The left-hand bars show the average wealth per household, the right-hand
columns the median wealth, i.e. the level of wealth that divides the population
into two halves. Surprisingly, the crisis-stricken countries perform rather well.
On average, Spanish households are 49%, and Italian households 41%, richer
than German ones, for example, and even Greek and Portuguese households lag
behind by not more than 24% and 22%, respectively. Cypriot households, with
an average wealth of € 671, 000, are a whopping 3.4 times as wealthy as German
ones, and 2.9 times as wealthy as French ones. Unfortunately, Ireland refused to
participate in the survey. It would have been interesting to compare it with
Cyprus, given that both economies show some similarities in terms of the role of
the banking sector. On average, household wealth in Greece, Italy, Portugal,
Spain and Cyprus exceeds household wealth in the rest of the Eurozone by 23%.

Figure 2.12 Household wealth (2010)
Source: European Central Bank, ‘The Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey: Results
from the First Wave’, Statistics Paper Series, No. 2, April 2013, p. 76.
The differences are even bigger when median wealth is considered. Median
wealth lies everywhere below average wealth, since income distribution is
skewed, with long tails to the right that affect means more than medians. As the
chart shows, even Greek and Portuguese median wealth levels are much higher
than the German one, exceeding it by 98% and 46%, respectively. Spanish
median wealth exceeds the German one by 255%, Italian median wealth does so
by 238%, while Cypriot median wealth dwarfs the German one by 419%.
There have been doubts as to the accuracy of the ECB study, given that the

good performance of the southern countries relative to northern ones, Germany
and Finland in particular, did not seem to conform to prior expectations. For
example, it has been argued that the differences can be explained by differences
in household size.37 However, even if this effect is taken into account, both
Italians and Spaniards on average are still 14% wealthier than Germans, 42%
wealthier than Dutchmen and 40% wealthier than Finns.38
There are two explanations for the high wealth of southern households shown
in the ECB survey. For one thing, the increase in government debt meant that the
citizens of southern countries did not pay enough taxes to balance the budget,
which enabled them to accumulate private wealth. To some extent, the enormous
private wealth in the south simply mirrors public impecuniousness, while in the
north private poverty reflects the sounder public finances. To put it another way:
in both the northern and southern countries governments took money from their
citizens to finance their expenditure, but while the northern governments took
this money in the form of taxes, the southern governments issued government
bonds in exchange, which then became part of private wealth.
For another thing, the inflow of credit from abroad led to the building boom in
the south described above, which boosted the value of real-estate property
beyond the liabilities built up by borrowing abroad. Credit created additional
private wealth, or at least the illusion of it.
Market or Government Failure?
In view of the horrors that the bursting of bubbles brought to the western and
southern European countries, which is now threatening the EU’s cohesion and
the very existence of the euro, the question is: how could this happen? How was
it possible for investors to dump their caution overboard for a whole decade and
invest, for a mere risk premium of 30 basis points, in assets that in the end turned
out to be junk, such as Greek government bonds (see Figure 2.3)? How could
they disregard the bankruptcy risk for a full decade, although the Maastricht
Treaty had made it utterly clear (article 125 TFEU) that there would be no
bailout once a country goes bust and that the creditors in that case would have to
bear the losses?
There are two potential answers to this. The first is that market agents often
have wrong expectations about the future and therefore make wrong decisions in
the present. After all, there have been credit bubbles in many places around the
world and throughout history.39 Investors at times neglect their caution, get
carried away, and infect each another expecting eternal growth, driving up asset

prices until the bubble bursts; then, all of a sudden, their mood changes. Animal
spirits fuel irrational expectations, and irrational fear erupts in panic.40
Some say this is a market failure, but in fact it is the lack of a complete set of
futures markets on which plans can be coordinated through binding
intertemporal contracts on the delivery of goods and credit.41 The
incompleteness of futures markets substitutes expectations of future market
prices and incomes for known market parameters, but these expectations often
turn out to be wrong because the intuitive or objective models of the world on
which agents base their decisions are wrong. Unfortunately, this problem cannot
be easily resolved due to the cost of creating such markets and enforcing long-
term contracts, and just adding a few future markets without having a complete
set of them may actually make things worse.42 Still, it is a bit too simplistic to
speak of a market failure if the incompleteness of markets is what is causing the
problem.
The other answer is that policymakers themselves contributed to causing the
problems. For example, they distorted expectations, creating excessive optimism
in the phase of bubble-building, because their expectations were based on even
worse models of the economy than those of market agents, or because they
deliberately wanted markets to deviate from an efficient allocation of capital
across the countries of the Eurozone to benefit their own constituencies.
In fact, the EU sent many signals that made investors believe that in case of
trouble other governments would bail out the bankrupt countries and their
creditors at the expense of their taxpayers, despite the no-bailout clause of the
Maastricht Treaty. The EU undermined the Maastricht Treaty by encouraging
investors to disregard risks and put their money in places they would normally
stay away from. The whole institutional apparatus was directed so much towards
this goal, given that it was the driving force for the euro project in the first place,
that a mere treaty clause, especially one on which only a minority of countries
had insisted, was not taken seriously by market agents.
Had the no-bailout clause been taken seriously, the Eurozone countries would
have had to implement directives and procedures for the case of state
insolvencies, specifying what would happen in such a case, in particular the
sequence in which creditors would be affected by haircuts and debt-rescheduling
operations. In addition, rules for orderly exits from the Eurozone would have had
to be specified. This would not only have provided clear guidelines for the
rescue operations for Greece that started in May 2010 and avoided the confusion
at the time of the Greek debt rescheduling of March 2012. It would also have
sent a signal to investors that the no-bailout clause was to be taken seriously and

that they do actually bear a sizeable risk by lending to over-indebted and
uncompetitive countries.
The bubbles in Greece and Portugal would have hardly been possible under
such circumstances, because markets would have demanded risk premia early
on, spoiling the debtor states’ appetite for ever more foreign credit. Indirectly,
such measures would also have reined in the forces inflating the private property
bubbles in Spain and Ireland, because they would have reduced the chances of
banks being bailed out by their governments, as eventually happened. As will be
explained in Chapter 8, the EU is currently preparing rules for bank resolution,
but exits and state bankruptcies remain taboo so as not to spook investors.
One of the most important policy decisions of the EU that reflected the
neglect of the no-bailout clause was to allow commercial banks, regardless of
the regulatory model they chose, to buy government bonds of all EU countries
without having to hold capital against such bonds. Small wonder then that the
banks dumped caution overboard and loaded their balance sheets with
government bonds, which later turned out to be toxic.43
According to the Basel Accords on banking regulation, banks had to hold a
certain proportion of their risk-weighted assets as equity capital (Tier 1 capital),
the risk weights being determined exogenously by a standard approach or
endogenously by a coherent internal risk model that the banks had to submit to
their supervising agencies. While the Basel Accords allowed the risk weights of
government bonds to be set at zero, when banks used the standard approach, the
more attractive internal risk models forced the banks to assign non-zero weights
to government bonds. The EU changed this rule in 2006, allowing the banks to
combine the advantage of being able to use their own risk models with a zero
risk weight for government bonds.44 Thus, banks didn’t have to set aside any
capital against government bonds, and unless rating agencies withdrew a
country’s investment-grade rating, no distinction was made among more or less
creditworthy countries. This practice was not implied by the Basel Accords,
which governs the way many banks worldwide are regulated, but by a special
provision that the EU governments added, belatedly and deliberately and without
public notice, to the Basel Accords.
Small and undifferentiated risk weights were also allowed for if banks were
lending to other banks in the Eurozone. Regardless of differences in
creditworthiness, a uniform risk weight of only 0.2 was required for claims on
other banks, much less than for lending to even well-run firms, which required
differentiated risk weights of 0.5 and more, often even 1. This provision
artificially heated up the European interbank market, by directing credit flows to

banks with low creditworthiness that would otherwise have found borrowing
more difficult. It induced northern European banks to lend excessively to the
banks in southern Europe and Ireland, encouraging them, in turn, to lend
excessively to local firms, households, and governments. This, too, contributed
to the exorbitant boost in investment and consumption that inflated the bubbles.
Much of this credit translated into higher wages for government employees and
construction workers, increasing the general living standard and boosting
imports, but making the economies dependent on the cheap-credit drug.
A mere political decision by bureaucrats far below the Treaty level, unnoticed
by the public, reduced the effective equity requirements of lending banks and
pronounced all borrowing governments and banks in the Eurozone as equally
safe, although they weren’t. This undermined the fundamental role of the capital
markets in assessing risks and charging well-differentiated risk premia. The
representatives of countries that considered themselves discriminated against
before the introduction of the euro because they did not understand or respect the
risk assessments conducted by markets now formed a majority in the
corresponding EU bodies, thus managing to secure access to cheap credit to the
detriment of safer investment opportunities and in blatant disregard for the
Maastricht Treaty’s stipulations.
The reckless decisions of bureaucrats were a major reason why the banks in
Europe were so willing to lend to each other and to governments, with such
disregard for the underlying risk of default. These decisions explain why the
banks of the north gobbled up the southern countries’ government bonds and
were lending such gigantic volumes of funds to the banks of the countries now in
crisis. They also explain the problematic linkage between southern European
banks and their sovereigns that the EU currently so deplores. The regulatory
mistakes created a huge distortion in international capital flows that made the
southern countries drug-addicted, destroyed their export industries, and built up
retail economies that concentrated on the delivery of imported goods. It also
caused the painful withdrawal symptoms when the drug supply was interrupted
and market-dictated austerity set in.
In the meantime, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has set up a
new regulatory system, Basel III, which is to become effective during a
transition period from 2013 to 2019 and be implemented by Europe’s national
parliaments before 2019. Unfortunately, that system perpetuates the old
mistakes. The risk weights that the EU had introduced are now even part of the
formal Basel Accords, granting the misallocation of capital an even more solid
base.45
This is also true of the new regulation of insurance companies, Solvency II,

agreed to by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.46
The solvency regulation hitherto imposed on insurance companies only specified
equity holdings in relation to the premium revenue. In the future, insurance
companies in principle will also have to hold equity in proportion to their
investment. However, like banks, they do not need to hold equity against
government bonds of EU countries as well as Norway, Liechtenstein, and
Iceland. Again, the system fails to discriminate between good and bad
borrowers, inducing insurance companies to turn a blind eye when lending out
their funds.
To be sure, the banks and insurance companies could have charged
differentiated risk premia and decided to voluntarily set aside more buffer
capital. But they didn’t do that, because they knew that they would lose any
additional precautionary capital if the worst came to the worst. The strategy of
operating with a minimum of capital is widespread around the world and is the
core of the business model of thousands of financial institutions. In normal
times, if all goes well, the profits are distributed to the shareholders; if a crisis
hits and the institution defaults, the only loss the shareholders have to bear is the
bit of capital they injected. Gambling with limited liability is the basic principle
of casino capitalism.47
The effects of overly lax and distortionary regulation were exacerbated by the
implicit promise of protection that, in the eyes of the capital markets, the
Eurozone countries had been given through the mere fact of their forming a
currency union. The conviction among investors that the stronger countries
would be bound to rescue the weaker ones in case of an impending sovereign
default or a collapse of their banking system, or that the weaker ones would have
enough political power to draw the necessary resources out of the common
monetary system, was built into the Eurosystem, since the ECB was seen as a
lender of last resort, available to provide cheap refinancing credit if necessary.
Even if other countries had not come to the rescue with fiscal funds, which in the
end they did, the local printing presses still available to the euro states that
enabled them to print euros instead of drachmas, liras or pesetas made it unlikely
that a borrowing country and its banking system would run out of money. True,
these printing presses could not be activated without obeying the rules of the
ECB, but for one thing these rules were flexible, including emergency drawing
rights (Emergency Liquidity Assistance, ELA; see Chapter 5) at a country’s own
discretion, and for another, the over-indebted and potentially imperilled
countries commanded substantial voting rights and political influence in the
ECB’s decision-making bodies. The ECB was seen as an institution with

unlimited firepower that could put massive sums of money on display to avert
liquidity crises and protect against insolvency.
In view of the negative experiences the European economies had had under
the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) set up in 1979, the ECB’s
unlimited firepower seemed to be the ultimate solution to the foreign exchange
problem. As explained in Chapter 1, the ERM collapsed when the German
reunification shock required exchange rate adjustments that the central banks of
Europe were ill-equipped to cope with, lacking enough funds to counteract the
speculative attacks.48 The Bundesbank, for instance, had set aside a total of 92
billion deutschmarks in September 1992 to buy ailing foreign currencies, 49 of
which 60 billion deutschmarks were used to prop up the French franc, 50 but
these sums were evidently not enough. The thinking was that with a currency
union, as opposed to a mere monetary system, no investor could expect
depreciation and hence the interest rates had to converge, providing the desired
relief to both private and public debtors, enabling the economies of Europe to
settle to a better equilibrium.51 But it was exactly this unlimited firepower that
created the bubble and all the catastrophic events derived from it. By virtue of its
mere existence, the Eurosystem helped generate ten years of calm and a
convergence of interest rates across the currency area. For ten years, the display
of money in the shop window sufficed. But the unwarranted confidence this
engendered led to the emergence of inflationary bubbles that eventually burst,
prompting the affected countries to take the money on display after all.
This illustrates the dilemma in putting together the Eurozone. On the one
hand, exchange rate stability is a must, which speaks for giving the ECB
unlimited firepower. On the other hand, tight control of budgets and avoidance
of debt excesses by all participating countries is also mandatory, which calls for
tight budget constraints and interest premia commensurate with each debtor’s
creditworthiness. The Eurozone evidently failed in its attempt to perform a
balancing act between these divergent aims, placing all the emphasis on the first
goal and disregarding the second. The budget brakes kicked in far too late, when
some rapidly accelerating economies had already derailed.
Most European politicians did not recognize this problem at all and were
ostensibly blindfolded by the short-term benefits of soft budget constraints to
their own countries, while those who did realize that there was a problem
consoled themselves with the belief that the Stability and Growth Pact would
apply the brakes in time. This belief proved delusory, since for one thing the
politicians then in office did not take the Pact seriously, and for another, they
were in any case powerless to do anything about the excessive indebtedness in

the private sector, which lies at the core of the crisis, as the Spanish and Irish
examples show. The Stability and Growth Pact was a placebo given to appease
the Germans, while at the same time the banks were given, under the table, a sort
of dope in the form of generous accounting rules and the implicit protection
granted by the ECB that encouraged lenders to literally close their eyes to risks.
1 See H.-W. Sinn and R. Koll, ‘Der Euro, die Zinsen und das europäische Wirtschaftswachstum’, ifo
Schnelldienst 
53, 
No. 
32, 
2000, 
pp. 
46–47, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2000_33_8.pdf>; Translation: ‘The Euro, Interest Rates and European Economic
Growth’, CESifo Forum 1, No. 3, October 2000, pp. 30–31, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/Forum300-sl1.pdf>; additionally, see H.-W. Sinn, Rescuing Europe, CESifo Forum 11,
Special Issue, August 2010, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Aug-
2010_0.pdf>; and O. Blanchard, ‘Current Account Deficits in Rich Countries’, IMF Staff Papers 54, 2007,
pp. 191–219; F. Giavazzi and L. Spaventa, ‘Why the Current Account May Matter in a Monetary Union:
Lessons from the Financial Crisis in the Euro Area’, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8008, September 2010.
2 This is a relationship that every student of economics learns in the initial courses. The goods (including
services) measured in the gross domestic product (GDP) are used for consumption, domestic real
investment and net exports. Since GDP minus depreciation is the sum of all income earned in a country,
GDP minus depreciation minus consumption is the savings of that country. These savings are also equal to
domestic net investment plus net exports. Since the part of savings that is not used for domestic investment
flows abroad, net exports of goods equal net capital exports. A more precise analysis shows that, strictly
speaking, it is the current account surplus that is equal to net capital exports. The current account surplus is
equal to net exports of goods plus net capital income received from abroad minus transfers sent abroad
(current donations made to people in other countries, such as guest worker remittances or development aid).
The current account surplus is by definition equal to the net capital export of a country up to the very last
cent, just as the left column total of a company’s balance sheet shows the same figure as the right column
total, although the type of items that are booked in the columns are different.
3 For this and the following sections, see also H.-W. Sinn, Rescuing Europe, August 2010.
4 These countries were: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. Greece (2001), Slovenia (2007), Cyprus (2008), Malta (2008), Slovakia
(2009) and Estonia (2011) joined later.
5 See Eurostat, Report on the Revision of the Greek Government Deficit and Debt Figures, 22 November
2004.
6 For the smaller debt markets like those of Greece, the reduction in spreads can also reflect a liquidity
effect, the creation of the Eurozone triggering new demand for the respective government bonds from
investors who seek to match the Eurozone composition in their portfolio holdings.
7 See R. J. Shiller, The Subprime Solution: How Today’s Global Financial Crisis Happened, and What to
Do About It, Princeton University Press, Princeton 2008; W. Münchau, Kernschmelze im Finanzsystem,
Hanser, Munich 2008, translation: The Meltdown Years: The Unfolding of the Global Economic Crisis,
Mcgraw-Hill Professional, New York 2009; G. A. Akerlof and R. J. Shiller, Animal Spirits: How Human
Psychology Drives the Economy and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism, Princeton University Press,

Princeton 2009; C. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly,
Princeton University Press, Princeton 2009; H.-W. Sinn, Kasino-Kapitalismus. Wie es zur Finanzkrise kam,
und was jetzt zu tun ist, Econ, Berlin 2009. Translation: Casino Capitalism. How the Financial Crisis Came
About and What Needs to Be Done Now, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2010; H.-W. Sinn, Die Target-
Falle, Gefahren für unser Geld und unsere Kinder, Hanser, Munich 2012; A. Admati and M. Hellwig,
Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do About it, Princeton University Press,
Princeton 2013.
8 See European Central Bank, Technical Features of Outright Monetary Transactions, press release, 6
September 2012, available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1.en.html>.
9 See Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the
ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 6 September 2012, available at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120906.en.html>. Draghi had made a similar
statement, though without alluding to the OMT already in July 2012. For an explicit discussion of the OMT
see Chapter 8.
10 See Federal Constitutional Court, 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1421/12, 2 BvR 1438/12, 2 BvR 1439/12, 2
BvR 
1440/12, 
2 
BvE 
6/12, 
12 
September 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bverfg.de/entscheidungen/rs20120912_2bvr139012en.html>. Germany’s President gave the
final signature on 27 September 2012.
11 See A. Marshall, Money, Credit and Commerce, Macmillan, London 1932; A. P. Lerner, The
Economics of Control, Macmillan, London 1962; St. P. Magee, ‘Currency Contracts, Pass-through and
Devaluation’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1973, pp. 303–325; R. Dornbusch, ‘Expectations
and Exchange Rate Dynamics’, Journal of Political Economy 84, 1976, pp. 1161–1176; R. Dornbusch and
S. Fischer, ‘Exchange Rates and the Current Account’, American Economic Review 70, 1980, pp. 960–971;
D. W. Henderson, ‘The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention Policy: Two Extreme Views and
a Synthesis’, Kredit und Kapital 6, 1981, pp. 156–209; H.-W. Sinn, ‘International Capital Movements,
Flexible Exchange Rates and the IS-LM Model. A Comparison Between the Portfolio Balance and the Flow
Hypotheses’, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 119, 1983, pp. 36–63; R. Dornbusch, ‘Exchange Rates and
Prices’, American Economic Review 77, 1987, pp. 93–106.
12 See G. A. Calvo, ‘Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops’,
Journal of Applied Economics 1, 1998, pp. 35–54.
13 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts; and Government Finance
Statistics.
14 See Council of the European Union, ‘Council Regulation (EC) No. 1466/97 of 7 July 1997 on the
Strengthening of the Surveillance of Budgetary Positions and the Surveillance and Coordination of
Economic 
Policies’, 
Official 
Journal 
L 
209, 
1997, 
p. 
1, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31997R1466:EN:HTML>, in particular article 2
littera a.
15 See European Council, ‘Resolution of the European Council on the Stability and Growth Pact,
Amsterdam, 
17 
June 
1997’, 
Official 
Journal 
C 
236, 
1997, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31997Y0802(01):EN:HTML>, 
p. 
1, 
IV, 
The
Member States, 5. It reads: ‘This correction should be completed no later than the year following the
identification of the excessive deficit, unless there are special circumstances’.
16 See Council of the European Union, ‘Council Regulation (EC) No. 1467/97 of 7 July 1997 on

Speeding Up and Clarifying the Implementation of the Excessive Deficit Procedure’, Official Journal L
209, 
1997, 
p. 
6, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=CELEX:31997R1467:EN:HTML>, in particular articles 11–13.
17 H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die Europäische Fiskalunion’, Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 13, 2012, pp. 137–
178. Updated on the basis of data from Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National
Accounts; Eurostat, Government Finance Statistics; and European Commission, Economic and Financial
Affairs, European Economic Forecast, Autumn 2013.
18 For Greece and Portugal, calculated on the basis of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, iLibrary, OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and Projections, Economic Outlook No. 86;
for Germany: German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 18, Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnungen,
Reihe 1.4, 2012, Status: September 2013; and German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 17, Preise,
Reihe 7, September 2013.
19 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts, National Accounts
Detailed Breakdowns, National Accounts Aggregates and Employment by Branch.
20 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, and Government Finance Statistics, Government
Deficit and Debt.
21 See C. Reiermann and K. Wiegrefe, ‘Herr und Helfer’, Der Spiegel, No. 29, 16 July 2012, pp. 32–34.
22 See H.-W. Sinn, The German State Banks. Global Players in the International Financial Markets,
Edward Elgar, Aldershot 1999.
23 Those guarantees are contingent liabilities that do not appear in the public deficit or debt statistics. See
H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 9: Rescue Attempts, p. 193.
24 Banco Financiero y de Ahorros (BFA) of € 18.9 billion, Catalunya Banc € 11.3 billion, NCG Banco €
7.6 billion, Banco de Valencia € 5.5 billion, Unnim Banc € 1.0 billion; see Eurostat Statistics, Government
Finance Statistics, Supplementary Tables for the Financial Crisis. These figures refer to 2012, the most
recent data available at this writing, and they probably do not yet include the funds set aside for the Spanish
bad banks FROB and SAREB, which received voluminous funds at the turn of 2012/2013. SAREB alone is
said to have received € 2.5 billion.
25 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Government Statistics, Government Deficit and Debt;
and European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, European Economic Forecast, Autumn 2013,
Table 38.
26 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Government Statistics, Government Deficit and Debt;
and European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO
– The annual macro-economic database.
27 Data that would have allowed the construction of this graph for 2013 were not yet published as of this
writing (February 2014).
28 Revaluation effects occur when, for instance, the market value of assets or securities changes.
Interestingly, the statistics also keep track of the changes on the value of the debt itself. Thus, the net
foreign debt of Greece and Portugal decreased on account of a decline in the market value of their bonds
held by foreigners, although the obligation to pay in full still stood (i.e. even before the Greek haircut of
2012).

29 The effective initial net foreign asset position is calculated by subtracting the accumulated current
account surpluses in the period 1996 to 2007 from the known 2007 value of the asset positions. It may
include revaluation effects during that period which, as the text explains, resulted from the high rates of
interest on the initial debt and thus constitute a hidden, implicit part of the initial debt. As the Eurostat
statistics only disentangle these two effects for a few countries, they are lumped together here under the
item of an ‘effective’ initial net foreign asset position.
30 The effective initial debt in 1995 itself consisted of two components, for which data are available in
the case of Spain. The first component was the notional value of Spain’s net foreign debt in 1995, i.e. at the
time of the Madrid Summit, which was € 99 billion. The second component was a huge revaluation effect,
amounting to € 291 billion, that materialized thereafter as the interest rates for new debt came down. In a
sense, this effect simply revealed the part of the initial debt that was hidden behind the high interest rates.
The sum of both components results in its effective initial debt of € 390 billion (the black bar).
31 See European Mortgage Federation, ‘Study on Interest Rate Variability in Europe’, 2006, pp. 1–29,
available 
at: 
<http://www.hypo.org/content/default.asp?
PageID=203#INTEREST%20RATE%20VARIABILITY>; and European Mortgage Federation, ‘Hypostat
2010. A Review of Europe’s Mortgage and Housing Markets’, 2010, pp. 1–98, in particular p. 8, available
at: <http://www.hypo.org/Content/Default.asp?PageID=524>.
32 See Banco de España, ‘Official Mortgage Market Reference Rates’, Boletín Estadístico 2013,
available at: <http://www.bde.es/webbde/es/estadis/infoest/series/be1901.csv>.
33 Mortgage interest sank in Spain between 1995 and 2001 by 5.44 percentage points, whereas in
Germany it fell by only 1.75 percentage points. See European Central Bank, Structural Factors in the EU
Housing 
Market, 
2003, 
pp. 
1–55, 
in 
particular 
p. 
22, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/euhousingmarketsen.pdf>. For the 1991–2001 period, the retreat of
mortgage interest amounted to more than 10 percentage points. See Banco de España, ‘Official Mortgage
Market Reference Rates’, 2013.
34 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Database, Time Series MFI (Monetary Financial Institutions),
Bestandsangaben; and European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and
Indicators, AMECO – The annual macro-economic database.
35 See Eurostat, Database, Population and Social Conditions, International Migration and Asylum.
36 See Eurostat, Database, Population and Social Conditions, International Migration and Asylum.
37 See G. D’Alessio, R. Gambacorta and G. Ilardi, ‘Are Germans Poorer than other Europeans? The
Principal Eurozone Differences in Wealth and Income’, VoxEU, 24 May 2013, available at:
<http://www.voxeu.org/article/are-germans-poorer-other-europeans-principal-eurozone-differences-wealth-
and-income>.
38 See European Central Bank, ‘The Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey: Results
from the First Wave’, Statistics Paper Series, No. 2, April 2013, p. 76. Average household size is 2.53 in
Italy, 2.68 in Spain, 2.04 in Germany, 2.22 in the Netherlands and 2.08 in Finland. See European Central
Bank, The Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey, 2013, p. 12. Net wealth per capita
amounts thus to € 108, 800 in Italy, € 108, 700 in Spain, € 95, 700 in Germany, € 76, 700 in the Netherlands
and € 77, 600 in Finland.
39 See C. Reinhart and K. S. Rogoff, This Time is Different, 2009.

40 See P. De Grauwe, ‘Animal Spirits and Monetary Policy’, Economic Theory 47, 2011, pp. 423–457;
G. A. Akerlof and R. J. Shiller, Animal Spirits, 2009.
41 See R. J. Shiller, The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Princeton University Press,
Princeton 2003; also O. Hart, ‘On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market Structure is Incomplete’,
Journal of Economic Theory 11, 1975, pp. 418–443; and the contributions by K. Arrow, P. Diamond, J.
Drèze, P. Dubey, D. Duffie, J. Geanakoplos, S. J. Grossman, A. Mas-Colell, O. Hart, R. Radner, and M.
Santos, in M. Magill and M. Quinzii (eds), Incomplete Markets, Edward Elgar, Northampton 2008.
42 See O. Hart, ‘On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market Structure is Incomplete’, 1975; as
well as M. C. Kemp and H.-W. Sinn, ‘A Simple Model of Privately Profitable but Socially Useless
Speculation’, Japanese Economic Review 51, 2000, pp. 85–95.
43 See H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 4: Why Wall Street Became a Gambling Casino, p.
92.
44 See Regulation Governing the Capital Adequacy of Institutions, Groups of Institutions and Financial
Holding Groups, paragraph 26 number 2 littera b in connection with paragraph 70 section 1 littera c;
Directive 2006/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 Relating to the
Taking Up and Pursuit of the Business of Credit Institutions (Recast), paragraph 80 number 1 in connection
with paragraph 89 number 1 littera d. As far as is known, all euro countries implemented these rules in their
national legislation. For the example of Germany, see Verordnung über die angemessene
Eigenmittelausstattung von Instituten, Institutsgruppen und Finanzholding-Gruppen, paragraph 26 number
2 littera b in connection with paragraph 70 number 1 littera c; Richtlinie 2006/48/EG des Europäischen
Parlaments und des Rates vom 14. Juni 2006 über die Aufnahme und Ausübung der Tätigkeit der
Kreditinstitute (Neufassung), paragraph 80 number 1 in connection with paragraph 89 number 1 littera d.
While the Basel Accord stipulates risk weights for government bonds, which, depending on a formal
rating or the classification of an export insurance agency, could be set at zero, they are only meant for the
case where a bank keeps to the standardized approach to risk assessment. Furthermore, the standardized
approach considers the option that claims on the bank’s own sovereign can be accorded a low risk weight. If
the banks, however, prefer the option of resorting to their own risk-assessment model (Internal Ratings
Based Approach, IRBA), the risk weights for government bonds are to be assigned endogenously. Thus, the
EU policy was bending and stretching the Basel rules substantially. See also H.-W. Sinn, Casino
Capitalism, 2010, chapter 7: Policy Failure.
45 See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for more
Resilient Banks and Banking Systems, December 2010 (revised June 2011), available at:
<http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs189.pdf>; and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Basel III: The
Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools, January 2013, available at:
<http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.pdf>.
46 See EIOPA, EIOPA Report on the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS5) for Solvency II, 2011,
available at: <https://eiopa.europa.eu/fileadmin/tx_dam/files/publications/reports/QIS5_Report_Final.pdf>.
47 See H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 4: Why Wall Street Became a Gambling Casino.
The author once called the incentives to gamble because of limited capital the BLOOS Rule, alluding to the
term ‘You cannot get blood out of a stone’ and he analysed this formally in his dissertation; and H.-W.
Sinn, Ökonomische Entscheidungen bei Ungewißheit, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen 1980, English edition:
Economic Decisions under Uncertainty, North-Holland, Amsterdam 1983, chapters III B and V C ,
available at: <www.cesifo-group.de>. Others have spoken of a Gamble for Resurrection to characterize this
same phenomenon; see M. Dewatripont and J. Tirole, ‘Efficient Governance Structure: Implications for

Banking Regulation’, in C. Mayer and X. Vives (eds), Capital Markets and Financial Intermediation,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1993, pp. 12–35; and M. Dewatripont and J. Tirole, Prudential
Regulation of Banks, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 1994, pp. 97 and 113; see moreover, H.-W. Sinn, Risk-
Taking, Limited Liability, and the Banking Crisis, Selected Reprints, Ifo Institute, Munich 2008, available
at: <www.ifo.de/de/w/43e7rkviz>.
48 See H. Geiger, Das Währungsrecht im Binnenmarkt der Europäischen Union, Verlag
Versicherungswirtschaft, Karlsruhe 1996, p. 40.
49 See H. Hesse and B. Braasch, ‘Zum optimalen Instrumentarium der Europäischen Zentralbank’, in B.
Gahlen, 
H. 
Hesse, 
and 
H. 
J. 
Ramser 
(eds), 
Europäische 
Integrationsprobleme 
aus
wirtschaftswissenschaftlicher Sicht, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen 1994.
50 See G. Braunberger, ‘Die Krise im EWS kann den Gewinn der Bundesbank schmälern’, Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 183, 10 August 1993, p. 11.
51 See Economic and Social Committee, ‘Opinion of the Economic and Social Committee on “An
Assessment of the Introduction of the Single Currency”’, Official Journal of the European Communities C
117/3, 
26 
April 
2000, 
pp. 
23–27, 
Sections 
7.1 
and 
7.2, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2000:117:0023:0027:EN:PDF>.

CHAPTER 3
The Other Side of the Coin
Euro Winners and Euro Losers—Capital Exports from the Core to the Periphery—Mass
Unemployment in Germany—Agenda 2010—The New Construction Boom—Misunderstanding
the Tango
Euro Winners and Euro Losers
The near-catastrophic developments in the GIPSIC countries, i.e. Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Cyprus, in particular their high rates of
unemployment (Figures 1.2 and 1.3) and the burst property bubbles (Figure
2.11), coincided with sharp recessions in these countries during the crisis. Figure
3.1 shows the magnitude of the recessions, with the curves baselined on 2007,
the year of the first breakdown of the interbank market. When the world sunk
into what is now often called the Great Recession in 2008 and 2009, the GIPSIC
countries, with the exception of Cyprus, followed suit. Unfortunately, most of
them did not recover when the world economy subsequently picked up and
experienced substantial growth as of 2010. On the contrary, some GIPSIC
economies, including that of Cyprus, contracted even further. The recession hit
hardest in Greece, where the economy shrank by 23%.
By contrast, Germany’s economy, the largest in Europe, grew appreciably
during the crisis, 1 while France’s economy stagnated.

Figure 3.1 Growth of selected euro countries during the crisis (2006–2013, %)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, GDP and its Main Components;
European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO –
the annual macro-economic database; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: GDP growth rates measured in terms of chain-linked volumes at 2005 prices. The figures present the
GDP growth rates for the period from 2007 to 2013. See also note to Figure 3.2. 2013 European
Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
In view of the differences in performance, it would seem all too obvious that
Germany has benefited most from the euro. Europe’s largest economy flourishes
while southern Europe suffers. Indeed, this fact has frequently been generalized
to portray Germany as the winner of the euro. The European Commission has
expressed this view, and even the German government has endorsed it.2 The
truth, however, is quite different, as we will see, since Germany before the onset

of the current crisis experienced its own euro crisis that required painful policy
reactions. From a longer-term perspective, Germany’s performance does not
look all that great.
Figure 3.2 shows the growth of the same euro countries as in Figure 3.1, but
starting in 1995, the year of the Madrid Summit at which the euro was
irrevocably adopted, the timing for its introduction was specified, and markets
started adjusting to the euro. The growth performance of the various countries
before the outbreak of the crisis in 2007 appears to be nearly the exact opposite
of what it was thereafter.

Figure 3.2 Growth of selected euro countries before and during the crisis (1995–2013, %)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, GDP and its Main Components;
European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO –
the annual macro-economic database; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: GDP growth rates measured in terms of chain-linked volumes at 2005 prices. The figures for the
volumes are obtained by dividing GDP values by the respective national GDP deflator. While this is the
usual statistical definition, it might be more appropriate in a currency union to deflate using the harmonized
GDP deflator so as to capture quality changes that lead to relative price changes. In such a case, the German
growth curve would look far worse, placing it well below Italy, at the very bottom of the ranking. 2013

European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
Germany in particular exhibited an entirely different performance relative to
the other economies before and after the crisis. Over the twelve-year period from
1995 to 2007 it grew by just 21%, only one percentage point more than Italy,
while the Eurozone on average grew by 31%. Until 2006, Germany’s growth
was even slower than Italy’s, turning the country into the Eurozone’s laggard. In
fact, in the period from the announcement of the euro at the Madrid Summit to
the year before the outbreak of the crisis, Germany experienced the lowest
growth rate of all European countries, even if Europe’s boundary were to be
drawn at the Urals. In 2002, a member of the Bundestag walked down the aisle
in the plenary room swinging a red railway lantern to signal that the German
economy was the last carriage in the European train.3
The GIPSIC economies, by contrast, grew very rapidly, by 37% between 1995
and 2007. Ireland’s economy even managed 129%, while the economies of
Greece and Spain both expanded by around 55%. This performance is obviously
the opposite of that shown in Figure 3.1 for the period since 2007. The former
gazelles became turtles, and the turtles, gazelles. In a sense, as mentioned, the
post-crisis performance is the mirror image of the pre-crisis one.
But not entirely. The initial growth phase was so strong that it more than
compensated for the slump the GIPSIC economies have experienced since 2007.
Over the entire period from 1995 to 2013, for instance, Ireland still grew by
113%, Spain by 45%, and Cyprus by 42%. Taken together, the GIPSIC
economies grew by 25% over the entire period, which is very similar to the 29%
growth for the Eurozone as a whole.
Germany, despite its recent growth, still ranks as an underperformer over the
entire period. Its growth of only 26% over the period from 1995 to 2013 did not
even reach the Eurozone average.
Portugal and Italy were also underperformers. Portugal started out superbly,
boasting the highest growth after Ireland in the first five years after the
announcement of the euro, but then it lost momentum and started to lag. Over
the entire period, it grew at similar rate (24%) as Germany. Italy, by contrast,
was a laggard before the outbreak of the crisis and has remained so ever since.
Its GDP in 2013 was only 10% larger than in 1995. Over the whole period, it
showed the worst performance of all countries (assuming that the data are
correct and not blurred by Italy’s incredibly large shadow economy).
If one compares the growth rates of real GDP per capita, the figures look
somewhat less dire for Germany than when considering the absolute values
shown on the chart above. This is because Germany’s population stagnated over

the eighteen years considered, expanding by only 0.5%, well below the 9.5%
average for the other Eurozone countries.4 In fact, with barely 8.3 newborns for
every 1, 000 people, Germany had the lowest birth rate of all OECD countries.5
Immigration was unable to offset the lack of births, as Germany’s bad economic
performance translated into declining immigration. After the massive inflow of
people from eastern Europe in the 1990s, the number of immigrants came down
when the euro was introduced and eventually even turned negative in 2008 and
2009, after the Great Recession broke out. A net emigration of native Germans
has taken place since 2005, and since 2006 there has even been a net emigration
of Germany’s Turkish population. This all translated into a steady decrease in
Germany’s population from 2003 to 2010. Only the good post-crisis
performance of the German economy has recently managed to reverse the
population trend.6
Despite its meagre population growth, per capita GDP in Germany slipped in
the Eurozone’s ranking. Figure 3.3 shows the evolution since 1995 of the
ranking positions of the seventeen countries that in 2013 were in the Eurozone.
In 1995 Germany was number two in the ranking, although German
reunification had reduced its average GDP per capita, being topped only by
Luxembourg, whose large financial services industry makes its top position
unassailable. Thereafter, the roaring growth of the smaller euro economies made
Germany fall steadily back; by 2007 the country had slid to eighth place. It was
not until after the crisis that it clawed its way back to seventh. (Compared to all
the countries that were members of the EU in 2013, it slid from third behind
Luxembourg and Denmark to 11th in 2007. By the end of 2013 it had regained
ninth place.) No other country dropped quite that far. Portugal fell three places
over that period, France and Belgium two places, and Italy one place. Ireland
and Finland, with a four-place improvement, were the best performers, followed
by Slovenia and Malta, with a two-place improvement.

Figure 3.3 Per capita GDP ranking of euro countries
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, GDP and Main Components;
European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, AMECO –
the annual macro-economic database; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: 2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
These facts alone should dispel the often-repeated notion that Germany has
been the greatest beneficiary of the euro. If truth were defined by the frequency
of public assertions, Germany would have indeed profited more than anyone else
from the euro. However, the statistics above show that these assertions are not
even approximately true.
Capital Exports from the Core to the Periphery
What happened in Europe during the period between the introduction of the euro

and the outbreak of the crisis can best be understood in terms of capital
movements, since the capital that created the bubble in southern Europe must
have come from somewhere, and this somewhere was often Germany. Germany
was by far the largest capital exporter at the time, to its own detriment.
From the time the euro was introduced, a growing fraction of German savings
started to flow abroad, with very little investment being made at home, and it
was this lack of investment that explains Germany’s miserable growth
performance shown in Figure 3.2. Germany had traditionally been a capital-
exporting country. In 1991, it turned into a net capital importer, when it needed
resources to nurture the ex-communist eastern part of its economy, and only
reverted to being a net capital exporter in 2002, the year the euro was physically
introduced. Shortly thereafter, German net capital exports surpassed those of
China, Russia, and Saudi Arabia, and in 2006 those of Japan. From 2006 to
2010, Germany was the second-largest net capital exporter in the world, behind
China, and in 2011 it took over the leading position, as shown in Figure 3.4.

Figure 3.4 The world’s largest capital exporters and a few other countries (1999–2013)
Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Database, October 2013; Deutsche
Bundesbank, Time Series Databases, External Sector, Balance of Payments; and Exchange Rates; Ifo
Institute calculations. Note: For 2013 the graphs include IMF forecasts (except for Germany).
Germany’s capital exports followed the announcement of the euro at the 1995
Madrid Summit with a certain delay, for the same reason as that explained in
Chapter 2, namely the inertia of current accounts (Section The Timing Problem).
When they finally became evident, around the time the euro was physically
introduced, they triggered an anguished debate about Germany’s future as a
business location.7 The Ifo Institute contributed to the debate in 2002 and 2003

with a proposal for the so-called ‘Activating Social Assistance’ and with a book
on Germany’s problems (‘Can Germany be Saved?’), both of which influenced
the reforms, known as Agenda 2010, eventually undertaken by the Schröder
government.8 The fact that Germany’s industrial workers were the world’s
highest-paid at the time seemed at odds with:
—the growing industrial competition that globalization represented,
—the fall of the Iron Curtain,
—the eastward expansion of the EU and, not least,
—the introduction of the euro.
The euro starkly exposed the German workers’ lack of competitiveness and
increased the competitive pressure they were exposed to by bringing
transparency to prices and wages, but most of all because it eliminated the
exchange-rate uncertainty. Such uncertainty had kept capital from exploiting the
advantages offered by moving to other places in terms of labour costs and
returns on investment. Eliminating the impediments to the free movement of
capital by removing exchange uncertainty was, as explained earlier, one of the
driving factors for introducing the euro. Thanks to the euro, investors now dared
to invest their resources in the Eurozone’s low-wage countries. German banks
and insurance companies, which had formerly been wary of investing in such
countries, now saw them as attractive alternatives compared to investing in
Germany, with the result that an increasing amount of German savings ended up
wandering abroad.
Faced with this situation, Germany had no other option but to undertake
wage-restraint reforms in order to avoid further damage to its industry and avert
the risk of turning Germany into a bazaar economy, one which eliminates jobs in
the domestic sector by importing an increasingly large amount of labour-
intensive intermediary products, and displaces capital, talent and value-added
towards the downstream sectors of the export industry.9 While the displacement
of value-added from the domestic sectors to the downstream sectors of the
export industry was unstoppable, it could at least be slowed down through wage
restraint. Wage restraint made it possible for some industries that were still
relatively labour-intensive to retain their competitiveness, while a sufficient
number of jobs were created in the service sector to compensate for the job
losses in industry. The reforms were painful, but unquestionably necessary.
Whereas the elimination of exchange rate uncertainty was a boon for the

countries in Europe’s periphery, for Germany it was a problem, because savings
capital flowed abroad instead of being invested at home. Germany posted the
lowest net investment rate of all euro countries by far in the five years between
the introduction of the euro (2002) and the year of the Lehman crisis (2008), as
shown in Figure 3.5 above.10
Figure 3.5 Overall net investment as a share of net national income (2003–2007)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, GDP and its Main Components; and
National Accounts, Income, Saving and Net Lending/Borrowing; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The chart shows the sum of private and public investment net of depreciation relative to net national
income. (Net national income is arguably the best denominator for comparing the domestic use of savings.
However, basing net investment on GDP or other income measures would not alter the ranking.)

The grass appeared to be greener everywhere but in Germany. The investors did
not see the risks that now are the focus of concern; they only saw the higher
yields they were promised elsewhere. German life insurers and banks, most of
all the Landesbanks that are now in the doldrums, 11 preferred to buy Greek,
Portuguese, and Spanish government bonds over German bonds for a mere 20 to
35 extra basis points, i.e. barely 0.20 to 0.35 percent more in yields. That was the
period when German savings capital was leaving the country in droves in search
for yields abroad, where it created jobs and fuelled economic growth.
Figure 3.6 shows the share of overall savings accumulated from 2003 to 2007,
which amounted to € 974 billion, going to net private and public investment at
home, net financial capital exports, and net outward foreign direct investment.
Over this period, 60% of German savings went abroad, a total of € 580 billion,
and only 40% was invested at home for private and public purposes.12 It would
be difficult to find another country that at any time in its history exported such a
high proportion of its savings to finance investment in other countries.
Figure 3.6 Use of German savings (2003–2007)
* Including statistically non-itemizable transactions.
Source: German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 18, Reihe 1.2; Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series
Databases, External Sector, Balance of Payments.

The chart also shows the increase in Target claims which, at € 66 billion, were
still relatively small, as well as other residual items that are not detailed further,
resulting from accounting errors, but which are still capital exports. Target
claims, as will be explained in detail later on in this book, result from the cross-
border relocation of central bank refinancing credit, being in effect a public
capital export.13 One remarkable aspect of the chart is that only a small portion
of Germany’s huge capital exports took the form of net foreign direct
investment. The spectacular German industrial complexes located abroad,
primarily in eastern Europe, account for only a small portion of capital
movements, probably because they were largely overshadowed by German
companies being bought by foreign investors. Much more important than direct
investment were the financial capital outflows through the anonymous channels
of the banks and insurance companies, which went largely unnoticed by the
media.
Normally, a capital export is a benefit for the exporting country as a whole,
because the gain in capital income outperforms the loss in labour incomes
resulting from this export. However, this assumes that the capital was invested
well. Savers in the northern European countries like Germany filled their savings
books and paid their life insurance policies, and the banks and insurance
companies sent their money abroad, in the hope of capturing higher yields than
at home. The funds thus exported served to finance many a sensible project, but
unfortunately they were also used to finance many ventures that were far less
sensible. The funds flowed across the Atlantic into dodgy asset-backed securities
(ABS) consisting of structured credit claims of US banks that, for political
reasons, were intended to help the poor buy a home and were at the centre of the
so-called subprime crisis.14 The money also flowed into the government bonds
of southern European countries, helping to finance salary increases for state
employees, and to savings banks, such as the Spanish Cajas, that today are
teetering on the brink of insolvency because they invested the money in risky
real-estate projects. In hindsight, the return on this investment was not exactly
what the investors had expected.
While Germany was by far the western world’s largest capital exporter, the
exposure of its banking system to the crisis countries was not the largest. As
Figure 3.7 shows, the exposure of the French banking system was larger. The
chart provides an overview of the exposure of national banking systems from
around the world to the public and private sectors of Greece, Ireland, Portugal,
Spain, and Italy (GIIPS), ranked by size at the time of the Lehman crisis (Q3
2008).15

Figure 3.7 International bank claims vis-à-vis public and private sectors of Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain,
and Italy at the time of the Lehman crisis
Source: Bank for International Settlements, Statistics, Consolidated Banking Statistics, May 2013.
Note: The figure shows cross-border claims and local claims of foreign affiliates, ordered according to their
value at Q3 2008. Domestic claims are not included. The claims are vis-à-vis both private and public
residents.
The exposure of French banks amounted to € 604 billion, and that of German
banks to € 581 billion, representing 31% and 24% of the respective GDP for
2008. Even in absolute terms, French exposure was a bit larger (4%) than that of
Germany. Relative to GDP it was 33% larger.
French banks had invested particularly strongly in government bonds. The
respective data are unfortunately not available for the time of the Lehman crisis,
but in the first quarter of 2010, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
published, for the first time, data concerning bank exposure to the sovereign debt
of Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. It turned out that the exposure of the

French banks to these four crisis countries was 55% larger than that of German
banks, and adjusted for the smaller French GDP it was even 95% higher, as
already mentioned in Chapter 1.16 All this explains why the French banking
system has been more heavily affected by the European debt crisis than the
German one, and also why, next to the borrowing countries themselves, it might
be the greatest beneficiary of the bailout operations of the ECB and the
community of states.
While Figure 3.7 only refers to financial claims on public and private GIIPS
institutions, French banks were also heavily engaged via equity stakes in the
banking systems of southern Europe. For example, Bank Geniki, Greece’s ninth-
biggest bank, is a subsidiary of Société Générale, and Emporiki Bank, the fifth-
biggest, was a subsidiary of Crédit Agricole, before it was sold for a symbolic
price of one euro to Greek Alpha Bank. Crédit Agricole, moreover, has
ownership stakes in Italy’s Intesa Sanpaolo and Cariparma, as well as Portugal’s
Banco Espirito Santo, while Banque Nationale de Paris owns the Italian Bank
BNL.
The reason for the large French exposure is not that France was a large net
capital exporter. As Figure 3.4 showed, it was in fact a net capital importer. The
true reason is that the French banking system acted as a hub for international
savings. French banks borrowed from the international markets and then
distributed the capital to the Mediterranean countries, with which France has
traditionally had close cultural ties, owing in particular to its geographical
proximity and its common Romance language.
The United Kingdom, primarily the City of London, also played the role of a
hub for southern Europe. While Britain was also a net capital importer (see
Figure 3.4), it had nevertheless invested heavily in the European crisis-hit
countries, its bank exposure to public and private institutions amounting to 18%
of its GDP in 2008.
Next to the UK, the banks of the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and
Spain (the latter not including the lending of Spanish banks to Spanish
customers), in that order, also showed significant exposure to the crisis countries
in absolute terms. Relative to GDP in 2008, Belgium (41%) tops the list,
followed by Ireland (38%), the Netherlands (32%), France (31%), Switzerland
(30%), Germany (24%), Portugal (19%), the United Kingdom (18%), Spain
(9%), Italy (4%), Japan (3%), and the US (1%).
Mass Unemployment in Germany

The lack of investment in Germany shown in Figure 3.5 gave rise to mass
unemployment that long appeared nearly intractable, peaking at rates similar to
Italy’s unemployment rate today (see also Figure 1.2). While during the peak of
the Internet boom it had seemed possible for Germany to break the trend towards
steadily increasing unemployment that had prevailed since the early 1970s, the
global slump after September 11, 2001 dashed this hope. German unemployment
increased sharply and, with a peak rate of 11.5% in April 2005, even surpassed
its level at the trough of the previous business cycle (9.7% in the period March
1997 to February 1998). At the time, Germany suffered by far the highest
unemployment rate of all the current members of the Eurozone. Figure 3.8
shows the evolution of the German unemployment rate in comparison with the
crisis-hit countries and with France.
Back in the years 2001 to 2006 Germany was the sick man of Europe, while
the GIPSIC countries now mired in crisis enjoyed nearly unprecedented
prosperity. In Ireland, Greece, and Spain in particular, unemployment decreased
significantly, at times even dramatically, after the euro was announced. Ireland
experienced a veritable explosion in employment between 2000 and the onset of
the financial crisis. Portugal was clearly more sluggish in this respect, once its
initial momentum waned, but in April 2005 it still had a rate of unemployment
that was three percentage points below that of Germany. Italy, despite its low
growth, boasted a reduction in unemployment in almost every year between
1998 and 2007, which earned it one of the Eurozone’s lowest jobless rates, at
about 6%. As Figure 3.8 shows, the overall unemployment rate of the GIPSIC
countries declined from 10.0% in 2000 to 7.3% in 2007. In April 2005, it was
three percentage points below the German one.
In France the unemployment rate also fell strongly after the euro was
announced, staying significantly below the German level from 2002 until 2007.
In April 2005, it was 2.4 percentage points lower than Germany’s.
The crisis reversed all these trends. Germany’s employment situation, which
had started to rebound in 2006 as the economy picked up, improved markedly,
while in the other countries employment levels simply collapsed. By the end of
2013 Germany had a much lower unemployment rate than during the peak of its
latest boom in 2008, whereas France had a much higher unemployment rate than
at the trough of its latest slump, in the winter of 2004/2005.

Figure 3.8 Unemployment rate in Eurozone countries, seasonally adjusted (1995–2013)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Population and Social Conditions—Labour Market—Labour Force Survey—
LFS Main Indicators; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The curves refer to all countries now in the Eurozone, based on data published by Eurostat: Slovenia
since January 1996, Slovakia since January 1998, Greece since April 1998, Cyprus and Malta since January
2000, Estonia since February 2000.
Agenda 2010
The German euro crisis forced the Schröder government to undertake painful
social reforms, announced under the name of Agenda 2010.17 These reforms
essentially meant that the government reshuffled funds from the long-term
unemployed to low-income earners. The government abolished long-term
unemployment insurance and let the long-term unemployment benefit fall to the
level of ordinary welfare, which just provides a subsistence minimum, but added

a wage subsidy element to welfare by reducing the benefit withdrawal rate for
low income earners. The new welfare system was labelled Unemployment
Benefit II. Around 1.3 million people in western Germany and one million
people in eastern Germany were affected by the elimination of long-term
unemployment assistance, and during the peak of the latest boom, in 2008, five
million employable people were receiving Unemployment Benefit II, of which
1.3 million collected the wage subsidy.18 Schröder’s party did not forgive him
for pushing through these reforms, and he lost his re-election bid to Angela
Merkel, albeit by a fairly scant margin.
The reforms were certainly not easy on the German workers; they posed an
extreme burden on them that massively affected the lives of many millions of
people and tore at the fabric of German society. The thesis that Germany was the
great euro winner is, in light of this development, simply absurd.
The Schröder reforms proved to be a blessing in disguise for Germany’s
labour market, since its citizens were paid less public money when staying out of
work and more when participating in the labour force. The reform effectively cut
the minimum wage implicit in the German welfare system by reducing the
reservation wage at which workers were willing to accept a job. The lower
reservation wage, in turn, implied a downward stretching of the wage
distribution and kept the average wage increase below the increase in labour
productivity for a number of years, raising the profit share in national income.
This gradually improved the competitiveness of the German workforce and gave
rise to the creation of more jobs, particularly in the low-wage segment.
A major reason for Germany’s healthy economic and labour market situations
after the onset of the financial crisis lies squarely with the Schröder reforms.
This success was born out of the necessity brought about partly by the euro, and
it is certainly not due to an advantage resulting from the euro itself. If Germany
had failed to follow the low-wage strategy, it would have been much harder to
bring unemployment down, and growth would have likely been less impressive
after the outbreak of the crisis than it actually has been.
The New Construction Boom
There is a further reason for Germany’s economic growth that is directly related
to the crisis. Before the onset of the crisis, German savings flowed massively
abroad because German banks and insurance companies, as well as private
investors, underestimated the risks of foreign investment, if only because they
expected bailouts for troubled countries. Once the crisis hit, they changed their

mind and opted to keep their capital at home. They turned primarily to German
real estate, triggering a huge construction boom that the country had not seen
since reunification.19 Money that was not invested directly in construction was
lent to homebuilders. Mortgage rates in 2011 and 2012 were the lowest in the
country’s history. (They moved in a way similar to the government bond rates,
shown in Figure 2.2.) Companies invested more in factories and machinery,
pushing up demand in the toolmaking industries and providing another impulse
to construction. New jobs were created in both sectors, the additional wage
income in turn boosting consumption. Furthermore, new jobs were also created
in the investing industries themselves, strengthening the trend even further. Ifo
researchers had already forecast this development as early as summer 2010,
speaking of a golden decade opening up because capital was once more being
invested at home—duly mentioning that this was relative to other countries and
that temporary slumps could be expected now and then for all countries.20
Subsequent developments proved them right.
The investors’ change of mind explains the boom and the increase in
investment in 2010 and 2011, which became the motor for growth, surpassing
external trade.21 After real investment in construction had decreased almost
continuously, by around one-fourth altogether over the one-and-a-half decades
from 1994 to 2009, it picked up in 2010. In 2012 it was 8% higher than in
2009.22Construction permits for residential units were 37% higher in 2012 than
in 2009, and for owner-occupied dwellings, 86% higher.23 Orders for civil
engineering projects climbed by 22%.24 Architects have a right to rejoice:
whereas their backlog amounted to only 4.7 months in 2007 and 5.3 months in
2009, it had risen to 5.9 months in 2012. This is its highest level since 1994,
when Germany was enjoying its reunification boom.25
The improvement in Germany’s economic performance is, in fact, just a
correction of the devastating development before the crisis and after the
announcement of the euro. At the time the capital sent to Spain was largely
wasted in the ruins now surrounding the Spanish cities to meet a demand that
could never have materialized, while both German housing stock and German
infrastructure were degrading. Seen in this light, the recent reversal of capital
movements seems to be efficiency-enhancing. The assertion that the post-crisis
boom in Germany proves that the country is a euro winner follows the same
logic as the assertion that a person who finds himself in convalescence after a
serious illness is a beneficiary from his malaise.

Misunderstanding the Tango
But don’t the persistent German trade surpluses indicate that the country has
indeed been a beneficiary of the euro? After all, its export success generates
profits and jobs, and is envied throughout Europe.
European politicians appear to think so, given how often the export argument
is bandied about in order to demonstrate the benefits that Germany has derived
from the euro. The German Chancellor is representative of many politicians
when she says:26
We in Germany are very well aware that we, as an exporting nation, profit particularly from the
euro.
Similarly, while she was still the French finance minister, Christine Lagarde,
now Managing Director of the IMF, time and again singled out the huge German
current account surplus, pointing out that this was just the counterpart of the
current account deficits of southern Europe.
It takes two to tango,
she said in 2010, emphasizing that Germany was enjoying its surplus at the
expense of other countries.27
As far as the statistics are concerned, Christine Lagarde is, of course, right.
Given that the Eurozone as a whole had a balanced external current account
when she made her statement, the German surplus must inevitably have had its
mirror image in the deficits of other euro countries. Figure 3.8 compares the
German and GIPSIC current account balances, which by definition are identical
to the respective capital exports and imports shown in Figures 2.1 and 3.4.
Evidently, the evolution of Germany’s current account surpluses and net capital
exports largely mirrors the deficits of these countries. When the euro was
decided upon in 1995, there were no imbalances worth mentioning. Over the
following years, however, imbalances literally exploded, peaking at about € 200
billion per year in the years 2007 and 2008, i.e. at the time the crisis began.

Figure 3.9 Capital flows and current account balances in the Eurozone—the European tango (1995–2013)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions,
Balance of Payments Statistics by Country; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs,
European Economic Forecast, Autumn 2013; Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Databases, External
Sector, Balance of Payments; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: GIPSIC 2013 European Commission forecast, Autumn 2013.
But did Germany really capture some advantages through its surplus and,
most crucially, at the expense of other countries? This would be too hasty a
conclusion, if only because Germany’s current account surplus certainly did not
result primarily from a net trade with other Eurozone countries. After all, as
Figure 1.5 showed, only 36% of German exports go to other Eurozone countries,
and while Germany’s trade surplus at the start of the crisis in 2007 with the rest
of the world was € 168 billion (6.9% of GDP), its trade surplus with the
Eurozone was only € 64.6 billion (2.7% of GDP), of which the GIPSIC countries
accounted for € 54 billion. Accounting for imported intermediate inputs and
recalculating the net exports to the GIPSIC countries in value-added terms,
Germany’s surplus with the GIPSIC countries amounted to just € 45.6 billion

(1.9% of German GDP).28 The weak link between the current account balances
is also apparent in the divergence of the current account figures after the crisis
set in, as Figure 3.9 reveals. During the crisis, the current account deficits of the
GIPSIC countries shrank, but the German current account surplus remained
more or less unchanged, and even increased somewhat. Obviously, Germany’s
current account surplus does not measure a net amount of goods and services
that it supposedly delivered to other Eurozone countries.
Moreover, the German surplus over the period in question was driven by
capital movements that weakened the German economy instead of strengthening
it. As explained at the beginning of Chapter 2, it resulted from the attempt of
investors to restructure their international portfolios from Germany to southern
Europe and elsewhere. As indicated by the convergence of interest rates (Figure
2.2), the announcement of the euro wiped out the perceived risk associated with
investments in southern Europe, causing a readjustment of real economic
activity that generated the current account imbalances and made the desired
portfolio reallocations possible. However, capital flowed not only directly from
Germany to the southern countries, but also to the international capital market,
and from there also to the GIPSIC countries. Recall that, according to Figure 3.7,
the French banking system had the largest, and the British the third-largest,
exposure to the GIPSIC countries, even though the two countries weren’t net
capital exporters.
Since German domestic investment fell while the increased savings resulting
from the rising profit share in national income sought higher returns abroad, the
country went through a prolonged slump. There was a lack of domestic demand
for consumption and investment goods, and not enough jobs were being created.
German incomes rose little, and the demand for imports lagged in comparison to
other countries. Exports, however, given that they were the imports of other
countries, rose apace with the rising incomes of those other countries. Because
of this the German export surplus was more an import deficit than anything else.
A further boost to Germany’s current account surplus came from its improved
competitiveness. Indeed, the massive unemployment in Germany coupled with
the Agenda 2010 reforms brought about significant wage moderation that
translated not only into a higher profit share and a higher savings rate, but also
into a lower inflation rate, improving the competitiveness of German products.
Germany went through what is known as a real depreciation through a curbing
of its inflation.
The situation was the exact opposite in the periphery countries. There, capital
was flowing in, fuelling inflationary consumption and an investment boom,
which in turn fuelled demand for imports, while rising wages and prices

undermined the competitiveness of their export industries.
That is the law of capitalism. If capital flows from A to B, A will experience a
slump and B a boom. The booming economy increases its imports and reduces
its exports as a result of higher incomes and prices, while the opposite occurs in
the sagging economy. Germany was the sagging economy, while the European
periphery was the booming one. That explains Germany’s surplus and the
European tango, but it by no means supports the thesis that the German current
account surplus materialized ‘at the expense’ of other countries. Nothing could
be more absurd than accusing the country whose capital seeps away to other
countries, creating jobs and income there rather than at home, of taking
advantage of other countries. Seeing a trade surplus as a sign of special profits of
the exporting country, a view shared by quite a number of leading German
politicians, is nothing but crude mercantilism.
Of course, from a national perspective there is a good side to a current account
surplus, inasmuch as it measures the accumulation of foreign assets or claims
against other countries. Germany’s current account surplus is, as it were, the
main driver of the yearly increase in the German net foreign asset position (see
Figure 2.9). From the time the euro was announced at the Madrid Summit in
December 1995 until 2013, Germans accumulated a whopping € 1, 529 billion
abroad, represented by the area under the German curve in Figure 3.9. While
these are claims against the rest of the world and certainly not primarily claims
against the GIPSIC countries, if only because much of Germany’s capital export
was flowing via the French banking system, it is remarkable that the GIPSIC
debt accumulated by way of current account deficits, amounting to € 1, 318
billion, is of a similar order of magnitude.
The accumulation of foreign assets naturally benefits the German owners of
these assets, since they receive the resulting interest income. That was the reason
why they sent their money abroad in the first place. However, two qualifications
to this statement are in order.
The first is that the ordinary German population, workers in particular who
possess only negligible financial assets, certainly did not benefit from the capital
exports, since the productivity gains and wage rises made possible by the
investments financed with domestic savings occurred abroad rather than at
home. Current account surpluses, contrary to widely held perceptions, are not
really beneficial for domestic workers. It is true that jobs are created in the
export sector, a trivial effect that is readily visible, but if capital had not been
exported, as represented by the current account surplus, the funds would have
fuelled domestic demand and created jobs in construction and the engineering
industries at home. So there is no net gain for domestic labour from the demand

effect that comes with a current account surplus, if this surplus is the result of a
portfolio shift from domestic to foreign investment. What many people overlook
is that it makes no difference to the demand for domestic products whether
domestic savings are used for domestic or foreign investment. The former leads
to as much demand in the domestic construction and equipment industries as the
latter leads to a net demand among the industries engaged in foreign trade. A
shift from domestic to foreign demand could only generate beneficial differential
effects for domestic labour if the export industries were more labour-intensive
than the domestic sector of non-tradeables, primarily the construction sector, but
the opposite is the case. Thus, if anything, the demand effect represented by the
export surplus is likely to be negative rather than positive for domestic labour.
The true difference between domestic and foreign investment comes from
supply-side effects. Obviously, only domestic investment generates more
domestic supply by increasing the domestic production capacity. If the supply
effect takes place abroad, domestic workers get nothing out of it; they can only
benefit if the supply effect occurs at home, as new jobs result from building new
factories and installing machinery for domestic use.
A second qualification to the above statement is that there is reason to doubt
whether the huge savings account that the Germans have filled abroad with their
trade surpluses will be available when the need arises to draw funds from it.
When the German baby-boomers reach their retirement age, which will be
around the years 2025 to 2030, and wish to retrieve the funds that their life
insurance providers have invested in southern Europe and elsewhere, Germany
will have to build a current account deficit by importing all the goods and
services that these citizens will need. Such a current account deficit would arise
automatically when the population in question begins to put their savings to use.
But this presupposes, of course, that the foreign credit-takers to whom the funds
were lent will be in a position to actually repay them. Whether they will be able
to, given their own demographic realities and level of indebtedness, remains to
be seen. If the money does not return, the current account surpluses will have
been for nought. Actually, as explained in Chapter 2, € 336 billion of the
increase in Germany’s net foreign asset position of € 1, 328 billion built up
through current account surpluses over the period 1996 to 2012 has already been
written off by open haircuts and by reductions in the market value of assets in
anticipation of future haircuts.
1 Among the euro countries, only Slovakia and Malta grew faster.

2 See P. Plickert, ‘Die Vor-und die Nachteile des Euro’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 22 June 2011,
available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-schuldenkrise/waehrungsunion-die-vor-und-
die-nachteile-des-euro-1653839.html>; A. Merkel, Regierungserklärung zum Europäischen Rat in Brüssel,
24/25 
March 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesregierung.de/ContentArchiv/DE/Archiv17/Regierungserklaerung/2011/2011-03-24-
merkel-europaeischer-rat.html>; and ‘Wie profitiert Deutschland vom Euro?’, ZDF heute-journal, 8
September 2011, available at: <http://www.etwasverpasst.de/sendung/88591/zdf/zdf-heute-journal/zdf-
heute-journal-vom-08-september-2011.html>; also ‘Geben Sie Ihr Ehrenwort, dass wir Deutschen kein
Geld verlieren?’, Interview by K. Diekmann and D. Hoeren with José Manuel Barroso, Bild, 10 October
2011, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.bild.de/geld/wirtschaft/jose-manuel-barroso/deutschland-euro-krise-
20394200.bild.html>.
3 See H.-W. Sinn, Die rote Laterne. Die Gründe für Deutschlands Wachstumsschwäche und die
notwendigen Reformen, Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaften (ed.), Ferdinand Schöningh
Verlag, Paderborn 2003; also ifo Schnelldienst 55, Special Issue, No. 23, 17 December 2002, pp. 3–32,
available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/SD23-2002.pdf>; and Deutscher Bundestag, ‘Das
Geschehen 
im 
Parlament 
festhalten’, 
12 
February 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundestag.de/dokumente/textarchiv/2010/28642186_kw06_stenografen/index.html>.
4 This is overlooked by The Economist. See ‘Vorsprung durch Exports. Which G7 Economy Was the
Best Performer of the Past Decade? And Can It Keep It Up?’, The Economist, 3 February 2011, available at:
<http://www.economist.com/node/18061550>; as well as H.-W. Sinn, Letter to the Editor: ‘Germany’s
Economy’, The Economist, 23 February 2011, available at: <www.ifo.de/w/3UfDQuwzg>.
5 See The World Bank, World Data Bank, World Development Indicators, available at:
<http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx>.
6 See The World Bank, World Data Bank, World Development Indicators.
7 See H.-O. Henkel, Die Kraft des Neubeginns: Deutschland ist machbar, Droemer, Munich 2004;
German Council of Economic Experts, Jahresgutachten 2002/03: Zwanzig Punkte für Beschäftigung und
Wachstum, November 2002.
8 In a letter to the Spiegel, Wolfgang Wiegard, then a member of the German Council of Economic
Experts, argued that this literature was the ‘intellectual basis’ of the Agenda 2010. See W. Wiegard, Letter
to the Editor, available at: <www.ifo.de/wiegard/w/j7yqcXB2>; also H.-W. Sinn, C. Holzner, W. Meister,
W. Ochel, and M. Werding, ‘Aktivierende Sozialhilfe. Ein Weg zu mehr Beschäftigung und Wachstum’, ifo
Schnelldienst 55, Special Issue, No. 9, 14 May 2002, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/SD9-2002.pdf>; H.-W. Sinn, Ist Deutschland noch zu retten?, Econ, Berlin 2003, English
translation: Can Germany be Saved?, MIT Press, Cambridge 2007; see also D. Snower, A. J. G. Brown, and
C. Merkl, ‘Globalization and the Welfare State: A Review of Hans-Werner Sinn’s “Can Germany Be
Saved?”’, Journal of Economic Literature 49, 2009, pp. 136–158.
9 See H.-W. Sinn, Die Basar-Ökonomie. Deutschland: Exportweltmeister oder Schlusslicht?, Econ,
Berlin 2005.
10 In 2011, a major revision of Germany’s national accounts was performed leading to a complete
overhaul of the calculations. Before this revision, Germany had had, for many years, the lowest net
investment rate of all OECD countries.
11 For an early criticism of the reckless investment strategy of the Landesbanks made possible by state
guarantees, see H.-W. Sinn, The German State Banks. Global Players in the International Financial
Markets, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, and Northampton, MA, USA, 1999.
12 The data revision of the German Federal Statistical Office carried out in August 2011 has increased

the share of domestic investment significantly. Based on the data before the revision, the share of German
savings invested at home in the period 2002 to 2010 was only 34%. See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Germany’s Capital
Exports Under the Euro’, VoxEU, 2 August 2011, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/germany-s-
capital-exports-under-euro>.
13 Intra-Eurosystem claims and liabilities resulting from under-or over-proportionate banknote issuance
are in many ways similar to Target balances, but unlike Target balances they are not included in balance-of-
payments statistics. For details see Chapter 6, Section Target Balances as a Public Capital Export.
14 Details can be found in H.-W. Sinn, Kasino-Kapitalismus. Wie es zur Finanzkrise kam, und was jetzt
zu tun ist, Econ, Berlin 2009, English translation Casino Capitalism. How the Financial Crisis Came About
and What Needs to Be Done Now, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2010, in particular chapter 6: Hot
Potatoes.
15 The data for Cyprus are not available.
16 See Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2010, p. 16.
17 See G. Schröder, ‘Regierungserklärung von Bundeskanzler Gerhard Schröder am 14. März 2003 vor
dem deutschen Bundestag’, Deutscher Bundestag, Plenarprotokoll 15, 2003, No. 32, in particular p. 2479.
The preparatory work that provided the basis for the Schröder reforms included the proposals for Activating
Social Assistance prepared by the Ifo Institute in May 2002, a parallel proposal by the Economic Advisory
Council to the Federal Ministry of Economics of August of that year, the proposals of the Hartz
Commission of that same month, and most of all by the Twenty-Point Programme of the German Council
of Economic Experts of November of that year. See H.-W. Sinn, C. Holzner, W. Meister, W. Ochel, and M.
Werding, ‘Aktivierende Sozialhilfe’, 14 May 2002; Advisory Council to the Federal Ministry of Economics
and Technology, ‘Reform des Sozialstaats für mehr Beschäftigung im Bereich gering qualifizierter Arbeit’,
BMWi Dokumentation, No. 512, 2002; P. Hartz, N. Bensel, J. Fiedler, H. Fischer, P. Gasse, W. Jann, P.
Kraljic, I. Kunkel-Weber, K. Luft, H. Schartau, W. Schickler, H.-E. Schleyer, G. Schmid, W. Tiefensee,
and E. Voscherau, ‘Moderne Dienstleistungen am Arbeitsmarkt’, Commission’s Report, 16 August 2002;
German Council of Economic Experts, Jahresgutachten 2002/03: Zwanzig Punkte für Beschäftigung und
Wachstum, November 2002.
18 See Bundesagentur für Arbeit, Grundsicherung für Arbeitsuchende: Erwerbstätige Arbeitslosengeld
II-Bezieher: Begriff, Messung, Struktur und Entwicklung, Appendix, table 1.
19 This section contains passages based on the Sohmen Lecture given by the author: H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die
Europäische Fiskalunion’, Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 13, 2012, pp. 137–178; see also H.-W. Sinn,
‘Genießt den Aufschwung!’, Wirtschaftswoche, No. 18, 30 April 2012, p. 44, available at:
<http://www.ifo.de/bauboom/w/nuQXV8ng>.
20 The first forecasts of this construction boom can be found in H.-W. Sinn, ‘Nachweisbare Wirkungen’,
Wirtschaftswoche, 
No. 
23, 
7 
June 
2010, 
p. 
39, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ifo.de/nachweisbare_wirkungen/w/3FZKYYgni>; also Ifo Viewpoint 115, 22 June 2010; and
H.-W. Sinn, Rescuing Europe, CESifo Forum 11, Special Issue, August 2010, pp. 19–20, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Aug-2010.pdf>; see also ifo Konjunkturprognose
2010/2011: Auftriebskräfte verlagern sich nach Deutschland, Ifo Institute, 23 June 2010, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2010_12_3.pdf>; and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Europa in der Krise’, Ifo
Annual 
Meeting 
2010, 
available 
at: 
<http://mediathek.cesifo-
group.de/player/macros/_v_f_750_de_512_288/_s_ifo/_x_s-764870657/ifo/index.html>.
21 See Projektgruppe Gemeinschaftsdiagnose, ‘Gemeinschaftsdiagnose Frühjahr 2012’, ifo Schnelldienst
65, No. 8, 26 April 2012 p. 29, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/SD-8-2012.pdf>.
22 See German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 18, National Accounts, Series 1.2, Quarterly GDP

Figures, Fourth Quarter 2012, table 3.10.
23 See German Federal Statistical Office, press release of 17 March 2011, No. 110, and press release of
14 March 2013, No. 101.
24 See German Federal Statistical Office, press release of 25 February 2010, No. 63, and press release of
25 February 2013, No. 69.
25 See E. Gluch, ‘ifo Architektenumfrage: Weiterhin hohe Auftragsbestände’, ifo Schnelldienst 66, No.
5, 
14 
March 
2013, 
pp. 
49–50, 
figure 
4, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2013_05_6.pdf>. Prices rose as well. According to data provided by real-estate
agents, the number of owner-occupied dwellings climbed by around 7% in 2011, while for terraced houses
(town houses), the rise was a bit more than 4% (see BulwienGesa AG, BulwienGesa-Immobilienindex
1975–2011, January 2012, p. 4). Agricultural plots were particularly sought after, their prices rising by
9.6% in 2009 and 8.7% in 2010 (see German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 3, Reihe 2.4, Kaufwerte
für landwirtschaftliche Grundstücke 2010, p. 14). Behind all these rises were the investors’ yearning for
safe investments that would protect their money from the vagaries of the euro crisis.
26 See A. Merkel, ‘Die EuropaRede’, Pergamon Museum Berlin, 9 November 2010, available at:
<http://www.bundeskanzlerin.de/ContentArchiv/DE/Archiv17/Reden/2010/11/2010-11-09-merkel-
europarede.html> (translated by the author).
27 
See 
C. 
Lagarde, 
Interview, 
Financial 
Times, 
15 
March 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/78648e1a-3019-11df-8734-00144feabdc0.html#axzz21iHcyCQk>.
28 See R. Aichele, G. Felbermayr, and I. Heiland, ‘Der Wertschöpfungsgehalt des Außenhandels: Neue
Daten, neue Perspektiven’, ifo Schnelldienst 66, No. 5, 14 March 2013, pp. 29–41, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2013_05_3.pdf>, forthcoming in English in CESifo Forum.

CHAPTER 4
The Competitiveness Problem
Why the Current Accounts Improved—Dying Industries—Too Expensive—The Necessary Real
Depreciation—Little Progress—How Did Ireland Do It?— The Baltics: Austerity Works—The
True Competitors—Caught in the Euro Trap: The Terrors of Deflation
Why the Current Accounts Improved
At the time this manuscript was finalized in February 2014, the European crisis
had been rumbling on for six and a half years, since the interbank market seized
up for the first time in August 2007. The citizens of the crisis-hit countries are
increasingly worried about the rise in unemployment, and the taxpayers of the
still-solid economies fret about increasing liabilities imposed on them through
the rescue operations. On the other hand, financial markets have calmed down
considerably, interest spreads have shrunk and some crisis countries, which had
previously been shunned by the capital market, have been able to return. The
international media have turned to other issues, and the world at large seems to
have put the crisis out of the collective mind. There are even some signs that the
real economies of southern Europe may be recovering.
One of the most frequently cited signs of progress is the reduction in the
current account deficits of the GIPSIC countries, as shown in Figure 3.9, often
combined with an allusion to the strong rebound in the exports of the crisis
countries. The current account reduction is seen as a sign of recovery and
improvement in competitiveness, the fruits of painful and courageous reforms
carried out with the support of the EU and the ECB.1
Unfortunately, however, such an interpretation is flawed, as Figure 4.1 shows.
The chart depicts the imports and exports behind the current account balances
separately for each of the six crisis-hit countries. In addition, it gives the pre-
crisis trend lines for imports and exports, to illuminate the causes of the
improvements in current account balances.

Figure 4.1 Components of the current accounts, seasonally adjusted (Q1 2002–Q3 2013)
* Q1 2002––Q4 2013.
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Quarterly National Accounts, GDP and Main
Components; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: Exports and imports include manufactured goods and services (seasonally adjusted and adjusted for
working days) as reported by Eurostat. The trend is calculated as a linear trend for the period Q1 2002 to Q4
2007.The chart shows annualized quarterly data.
The charts show that imports and exports collapsed with the outbreak of the

crisis and recovered partially thereafter. However, in all cases, imports declined
more strongly than exports, explaining all of the current account improvements.
In none of the countries did exports rise beyond their trend level. In Greece,
Cyprus, and Italy exports even collapsed outright. In Portugal, Spain, and
Ireland, exports have reached their pre-crisis trends, although they apparently are
not about to surpass them. In short, exports recovered after the Great Recession
of 2008/2009, but they have not surpassed their pre-crisis trend level, which an
improvement in competitiveness would have accomplished.
The decline in imports resulted from the crisis itself. The collapse of the
distressed economies has driven down employment and incomes, and has hence
reduced imports via a mere income effect resulting from the austerity imposed
by capital markets.
A sizeable contribution to the current account improvement also stems from a
reduction in net investment income earned by foreign capital, caused by
monetary easing on the part of the ECB, a profit squeeze of subsidiaries of
foreign companies operating in the crisis countries, and the various fiscal or
quasi-fiscal rescue operations, which replaced market credit with low-interest
public credit or provided public insurance that enabled creditors to content
themselves with lower yields. After all, a current account deficit is, roughly
speaking, the sum of imports and net investment income paid to non-residents,
minus exports.2

Figure 4.2 Net investment income paid by GIPSIC countries to non-residents
* Given the average rate of return of Q4 2007, in proportion to net foreign debt (without devaluation
effects). Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Quarterly National Accounts, GDP and Main
Components; and Balance of Payments—International Transactions, Balance of Payments Statistics and
International Investment Positions, Balance of Payments by Country; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The dotted curve depicts the notional annual burden on the GIPSIC economies from net investment
income payments to non-residents if the average rate of return had remained at the Q4 2007 level, i.e. had
the investment income payments grown in proportion to net foreign debt, assuming that this debt grew
according to the GIPSIC current account deficits without potential write-offs in the market value of this
debt.
Figure 4.2 shows the potential effect of the rate of return reductions through
the provision of rescue funds, ECB interventions, and a profit squeeze. It
compares the actual net investment income the GIPSIC countries paid to the rest
of the world (solid line) with hypothetical net investment income that the
GIPSIC countries would have had to pay to the outside world (dotted line) if the
average rate of return on their net external debt position had remained constant
at the level it had at the end of 2007, while their net external debt position grew
according to the current account deficits. Interestingly enough, the investment

income paid out by the crisis countries in 2012 was 26% lower than in 2007,
even though the interest spreads increased—in fact exploded—as of 2008 (refer
also to Figure 2.2) and the stock of GIPSIC net foreign debt (including
revaluation effects) increased by € 347 billion, or by 22% of its 2007 level.
In the year 2012 alone, the GIPSIC countries gained € 67 billion from the rate
of return reduction. Given that their net foreign debt was about € 2 trillion at the
end of 2012, this corresponds to a rate of return reduction of about three
percentage points (see Figure 2.10). In the five years from 2008 through to 2012,
the GIPSIC countries reaped benefits of at least € 209 billion altogether, which
on average amounted to € 1, 558 per capita. The true gain, if measured against
the sharply rising market rates, is much larger than this, but difficult to calculate
in an unambiguous way. Thus, the sum mentioned is a very conservative
estimate of the benefit brought about by monetary policy, rescue operations, and
lower profit remittances.

Figure 4.3 GIPSIC exports, imports, and net interest burden, seasonally adjusted
* Given the average 2007 rate of return, in proportion to net foreign debt (exclusive of revaluation effects).
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Quarterly National Accounts, GDP and Main
Components; and Balance of Payments—International Transactions, Balance of Payments Statistics and
International Investment Positions, Balance of Payments by Country; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The dotted curve depicts the sum of imports and the hypothetical annual net investment income paid
to foreigners according to the calculations underlying Figure 4.2. The chart shows annualized quarterly
data.
Figure 4.3 shows what the interest savings implied for the current account. It
depicts the aggregate goods and services exports and imports of the GIPSIC
countries and, represented by the height of the dotted area, the GIPSIC
countries’ net interest burden (including profit remittances and retained earnings
of foreign corporations), which in principle is a liability of the GIPSIC countries

to the rest of the world and hence a negative entry to their current accounts,
similar to the imports of goods. The dashed area above the dotted area shows a
conservative estimate of the additional interest burden that the GIPSIC countries
would have had to bear without the public support provided by rescue funds,
ECB interventions, and reduction in profit remittances as calculated above and
shown in Figure 4.2. The most recent figures on the right-hand side of the chart
show that imports and net interest payments to non-residents have now fallen
below exports. But obviously this would not have happened, other things being
equal, had the outside world not contented itself with a lower rate of return on
the funds provided.
Dying Industries
The disheartening reason for the southern countries’ current account
improvements is unfortunately confirmed by the available data on the evolution
of manufacturing output shown in Figure 4.4. Since manufacturing output is
usually closely related to a country’s exports and often the key to economic
prosperity, it is essential for recovery to include this sector.

Figure 4.4 Escaping the crisis? Manufacturing output, seasonally adjusted
Source: Eurostat, Database, Industry, Trade and Services, Short-term Business Statistics, Industry,
Production in industry; CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, World Trade Monitor,
Database; OECD, OECD.StatExtracts, Industry and Services, Production and Sale (MEI); Ifo Institute
calculations.
Note: The monthly data are seasonally adjusted. In addition, monthly data are smoothed with an average
over the last three months (including the month in question). The data are normalized such that their value
at Q1 2008 is 100.
The chart shows that, by the end of 2013, the advanced economies had not
succeeded in reaching their pre-crisis manufacturing output level, defined as the
level at Q1 2008, while the emerging and developing economies had grown at a
blistering pace. The US and Germany, which have been included as benchmarks,
have just about reached their pre-crisis level. The GIPSIC countries—and France

—have clearly performed miserably.
Developments in Italy, the largest of the crisis countries, are particularly
disquieting insofar as the highly productive, family-owned manufacturing
industries of northern Italy have always been the country’s pride and stability
anchor. Toolmaking, metal working, leather, fashion, and many other branches
have been the region’s traditional mainstays, but the firms in these sectors are
currently dying like flies, which may be one of the reasons why the Italian
statistical office has stopped publishing the data. Even Fiat, once one of
Europe’s biggest car manufacturers, is considering leaving the country. As the
Italian curve in Figure 4.4 shows, there was some justified hope for an Italian
recovery in 2010, but starting in 2011 the manufacturing sector nosedived. Small
wonder that Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian Prime Minister at the time and a
former successful entrepreneur, in autumn 2011 began secret negotiations about
a euro exit, as mentioned in the Introduction. By the end of 2013, Italian
production was at about the level it had reached in 2009 after the Great
Recession of the world economy and 23% below the level before the crisis.
Obviously, Italy shows all signs of a double-dip recession.
Even worse was the development in Spain. There was also a double dip here,
but more of a double-dip depression rather than a mere recession, the second dip
leading to an even lower level than the first one. By the end of 2013, industrial
output in Spain had fallen by 30%. This is a catastrophic development that
resembles that of the Great Depression from 1929 to 1933 in many industrialized
countries.
Greece performed similarly, although there was no double dip. Output fell by
31% by the end of 2013. The industrial production of Cyprus declined by 41%
(by November 2013).
Portugal and France have performed somewhat better, but with output
reductions of 11% and 16% respectively, both still fall below the average of the
world’s industrialized countries (7%). While a turnaround seems to be underway
in Portugal, the French economy seems to be stalling, where news of closing
automobile factories are abundant. PSA Peugeot Citroën announced job cuts of
11, 200, and Renault of 7, 500.3 The French government is planning rescue
operations by subsidizing the purchase of environmentally friendly cars.4
Among the crisis countries, only Ireland has performed well. This confirms
the impression gained from Figure 4.1, which will be discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.
Too Expensive

An improvement in competitiveness in the sense of a structural improvement in
current accounts and a recovery of manufacturing output can only come from a
substitution effect due to relative price changes, not from income effects or
artificial measures that reduce the cost of credit. A country is uncompetitive if
the prices of the goods it delivers are too high, and if it needs foreign credit to
finance its imports and living standards. Conversely, even the world’s least-
productive economy can be competitive, in the sense that it can get along
without foreign credit if its products are cheap enough and if it satisfies itself
with a sufficiently low living standard. There is no such thing as a technical lack
of competitiveness.
Politicians and the general public often speak of a lack of competitiveness in
the sense of the low productivity of their economies because of poor
infrastructure, inefficient legal systems, low innovation, lack of discipline,
corruption and so on. Indeed, these elements can undermine a country’s
competitiveness, but if so, only because they imply excessively high prices,
given the wages and other kinds of costs. If, on the other hand, productivity is
given, there is always the possibility of making a country competitive by cutting
wages and other kinds of income. A lack of competitiveness in the sense of trade
deficits simply means overblown income aspirations relative to productivity, and
hence overblown prices.
This will be the topic of the remainder of this chapter. This section shows that
the GIPSIC countries lost their competitiveness by inflating their prices
excessively during the credit bubble that the euro brought about, and the
following sections will examine the possibilities for bringing these prices down
through deflation in order to regain competitiveness, a task that is, as we will
see, much more difficult than it sounds.
Figure 4.5 shows how strong inflation actually was in Ireland and southern
Europe. The bars depict the price increases between the Madrid Summit of 1995
and 2007, the year the US subprime crisis spilled over to Europe. The changes
shown are not those of consumer prices, which include imported goods, but of
the GDP deflator, i.e. the price index for the domestically produced goods.
The GDP deflator is a good indicator for a country’s competitiveness, since its
evolution comes close to measuring the analogue to depreciation or appreciation
of a currency. It makes no difference whether the domestic currency appreciates
or domestic prices and incomes inflate: both make domestic products more
expensive for foreigners and foreign products relatively cheaper for domestic
residents. In either case foreigners and domestic residents alike will have an
incentive to substitute foreign for domestic goods, and a trade deficit will
emerge as a result.

Figure 4.5 Price change from 1995 to 2007 of goods produced in the Eurozone countries (GDP deflator)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts, GDP and Main
Components, Price Indices.
The six troubled countries are indicated by the hatched bars, while the grey
column shows the Eurozone average. It can be seen that the distressed countries’
inflation rates all lay well above the Eurozone average. While prices rose on
average by 24% in the Eurozone, Italian prices increased by 36%, Portuguese
prices by 45%, Irish prices by 52%, and Spanish prices by 54%. Inflation in
Greece was even worse, with a figure of 77%. Germany’s prices, in contrast,
rose over the 12 years by only 9%.5 Thus, Germany underwent a real (or
internal) depreciation relative to other countries, and the others a real
appreciation. And to reiterate the point made above: in terms of the effects on
competitiveness it makes not difference whether relative prices increase because
of a currency appreciation or a genuine price increase.

In principle, the price increases could have resulted from the so-called
Balassa–Samuelson effect.6 This effect is based on the assumption of
idiosyncratic productivity increases in a country’s export sectors that result in
wage rises in the export industry, which then spread to the domestic service
sectors and increase service prices, assuming that the productivity in these
sectors grows less than in the export sectors. In such a case, the price increases
are not detrimental to competitiveness. However, as explained in Chapter 2, the
price increases in the GIPSIC countries resulted instead from credit bubbles in
the construction and government sectors, spreading from there via higher wages
and intermediary costs to the export sectors, undermining their competitiveness.
This is the opposite of the price transmission postulated by the Balassa–
Samuelson effect.
Figure 4.6, which depicts data from Spain, shows that there is indeed little
evidence for the Balassa–Samuelson effect. Evidently, after 1998, when interest
rate convergence was completed (see Figure 2.2) and the foundation of the
housing bubble was laid, construction wages increased relative to manufacturing
wages, indicating that the former were pulling the latter and not the other way
around. This confirms the credit bubble as the valid explanation rather than the
Balassa–Samuelson effect.

Figure 4.6 Spanish wage per worker in construction relative to manufacturing (Q1 1990–Q1 2013)
Sources: Instituto Nacional de Estadística, INEbase, Society, Labour Market, Wage Survey for Industry and
Services (1990–1999), Main Series 1981–2000, Ganancia media por trabajador y mes. Pagos totales por
sectores de actividad, periodo, categorías profesionales y unidad, empleados y obreros; Quarterly Labour
Cost Survey (QLCS, since 2000), Main Series of the QLCS by Activity Sectors, Period, Cost Components
and Measurement Unit, Total Wage Cost per Worker.
Note: The data are smoothed with a moving average.
The price increases measured by the GDP deflator were not homogeneous for
all goods. Naturally, tradeable goods such as exported or imported manufactured
products cannot easily become more expensive, since their prices are largely
fixed by direct international competition. A small price increase suffices to wipe
out much demand. Thus, the inflation pressure is relieved primarily through the
so-called non-traded goods, such as household services, haircuts, restaurants and
the like, for which the international competition is low. Still, as mentioned, the
GDP deflator is an excellent measure for a country’s competitiveness, since an
increase in the price level of non-tradeables often results from wage increases
and translates into higher production costs and lower profit margins for the
tradeables, so that small price increases suffice to reduce exports and raise
imports.7 Apart from that, most goods are tradeable in a broader sense of the
word. For example, even restaurant services, haircuts or housing rents are
tradeable by migration and tourism.
Figure 4.5 only refers to nominal price changes of domestically produced
goods. To assess the full effect on competitiveness it also has to be taken into
account that some exchange rate realignments took place after the Madrid
Summit of December 1995 and before the irrevocable fixation of conversion
rates for a euro entry in May 1998. A case in point is Italy, where a revaluation
of the lira by slightly more than 11% against the deutschmark was performed on
25 November 1996.8 If the latter effect is combined with the real appreciation
through inflation that occurred thereafter, it turns out that Italy became 44%
more expensive relative to Germany in the period from the Madrid Summit in
1995 to 2007. The time when the Adriatic coast was the ‘Teutonic barbecue’,
alluding to the Germans sunbathing there on account of everything being so
cheap, is long gone. Germans looking for an inexpensive meal out now prefer to
stay in Germany. Even pizzas offered by Italian restaurants in Germany are often
cheaper than those offered by restaurants in Italy.
Figure 4.7 above shows the percentage of revaluation or devaluation for each
country relative to its Eurozone trading partners over the period in question,
taking potential realignments of exchange rates into account, as published by the
European Commission. Clearly, all countries now in trouble appreciated

significantly, led by Italy, with 26%, and Ireland, with 32%. Note that the
percentage for Italy is lower than the 44% appreciation relative to Germany
mentioned earlier, since some of Italy’s trading partners also appreciated relative
to Germany over that period.
Figure 4.7 Real appreciations and depreciations relative to the respective rest of the Eurozone (1995–2007)
Source: European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators,
Price and Cost Competitiveness, Quarterly Real Effective Exchange Rates vs. (rest of) EA17, Price Deflator
GDP, Market Prices; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The EU figures shown here refer to changes in the national GDP deflator relative to the average GDP
deflator of the rest of the Eurozone, when trade shares are used as weights.
The last bar in the chart shows the appreciation of the six countries now in
distress, if one considers them as one entity. The increase in the average price
index of these countries relative to the trade-weighted rest of the Eurozone was a
non-negligible 29%.
Over the period in question, Germany depreciated by 21% in trade-weighted

terms. This is the main reason behind Germany’s resilience during the euro crisis
and behind its remarkable competitiveness. Whether the productivity of German
industry has increased more than the productivity of other industries in the
period in question is debatable. It is clear, however, that its products have
become relatively cheaper. As described in Chapter 3, the real depreciation
brought about through wage restraint was no walk in the park, but it paid off.
The Necessary Real Depreciation
The real appreciation evidently deprived the distressed countries of their
competitiveness.9 Prices and wages rose during the bubble-building period
beyond the level that would have made sustainable economic development
possible without depending on credit inflows. For a number of years, the current
account deficits of the GIPSIC countries continued to grow unabated (Figure
3.9) and, with them, their need for foreign credit to finance the deficits.
Everything went just fine for as long as the markets were willing to finance these
deficits, but when they pulled back in the summer of 2007, the crisis set in.
Given that cheap credit is no longer available today, the real appreciation of
the GIPSIC countries has to be undone. This can be achieved by rewinding the
price clock through deflation in the GIPSIC countries, or by inflating the core,
notably Germany. Outright deflation is a difficult undertaking, since the price
clock only runs smoothly going forward. It is always a pleasure to raise wages
and prices; lowering them, in contrast, provokes massive resistance. And
outright inflation in Germany would also meet strong resistance, as will be
discussed later on in this chapter. Nevertheless, there is no alternative to a
realignment of relative prices in the Eurozone if the competitiveness of the
crisis-stricken countries is to be re-established within the Eurosystem, and if this
is to be achieved without inflation in the aggregate, deflation in some countries
cannot be avoided.
It is somewhat surprising in this regard to hear the president of the ECB,
Mario Draghi, expressing his concern about such a solution. Defending the
ECB’s OMT programme, which will be discussed in Chapter 8, he argued in the
German parliament:10
In our assessment, the greater risk to price stability is currently falling prices in some euro area
countries. In this sense, OMTs are not in contradiction to our mandate: in fact, they are essential
for ensuring we can continue to achieve it.
With this statement, Draghi implicitly refers to price stability as the main goal

of the ECB’s policy and defends the ECB’s taking actions against the risk of
deflation in some countries. This concern seems misplaced, since deflation in
some countries would be useful and indispensable to restore their
competitiveness.
To date, the ECB has always defined price stability in terms of the average
Eurozone price level, rather than in terms of idiosyncratic country price levels.
Given that the idea of fighting national changes in price levels was vigorously
denied by ECB board members when the southern countries inflated at an above-
average rate, it is mystifying to find the ECB now arguing that it needs to take
action to counteract the trend towards deflation in those very same countries.11 If
country prices were to be stabilized, the ECB should have implemented
restrictive monetary policies in the years during which inflationary credit
bubbles accumulated; it is not the time for the ECB to intervene now that the
mistakes need to be corrected by way of realigning relative prices.
It is true that there are reasons for protecting an economy against the mass
unemployment and destabilization that usually precedes a deflation. This could
justify expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, but the motivation for such
policies lies outside the ECB’s mandate. Supply-side policies to enhance the
downward-flexibility of wages would also be very useful, as they would work
towards reducing an economy’s level of unemployment. Arguing that such
policies should not be tolerated would be a tragically mistaken interpretation of
the ECB’s mandate.
How far back would the price clock have to be set in order to regain
competitiveness? The answer is difficult, since part of the price hikes in the
GIPSIC countries may have been justifiable and sustainable because of the
above-mentioned Balassa–Samuelson effect. To the extent that this effect played
a role, it seems that the price clock should not be set back all the way to 1995.
On the other hand, returning to old prices may not be sufficient for restoring
competitiveness in the sense of having a balanced current account, since the
GIPSIC countries have built up much foreign debt, which will lead to higher
interest payments once markets have come back to normal and the rescue credits
have been repaid. Thus, the price clock may have to be reset further back than
only to the year 1995.
Researchers from the Goldman Sachs economics department have developed
a model to simulate the necessary realignments.12 The authors explored the
question of how much realignment of relative goods prices in the Eurozone
would be necessary in the long run (20 years) to reduce all net foreign asset
positions to below 25% of GDP in absolute terms. They found that the troubled

countries would have to cut their prices relative to the Eurozone average to
improve their current accounts, and Germany would have to increase its prices
relative to the Eurozone average to scale down its current account surplus.
Recall that net foreign asset and debt positions result primarily from
accumulating current account imbalances and that, as shown in Figure 2.9,
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Cyprus all had net foreign debt positions in
the neighbourhood of 100% of GDP in 2012, while Germany had a net foreign
asset position of about 40%. The authors assumed an average Eurozone inflation
rate of 2% and that the external value of the euro will adjust so as to keep
constant the average relative price level of the euro countries, expressed in terms
of foreign goods. Given that the euro has a flexible exchange rate, that the ECB
refrains from manipulating the exchange rate, and that the Eurozone as a whole
had a balanced current account with the rest of the world before the crisis, this is
a reasonable assumption. Table 4.1 shows the results of the calculations.
Table 4.1 Realignment needs in the Eurozone as of Q3 2010 relative to the Eurozone average

* As of Q3 2012, taking the haircut on Greek government debt, the rescue operations and interest-reducing
policies into account.
Source: H. Pill, K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and A.
Paul, Goldman Sachs Global Economics, ‘Achieving Fiscal and External Balance (Part 1): The Price
Adjustment Required for External Sustainability’, European Economics Analyst, Issue No. 12/01, 15 March
2012; H. Pill, K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and S.
Graves, Goldman Sachs Global Economics, ‘External Rebalancing: Progress, but a Sizeable Challenge
Remains’, European Economics Analyst, Issue No. 13/03, 17 January 2013; OECD Database,
OECD.StatExtracts, National Accounts, PPPs and Exchange Rates; Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The calculations in the first two numerical columns show the realignments of the GDP deflators
relative to the Eurozone average, as of Q3 2010, that would bring the absolute values of net foreign asset
positions of all euro countries below 25% of GDP in the long run (20 years), assuming an adjustment of the
external euro value so as to keep the average terms of trade of the Eurozone relative to the rest of the world
constant. The figures in parentheses give the necessary realignments taking the Greek haircut as well as
interest-reducing policies into account. The third numerical column gives the necessary realignments
relative to Turkey for Greece and Portugal based on average price levels of the years 2011–2013.

The first numerical column shows the country-specific ranges of required
depreciation and appreciation that result from different model specifications,
while the second numerical column gives the mean of these ranges in a baseline
scenario applying to Q3 2010. By construction, the need for realignment
depends not only on assumptions about the real economy but also on debt levels
and the interest rates. For the baseline scenario, moderate interest burdens on
foreign debt similar to those prevailing at the time (refer also to Figure 4.2) have
been assumed.
In addition to a baseline scenario, the Goldman Sachs study gives revised
estimates that refer to the situation in Q3 2012. They are indicated in parentheses
in the third column. The revision takes into account the additional
intergovernmental rescue operations and the ECB’s support, as well as the Greek
haircut of € 105 billion, or 54% of GDP, which brought down the interest burden
and facilitated the task of reducing net foreign debt positions.
The table shows that alarmingly high price cuts are necessary for Greece and
Portugal (30%) in the baseline scenario. In the revised scenario, the price cuts
are still substantial, at 20% each. The two estimates for Greece are of the same
order of magnitude as that calculated by the EEAG, under alternative
assumptions about the income elasticity of Greek imports, to eliminate the
current account deficits.13
The orders of magnitude are also confirmed if the Greek and Portuguese price
levels are compared with Turkey’s price level according to the OECD’s
purchasing power statistics. The required devaluations resulting from this
comparison, based on average prices and exchange rates of the years 2011–2013,
are shown in the third numerical column. Purchasing-power parity is the level of
an exchange rate at which the prices of a given basket of goods and services
bought in two countries are equal. Comparing it with the actual exchange rate
makes it possible to assess a country’s over-or undervaluation relative to another
country. While the price levels of developed and less-developed economies
cannot be easily compared because of the Balassa–Samuelson effect, the price
levels of countries of similar economic development, such as those of Turkey
and Greece, can. Turkey’s coast, food and temples are on a par with Greece’s.
For tourists, the services are of a comparable level. Their products are also
comparable. In this light, Greece should not be any more expensive than Turkey
if it wants to stay competitive relative to its neighbour which, being seven times
as large, determines the local market conditions. But, in reality, Greece was 55%
more expensive in the years 2011 to 2013 on average. It therefore would need to
cut its prices by 36% to regain its competitiveness, 14 which is an even steeper

drop than the Goldman Sachs researchers came up with, but still of the same
order of magnitude. Turkey has a customs union with the EU and there are no
restrictions on tourism. It is simply impossible for Greece to be competitive
against its mighty neighbour. Applying the same reasoning to Portugal,
Portuguese prices would have to fall by 29% relative to their average 2011–2013
level to come to par with Turkey’s.
Among the countries that need realignment, Spain stands out because of its
size (46 million inhabitants) and the magnitude of the necessary realignment.
According to the baseline scenario, its prices will have to fall by about 30%, and
even in the revised scenario the necessary price cut, 27.5%, is still huge. This
confirms the concerns expressed in Chapters 1 and 2 that Spain could be the
Eurozone’s biggest problem. Spain has by far the biggest external debt in
absolute terms and, next to Greece, the largest unemployment rate in the
Eurozone. The next section will discuss how much of the necessary realignment
has already taken place.
Remarkably, France should also have to depreciate, by 20%, a figure that is
not affected by the revision of the calculations. This result, which follows largely
from France’s growing current account deficit (1.8% of GDP in 2013) gives the
issue an entirely new facet.
Italy, by contrast, needs only a small realignment. This is surprising, given
Italy’s huge inflation in the early years of the euro and the lira appreciation of
1996 (see Figure 4.5). The explanation is that, at only 24.8% of GDP in 2010,
the year on which the Goldman-Sachs figures are based, Italy’s net foreign debt
was comparatively very low, even below the 25% threshold assumed by
Goldman Sachs. However, the calculation may have been a bit too optimistic,
given that Italy’s net foreign debt position increased to 28% in 2012 (see Figure
2.9) and 29% in 2013. The calculations show that Italy does not need a positive
current account balance to satisfy the debt sustainability criterion if the economy
grows, but unfortunately it has shrunk instead since the calculations were made.
Note, however, that the calculations are based on a long-run forecast (20 years)
and do not hinge much on the performance of one or two years.
On the flip side of the coin are Ireland and Germany. According to Table 4.1,
Ireland needs no price cuts—if anything, a small revaluation instead, while
Germany would need to increase its prices by 20% relative to the average to
rebalance the Eurozone, reducing its own competitiveness and net foreign assets
to help the crisis countries improve their competitiveness and redeem their debt.
Little Progress

Could it be that the process of relative price adjustment has already taken place?
Are the southern countries already on the way to restoring their competitiveness?
If so, there would be reason to hope that they might soon be able to do without
rescue funds, and it would make sense for the taxpayers of the still-sound
economies to continue standing by them for a while. If not, a more radical
solution to the euro crisis may have to be sought.
Representatives of the financial industry and EU officials often point to the
improvements in the crisis countries’ unit labour costs, regarding them as a sign
that the EU policies are on the right track and insisting that the taxpayers stay
firm, because success is near. But unit labour costs are the wrong indicator. For
one thing, they are instrumental variables that are subordinate to product prices
when it comes to assessing a country’s competitiveness. Their decline would
indicate an improvement in competitiveness only if they induced a subsequent
price decline. For another, a reduction in unit labour costs only signals improved
competitiveness if employment stays constant, since an increase in
unemployment in itself leads to a reduction in the unit labour costs, given that
the marginal jobs that disappear first have a lower productivity and higher unit
labour costs than average jobs.
If a country lurches into a crisis, most firms rationalize the jobs with high unit
labour costs first, and firms with high unit labour costs that cannot rationalize
them go bankrupt. Both effects naturally reduce the average unit labour costs of
the remaining jobs, even if not a single competitive new job was created. This
explains, to a large extent, the fall observed in unit labour costs. It is a mere
statistical artefact.
Germany suffered from a similar confusion in the public debate during its own
euro crisis, since the crisis had also led to rapidly increasing unemployment and
falling unit labour costs.15 While economists argued that German wages were
too high, and that a welfare reform was necessary to reduce the social
replacement incomes and the resulting wage demands to save jobs, unions
pointed to the improving unit labour costs and argued that no harsh reforms were
necessary, since the economy was already on the right track. In fact, however, no
wage cuts had taken place, and no surge in technological efficiency was
occurring. The only reason for the improvement in unit labour costs, just as in
southern Europe today, was the rationalization of marginal jobs and the resulting
increase in unemployment. The real breakthrough for the German economy
came only later, when the social reforms of the Schröder government led to
substantial wage restraint (see Chapter 3, section Agenda 2010), which, in turn,
increased growth and employment.
Figure 4.8 provides an overview of the changes in relative prices in the

Eurozone since the Madrid Summit of 1995, also called ‘real effective exchange
rates’.16 According to the European Commission’s definition, the real effective
exchange rate of a country is its GDP deflator relative to the weighted average of
the GDP deflators of the rest of the Eurozone, where trade shares are used as
weights. In the chart, the real effective exchange rates or relative prices are
normalized to 100% in Q3 2007, the time of the first breakdown of the interbank
market.
The chart shows that all GIPSIC countries appreciated dramatically relative to
the respective rest of the Eurozone before the outbreak of the crisis. By contrast,
Germany became steadily cheaper in relative terms until 2007. That was the real
depreciation mentioned above, a respectable 21% between 1995 and 2007. All
this is basically the same information given in Figure 4.7.
What the chart shows in addition is sobering, however. After the onset of the
crisis and until 2009, there were grounds to hope that Germany’s real
depreciation process had bottomed out and that the trend would reverse. But
what happened was largely the opposite. While Germany’s inflation followed
the average of its trading partners in the Eurozone, Italy and France, instead,
inflated faster than their trading partners and faster than Germany, undermining
their competitiveness even further. These countries show no signs of the real
depreciation that would be necessary. With France in particular, a problem lurks
here that could spell doom for the Eurozone. Surprisingly, Greece even
accelerated its inflation after the crisis broke out. The sharp increase in the slope
of the Greek price curve after 2007 depicts this clearly. In the three years from
2005 through 2007, the annual Greek inflation rate (GDP deflator) was 0.5
percentage points above the level for the rest of the Eurozone, but in the
subsequent three years it accelerated to 1.5 percentage points above this level, its
relative price inflation continuing until 2010. Only in 2011, with scant access to
the capital markets and interest spreads rising rapidly (Figure 2.2), Greece was
forced to reverse its inflation trend. It was not until the end of 2012, more than
five years after the onset of the crisis, that Greece managed to once again reach
the level of the real exchange rate with which it had entered the crisis.
It must be kept in mind, however, that Italy and Greece have raised their
indirect taxes in this phase, which is not necessarily detrimental to
competitiveness, since export goods, except for the export of tourism services,
are exempt from these taxes while import goods are burdened with them. In the
case of Italy, that accounts for less than one percentage point of appreciation so
far, while in the case of Greece it accounts for three percentage points at most.17
Spain and Portugal have depreciated in real terms relative to their trading

partners. From Q3 2007 to Q3 2013, Spain managed a real devaluation of about
5% and Portugal one of about 1.5%.
With the exception of Ireland, none of the crisis countries has come anywhere
near the required depreciations calculated by Goldman Sachs, as discussed in the
previous section. The horizontal portions on the right-end of the curves show the
long-run target values for the real exchange rates, according to the Goldman
Sachs calculations for the baseline scenario relative to Q3 2010, which does not
take into account all the interest-reducing measures of the ECB or the rescue
funds.
Only for Greece does the chart show an updated calculation, which takes into
account the country’s huge debt relief of 54% of its GDP that, as mentioned
above, took place in 2012. Since this is a permanent relief, Greece will continue
to benefit from it even if the rescue operations come to an end and interest rates
return to normal.
Recall that while the Goldman Sachs results are relative to the average of the
Eurozone including the country considered, the European Commission (EC) data
give each country’s appreciation or depreciation relative to the respective rest of
the Eurozone. In order to make the Goldman Sachs data compatible, it was
recalculated to match the EC yardstick. For small countries this makes little
difference, but for large countries the respective depreciation and appreciation
figures are correspondingly higher.

Figure 4.8 Real effective exchange rates (GDP deflator relative to the rest of the Eurozone)
* Revised calculation after the haircut on the Greek sovereign debt. Sources: European Commission,
Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators, Price and Cost Competitiveness,
Quarterly Real Effective Exchange Rates vs. (rest of) EA17, Price Deflator GDP, Market Prices; H. Pill, K.
Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and A. Paul, Goldman

Sachs Global Economics, European Economics Analyst, Issue No 12/01, 15 March 2012; H. Pill, K. Daly,
D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and S. Graves, Goldman Sachs
Global Economics, European Economics Analyst, Issue No. 13/03, 17 January 2013.
Note: The chart shows the original values of the real effective exchange rates as published by the European
Commission. As a rule, these refer to the ratio of the price level of the goods produced in a given country
(GDP deflator) to the trade-weighted price average of its trading partners or, if the price index is not
available, to a measure of the average total unit cost of goods produced. The last point in the diagram giving
actual data instead of a long-run requirement is Q3 2013.
One of the more alarming aspects of Figure 4.8 is that Germany did not
appreciate during the crisis even though its goal should be to appreciate by 20%
against the average, which is 30% against the rest of the Eurozone, to help
improve the competitiveness of the GIPSIC countries and France. This all means
that after six and a half years of crisis, in most of the GIPSIC countries the
necessary realignments are not yet underway and there is little hope that they
might be achieved in the near future. Small wonder then that none of the crisis
countries has succeeded in raising its exports beyond trend, as shown in Figure
4.1. A drop in their relative prices is mandatory for them to translate the income
effect resulting from the economic collapse and mass unemployment into an
import-substitution effect. This is the only way for them to return to normal rates
of unemployment.
Note that there are two reasons why competitiveness improves if the prices of
non-traded goods fall. For one thing, it reduces the cost of intermediate goods
used in exports and signals a fall in wage costs for the export industry. For
another, consumers will then substitute domestic for foreign goods, which will
reduce imports and create jobs at home. The latter effect is particularly important
for a country like Greece, which no longer has a significant export industry other
than tourism.
Greece has a huge current account deficit in agricultural products, which,
considering its nearly ideal climate and given the huge success of Israel, which
certainly enjoys no better conditions, seems downright preposterous. Its imports
of agricultural goods exceed exports by one and a half times.18 The country even
imports tomatoes from the Netherlands and refined olive oil from Germany.19 If
prices and wages came down in Greece, Greeks would undoubtedly turn to their
own products and shun imports, farmers would again cultivate their fields
instead of letting them lie fallow, and the young would again find employment in
the agricultural sector.
How Did Ireland Do It?

As crucial as a real depreciation is for regaining competitiveness, it can be very
difficult to achieve. Within the Eurozone, it presupposes a very large economic
contraction accompanied by massive unemployment, which no one would wish
upon any country. Chapter 9 will analyse the real options for depreciation
available inside and outside the Eurozone.
It is all the more surprising then that Ireland did find a way to engineer a real
depreciation within the Eurozone. Relative to the other countries in the
Eurozone, Ireland depreciated by a stunning 15% in the period from 2006 to
2012. This has no parallels in the other troubled countries.
And the depreciation has borne fruit. Whereas Ireland posted growing current
account deficits in the years before the crisis, from 0.6% of GDP in 2004 to 6%
in 2008, the deficit disappeared during the crisis. In 2010, it turned into a small
surplus, which by 2013 had climbed to a quite respectable 4% of GDP.
It is true that part of this success is due to the interest-alleviating policies of
the ECB and the community of states, as can be measured following the
methodology discussed for Figure 4.3 above. Had Ireland’s net investment
income payments to the rest of the world grown from 2008 to 2012 in proportion
to the growth of the Irish net foreign debt resulting from further current account
deficits, Ireland’s annual net interest burden would have consumed another 4.0%
of its 2012 GDP. However, the improvement in the current account from 2008 to
2012 went from minus 5.6% to plus 4.4% of GDP, i.e. 10.0 percentage points of
GDP, a significantly larger figure.
It is also true, of course, that the collapse of the Irish economy has driven
down imports, as shown in Figure 4.1. The income effect was also in Ireland the
primary driver behind the current account improvement.
Still, the relatively good performance of Irish exports (Figure 4.1) and, in
particular, of industrial production (Figure 4.8) singles out Ireland as a success
story. While other crisis countries suffered from a double-dip recession or even
depression, Irish industrial production recovered more quickly from the crisis
than even that of Germany or the United States.
Because of this superb performance, Ireland was able to actually pay back
some of its external debt. This instilled more confidence among investors and
led to lower yields on Irish debt. As Figure 2.2 shows, the only yields that
managed to escape the upward trend in the crisis-stricken countries as early as
summer 2011 were those of Ireland.
How did Ireland manage to cut its prices, while the other distressed economies
still show no sign whatsoever of a similar development? There are several
possible explanations.

Figure 4.9 Labour income in the public sector and on average (2005–2012)
* Public Administration, Defence, Social Security. Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance,
Annual National Accounts, National Accounts Aggregates and Employment by Branch.
Note: The curves show the development of the aggregate compensation flowing to employees, not the wage
per person.
First of all Ireland, for which the US social model was the one to follow,
always had more flexible labour markets and weaker unions than the other
countries, so that it was somewhat easier to push through wage reductions.
Figure 4.9 shows the evolution of workers’ compensation in the overall economy
and in the public sector by country, before and after the onset of the crisis.20
It can be readily seen that Ireland suffered large wage reductions. Wages in
the overall economy fell by 13% from 2007 to 2012. In contrast, they fell in
Spain by only 4%, while in Portugal they rose by 3% from 2007 to 2011. In

Greece, compensation kept increasing until 2009, to then sink significantly,
falling by a total of 7% from 2007 to 2011.
It is noteworthy that, according to the information available as of this writing
(February 2014), public sector wages have exhibited strong downward rigidity.
During the crisis they only went down in net terms in Ireland, by 14% from 2007
to 2012. In Spain, by contrast, public sector wages initially kept rising rapidly,
by 19% until 2010, to only then decline a bit. In net terms they increased by 11%
from 2007 to 2012, despite the desperate situation of Spain’s finances and its
rising mass unemployment. In Portugal public wages stayed constant in net
terms.
In Greece, public sector compensation increased by 28% from 2007 to 2009,
to then fall by 15% from 2009 to 2011. The net result was an increase
throughout the crisis of 9% from 2007 to 2011, i.e. during the same period in
which the Irish government sector wages fell by 10%. This puts quite a damper
on the assertion that Greece has implemented massive austerity measures. While
the private sector shows signs of austerity, the public sector does not.
Secondly, Ireland has a powerful export industry. Irish exports amounted to
108% of GDP in 2012 given that exports, like everywhere else, have a high
import component. Spain’s exports amounted to barely 33%, Portugal’s to 39%,
and Greece’s to 27% of their respective GDP. Countries with a significant export
industry tend to have a strong export lobby that pleads for wage restraint. If, by
contrast, a country has a strong import lobby, as Greece does, pushing through a
real depreciation is much harder, because it hurts import businesses. When the
prices of domestic goods fall, as they would in the case of a real depreciation,
people will shun imports, hurting importers. The importance of the export sector
was highlighted by the Greek Minister of Economics, Michalis Chrysochoidis, in
February 2012 in an interview with the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung,
when he complained that the many EU subsidies had destroyed his country’s
export industry, driving the better companies and talents from the export to the
import business.21 The minister made plain what in economic theory is known as
the Dutch Disease, namely that inflowing capital makes exports disposable and
increases the demand for imports. In the Netherlands’s case, which gave the
disease its name, it was not EU money that was behind the inflows of funds, but
the country’s gas exports.22
Thirdly, and most importantly, the crisis reached Ireland earlier than the other
troubled countries. This is clearly evident in the early bursting of the Irish
property bubble in 2006 (Figure 2.11) and naturally in the sharp downward shift
of goods prices starting in the same year (Figure 4.8). Ireland stood alone at the

time. There were no intergovernmental rescue packages and no special ECB
programmes. The country had to help itself—and so it did, by lowering its wages
and prices.
The rest of the stricken countries were hit by the crisis two or more years later,
after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Instead of taking
Ireland’s path of austerity and social parsimony, they preferred to look for
alternative solutions, in particular resorting to the local printing presses. This
issue will be discussed in depth in the subsequent chapters.
The Baltics: Austerity Works
The Baltic states undertook measures similar to Ireland’s. Latvia and Lithuania
have been members of the ERM–II system since 2005 and 2004 respectively, a
preliminary stage to joining the Eurosystem in which the exchange rate may not
move more than ±15% relative to the euro. Estonia introduced the euro in 2011,
while Latvia did so on 1 January 2014. Lithuania wants to join as soon as
possible.
Just like the other former Communist countries, the Baltics have seen
significant increases in their prices and wages since 1995, with Estonia’s price
level doubling by the time the crisis hit. To be sure, the price increases are
largely a statistical artefact, because the goods produced by these countries at the
time of the transition, essentially identical to those of the Communist era, cannot
be compared to those being produced now.
Still, the countries became too expensive for reasons similar to those of the
now-stricken countries, and eventually had to break this trend. As Figure 4.10
shows, they did so by imposing austerity, reducing their wages dramatically after
the onset of the crisis. From 2007 to 2012 Latvian wages plunged by 9% in net
terms in the overall economy, and by 16% in the public sector. For the sub-
period 2008 to 2010, the decline in both public and overall wages was a
staggering 34%, a record among the countries considered, even surpassing the
decline in Ireland.
In Lithuania the wage reductions from 2008 to 2009 amounted to 17%
(overall economy) and 10% (public sector). Over the period from 2007 to 2012,
however, wages in the public sector remained stable, while they increased by 5%
in the economy as a whole. In Estonia wages increased by 9% (whole economy)
and by 22% (public sector) over the entire period.
All three countries suffered from a sharp recession. Real GDP in Latvia
plunged by 12% between 2007 and 2012, in Estonia by 4%, and in Lithuania by

2%.
Figure 4.10 Wages in the Baltics (2005–2012)
Source: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Annual National Accounts, National Accounts
Aggregates and Employment by Branch.
Latvia’s performance is quite remarkable. The big question is: why did Latvia

bite the bitter bullet of a real depreciation voluntarily, although it still had the
possibility of carrying out an outright devaluation of its currency? The answer
was provided by former Latvian Prime Minister, Valdis Dombrovskis, at the
Munich Economic Summit policy forum: doing otherwise would have imperilled
his country’s prospects for Eurozone accession.23 Using this argument, he was
able to bring all social partners on board for a policy of massive wage cuts. And,
as he summed up,
To get into the Eurozone you do anything. Once in, you can evidently do whatever you want.
Figure 4.11 shows that wage restraint in Latvia and Lithuania did have
positive implications for competitiveness. While imports declined more than
exports, just as in the GIPSIC countries (see Figure 4.1), exports even surpassed
their pre-crisis trend in both countries. Lithuania in particular shows a
remarkable success.
Austerity works
beamed former Lithuanian Prime Minister, Andrius Kubilius.24

Figure 4.11 Exports and imports in the Baltics, seasonally adjusted (Q1 2002–Q3 2013)
* Q1 2002–Q4 2013.
Source: Eurostat, Economy and Finance, Quarterly National Accounts, GDP and Main Components; Ifo
Institute calculations.
Note: Exports and imports include manufactured goods and services (seasonally adjusted and adjusted by

working days) as reported by Eurostat. The trend is calculated as a linear trend in the period Q1 2002 to Q4
2007. The charts show annualized quarterly data.
The True Competitors
The relative flexibility of the Baltic countries points to a particular problem that
the southern European economies face: the new competition from eastern
Europe. While such competition did not seem an issue when the euro was
announced in 1995, it has became a growing concern for the southern economies
ever since the bulk of eastern European countries joined the EU in the years
2004 to 2007. Most eastern European countries have shaken free of the yoke of
Communism and overcome their transition problems. The Baltics, Poland, the
Czech Republic, Slovenia and, with some reservations, Hungary are now well-
established, functioning market economies with a skilled labour force. All are
attractive as business locations and have already been able to build up highly
competitive industrial sectors, largely due to foreign direct investment from
Germany and other countries. There is no parallel to this strength in southern
Europe, except perhaps in Italy. In addition, the eastern EU countries have one
further big advantage over the southern European countries: they are cheap.
Figure 4.12 compares the hourly wages for industrial workers in the six euro
crisis countries and the eastern EU countries. Clearly, nearly all crisis countries
have substantially higher wages than the eastern EU countries. The only
exception is Slovenia, which has surpassed Cyprus and Portugal. On average, the
wages of the southern euro countries and Ireland shown in the chart are 247%
higher than those in eastern Europe, if the respective shares in hours worked are
used as weights. Wages in the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary, three
countries that host huge Volkswagen plants (Skoda and Audi), compete directly
with those in Spain, which also hosts a sizeable car company owned by
Volkswagen (Seat), but they are only about half or one-third of the Spanish ones.
And the biggest eastern country, Poland, has hourly wages of only about € 7,
which is less than half of those in Greece and one-third of those in Spain. These
wage differences are huge by any standards, and one does not have to be an
economist to expect southern Europe to face a long period of hardship until
eastern Europe has prospered sufficiently to give the southern European
countries a second chance.

Figure 4.12 Wages per hour in manufacturing in the GIPSIC countries in comparison with eastern EU
countries (2012)
Source: German Federal Statistical Office, ‘Arbeitskosten in Deutschland 2012 um 32% höher als im EU-
Durchschnitt’, 
press 
release 
of 
26 
March 
2013, 
No. 
116, 
available 
at:
<https://www.destatis.de/DE/PresseService/Presse/Pressemitteilungen/2013/03/PD13_116_624.html>.
The problem for southern Europe is that eastern Europe is large. Were it a
small region, the low-wage competition from there might not pose much of a
threat to the domestic upswing. In fact, eastern EU countries are home to 101
million inhabitants.25 While this is less than the population of the southern
European crisis countries, which stands at 130 million, 26 it is of a similar order
of magnitude and certainly large enough to imply painful reallocations of capital.
This statement is true a fortiori when considering that the EU has signed
association agreements with Turkey and Serbia, two countries with even lower
wages, that give these countries preferential access to EU markets. Their joint
population is currently 81 million.27 There is such an abundance of highly
profitable investment opportunities in southeastern Europe and Turkey that the
southern euro countries will have a hard time competing.

Caught in the Euro Trap: The Terrors of Deflation
Correcting the overblown wages and prices in southern Europe is indispensable
for a recovery of that part of the European Union, but the task will be hard and
possibly insurmountable within the currency union. At first glance, the necessary
realignment of relative prices in the Eurozone seems not too difficult to achieve.
After all, if wrong prices arose through differential inflation rates over a few
years, it should be possible to correct the mistake over a similar period of time
by reversing the structure of inflation rates. However, this optimism is ill-
founded, since the price clock cannot easily be wound backwards.28
The countries that inflated after the euro announcement are those that were
long accustomed to inflation. Unions, governments, banks, households, and
firms had all been used to substantial inflation, to which they adjusted their
expectations, purchasing habits, wage demands, and price-setting behaviour long
before the euro was introduced. Conversely, those countries that underwent a
real devaluation, Germany in particular, were accustomed to a low inflation rate
before the euro was introduced. It will not be easy for these countries to simply
trade places, because this would require overcoming well-established national
habits, traditions, and preferences that are deeply ingrained in their psyche.
As mentioned above, the difficulty is particularly large insofar as the path
back towards equilibrium prices will in some cases be even longer than the path
towards today’s prices, because the distressed countries have accumulated much
external debt in the meantime, which have contributed to deteriorating the
current accounts. The Goldman Sachs study clearly reflects this aspect in the
cases of Spain, Portugal, and Greece, calculating that these countries would have
to lower their relative prices to below their level at the time of the Madrid
Summit in 1995.
To illustrate the difficulties, suppose the realignment of the Eurozone
according to the Goldman Sachs study were to be achieved without deflation in
any of the member countries. Then Germany would have to inflate by 5.5% per
year for ten years, entailing a total price level increase of 71% and a reduction of
42% in the real value of nominal savings. The average Eurozone inflation rate in
this case would be 3.6% p.a. Even if it were technically possible for the ECB to
manage such a level of inflation, it would violate the Maastricht Treaty and
create an uproar in Germany, where the trauma of the hyperinflation experienced
from 1915 to 1923 still sits deep in the German psyche. At the time,
hyperinflation deprived the middle class of its wealth and drove it to look for
radical political solutions. This is the reason why Germany accepted giving up
the deutschmark only under the condition that the maintenance of price stability

be the goal of the ECB. The first sentence of article 105 TFEU reads: 29
The primary objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability.
Apart from that, it would be difficult to create inflation, given that the
Eurozone is close to a liquidity trap, i.e. a situation where the interest rates are
already close to zero and monetary policy has lost its effectiveness. Japan
provides a useful warning. After its housing bubble burst in 1990 and a banking
crisis in 1997 drove 40% of the banks to the brink of bankruptcy and into
government rescue operations, the Bank of Japan set the short-term interest rate
at close to zero, a level it has kept to this day, flooding the economy with money.
However, despite all its efforts, the Bank of Japan was not able to avoid a
protracted bout of deflation and secular stagnation, to use Alvin Hansen’s
term.30 After an inflation rate of about 20% from 1980 to 1994, the Japanese
GDP deflator has fallen by about the same amount so that now, a third of a
century later, it is back at its 1980 level.
Thus, a realignment of the Eurozone may require the crisis-stricken countries
to actually deflate. As this deflation would affect only a subset of countries in
the Eurozone, it would not be sterilized by an outright currency appreciation as
in the case of Japan, but would improve the deflating countries’ competitiveness
as it did in the case of Ireland, Latvia or Lithuania.
An additional reason why deflation is needed is that, unlike those countries
that underwent real depreciations before the crisis, the GIPSIC countries are
being shunned by the capital markets and therefore do not have much time for a
gradual realignment through reduced inflation. Capital markets are impatient and
have exerted a great deal of pressure to accomplish the required price
adjustments quickly, enforcing outright deflation.
However, deflation would impose much hardship and strain on countries like
Greece, Portugal, or Spain, as evidenced by their current unemployment levels,
particularly among the young (see Figure 1.2 and 1.3). While the economy
would prosper after the deflation has run its course, the process itself of deflating
is painful and tears at the very fabric of society. The political systems are
strained by factional conflicts and by strong unions that are not easily moved to
compromise.
This is the argument John Maynard Keynes used in his essay on ‘The
Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill’ in 1925, which he repeated in his
General Theory.31 Keynes had warned Churchill not to bring Great Britain back
to the gold standard, since this would force it to undergo a real depreciation that,
due to the resistance of the unions, would result in mass unemployment. Every

union, he argued, would object to wage cuts given that it could not assume that
other unions would simultaneously accept such cuts. Thus, services like
restaurants or hairdressers would not be expected, by a single trade union
deciding in isolation, to become cheaper after accepting a wage cut, thereby
mitigating the real income loss. Moreover, the relative income position of its
members would deteriorate. Resistance would be weaker if a simultaneous cut in
all wages could be orchestrated, but given that this is impossible, nominal wages
tend to be downward-sticky, causing mass unemployment when demand falls.
During the Great Depression, Britain indeed suffered from the effects Keynes
had described, and was forced to leave the gold standard again.
Germany, under the Weimar Republic, provided another example of the
effects Keynes described. Under the Dawes Plan, which codified the Treaty of
Versailles, Germany was prevented from devaluing its currency as a vehicle to
improve its competitiveness. A key element of the treaty resulting from the
Dawes Plan was the German banking law of 1924, which set an immutable
exchange rate between the Reichsmark and gold. Any attempt to change it would
have led to calamitous conflicts with Germany’s public and private creditors.
Not even Hitler dared to tamper with this.32 In the years following the onset of
the 1929 economic depression, some of Germany’s competitors devalued their
currencies, in particular Great Britain, Japan, and some of the Scandinavian
countries. After the UK gave up its gold peg in 1931, the British pound fell by
around 30% against the gold standard. (Later, in 1934, the US devalued by
around 40%, spelling the beginning of the end of the gold standard.) In view of
this, the only solution for Germany to regain its competitiveness was through a
real depreciation by way of reducing prices and wages, a course that was
followed with remarkable doggedness by the government of Chancellor of the
Republic Heinrich Brüning through harsh austerity measures.33
As a result, German wages plummeted by 27% between 1929 and 1933, 34
while consumer prices fell by 23%.35 This real depreciation was brought about
by mass unemployment of around 30%, not cushioned by a welfare state
supported with public credit from other countries, 36 and a 16% drop in GDP
from 1928 to 1932.37 While the countries that had left the gold standard
performed reasonably well, Germany’s depression pushed the country to the
brink of a civil war, with left-wing and right-wing hordes brutally battling each
other on the streets. What came in 1933 turned out to be worse than any civil
war.
What the German example shows is that real depreciations of the magnitude
of those needed by Portugal, Greece, and Spain can have dire consequences in

politically divided countries. The unions will oppose such a step with all their
might, even taking to the streets to defend their members’ standpoint.
Theoretically, the unions could be talked into accepting this if wage cuts were
coordinated across a wide front, because the nominal lowering of wages would
lead to a drop in the price of domestically produced goods. In reality, however, it
is inordinately difficult to orchestrate such a wide-ranging wage cut. The
consequence is that every single union will fight tooth and claw to preserve their
members’ wages. None will want to be the first to cave in, hoping that the others
will take the plunge instead. Keynes himself pointed to the trap into which
Germany had fallen during the Weimar Republic because of its fixed exchange
rate.38 Interestingly, Keynes’ great opponent, Milton Friedman, agreed with him
on this point.39 Since nominal wages in a modern economy exhibit downward
rigidity, the possibilities for performing a real depreciation through wage cuts
and price reductions are limited.
And even if the unions came around to accepting it, there is still the problem
that a real depreciation would lead to severe distortions in individual balance
sheets. With price reductions of the magnitude envisaged here, many normal
companies that own assets such as machinery and buildings and owe debts to
domestic banks would run into difficulties, because the value of their assets as
well as their cash flow would diminish, while their debts and their debt service
would remain unchanged. Many companies would go bankrupt, even if at first
glance the lower prices ought to make them more competitive.40 Likewise, many
private households that bought property on credit would be unable to service
their debt after a balanced wage and price cut, and would be driven into
insolvency. The distortion of the domestic debt-to-asset ratios is an
insurmountable problem that would doom every attempt to carry out a sizeable
real depreciation by way of actual and not relative price reductions.
The internal debt problem is particularly severe for the GIPSIC countries,
since all of them lost their competitiveness because of the credit bubble that the
euro brought about. Thus, typically, their firms, private households, and
governments are overburdened with debts and debt service obligations that make
it impossible for them to accept a significant real depreciation even if prices and
incomes could all be cut simultaneously and in proportion. And if a real
depreciation via deflation nevertheless happens, there will inevitably be a
massive surge of bankruptcies of firms and households.
This, by the way, is a major difference between the Baltics and the GIPSIC
countries. The former had just escaped Communism and were too expensive
because they had entered the ERM II with overvalued currencies, but their

governments, households and firms did not hold much debt. Thus, it was
relatively easy to convince the various groups of society of the merits of
austerity programmes. Obviously, this example cannot easily be translated to
southern Europe and Ireland.
That is the real dilemma, the blind alley the Eurozone is stuck in. 40% of the
population of the Eurozone, namely the population of the GIPSIC countries, and
perhaps even France, which accounts for 20%, are trapped in a dreadful situation
where competitiveness has been lost due to excessive credit-financed inflation
and from which the escape route by way of price cuts is blocked by the internal
debt problem.
In such a situation, an outright depreciation through exiting the currency union
remains the only practicable possibility. However, the fear of an exit causes bank
runs and capital flight that could drive the banking sector into bankruptcy,
forcing the affected countries to introduce capital controls and limit the amounts
that can be withdrawn from bank deposits. The bankruptcy of the Cypriot
banking system in early 2013 demonstrated very clearly which ramifications
could be expected, suggesting that the set of solutions for the Eurozone, at least
the set of easy solutions, may be empty.
That said, the big advantages of an outright devaluation should not be
overlooked. It boosts demand for locally produced goods, since imports become
more expensive and prompt people to switch to the local equivalents. It
stimulates export demand. And it leaves the domestic debt obligations relative to
people’s incomes unchanged, avoiding the distortion to balance sheets of
individuals and institutions holding domestic debt. All debts held with domestic
lenders are included automatically in the currency conversion, so that no one
needs to declare insolvency on account of his local banking debts or other
domestic debt contracts.
But foreign debts continue to be a problem. In this respect, however, there is
no difference between an internal, real depreciation and an outright depreciation
by changing the value of the currency. In both cases foreign debts will rise
relative to the value of domestic assets, whose value will decline with the
depreciation of the domestic currency.
The increase in the relative size of the foreign debt is used sometimes as an
argument against allowing such an open depreciation. But the argument is
flawed. A sufficiently large depreciation will boost a country’s competitiveness
in such a way that it once again will be able to post current account surpluses
that, in turn, will enable it to repay at least part of its debts. Seen in this light, the
path to a sustainable foreign debt, in the absence of debt forgiveness, would
seem to go through an initial increase in the foreign debt-to-GDP ratio. Only

after increasing this ratio as a result of a devaluation is it possible to lower it
through current account surpluses to the pre-devaluation level.
That said, a country could still go bankrupt and become unable to repay its
foreign debt. In that case, either its creditors would have to give up some of their
claims to allow the country a restart, or the taxpayers of other countries would
have to bail the country out. But this issue is largely independent of the
competitiveness problem.
Even in cases where the debt problem can be resolved, some countries may
only be able to regain their competitiveness by leaving the Eurozone and
devaluing their new currency. The last chapter of this book will discuss the
possibilities of minimizing the risks that such a solution would entail.
1 See Council of the European Union, press release of the 3220th Council Meeting, Economic and
Financial 
Affairs, 
Brussels, 
12 
February 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ecofin/135438.pdf>; 
H. 
Van
Rompuy, Speech by President of the European Council at the Annual ‘State of Europe’ Event, 11 October
2012, available at: <http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/132796.pdf>;
‘On 
Being 
Propped 
up’, 
The 
Economist, 
25 
May 
2013, 
p. 
29, 
available 
at:
<http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21578394-spains-pain-likely-continue-despite-some-promising-
reforms-unless-new-sources-growth>.
2 Investment income here is meant in a broad sense of the word, including, e.g., interest income,
dividends and retained earning of foreign subsidiaries. In addition to investment income, the current
account includes other cross-border income payments as well as international transfers by governments,
such as development aid, and by individuals, such as guest worker remittances.
3 See ‘Peugeot to Cut Added 1, 500 Jobs as European Sales Plunge’, Bloomberg, 12 December 2012,
available at: <http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-12-11/peugeot-to-cut-added-1-500-jobs-as-european-
sales-plunge.html>; and ‘Renault to cut about 7, 500 jobs in France’, BBC News, 15 January 2013, available
at: <http://www.bbc.com/news/business-21032990>.
4 See ‘Frankreichs Regierung beschenkt Autoindustrie’, Zeit Online, 25 July 2012, available at:
<http://www.zeit.de/wirtschaft/2012-07/frankreich-autoindustrie-hilfen>; and ‘Peugeot Citroen Secures
Government Funds’, Bloomberg, 24 October 2012, available at: <http://www.bbc.com/news/business-
20054391>.
5 The figures refer to the growth rate of the GDP deflator, which in the German case was below the
inflation rate of consumer products.
6 See K. S. Rogoff, ‘The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle’, Journal of Economic Literature 34, 1996, pp.
647–668; H.-W. Sinn and M. Reutter, ‘The Minimum Inflation Rate for Euroland’, CESifo Working Paper
No. 377, December 2000, pp. 1–17; A. Alesina, O. Blanchard, J. Galí, F. Giavazzi, and H. Uhlig, Defining
a Macroeconomic Framework for the Euro Area, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London 2001,
chapter 3: Country Adjustments within the Euro Area: Lessons after two Years; É. Balázs, I. Drine, K.
Lommatzsch, and C. Rault, ‘The Balassa–Samuelson Effect in Central and Eastern Europe: Myth or

Reality?’, Journal of Comparative Economics 31, 2003, pp. 552–572; K. Rose and K. Sauernheimer,
Theorie der Außenwirtschaft, Vahlen, Munich 2006, chapter 3.
7 Competitiveness could also be measured by the ratio of the prices of non-tradeable and tradeable goods.
This ratio would show the same evolution as the GDP deflator.
8 Originally, when the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) was introduced on 13 March 1979, one
thousand liras was worth 2.19 deutschmarks, but a substantial bout of inflation in the 1980s eroded this
parity. After the ERM ran into difficulties in 1992, the thousand liras even fell to 80 pfennig (cents of a
deutschmark) on 19 April 1995. By the time of the Madrid Summit, the thousand liras had climbed again to
90 pfennig, and a subsequent appreciation brought it to 1.01 deutschmarks.
9 See also H.-W. Sinn, ‘Austerity, Growth and Inflation: Remarks on the Eurozone’s Unresolved
Competitiveness Problem’, The World Economy 37, 2014, pp. 1-13, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/sinn-world-econ-2014_pdf >.
10 See M. Draghi, Opening Statement at Deutscher Bundestag, Speeches and Interviews, 24 October
2012, available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp121024.en.html>.
11 For example José Manuel González-Páramo, at that time Member of the Executive Board of the
European Central Bank, said in a speech: ‘First, there is a broad consensus among academics, observers and
policy-makers that monetary policy should focus on maintaining price stability in the single currency area
as a whole. [. ..] By contrast, it is widely recognised that assigning to monetary policy the additional role of
directly addressing the relative balance between the sectors or regions of the single currency area in the
process of adjustment to shocks would overburden monetary policy to the detriment of its primary role’.
See J. M. González-Páramo, Inflation Differentials in the Euro Area, Speech at Cámara de Comercio,
Industria 
y 
Navegación 
de 
la 
Región 
de 
Murcia, 
23 
May 
2005, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2005/html/sp050523.en.html>. Lucas Papademos, at that time
Vice President of the ECB, emphasized: ‘Needless to say, but I will say it anyway to make it abundantly
clear, the single monetary policy cannot address the ULC growth and inflation divergences in individual
countries. And since it cannot do it, it should not attempt to do it and it will not do it. However, by ensuring
the preservation of price stability in the euro area as a whole, it can help guide and anchor inflation
expectations to price stability in all euro area countries and thus help consumers and firms to take
appropriate economic decisions’. See L. Papademos, Inflation and Competitiveness Divergences in the Euro
Area Countries: Causes, Consequences and Policy Responses, Speech at the conference ‘The ECB and its
Watchers 
IX’, 
Frankfurt, 
7 
September 
2007, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_2.en.html>. And even then-ECB President Jean-
Claude Trichet made it clear in 2011 that ‘temporary deviations from the euro area-wide inflation average
should not be a matter of concern’. See J.-C. Trichet, Competitiveness and the Smooth Functioning of EMU,
Lecture 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Liège, 
23 
February 
2011, 
available 
at:
<https://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2011/html/sp110223.en.html>.
12 The source is given under Table 4.1.
13 See EEAG, The EEAG Annual Report of the European Economy: The Euro Crisis, CESifo, Munich
2012, chapter 2: The European Balance-of-Payments Problem.
14 Note that 155*(100%–36%) ≈100
15 See H.-W. Sinn, Ist Deutschland noch zu retten?, Econ, Berlin 2003, English translation: Can
Germany be Saved?, MIT Press, Cambridge 2007, chapter 2: How German Workers Lost Their Competitive
Edge.

16 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Austerity, Growth and Inflation. Remarks on the Eurozone's Unresolved
Competitiveness Problem’, 2014.
17 Italy raised its normal VAT rate from 20% to 21% on 17 September 2011. It also raised the petrol
(gasoline) tax, increasing the price per litre by 16 cents of a euro (see ‘Italien erhöht Benzinsteuer stark’,
Der Standard, 7 December 2011, available at: <http://derstandard.at/1323222432610/Monti-Sparplan-
Italien-erhoeht-Benzinsteuer-stark>). Greece raised the reduced VAT rates from 4.5% and 9% to,
respectively, 5% and 10%, and the normal VAT rate from 19% to 21% on 15 March 2010. On 1 July 2010,
the reduced rates were again raised to 5.5% and 11%, respectively, and the normal VAT rate to 23%. A
further hike came on 1 January 2012, bringing the reduced rates to 6.5% and 13%, respectively (European
Commission, VAT Rates Applied in the Member States of the European Union, 1 July 2012).
18 In 2010, imports of agricultural goods exceeded exports by 47%. See World Trade Organization,
Statistics 
Database, 
Trade 
Profiles, 
Greece, 
April 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://stat.wto.org/CountryProfile/WSDBCountryPFView.aspx?Language= E&Country=GR>.
19 See ‘Greece Importing Olive Oil from Germany’, ekathimerini.com, 8 September 2011, available at:
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/4dcgi/_w_articles_wsite1_1_08/ 
09/2011_405493%
CE%93%20%CE%B2%E2%82%AC>.
20 The data shown in the graph are the most recent available as of this writing (February 2014).
Unfortunately, all countries publish their wage data after a long delay, Greece in particular.
21 See M. Chrysochoidis, ‘Die Gesellschaft ist reifer als ihr System’, Interview by M. Martens,
Frankfurter 
Allgemeine 
Zeitung, 
9 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/politik/europaeische-union/griechischer-wirtschaftsminister- 
die-gesellschaft-
ist-reifer-als-ihr-system-11642768.html>.
22 See N. M. Corden and J. P. Neary, ‘Booming Sector and De-Industrialization in a Small Open
Economy’, Economic Journal 92, 1982, pp. 825-848.
23 See V. Dombrovskis, ‘Managing the Crisis. The Case of Latvia’, 9th Munich Economic Summit,
CESifo and BMW Stiftung Herbert Quandt, 30 April 2010. Dombrovskis made this remark during the
discussion following his presentation.
24 At the 12th Munich Economic Summit, CESifo and BMW Stiftung Herbert Quandt, 16 May 2013.
25 Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia. Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, Annual National Accounts,
Auxiliary Indicators to National Accounts.
26 Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
27 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts, Annual National Accounts,
Auxiliary Indicators to National Accounts.
28 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Reining in Europe’s Debtor Nations’, Project Syndicate, 23 April 2010, available at:
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/reining-in-europe-s-debtor-nations>; and P. Krugman, ‘The
Euro 
Trap’, 
New 
York 
Times, 
29 
April 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/30/opinion/30krugman.html>. See also H.-W. Sinn (interview),
‘Schuldenbegrenzung nicht ernst genommen’, Berliner Zeitung, 29 March 2010, No. 75, p. 12, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/ w/3MaFL6G8B>, ‘Das zwingt uns in die Knie’, Spiegel online, 26 April

2010, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/w/Kcf7SuQZ>, and ‘Das Griechen-Drama wird
schrecklich 
enden’, 
Focus 
online, 
19 
March 
2010, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/w/3Fzcg9dcq>.
29 See EU, ‘Treaty on European Union’, Official Journal C 191, 29 July 1992, available at: <http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/en/treaties/dat/11992M/htm/11992M.html>.
30 See A. Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation, Norton, New York 1938.
31 See J. M. Keynes, Essays in Persuasion, Macmillan, London 1931, chapter 5: The Economic
Consequences of Mr. Churchill (1925), and J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, Palgrave Macmillan, London 1936, here Macmillan 1960, p. 267.
32 See C. G. Dawes and R. McKenna, Die Sachverständigen-Gutachten, Der Dawes-und McKenna-
Bericht, mit Anlagen, literal after the original text, Frankfurter Societäts-Druckerei, Frankfurt am Main
1924, pp. 10, section VI and pp. 12 f., sections IX and X. See also P. Heyde, Das Ende der Reparationen.
Deutschland, Frankreich, und der Youngplan; 1929–1939, Ferdinand Schöningh Verlag, Paderborn 1998,
pp. 48 and 51.
33 See K. Borchardt, ‘Zwangslagen und Handlungsspielräume in der großen Wirtschaftskrise der frühen
dreißiger Jahre: Zur Revision des überlieferten Geschichtsbildes’, Commemorative speech of 2 December
1978, Jahrbuch der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Beck, Munich 1979, pp. 85–132; detailed
descriptions of the situation during the German inflation of the 1920s can also be found in N. Ferguson,
‘Keynes and the German Inflation’, English Historical Review 110, 1995, pp. 368–391; N. Ferguson,
‘Constraints and Room for Manoeuvre in the German Inflation of the Early 1920s’, Economic History
Review 49, 1996, pp. 635–666; N. Ferguson and B. Granville, ‘“Weimar on the Volga”: Causes and
Consequences of Inflation in 1990s Russia Compared With 1920s Germany’, Journal of Economic History
60, 2000, pp. 1061–1087.
34 See J. H. Müller, Nivellierung und Differenzierung der Arbeitseinkommen in Deutschland seit 1925,
Duncker & Humblot, Berlin 1954.
35 See German Federal Statistical Office, Fachserie 17, Preise, Reihe 7, p. 2.
36 See D. Petzina, ‘Arbeitslosigkeit in der Weimarer Republik’, in W. Abelshauser (ed.), Die Weimarer
Republik als Wohlfahrtsstaat. Zum Verhältnis von Wirtschafts-und Sozialpolitik in der Industriegesellschaft,
Vierteljahrschrift für Sozial-und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Beiheft 81, Stuttgart 1987.
37 See A. Maddison, The World Economy. Historical Statistics, OECD, Paris 2003, p. 50.
38 See J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, 1936 (1960, p. 267).
39 See M. Friedman, Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1953, chapter:
The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates, especially p. 165 and p. 173.
40 These problems stood in the centre of Irving Fisher’s debt deflation theory. See I. Fisher, ‘The Debt-
Deflation Theory of Great Depressions’, Econometrica 1, 1933, pp. 337–357.

CHAPTER 5
The White Knight
The Crash—Help from the Printing Press—Lowering Collateral Standards and Extending
Maturities—Moral Hazard—ELA Credit
The Crash
The derailment of the European express, hurtling along with no private or public
debt brakes, started when the US financial crisis engulfed the European banks.
The write-offs of now-toxic US securities deprived the European banks of
capital and destroyed the illusion that a triple A rating equalled safety. The
growing number of ailing banks contributed mightily to the increasing
insecurity. This led, in August 2007, to the first breakdown of the European
interbank market. The result was a change in the risk assessment of securities
from the European periphery and in the willingness to hold such instruments, as
reflected in the yawning, and growing, spreads that became evident at that time
(see Figure 2.2).
The many banks that folded did so spectacularly. Just one month after the
ECB had alleviated the first small collapse of the interbank market in August
2007 with a generous injection of liquidity, the first bank run occurred, affecting
the UK’s Northern Rock bank. The difficulties of that bank to borrow from other
banks fed the fear that it faced looming insolvency. Its customers rushed to have
their demand deposits paid out in cash, but given that no bank ever has all the
cash on hand that is shown on its depositors’ account balances, panic broke out.
The Bank of England, which had at first refused to come to the rescue, had no
other option but to restore confidence in the bank by providing financial
assistance and, ultimately, by nationalizing the bank in February 2008. Then the
US bank Bear Stearns started wobbling, while at the same time Germany’s
Saxony state bank (Landesbank Sachsen) took a hit through the businesses of its
Irish special purpose vehicle, Sachsen LB Europe. In July 2008, the US
mortgage lender IndyMac filed for bankruptcy, while in Germany one state bank
after another went into a tailspin in the first half of 2008.1
After the collapse of the Lehman Brothers investment bank in September
2008, the interbank market seized up around the world, with hundreds of banks

folding in the aftermath.
The financial markets calmed down somewhat in the following months,
thanks to substantial fiscal and monetary rescue programmes, and a global
upswing started in the second half of 2009. But the days of low market interest
rates for the banks and governments of the Eurozone’s periphery, and with it the
attendant overheating of the economy, were over. What had started as a desirable
convergence process turned out to be a bubble that eventually burst. As Figure
2.2 showed, the spreads went up to levels not seen since before the euro was
announced.
Figure 5.1 depicts bank exposure and capital flight in the crisis countries
according to official data of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
Clearly, nearly all national banking systems (see also Figure 3.7) reduced their
gross exposure to the private and public sectors of the crisis countries quite
substantially after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.2 They typically stopped
rolling over their loans and demanded redemption of the existing debts at
maturity, thus reducing their overall exposure to the GIIPS countries (GIPSIC
minus Cyprus) from € 2.449 trillion in Q4 2007 to € 1.349 trillion in Q3 2013,
i.e. by € 1.100 trillion. Capital fled massively back to the home country or to
countries considered safe havens.

Figure 5.1 International bank claims vis-à-vis private and public sectors in Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain,
and Italy
Source: Bank for International Settlements, Statistics, Consolidated Banking Statistics.
Note: The figure shows cross-border claims and local claims of foreign affiliates, ordered according to their
value at Q3 2008 (Lehman crisis). Domestic claims are not included.
The only nation whose banking sector significantly increased its exposure to
the crisis countries was the United States, going from € 85 billion in Q4 2007 to
€ 121 billion in Q3 2013. Obviously, US banks were less risk-averse than their
European counterparts, stepping in when the latter stepped out, and seeking
profit opportunities.

The reader should be warned, however, that the chart only shows the
reduction in the gross exposure of lending banks with regard to the private and
public sectors of the GIIPS economies, concealing the fact that the GIIPS banks
in turn changed their exposure vis-à-vis other countries as well.3 Thus, for
example, Italian banks recalled funds from abroad to the tune of € 131 billion in
the period considered, presumably to partly compensate for the € 334 billion that
foreign banks had withdrawn from Italy. Similarly, Irish banks recalled € 414
billion from abroad, while foreign banks recalled € 264 billion from Ireland.
Interestingly enough, however, Spanish banks lent an additional € 289 billion
to other countries over that period, while foreign banks withdrew € 298 billion
from Spain, both figures representing outright capital flight in the face of an
impending collapse of the Spanish banking system. Most of the Spanish flight
money, about € 139 billion, was brought to Latin America including the
Caribbean, Brazil alone receiving € 78 billion. Britain ended up with € 55
billion, the US with € 65 billion.
A similar phenomenon was observed in Greece. While foreign banks
withdrew € 145 billion from Greece, Greek banks transferred € 69 billion to a
large range of countries, the list of known and reported money transfers being
topped by Turkey and Cyprus, followed by Bulgaria, Romania, the UK, the
Marshall Islands, Liberia, Serbia, Germany, Albania, the Ukraine, Panama, and
the Maldives. In addition, there were probably many transfers to countries not
captured by the BIS statistics. For example, it has been reported that Greeks
have parked € 200 billion in Switzerland.4
Moreover, capital often flowed through other countries before it reached, or
after it left, the GIIPS countries. This is clearly shown by the BIS statistics on
cross-country banking exposure. While French gross bank exposure to the GIIPS
countries (all sectors) shrank by € 204 billion from Q4 2007 to Q3 2013, Belgian
banks reduced their exposure to France by € 68 billion, Dutch banks by € 56
billion, and British banks by € 27 billion, giving a combined total of € 151
billion. Thus, in effect, much of the capital that France had lent to the GIIPS
countries and that it recalled during the crisis may originally have come from
other countries, via the European interbank market. Figures 3.7 and 5.1 show
that the French banking system had lent more funds than other banking systems
to the crisis-hit countries, but given that France was not a net capital exporter
(Figure 3.4), it must have been other countries’ savings that it was lending out.
Indeed, thanks to France belonging to the Romance language family, the French
banking system served as a hub for the distribution of savings to southern
Europe.

All of this is interesting, but confusing. The complex structure of financial
capital flows does not lend itself to a simple narrative and is rather incomplete,
since many agents involved in financial capital flows such as insurance
companies, private equity companies, hedge funds, and companies of the real
economy are not banks and hence not included in the BIS statistics.
The Bundesbank statistics on the nature of private capital flows between
Germany and the rest of the world shed some light on the importance of other
sectors.5 While the BIS statistics reveal that German banks recalled € 902 billion
from other countries in the period Q4 2007 to Q3 2013, € 304 billion from the
GIIPS alone, and that foreign banks, in turn, recalled € 173 billion in net terms
from Germany, the Bundesbank reports that German enterprises and private
households at the same time exported capital worth € 1, 026 billion in net terms
through lending, the purchase of foreign securities, and direct investment.6 Thus,
it seems that the private capital flows into and out of Germany roughly balance
out. But even this information is incomplete as it excludes, among others, recalls
of funds by foreign financial institutions like hedge funds and investment funds
as well as investments in Germany by foreign enterprises and households.
As the German balance of payments statistics reveal, which in principle
comprise all capital flows, there were no private capital flows in net terms to
Germany since the beginning of the crisis; on the contrary, a net export of capital
amounting to € 521 billion occurred from the beginning of 2008 to 2013.7 Only
in one year, 2010, was there a net private capital inflow (about € 100 billion), but
this was more than offset by the net outflows of other years.8 Thus, even though
German banks recalled some of the credit they had given to other countries,
international financial institutions as well as German firms and households
exported even more private capital from Germany in the period considered. This
is important insofar as it has been claimed over and again in opinion columns
that a huge capital flight to Germany occurred during the crisis.
However, even the information that the private net capital export was € 521
billion from 2008 to the end of 2013 is puzzling, as it seems to be at odds with
the fact that Germany had a huge current account surplus of € 1, 001 billion over
this period, and hence overall net capital exports of that same magnitude (refer
also to Figure 3.4).9 This puzzle will be solved in Chapter 7.
There is little doubt, though, that the net flow of private capital to the GIPSIC
countries shrank substantially, and that it even reversed direction for some
periods and some countries, as will be shown in more detail in Chapter 7. This
turned out to be a huge problem for the GIPSIC countries, since the inflationary
credit bubble analysed above had deprived them of their competitiveness and

had created huge current account deficits that needed to be financed (see Figure
2.1). This raises one question: who was the white knight who came to the rescue
and financed the current account deficits and the private capital flow reversal?
The answer is: the Eurosystem.
Help from the Printing Press
The Eurosystem was the white knight who initially rescued the troubled
countries. In accordance with the rules set by the ECB Governing Council, the
national central banks (NCBs) of the GIPSIC countries offered the local
commercial banks refinancing credit at generous rates; in other words, they
helped them with the printing press. That help began in October 2008, after the
Lehman debacle. In addition, from May 2010, all NCBs and the ECB itself
purchased a substantial amount of the GIPSIC countries’ government bonds, and
in September 2012 the ECB announced that it would henceforth do it without
limit (through the so-called OMT programme). This came in addition to the
intergovernmental rescue operations that had started in May 2010. The rest of
this chapter, as well as the two following ones, will concentrate on the role of
local refinancing credit. Government bond purchases and intergovernmental
rescue operations will be discussed in Chapter 8.
Refinancing credit is granted by an NCB through the issuance of self-created
money to commercial banks in its jurisdiction, typically against adequate
collateral, in line with the rules of the Eurosystem and normally with shared
responsibility and risk. In Europe, refinancing credit is the main channel through
which the NCBs issue money. It is subdivided into main refinancing operations,
long-term refinancing operations, and credit from the so-called marginal lending
facility. In addition, however, the local NCBs, and to a limited extent even the
ECB itself, issue money by way of open-market purchases of assets held by the
banking sector, which is the predominant method of money creation used in the
USA. The assets bought include gold, foreign currency, government bonds, and,
temporarily, covered bonds issued by the private sector. The rest of this book
will refer to refinancing credit and asset purchases to summarize all of these
sources of money creation.
The money issued can take the form of banknotes, but it typically first comes
as book money credited to the demand deposits that commercial banks hold with
their respective NCB. Unless otherwise noted in this book, money is meant to be
central bank or base money, i.e. banknotes in circulation and demand deposits
that commercial banks hold with their NCBs, called ‘current accounts’ and

‘deposit facilities’. As the former term in economics is already used in foreign
trade accounting, where it means something entirely different, it will be avoided
here. Moreover, deposit facilities in the Eurozone have lost most of their
practical importance since banks no longer receive interest on them. In addition,
commercial banks hold term deposits with the central banks against interest, i.e.
they lend money to their NCB. These term deposits are not part of the monetary
base.
Moreover, whenever the term ‘money printing’ is used in this book, it means
money creation in a broader sense of the word, and not only the physical process
of printing banknotes.10 Similarly, the terms money shredding and money
transfers will later be used in this metaphorical sense.
Refinancing credit used to be given at very short maturities—a couple of days
up to at most three months used to be the norm—and had to be renewed
constantly. Today, longer maturities are common. The NCBs create the money,
credit it to the account of the commercial banks that request it in their
jurisdiction, and charge a given interest rate, typically the main refinancing rate.
This rate has been reduced repeatedly during the crisis, standing at 0.25% as of
this writing.
Normally, a bank gets the money that it lends out to its customers from
depositors or from other lenders, which, in turn, have received the money from
their clients. The money, in other words, comes from the private sector and
flows back to it. However, a growing economy needs an increasingly large
amount of money for general transactions, since a good portion of the money is
always circulating and kept temporarily in wallets and accounts. For this reason,
given a country’s payment habits, additional money has to be created by its
central bank every year in proportion to the nominal growth of the economy and,
through lending it to the commercial banks, brought into private circulation. The
stock of refinancing credit that lies behind the money circulating in a growing
economy must also be increased accordingly. This brings in a growing amount
of interest revenue to the central bank, the so-called seignorage, which it then
passes on to the treasury.11 As mentioned in Chapter 1, the stock of seignorage
capital of the Eurosystem in 2013 was about € 1.3 trillion in a static calculation,
and could be about € 2.9 trillion in a dynamic one. Since the NCBs act under
common rules, their interest income is pooled, each NCB receiving a fraction of
it depending on the size of its sovereign’s economy. The fraction is called its
‘capital key’ after the relative, and minuscule, equity injections into the ECB
system upon its foundation.12
In addition to the central bank’s creation of base money, commercial banks

create book money by lending out demand deposits that serve the same purpose
as bank notes and are also needed in proportion to the economic activity level of
a country. They earn seignorage income on the self-made deposit money, just
like the central banks on base money. Given the cash withdrawal rate of private
agents, and given the minimum reserve needed to ensure liquidity (and possibly
to satisfy legal constraints), a commercial bank cannot, however, arbitrarily
create book money beyond a certain proportion of the central bank money it
holds without risking illiquidity. Thus the stock of book money made by a
commercial bank is endogenously determined by its stock of base money and is
not a separate explanatory variable for the issues considered in this book.
During an economic crisis, which is accompanied by a loss of confidence
between creditors and debtors, more fresh money from the central bank is
needed, since potential creditors prefer to hoard their base and book money
instead of lending it on to others, out of fear that they won’t see it again. A
sudden increase in liquidity preference, however, destabilizes the economy,
since the additional liquidity hoarded ceases to be available for credit that final
investors could use for purchasing investment goods. The flow of funds from
savers to real investors is disturbed, implying a lack of aggregate demand. To
avoid this destabilizing effect, the central bank must issue additional money to
make up for the leakage in the savings–investment flow that occurs through
hoarding.
Hoarding is a graver problem when savers’ money must pass through several
financial institutions, like banks and insurance companies, before it reaches the
final borrower, who wishes to use it to purchase real goods, typically investment
goods. When a widespread loss of confidence occurs, many different cash
hoards in these intermediary financial institutions are filled at the same time. At
every step of the flow of credit from the saver to the final investor, a portion of
the money disappears into a hoard, meaning that in some cases very little reaches
the real investor. This turns a financial crisis into a crisis of the real economy,
which can cause massive unemployment. The interbank market is one such
many-staged system. As a result of the sudden hoarding of money, it broke down
temporarily in August 2007 and then again, massively, after the collapse of the
Lehman Brothers investment bank in September 2008. The effects on the real
economy were dire, pushing the global economy in 2009 into its worst recession
in the post-war period, the Great Recession.
The ECB tried, initially somewhat hesitantly and then more vigorously, to
replace the extra money being hoarded. Except for a direct intervention on 9
August 2007 and on the following days, when it offered commercial banks
unlimited liquidity overnight, 13 it limited itself to the normal refinancing

operations available to all banks. But when the crisis grew more acute and the
interbank market seized up after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, it
implemented a wide-ranging Enhanced Credit Support programme with which it
generously provided liquidity.14 After years of having auctioned only limited
amounts of central bank money to commercial banks, starting in October 2008 it
allowed its NCBs to grant unlimited refinancing credit at gradually reduced rates
of interest (first 1% and eventually as low as 0.25%), provided sufficient eligible
collateral was pledged. The new policy, which still is in place at this writing,
was called the Full Allotment Policy.
These measures offered the commercial banks an alternative to the faltering
interbank market. Instead of getting money from other banks, which now
preferred to keep it to themselves, the indebted banks now turned to their
respective NCBs.
At the same time, the ECB continued to allow the banks with excess liquidity
to deposit it at the ECB itself for a moderate rate of interest, instead of keeping it
in their demand deposits and drawing no interest income. With this policy, the
ECB claimed to take the position of an intermediary between creditor and debtor
banks, channelling lending through its books in order to guarantee the security of
credit operations.15 This is only a heuristic description of the procedure,
however, since the Eurosystem’s lending operations do not depend in any way
on how much money commercial banks deposit with their central banks. Later
the ECB preferred to speak of improving the ‘functioning of the monetary policy
transmission mechanism’.
The generous provision of refinancing credit by the Eurosystem was a
complete success. It contributed very quickly to restoring confidence among the
healthy banks of the still-sound economies, the necessary ingredient for a
functioning interbank market. Just a few months after introducing such
measures, around the turn of the year 2008/2009, the interbank market got going
again and could have quickly returned to an arguably healthier situation, given
that markets had begun to differentially reassess country and institutional risks,
if the continued application of these measures had not provided a more attractive
alternative for the commercial banks.
The reassessment of risks by markets meant that the GIPSIC countries had to
pay higher risk premia than they were used to. Confidence in the solvency of
these countries was damaged, because now, during the crisis, investors were
keeping a watchful eye on such countries’ exorbitant foreign and sovereign
debts. Their commercial banks were regarded as increasingly vulnerable, since
they had gorged themselves on government bonds (as a result of not being

obliged to hold equity against them, as explained above). In addition, they had
given huge volumes of mortgage loans to the private economy that turned sour
because of the collapsing real-estate market. For this reason, they had to pay
ever larger risk premia for interbank loans from countries that had surplus
savings. This pushed up the commercial banks’ demand for cheap refinancing
credit from the respective NCBs, and the ECB saw itself under increasing
pressure to extend the planned duration. It kept setting termination dates, but as
they came nearer, they were postponed again and again, despite the fact that a
global upswing had started to be felt in summer 2009, which gained enormous
impetus in the years 2010–2012. At this writing, the emergency measures are
still in place and have been announced to remain so at least until 7 July 2015,
which would be eight years after the outbreak of the crisis and nearly seven
years after they had first been adopted.
Even though the ECB refinancing policy was designed for the entire Eurozone
and did not contemplate any special measures for individual countries, after the
Lehman shock was overcome it started to function as a special operation to
finance southern and western countries, since that was where financing problems
persisted and markets demanded higher yields. The ECB’s refinancing policy
then ceased to be a policy aimed at battling the crisis in general,
metamorphosing instead into a creative measure to benefit the GIPSIC countries
by providing credit from the printing press at below-market conditions. The
credit flowed via the commercial banks to private companies and to local
governments, whose bonds and securities were used as collateral for obtaining
refinancing credit.
In practice, the ECB’s refinancing policy was a rescue facility for the
peripheral economies that preceded by two-and-a-half years the multilateral
rescue programmes introduced in May 2010. By the time this manuscript hits the
bookstores, the Eurozone will have nearly completed its seventh year of crisis
and the sixth year of the ECB’s rescue programmes for the countries in the
Eurozone’s periphery.
Before the introduction of the euro, the countries making up the Eurozone
today had already had the possibility of resorting to the money-printing press,
since they followed an autonomous monetary policy. They had to be careful,
however, since excessive money printing would necessarily bring about inflation
and a devaluation of the currency, with the result that its purchasing power
abroad would diminish. The euro offered them the apparent advantage of being
free of the risk of devaluation, even if they made generous use of the printing
press, since they were now part of a currency union in which no exchange rates
existed among the member countries. Furthermore, the additional money printed

by one NCB was offset by the reduced creation of money by other NCBs, so that
there was not even an inflation risk.
This advantage was small when the Eurosystem offered only short-term
liquidity against high-quality collateral, and the auctioning of this liquidity kept
refinancing credit in short supply. However, when the Eurosystem eased access
to central bank credit during the crisis, the advantage became far more evident
and the money-printing press was actively used by a number of countries to
avoid the comparatively more onerous credit conditions demanded by the
interbank market. This enabled these countries to continue financing their
current account deficits, despite the bursting of the credit bubble and the refusal
of private investors to provide funding, simply by printing the money that they
could not, or at unfavourable conditions, borrow in the market. In addition,
resorting to the printing press made it possible for them to create the funds they
needed to compensate for temporary waves of capital flight to France and
northern European countries, as well as to the UK, the US, and many other
countries. Chapter 7 will document the financing from the printing press,
country by country.
The reader may be excused for doubting that this is actually so. Is it really
possible for the Eurozone’s NCBs to print as much money as they wish and then
lend it out via their banks to their domestic economy and government? Are there
no allotted stocks of central bank money that may be created according to the
size of the respective economy, like ‘small country, small printing press—big
country, big printing press’? It cannot really be that countries may simply print
money that they can no longer borrow cheaply elsewhere and go on as if nothing
had changed, can it?
The answer is that, whether right or wrong, they can. Neither the ECB statutes
nor the European treaties contemplate an apportionment of central bank money
dependent on the size of the member countries’ economies. On the contrary, it is
widely accepted that it does not matter where the Eurosystem’s refinancing
credit is issued. This view stands in striking contrast to the facts that banks are
not subject to common regulation, that countries have different propensities to
make use of the local printing press, that collateral standards are low and
interpreted differently, and in particular, that the unitary European state, which
could separate the bankruptcy risk of financial institutions from the respective
country risk by embedding the banks and their clients into a common fiscal
system, has not been founded yet and, unfortunately, will not be founded in the
foreseeable future. The last chapter of this book will return to these issues.
There is, however, an indirect way to apportion money creation according to
economy size, in the form of borrowing banks having to pledge eligible

collateral to their NCB. Since it can be assumed that a smaller economy will
have less collateral of sufficient quality available than a larger one, this could
indirectly limit money creation. The ECB Governing Council, alas, which
defines the rules for eligible collateral, has done everything in its power to lift
this restriction.
Lowering Collateral Standards and Extending Maturities
Before the crisis, banks had to secure the refinancing credit they received from
their NCBs with agency-rated collateral, the minimum rating being single A in
the ECB’s internal rating scale, which, for example, corresponds to Standard &
Poor’s rating of A–.16 The credit was only short-term, typically being provided
for a week. The lots of refinancing credit offered were limited and had a
maximum maturity of three months, the general idea being that the ECB
provided the amount of liquidity necessary for commercial banks and the rest of
the private sector to carry out their internal transactions, rather than providing
funding to the financial sector to make up for the lack of domestic savings or
foreign credit. If a country wanted to purchase more goods abroad than it sold
there, it couldn’t just turn to the central bank to get the money, unless it offered
absolutely safe collateral; it had to tap the international capital markets for
funding, at increasingly higher rates of interest. The higher interest rates
moderated import wishes and made it attractive for foreigners to provide the
required funds.
When the US financial crisis spilled over to Europe, this sort of monetary
policy was severely challenged. As lenders, in particular foreign banks providing
funds through the interbank market, shied away from countries burdened with
huge current account deficits, withdrawing their funds or demanding higher
yields, the commercial banks of these countries faced a liquidity crisis, if not a
solvency crisis. They tried to overcome the shortfall by borrowing from their
NCBs, pledging collateral in exchange. However, they were quickly running out
of sufficiently good collateral, and the maturities of the ECB credit were too
short to replace foreign private credit.
When the crisis came to a head with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in
autumn 2008, the ECB Council helped the commercial banks with various policy
changes. The most visible one concerned the above-mentioned move from
auctioning limited money tenders to the establishment of the Full Allotment
Policy. More importantly, however, it dramatically reduced the quality
requirements for eligible collateral and extended the maturities of refinancing

loans.17 These measures, as well as subsequent measures taken during the course
of the crisis, are summarized in Table 5.1 and will be described below.
Table 5.1 Changes in the ECB’s refinancing policy (date of implementation)
Date
Policy measure
15 October
2008
Full allotment policy
Until 24
October
2008
Minimum rating of collateral: single A
As of 25
October
2008
Minimum rating reduced to triple B for all assets except ABS1)
Securities issued by credit institutionson non-regulated markets
accepted(includes STEP2) market)
Cyprus30
October
2008
Maturity of LTROs3) extended to six months
February
2009
Acceptance of government guaranteedown-use bonds as
collateral
1 March
2009
Minimum rating of ABS: triple A
23 June
2009
First of three LTRO tenders with a maturity of 12 months
6 May 2010
Rating requirement waived for bonds issued or guaranteed by
Greece
1 April 2011
Rating requirement waived for bonds issued or guaranteed by
Ireland
7 July 2011
Rating requirement waived for bonds issued or guaranteed by
Portugal
19
December
2011
Lowering of rating requirement to single A for speci.c ABS4);
acceptance of ACC5)

21
December
2011
First of two LTRO tenders with a maturity of 3 years
29 June
2012
Lowering of rating requirement to triple B for all ABS
3 May 2013
Rating requirement waived for debt instruments issued or
guaranteed by countries that are under an EU-IMF programme
9 May 2013
Rating requirement waived for bonds issued or guaranteed by
Cyprus
1) Asset-backed securities.
2) Short-term European Paper, unregulated market (see Box 5.1).
3) Long-term Refinancing Operations.
4) Asset-backed securities consisting of residential mortgages or loans to small and medium-size
enterprises.
5) Additional credit claims.
In October 2008, the ECB doubled the maximum maturity of its refinancing
credit to six months, providing € 265 billion with such maturity in 2008 and
2009.18 It granted this credit under the acronym of LTRO, which stands for
Long-Term Refinancing Operations. In May 2009, the ECB decided to offer
three twelve-month LTROs in full allotment mode, the first of which was
launched in June and met a total demand of € 442 billion. By the end of 2009 the
overall volume of such LTROs had increased to € 614 billion.19 On 21
December 2011, the Eurosystem even began to offer refinancing credit for up to
three years.20 In two tranches, the latest of which was made available on 29
February 2012, the ECB lent a total of € 1.019 trillion. President Draghi called
his programme the ‘Big Bazooka’.21 Out of the total, € 566 billion was used to
replace existing short-term refinancing credit, but the rest (€ 453 billion) was
provided in addition to that. Some banks hoarded the money; others used it to
replace private credit they had received from other banks. In total, the banks of
the Eurosystem parked almost € 600 billion with the ECB’s deposit facility in
order to build up a safe buffer stock of liquidity for later use rather than lending
it out higher market interest rates.22
The measures reducing the quality requirements for eligible collateral were
sophisticated, multiple, and dramatic. The first measure was taken shortly after
the introduction of the Full Allotment Policy on 15 October 2008. On 25
October 2008 the minimum for eligible collateral, except asset-backed securities

(ABS), was reduced from single A to triple B, which is one grade above junk
status. The ECB announced on various occasions that it would return to normal
rating requirements at pre-specified dates, but when the dates arrived it always
extended them; this policy remains in effect to this day.23
The lowering of the rating requirement to triple B helped for a while, since it
liberated a substantial fraction of bank assets to be used as collateral and allowed
banks to acquire more such assets with fresh refinancing credit. However, even
the collateral that satisfied this reduced standard was soon exhausted. The ECB
reacted by reducing collateral requirements even further to allow crisis-ridden
countries to draw more credit from the printing presses at the disposal of their
NCBs. The relief was always short-lived, lasting only until the latest collateral
category accepted was exhausted. But when this happened, the ECB liberated
more collateral by further reducing its quality requirements.
Government bonds have played a major role in the collateral pledged by
commercial banks to draw refinancing credit from their NCBs. Banks borrow
freshly printed money from their NCBs, buy government bonds with this money,
and use these same government bonds as collateral for the credit. This has
always been a convenient process for indirect government financing. The
process stalled, however, when the rating agencies published negative outlooks
for the government bonds of Greece, Portugal, and Ireland and subsequently
downgraded these bonds to non-investment grade (Greece in April 2010,
Portugal and Ireland in July 2011).24 The ECB Governing Council reacted by
simply exempting the respective government bonds, as well as private securities
guaranteed by these governments, from the minimum rating requirements
(Greece in May 2010, Portugal in April 2011, Ireland in July 2011, and Cyprus
in May 2013).25 On 3 May 2013 the ECB generalized these exemptions by
waiving the minimum rating requirements for countries supported by and
compliant with an EU-IMF programme.26 Moreover, the ECB decided to buy the
government bonds of the crisis-stricken countries through its SMP and OMT
programmes in order to maintain the value of collateral, as will be discussed in
more detail in Chapter 8. All this enabled indebted states to place new
government bonds in the market, since the banks were able to buy them with
fresh money that they were drawing from the national printing presses in
exchange for pledging these bonds as collateral.
According to the ECB’s accounts, the total volume of such indirect state
finance, including regional and central governments, was € 452 billion in Q1
2013, most of which was concentrated in the crisis countries.27 According to J.
P. Morgan, by February 2011 39%, or € 56 billion, of the collateral pledged at

the Greek central bank consisted of Greek government bonds. Moreover, another
38%, or € 55 billion, was accounted for by securities guaranteed by the Greek
state.28 The measures constituted indirect government financing through the
ECB, and prevented the collapse of these states. State guarantees enabled
commercial banks to pledge non-tradeable claims and securities as collateral.
Since the true value of these assets was not known, given that they were not
traded, banks tended to price them at their face value and asked the respective
national governments to issue guarantees for them, which the governments did to
safeguard cheap ECB credit for their economies. The only problem was that the
governmental guarantees were worthless, given that the guaranteeing sovereigns
themselves were threatened by insolvency, according to the judgement of the
rating agencies.
An important role in the ECB’s collateral policy was played by asset-backed
securities (ABS). These are structured composite claims on a portfolio of assets
that are supposedly safer than the original assets, thanks to internal risk
diversification within the portfolio and thanks to the creation of a hierarchy of
claims according to the waterfall principle.29 Banks were allowed to compose
these ABS papers from claims they held on private companies and other banks
and to pledge them as collateral to their respective NCBs in the Eurosystem.
ABS had been explicitly allowed as collateral since at least 2004, provided that
they were traded in the market and had a rating of at least single A. As
mentioned above, they were left out in the general reduction of collateral
requirements to triple B that took place on 25 October 2008. Nevertheless, when
the crisis induced commercial banks to replace interbank credit with refinancing
credit from their NCBs, ABS became an attractive way to generate the necessary
collateral. The stock of ABS used for this purpose increased dramatically, from
an average of € 182 billion in 2007 to € 490 billion in 2010.30 To avoid any
potential misuse, the ECB tightened the standard for ABS from single A to triple
A on 1 March 2009.31 However, as the ingredients for such good ABS became
scarce, the Governing Council could not maintain this policy. On 19 December
2011 it decided to reduce the minimum rating requirement for ABS backed by
residential mortgages or by loans to small and medium-size enterprises to the
single A category once again.32 Moreover, in June 2012 it lowered the minimum
rating further, to triple B, the lowest possible investment grade, and applied this
reduction to a broad range of securities including residential mortgages, loans to
small and medium-size enterprises, commercial mortgages, car loans as well as
leasing and consumer loans.33
The use of ABS gave banks ample room to mix in dubious claims that would

otherwise have been difficult to pledge as collateral on their own. In Ireland,
property loans were bundled into packages worth billions and submitted as
collateral to the ECB. The resulting non-traded ABS papers were often protected
by state guarantees in order to make them eligible as collateral for refinancing
operations, despite the low quality of the original securities. Spanish banks were
also able to bundle vast amounts of real-estate claims into ABS and to pledge
these as collateral to the ECB.
It is well known that ABS instruments played an inglorious role in the US
financial crisis, because they had permitted banks to bundle securities of
differing quality to receive a better rating, pretending that the diversification
would eliminate stochastically independent risks whereas, in fact, many such
securities bore highly correlated risks. After the institutional swindle was
detected at the outset of the crisis, new issues largely disappeared from the
markets, 34 but they still flourish in the refinancing operations that the ECB
permits its banks to perform. The world’s savviest investor, Warren Buffet, once
called them ‘weapons of mass destruction’.35 Another metaphor often used to
describe them is ‘sausages’ because, as with real sausages, one does not
necessarily want to know exactly what ingredients they contain.
The bits of meat that were fed into the ABS sausages were sometimes no
longer edible. For instance, a claim was found in a Spanish ABS paper against
the Real Madrid football club that had resulted from a loan to purchase football
player Cristiano Ronaldo, while in Portugal some securities maturing on 31
December 9999 (this is no typing error) found their way into other ABS.36 In the
meantime, large haircuts for the hopelessly over-indebted football clubs in Spain
have been discussed.37 Such haircuts would deprive the ECB of part of its
collateral. Should the banks become insolvent, wobbling as they are from
massive volumes of toxic property loans, and fail to repay their refinancing
loans, other countries’ taxpayers will end up paying for the Real Madrid football
players as well.
A strange aspect of the collateral policy is that banks are able to pledge
securities issued by the banking sector itself, rather than by other parties such as
governments or companies. The condition for accepting such bank bonds is that
they be traded on regulated markets or certain non-regulated markets accepted
by the ECB. The latter possibility was opened on 25 October 2008.38
The possibility of using bank bonds as collateral was closely linked to the so-
called STEP market, which is a sort of French enclave controlled by the Banque
de France that is run according to national rules. In July 2013, the total amount
of outstanding STEP debt securities accepted as collateral and treated as ‘eligible

marketable assets’, even though the STEP market itself was not regulated by the
ECB, was € 404 billion, of which € 341 billion was debt issued by financial
institutions.39 The role of the STEP market and other details are explained in the
box below.
BOX 5.1 The STEP market
STEP stands for Short-Term European Paper, commercial securities, including
papers issued by financial institutions, with maturities of between a few days
and one year, which are not traded on the stock exchange. The STEP market
was initiated in 2006 with the aim of integrating European markets for short-
term securities through the convergence of market standards and practices. It
was first accepted as a non-regulated market for collateral purposes in
Eurosystem credit operations in April 2007, but at that time it was taboo to
accept securities issued by financial institutions.40 The ECB broke this taboo in
October 2008 for the first time, when it declared STEP-labelled securities
issued by banks temporarily eligible as collateral in Eurosystem credit
operations, their acceptance being prolonged for another year in December
2009.41 In September 2011, the ECB made a fundamental change to its
‘General documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and
procedures’.42 It approved the suspension of the eligibility requirement,
according to which debt instruments issued by credit institutions are only
eligible if traded on a regulated market. Since January 2012, STEPs issued by
financial institutions have been eligible for use as collateral in Eurosystem
credit operations without any time limitation.
In July 2013 the stock of outstanding STEP securities pledged as collateral
was € 404 billion, of which about 84% consisted of papers issued by
commercial banks.43
The STEP market is managed by EURIBOR-EBF, an organization of the
European Banking Federation (EBF) that was recently suspected of having
manipulated the prime rate Euribor, 44 and it is supervised by Banque de
France according to criteria that do not satisfy the ECB’s definition of
‘regulated markets’.45
Detailed data on securities traded are provided by Euroclear France to the
Banque de France, but they are not fully reported to the ECB. Euroclear France
is an associate of the Euroclear Bank, which is one of the big players in the
STEP market. By its own account, it is the world’s second largest broker of

short-term papers. All this is suggestive of a French monetary policy enclave
within the Eurosystem. This impression is corroborated by observing that
French banks rely heavily on the STEP market as a means of rapid borrowing.
French banks have issued about € 190 billion worth of STEP-labelled bonds
altogether, and effectively run the market.46 It seems that the STEP market is
still growing, attracting many new customers, such as banks from Spain and
Portugal.
The problem with this acceptance of bank bonds was that banks could
mutually issue and trade self-made bonds, which were then eligible as collateral
for drawing refinancing credit from their respective NCBs. The only safeguard
against misuse was initially that the bank bonds needed to be traded.47 However,
a couple of banks could issue such bonds, mutually trade them, and then use
them to draw refinancing credit from their respective NCBs. In effect, this was
as if the banks borrowed from the printing press without having to pledge any
collateral. The ECB tried to prevent misuse by imposing quantity constraints on
the use of uncovered bank bonds from closely linked issuers.48 Nevertheless, by
the end of 2012, the stock of uncovered bank bonds that were in principle
eligible as collateral for refinancing operations was € 2.5 trillion, while the stock
of such bonds used as collateral was about € 329 billion.49
A convenient side-effect of this trade was that it could be used to create equity
out of nothing if trading took place above the bonds’ face value. In principle,
every bank participating in symmetric circular trading could book asset values
above the liability it incurred by issuing its own bonds. This is a well-known
aspect of circular trading of assets in general.50
Another variant of the use of bank bonds is own-use bonds, i.e. bonds that are
not traded but issued and provided as collateral by the same bank that requested
the refinancing credit. Such own use bonds were accepted by NCBs provided
that a national government guaranteed them. Italian banks, for example, pledged
€ 40 billion worth of own-use bonds as collateral in 2011, and Irish banks did so
to the tune of € 18 billion in 2011, and another € 8 billion in March 2013.51
Greek banks reportedly pledged own-use bonds totalling € 6.4 billion in 2011.52
Non-marketable assets accepted as collateral also include direct credit claims
on companies. After a heated discussion and against the vote of the Bundesbank,
the ECB Council decided on 8 December 2011 to give up the idea of uniform
minimum quality standards for collateral by leaving it to individual NCBs to
‘accept as collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy operations credit claims
that do not satisfy the Eurosystem eligibility criteria’.53 This policy, which is

known as the Additional Credit Claims Framework (ACC), was implemented on
19 December 2011; it meant that individual NCBs were allowed to accept, at
their own risk, credit claims with a credit rating below the ECB’s scale of
acceptable collateral, provided they developed their own eligibility criteria and
had them approved by the Governing Council.54 Only seven out of the 17 NCBs
of the Eurosystem, among them most prominently the Banque de France and
Banca d’Italia, made use of this option and submitted their idiosyncratic
eligibility criteria for approval at the Council Meeting of 9 February 2012.55 In
Q1 2013, the volume of credit claims used as collateral amounted to € 472
billion, which corresponds to 19% of all collateral pledged.
Non-marketable assets accepted as collateral moreover include the above-
mentioned government-guaranteed credit claims and other collateralized credit
claims, retail mortgage-backed securities and fixed-term deposits from eligible
counterparties such as public sector entities or international and supranational
institutions. They became a major tool for expanding refinancing credit, and in
fact they are the collateral category showing the greatest dynamism. The volume
of assets in this category more than tripled from 2007 to 2010, from an average
of € 109 billion to € 359 billion, and almost doubled once again to € 644 billion
in Q1 2013.56 The share of all collateral pledged that falls under this category
increased from 10% of the total to 26% over this period.
In summary, the combination of longer maturities, extremely low collateral
requirements, and a low interest rate meant that the ECB has in effect been
significantly underbidding the interbank market for bank credit. This kept the
troubled banks and their clients afloat, but it also meant that the role of the
private capital market as a screening device for good and bad investment
opportunities was largely undermined, an issue upon which this book will
elaborate in several later sections. Quite a number of zombie banks were
sustained with the implemented measures, and they now need to be recapitalized
with public funds in a banking union (see Chapter 8).
To reiterate the point made above, the higher the interest rates the Eurozone
banks had to pay in the market, the more the lowering of collateral standards and
the prolongation of maturity helped them. Thus, even if strictly identical, but
equally generous, collateral policies had been applied in all countries of the
Eurozone, the ECB’s risk absorption through the lowering of collateral standards
would still have distorted the markets.
However, not even that condition holds, since collateral policies are not as
uniform as they seem. The ECB accepts about 38, 000 different assets as
collateral and uses detailed descriptions and rules for the respective country

provisions, acknowledging the different national histories of collateral
formation.57 It has been accused of losing oversight of this system and of being
unable to effectively limit the NCBs’ scope for idiosyncratic interpretations of
the general rules, which has effectively resulted in different eligibility criteria for
collateral in the various countries.A particular problem is the application of
haircuts on the collateral pledged to minimize the risk of under-
collateralization.58 While the Eurosystem does use a general system of haircut
rules, the NCBs’ application of these rules has diverged substantially, because
the necessary evaluation is carried out locally. The individual NCBs in particular
circumvented the lexicographic ordering of evaluation criteria defined by the
ECB, manipulating the ratings of the collateral they accepted so as to increase
the stock of eligible collateral that banks could use to draw more refinancing
credit.59
Moral Hazard
There is broad agreement that the ECB carried out the right policies in the
immediate aftermath of the Lehman crisis, when the breakdown of the interbank
market called for swift action. However, the long duration and successive
extension of the ECB policies, even after the world economy started to recover
strongly in the second half of 2009, and in particular the policy of lowering
eligible collateral standards to junk levels, gave cause for growing concern.60 It
was feared that the ECB was bailing out banks and their creditors, interfering in
the process well beyond the realm of monetary policy.
Bundesbank president Jens Weidmann expressed these concerns when he
wrote a widely cited letter to ECB President Mario Draghi in early 2012, the
content of which was leaked to the press, complaining about the low quality of
the collateral being pledged by banks when drawing refinancing credit from their
local central banks.61 The smouldering conflict between the Bundesbank and the
ECB, which started with the ECB’s government bond purchases in May 2010
(SMP, see Chapter 8) and led to the resignations in 2011 of Bundesbank
President Axel Weber and the ECB chief economist, Jürgen Stark, flared up with
this letter.
In theory, the ECB was carrying out monetary policy, helping out with
liquidity where needed. In practice, it was bailing out private banks and their
creditors with credit from the printing press. In order for the liquidity
interpretation to prevail, it would have been necessary for the ECB to stick to a
policy of requiring first-rate collateral. Obviously it not only deviated from this

policy, but turned it on its head by throwing all caution to the wind with its
multifaceted and opaque system of collateral standards.
One may wonder where the incentives for reducing the collateral requirements
so dramatically came from. An explanation lies in a classical moral hazard
problem resulting from the fact that the cost of bank failures, in terms of write-
off losses on the ECB’s refinancing credit, is being socialized within the
Eurosystem, which pools the returns and losses from monetary policy operations
among the participating central banks and hence the national budgets, to which
the profit distribution of the Eurosystem flows (see Chapter 1). This moral
hazard effect explains the controversial collateral decisions taken by a majority
of the ECB Governing Council against the fierce, but futile opposition of a
minority. It also explains why the governments and NCBs of the crisis-stricken
countries were eager to resort to the local printing presses by stretching the
Eurosystem’s collateral rules to the limits, enabling local banks to buy
government bonds and lend funds to the private economy even though private
investors were shunning domestic borrowers. The immediate benefits of the cash
flow generated by the new credit, in terms of preserving asset prices, the
infrastructure, jobs, pensions and wages, remained in the national economy,
whereas if the debtors and the banks that lent them the money should fail, part of
the losses would be shared by the community of Eurosystem states.62 Actually,
this incentive is particularly large for small countries, whose own proportional
share in a euro lost by providing unsound refinancing credit is negligible. The
fact that the smaller countries, in turn, have much larger voting rights per capita
than the bigger ones (see Chapter 1) appears very problematic in this regard.
A counterargument to this interpretation could be that the ECB thus far has
avoided major losses from its risk-taking strategy. But, as will be argued in
Chapter 8, this argument overlooks the fact that the prior decisions of the ECB
Governing Council to impose the risk of bankruptcies on the taxpayers of the
Eurozone prejudiced the subsequent choices of parliaments and forced through a
later repackaging of risks by establishing huge fiscal rescue funds. Eventually it
may even turn the Eurozone into a transfer union, forcing one group of countries
to transfer resources to another so as to prevent the latter’s banks from
defaulting.
The ECB has not openly reacted to these concerns, but has repeatedly stated
that, despite the lowering of collateral standards, it sees no risk in the credit
granted, since the haircuts it applies to the collateral are sufficient. It observes
the market value of collateral on a daily basis and if this value falls, it will
immediately 
demand 
additional 
collateral 
or 
withdraw 
the 
credit.63

Unfortunately, however, the ECB has to this date published no statistics on
which securities it has accepted as collateral and which deductible it has applied;
nor has it published information on how well this safeguarding strategy has
functioned in practice.64Moreover, of course, adjusting the haircuts to daily
fluctuations in market values only makes sense for traded assets, not for the 26%
of all collateral that is non-traded.
Even when assets are traded, the haircut policy is no safeguard against the
ECB incurring losses. By reducing the rating quality requirement to extremely
low levels, even below investment grade, the ECB has subjected itself to the risk
of a sudden default on a country’s debt, which could instantly reduce its bonds’
market value by a multiple of the haircut applied, without it being possible for
the ECB to demand additional collateral. If the ECB, in a financial crisis,
declared only some collateral insufficient, it would limit the banks’ access to
refinancing credit, which would reduce their demand for the bonds they could
submit as collateral, thereby annihilating the available collateral.
Such a situation occurred in late February 2012 with Greek government bonds
accepted as collateral by the Greek NCB, after the Greek parliament increased its
pressure on holders of Greek government bonds to ‘voluntarily’ accept
relinquishing part of their claims. The parliament announced that it would
change the contractual conditions for government bonds (the so-called collective
action clauses) from that point on in such a way that cuts would be forced upon
those bondholders who did not voluntarily agree to waive part of their claims, an
agreement as voluntary as a confession before the Spanish Inquisition.65 After
this announcement, the value of Greek bonds plummeted and the collateral for
the outstanding refinancing credit provided by the Greek central bank was
apparently no longer sufficient. Neither was it possible for the Greek commercial
banks to provide additional collateral. As a result, the ECB saw itself forced on
28 February 2012 to waive the collateral requirement altogether, and to ask the
Greek NCB to convert the collateralized refinancing credit into mere ELA credit,
a form of emergency credit available at milder conditions.66 When the debt
moratorium was completed, it again accepted Greek government bonds as
collateral, but on 25 July 2012 Greek bonds came under so much renewed
pressure that the ECB had to ask the Greek NCB to resort to ELA loans once
again.67
When the euro was first discussed some 20 years ago, one of the arguments
for it was that it would impose more debt discipline on the countries of southern
Europe that were used to solving their debt problems with the printing press.
When national currencies prevailed, governments borrowed excessively and

used to sell some of their bonds to commercial banks, which bought them with
refinancing credit from the national printing press, a process that led to both
inflation and currency depreciation. The euro, so the argument went, would
induce more discipline because governments would have to borrow in a currency
that they could not print, akin to borrowing in a foreign currency.
This view unfortunately turned out to be wrong, since the indebted countries
had the majority in the ECB Governing Council and could, in fact, change the
rules of local money printing at their discretion. The situation was even better
than before, as the currency they allowed their local central banks to print and
issue as refinancing credit was accepted as legal tender elsewhere in the
Eurozone and could be used to buy goods or assets there. This will be discussed
in more detail in the following two chapters.
And not even a majority in the ECB Governing Council was necessary to
activate the local money printing presses. The ELA credit mentioned above
clearly resembled a self-service facility.
ELA Credit
ELA is an acronym for ‘Emergency Liquidity Assistance’. It consists of credit
that the NCBs can give their commercial banks at their own risk, unless two-
thirds of the ECB Governing Council oppose the operation.68 In 2013, 8 out of
23 members of the Governing Council, i.e. slightly more than a third of the
council members, were nationals of GIPSIC countries (see Figure 1.6) that
needed cheap credit. In other crisis years the GIPSIC countries accounted for an
even higher share of the votes. (Only with the entry of Latvia in 2014 have the
GIPSIC countries lost the necessary quorum.) Thus, a blocking coalition of other
nationals in the Governing Council was impossible. Theoretically, the nationals
of the GIPSIC countries in the Council could have provided their countries with
as much credit from the printing press as they wished, and no one would have
been able to stop them.
Voluminous ELA credit has been drawn from the Eurosystem by the central
banks of Greece, Ireland, and Cyprus, and they indeed were close to bankruptcy
when they used this tool. For Ireland the maximum stock of ELA credit was € 70
billion (February 2011), or 43% of 2012 GDP, for Greece it was € 126 billion
(May 2012) or 64% of 2012 GDP, and for Cyprus it was € 11 billion (April
2013) or 64% of 2012 GDP.69 In total it seems that the ECB Council tolerated
ELA credit of up to € 251 billion, the peak reached in June 2012. By December
2013, the outstanding stock of ELA credit had declined to € 75 billion, largely

because it had been replaced with other rescue credit.70
The reason for the low hurdle to using ELA credit is the assertion that this
credit does not impose a liability risk upon other countries, as the issuing NCB
itself would have to bear any write-off losses. Basically, it is seen as a country’s
own affair without implications for the rest of the Eurozone as long as it does not
interfere with the single monetary policy. This has been repeatedly stressed by
ECB representatives including, for example, Jörg Asmussen, a member of the
ECB board, at an official hearing of the German Constitutional Court on 11 June
2013.71 This view is at best a half-truth, since the Eurosystem does indeed bear a
liability risk if the ELA credit is large enough, as will be explained below.
As Chapter 1 showed, income from monetary operations is normally pooled
among the Eurosystem members. Formally, ELA credit is an exception, but the
actual way of calculating interest remittances in the Eurosystem qualifies this
exception. ELA credit is lent out by an NCB to commercial banks at a rate of
interest that is usually one percentage point higher than the ECB’s main
refinancing rate. While the interest surcharge remains with the NCB as
compensation for the risk it is claimed to be assuming, the NCB effectively has
to share the portion of the interest that it would have collected from normal
refinancing credit with the other NCBs. The reason for this is that, given the
monetary base of the Eurosystem, ELA credit reduces the scope for ordinary
refinancing credit elsewhere in the Eurosystem, together with the corresponding
interest revenue.72
To understand the risk that ELA credit imposes on the Eurosystem, it is useful
to note that the value of a loan is equal to the present value of an infinite interest
stream generated by this loan and a chain of equal replacement loans that finance
the payment of principal at maturity. Normally, when a bank cannot repay its
refinancing credit and the collateral pledged turns out to be worthless, the losses
are borne by the entire Eurosystem, in the sense that the interest stemming from
the corresponding credit chain no longer flows into the pool, while the country in
question still receives its share of the overall remaining Eurosystem interest
revenue from monetary policy operations. Despite the short maturity of
refinancing credit, the Eurosystem’s loss is permanent since, given the time path
of the monetary base, it is not possible to recoup the interest losses by issuing
more refinancing credit to replace the defaulting refinancing credit. The interest
losses are permanently shared among the members of the Eurosystem in
proportion to their respective capital keys. This is true regardless of the
accounting rules that specify how the write-off losses are to be booked.
By contrast, in the case of default on an ELA loan, liability falls upon the

issuing NCB, and thus on the state it belongs. The NCB in this case has to accept
forever a liability that leads to a corresponding permanent reduction in interest
received from the Eurosystem. This seems to fit the above narrative.
However, when an NCB has issued so much ELA credit that its entitlement to
the Eurosystem’s pool of interest revenue is smaller than the interest on ELA
credit that it has to deliver to the pool, that NCB has to consume the income
from assets financed with equity capital to fulfil its obligations. If that income is
not high enough, the Eurosystem will share in the ELA losses. Thus, the
Eurosystem will risk ELA write-off losses if a country’s ELA credit exceeds the
sum of the present value of this country’s entitlement to the pool’s interest
income and its own equity capital. While legally the NCB remains liable, in such
a situation it actually cannot fulfil its payment obligations.
It may be speculated that the state has an implicit liability, forcing it to endow
its NCB with new equity capital, but this is a grey zone without clear and
binding rules. The statutes of the Eurosystem definitely do not foresee such a
recapitalization.73 In all likelihood, therefore, the Eurosystem will itself suffer
the losses.
Under static conditions, the critical level beyond which the liability for
additional ELA credit becomes indistinguishable from that of a normal
refinancing credit is where an NCB’s stock of ELA credit (the present value of
its ELA interest obligations) equals the sum of its equity capital and its capital-
key share in the Eurosystem’s monetary base (the latter being the present value
of the NCB’s entitlements to the Eurosystem’s interest pool). During the crisis,
the total stock of ELA credit exceeded this critical level by up to 144% in
Greece, 276% in Ireland and 244% in Cyprus.74 This shows that the idea of ELA
credit being issued at an NCB’s own risk (and therefore not needing a majority
in the Governing Council) is a myth.
Given that an NCB can itself decide on the provision of ELA credit, it is
tempting for officials faced with the near-bankruptcy of their country’s banking
system to use this kind of credit to delay the bankruptcy and bail out important
bank creditors, allowing them to bolt before disaster strikes. This seems to have
occurred with at least some of the € 11 billion in Cypriot ELA credit, of which €
9.5 billion, or over half of Cypriot GDP, went to Laiki Bank.75 This was clearly
stated by Cyprus’s President Nicos Anastasiades in a letter to ECB President
Mario Draghi that was leaked to the public. According to Anastasiades, Laiki
Bank was already bankrupt when it received the ELA credit, but the credit was
used to bridge a change in government and make elections possible.76 The bank
eventually defaulted in March 2013.77 An intergovernmental rescue package of €

10 billion, 56% of GDP, was then provided to Cyprus to avoid a sovereign
default. While this protected the ECB from write-off losses, because it shifted its
risk onto the rescue funds, it makes little difference to the taxpayers. They will
either have to replace the ECB’s seignorage losses, stand in for the losses of the
rescue funds, or finance subsequent transfers to Cyprus to protect the rescue
funds from admitting the losses.
ELA credit is supposed to help banks overcome liquidity crises but not to
delay insolvency. It is also not meant to provide relief to local governments,
which might wish to rescue banks in trouble, because this would violate article
123 TFEU, which forbids a state finance with the printing press. However, these
constraints have not always worked in practice.
A clear abuse occurred in Greece in the last quarter of 2012, when the Troika
had temporarily stopped the disbursement of a new tranche of intergovernmental
rescue credit, because Greece hat not fulfilled all of its conditions. As this would
have triggered a default of Greece, the Greek central bank issued ELA credit to
the banks, which then helped the government. The ECB Governing Council
tolerated this use of the ELA credit to bridge the gap, as no one wanted to pull
the plug on the country.
In the case of Ireland, the stock of ELA credit was used to compensate for two
rapid waves of capital flight that took place in 2008 and 2010 (see Chapter 7,
Figure 7.3). In the meantime, the outstanding credit has come down from the €
70 billion mentioned to only € 2.4 billion. The reason was partly that Ireland’s
economy recovered rapidly thanks to a huge real devaluation, as shown in the
previous chapter, but also, and more importantly, to Ireland having received
intergovernmental aid in exchange (see also Chapter 7). The largest chunk of the
reduction can be attributed to the fact that € 40 billion in ELA credit granted to
the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC), the bad bank created out of the
remainders of the near-bankrupt Anglo-Irish bank, was converted into low-
interest long-term government bonds with an average maturity of over 34 years
and handed over to the Bank of Ireland when IBRC defaulted in February
2013.78 That way the potential write-off losses were converted into long-term
interest losses, which are basically the same in present-value terms, but have the
advantage of not having to be reckoned in today’s accounts by the Bank of
Ireland.
For the Eurosystem, this conversion of ELA credit into government bonds
held by the Bank of Ireland was neutral, inasmuch as it continued to receive the
same interest from the Bank of Ireland as if the ELA credit had persisted.
However, by accepting the deal, the Eurosystem has effectively extended the
maturity of a refinancing credit, which originally was intended to be extremely

short-term, to the maturity of long-term government bonds, without demanding a
higher yield as the market would have done. This deal has nothing to do with
monetary policy, but is outright state financing, blatantly violating article 123 of
the EU Treaty and imposing part of the risk of default of the Irish state on the
Eurosystem without paying a risk premium.
The Irish example aroused the interest of other countries too. Cypriot
President Nikos Anastasiades wrote a letter to the EU Commission, the ECB,
and the IMF in June 2013 suggesting the same deal for his country.79 However,
his request has been rejected for the time being.
The repackaging from ordinary refinancing credit to ELA credit, and from
ELA credit to a more direct credit at reduced interest rates from the ECB system
or the rescue funds, shows that the ECB’s collateralization strategy is not at all
riskless, and wholly insufficient to protect the member states of the Eurosystem
from losses in the case of a sovereign bankruptcy. Repackaging risks does not
make them smaller, it only changes their appearance. With its policies, the ECB
has drifted far from its duty of conducting monetary policy, increasingly acting
instead as a lender of last resort for countries on an ongoing basis. Eventually,
EU taxpayers will be hurt by this strategy, as they will have to bear the ECB’s
losses or those of the intergovernmental rescue funds that bail out the ECB, or
the losses of subsequent transfer systems, yet to be established in the Eurozone,
that bail out the rescue funds.
1 See W. Münchau, The Meltdown Years. The Unfolding of the Global Economic Crisis, McGraw-Hill,
New York 2009; H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism. How the Financial Crisis Came about and What Needs to
Be Done Now, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2010; and A. S. Blinder, After the Music Stopped, Penguin
Press, New York 2013.
2 As the data depicted in the graph stem from the consolidated balance sheets of banks, they include
changes in the market value of claims to the extent the claims were reported in the banks’ trading books as
well as write-off losses at maturity. However, this effect cannot be dominant insofar as market values had
plummeted up to the peak of the crisis in August 2012 and went up thereafter, as markets calmed and
interest rates came down again. Obviously the graph does not show any particular abnormality around Q3
2012, as it should if the market revaluation were a strong effect. One of the reasons for the absence of
visible revaluation effects could be that, particularly in troubled times, banks tend to hold their claims in the
banking books, which spares them the task of reporting losses in market values.
3 For this and the following see Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics,
table 9E, available at: <http://www.bis.org/statistics/consstats.htm>.
4 See ‘Leveraging the Backstop: A Trillion Euro Insurance Policy for the Common Currency’, Spiegel
Online 
International, 
19 
October 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/leveraging-the-backstop-a-trillion-euro-insurance-policy-for-

the-common-currency-a-792641.html>.
5 See also H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Balances and the German Financial Account in
Light of the European Balance-of-Payments Crisis’, CESifo Working Paper No. 4051, 2012, figure 5,
available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp4051.pdf>.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Zahlungsbilanzstatistik, January 2014, p. 58, available at: <
http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Veroeffentlichungen/
Statistische_Beihefte_3/2014/2014_01_zahlungsbilanzstatistik.pdf?__blob= publicationFile>.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Zahlungsbilanzstatistik, January 2014, pp. 58–59.
8 In 2011 and 2012, Germany’s private capital export was small, however, at € 14 billion and € 35
billion, respectively.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Zahlungsbilanzstatistik, January 2014, p. 7.
10 International payments, which will be considered below, are also purely electronic transactions that do
not involve transporting cash. The printing-press metaphor is common in technical discussion when
referring to creating and transferring money and should not be taken at face value. In cases referring to
physical money, the context will make it clear.
11 Incidentally, the German interest revenue resulting from refinancing credit was greatly reduced after
the introduction of the euro, because the special profits that the Bundesbank used to make as a result of the
extensive use of the deutschmark in eastern Europe and Turkey are now socialized. See H. Feist und H.-W.
Sinn, ‘Eurowinners and Eurolosers: The Distribution of Seignorage Wealth in EMU’, European Journal of
Political Economy 13, 1997, pp. 665–689.
12 Including retained revaluation profits, the ECB’s equity capital was € 21 billion on 31 December
2013.
13 See J.-C. Trichet, ‘Supporting the Financial System and the Economy: Key ECB Policy Actions in the
Crisis’, Speech at a conference in Madrid organised jointly by Nueva Economía Fórum and the Wall Street
Journal, 22 June 2009, available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2009/html/sp090622.en.html>.
14 See J.-C. Trichet, ‘The ECB’s Enhanced Credit Support’, CESifo Working Paper No. 2833, October
2009, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp2833.pdf>. An overview of the
monetary policy of the West’s central banks and other rescue operations can be found in H.-W. Sinn,
Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 9: Rescue Attempts, in particular pp. 206 ff. and 215 ff.
15 See J.-C. Trichet, ‘The ECB’s Enhanced Credit Support’, October 2009.
16 According to the ECB’s harmonized rating scale, a ‘single A’ rating is a rating of at least ‘A3’ from
Moody’s and ‘A-’ from Fitch or Standard & Poor’s, while a ‘triple B’ rating is a rating of at least ‘Baa3’
from Moody’s and ‘BBB-’ from Fitch or Standard & Poor’s. See European Central Bank, Eurosystem
Credit 
Assessment 
Framework 
(ECAF), 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/paym/coll/risk/ecaf/html/index.en.html>.
17 Cf. also European Central Bank, Collateral Eligibility Requirements – A Comparative Study Across
Specific Frameworks, Frankfurt, July 2013; European Central Bank, ‘The Eurosystem Collateral
Framework throughout the Crisis’, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2013, p. 71 – 86; C. Hofmann, ‘Central
Bank Collateral and the Lehman Collapse’, Capital Markets Law Journal 6, 2011, pp. 456 - 469; J. Eberl
and C. Weber, ‘ECB Collateral Criteria: A Narrative Database 2001-2013’, ifo Working Paper No. 174,

February 2014, pp. 14–15.
18 See European Central Bank, Measures to Further Expand the Collateral Framework and Enhance the
Provision 
of 
Liquidity, 
press 
release, 
15 
October 
2008, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2008/html/pr081015.en.html>.
19 See European Central Bank, Monetary Policy, Instruments, Open Market Operations, Tender
Operations 
History, 
History 
of 
all 
ECB 
Open 
Market 
Operations, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/mopo/implement/omo/html/top_history.en.html>.
20 See European Central Bank, ECB Announces Measures to Support Bank Lending and Money Market
Activity, 
press 
release, 
8 
December 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2011/html/pr111208_1.en.html>.
21 See ‘Stabile Preise ohne monetäre Staatsfinanzierung’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 47, 24
February 2012, p. 14.
22 Between calendar week 50/2011 and calendar week 10/2012, deposit facilities increased by € 584
billion. See European Central Bank, Consolidated Financial Statement of the Eurosystem as at 16
December 
2011 
and 
9 
March 
2012, 
press 
release, 
20 
December 
2011, 
available 
at:
<https://www.ecb.int/press/pr/wfs/2011/html/fs111220.en.html> and 13 March 2012, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/wfs/2012/html/fs120313.en.html>, respectively.
23 On 15 October 2008, the ECB announced the ‘Temporary expansion of the collateral framework’ to
be effective from 22 October 2008 until the end of 2009, lowering the rating requirement for all assets
except ABS from single A to triple B. On 7 May 2009 it said that this expansion was to be extended until
the end of 2011. In March 2010, President Trichet signalled that it was the intention of the ECB Governing
Council to keep up this minimum credit threshold beyond 2011, which was then also officially announced
on 8 April 2010. This prolongation lacked an expiration date and is still in force. Refer also to European
Central Bank, Measures to Further Expand the Collateral Framework and Enhance the Provision of
Liquidity, 15 October 2008; European Central Bank, Technical Specifications for the Temporary Expansion
of 
the 
Collateral 
Framework, 
press 
release, 
17 
October 
2008, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2008/html/pr081017_2.en.html>; European Central Bank, Longer-Term
Refinancing 
Operations, 
press 
release, 
7 
May 
2009, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2009/html/pr090507_2.en.html>; J.-C. Trichet, Introductory Statement
Before the Plenary of the European Parliament, Brussels, 25 March 2010, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2010/html/sp100325.en.html>; European Central Bank, ECB Introduces
Graduated Valuation Haircuts for Lower-Rated Assets in its Collateral Framework as of 1 January 2011,
press 
release, 
8 
April 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2010/html/pr100408_1.en.html>; European Central Bank, ECB Reviews
Risk Control Measures in its Collateral Framework, press release, 28 July 2010, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2010/html/pr100728_1.en.html>.
24 On 27 April 2010 Standard & Poor’s reduced the rating of Greece to BB+, see Standard & Poor’s,
Greece Long-and Short-Term Ratings Lowered to ‘BB+/B’, Outlook Negative, ‘4’ Recovery Rating
Assigned to Sovereign Debt, 27 April 2010, available at: <http://www.standardandpoors.com/products-
services/articles/en/us/?assetID= 1245211893945>. Moody’s downgraded Portugal on 5 July 2011 to Ba2
and Ireland on 12 July 2011 to Ba1, see Moody’s, Rating Action: Moody’s Downgrades Portugal to Ba2
with a Negative Outlook from Baa1, 5 July 2011, available at: <http://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-
downgrades-Portugal-to-Ba2-with-a-negative-outlook-from?docid=PR_222043>; and Moody’s, Rating
Action: Moody’s Downgrades Ireland to Ba1. Outlook remains negative, 12 July 2011, available at:

<http://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-downgrades-Ireland-to-Ba1-outlook-remains-negative?
docid=PR_222257#>.
25 See European Central Bank, ECB Announces Change in Eligibility of Debt Instruments Issued or
Guaranteed 
by 
the 
Greek 
Government, 
press 
release, 
3 
May 
2010, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2010/html/pr100503.en.html>; European Central Bank, ECB Announces
the Suspension of the Rating Threshold for Debt Instruments of the Irish Government, press release, 31
March 2011, available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2011/html/pr110331_2.en.html>; European
Central Bank, ECB Announces Change in Eligibility of Debt Instruments Issued or Guaranteed by the
Portuguese 
Government, 
press 
release, 
7 
July 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2011/html/pr110707_1.en.html>; 
European 
Central 
Bank, 
ECB
Announces Change in Eligibility of Marketable Debt Instruments Issued or Guaranteed by the Cypriot
Government, 
press 
release, 
2 
May 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2013/html/pr130502_3.en.html>.
26 This decision made it possible to end the idiosyncratic exceptions for Greece, Ireland and Portugal.
See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2012/18’, Official Journal, L 218/20, 15 August 2012,
available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/l_21820120815en00200023.pdf>; also European
Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2013/5’, Official Journal, L 95/21, 5 April 2013, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/l_09520130405en00210021.pdf>.
27 See European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Collateral Data, 16 May 2013,
available 
at: 
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/pdf/collateral/collateral_data.pdf?
d8fde58106fc320aa93eb9244a487513>.
28 See N. Panigirtzoglou, G. Koo, S. MacGorain and M. Lehmann, ‘Flows & Liquidity. Who are the
Losers from Greek Debt Restructuring?’, J. P. Morgan, Global Asset Allocation, 6 May 2011.
29 For a detailed description see H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 6: Hot Potatoes, in
particular p. 115 ff.
30 See European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Collateral Data, 16 May 2013.
31 See European Central Bank, ‘Guideline ECB/2009/1’, Official Journal, L 36/59, 5 February 2009,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/l_03620090205en00590061.pdf>.
32 See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2011/25’, Official Journal, L 341/65, 22 December 2011,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/l_34120111222en00650066.pdf>.
33 See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2012/11’, Official Journal, L 175/17, 5 July 2012,
available at: <https://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/l_17520120705en00170018.pdf>. The lowering to triple B
is part of the ‘temporary framework’, which the ECB introduced in response to the crisis.
34 For the evolution of issuance volumes before and after the beginning of the crisis, see H.-W. Sinn,
Casino Capitalism, 2010, chapter 6, Fig. 6.1, p. 114.
35 See ‘Buffett Warns on Investment “Time Bomb”’, BBC News, 4 March 2003, available at:
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/2817995.stm>.
36 See ‘Zweifelhafte Werte’, Der Spiegel, No. 23, 6 June 2011, p. 62f, as well as ‘Auf schmalem Grat’,
Der Spiegel, No. 21, 23 May 2011, p. 60 f.
37 See ‘Fußball Spanien: Spanische Klubs dürfen auf Schuldenschnitt hoffen’, Handelsblatt, 12 March

2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.handelsblatt.com/fussball-spanien-spanische-klubs-duerfen-auf-
schuldenschnitt-hoffen/6314162.html>.
38 See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2008/11’, Official Journal, L 282/17, 25 October 2008,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/l_28220081025en00170018.pdf>.
39 See European Central Bank, Monetary and Financial Statistics, Short-Term European Paper (STEP),
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/stats/money/step/html/index.en.html>.
40 See European Central Bank, Assessment of STEP for Collateral Purposes in Eurosystem Credit
Operations, 
press 
release, 
15 
September 
2006, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2006/html/pr060915.en.html>.
41 See European Central Bank, Measures to Further Expand the Collateral Framework and Enhance the
Provision of Liquidity, 15 October 2008; for the prolongation see European Central Bank, Longer-Term
Refinancing Operations, 7 May 2009.
42 See European Central Bank, ‘Guideline ECB/2011/14’, Official Journal, L 331, 20 September 2011,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/02011o0014-20130103-en.pdf>.
43 For statistical data on the STEP market, see European Central Bank, Monetary and Financial
Statistics, 
Short-Term 
European 
Paper 
(STEP), 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/step/html/index.en.html>.
44 See A. White, ‘Euribor Should Be Overseen by EU Regulators, EBF Chief Says’, Bloomberg, 20 July
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-12/euribor-should-be-overseen-by-eu-
regulators-ebf-chief-says.html>.
45 See European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Eligibility Criteria and Assessment,
Marketable Assets, available at: <https://www.ecb.int/paym/coll/standards/marketable/html/index.en.html>.
46 Refer also to M. Brendel and S. Jost, ‘Die europäische Notenpresse gerät außer Kontrolle’, Die Welt,
6 
January 
2013, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.welt.de/finanzen/article112420942/Die-europaeische-
Notenpresse-geraet-ausser-Kontrolle.html>.
47 See European Central Bank, ‘Guideline ECB/2011/14’, 20 September 2011.
48 See European Central Bank, Adjustment of Risk Control Measures for Newly Issued Asset-Backed
Securities and for Uncovered Bank Bonds, press release, 20 January 2009, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2009/html/pr090120.en.html>.
49 European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Collateral Data, 16 May 2013.
50 M. Lewis gave a funny and telling example: ‘You have a dog, and I have a cat. We agree that they are
each worth a billion dollars. You sell me the dog for a billion, and I sell you the cat for a billion. Now we
are no longer pet owners, but Icelandic banks, with a billion dollars in new assets’; see M. Lewis,
Boomerang. Travels in the New Third World, W.W. Norton & Company, New York 2011, p. 17.
51 See S. Sirletti and E. Martinuzzi, ‘Italy Banks Said to Use State-Backed Bonds for ECB Loans’,
Bloomberg, 21 December 2011, available at: <http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-12-20/italian-banks-
are-said-to-use-state-guaranteed-bonds-to-receive-ecb-loans.html>; and J. Brennan, ‘Irish Banks Aid
Funding With Own-Use Bonds Amid Cyprus Woes’, Bloomberg, 28 March 2013, available at:
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-28/irish-banks-aid-funding-with-own-use-bonds-amid-cyprus-

woes-1-.html>. See also European Central Bank, Adjustment of Risk Control Measures for Newly Issued
Asset-Backed Securities and for Uncovered Bank Bonds, 20 January 2009; and European Central Bank,
‘Decision 
ECB/2013/6’, 
Official 
Journal, 
L 
95/22, 
5 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/l_09520130405en00220022.pdf> (accessed 7 February 2014).
52 See T. Alloway, ‘Greek Banks in € 6.4bn Bond Switch’, Financial Times, 6 November 2011,
available 
at: 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/a008a664-0898-11e1-9fe8-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2Z7qWa4rG>.
53 See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2011/25’, 22 December 2011, article 4, paragraph 1.
54 European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2011/25’, 22 December 2011, article 4, paragraph 1; refer
also, European Central Bank, Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework (ECAF).
55 See European Central Bank, ECB’s Governing Council Approves Eligibility Criteria for Additional
Credit 
Claims, 
press 
release, 
9 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120209_2.en.html>; also Banque de France, Eligibility
Criteria Regarding Additional Credit Claims, press release, 9 February 2012, available at:
<http://www.banque-france.fr/uploads/tx_bdfgrandesdates/2012-02-9-eligibility.pdf>.
56 See European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Collateral Data, 16 May 2013.
57 See M. Brendel and S. Jost, ‘EZB leistet sich gefährliche Regelverstöße’, Die Welt, 11 July 2013,
available 
at: 
http://www.welt.de/wirtschaft/article115063852/EZB-leistet-sich-gefaehrliche-
Regelverstoesse.html; also European Central Bank, Payments and Markets, Collateral, Eligibility Criteria
and Assessment, Marketable Assets.
58 See M. Brendel and C. Pauly, ‘Europe’s Central Bad Bank: Junk Bonds Weigh Heavy on ECB’,
Spiegel 
Online 
International, 
6 
June 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/europe-s-central-bad-bank-junk-bonds-weigh-heavy-on-ecb-a-
766856.html>; M. Brendel and S. Jost, ‘EZB leistet sich gefährliche Regelverstöße’, 11 July 2013.
59 See M. Brendel and S. Jost, ‘EZB leistet sich gefährliche Regelverstöße’, 11 July 2013, and J. Eberl
and C. Weber, ‘ECB Collateral Criteria: A Narrative Database 2001-2013’, February 2014, pp. 14–15.
60 See, for example, J. Rocholl, ‘Die Finanzflut der EZB ist gefährlich’, Handelsblatt, 29 February 2012,
available at: http://www.handelsblatt.com/meinung/gastbeitraege/gastkommentar-die-finanzflut-der-ezb-ist-
gefaehrlich/6267948.html>; and J. Rocholl, ‘Die EZB und die Kunst des Unmöglichen’, Handelsblatt, 14
May 2012; see also M. J. M. Neumann, ‘Die Europäische Zentralbank auf Abwegen’, Argumente zu
Marktwirtschaft und Politik, No. 116, Stiftung Marktwirtschaft und Politik, March 2012; A. Sibert, ‘The
Damaged 
ECB 
Legitimacy’, 
VoxEU, 
15 
September 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.voxeu.org/article/damaged-ecb-legitimacy>; S. Eijffinger and L. Hoogduin, ‘The European
Central Bank in (the) Crisis’, CESifo DICE Report, 10, No. 1, pp. 32–38, January 2012, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/dicereport112-forum6.pdf>.
61 See S. Ruhkamp, ‘Die Bundesbank fordert von der EZB bessere Sicherheiten’, Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung, 2 February 2012, available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/schuldenkrise-
die-bundesbank-fordert-von-der-ezb-bessere-sicherheiten-11667413.html>.
62 A similar argument was made by C. B. Blankart ‘Goldgräber bedrohen Euroland’, in D. Meyer (ed.),
Die Zukunft der Währungsunion. Chancen und Risiko des Euros, LIT-Verlag, Berlin 2012, pp. 291–295.
Another type of common-pool problem is described by Aaron Tornell and Frank Westermann. They argue

that under the euro, each single NCB has an incentive to over-extend the printing press as the burden of
higher inflation is imposed on all countries, while the benefits accrue at home. See A. Tornell, ‘Target2
Imbalances and the Dynamic Tragedy-of-the-Commons in the Eurozone’, UCLA Mimeo, September 2012;
A. Tornell and F. Westermann, ‘The Tragedy-of-the-Commons at the European Central Bank and the Next
Rescue Operation’, VoxEU, 22 June 2012, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/tragedy-commons-
european-central-bank>. See also C. B. Blankart, ‘Oil and Vinegar—A Positive Fiscal Theory of the Euro
Crisis’, forthcoming in Kyklos.
63 See also European Central Bank, ‘Guideline ECB/2011/14’, 20 September 2011, especially p. 51.
64 There is only general information available in European Central Bank, ‘Haircut Schedule for Assets
Eligible for Use as Collateral in Eurosystem Market Operations’, Monetary Policy, Collateral, Risk
Mitigation, 
Liquidity 
Categories, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2010/html/sp090728_1annex.en.pdf?
56d9b9db6fddaf7fcd28ebcd6706e630>.
65 See Greek Ministry of Finance, Rules for the Amendment of Securities, Issued or Guaranteed by the
Greek 
Government 
by 
Consent 
of 
the 
Bondholders, 
23 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.hellenicparliament.gr/en/Nomothetiko-Ergo/Anazitisi-Nomothetikou-Ergou?
law_id=3b426740-db7b-471a-9829-80a89a6518b5>.
66 See European Central Bank, Eligibility of Greek Bonds Used as Collateral in Eurosystem Monetary
Policy 
Operations, 
press 
release, 
28 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120228.en.html>.
67 See European Central Bank, Collateral Eligibility of Bonds Issued or Guaranteed by the Greek
Government, 
press 
release, 
20 
July 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.de/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120720.en.html>; and D. Szarek, ‘Jetzt drucken sich die
Griechen 
ihre 
Euro 
selbst’, 
Focus, 
25 
July 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.focus.de/finanzen/news/staatsverschuldung/banken-refinanzieren-sich-ueber-notkredite-die-
ezb-schaltet-auf-stur-also-schoepfen-sich-die-griechen-ihr-geld-selber_aid_786691.html>.
68 See also article 14.4. of the ECB Statute, Protocol of the Statute of the European System of Central
Banks 
and 
of 
the 
European 
Central 
Bank, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_statute_2.pdf>; and European Central Bank, Annual Report 1999, p.
98 f, available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/annrep/ar1999en.pdf>.
69 See Central Bank of Ireland, Financial Statement of the Central Bank of Ireland, items ‘Other Claims
on 
“Euro 
Area 
Credit 
Institutions” 
and 
“Other 
Assets”’, 
available 
at:
<http://www.centralbank.ie/polstats/stats/cmab/pages/money%20and%20banking.aspx>, Central Bank of
Greece, Monthly Balance Sheet, May 2013, items ‘Other Claims on Euro Area Credit Institutions
Denominated 
in 
Euro’ 
and 
‘Sundry’, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/financialstat201205_en.pdf>; and Central Bank of Cyprus,
Monthly Balance Sheets, April 2013, item ‘Other Claims on Euro Area Credit Institutions Denominated in
Euro’, 
available 
at:
<http://www.centralbank.gov.cy/media/pdf/BALANCE_SHEET_APRIL_2013_EN.pdf>. As of December
2013, the stock of ELA credit granted in Greece was € 19 billion, in Ireland € 2 billion, and in Cyprus € 10
billion.
70 See European Central Bank, Consolidated Financial Statement of the Eurosystem as at 31 December
2013, available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/wfs/2014/html/fs140108.en.html>. ELA credits are
not explicitly reported in the ECB balance sheet. However, the term ‘Other Claims on Euro Area Credit

Institutions in Euro’ is usually taken as an approximation. It reached a maximum of € 251 billion in June
2012.
71 See J. Asmussen, Statement by the ECB in the Proceedings Before the Federal Constitutional Court,
Karlsruhe, 11 June 2013, to the Constitutional Complaint 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1439/12 and 2 BvR
1824/12, 2 BvE 6/12.
72 Information provided by the Bundesbank. Contrary to this, it has been argued that the interest remains
with the NCB and flows to the national treasury. See W. Buiter, J. Michels, and E. Rahbari, ‘ELA: An
Emperor Without Clothes?’, Global Economics View, Citigroup Global Markets, 2011; on p. 2 the authors
claim: ‘article 14.4 thus highlights that, as the decisions regarding ELA are taken by the NCBs themselves,
the costs and liabilities arising from ELA support are not pooled or shared by the other members of the
Eurosystem. In particular, unlike operations carried out as part of the functions of the Eurosystem, any
resulting gains or losses are not pooled and shared with the other members of the Eurosystem’.
73 See ‘Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank’, Official Journal of the European Union, C 83/230 EN, 30 March 2010, article 33.2.
74 The equity capital in all cases is measured including the revaluation reserves. The figures mentioned
refer to November 2012 (Greece), February 2011 (Ireland) and April 2013 (Cyprus). To understand the
calculation, let us look at the Irish figures in detail. In February 2011, the Irish stock of ELA credit (other
claims on euro area credit institutions in euro and other assets) was € 70.3 billion. However, as the Irish
capital key was 1.6% and the aggregate stock of base money in the Eurosystem was € 1.057 trillion, the
present value of the Irish interest entitlement from this pool under static conditions was only € 16.8 billion.
The Bank of Ireland’s capital and reserves amounted to € 1.7 billion, and its revaluation account, which is
also equity capital, was € 0.2 billion, the total stock of equity therefore being € 1.9 billion, and the sum of
equity and present value of interest entitlements was € 18.7 billion. Thus, the ratio of ELA credit generated
in the Irish banking system, implying interest to be delivered to the pool, and the sum of equity and the
present value of interest entitlements from the pool, was 3.76, implying that the former was 276% bigger
than the latter.
75 See K. C. Engelen, ‘From Deauville to Cyprus’, The International Economy, Spring 2013, pp. 51–53,
73–76.
76 Anastasiades further cites the confession made at a press conference on 28 March 2013 by the Greek
NCB Governor at the time of the ELA credit, Panicos Demetriades: ‘Emergency Liquidity Assistance for
Laiki reached 60 percent of the GDP of Cyprus. This was not pleasant, but we had to sustain Laiki in order
for the elections to take place’; see also K. C. Engelen, ‘From Deauville to Cyprus’, Spring 2013.
77 See H.-J. Dübel, Bewertung des Bankenrestrukturierungsprogramms in Zypern und seiner
Auswirkungen auf Konzepte und Institutionen der Bankenunion, Kurzgutachten im Auftrag der SPD-
Bundestagsfraktion, 
Finpolconsult, 
Berlin, 
18 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.finpolconsult.de/mediapool/16/169624/data/Zypern_Bankenrestrukturierung_Finpolconsult_4_
and H.-J. Dübel, Creditor Participation in Banking Crisis in the Eurozone—A Corner Turned? Empirical
Analysis of Current Bank Liability Management and Restructuring Policies with Conclusions for the
European Bank Restructuring and Resolution Framework, Finpolconsult, Berlin, 28 June 2013, available
at:
<http://www.finpolconsult.de/mediapool/16/169624/data/Duebel_Bank_Creditor_Participation_Eurozone_F
78 See Central Bank of Ireland, Central Bank Statement, 7 February 2013, available at:
<http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/CentralBankStatement.aspx>. The former ECB
chief economist Jürgen Stark classified this as prohibited state financing; see J. Stark, ‘Irlands verbotener

“Deal” 
mit 
der 
Notenbank’, 
Die 
Welt, 
14 
March 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.welt.de/finanzen/article113645427/Irlands-verbotener-Deal-mit-der-Notenbank.html>.
79 See R. Berschens, ‘Wieder Notruf aus Zypern’, Handelsblatt, No. 116, 20 June 2013, p. 10.

CHAPTER 6
The European Balance-of-Payments
Crisis
The Target Balances—Ballooning Target Balances—Why Target Balances are a Measure of
Credit—Target Balances as a Public Capital Export—Inside Money, Outside Money, and the
Local Printing Press—Crowding out Refinancing Credit in the North
The Target Balances
While it is extremely difficult to understand and keep an overview of the
multitude of ECB policy decisions that helped the crisis countries to draw
replacement credit from the local printing presses, the so-called Target balances
—first published and analysed by the Ifo Institute—make starkly, and
accurately, clear the full dimension of the ECB’s rescue activities.1 Until
recently, political decision-makers at the European or national level knew very
little about Target balances and, apparently, often preferred it that way in order
to spare themselves the burden of having to deal with the issue, exculpating
themselves with an allusion to the independence of the ECB. However, after the
issue became a much-talked-about topic in financial circles and the rating
agency Moody’s changed the outlook of Germany from ‘stable’ to ‘negative’,
emphasizing Germany’s Target risk, 2 the political silence has come to an end
and spawned a wide range of scholarly publications.3
The issue became a hot political topic when Jens Weidmann, the Bundesbank
president, expressed his concern about the Bundesbank’s Target claims, asking
in the letter mentioned in the previous chapter for them to be collateralized, and
complaining about the low collateral standards for refinancing credit.4
Weidmann waited several months to write his letter, during which the
Bundesbank kept quiet about the Target issue while it debated it internally in
depth. With this letter, Weidmann distanced himself from the previous stance of
the Bundesbank, which had maintained that the Target balances were mere
statistical entries, a normal by-product of money creation in the European
monetary system.5 This position had been criticized, amongst others, by former
Bundesbank President Helmut Schlesinger, during whose tenure in office the

Maastricht Treaty was adopted.6 With Weidmann’s letter the Bundesbank now
made its concern clear, namely that the Target balances amongst the national
central banks (NCBs) had grown very large and could pose a significant burden
for the Eurozone’s NCBs. While the ECB has not published Target balance
panel data up to this day, it has in the meantime acknowledged the accuracy and
definition of the data in a semi-official publication in CESifo Forum, 7 as well
as, indirectly, through statements by its President confirming that the ECB
monitors the data virtually on a daily basis.8
Behind the Target balances is the same refinancing credit given by the NCBs
that was discussed in the previous sections. At first sight they appear to be
nothing special, but they actually reflect the amount of central bank credit that
has been issued in excess of the liquidity needs for transactions within the
NCBs’ national jurisdictions. This excess money is used by the economic agents
of the country in question to purchase goods and assets abroad, and to pay off
external debt. Thus, the Target balances mean something fundamentally
different from simply providing the necessary liquidity for a national economy
to conduct its transactions, i.e. the liquidity that moves from one account to
another, but stays within the country. In fact, the balances enable a country to
sustain a net inflow of goods or assets from abroad, or to repay foreign credit, by
virtue of its NCB providing a continuous overflow of refinancing credit, akin to
a personal overdraft facility being added to the personal checking account.
This excess liquidity is a direct consequence of the lowering of the standards
for eligible collateral that the country’s commercial banks must pledge at their
NCB to receive refinancing credit. Conversely, in the core countries,
economically speaking, the Target balances measure the public international
credit provided to the GIPSIC countries through the refinancing operations of
the ECB system. This, in effect, is nothing other than the public rescue packages
EFSF, ESM, and whatever else they are called, which the parliaments in Europe
have laboriously agreed on. The differences lie in the national recipients—banks
or states–– and the credit conditions in detail, but not in the economic substance.
The extra refinancing credit measured by the Target balances explains why
the capital imports of the crisis-hit countries were able to continue during the
first years of the crisis (as Figure 2.1 showed), albeit at reduced volumes, despite
the crisis having had its roots precisely in the fact that the capital markets
shunned these countries. This extra refinancing credit was a rescue package that
predated all other rescue packages—or, to recall the above image, it was the
weapon wielded by the ECB which, as a white knight, came to the rescue when
the capital markets ceased to be available. For reasons that will become clearer

later, the extra refinancing credit showing up in the Target balances is called
‘Target credit’ in this book. The volume of Target credit that the GIPSIC
countries have drawn far exceeds the volume of the official rescue credit.
The issue is technically complex, and the casual reader cannot be expected to
be able to understand it all at first go. It is, however, of paramount importance to
understanding what is going on in the Eurozone, much more important than all
the rest of the rescue packages combined. The dynamics of the evolution of
Target balances has ended up putting a substantial share of the foreign wealth of
the creditor nations on the line. This and the following chapters will attempt to
untangle this complexity, step by step, and make the issue understandable to
everyone.
Target is the name of the settlement system through which international euro
transactions between banks in the Eurozone are processed. It is an acronym for a
complex expression (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross settlement
Express Transfer system) that does not convey much about its meaning. The
Target system channels and measures payment orders between the national
central banks (NCBs) in the Eurozone that result from orders given by public
and private financial institutions to their respective commercial banks. A Target
deficit of an NCB is a net outflow of payment orders to other countries, or, in
economics parlance, a balance-of-payments deficit. Conversely, a Target surplus
is a net inflow of payment orders from other countries, or a balance-of-payments
surplus.9 Heuristically, we may also speak of international money flows,
although this is not entirely precise, since the money, in the sense of deposits of
commercial banks with their respective central banks, is eliminated in the
country from where the payment order originated and created anew in the
country of destination.
Sometimes, the term Target2 is used instead of Target, in order to refer to the
second iteration of the system, which came into force in 2007. But this is of little
relevance. The differences between the first and the second Target systems are
only of a technical nature and have no bearing upon the economic interpretation
of the Target account as measuring balance-of-payments imbalances.10 Thus the
‘2’ behind the acronym has no real economic meaning and will be disregarded in
this book.
The Target system captures only the electronic movement of money, i.e. the
international money transfers. There are no statistics on the physical flow of
money, of the kind that would be transported in a suitcase. Since the payment
flows in the Eurozone are not restricted, while cash transport is controlled, it can
be assumed that physical cash transport within the Eurozone is relatively small.

A certain movement of cash across borders occurs, of course, through tourism
and guest workers paying visits to their home countries inside and outside the
Eurozone (such as Turkey and the eastern European EU countries), which is an
effect of some importance in Germany. Potentially, an issue similar to that of the
Target balances arises, an aspect that will be discussed in Chapter 8.11
Within the Eurozone, payments are continuously flowing to and from
merchants and financial institutions both within countries and across borders, but
only cross-border transactions are captured by the Target balances. People live in
one country, buy from another, and export to a third. Shares of stock, bonds,
property, and whole factories are bought and sold across borders. New credit
will be drawn, and old debts will be repaid. These transactions always lead to
payment orders, but as a rule to no net payment orders that would build up a
balance for a given country, since inflows and outflows net each other out. Such
a situation is known as a balance-of-payments equilibrium.12
A balance-of-payments equilibrium between countries is not the same thing as
a current account equilibrium. The latter means, roughly speaking, that a country
exports as much in goods and services as it imports. However, a country can
have a current account deficit because it imports more than it exports, while its
balance of payments is in equilibrium, because it is receiving an inflow of credit
that finances the current account deficit.
Let’s take Greece. Greece buys more goods from abroad than it exports.
Therefore, it requires money to cover the shortfall. To get the funding, it taps the
international capital markets. Money flows, for example, from a French bank
through a Greek bank to one of its customers, who in turn transfers it to
Germany because he wants to import a German car. The money comes from
abroad and flows abroad once again. The Greek balance of payments is in
equilibrium. This is the way it was before the financial crisis.
In a country like Germany, which has an export surplus, it was the other way
around. Germany enjoyed an inflow of money from abroad because it exported
more than it imported; it used the funds to purchase bonds, shares of stock,
property or other assets abroad, or to provide credit to foreign borrowers. Money
flowed for instance from Germany via the Benelux countries to French banks,
from where it was forwarded to Greece.
In all countries, money flowed in both directions across borders, but there
were no net flows of money across borders. The Target balances or the balance
of payments were roughly zero, i.e. there was a balance-of-payments
equilibrium. Figure 6.1 illustrates the situation by way of a three-country
example where, for the moment, only the solid arrows are considered.

Figure 6.1 Payment flows in a balance-of-payments equilibrium and a balance-of-payments crisis
Source: Illustrated by the Ifo Institute.
A balance-of-payments imbalance occurs when more money flows across
borders in one direction than in the other, i.e. when outflows and inflows don’t
net out and a balance remains. If, for instance, the Greek car buyer does not get a
loan from France, but wishes to purchase the car nonetheless by transferring
money already existing in Greece, a Target deficit or balance-of-payments
deficit will result, since now the same amount of money will have left Greece as
before, but less money will have flowed into the country. If all other things
remain equal, a surplus will arise in France, since less money has been
transferred to Greece, while the German balance of payments remains in
equilibrium. Of course, in this situation it is likely that the flow of credit from
Germany to France ceases, since France no longer needs the credit. In this latter
case, the balance-of-payments surplus in our example occurs in Germany, not
France.

Note that this example is for didactical purposes only. In reality, the flow of
credit went from Germany into the large pool represented by the international
capital market, from where France was drawing its funds before it lent them to
Greece, without France being able to assess the origins of these funds.
Moreover, there were substantial direct flows from Germany to Greece. At the
present level of abstraction, however, these qualifications can be disregarded.
During the crisis, private capital flows not only dried up, for some countries
and over certain periods, they even reversed their direction, since there was
outright capital flight, primarily taking the form of lenders deciding not to roll
over outstanding loans and demanding repayment. This happened in particular
with European interbank credit, which is typically short-term and can easily be
repatriated by not rolling it over.
In the above example this is represented by the dashed arrows from Greece to
France and from France to Germany. Greece now has to issue net payment
orders to other countries not only for buying goods from there, but also for
redeeming the existing debt.
Balance-of-payments imbalances such as those between Eurozone countries
can also occur in principle among regions within a country, or between the
Eurozone and the rest of the world. However, the probability of such imbalances
emerging on a large scale is very small.
Within individual European countries, fiscal equalization schemes make sure
that regional and local administrations are supported and strictly controlled if
they run into financial problems. The restrictions prevent excessive borrowing
and thus make a sudden stop of private capital flows or even a capital flight
unlikely. Moreover, if a region nevertheless does run into financial stress that the
market does not alleviate, there is often public credit from other regions to help
out, which means that such regions will be able to avoid balance-of-payments
deficits. That is why no shunning of particular regions by private lenders within
the European states has been observed.
In the US things are a bit different, as there is no formal fiscal equalization
scheme between the different federal states and the implicit shock absorption
through federal institutions or the federal unemployment system is very small.13
However, there are other institutional constraints that imply a limitation and
settlement of Target-like imbalances. (See Chapter 7, Section How Target-Like
Balances are Settled in the USA.)
Externally, with regard to countries outside the currency zone, flexible
exchange rates and different currencies usually make sure that goods and capital
flows balance out. Larger cross-border currency movements occur only when the
central banks hoard foreign currency in order to influence the exchange rate.

Between the private sectors of different currency areas there are no significant
net flows of foreign currency, since there is usually not much use for a currency
outside the country where it serves as legal tender. A notable exception is the
dollar, which is a medium of exchange throughout the world.
A distinction is normally made in international payment transactions between
payments within the framework of the current account, and the capital account.
The current account balance covers transactions related to the acquisition of
goods of current production, services—including interest on credit operations—
and gifts. The capital account, in turn, measures payments resulting from the
exchange of assets, in particular the granting or repayment of credit. The cross-
border sale of an asset makes it possible for the seller to buy something else, just
as when s/he ‘sells’ an IOU, which is one way to interpret the taking out of a
loan. IMF statistics sometimes define the capital account much more narrowly
and use the term ‘financial account’ for most of what economists label capital
account. This terminology is, however, not common in economics parlance. For
the purposes of this book, the term ‘capital account’ covers credit of all kinds,
including short-term interbank credit and direct investment, as well as all kinds
of asset purchases, including financial assets and real assets such as stocks or
real estate, the latter qualifying as direct investment if the buyer acquires a
sufficiently large ownership share. Although we will see that changes in Target
imbalances also measure a public capital flow between the NCBs, the term
‘capital flows’ will usually, unless otherwise stated, be meant to refer to what is
ordinarily understood by a capital flow, i.e. credit provided by private agents and
by fiscal entities.
Based on the above, one can say that a balance of payments is in equilibrium
when the capital account and the current account net each other out, and in
disequilibrium when they don’t. In the Eurozone, therefore, a balance-of-
payments or Target deficit can be defined as the portion of the current account
deficit that is not financed by net private and fiscal capital imports, or,
equivalently, as the sum of the current account deficit and the net private and
fiscal capital export. This definition will be useful later when the relationship
between the Target balances and the current account balances is discussed.14
Figure 6.1 also shows a printing machine and a paper shredder, both being
meant metaphorically only. They come into play because the activities of
commercial and central banks automatically sterilize the effects of international
money flows on the stocks of money circulating within the countries. The
outflow of money from Greece goes hand-in-hand with the creation of new
money by way of refinancing operations, since otherwise the stock of money
circulating in Greece would shrink and internal transactions would be hindered.

The inflow of money into Germany, in turn, leads to additional liquidity that
German banks do not need and which they therefore choose to lend to the
Bundesbank, with the effect that the money is removed from the economy.
These aspects will be discussed in more detail below.
Ballooning Target Balances
Whereas Figure 6.1 only serves to provide a basic understanding of the
processes involved, Figure 6.2 shows exact figures from a database that Timo
Wollmershäuser and the author compiled from the balance sheets of the
Eurozone’s NCBs or, in the cases where individual NCBs do not or did not
publish such data, from the statistics of the IMF.15 This panel data set has been
replicated by many researchers after we published and interpreted it.16 The
figures are contained in the balance sheets of the NCBs because, as will be
discussed later in more detail, they constitute claims and liabilities among the
central banks. Usually they are fairly well tucked away under obscure headings
and mixed with other entries, so that it is not very easy to extract them. Some
countries give the data only to the IMF, from whose publications it must then be
extracted. The deadlines for publication vary as well. To this day, no
comprehensive primary statistic on Target balances is available from the ECB
itself. But the way we calculate these balances based on the NCB balance sheets
and complemented by the IMF statistics is now even being used by the ECB
itself, and has become the norm around the world.17

Figure 6.2 Cumulative balance-of-payments imbalances in the Eurozone (January 2003–– December 2013)
Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank, Database, Time series BBK01.EU8148B; De Nederlandsche Bank,
Statistics, Financial Institutions, Domestic MFI-statistics (monetary), Balance sheet of the Nederlandsche
Bank; Banco de España, Boletín Estadístico, Balance sheet of the Banco de España; Banca d’Italia,
Statistical Database, Bank of Italy balance-sheet aggregates; for the other countries see International
Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, net claims on Eurosystem (IFS code xxx12e0szkm),
Currency issued (IFS code xxx14a00zkm), and Currency put into circulation (IFS code xxx14m00zkm).
Note: The Target balance data for Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, and Spain stem directly from their
central bank balance sheets. For the other countries, we calculate a precise proxy from the International
Financial Statistics of the International Monetary Fund, following the methodology of H.-W. Sinn and T.
Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’,
2012, Appendix, p. 504ff. The ‘Target claims’ are computed as the difference between ‘Net claims on
Eurosystem’ and the ‘Intra-Eurosystem claims related to banknote issuance’. The latter is calculated as the
difference between ‘Currency issued’ and ‘Currency put into circulation’. This chart was created with the
newest data available as of 26 February 2014, which includes the values for all countries as of December
2013.

The figure shows the evolution within the Eurozone of the balance-of-
payments or Target balances for a northern euro bloc that includes Germany, the
Netherlands, Finland, and Luxembourg, and the GIPSIC countries (Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy and Cyprus). As before, GIPSIC stands for those
countries receiving official aid from intergovernmental rescue programmes or in
the form of government bond purchases by the ECB. The dotted curve for the
northern euro bloc shows the accumulated balance-of-payments surpluses,
known as Target claims, measured by the left-hand scale, and the solid curve for
the GIPSIC shows the accumulated balance-of-payments deficits, i.e. the Target
liabilities, the values of which can be read on the right-hand scale. All figures
refer to stocks and not current flows; the flows are illustrated by the slopes of the
curves. Both scales are divided into identical intervals and differ only in their
algebraic sign. It can be seen that until the summer of 2007 the balances were
roughly zero, Target claims amounting then to just around 1.3% of the
Eurozone’s 2007 GDP.
After August 2007, however, when the European interbank market stumbled
for the first time, significant imbalances started to develop. Quite remarkably,
the curves for the GIPSIC countries and the northern euro bloc paralleled each
other, even though they refer only to subsets of euro countries and the balances
add up to zero only in the aggregate, as will be explained further below. Since
the banks of the northern euro bloc, as well as the banks of countries that acted
as intermediaries for European capital flows such as France or Belgium, were
now lending abroad only hesitantly, the GIPSIC countries, all of which had
inherited large current account deficits from the pre-crisis credit bubble, had to
finance their goods purchases with money that was not being replenished with
inflows from abroad. What is worse, in some cases they also had to finance the
repayment of prior credit taken abroad. They covered the shortfall, as discussed
above, by drawing refinancing credit from their NCBs, something made possible
by the lowering of collateral requirements that enabled more and more collateral
to be eligible for refinancing credit purposes. The NCBs provided this additional
credit by printing the money and lending it to their commercial banks, which
then, in turn, used it to carry out net payments to other euro countries in a
volume that is measured by the Target balances.
In spring 2011, when the Ifo Institute figures on Target balances were first
published, with Germany holding just over € 300 billion in Target claims, some
readers said that the sums would go back down soon and that the latest
developments already showed that things were quieting down. Far from it. From
April 2011 to August 2012, Germany’s Target claims rose by around € 85 billion
per quarter, or € 28 billion per month. Germany’s Target claims peaked in

August 2012 at € 751 billion. Similar developments occurred in the other
countries of the northern euro bloc. In August 2012, the total Target claims held
by the northern bloc amounted to € 1, 060 billion, or 11.2% of the Eurozone’s
GDP of that year. On the flip side of the coin, by August 2012 the Target
liabilities of the GIPSIC countries had reached a level of € 1, 002 billion. As it
turned out, the Target balances exploded.18
However, as the chart shows, the balances declined after September 2012. As
will be explained in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8, this happened because
intergovernmental fiscal rescue credit was being paid out to the crisis countries
and because the ECB and the rescue fund ESM promised to buy the government
bonds of crisis-afflicted countries should these countries run into acute financial
difficulties. These guarantees have induced foreign investors to buy the
government bonds of the GIPSIC countries and, indirectly, rekindled confidence
in these countries’ private assets. The incoming public and private payment
orders have reduced these countries’ Target debt.
For the discussion of the economics involved it is useful to differentiate
between domestic and external money or, in short, inside and outside money.19 I
label outside money the money which circulates in one Eurozone country, but
originated in another through liquidity-creating operations, i.e. refinancing credit
given to commercial banks or asset purchases from them, that was then
transferred to this country by way of payment orders through the Target system.
Inside money, in turn, is defined as money that was created by refinancing credit
or asset purchases in the same country where it circulates. Given these
definitions, the dashed curve in Figure 6.2 thus measures the stock of outside
money that arrived in the northern euro bloc, while the solid curve shows money
created in the GIPSIC countries that was used for international payment orders
and became outside money elsewhere. The similarity of the curves suggests that
the outside money circulating in the northern euro bloc did indeed largely
originate in the GIPSIC countries.
Figure 6.3 provides a more differentiated depiction of the Target balances at
the time of their peak, in August 2012. It can be seen that Germany,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Finland had all amassed significant stocks of
outside money or, equivalently, Target claims, while the GIPSIC countries had
become Target debtors, because they produced more money via refinancing
credit or asset purchases than they needed for internal circulation, sending it
abroad to redeem their debts or to buy assets and goods. The GIPSIC countries
are joined by Austria, Belgium, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Malta, but the liabilities
of the latter are relatively small. The Target balances within the Eurosystem add

up to zero, including an own Target balance that accumulated for the ECB itself,
whose origin is explained in a footnote.20
Figure 6.3 Target balances by country (peak values August 2012)
Source: See Figure 6.2.
Note: The countries not mentioned in Figure 6.2 are calculated in the same manner as Greece, Cyprus,
Finland, Portugal, or Luxembourg from IMF data. For the calculations, see H.-W. Sinn and T.
Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’,
2012, Appendix, p. 504ff.
Obviously, the Deutsche Bundesbank was, by a wide margin, the
Eurosystem’s largest Target creditor. By August 2012 it accounted for no less
than 70% of the total Target claims in the Eurosystem, although it held only 27%
of the ECB’s liable capital. In per capita terms, however, Luxembourg topped
the list with € 226, 400, followed by Finland with € 11, 700, Germany with € 9,
200, and the Netherlands with € 7, 500.

On the side of the Target debtors, Spain stood out with a Target debt of € 434
billion, followed by Italy with € 289 billion, Greece with € 107 billion, Ireland
with € 91 billion, Portugal with € 71 billion, and Cyprus with € 10 billion. It is
noteworthy that Belgium and Austria, with € 34 billion and € 41 billion,
respectively, also showed substantial Target debt levels. In per capita terms
Ireland topped the list, with a Target debt of € 19, 800, followed by Cyprus with
€ 11, 600, Greece with € 9, 500, Spain with € 9, 400, Portugal with € 6, 700,
Austria with € 4, 900, Italy with € 4, 700, and Belgium with € 3, 100.
Why Target Balances are a Measure of Credit
Balance-of-payments imbalances always measure international credit between
monetary authorities, a form of public credit. Usually they occur when foreign
currency reserves are depleted or accumulated in exchange for goods or assets.
In the Eurosystem, what is accumulated are Target claims and liabilities instead
of foreign currency reserves, but otherwise the situation is similar.
Nevertheless, the case is not obvious to the non-economist, since normally the
granting of credit is accompanied by a handing over of money. It is legitimate to
wonder whether, and how, a creditor NCB holding a Target claim has lent
money to another NCB that bears a Target liability. The answer is, of course,
that it hasn’t. The credit relationship arises in an entirely different sense.
Consider the example of a Spaniard purchasing an asset from a seller in the
Netherlands. This purchase causes the Dutch central bank to carry out a payment
order on behalf of the Central Bank of Spain, which itself acts on behalf of the
Spanish commercial bank of the buyer of the asset. The Dutch central bank
makes the payment to the commercial bank of the Dutch seller, and in exchange
it acquires a claim against the Spanish central bank, or, more precisely, against
the Eurosystem, which itself receives a claim against the Spanish central bank.
The Dutch central bank pays the Dutch seller, and by doing so on behalf of the
Spanish central bank, in effect it gives the latter a credit.
It is akin to me lending money to a friend who forgot his wallet so that he can
pay, say, the plumber’s bill. By carrying out the payment, I am granting my
friend credit (giving him a loan), acquiring in the process a claim against him.
The only difference is that, come evening, my friend will repay the loan,
whereas the Target claim can remain in principle for ever, and can never be
called due. Spain, then, receives the assets without having to deliver any goods
or assets in return other than the Target debt title. And this does not only apply
to assets. It doesn’t make any difference what is acquired with the money that

the Dutch central bank pays out to the seller’s account—goods, services or
securities, property or a company, or a simple debit note that ceases to exist
when the debt is repaid. The procedure is always the same.
The analogy with the friend also differs from the Target case insofar as I can
always decide whether I want to help my friend out of the tight spot or not. In
the Target case, the Dutch central bank has no leeway to decide. It is obliged to
carry out the payment. That is the way the Eurosystem operates.
By carrying out the payment order, the Dutch central bank creates money that
then circulates in the Netherlands. Normally, it creates money by giving
refinancing credit to commercial banks or buying assets from them. In the
example explaining the Target balances, however, it does not receive a claim on
the commercial banks nor titles to private assets, but claims on the ECB system
instead.
The net payment orders from Spain, both in the example and in reality, reduce
the stock of money circulating in Spain, since the buyer of the asset relinquishes
a deposit with his commercial bank, which in turn relinquishes money deposited
with its central bank. This is the link between the generous refinancing policy of
the ECB system, made possible by lowering the collateral requirements as
discussed above, and the rise in the Spanish Target balance. The last section of
this chapter will explain this in greater detail. With a less generous policy, the
credit from the printing press would have been scarcer, credit conditions would
have been more attractive for foreign lenders to Spain, in the sense that Spanish
interest rates net of risk premia would have been higher, prompting more foreign
credit to flow to Spain, and implying a higher volume of reverse payment orders
from other countries to Spain that would have reduced Spain’s Target liabilities.
And perhaps the Spanish buyer of the Dutch asset would have purchased
domestic assets instead.
Target was not originally intended to serve as a source of credit between the
NCBs. As Helmut Schlesinger, a former president of the Bundesbank, explained,
the Target system was supposed to serve solely as a clearing house for financial
flows without credit-granting arising as a result.21 It was thought at the time that
the Target credit would only remain overnight and be netted off almost at once,
and so indeed it was until 2007.
Schlesinger also argued that, at the time, the idea was that international
payment orders would be carried out by private clearing houses that provided
credit to one another in case the balances between them did not net out to zero,
rather than having the Eurosystem provide the credit. Indeed, there are private
payment orders between commercial banks in Europe, as well as within
multinational banks that maintain internal payment systems, that do not go via

Target. When these payments are not settled, a private international credit flows
between these institutions which is not, and should not, be tallied to the Target
balances, given that these balances measure public rather than private
international credit.22
As will be explained in detail in Chapter 7, Target-like balances can also arise
in the US, but as the US payment system is basically private, though publicly
controlled, they must be settled annually. Thus, imbalances of the European
magnitude cannot happen in the US system. In the Eurozone the Target positions
are kept open and there is no settlement mechanism. The creditor countries’
NCBs must content themselves with an everlasting bookkeeping claim, and can
find relief only in the fact that the entire ECB system guarantees the Target
claims by socializing bilateral claims on a daily basis. In the above example, the
Dutch NCB first acquires a claim on the Spanish NCB; at the end of the day,
however, this claim is transformed into a claim on the ECB and, conversely, the
liability of the Spanish NCB becomes one to the ECB, or better, to the
Eurosystem.23 Therefore, should the Spanish NCB default, all surviving NCBs
share in the losses, provided the Eurosystem as such survives.
Given that the Target stocks are credit, it is logical that they yield interest
revenue. Indeed, the interest rate equals the main refinancing rate, i.e. the rate
applied to commercial banks that receive refinancing credit from their respective
NCBs.24 Until October 2008, this rate was 4.5%, but was thereafter steadily
lowered until it reached a level of only 1% in May 2009. On 11 July 2012 it was
lowered even further, to 0.75%, on 8 May 2013 it was lowered to 0.5%, and on
13 November 2013 to 0.25%, where it stands as of this writing. This rate is far
lower than the average inflation rate in the Eurozone, which hovered around 2%
between 2008 and 2012, and decreased to 1.4% in 2013 and to 0.8% in January
2014. The interest accrued is added yearly to the Target stocks and carried over
from year to year as compound interest.
The fact that interest is charged and added to the balance qualifies somewhat
the above assertion regarding Figure 6.1, according to which the chart’s curves
depict the stocks of central bank money flowing electronically across borders.
The assertion has to be modified to take account of the interest accrued, which is
included in the balance sheets as well. But since this rate was nearly always at or
below 1% over the period in question, the quantitative difference between the
balances and the sum of cross-border money flows is negligible. In fact, the
interpretation of the balances as credit is all the more accurate as a result, since
credits that have been granted at different times can only reasonably be
compared when cumulative interest payments are added.

Thus, an NCB with a negative Target balance must pay interest to the ECB
and, conversely, the NCBs of countries with a positive Target balance receive
interest income from the Eurosystem. The question arises, why is this so? After
all, interest payments among the Eurozone NCBs are irrelevant, since interest
charges and interest income are distributed among the NCBs according to their
respective capital keys at the ECB. It is as if one spouse in a community–
property marriage pays the other spouse interest on the purchase of a car. The
money paid in interest is not gone from the household, since it belongs to the
partners, before and after payment, in equal measure. The answer can only be
that the creators of the system took into account the possibility of insolvency of
one of the NCBs or an exit from the Eurosystem, since in that case the interest
charged to this NCB goes into the remaining claims of the ECB system. If, say,
Greece should leave the Eurozone, the remaining NCBs keep their claims on
Greece, including interest and compound interest. Without this possibility in the
background, the interest on the Target debt is meaningless.
Target Balances as a Public Capital Export
The reason for the credit-like nature of the balances lies deeper than in the
necessities of double bookkeeping, since the net flow of money that leads to
Target balances stands vis-à-vis a real flow of goods and/or assets (including the
‘repurchase of private debt titles’, i.e. the redemption of a debt). This net flow of
goods and assets must be booked in the NCBs’ balance sheets as claims and
liabilities, since it would otherwise amount to gifts from one national economy
to another. To be sure, the private sellers of export goods receive their money
and are therefore content enough. But this money is actually a claim on their
own NCB that sits on the liability side of its balance sheet. The claim of this
NCB on other NCBs, or the Eurosystem, represents the sole countervalue for the
national economy of the country that has exported these goods or assets.
It is therefore logical for the change in the Target balances to be indeed
booked as capital flows under the line labelled ‘Capital Investments Abroad’ (or
with a similar label) in the national balance-of-payments statistics. It is also
logical for the Target stock, as reported in the NCB balance sheets, to be tallied
as part of a country’s net foreign asset position. The reader may recall the
discussion on the rapid rise in the net foreign asset positions after the euro
announcement in Chapter 2, in the context of Figures 2.9 and 2.10. As will be
shown in Chapter 7, a substantial part of this rise, in particular after 2008, was
due to the increase in Target balances. Figure 6.4 shows the fraction of the net

foreign asset position of a selected number of euro countries that is officially
accounted for by Target credit, with both the net foreign asset position and the
Target balance expressed as a portion of GDP.
Figure 6.4 Target balances (grey) and foreign assets, relative to GDP (2012)
Sources: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions;
Target balances: see Figure 6.2.
It is noteworthy that for some of the troubled countries, notably Greece and
Ireland, Target liabilities account for a major share of their net foreign debt, if
one considers this debt as composed of two elements: ordinary (private and
fiscal) credit and asset titles on the one hand, and Target liabilities on the other.
Of Greece’s net foreign debt of 109% of GDP in 2012, 50 percentage points was
accounted for by Greek Target liabilities; of Spain’s 91%, 33 percentage points;
of Italy’s 28%, 16 percentage points; of Portugal’s 115%, 39 percentage points;

and of Ireland’s 112%, 48 percentage points. If countries are ranked by the share
of Target liabilities in their total net foreign debt, Italy would top the list, with
more than 50%.
Conversely, in the Netherlands and Germany, net foreign assets, considering a
similar decomposition, consist to a large extent of mere Target claims. In
Germany, 25 percentage points out of a net foreign asset position of 42% of
GDP in 2012 was accounted for by the Bundesbank’s Target claim. In absolute
terms, this was € 656 billion out of € 1, 107 billion. In the Netherlands, Target
claims accounted for 20 percentage points out of a total of 47% of GDP.
In Finland the situation was unusual, since the Finnish Target claims exceeded
its net foreign asset position, which is 18% of GDP, by 19 percentage points.
This indicates that the Finnish economy no longer held ordinary net claims on
the rest of the world; what is more, if the Eurosystem had defaulted on the
Finnish Target claims, Finland would have fallen into a net debtor position to the
tune of 19% of its GDP.
Inside Money, Outside Money, and the Local Printing Press
We should now return to the relationship between Target balances and the
ECB’s refinancing policy, alluded to briefly in the context of Figure 6.1, which
explained the basic mechanics of the Target system (recall the printing press
image). No economy can cope with ever-increasing amounts of money being
sent abroad, unless the money leaving the country is replenished, since otherwise
a liquidity crisis will inevitably occur. The stock of central bank money in a
modern economy is quite small. While the wealth of the citizens typically
amounts to three to five times the country’s GDP, the stock of central bank
money, as defined by the so-called monetary base, has an order of magnitude of
only one-tenth to one-fifth of GDP. In 2011, for example, the stock of central
bank money in the Eurozone amounted to 12.3% of GDP, in Germany 17.8%,
and in Greece 19.7%. Greece, however, had a 9.9% current account deficit in
2011. Even if Greece had suffered no capital flight and its current account deficit
had to be financed solely with existing money, the stock of money would have
been exhausted within two years if no fresh funding from the Greek NCB had
been forthcoming, making it impossible to conduct any domestic transactions.
This makes it clear that the outflow of money measured by the Target
balances must be compensated by printing fresh money—indeed, that money
printing made such outflow possible in the first place. To be sure, there is a
certain flexibility in the economy that makes it possible to produce a given GDP

with a somewhat smaller stock of money in circulation, as has always been
pointed out by Keynesian economists who stress the flexibility of money
demand and the velocity of money circulation. It is possible to get by, given
one’s income and expenditure, with a lower average stock of money in the wallet
and on the checking account by filling the savings account more frequently with
smaller quantities and withdrawing smaller sums from the ATM while paying it
more frequent visits. Similarly, a commercial bank can get by with a lower
average stock of central bank money on its account with its NCB by resorting to
a more sophisticated and risky liquidity management. The necessary change in
the stock of liquidity carried around can be induced by a rise in the short-term
interest rate, since this raises the opportunity cost of holding liquidity. But this
flexibility is utterly insufficient to cope with the net outflow of money that the
troubled countries have experienced since the crisis broke out.
It is the same with an individual. If income disappears and the individual does
not want to give up his/her interest-bearing physical and financial assets, the
living standard can be maintained for as long as the liquid money in the wallet
and on the bank account lasts. While it lasts, the person will have a negative
balance of payments, because the bank account will be depleted fairly quickly,
and the wallet even faster. But the money will eventually be gone and something
will have to be done to improve the balance of payments, either by finding a job
or getting a loan or selling part of one’s assets. If the balance of payments fails
to be improved with a paying job, and the person does not want to sell assets and
the bank not only refuses to provide credit, but starts to demand repayment of
outstanding credit, this person has a problem. It is not advisable for him or her to
try to solve the problem by printing in his basement the money needed, since
that is severely punishable by law. But in the case of the Eurozone countries, the
situation is a bit different.
Figure 6.5 shows what happened during the crisis. The dotted curve depicts
the evolution of the GIPSIC monetary base, i.e. the stock of money circulating
there, since the first year of the crisis. The monetary base of a country consists of
the banknotes that the country’s NCB has issued and the demand deposits held
by the commercial banks at the NCB. It can be seen that the monetary base of
the GIPSIC countries did not decline, despite their huge balance-of-payments
deficits, initially following a rising trend that later flattened somewhat. The
money sent abroad by way of payment orders must therefore have been
reprinted, for if not, their monetary base would have declined on a par with the
rise of Target balances.
The steeply rising solid curve gives the overall amount of money created in
the GIPSIC countries by refinancing credit and asset purchases. This is indeed

much more money than is circulating within these countries. The difference
between this curve and the dotted curve measures the net amount of central bank
money that flowed out of these countries by way of payment orders, as measured
by the Target balances. It is what was called outside money above in the Section
Ballooning Target Balances, as opposed to the inside money that circulates in
the country where it was created through refinancing operations and asset
purchases.
Figure 6.5 Inside money and outside money of the GIPSIC countries (January 2007––December 2013)

Sources: Balance Sheets of the ECB, Central Bank of Ireland, Central Bank of Greece, Banco de Portugal,
Banco de España, Banca d’Italia, Central Bank of Cyprus; International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics; H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and
Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012, figure 3, updated with a slightly changed definition of
the monetary base (now including deposit facilities, according to the official definition.)
Note: The monetary base of a country or a group of countries is defined as demand deposits of commercial
banks with their NCBs (including deposit facilities) plus statutory banknotes (banknote issuance in
proportion to size of economy) plus related ‘intra-Eurosystem liabilities’ (over-proportionate issuance of
banknotes), the latter item netting out to zero if the group of countries comprises the entire currency area.
Inside money is the central bank money that has been created locally by refinancing operations or asset
purchases and has not been sent, in net terms, to other countries by way of international payment orders.
Outside money, the money that the Target balances measure, is the net portion of money created by a
country’s NCB through refinancing operations or asset purchases that have flowed out of the country by
means of international payment orders and circulates abroad. The charts were smoothed by using rolling
three-month averages. In December 2013, the monetary base of the GIPSIC countries amounted to € 330
billion, the demand deposits of commercial banks to € 56 billion, statutory bank notes to € 335 billion, and
there were € 61 billion in intra-Eurosystem claims from under-proportionate banknote issuance, so that the
actual banknote issuance was € 274 billion.
Figure 6.5 provides a deeper economic interpretation to complement the
analysis of the Target balances conducted so far. As discussed above, these
balances represent credit flowing between NCBs resulting from mutual payment
orders. The balances accurately measure the cross-border net flow of money,
because the monetary base shrinks in the country where the payment order is
issued and expands where the payment is received. But there can be no overflow
of money if no additional money is created in the originating country. As the
chart shows, the point in time at which the stock of outside money equalled the
stock of inside money was already reached in July 2011. Thereafter, no central
bank money would have been left in the GIPSIC countries if it had not regularly
been replenished with the printing press. Indirectly, therefore, the Target
balances measure the additional money creation and, with it, the additional
granting of refinancing credit (or money through asset purchases) above and
beyond the liquidity needs of the economy. As shown above, this additional
refinancing credit was made possible by the lowering of collateral standards and
the extension of maturities. It enabled banks to deliver the freshly printed money
to the local economy, making it possible for citizens to continue purchasing
goods or assets from abroad, or to pay off foreign debt. Without the cheap credit
from the printing press, which undercut market conditions, there would have
been a shortage of liquidity in those countries, leading to higher interest rates
being demanded of them. Their citizens would have been able to buy fewer
goods and assets from abroad, and foreign investors would have been inclined to
provide more private credit, since yields net of risk premia would have been

higher. All of this would have kept the net payment orders measured by the
Target balances from rising as explosively as they did.
In the United States, it was a great cause for concern that the Federal Reserve
System tripled the monetary base during the crisis.25 All the more alarming then
is that the volume of money created in the GIPSIC countries in a span of five
years, from the end of 2007 to 2012, has grown more than threefold, going from
€ 305 billion to € 943 billion, as the chart shows.26
The self-service at the printing press was carried out to an extreme that is truly
astounding. At its peak, in July 2012, before the ECB calmed the markets with
the announcement of its OMT programme, it had grown to € 1, 359 billion in the
six crisis-hit countries, with € 985 billion of this sum having been used to buy
goods and assets abroad and repay external debt. This was a stealth rescue
facility provided by the Eurosystem of which the public knew little, and which
dwarfed all of the official rescue programmes.
Crowding out Refinancing Credit in the North
The question now is how the enormous increase in money creation in the crisis-
hit countries has affected the rest of Europe. In public discussion, the issue
raised most often is inflation. Politicians and economists warn against this
danger, 27 while the ECB reassures everyone that there are no signs of an
inflationary trend.28
One thing is certain: a vast amount of liquidity has been created in the GIPSIC
countries that has landed in the other countries of the Eurozone. The money that
had flowed from the core to the GIPSIC countries before the crisis, in the form
of private credit, now ceased to flow, while the money that the core countries’
banks had lent to the now-troubled countries fled back home because investors
were afraid of the risks, and unwilling to compete with the local printing presses,
which were offering credit regardless of these risks at conditions private lenders
could never meet. Moreover, as documented at the beginning of this chapter,
there was large-scale capital flight from Greek and Spanish banks to safer places
abroad.
All of this translated into a surplus of liquidity and credit in the rest of the
euro countries, which pushed interest rates to a historical low and triggered a
construction boom in Germany (see Chapter 3). The upswing in Germany
absorbed only a small portion of the liquidity, using it as additional transaction
cash. The banks of the northern euro bloc found themselves flush with liquidity
and had difficulty disposing of it.

While this could mean that there may have been forces stoking inflation in
these countries, no sizeable inflation differentials between the GIPSIC countries
and the rest of the Eurozone have yet materialized, as Figure 4.8 in Chapter 4
showed (bar Ireland). The harmonized inflation rate in the Eurozone, in turn,
gives no reason for concern: while it was 2.1% on average in the five crisis years
from 2008 to 2012, it averaged 2.2% in the previous five years.
The reason was probably that the monetary base in the Eurozone did not, in
fact, expand extraordinarily in the aggregate during the crisis. The more than
threefold increase mentioned above in the stock of money balances created in the
GIPSIC countries in the period 2007–2012 contrasts sharply with the increase in
the stock of money balances in the aggregate of all euro countries, which
amounted to ‘only’ 71%.
Figure 6.6 shows what happened. Obviously the explosion of the stock of
money balances created in the GIPSIC countries by way of refinancing credit,
caused or made possible by the ECB’s collateral and maturity policies, only
moderately expanded the aggregate monetary base, because it reduced the inside
money circulating in the rest of the Eurozone. This happened because the
commercial banks of the other Eurozone countries took countervailing actions to
get rid of at least some of the inflowing liquidity, since they did not need it, by
repaying their own refinancing credit or lending the surplus cash to their NCBs
by investing in fixed-term deposits.
Remarkably, the expansion of the stock of money created in the GIPSIC
countries had become so large by that April 2012 it eventually reached the trend
value for the aggregate stock of money balances in the entire Eurozone, € 1, 189
billion. At that point, all the money normally needed for transactions in the
Eurozone was created in the six crisis countries. True, there was an additional
stock of € 493 billion of inside money in the non-GIPSIC countries at that time,
29 but that money was not being used for transactions; it was mostly held in NCB
demand deposits by commercial banks, because the ECB had only auctioned
limited slots for fixed-term deposits among the commercial banks. In addition,
the interest for money parked in the deposit facility, which used to absorb much
liquidity, had been set to zero on 11 July 2012. This reduced the incentive to
park the liquidity there.

Figure 6.6 The structure of the monetary base and the role of Target balances (January 2002––December
2013)
Note: For the definitions and sources see Figure 6.5. The inside money of the non-GIPSIC countries
includes money created by asset purchases by the ECB itself.
At the peak of the aggregate value of the monetary base in July 2012, 77% of
the base money circulating in the Eurozone had originated in the six crisis
countries through refinancing operations or asset purchases. This share itself
peaked in April and September 2013 at 81%. Figure 6.7 shows this quite
graphically by providing the information given in Figure 6.6 in relative terms, all
variables being expressed in relation to the aggregate stock of base money in the

Eurozone.
Figure 6.7 International shifting of refinancing credit as a result of net payment orders (January 2007–
December 2013)
Note: For definitions and sources see Figure 6.5 as well as the balance sheet of the ECB.
The rising solid line in the centre of the chart shows which fractions of the
total stock of base money available in the Eurozone were created in the GIPSIC
countries (the distance from the abscissa) and in the non-GIPSIC countries (the
distance from the upper boundary) by way of refinancing credit and asset

purchases.30 Similarly, the dotted line shows which fractions of the total
monetary base were actually circulating in the GIPSIC (the distance below the
line) and non-GIPSIC countries (the distance above the line). The distance
between the solid and the dotted lines is the Target balance, i.e. the outside
money that was created by refinancing credit and asset purchases in one group of
countries, flowed through payment orders into another group, and now circulates
there.
It is clearly evident that the liquidity flowing into the non-GIPSIC countries
through the payment orders measured by the Target balances gradually crowded
out the liquidity created by asset purchases and refinancing credit in these
countries. The alternative source of liquidity available to commercial banks has
constrained the NCBs’ ability to issue refinancing credit.31 The crowding-out
process lasted until April 2013, when the percentage of the monetary base
consisting of the Target debt of the GIPSIC countries, i.e. the outside money
circulating in the non-GIPSIC countries, peaked. At that time, only 19% of the
Eurozone’s monetary base had originated in the non-GIPSIC countries (or from
the ECB itself), even though these countries accounted for 68% of the
Eurozone’s GDP. Fully 81% of the money circulating in the Eurozone originated
in the GIPSIC countries. 25 percentage points of this money was used for
providing liquidity to these countries, and 56 percentage points was Target credit
that enabled the GIPSIC countries to buy goods and assets elsewhere and redeem
their foreign debt. After September 2013, the percentage of money created
declined somewhat. Nevertheless, by the end of 2013, 75% of the Eurozone’s
monetary base was created in the GIPSIC countries. Fully 49% of the
Eurozone’s monetary base, € 613 billion in absolute terms, originated from
Target credit provided to the GIPSIC countries.
It is a matter of debate whether this helped these countries more than their
creditors, who otherwise might not have been able to get their money back.
However, it definitely was a huge bailout operation by the ECB that was implicit
in the rules of the Eurosystem and was not understood by the public, and initially
not even by economic specialists. This is why the English version of the original
article on this issue bore the title ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’.32
In Germany the crowding-out process was particularly pronounced.33 There,
the net refinancing credit, calculated by subtracting the fixed-term deposits that
commercial banks hold with their central bank, turned negative as early as
August 2011.34 The only inside money existing in Germany at that time had
originated from the Bundesbank’s prior asset purchases. After August 2011, the
net creditor position of German commercial banks with the Bundesbank

remained negative for many months, peaking at –€ 99 billion, or –17% of the
German monetary base, in February 2012. Only in December 2013 the
Bundesbank’s refinancing credit turned positive again, with a value of € 5
billion, or 0.9 % of the German monetary base.
In Finland the situation was even more extreme. There, the net refinancing
credit turned negative in October 2010 and has remained negative ever since,
peaking at –€ 21 billion, or –42% of the Finnish monetary base, in January 2012.
By December 2013, the last data point available at this writing, it was –€ 11
billion, or –34% of the monetary base.35 The Bank of Finland, even in net terms,
borrowed funds equal to one-third of its monetary base from its commercial
banks to absorb the excess liquidity that capital flight had washed ashore.
However, sterilizing changes in the stock of central bank money not only
originated from the NCBs’ borrowing and lending operations, but also from their
buying and selling of marketable assets. Figure 6.8 shows the overall effect of all
money-creating and -absorbing operations for Germany and Finland.
Obviously, by June 2012 even the stock of money created by the
Bundesbank’s asset purchases and refinancing operations taken together had
been crowded out in net terms. The stock of inside money vanished, as the
Target balances reached the level of the entire German monetary base.36 The
monetary base was created exclusively by the Bundesbank’s fulfilling of net
payment orders on behalf of other central banks of the Eurozone. By the end of
June 2012 and in the following months, the Bundesbank’s Target claims even
slightly exceeded the German monetary base, the excess peaking at € 61 billion,
or 9% of the German monetary base, in November 2012.37 The Bundesbank had
effectively stopped being a central bank that lends out its self-created money
against interest and collateral, turning instead into a sort of paper shredder
mopping up huge amounts of liquidity that had been generated in other Eurozone
countries by way of asset purchases and lending to commercial banks, receiving
Target claims in exchange. The period of negative inside money lasted about
one-and-a-half years, until November 2013. Germany’s ‘self-made’ monetary
base did not turn positive again until December 2013, with a value of € 46
billion, or 8% of Germany’s monetary base. During the crisis, Germany had lent
out its entire stock of money balances to rescue Europe (including its own
banks).
The same was true for Finland, as shown on the right-hand chart. In Finland,
the inside money was entirely crowded out by the end of 2011, then came a short
period when the stock of inside money again was slightly positive, then it turned
negative again, and did not return to the normal, positive range until the end of

2012, after the crisis had calmed, as Finnish Target claims again fell below the
monetary base level. By the end of 2013, still about one-third of the Finnish
monetary base was inside money and two-thirds were outside money, stemming
from credit operations or asset purchases elsewhere in the Eurozone.
Figure 6.8 Crowding out inside money in Germany and Finland
Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank and Bank of Finland balance sheets; International Monetary Fund,
International Financial Statistics.
Note: For the underlying Target balances see Figure 6.2. The corresponding chart for the Netherlands
cannot be constructed, since the Dutch central bank does not publish data on the monetary base.
What all this shows is that the Target balances do not represent an increase in
the monetary base, but a mere shifting of refinancing credit from the north to the
south. One could say that the Target balances measure the extent to which the
(electronic) printing press has been lent to the southern NCBs. This lends a
stronger foundation to the interpretation of the Target balances as a measure of
intergovernmental credit, which follows from the way such balances sit in the
respective NCB balance sheets.38 While the southern NCBs printed and lent out
large amounts of money so as to give their economies the possibility of
continuing to import goods and assets from other countries and pay off their

foreign debt, the northern NCBs ‘shredded’ the inflowing money by becoming
net debtors to their commercial banks, or by giving them less refinancing credit.
The ECB was, of course, aware of this situation. It justified its policy by
claiming to assume the role of a credit intermediary among the banks. Since
banks hesitated to provide credit to each other, concerned that they would not get
their money back, they preferred to park it at the ECB; and the ECB itself then
took on the task of lending out the money. This had advantages for both sides,
according to the ECB. The borrowing banks received the money on cheaper
terms, and the lending banks enjoyed more security on their investment.39
However, this view hides the fact that with its policy the ECB systematically
redirected savings capital from one group of countries to another, a process that
may have slowed down the correction of the current account imbalances
between the Eurozone countries and constituted an international public capital
flow performed by the central banks of the Eurosystem. The volume of this
international capital flow is measured by the Target balances.
1 This and the following sections are based on H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans,
Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, International Tax and Public
Finance 19, 2012, pp. 468–508, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/sinn-itax-2012-
target.pdf>, previous versions of which were published as NBER Working Paper No. 17626, November
2011, <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/NBER_wp17626_sinn_wollm.pdf>, and CESifo Working Paper
No. 3500, June 2011, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp3500.pdf>. See also H.-
W. Sinn, ‘Die Target-Kredite der deutschen Bundesbank’, ifo Schnelldienst 65, Special Issue, 21 March
2012, pp. 3–34, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Sd_Sonderausgabe_20120321.pdf>.
These scholarly publications followed short opinion pieces written previously by the author that defined
Target balances in terms of current accounts and capital accounts and explained the basic issue: H.-W. Sinn,
‘Die riskante Kreditersatzpolitik der EZB’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 103, 4 May 2011, p. 10,
available 
at: 
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-schuldenkrise/target-kredite-die-riskante-
kreditersatzpolitik-der-ezb-1637926.html>, and, similarly in English, H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth
Bailout’, VoxEU, 1 June 2011, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/ecb-s-stealth-bailout>. The first
public statement about the alarming levels that the balances had reached was published in H.-W. Sinn,
‘Neue Abgründe’, Wirtschaftswoche, No. 8, 21 February 2011, p. 35. An English translation was published
as an international press release by the Ifo Institute as: ‘Deep Chasms’, ifo Viewpoint No. 122, 29 March
2011, available at: <http://www.ifo.de/Viewpoint_122/w/4XRFPXeMj>. Two days later the first statement,
containing similar information, appeared on the internet: see J. Whittaker, ‘Intra-eurosystem Debts’,
Lancaster 
University 
Working 
Paper, 
31 
March 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/51933/4/eurosystem.pdf>. The first calculation of the Bundesbank’s exposure to
other countries’ Target liabilities, as determined by its share in the ECB’s capital key, was presented in H.-
W. Sinn, ‘Tickende Zeitbombe’, Süddeutsche Zeitung, No. 77, 2 April 2011, p. 24. There were some early
misinterpretations of the author’s opinion pieces, which led to an internet debate that rapidly snowballed
and cannot possibly be documented here. For this see the appendix to the above mentioned CESifo working
paper, as well as H.-W. Sinn, ‘On and off Target’, VoxEU, 14 June 2011, available at:
<http://www.voxeu.org/article/and-target>. Target imbalances were originally thought to be limited to the

transition period from fixed exchange rates to the introduction of the euro (stage III of the currency union).
The problems that could arise during this period were discussed by P. M. Garber, ‘Notes on the Role of
Target in a Stage III Crisis’, NBER Working Paper No. 6619, 1998, and, P. M. Garber, ‘The Target
Mechanism: Will it Propagate or Stifle a Stage III Crisis?’, Carnegie—Rochester Conferences on Public
Policy 51, 1999, pp. 195–220. Later, in December 2010, Garber reportedly also wrote an internal text for
Deutsche Bank about which this author was informed, after his own publications in spring 2011, by Thomas
Mayer, Deutsche Bank, and which was subsequently published on the internet. See P. M. Garber, ‘The
Mechanics of intra Euro Capital Flight’, Deutsche Bank Economics Special Report, December 2010.
Garber, however, did not have at his disposal, at the time of his writing, the panel data set on Target
balances of the Eurozone countries that Sinn and Wollmershäuser assembled, and did not discuss the
macroeconomic relationships between capital accounts, current account balances and Target balances, or
the relationship between the balance of payments and Target balances. The author himself was made aware
of the Target problem by former Bundesbank President Helmut Schlesinger in early autumn 2010, during a
meeting of the Scientific Advisory Council of the German Ministry of Economics. Up to this day, the ECB
has not published a coherent set of Target statistics.
2 Moody’s, Moody’s Changes the Outlook to Negative on Germany, Netherlands, Luxembourg and
Affirms 
Finland’s 
AAA 
Stable 
Rating, 
31 
July 
2012, 
London, 
available 
at:
<https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-changes-the-outlook-to-negative- 
on-Germany-Netherlands-
Luxembourg--PR_251214>. The agency’s statement read: ‘The second and interrelated driver of the change
in outlook to negative is the increase in contingent liabilities [...] The contingent liabilities stem from
bilateral loans, the EFSF, the European Central Bank (ECB) via the holdings in the Securities Market
Programme (SMP) and the Target 2 balances, and—once established—the European Stability Mechanism
(ESM)’.
3 Following the initial articles of H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account
Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012, a first round of scholarly responses,
including authors from the ECB and the Bundesbank, was published by the Ifo Institute in August 2011, in
a special issue of Ifo Schnelldienst: ‘Die europäische Zahlungsbilanzkrise’, ifo Schnelldienst 64, No. 16, 31
August 2011, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/SD-16-2011.pdf>. An English translation
of this volume was published as a special issue of CESifo Forum in January 2012; see, H.-W. Sinn (ed.),
‘The European Balance of Payments Crisis’, CESifo Forum 13, Special Issue, January 2012, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Jan-2012.pdf>. The following provides the names
of contributing authors, the respective titles of their articles in English and page references: H.-W. Sinn,
‘The European Balance of Payments Crisis: An Introduction’, pp. 3–10; H. Schlesinger, ‘The Balance of
Payments Tells Us the Truth’, pp. 11–13; W. Kohler, ‘The Eurosystem in Times of Crises: Greece in the
Role of a Reserve Currency Country?’, pp. 14–22; C. B. Blankart, ‘The Euro in 2084’, pp. 23–28; M. J. M.
Neumann, ‘The Refinancing of Banks Drives Target Debt’, pp. 29–32; P. Bernholz, ‘The Current Account
Deficits of the GIPS Countries and Their Target Debts at the ECB’, pp. 33–34; T. Mayer, J. Möbert, and C.
Weistroffer, ‘Macroeconomic Imbalances in EMU and the Eurosystem’, pp. 35–42; G. Milbradt, ‘The
Derailed Policies of the ECB’, pp. 43–49; S. Homburg, ‘Notes on the Target2 Dispute’, pp. 50–54; F. L.
Sell and B. Sauer, ‘Money, Capital Markets and Welfare: An Analysis of the Effects of Target2 Balances’,
pp. 55–62; I. Sauer, ‘The Dissolving Asset Backing of the Euro’, pp. 63–72; J. Ulbrich and A. Lipponer,
‘Balances in the Target2 Payments System—A Problem?’, pp. 73–76; C. Fahrholz and A. Freytag, ‘A Way
to Solve the European Balance of Payments Crisis? Take a Chance on Market Solutions!’, pp. 77–82; U.
Bindseil, P. Cour-Thimann, and P. J. König, ‘Target2 and Cross-border Interbank Payments during the
Financial Crisis’, pp. 83–92; F.-C. Zeitler, ‘Ways Out of the European Sovereign Debt Crisis after the
Decisions of the July 2011 Summit’, pp. 93–95; K. Reeh, ‘Balance of Payments Adjustment in the
Monetary Union: Current Events Help Shed New Light on an Old Question’, pp. 96–101, and A. Tornell
and F. Westermann, ‘Greece: The Sudden Stop That Wasn’t’, pp. 102–103. See moreover U. Bindseil and

P. J. König, ‘TARGET2 and the European Sovereign Debt Crisis’, Kredit und Kapital 45, 2012, pp. 135–
174; U. Bindseil and A. Winkler, ‘Dual Liquidity Crises - A Financial Accounts Framework’, Review of
International Economics 21, 2013, pp. 151–163; J. Pisani-Ferry, ‘The Known Unknowns and Unknown
Unknowns of European Monetary Union’, Journal of International Money and Finance 34, 2013, pp. 6–14.
An extensive recent overview of additional literature and a summary of the issues from the perspective of
the ECB’s specialist on Target balances can be found in P. Cour-Thimann, ‘Target Balances and the Crisis
in the Euro Area’, CESifo Forum 14, Special Issue, April 2013, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Apr-2013.pdf>. Also see T. Mayer, Europe’s Unfinished Currency,
Anthem Press, London 2012; R. A. Auer, ‘What Drives Target2 Balances? Evidence from a Panel
Analysis’, CESifo Working Paper No. 4216, April 2013, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp4216.pdf>, and N. Potrafke and M. Reischmann, ‘Explosive Target Balances’,
CESifo 
Working 
Paper 
No. 
4297, 
June 
2013, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp4297.pdf>.
4 S. Ruhkamp, ‘Die Bundesbank fordert von der EZB bessere Sicherheiten’, Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, 29 February 2012, available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/schuldenkrise-die-
bundesbank-fordert-von-der-ezb-bessere-sicherheiten-11667413.html> and, S. Ruhkamp, ‘Bundesbank geht
im Targetstreit in die Offensive’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 12 March 2012, available at:
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/wirtschaftspolitik/f-a-z-gastbeitrag-bundesbank-geht-im-targetstreit-
in-die-offensive-11682060.html>. The article, translated freely, reads: ‘In a letter whose content is known to
the F.A.Z., Weidmann refers explicitly to the growing Target claims. He suggests collateralising the claims
of the ECB on the financially weak national central banks in the Eurosystem, which he said have reached an
amount exceeding € 800 billion’.
5 Deutsche Bundesbank, Bundesbank Target2 Balances, press release, 22 February 2011, available at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Pressemitteilungen/BBK/2011/2011_02_22_Bundesbank_TARG
and Deutsche Bundesbank, ‘The Evolution of the Bundesbank’s TARGET2 Balances’, Monthly Report 63,
No. 3, March 2011, pp. 34–37. The Bundesbank took a similar stance in a letter to the Ifo Institute dated 18
March 2011.
6 H. Schlesinger, ‘The Balance of Payments Tells Us the Truth’, January 2013.
7 See P. Cour-Thimann, ‘Target Balances and the Crisis in the Euro Area’, April 2013.
8 See M. Draghi, Transcript of the questions asked and the answers given by Mario Draghi, President of
the ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, press conference, 4 April 2012, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120404.en.html>: ‘...we have to look at the consolidated
bank balance sheets, country by country. And, as you can imagine, we look at them every day. As well as
inflation expectations and TARGET2 balances. These are three things that we look at almost every day.
Every day actually, not almost every day!’ The author had informed M. Draghi about the Target balances
on the occasion of a scholarly PowerPoint presentation at Banca d’Italia on 22 April 2011.
9 This was first explained in H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die riskante Kreditersatzpolitik der EZB’, 4 May 2011, and
H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’, 1 June 2011. The first formal analysis was provided in H.-W.
Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s
Rescue Facility’, 2012.
10 When the Eurosystem started to operate, only large payment orders were channelled through the
ECB’s payment system. In addition to Target, the banks of each country can use private payments systems;
originally most payments were processed and netted off through those systems. Since the payments from
country A to country B are usually offset by payments from country B to country A, the Target system was

only used for surplus settlement among the private payments systems. This changed with the introduction of
the Target2 system in 2007. Increasingly, smaller payments were also processed directly through the Target
accounts at the ECB. According to recent data, two-thirds of the Target transactions had a volume of less
than € 50, 000, with the median at only € 10, 000. See European Central Bank, Target Annual Report 2010,
Frankfurt 2010; and European Central Bank, The Payment System—Payments, Securities and Derivatives,
and the Role of the Eurosystem, Frankfurt am Main 2010. While it is true that this change exerted a
significant influence on the Target system’s transaction volume, the balances booked annually in the system
were not affected. From the beginning, they captured the whole of the net deficits and surpluses in the
transfer of payments between the banks of the individual Eurozone member countries. This makes it
possible to make a consistent interpretation of the time series, such as that shown in Figure 6.2 below. The
rise in Target balances since 2007 shown is no statistical artefact.
11 Refer also to J. Whittaker, ‘Eurosystem Debts, Greece, and the Role of Banknotes’, Lancaster
University 
Working 
Paper, 
14 
November 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/51935/1/eurosystemNov2011.pdf>. The Bundesbank balance sheet, for example,
distinguishes between ‘statutory’ banknote circulation and the banknote circulation that goes above and
beyond it. The statutory banknote circulation is measured in accordance with the share of the country in the
capital of the ECB, which itself is an average of the country’s population and GDP share and denotes a
normal value. If the effective banknote circulation lies above this value, a cash outflow to other countries is
assumed, which measures a similar debt as the electronic outflow of money through the Target system. This
debt is booked under ‘Intra-Eurosystem liabilities from the issuance of euro banknotes’. It increased from €
100 billion at the end of 2007 to € 224 billion at the end of December 2013. This change stands vis-à-vis a
change in the Bundesbank’s Target claims on the ECB system, which increased by € 439 billion over the
same period (from € 71 billion to € 510 billion). This must be accounted for mostly by euro banknotes that
are issued in Germany, but are circulating abroad (mostly in eastern Europe and Turkey, as mentioned
above, but also in Russia and other countries.) and that have taken over the role of the former deutschmark
that used to circulate in those countries, which at the time accounted for about one-third of the amount of
the German monetary base. With the currency union, Germany gave its seignorage capital in the form of
deutschmark banknotes circulating abroad to the other member countries. See H. Feist and H.-W. Sinn,
‘Eurowinners and Eurolosers: The Distribution of Seignorage Wealth in EMU’, European Journal of
Political Economy 13, 1997, pp. 665–689; and H. Feist and H.-W. Sinn, ‘The Accidental Redistribution of
Seignorage Wealth in the Eurosystem’, CESifo Forum 1, No. 3, Autumn 2000, pp. 27–29, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/Forum300-special.pdf>, and H. Feist and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Der Euro und
der Geldschöpfungsgewinn: Gewinner und Verlierer durch die Währungsunion’, ifo Schnelldienst 53, No.
31, 17 November 2000, pp. 14–22. The value of this ‘gift’ has grown apace with general economic growth.
It must account for the lion’s share of the € 204 billion mentioned above. Unlike the Target claims and
liabilities, claims and liabilities from over-proportionate banknote issuance are not included in the
calculation of net foreign asset positions as considered, e.g., in Figure 2.9.
12 In statistical reporting, a balance of payments is by definition always in equilibrium. This is because a
disequilibrium in payments of private agents and fiscal authorities (payments ‘above the line’) will be
matched by a change in the position of the monetary authority vis-à-vis the rest of the world (payments
‘below the line’). By contrast, the definition of equilibrium used here refers only to the balancing of
payments above the line.
13 The automatic shock absorption through fiscal mechanism amounts to around 13% to 15%, i.e. a local
gross income loss of $ 1 billion leads to a net income loss of $ 870 million to $ 850 million. See P.
Asdrubali, B. E. Sorensen, and O. Yosha, ‘Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963–1990’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 1996, pp. 1081–1110, who estimate 13%; or D. Gros, Fiscal Union
after Banking Union or Banking Union instead of Fiscal Union?, unpublished note for the Austrian

Government, June 2013, which estimates 15%; as well as D. Gros and E. Jones, ‘External Shocks and
Unemployment: Revisiting the Mundellian Story’, unpublished manuscript, Centre for European Policy
Studies, February 1995; see also J. von Hagen, ‘Achieving Economic Stabilization by Risk Sharing within
Countries’, in R. Boadway and A. A. Shah (eds), Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers. Principles and
Practice, The World Bank, Washington 2007, pp. 107–132; M. Dolls, C. Fuest, and A. Peichl, ‘Automatic
Stabilizers and Economic Crisis: US vs. Europe’, Journal of Public Economics 96, 2012, pp. 279–294.
14 This definition was first stated in H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die riskante Kreditersatzpolitik der EZB’, 4 May 2011;
or, in English, in H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’, 1 June 2011. A brief mathematical interpretation
can be found in H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital
Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012; or also in S. Homburg, ‘Notes on the Target2 Dispute’, January
2013.
15 See H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows:
The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012; in particular the preceding working paper versions as well. Regularly
updated Target data are available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/ifoHome/policy/Haftungspegel.html>.
16 The figures were first presented by the author to an audience at Banca d’Italia during a lecture on 22
April 2011, and then at the Munich Economic Summit on 19 May 2011, from where they found their way
into the Financial Times with the permission of the author and were commented upon by Martin Wolf. See
M. Wolf, ‘Intolerable Choices for the Eurozone’, Financial Times, 31 May 2011, available at:
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/1a61825a-8bb7-11e0-a725-00144feab49a.html#axzz2Z7HBqk4Z>. 
The
formal working paper appeared a few days later. This made them immediately known worldwide.
17 The ECB’s first statement on the economic significance of the Target balances appeared in its October
2011 Monthly Report. See European Central Bank, ‘TARGET2 Balances of National Central Banks in the
Euro Area’, Monthly Bulletin, October 2011, pp. 35–40, in particular p. 37. In footnote 5, the Bank stated
that there is no single database grouping together the statistics, but that the data can be calculated on the
basis of IMF data and from the balance sheets of the individual central banks. It thus advocated using
exactly the same method that Sinn and Wollmershäuser had used for their working paper of June 2011. See
CESifo Working Paper preliminary version by H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current
Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, June 2011. In fact, it would be possible
to further refine this method by also subtracting the intra-Eurosystem balances related to the transfer of
foreign reserves, as explained by P. Cour-Thimann, ‘Target Balances and the Crisis in the Euro Area’, April
2013, Annex D.
18 See N. Potrafke and M. Reischmann, ‘Explosive Target Balances’, June 2013.
19 The definition follows Gurley and Shaw’s definition, but is not identical to it. See J. G. Gurley and E.
S. Shaw, Money in a Theory of Finance, Brooking Institutions, Washington, DC, 1960.
20 In addition to the country Target balances, by the end of 2013 the ECB had itself incurred an intra-
Eurosystem Target claim of € 1 billion. This basically resulted from a dollar-euro swap agreement with the
US Federal Reserve. The ECB sold the dollars it borrowed from the Fed to some Eurosystem NCBs, the
Banque de France in particular. By doing so, it received a Target claim against the Eurosystem NCBs and
incurred an external liability with the Fed. See European Central Bank, Annual Accounts 2013, p. 27. On
the flip side of the coin, the ECB participated in the SMP programme and bought € 13 billion worth of
GIPSIC government bonds, which created Target claims elsewhere in the Eurosystem and a corresponding
Target liability for itself. See European Central Bank, Annual Accounts 2013, p. 19. The ECB moreover
holds external Target liabilities vis-à-vis Bulgaria, Denmark, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Romania,
which, as associated members of the Eurosystem, are allowed to accumulate Target claims, but not to incur

Target liabilities. The counterpart to these ECB liabilities are claims of the ECB on Eurosystem NCBs that
issued payment orders to the associated NCBs. See also P. Cour-Thimann, ‘Target Balances and the Crisis
in the Euro Area’, April 2013, p. 48.
21 See H. Schlesinger, ‘The Balance of Payments Tells Us the Truth’, January 2013.
22 The ECB rightly points out that such private payment systems within international institutions result
in different Target balances than would have prevailed without such systems. It does not mention, however,
that that is exactly the reason why Target is a measure of public international credit. See European Central
Bank, Monthly Bulletin, May 2013, p. 106.
23 See Taxpayers Association of Europe (TAE), ‘Target2: Die finanzielle Atombombe’, MMnews, 24
February 2012, available at: <http://www.mmnews.de/index.php/wirtschaft/9560-target2-die-finanzielle-
atombombe>.
24 Reply 2011/003864 of the Bundesbank to a question by the Ifo Institute, dated 11 March 2011, and
letter from the ECB to the Ifo Institute, dated 15 March 2012. Article 2 paragraph 1 of the unpublished
decision ECB 2007NP10 on the interest yield of intra-Eurosystem net balances states: ‘Intra-Eurosystem
balances [. ..] are remunerated at the latest available marginal interest rate used by the Eurosystem in its
tenders for main refinancing operations’.
25 For the policy responses of the Federal Reserve Bank to the financial crisis starting in 2007, which
lead to this tripling, see B. S. Bernanke, The Federal Reserve and the Financial Crisis, Princeton University
Press, Princeton 2013.
26 A similar point was made by A. Tornell and F. Westermann, ‘Europe Needs a Federal Reserve’, New
York Times, 21 June 2012, available at: <http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/21/opinion/the-european-
central-bank-needs-more-power.html?_r=1>.
27 See M. Feldstein, ‘Is Inflation Returning?’, Project Syndicate, 29 August 2012, available at:
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/is-inflation-returning-by-martin-feldstein> or ‘The World
from Berlin: “High Inflation Causes Societies to Disintegrate”’, Spiegel Online International, 11 May 2012,
available at: <http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/fear-of-inflation-in-germany-after-bundesbank-
comments-a-832648.html>.
28 See M. Draghi, ‘Stabile Preise ohne monetäre Staatsfinanzierung’, Interview by H. Steltzner and S.
Ruhkamp, 
Frankfurter 
Allgemeine 
Zeitung, 
24 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120224_1.en.html>.
29 This figure includes a minor amount of money created through the ECB’s own asset purchases.
30 The latter includes money created through the ECB’s own asset purchases.
31 The term ‘crowding out’ has created some confusion in the debate as non-economists active in the
internet re-interpreted it as a supply-induced crowding out, and disseminated this interpretation across the
English-language blogosphere. Someone even implied that Sinn and Wollmershäuser had argued that the
Target balances created a credit crunch. However, the crowding out of refinancing credit in the non-GIPSIC
countries occurs because the demand for, rather than the supply of, liquidity is given. It constrains the ECB,
not the commercial banks. This is the exact opposite of a credit crunch. This use of the term crowding-out
harks back to the beginning of the crowding-out debate in monetary economics, starting with Milton
Friedman’s argument that useful public goods crowd out private goods because they are substitutes for
them. See M. Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1962, chapter VI:

The Role of Government in Education. As an example, Friedman used free school meals that crowd out
meal provision by the parents, since the demand for meals is limited. It is precisely this kind of crowding
out, resulting from a reduction in demand, that the inflowing Target money has caused. Another example is
the crowding out of one supplier in a market through the entry of another. A detailed analysis of this issue
can be found in H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital
Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012; see in particular the preceding working paper versions as well.
See also H.-W. Sinn, ‘On and off Target’, 14 June 2011, which discusses this and other misunderstandings.
32 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’, 1 June 2011. For a scholarly analysis see H.-W. Sinn
and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue
Facility’, 2011 and 2012.
33 Unfortunately the Dutch central bank does not publish data on the aggregate monetary base. Thus, it is
not possible to report on its particular situation in this regard.
34 See also H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital
Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012, p. 485; see also A. Tornell and F. Westermann, ‘Has the ECB
Hit a Limit?’, VoxEU, 28 March 2012, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/has-ecb-hit-limit>.
35 
See 
Balance 
Sheet 
of 
the 
Bank 
of 
Finland, 
available 
at:
<http://www.suomenpankki.fi/en/tilastot/tase_ja_korko/Pages/tilastot_rahalaitosten_lainat_talletukset_ja_ko
and International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, Datastream.
36 It is worth remembering that the monetary base of a country is defined as including over-proportionate
banknote issuance, and it is not known whether these banknotes are circulating in Germany or elsewhere in
the world. See footnote to Figure 6.5.
37 The difficulties that the Bundesbank would encounter when its entire monetary base was turned into
Target credit were discussed and forecast for 2013 in H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans,
Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, CESifo Working Paper No.
3500, June 2011; see in particular figure 15. As it turned out, they arrived a year earlier than expected.
38 This interpretation was first posited in H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die riskante Kreditersatzpolitik der EZB’, 4 May
2011; and H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’, 1 June 2011.
39 See J.-C. Trichet, ‘Enhanced Credit Support: Key ECB Policy Actions for the Euro Area Economy’,
Lecture given at Munich Seminar, CESifo and Süddeutsche Zeitung, 13 July 2009; and J.-C. Trichet, ‘The
ECB’s Enhanced Credit Support’, CESifo Working Paper No. 2833, October 2009, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp2833.pdf>.

CHAPTER 7
Current Accounts, Capital Flight, and
Target Balances
Financing Balance-of-Payments Deficits—Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus Living off the
Printing Press—Irish Capital Flight—The Flight from Italy and Spain—France in Between
—Germany: Exporting for Target Claims—Finland and the Netherlands—Bretton Woods and
the European Payment Union—Transfer Roubles—The Swiss Example—How Target-Like
Balances are Settled in the USA—A Fundamental Dichotomy in the Rescue Policies
Financing Balance-of-Payments Deficits
Chapters 2 and 4 showed that the countries now in crisis (Greece, Ireland,
Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Cyprus, grouped under the acronym GIPSIC) lost
their competitiveness and ran up massive current account deficits as a result of
an inflationary credit bubble induced by reduced borrowing costs brought about
by the introduction of the euro. When the US crisis spilled over to Europe, the
capital markets were no longer willing to finance such deficits. Chapters 5 and 6
discussed how and in what sense the GIPSIC countries made use of their money-
printing presses as a replacement for funding unavailable at more desirable
conditions from the capital markets. This chapter will look at the countries
individually and attempt to ascertain the degree to which they actually financed
their current account deficits with freshly created money, which portions were
financed through other channels, and what role capital flight played, in the sense
of a reversal of the flow of capital, a case discussed in the previous chapter in the
context of Figure 6.2.
A current account deficit, i.e. the excess of imports and interest payments on
net foreign debt over exports and net transfers received, needs to be financed.
Assuming that the local stock of central bank money is being held constant, a
country has only three possibilities:1
1. Incoming payment orders associated with private capital import. These
normally result from the investment decisions of foreign private investors
and their financial institutions, including portfolio decisions and foreign
direct investment (such as the acquisition of a company), as well as from

a repatriation of capital by domestic residents. This is the normal option,
and the one that actually financed the current account deficits until the
crisis struck.
2. Incoming payment orders associated with fiscal credit provided by other
states or international organizations. This is basically intergovernmental
credit from multilateral institutions such as the Eurozone, IMF or ESM.
This type of credit started flowing in May 2010, and will be discussed in
further detail in Chapter 8.
3. Local money creation through refinancing operations and asset purchases
by the national central bank (NCB). For the reasons explained in Chapter
6, this book calls ‘Target credit’ the extra money created to make net
payment orders possible without eroding the monetary base.
The relationship between these three variables and a country’s current account
balance results from a national budget constraint that cannot be altered except by
theft, and of course, it holds algebraically: if one of the items changes its sign,
the others must compensate for it. If, for example, a country’s private capital
import is negative because the capital inflow not only stops, but reverses its
direction, Target credit or fiscal credit have to make up for it. Otherwise, either
the current account deficit could not occur or the capital flow could not reverse
its direction. Note that if country A uses Target credit to finance its current
account deficit vis-à-vis country B (or a capital flight to country B), this means
that country B’s NCB issues the money in exchange for a claim on the ECB
system instead of a claim on commercial banks in its own jurisdiction, while the
ECB receives a claim on the NCB of country A, which receives a claim on its
banks by giving them refinancing credit (or buys assets from them) in the first
place. This was explained in the previous chapter.
This statement needs to be qualified if a euro country has a current or a capital
account imbalance with countries outside the Eurozone. While such imbalances
by themselves lead to flows of euros or other currencies across borders, they
normally do not last long, as economic agents in each currency area usually try
to get rid of excess stocks of money that is legal tender only in other
jurisdictions.2 Exchange rate adjustments will usually induce countervailing
transactions in the reverse direction that have the effect of absorbing the
excesses. Imbalances can only occur if central banks manipulate the exchange
rate by accumulating foreign currency, which is typically the case in fixed-
exchange rate systems, or if there are sizeable changes in the stocks of currencies
held outside their currency areas for international transaction purposes. While it
is true that both the dollar and, to a limited extent, the euro are used as a means

of payment outside their respective jurisdictions, there are usually no significant
increases or reductions in their respective stocks of dollars or euros.
In the Eurozone the exchange of foreign currency is operated by the ECB
itself, which allocates Target liabilities and Target claims to NCBs according to
the currency they buy or sell abroad. Suppose a citizen of a particular euro
country buys a Chinese product, to be paid for in dollars. The citizen draws up
the payment order in euros, but his bank converts the euros into dollars, which it
receives from its NCB; the latter, in turn, receives the dollars from the ECB in
exchange for a Target liability. However, with a flexible exchange rate, there
will be a similar inflow of dollars into the Eurozone, as foreigners buy Eurozone
goods or assets, which the ECB converts into euros. This reverse payment order
means that the ECB allocates a Target claim to the NCB of the recipient of the
payment. Similarly, if the citizen pays for the Chinese product in euros, which
are then used to buy goods or assets from another other euro country, his NCB
has to accept a Target liability with regard to the ECB, while the other euro
country’s NCB receives a Target claim on the ECB.
Thus, it is not the euro-internal current account and capital account
imbalances of a country to which the above accounting identity refers, but to the
one with the entire rest of the world, including euro and non-euro countries.
The question that now arises is in which proportion Target credit, private
capital imports, and, if any, fiscal capital imports contributed to financing the
current account deficits. Whatever the answer, it shouldn’t be interpreted as if
Target credit was the cause of current account deficits or that the two are
correlated. Given that the current account deficits of the crisis countries react
only sluggishly and must be financed somehow, as was discussed in Chapter 2
(Section The Timing Problem), it is clear that the main short-term correlation is
between Target and the other two variables (private capital flows and fiscal
rescue credit). Nevertheless, it is useful to find out what contributions the
separate items have made.
A first overview is provided by Figure 7.1, which reviews the combined
budget constraints of the GIPSIC countries. This is a very rich and informative
chart whose reading requires close attention and, since it forms the basis for the
rest of this chapter, it should be studied carefully. The figure shows the time
paths of:
—the cumulative GIPSIC current account deficit, 1 January 2008 being the
base point, set at zero,
—the stock of GIPSIC Target liabilities,

—the stock of fiscal rescue credit paid out to the GIPSIC countries (added
to the Target balances),
—the stock of GIPSIC government bonds purchased by non-GIPSIC NCBs
and the ECB itself (again added to the former two items), and
—the stock of net foreign debt of the GIPSIC countries evaluated at market
prices. (Basically, this stock is the sum of current account deficits
accumulated from far back in the past, adjusted for a revaluation of
outstanding debt and liability titles as shown in the context of Figure 2.9
in Chapter 2.)
Since all the curves show stocks, their slopes indicate the respective flows.3
Thus, for example, the slope of the cumulative current account curve shows the
current account deficit, whose level the reader already knows from Figure 2.1.
As can be seen, the deficits existed before the crisis broke out in 2007 and have
persisted thereafter. Only with a delay of a couple of years did they gradually
come down, as shown by the flattening and eventually downward-pointing slope.
The figures at the end of the curves refer to the values at the end of 2013,
unless otherwise noted. The figures in brackets give the corresponding
increments as of 1 January 2008. By the end of 2013, GIPSIC Target debt was €
613 billion, as shown in Figure 6.2, while the increment as of 1 January 2008
was € 631 billion, given that the starting stock of Target debt at that point in time
was –€ 18 billion.
As explained in Chapter 2, before the outbreak of the crisis markets were still
willing to finance the current account deficits. Thus, the Target balances were
vanishingly small until 2007. However, since autumn 2008, when the Lehman
debacle brought the crisis to full swing, the Target balances started to rise
sharply because the measures described in Chapter 5, particularly the lowering
of collateral standards for local refinancing credit and the extension of its
maturity, cranked up the printing presses, given that ECB funding became
available at below-market conditions. The Target curve shows which part of the
current account deficits, accumulated since 1 January 2008, was financed at
various points in time by Target credit, i.e. the ECB internal credit among the
NCBs. Strictly speaking, the contribution of Target credit is given by the
increase in the height of the curve from 1 January 2008 to the respective date,
but given that Target credit was close to zero at the starting point, this is of little
relevance in the chart.

Figure 7.1 Net foreign debt, cumulative current account balances, Target liabilities, and open rescue
operations (GIPSIC)*
* Securities Markets Programme (SMP): book value of GIPSIC government bonds held by non-GIPSIC
central banks. Sources: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International
Transactions; European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, The EU as a Borrower; European
Commission, EU Budget 2011, Financial Report; European Commission, The Economic Adjustment
Programme for Greece: Fifth Review; European Financial Stability Facility, Lending Operations; IMF,
Financial Activities; IMF, SDR Exchange Rate Archives by Month; IMF, Updated IMF Quota Data;

European Stability Mechanism, Financial Assistance; European Stability Mechanism, ESM Factsheet;
ECB, Open Market Operations; Banca d’Italia, Base Informativa Pubblica, Balance of Payments and
International Investment Position; for Target balances, see Figures 6.2 and 6.3.
Note: The figures in brackets show the respective increments of the curve values as of 1 January 2008. In
this diagram they differ from the curve values by the value of the GIPSIC Target claim on 31 December
2007, which amounted to € 18 billion.
The fiscal rescue credit is calculated net of the six crisis countries’ own contributions to rescue operations
and net of debt redemptions (€ 1.7 billion up to December 2013), only actual payments being tallied. It
includes all financial help disbursed by the EU, IMF, the euro countries, EFSF, and ESM (monthly data).
Greece: first rescue package of the euro countries and IMF, second rescue package of the EFSF and the
IMF. Ireland: EFSF, EFSM, and IMF. Portugal: EFSF, EFSM, and IMF. Spain: ESM. Cyprus: ESM and
IMF. By December 2013, this had translated into a net fiscal rescue credit of € 339 billion. The countries’
own contributions follow from the rescue agreements in the case of the first Eurozone package, from the
share in the revenues of the EU budget in 2011 in the case of EU contributions, and from their contributions
to ESM’s paid-in capital.
Government bond purchases by the ECB: since all the euro countries’ NCBs participated in the purchase
of sovereign bonds according to their share in the ECB’s capital, the GIPSIC share (37%) is subtracted from
the overall total. This and the following charts are based on data available as of 24 February 2014.
However, the GIPSIC countries not only received credit from the ECB, but
also from fiscal institutions. The fiscal capital flows resulting from the various
rescue operations are measured by the height of the dotted area placed on the
Target curve. The rescue programmes began with the decisions adopted by the
EU countries on 10 May 2010. These decisions paved the way for the
intergovernmental aid for Greece and the establishment of the European
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which in January 2011 began to issue credit
to Ireland, and in May 2011 also to Portugal. In addition there were rescue
credits from the IMF and the EU, the latter in the form of the European Financial
Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM). Later, in 2012, the permanent rescue fund
ESM was added. The credit flows are calculated here net of the GIPSIC
countries’ own contributions to the rescue programmes and net of repayments.
The figures shown include only the actual disbursements, not the total
programme volumes. As the dotted area demonstrates, the net flow of these
rescue credits increased sharply after May 2010 and contributed to funding the
crisis-stricken countries. By the end of 2013 the stock of fiscal rescue credit
received by the GIPSIC countries was € 339, as indicated by the curly bracket.
In the following, the upper boundary of the dotted area will be labelled ‘public
credit, ’ as it measures the sum of the Target and fiscal credits.
The difference between the current account curve and the public credit curve
by definition gives the net private capital import into the GIPSIC countries
accumulated since 1 January 2008 (minus the small starting Target claim of € 18
billion). The two double-arrowed lines on the left show this difference at
alternative points in time referring to the initial phase of the crisis. Obviously, up

to these points private capital still had co-financed the current account deficits.
The third double-arrowed line, further to the right, refers to the reverse situation.
As the sum of Target and fiscal credits exceed the accumulated current account,
in net terms private capital had left the GIPSIC countries during the crisis up to
that point in time. Public credit, fiscal and Target, had not only financed the
current account deficits, but also an outright capital flight.
At the last data point available as of this writing, December 2013, the public
credit, i.e. the sum of the Target and the fiscal rescue credits, net of the
countries’ own contributions, was € 953 billion (the increment of this sum since
1 January 2008 being € 970 billion). About two-thirds of this sum was Target
credit, and one-third was fiscal rescue credit, an issue that will be discussed in
more detail in Chapter 8 in the context of Figure 8.2.
In addition, the chart shows two further curves that provide complementary
information on the financing of the GIPSIC countries. The first is the curve
labelled ‘effective public international credit (including cross-border SMP
purchases)’. The distance between it and the upper boundary of the dotted area
measures the stock of GIPSIC government bonds bought by non-GIPSIC central
banks (including the ECB itself) under the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme
(SMP) introduced in May 2010. This is not a direct entry to the balance-of-
payments statistics, because the NCBs buy the bonds only from the banks in
their jurisdictions. When those banks or other market agents purchase such
government bonds from the GIPSIC countries, the purchases are counted as a
private capital import for the GIPSIC countries, although they are publicly
induced. To be specific: when the non-GIPSIC central banks buy GIPSIC
government bonds from their local commercial banks, a local shortage of such
bonds occurs that banks will likely, though not necessarily, refill by
repurchasing the bonds in the international market. This induces a net flow of
such bonds from the GIPSIC countries, where the bonds are issued by the
respective states, and results in a private capital import and a corresponding
reduction in their Target debt. Thus the height of the area corresponding to the
cross-border SMP purchases can be assumed to roughly measure a publicly
induced, albeit privately processed, capital flow to the GIPSIC countries.
Subject to this qualification, the second curve from above indeed shows what
was labelled ‘effective international public rescue credit, ’ incorporating all
programmes. This overall public credit reached a total of € 1, 065 billion by
December 2013, as indicated on the right-hand edge of the chart.4 The curve
peaked in August 2012 at a value of € 1, 361 billion.
The effective overall sum of public international credit could even be
augmented by the ECB’s Covered Bond Purchase Programmes I and II (CBPP),

which obliged all NCBs to buy well-specified private collateralized bonds. By
the end of 2013 the stock of assets purchased under these programmes was € 57
billion, of which the non-GIPSIC countries and the ECB accounted for € 36
billion.5 However, given that the ECB has not revealed in detail what it has
bought, it can only be surmised that these programmes concentrated on covered
bonds of the GIPSIC countries. If so, the total fiscal and quasi-fiscal credit
provided to the GIPSIC countries and showing up directly or indirectly in the
balance-of-payments statistics would have been € 1.101 trillion by December
2013.
The second curve added as complementary information is the curve at the top
of the chart; it shows the net foreign debt position of the GIPSIC countries,
which the reader knows already from Figure 2.9. The slope of that curve, in the
absence of revaluation effects, would be equal to the slope of the curve showing
the accumulated current account deficit. However, as discussed in Chapter 2,
Eurostat wrote off some of the debt of the GIPSIC countries because of the
decline in its market value. By September 2013 (the last data point available at
this writing), GIPSIC net foreign debt was € 2, 049 billion. At the end of 2012,
GIPSIC net foreign debt amounted to € 1, 984 billion, of which 42% was Target
debt, 15% fiscal rescue credit, and 7% credit from other central banks resulting
from their purchases of GIPSIC government bonds.6 Only the remaining 26%
was truly private. This qualifies the information about the share of Target debt in
the 2012 net foreign debt positions of the individual GIPSIC countries as given
above in Figure 6.4.
The relationship between the public credit curve (Target and fiscal) and the
curve showing the cumulative current account deficit tells the story of the crisis.
When both curves have the same slope, the current account deficit in the
respective period is entirely financed by new public credit and there are no other
net capital flows across borders, although of course the gross flows in all
directions are always huge. When the public credit curve’s slope is steeper than
that for the cumulative current account deficit, public credit finances more than
just the current account deficit at the respective point in time, indicating that
private capital is being exported in net terms. When the public credit curve is
flatter, public credit finances less than the current account deficit, indicating that
there is still a net private capital import.
Public credit increased endogenously, through market forces, and exogenously
through the policy measures of the ECB Governing Council as discussed in
Chapter 5, as well as through fiscal policy decisions that will be discussed in
Chapter 8. It came in three waves: during the second half of 2008 (Lehman

Brothers), in the first half of 2010, and again from summer 2011 to summer
2012. During these periods the slope of the public credit curve was steeper than
the curve of cumulative current accounts, indicating outright capital flight.7
Private capital in net terms was relocated by foreign investors to other countries,
mostly in the sense that the banks of creditor countries recalled their interbank
credit and placed it elsewhere. Foreign investors were no longer willing to
finance the current account deficits and, in addition, they also wanted their
money back when loans matured, rather than rolling over the debt. The GIPSIC
countries largely filled the financial gap with the printing press, which was
activated by lowering the collateral standards for refinancing credit as discussed
in Chapters 5 and 6. They used the printing press to finance their current account
deficits and to redeem part of their existing debt as demanded by their foreign
creditors. In addition, after May 2010 fiscal rescue credit started to arrive, which
was used for essentially the same purposes.
While it was predominantly foreign investors who fled, residents of the
GIPSIC also fled into safe havens. The case of Greek and Spanish banks shifting
€ 358 billion to other countries in the period 2008 to September 2013 was
documented at the beginning of Chapter 5. The banks borrowed money from
their central banks and lent it to other countries. Or the banks used the money
they borrowed from their central banks to buy assets, typically government
bonds, from domestic investors, and these invested the funds in other countries.
During the year 2009 and again in the period from autumn 2010 to spring
2011, markets had calmed temporarily, after the first two waves of capital flight.
In these periods the public credit curve was rather flat, while the cumulative
current account curve remained steep, indicating that the markets were again
willing to finance an increasing portion, if not all, of the current account deficits.
On balance, until the autumn of 2009, there was no capital flight in net terms and
in the aggregate. The increasing distance between the curves depicting the
cumulative current account and the Target debt shows that a sizeable private
capital import financed most of the current account deficits.
But then came two stormy periods of capital flight, the first in spring 2010,
and the second from summer 2011 to summer 2012.8 During these periods more
private capital left the crisis countries than had entered since the beginning of
2008. In the autumn of 2011, a point was reached where the Target credit just
sufficed to finance the current account deficit that had accumulated since 1
January 2008. But this was obviously only a snapshot, as the capital flight
continued until the summer of 2012, driving the public credit curve way above
the current account curve.

After the summer of 2012, markets calmed down and the capital flow even
reversed its direction, as can be seen by the sharply declining public credit curve.
Even the curve showing the effective public credit, including the cross-border
SMP purchases of government bonds by NCBs, was coming down in this period.
The calming of markets was presumably due to the establishment of the
permanent rescue fund ESM and to the ECB’s announcement of its OMT
programme, both of which promised buyers of GIPSIC government bonds much
more safety, inducing investors to send fresh money to these countries. This will
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
However, the decline in Target debt itself was not only attributable to the
increasing confidence of the markets. It also resulted from the surge of fiscal
rescue credits, which reduced Target debt through the associated issuance of net
payment orders to the GIPSIC countries. The decline in the Target balances from
the peak of the Target curve in August 2012 to December 2013 was € 389
billion. Over the same period, the fiscal rescue funds gave rise to a flow of
payment orders from the non-GIPSIC to the GIPSIC countries amounting to
around € 112 billion. Thus, 29% of the decline in Target balances over that
period was attributable to the fiscal rescue funds alone. The rest can be attributed
to the ECB’s OMT programme and the announcement of the ESM.
In principle, the actual cross border purchases under the SMP could also have
contributed to bringing down the Target balances, as they induced private
international payment orders to the GIPSIC countries, but the SMP ended in
February 2012, and therefore could not exert any effect. It did exert an effect,
however, before this date. As mentioned above, the peak of the effective public
credit curve was reached in August 2012, with € 1, 361 billion. Other things
equal, this would have been the GIPSIC Target debt at that point in time, had
there been no SMP and no fiscal rescue programmes. By the same token, in the
absence of fiscal rescue credit and the SMP, the GIPSIC Target debt would have
been € 1, 065 billion by the end of 2013. Both the fiscal rescue credit and the
credit granted through the SMP programme merely repackaged Target credit,
distributing the overall sum to various other types of rescue credit whose
economic similarities the public would not normally be able to discern.
It is important to note what this means for the way current account deficits
were financed during the crisis. From the beginning of 2008 to September 2013
(the last current account data point available as of this writing), Target credit and
fiscal rescue credit financed the entire € 613 billion of cumulative current
account deficits of the GIPSIC countries and, in addition, a capital flight of
around € 425 billion. Thus, in net terms, 59% of the public credit provided to the
GIPSIC countries (Target and fiscal) served to finance the current account

deficits and 41% compensated for the net capital flight. Taking the SMP into
account, which by September 2013 likely had induced a public capital inflow
into the GIPSIC countries of around € 113 billion, the true private capital flight
that was financed in addition to the current account deficits may have even been
€ 538 billion.
To reiterate a point made earlier, the statement of how the GIPSIC current
account deficit was financed is an accounting statement, not one about economic
causality, correlation or the like. It is on the same logical level as saying that,
over a certain time span, x% of the government budget was tax-financed and y%
was debt-financed. It is tempting to rework such a statement using one of the
modern econometric toolboxes, but an accounting identity simply does not lend
itself to such an exercise.9 The inertia of the current account logically implies
that there should have been a nearly perfect negative correlation between the
short run Target deficit and private capital imports during the time span
considered.10 Short-term capital, as always, was jittery and jumping across
borders in both directions, and the buffer was the Target credit.
Note also that the accounting statement not only includes current account
deficits with the rest of the Eurozone, but also deficits with the rest of the world,
outside the Eurozone. Buying goods in net terms from non-euro countries
requires credit from someone else, and if this credit is not being provided by the
capital market, it must come from public sources such as intergovernmental
credit or extra credit from the printing press. As explained above, an
international money order to a country outside the Eurozone also leads to a
Target liability for the originating country and to a Target surplus somewhere
else in the Eurozone, unless the ECB or other central banks influence the
exchange rate by hoarding or dishoarding currency reserves.
Overall, the chart thus confirms the overwhelming role of public credit in
maintaining the living standards of the crisis-stricken countries and
compensating for the capital flight that affected them. Target credit is the most
important part, but the least known form of this support. The fact that it carries a
minuscule interest rate given by the ECB’s main refinancing rate (held for long
at only 1% and currently just 0.25%) is probably the main explanation for the
puzzle presented in Figure 4.3, namely that the net investment income that the
GIPSIC countries paid to other countries declined during the crisis in absolute
terms, even though they kept borrowing abroad in net terms and had to pay
higher rates in the markets. Since the GIPSIC countries’ additional credit taken
during the crisis was just Target credit, and since Target credit even replaced
some of the existing credit that had to be serviced at market conditions, the

decline in net interest payments should not be all that surprising.
Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus Living off the Printing Press
The same analysis as that carried out for the GIPSIC countries as a group can be
made for each individual country, except for the curve of the ECB’s government
bond purchases in the SMP programme, for which no country-specific panel data
have been published.11
Let us start with Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus, the first two of which,
according to the analysis presented in Chapter 4, are among the least
competitive. All three countries had enormous current account deficits even
before the crisis started. In 2007, Greece’s deficit amounted to 14.6% of GDP,
Portugal’s to 10.1% and Cyprus’s to 11.7%.12 In the case of Greece and
Portugal, the deficits would have been about 1.5 percentage points higher if
these two countries hadn’t already been receiving significant public transfers
from the EU. It will be difficult to find examples in history of such huge levels
of net absorption of external resources by independent states. And unfortunately,
as shown in Figure 2.6, the excess absorption served consumption rather than
investment purposes.
In the meantime, the current account deficits have come down, but only due to
the collapse of incomes during the crisis, not due to a realignment of relative
prices, as would be required for an improvement in competitiveness. This was
discussed in the context of Figure 4.1.
Figure 7.2 shows the situation in the three countries in an analogous way to
Figure 7.1. All the curves have the same meaning as before. It can be seen that in
the initial years of the crisis the Target credit provided in all three countries was
about the same as their cumulative current account deficit. In fact, it is surprising
that the coincidence lasted roughly until the fiscal rescue credits began to flow,
which was May 2010 for Greece, May 2011 for Portugal, and May 2013 for
Cyprus. Thus, up to these points in time the cumulative net private capital
movements were close to zero. This clearly indicated a sudden stop of private
capital imports, not of a reversal of capital flows, to use the terminology
introduced when the Target balances were explained in Figure 6.2. The
cumulative current account deficit up to these points in time was indeed financed
with refinancing credit from the central bank, i.e., to be blunt, with the printing
press.
The charts show once again, however, that the capital flows were more
volatile than the trade flows. There were always short periods during which the

slope of the Target curve exceeded that of the current account curve, indicating
net private capital outflows, followed by short periods of capital inflows, albeit
at a lower level. Thus, the statement that the printing press financed the current
account deficits over the period in question should not be taken to imply a
correlation. It is a mere statement about an accounting identity. Since private
capital flows did not contribute to financing the current account deficits, and the
fiscal rescue credits were not yet available, the Eurosystem’s Target credit must,
by definition, have done the entire job.

Figure 7.2 Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus
* September 2013
Sources: See Figure 7.1.
Note: The fiscal rescue credit here and in the following graphs is calculated net of the respective country’s
own contributions to the rescue programmes and net of debt redemption, if any. Cf. the explanations given

below Figure 7.1. The figures in brackets show increments from 1 January 2008 to end of December 2013.
For Cyprus no Target data before 2008 are available.
The situation changed dramatically when huge fiscal rescue packages became
available. By September 2013, three and a half years after the first fiscal credit
had been released for Greece, the sum of Target and fiscal rescue credit
exceeded the cumulative current account deficits, by € 148 billion in Greece and
€ 52 billion in Portugal. This shows that in the later phase of the crisis fiscal and
Target credit not only financed the net import of real economic resources as
measured by the current account deficits, but also an outright capital flight.
Although it is not possible to say what type of public credit financed what—
current account or capital flight—the charts do suggest that the fiscal rescue
operations induced or enabled a capital flight of a similar magnitude, for without
the possibility of tapping public credit—refinancing credit from the printing
press (Target) or fiscal credit from other states––it would not have been possible
for debtors to redeem their debt, or for investors to sell their local assets and
send the proceeds abroad.
It is worth noting that, in the case of Greece, Target liabilities have come
down significantly since November 2012, when they peaked at € 107 billion, or
55% of GDP. At first glance this could be taken as proof that capital is now
returning to Greece and that the situation is calming down. However, this would
be a misinterpretation, since the sum of Target credit and fiscal rescue credit
roughly stayed constant over this period, 13 while the current account curve
began to flatten out, indicating a reduction in the Greek current account deficit.
Thus, the reduction in the Greek Target debt can entirely be attributed to the
surge of fiscal rescue credit paid out to Greece, which, by virtue of the
mechanics of Target accounting, reduces the Target credit one-to-one. The
reduction in the Greek Target debt shows nothing but a repackaging of public
rescue credits, definitely not a return of private capital to Greece. As the reader
can easily verify, exactly the same situation prevailed in Portugal. No private
capital has returned to Portugal as of this writing.
In Cyprus, where capital controls were introduced in March 2013 after the
collapse of Laiki Bank, the sum of Target credit and fiscal rescue credit
continued to increase, while the current account turned positive. Thus, private
capital flight from this country continued up to this writing as fast as the capital
controls allowed it.
Irish Capital Flight

The situation in Ireland differs markedly from the one in Portugal and Greece,
since Ireland’s current account deficit was smaller and capital flight played a far
larger role. The relative Irish current account deficit, which in 2007 amounted to
5.3% of GDP and 5.6% the following year, was very large by international
standards, but still less than two-fifths of Greece’s and only about half as large
as Portugal’s. As a tax haven, Ireland’s problem was, as Figure 7.3 shows, very
clearly capital flight, or repatriation of capital by the core countries. The
mountain of Target liabilities amassed by Ireland was significantly larger than
what it needed to finance its current account deficit. It reflects primarily the
capital flight from the country.14
As the Section The Foreign Debt Problem in Chapter 2 discussed, the
transformation of maturities, i.e. borrowing short-term to finance long-term
loans, brought Ireland’s banks into enormous difficulty. The yields they had to
offer for fresh capital climbed ever higher, while at the same time their long-
term loans lost value. In only two years, from September 2007 to September
2009, this increased Ireland’s net external debt by € 147 billion, equivalent to
almost its entire GDP (€ 162 billion in 2009). The government tried to calm the
markets by offering huge guarantees for the banks, worth over 200% of GDP. It
failed. As discussed in Chapter 2, the country was caught in the global financial
maelstrom and within a year its budget deficit had soared to 30% of GDP,
forcing it to seek the help of the official rescue packages, which cost it part of its
sovereignty.

Figure 7.3 Ireland
Sources: See Figure 7.1.
Note: See Figures 7.1 and 7.2.
Figure 7.3 shows that Irish capital flight occurred in two waves. The first
came directly after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008. The
Bank of Ireland made large use at that time of ELA (Emergency Liquidity
Assistance) credit from its central bank, probably because there was not enough
eligible collateral available for the enormous volume of refinancing credit
needed (see Chapter 5). The situation subsequently calmed down somewhat and
some capital flowed back to the country in the winter of 2009/2010. But in the
autumn of 2010 the second wave hit, much stronger than the previous one,
forcing Ireland to seek the help of the fiscal rescue programmes. Up to
December 2013, a total gross amount of € 62 billion, or € 60 billion net of own
contributions, was disbursed for Ireland.
As in the case of Greece, the fiscal rescue funds paid out to Ireland accounted
in large part for the reduction in Irish Target liabilities. From January 2011,
when the first fiscal rescue credit was paid out to Ireland, until December 2013,

Irish Target debt came down by € 90 billion, while at the same time a total of €
60 billion in rescue credit was given to the country. Thus, two-thirds (67%) of
the reduction in Irish Target debt was simply a repackaging from Target to fiscal
credit, while the remainder is explained by a return of private capital,
presumably induced by the ECB’s provision of insurance through it OMT
programme.
Indeed, the expectation that the reliance on central bank liquidity and thus
Target credit could be reduced was one of the reasons why the then-president of
the ECB, Jean-Claude Trichet, pressed Ireland to seek the help of the rescue
programme. Ireland at that time did not want rescue money, since it carried a
5.8% interest rate, while Target credit cost it only 1% in interest. But Trichet
insisted on replacing the money-printing press with intergovernmental and IMF
help in order to bring the ECB balance sheet under better control. By the end of
2013, Ireland still held € 54 billion in Target liabilities, equivalent to 33% of its
GDP.
The Flight from Italy and Spain
The year 2011 was the euro’s annus horribilis. Target credit and fiscal rescue
packages had more or less brought under control the first wave that hit the
smaller economies, but then a second and far bigger wave struck; it left Italy and
Spain reeling.
Some observers declared themselves absolutely stunned. Who would compare
Italy with Greece? Italy is a productive, rich country, with 41% more private
wealth per household or 14% more per capita than Germany.15 The northern
Italian economy is one of Europe’s most productive. The fact that Italy had long
managed with public debt exceeding 100% of GDP and a small foreign debt,
amounting to less than 30% of GDP (29% at the end of September 2013),
appeared to be enough to calm the markets. By comparison, the other crisis-hit
countries’ foreign debt amounted to about 100% of GDP (see also Figure 2.9).
And yet, Italy was now stumbling too.16 Spreads on Italian debt started to rise
against Germany’s benchmark in July 2011 (see Figure 2.2), and the first foreign
banks started to pull capital out of the country, turning Italy’s Target claims into
a Target liability that soared after August 2011. Silvio Berlusconi’s government
tried to soothe the markets with austerity programmes hastily put together in
August, to no avail. By the end of 2011, Italy’s Target liabilities, fuelled by
capital flight and the granting of fresh refinancing credit, had shot to € 191
billion, from € 6 billion in June of that year. That was the time when Prime

Minister Silvio Berlusconi initiated secret negotiations about Italy’s exiting the
euro, as cited in the Introduction. By August 2012, Italy’s Target liabilities had
soared to € 289 billion, as Figure 7.4 shows, marking a total increase of € 295
billion as of 1 January 2008.
Figure 7.4 Italy and Spain
* End of September 2013.
Sources: See Figure 7.1.
Note: See Figures 7.1 and 7.2. Unlike the other GIPSIC countries, Italy made a net contribution to fiscal
rescue operations of € 27 billion. This is not shown in the diagram.
The situation in Spain was similar. Before the summer of 2011, Spain’s Target

liabilities increased somewhat, but remained moderate. From January 2008 until
June 2011, the Spanish NCB had taken on € 42 billion in Target credit, whereas
the country’s cumulative current account deficit had risen to € 227 billion by that
time. Thus, approximately one-fifth of the current account deficit of those three-
and-a-half years was financed with the money-printing press. The rest was
financed by normal capital imports.
The situation in Spain also changed dramatically in July 2011. From June
2011 to August 2012, Spain’s Target liabilities rose from € 45 billion to € 434
billion. The € 389-billion increase was even larger than Italy’s € 295 billion over
the same period. As discussed at the beginning of Chapter 6, foreign banks
withdrew huge amounts of funds from Spanish banks, but Spanish banks also
shifted deposits abroad.
The capital flight that gave rise to these Target liabilities was much larger than
the private capital import that occurred in the first period of the crisis, before the
summer of 2011, which is approximately measured by the distance between the
curve of cumulative current account deficits and the Target curve at that point in
time, given that the Spanish Target liabilities were only € 3 billion at 1 January
2008.
By the end of 2011, Spain’s Target curve had already reached the cumulative
current account curve. Thus, summed over the four acute-crisis years from 2008
to 2011, Spain’s cumulative € 242 billion current account deficit was not
financed with private capital imports, but exclusively with the money-printing
press, because the capital that had been imported until the summer of 2011 left
Spain again within just a few months.
In Italy the Target and current account curves also met by the end of 2011, but
since the Italian Target debt in 2008 started with a negative value (–€ 36 billion)
rather than about zero as in Spain, the Italian printing press financed even more
than the cumulative current account deficit over that period. Capital flight was so
large that within only half a year it more than offset Italy’s total capital imports
since the beginning of 2008.
Whereas Greece, Portugal, and Ireland had all received fiscal rescue credit,
this was not yet the case for Italy. Italy has benefited from the ECB’s purchasing
of its government bonds, but it has not received funds from any of the rescue
programmes. It has instead itself made contributions, through its provision of
equity capital for the ESM and, in particular, its additional guarantees for the
ESM, which, however, do not show up in Italy’s international payment statistics
until they lead to payment flows.17 Spain, by contrast, after a short period of
being a contributor to the fiscal rescue programmes, became a recipient in
December 2012 with an inflow of funds, net of Spain’s own contributions, as

illustrated by the dotted area above the Target curve on the right. Relative to the
huge Target credit that Spain received, however, the fiscal rescue funds appear
small.
What exactly triggered the unease in the capital markets in the summer of
2011 is unclear. The GIPSIC countries had accumulated a rising amount of
external debt, their loss of competitiveness was manifest, the housing bubble had
burst, banks were suspected of concealing huge quantities of toxic assets,
unemployment was soaring, and the hope had vanished that the real economy
would soon recover. All of this was reason enough for investors to become
increasingly nervous, but it does not explain the trigger event in the summer of
2011, as the respective processes had already been underway for a while then.
Whatever it was, once a seed of distrust was sown, contagion was swift among
investors, which, in turn, provided a new boost to capital flight and generated a
self-fulfilling process of confidence destruction.18
There are reasons to suspect that the capital flight out of Spain and Italy was
encouraged by the ECB’s rescue operations themselves. The Big Bazooka offer
of December 2011, the Long-Term Refinancing Operation (LTRO) described in
Chapter 5 that eventually provided up to a trillion euros in three-year refinancing
credit in two tranches, had considerable effects. Spanish banks, for example,
took more than € 250 billion of this long-term refinancing credit, using it to
repay their interbank credit and replace funds that Spanish investors had whisked
abroad to protect them from a possible wave of bankruptcies. Spanish banks also
bought € 85 billion in additional Spanish government bonds over that period,
offering a chance for other investors to unload these bonds and bring the
proceeds out of the country.19 Spanish banks themselves also invested huge
amounts abroad, often in Latin America, as shown at the beginning of Chapter 5.
The consequence of this policy was a jump of about € 101 billion in Spanish
Target liabilities from January through late April 2012, as the chart shows.
Italian banks made use of the LTRO to take on € 201 billion in long-term
refinancing credit from the Banca d’Italia from December 2011 to June 2012.20
They used the money to redeem interbank credit taken abroad, buy domestic
securities, including government bonds, and give new loans to private
customers.21 The money either flowed directly abroad or was paid out to Italians
first, who then brought it to safe havens abroad. In this respect, the Big Bazooka
stabilized the prices of Italian and Spanish bonds in the short-term, but at the
price of bolstering the capital flight it was meant to combat.
The Italian crisis led, in November 2011, to the fall of the Berlusconi
government. The new Prime Minister, Mario Monti, a former EU Commissioner

and professor of economics at the University of Milan, started out with sweeping
reforms. He pushed his first € 30-billion austerity package through parliament in
2011. It included, among other things, a rise in the retirement age, cuts in health
spending, and a VAT rise.22 However, when he tried to liberalize the labour
market by breaking the tenure rights of older workers in order to help younger
ones enter the market, he did not achieve much because the unions, heartened by
the ECB’s help, did not feel any sense of urgency to relinquish social
achievements they had fought for decades to obtain.23 Like nearly all of his
predecessors, Monti had to step down after only a few months in office. He
failed miserably in the elections of February 2013, giving way to a new
government under Enrico Letta, who in the meantime has been replaced by
Matteo Renzi.
France in Between
The great unknown in the European calculation is France. On the one hand, the
Grande Nation should be well above suspicions of financial instability. France
possesses a functioning state endowed with the power to tap its own citizens for
financial resources at any time and to bring forward European solutions to its
domestic problems, if necessary. A sovereign default is a priori unlikely.
On the other hand, the French state has quite nearly exhausted its potential. In
2013 the country had the second largest public sector (57% of GDP), after
Denmark, among the OECD countries, 24 while its public debt amounted to 93%
of GDP. The French unemployment rate was 10.8% as of December 2013, about
as high as the German rate at the peak of Germany’s own euro crisis in 2005
(compare Figure 3.8). During the financial crisis (2008–2013), when the current
account deficits of many countries decreased as a result of the reduction in
imports triggered by the recession, the French current account, which before the
crisis had been in equilibrium, worsened to 1.8% of GDP in 2013. According to
the analysis by the economics department of Goldman Sachs cited in Chapter 4
(see Table 4.1 and Figure 4.8), France needs a real depreciation of 20% relative
to the Eurozone average in order to achieve debt sustainability. The Standard &
Poor’s rating agency downgraded France from top-notch to AA-in January 2012,
followed by downgrades by Moody’s in November 2012 and the French-owned
agency, Fitch, in July 2013.
France’s particular disadvantage is that its banks acted as a hub for European
savings. French banks borrowed in the European interbank market, often from
Belgium, the Netherlands, and the UK, who in turn borrowed from other

countries, Germany in particular, and distributed the funds around southern
Europe, an area to which it is closely tied for historical and cultural reasons
(refer also to the discussion of Figure 5.1). Whereas Germany’s banks had
concentrated on the American business and got a bloody nose from the write-off
losses on US structured securities, French banks were hardly affected, since they
had specialized in southern Europe.25 When the fiscal rescue operations were
agreed, at the end of Q1 2010, French banks held 95% more government bonds
of Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain in their books relative to the size of the
French economy than did German banks.26
France’s nail-biting is reflected in its Target curve, depicted in Figure 7.5.
France evidently had to battle against some capital flight during the first wave of
the crisis (notably related to difficulties in refinancing markets in US dollars),
which pushed its Target liabilities to around € 100 billion. The balance declined
in 2010, only to rise once again during the second wave that began in the
summer of 2011. However, in the spring of 2012, when capital flight was in full
swing in the Eurozone, as the overall rise in Target balances (see Figure 7.1)
clearly shows, the French Target debt declined, indicating that in all the turmoil
France was considered a relatively safe haven by the capital markets. By the end
of 2013 the French Target debt was close to zero, only € 4 billion higher than at
the beginning of the crisis.

Figure 7.5 France
Sources: See Figure 7.1; for the Target balance, see Figure 6.3.
It is noteworthy that while France had no net external debt before the crisis, it
did accumulate such debt during the crisis. With a volume of € 430 billion by the
end of 2012, equivalent to 21% of GDP, it shows a significant change with
respect to the onset of the crisis. The fact that the increase in this debt, like in
Ireland’s case, is much larger than that which could be accounted for by its
current account deficits, suggests that France’s banks were also acting as credit
intermediaries, borrowing short-term to lend long-term to countries that were
later swamped by the crisis, ultimately taking large losses on their investments.
Thinking of French banks as institutions that borrowed short-term in the
interbank market to lend long-term at enticing interest rates to southern
European entities does not appear to be too wide of the mark.
When assessing the French Target debt, account must be taken of the fact that

the French participation in the rescue operations, taken by itself, would have
resulted in Target debt. The Banque de France, for example, had to buy € 45
billion worth of GIPSIC government bonds through the ECB’s SMP programme.
Since these bonds came from abroad, French participation induced payment
orders to other countries, building up a corresponding Target debt. In addition,
French contributions to fiscal rescue operations and potential sales of ESM
securities in the French capital market will have also contributed to the French
Target debt. Since France’s actual Target debt is nevertheless close to zero, there
must have been a private capital import above and beyond the current account
deficit to accommodate the public capital outflows.
Germany: Exporting for Target Claims
With a current account surplus of € 201 billion in 2013, Germany was the
world’s largest capital exporter (see Figure 3.4). As the country accumulated
huge Target claims, the question is what fraction of the capital export was
accounted for by such Target claims and what was the contribution made by the
rescue credit. Figure 7.6 provides the answer. It resembles the previous charts,
except that, since Germany’s net foreign asset position is positive rather than
negative, the chart now shows assets and claims, rather than liabilities and debt.

Figure 7.6 Germany
Sources: See Figure 7.1 as well as Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Databases, External Sector, Current
Account by Country and Group of Countries.
Note: The numbers in brackets give increments as of 1 January 2008.
There are two curves for Germany’s cumulative current account surplus. The
solid one depicts the surplus against the rest of the world, and the dashed one the
surplus against the rest of the Eurozone. Interestingly, the solid curve roughly
reaches about the same altitude as the Target curve at the peak of the intra-euro
balance-of-payments crisis in June 2012. In the first five years of the crisis
(2008–2012), the increase in German Target claims amounted to € 585 billion,
while the cumulative German current account surplus was € 800 billion. Thus,
73% of Germany’s cumulative current account surplus in the first five years of
the crisis was not paid for with money foreigners had collected by selling
marketable assets to, or borrowing from, Germany, but with money borrowed
from the printing press elsewhere in the Eurozone. In exchange, all that the

Bundesbank received was a compensating Target claim. Only 27% of
Germany’s current account surplus during this period was used to accumulate
private claims against foreign countries and institutions.
In 2013, the German Target balance came down significantly, indicating a
strong increase in private capital export from Germany that began in the second
half of 2012 and gained momentum in 2013. The situation had improved
dramatically because the OMT and the ESM had calmed the markets. By the end
of 2013, Germany’s accumulated current account surplus was € 1, 001 billion, of
which € 439 billion, or 44%, was Target-financed and 56% was accommodated
with private capital export.
At the beginning of Chapter 5 it was shown that despite the substantial retreat
of German banks from the GIPSIC countries, Germany still posted a
considerable net private capital export of € 521 billion during the first 6 years of
the crisis (1 January 2008 to 31 December 2013), and that it was puzzling that
this capital export was much smaller than the country’s overall capital export, in
terms of its persistent current account surplus, which reached a cumulative € 1,
001 billion during the period considered. The information given in Figure 7.6
solves this puzzle: the public capital flow through the printing press largely filled
the gap. In addition, Germany’s participation in the first intergovernmental
rescue programme for Greece, which induced direct payment orders from
government to government, contributed with € 15 billion to filling this gap,
admittedly a small sum.
In all likelihood, however, a large part of the € 521 billion in private capital
export was also caused by public interventions.
Firstly, private funds moved into the Luxembourg-based rescue fund, which
then distributed them as public credit to the crisis-stricken countries. The overall
rescue credit provided by international institutions in the period considered (net
of the direct intergovernmental aid to Greece) was € 340 billion, to which
German investors have contributed an unknown share. Since investors from all
euro countries bought a good 40% of the European rescue credit titles, the
German share may have been in the range of € 30 to € 60 billion.27
Secondly, as the Bundesbank participated in the SMP programme, Germany’s
Target claims were reduced through the issuance of payment orders to other
countries as part of the process of bringing the GIPSIC government bonds to
Germany. Germany’s participation in the SMP alone could therefore have
reduced its Target claims by € 48 billion, or about 5% of Germany’s cumulative
net capital exports during the period from 2008 to 2013.
Thirdly, private funds moved directly to the crisis-stricken countries under the
protection of the ECB’s OMT programme and the permanent rescue fund ESM,

a topic that will be studied at length in Chapter 8. This also might explain a
considerable share of private capital exports.
It is true that German firms earning export revenues did not care whether the
money they received came out of other countries’ printing presses or had
previously been acquired by selling assets to, or borrowing from, Germany. For
them Target finance is of no concern. However, in the aggregate the origin of the
money is important insofar as Target finance means that a corresponding part of
the German savings that people bring to their banks is not used by these banks to
acquire foreign assets, but to redeem the refinancing credit they have drawn
from the Bundesbank, or to transfer funds to term deposits with the Bundesbank.
Thus, it was not private individuals, but ultimately the Bundesbank, a public
institution, which acquired most of the claims against the rest of the world in
exchange for the German export surplus. It acted similarly to a sovereign wealth
fund investing domestic savings abroad, the only difference from a true wealth
fund being that it did not invest its funds deliberately, but built up accounting
claims on the Eurosystem through other countries using their printing presses
and exerting their implicit drawing rights within the ECB system. These claims
can never be called due, bear a paltry rate of interest equal to the ECB’s main
refinancing rate, and are at risk should the euro break up, as will be discussed in
Chapter 8.
Instead of comparing the Target flow with the current account surplus,
Germany’s Target stock may also be compared with its net foreign wealth,
resulting from previous current account surpluses. The data underlying Figure
7.6 show that, by the end of 2012, German Target claims accounted for 59% of
the net foreign wealth (see also Figure 6.4) that Germany had acquired over its
history. By the end of September 2013, they still accounted for 45% of the
country’s net foreign wealth.
All this does not mean that the Target debtors just used the fresh money from
their printing presses to buy German goods, having the corresponding sums
chalked up to their accounts at the ECB. The true relationship between Germany
and the Target debtors is more complicated than this, involving many other
countries inside and outside the Eurozone.
Recall that, in principle, the Eurosystem allows a country to finance not only
the euro-internal balance-of-payments deficit with credit from the local printing
press, which is then converted into Target debt, but also its balance-of-payments
deficit with the rest of the world. The country receives goods or assets from the
rest of the world for the money it prints, and this money then flows to another
country of the Eurozone in exchange for goods or assets, leading to a Target
claim for the respective central bank that has to carry out the payment orders.

Consider an example. Suppose a Chinese businessman buys a German car
with dollars he received from a Spanish buyer of a Chinese product, who in turn
received the dollars from the ECB in exchange for new euros borrowed from
Banco de España, and let’s assume that the German carmaker hands the dollars
via his bank to the Bundesbank to convert them into euros. In this case the
Banco de España builds up a Target liability and the Bundesbank acquires a
Target claim. The Bundesbank essentially credits the delivery of goods from
Germany via China to Spain.
Or think of a capital flight from Spain to Britain by way of payment orders in
euros. The euros from the Spanish printing press allow Spanish banks to repay
their debt with British investors, who then lend them to US borrowers who use
them to buy the German car. Even in this case, a Spanish Target debt
corresponds to a German Target claim, because, in a sense, Germany repaid the
Spanish foreign debt with a car delivery in exchange for receiving a Target claim
against the ECB system.
This latter example is particularly relevant insofar as it may explain why the
parallelism between Germany’s Target claims and the cumulative German
current account surplus, as shown by Figure 7.6, is closer than the respective
parallelism between the Target liabilities of Ireland, Spain, and Italy and their
cumulative current account deficits. The money fleeing from these countries
presumably went to a large number of countries inside and outside the Eurozone,
before it eventually was lent to foreign importers of German goods. Think for
example of the substantial flight of Spanish capital to Latin America
documented at the beginning of Chapter 5, or the retreat of British capital from
Cyprus and Ireland. All these capital movements involved euro payment orders
from GIPSIC countries that consumed the GIPSIC monetary base, which would
not have been possible without the NCBs of the GIPSIC countries activating
their (electronic) printing presses to replenish this base. After crisscrossing the
world, the new euros printed in the GIPSIC countries ended up buying German
goods, replacing a potential German accumulation of marketable assets with
mere Target claims.
This may also help to explain the puzzle of why the German current account
surplus did not fall during the crisis with the collapse of Germany’s GIPSIC
customers and the corresponding disappearance of their current account deficits,
as documented in Figure 3.9, but remained stable and even increased somewhat,
reaching a record level of about 7.3% of German GDP in 2013, a level heavily
criticized by EU politicians. The likely cause is the ECB’s financing of the
capital flight from the GIPSIC countries to non-euro countries. The global
abundance of fresh euros that came out of the GIPSIC printing presses induced a

depreciation of the euro (13% from 2008 to 2012 against the dollar) and
sustained Germany’s huge current account surplus, by now the largest in the
world (see also Figure 3.4). Without the ECB’s collateral policy cranking up the
local printing presses, interest rates in the GIPSIC countries would have been
higher, capital flight would have been lower, fewer euros would have been
supplied to the currency markets, the value of the euro would have been higher,
and the German current account surplus lower. And, instead of being
compensated for three-quarters of its current account surplus in the years 2008–
2012 with mere Target claims, Germany would have been able to convert its
somewhat lower current account surplus into marketable foreign assets. Thus, to
some extent, Germany effectively exported its goods to redeem the private
foreign debt of southern European countries, replacing these countries’ private
creditors with the ECB system, which in turn became a debtor to the
Bundesbank.
It could be objected that the German current account surplus stayed high and
gained strength in 2013 even though the private capital flows reversed and the
euro appreciated against the dollar (3% from 2012 to 2013). However, this is
likely due to the well-known anomaly of current account reactions in the short
run, i.e. the combination of sluggishness of export and import quantities and a
price reduction of goods imported from non-euro countries.28
It is an irony that Germany is being disparaged for its current account surplus,
when in fact the persistence of this surplus has largely resulted from the rescue
credits that the Bundesbank was forced to provide, and it is a sign of blunt
ignorance of basic economic accounting identities when EU officials ask
Germany to both export more rescue capital and fewer goods to other countries.
They demand the impossible.
Finland and the Netherlands
The last two countries considered explicitly in this chapter are Finland and the
Netherlands, which have also accumulated huge Target claims, at least until
recently, as the last chapter documented (Figure 6.4). Figure 7.7 shows
simplified versions of the respective charts (without the contributions to fiscal
rescue credits and without the net foreign asset position––for this see Figure
2.9).

Figure 7.7 Other countries from the northern euro bloc
Sources: See Figure 7.1.
Notes: Unlike for Germany, intra-Eurozone current account data for the rest of the Eurozone have not been
published. The figures in brackets give increments as of 1 January 2008.
The charts show rather different patterns of Target balances for these two
countries. In the case of the Netherlands, which has traditionally had a sizeable
current account surplus, the additional Target claims that De Nederlandsche
Bank built up from the beginning of 2008 to June 2011 accounted for just 34%
of the country’s cumulative current account. Afterwards, however, a lot of
capital fled to the Netherlands which, in quantitative terms, meant that the
private capital that had been exported returned in net terms. This follows from
the fact that, by January 2012, the Dutch Target curve temporarily reached the
cumulative current account curve (while it was close to zero on 1 January 2008).
After that point in time, however, the Dutch continued to export private capital.
Over the whole span of the crisis, from 1 January 2008 to September 2013, the
latest month for which data are available as of this writing, 33% of the Dutch
current account surplus was paid for with money from foreign printing presses,
while the rest was used for private capital exports or fiscal rescue credit.
The situation in Finland was obviously very different. While the Finnish

current account surplus disappeared in 2011, as the slope reversal of the
cumulative current account curve shows, there was a huge capital flight towards
Finland after the summer of 2011, which came to a halt a year later when the
ESM was ratified and the OMT was announced. Just like the Netherlands,
Finland was considered a safe haven to safeguard against the risk of a currency
breakup.29 The insurance was provided by Suomen Pankki, Finland’s central
bank, which credited the payment orders for the investors who deposited funds
in Finland, and received claims on the Eurosystem in exchange.
Bretton Woods and the European Payment Union
The significance of the Target balances is made clearer by reflecting on the
Bretton Woods system, the monetary order that governed currency relations
among the world’s major industrial countries in the post-war period until 1973,
with a gold-backed system that tied individual currencies to the dollar.30
During the 1960s, US products had become increasingly expensive, and a US
current account deficit developed. European visitors found the US expensive,
while Americans went on shopping sprees in Europe. They purchased with
abandon, be it companies, cars or shares of stock. American tourists were as
ubiquitous back then as the Japanese are today.
But the Americans were not borrowing the money that they were spending
abroad: they were printing it. Not for nothing was the dollar the world’s reserve
currency, accepted around the globe. Many countries actually had to accept it,
since the fixed-currency system forced the other countries’ central banks to
hoard dollars when there was excess supply in the market. This way, the US
Federal Reserve could provide the US economy with ever larger quantities of
dollars through asset purchases and refinancing operations for people’s shopping
tours abroad. The US built up a huge balance-of-payments deficit, while the
European countries accumulated corresponding surpluses. The excess dollars
flowed mainly to Europe and were exchanged into national currency by the
European central banks. The Banque de France and the Bundesbank
accumulated growing hoards of dollars over the years, which were often
converted to US Treasury Bills.
By virtue of the conversion of dollars into national currency, an amount of
deutschmarks and francs got into circulation in Germany and France that did not
result from domestic asset purchases or refinancing operations by their
respective central banks, since such activities had already taken place in the US.
The resulting ‘dollar-deutschmarks’ and ‘dollar-francs’ circulating in Europe,

in effect outside money originating in the US, crowded out the European inside
money, i.e. the money created domestically through refinancing operations and
asset purchases by the Bundesbank or the Banque de France.
The outside money that came to circulate in Germany and France in this way
was of exactly the same nature as the outside money that came from the GIPSIC
countries during the crisis. And the stocks of dollars and US Treasury Bonds in
the European central banks then are now the Target claims of northern bloc euro
countries against the Eurosystem.
The international credit shift through the central banks was also similar. While
the European central banks saw their refinancing credit retrench, the Fed
provided ever more credit to the US economy by buying predominantly public
securities from banks. The US back then was in a very similar situation to the
current position of the GIPSIC countries. It was said at the time that Europe had
indirectly helped to finance the Vietnam war.31
French President Charles de Gaulle, who disliked the US engagement in what
had been French Indochina, in 1968 took literally the US assertion that the dollar
was a gold-backed currency and demanded that France’s dollar reserves be
converted into gold. He sent his submarines to the US to escort the gold from
New York back to France. That spelled the end of the Bretton Woods system,
since the US did not possess enough gold to satisfy all conversion wishes and
had to give up the gold standard.32 Five years after de Gaulle’s subs went to pick
up the French gold, Bretton Woods was history. Since then, most exchange rates
in the world have been determined by market supply and demand.
The Bundesbank, in contrast, had given assurances that it would not convert
its dollar reserves into gold.33 It had at the time, however, amassed large
balance-of-payments surpluses against other European countries within the
European Payment Union (EPU).34 The EPU was established on 1 July 1950 as
the result of a US endeavour to create a multilateral payment system within
Europe as a sub-system to the Bretton Woods system created in 1944. This
endeavour was marked by three intra-European clearing agreements between
1947 and 1949, which differed in signatory states, clearing categories and
linkages to the European Recovery Program. The clearing of imbalances within
the EPU was done monthly by the Bank for International Settlements.35
An increasing fraction of the imbalances within the EPU, ultimately 75%, had
to be settled at the creditor’s choice with either dollars or gold at the official
parities, but since the market price of gold was below the parity, the creditors
preferred gold settlement.36 By 1958, the Bundesbank had accumulated a gold
stock of 2, 346 tonnes.37

The EPU was replaced in 1958 by the European Monetary Agreement, which
demanded the settlement of imbalances with dollars, but due to the official gold
parity of the dollar, the actual settlement was often carried out with gold. So in
the following ten years, the Bundesbank’s physical stock of gold reserves
increased by another 55%, to a total of around 4, 000 tonnes (or 18 billion
deutschmarks) in 1968.38 This stock, minus around 6% that was ceded to the
ECB in early 1999, still belongs to the Bundesbank.39 The Bundesbank’s gold
today is worth about 15 times more in nominal terms than its value back then,
which in real terms is 4.4 times, corresponding to an annual real rate of return of
3.4%. 40 By contrast, its Target claims currently bear an interest rate of 0.25% in
nominal terms and about –1% in real terms. Because of the need to settle the
balance-of-payments imbalances under the Bretton Woods system, the European
deficit countries tried to avoid them and kept their local money supply scarce.
This kept the interest rates up, which discouraged local borrowing, kept the
current account deficit in check, and encouraged capital imports, which financed
the current account deficit and limited the balance-of-payments deficit. The
basics of this mechanism were described by classical economist David Hume as
early as the nineteenth century.41 It was almost certainly the need to settle the
balances that explains why the imbalances at the time were much smaller than
those under the Eurosystem today, even in relative terms. In 1968, the
Bundesbank’s dollar reserves amounted to 1.6% of German GDP, and the gold
reserves to 3.4%. Together, they were equivalent to 5% of GDP, or 26.72 billion
deutschmarks.42 The Bundesbank’s Target claims, by contrast, amounted in
August 2012 to € 751 billion, or 28.4% of German GDP.43 The Bundesbank has
kept the dollar reserves to this day, not as cash, but typically in the form of US
government bonds and Treasury bills.
Transfer Roubles
As far removed as the Soviet empire was from a market economy, it also needed
an internal payment system to allow for mutual transactions. Such a system was
introduced in 1964 among the socialist countries of the world assembled under
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA, but usually known as
Comecon), including the Soviet Union, the eastern European countries, and
other socialist countries such as Cuba and Vietnam. It replaced the ineffective
system of barter trade that had existed before.44 Every state had an account with
the International Bank for Economic Co-operation (IBEC) in Moscow that it

could use for payment orders to other states, the unit of account being the so-
called transfer rouble.45
Since the system imposed no limits to balance-of-payments imbalances,
member states took advantage and built up growing debt positions that basically
were credited by the Central Bank of Russia. This led to inflation and growing
political tensions within the system, as Russia was unable to cope with the
export of real economic resources that it had to credit to the member countries.46
These tensions ultimately contributed to the fall of the Soviet system. In 1992,
after the Wall had come down, Russia changed the system by introducing
bilateral overdraft limits.47 This, however, reduced its attractiveness for the
member states and induced them to exit it, which led to the collapse of the
Rouble Zone in September 1993.48
Russian credit to the former Soviet republics amounted to 9.3% of Russian
GDP, and the debts built up ranged from 11% of the debtor countries’ GDP
(Belarus and Moldova) to 91% (Tajikistan).49 The end of the system was a great
mess, and Russia was unable to have its claims settled.50
The Swiss Example
Another useful comparison that helps understand the Target imbalances in the
Eurozone is Switzerland. Switzerland is in a similar situation today as Germany
was under the Bretton Woods system or is now in the Eurosystem. The return of
Swiss investment capital from abroad, together with capital flowing in from
distressed countries, has brought about a strong appreciation of the Swiss franc,
reducing the competitiveness of Swiss industry. This prompted the Swiss
National Bank to apply the emergency brakes. On 6 September 2011, it
announced that it would henceforth tolerate no fall in the price of the euro below
1.20 francs or, equivalently, no increase in the price of the Swiss franc above 83
euro cents. The announcement was credible, since while no central bank can
permanently protect its currency against devaluation—because in order to
accomplish that it would need to sell foreign currency, of which it only has a
finite amount—it can indeed protect it against appreciation by simply printing
money or issuing bonds in order to meet the demand of domestic or foreign
investors for Swiss francs or financial investments. The result of the market
intervention was a surplus in the Swiss balance of payments that brought a very
large amount of euros to the Swiss central bank. The central bank did not hold
the euros as cash, however, but invested them promptly in European securities,
and particularly in German sovereign bonds. Today it is the largest holder of

German government bonds in the world.51
The stock of German bonds held by the Swiss central bank is the analogue to
the Bundesbank’s Target claims.52 The only difference is that, in this case, these
claims consist of marketable securities that can be exchanged at any time into
other assets. The claims that Swiss commercial banks have amassed on the
Swiss National Bank, unlike those that the German commercial banks have
accumulated on the Bundesbank, can be serviced at any time by the Swiss
National Bank without resorting to inflationary money printing, even if the
exchange rate regime should be terminated.
How Target-Like Balances Are Settled in the United States
Another useful comparison for the Eurosystem is the monetary system of the
US, called the US Federal Reserve or simply the Fed.53 The Fed has a Board of
Governors based in Washington, but it also has 12 Federal Reserve Banks—let
us call them ‘District Feds’—which implement monetary policy in compliance
with Fed rules. This is similar to the Eurosystem, with its Governing Council
and Board in Frankfurt, and an NCB in each of its 18 member states. However,
despite this similarity, there are substantial differences between the two systems.
In the US, money comes predominantly into circulation through the Fed’s
purchase of federal public securities (Treasury bills as well as securities issued
by federal agencies and government-sponsored enterprises) held by private
banks. However, during the crisis, the Fed also bought asset-backed securities
issued by the private sector. Most purchases are made by the New York Fed
acting on behalf of the Federal Open Market Committee. The portfolio thus
created, the so-called System Open Market Account (SOMA), 54 is owned by all
District Feds. In addition to this centralized form of money creation, the District
Feds provide local refinancing credit through the so-called discount window, as
well as refinancing credit against collateral (‘repos’), the latter being similar to
the credit offered by the Eurozone’s NCBs. A number of additional facilities
were introduced during the crisis years to provide short-term credit to the
banking sector, among them the Term Auction Facility and the Primary Dealer
Credit Facility. The Term Securities Lending Facility, in turn, allows swapping
private for government assets so as to endow the private sector with better
collateral for credit from private sources as well as the Fed.
Unlike in Europe, the US central bank system is not a governmental
institution. The District Feds belong to the private commercial banks that hold
stock in them, and are at their service. The Fed is, however, under public control

and has to deliver its seignorage profit to the Federal Government. Their district
boundaries have little to do with federal state borders: in some cases, several
states belong to one District Fed; conversely, there are states whose territory
falls within two different District Feds’ jurisdictions.
In the US system, payment orders between the commercial banks flow
through the District Feds, each of which keeps an Interdistrict Settlement
Account (ISA) with each of the eleven other District Feds. The balance on this
account is, in principle, the same as the Target balance of an NCB in the
Eurozone, since it shows the net volume of payment orders a District Fed has
performed on account of the others; in other words, how much credit it has
granted them by crediting the accounts of beneficiary commercial banks,
fulfilling the payment orders.
Imbalances in the ISA cross-district payment orders resulting from
asymmetric money creation cannot be carried forward as in Europe, but have to
be settled mutually between the District Feds in April of every year by handing
over a respective ownership right in the SOMA portfolio.
To understand the US system, it is useful to recall how it evolved over the
course of its two-hundred-year history. Initially there were only dollar coins
issued locally by official mints, abiding by the rules about exact gold and silver
content set by Federal law. Paper money was first brought into circulation in
1861 to finance the American Civil War. The Federal Reserve was not
established until 1913. To be sure, there were earlier attempts at setting up
central banks, in 1791 and 1816, but they were only granted 20-year charters and
were closed once the charters expired.
Before the Federal Reserve System existed, money transfers were already
being made across the country, without cash having to be transported physically
from one place to another. People would send checks as payment, and in order
for them to be cashed, transfers had to be made between the commercial banks
involved. The banks carried out the payment orders and provided temporary
credit to each other if the orders did not net out to zero, but eventually the
balances had to be settled physically, usually with gold, which then had to be
transported between the banks involved. Any lover of cowboy movies will
understand that this was a costly and cumbersome settlement procedure.
The new Federal Reserve System made the settling process easier in 1915
with the establishment of a so-called Gold Settlement Fund, which contained
physical gold and gold certificates at the Fed, in which each District Fed owned
proportional shares.55 The balance-of-payments imbalances between the districts
were settled on a weekly basis by transferring a respective ownership share to
gold or gold certificates between the District Feds, rendering the physical

transportation of gold unnecessary. In 1934 District Feds had to deliver all their
gold to the Federal Reserve System, and henceforth the settlement only took
place by transferring ownership rights to gold certificates.56 After the gold-based
Bretton Woods system of international exchange rates broke down in 1973, gold
certificates also lost their role for the intra-US settlement procedure. From 1975
onwards, the transfer of gold certificates was replaced by the transfer of
ownership shares in the SOMA portfolio acquired in the process of money
creation. This, however, did not alter the nature of the settlement procedure.
There are at least four aspects of the Federal Reserve which explain why the
US’s ISA balances did not reach similar levels as in the Eurozone, or why they
cannot be interpreted as evidence of local printing presses underbidding the
capital market, as is the case in the Eurozone.
1. The private nature and structural disentanglement between state and district
Fed borders limits the political influence on local monetary policy. This alone
makes the bailing out of states with local refinancing credit collateralized with
non-investment-grade government bonds, which was an essential ingredient of
the ECB’s bailout policy (see Chapter 5), unthinkable in the US. The asset
purchases, which are the major channel of money creation in the US, involve a
regionally unbiased portfolio of mostly federal government bonds rather than
bonds issued by single states, let alone those issued by profligate states such as
California or Illinois.
2. In the US, money normally comes into circulation because the NY Fed
distributes it on behalf of the Federal Reserve System, buying federal
government bonds that formerly had been sold throughout the United States to
finance the federal budget, a process which itself should be more or less neutral
with regard to the ISA balances.57 If the NY Fed buys such bonds, it induces a
flow of bonds from all over the union to New York and corresponding payment
orders to other District Feds, which results in an ISA liability for the NY Fed.
This liability is not comparable to the Target liability of a Eurozone NCB, since
it does not result from underbidding the local capital market with the printing
press, but ultimately from financing the government of the federation whose
outlays benefit all regions equally. While this was a dominant aspect before the
crisis, after the crisis broke out other aspects became more important.
3. Given that the US is a federal nation with a common banking law, there are
nationwide banks that concentrate their demand for money from the printing
press on particular districts, typically those where their headquarters are located.
Thus, for example, the Bank of America’s headquarters are located in the
Richmond district and the Wells Fargo headquarters in the San Francisco

district. This may explain why these two districts built up particularly large
levels of ISA liabilities during the crisis, when the Fed carried out its special
liquidity-creating programmes, as explained above. Since these programmes
gave all District Feds better access to the Fed’s printing press, money creation
was temporarily relocated from the NY Fed to other District Feds.58 Obviously,
there is no analogy between this mechanism and the Eurozone, if only because
most European banks are national, while the few that do operate internationally
have legally independent subsidiaries rather than branches in other countries.
4. The settling of the ISA balances with marketable securities makes resorting
to the local printing press not impossible, but less attractive, because imbalances
have to be settled by handing over ownership shares in the SOMA portfolio. It is
true that the disadvantage from settling liabilities is limited, given that the
interest on the respective securities net of expenditures has to be handed over to
the Federal Government. However, some of the local profit remains in the
District Fed insofar as its own wages and other amenities can be deducted before
the rest of the profit is transferred to the Federal Government, which opens up
room for the employment of more staff and the payment of higher salaries.
Indeed, salaries across the District Feds in the US are very uneven, with some
District Fed presidents earning 50% more than others.59
The limited incentive and possibilities in the US to issue more than the fair
share of money locally has in the history of the US, time and again, led to
substantial differences in short-term federal funds rates, often of 100 basis points
and more, as documented by the 2013 EEAG Report on the European
Economy.60 These differences triggered a similar adjustment process as in the
Bretton Woods system. If a region was short of capital to finance its current
account deficit, it could not resort to the printing press to close the gap, but had
to offer higher interest rates to the market to induce a capital import from other
regions. This mechanism kept the balance-of-payments imbalances in check.
What this all meant for the development of actual ISA balances during the
crisis is shown in Figure 7.8. The two solid curves show the evolution of the
gross Target balances and the gross ISA balances, both in relation to the size of
the respective economy (Eurozone and US GDP). It can be seen that the volume
of ISA balances before the financial crisis struck was around 0.2% to 0.3% of
GDP, rising during the crisis to 2% and then to nearly 3%, only to sink thereafter
to a level comparable to that of before the crisis.
It can also be seen that the volumes typically came down in or around April of
each year, in those cases when they had grown previously. This is because April
is the month when the settlement has to be performed.

The settlement is not for the full imbalance, but follows a specific formula that
typically implies partial settlement only. What is actually calculated for
settlement is the difference between the daily average of the balances over the
previous twelve months and the unsettled remainder of the balances in April a
year before. This is not entirely insignificant, since it means that, in the US,
balances can also accumulate during a crisis. The balances, however, do not
increase steadily and systematically, but are brought down on a regular basis
through the settlement process, as the chart shows, and, to reiterate a point made
above, unlike in the Eurozone, unsettled balances do not imply undercutting the
market with the printing press to aid weaker regions.

Figure 7.8 Target and ISA balances* as a share of GDP in the Eurozone and the USA, respectively
(January 2003–December 2013)
* Sum of the gross Target claims and sum of the gross ISA claims, respectively, of the Eurosystem’s central
banks and the Federal Reserve System, respectively.
Source: H.-W. Sinn, ‘Fed versus ECB: How Target Debts Can Be Repaid’, VoxEU, 10 March 2012,
available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/fed-versus-ecb-how-target-debts-can-be-repaid>; H.-W. Sinn
and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue
Facility’, 2012, figure 9, updated.
Note: The chart is based on data up to December 2013.

In the Eurozone, the gross volume of Target balances amounted to around 1%
of GDP until the financial crisis hit in 2007, rose steadily thereafter until it
levelled off temporarily at about 5%, and rocketed afterwards to 11.4% of the
Eurozone’s GDP, or € 1.075 trillion, in August 2012. By December 2013, the
Eurozone balances had come down to 7.3% of GDP, after the ECB’s
announcement of its readiness to make unlimited purchases of distressed-country
government bonds in the secondary market, which induced new private capital
flows to the crisis-stricken countries.
An interesting month showing how the American system works is April 2009.
In the run-up to that month the balances decreased gradually, month by month,
because the District Feds apparently took care, by granting less credit, to avoid
the losses resulting from the reallocation of ownership shares in the Fed’s
clearing portfolio. The cutback in local credit from the printing press gave rise to
an inflow of private credit from other districts. After the settlement deadline, the
balances went up again. The downward-and-upward movement around April
2009 is evidence of the incentive effect mentioned above. In other years, the fear
of a settlement as such reduced the balances. At the latest data point available as
of this writing, December 2013, the gross volume of ISA balances amounted to
merely 1.9% of US GDP, or $ 306 billion.
The comparison with the US starkly exposes a design flaw in the Eurosystem.
If a monetary system offers the weaker economies unlimited amounts of money
on a display window, confidence will be maximized, stabilizing the capital
markets and minimizing interest rate differences across regions. But this is
precisely what destabilizes the regions, since it encourages them to take on too
much private credit in the first place. This, in turn, leads to inflationary
overheating, huge trade imbalances and a loss of competitiveness until their
external debt is so large that the markets begin to expect a breaching of the
system ceilings and decide to withdraw, prompting the credit-dependent
economies to start taking the money from the display window.
It is not sensible to induce absolute market confidence in the economy of a
country or region through artificial protection mechanisms, such as unlimited
amounts of funding on a display window or unlimited firepower of the central
banks. The capitalist system thrives upon a healthy scepticism on the part of
investors, i.e. upon the caution of those who fear losing their money. The
possibility of losing the money invested should never be removed, because
otherwise the markets run wild and control is lost, just like a car without brakes.
It has been argued that no measures can be instituted to put a brake on Target
balances, since the Eurosystem would collapse as a result. The balances, it is
said, are necessary for a smooth flow of transactions, and for this reason

everything should stay as it is. If this were true, the US system would have
collapsed long ago.
In reality, the US monetary system has persisted now for quite some time,
because it does not offer the possibility of a self-service culture through its
interdistrict settlement system and imposes tight constraints on local credit
provision. Up to 1975, the US even required ISA balances to be settled with
gold. The US system is not so strict as to demand a continuous flattening of
balance-of-payments imbalances, and indeed the constraints were loosened after
1975 and during the crisis, as described above. Thus, as the chart shows,
temporary balance-of-payments deficits did materialize. However, the
mechanisms to limit the imbalances were still relatively strong before the crisis
and have to some extent been maintained during the crisis. If private credit does
not suffice to cover the balance-of-payments deficit, the District Fed in question
may issue and lend out more money. But the resulting outflow of money must be
swiftly compensated for by transferring ownership rights in the SOMA portfolio.
The system thus has shock absorbers that are stiff enough to keep the wheels
from bouncing about and to hold the economic vehicle on course.
After considering the evolution of the US system, the ECB’s notion that it is
unnecessary to settle the balances, but suffices just to chalk them up to a credit
account as is done in Europe, is unconvincing.
A Fundamental Dichotomy in the Rescue Policies
Bankers, politicians, and quite a number of economists are satisfied with the way
the Eurosystem functions. They argue that the crisis-stricken countries must
carry out reforms to regain their competitiveness and the confidence of the
markets and that, until that happens, ample liquidity should be provided.61 Some
observers even give the impression that the current account deficits and capital
flight are exogenous occurrences to which the only sensible reaction is to
provide generous amounts of ECB liquidity and public rescue packages.
This position is defensible from the perspective of money in the display
window being the best deterrent against speculative attacks. It is also convenient
for creditors and debtors alike, as it results in a bailout of over-indebted
countries and their creditors with taxpayers’ money. However, the accounting
identities between the variables that play a role in a country’s budget constraints
mentioned at the outset of this chapter should not be overlooked. It is an
irrefutable fact that a current account deficit and a private capital export can only
occur simultaneously to the extent that central banks deliver fresh money, and

hence public credit, to an economy, or to the extent that intergovernmental credit
fills the funding gap. If public credit had not been available as an alternative, the
crisis-hit countries couldn’t have accumulated current account deficits and
experienced capital flight simultaneously. That is the fundamental dichotomy in
the rescue operations: they must either have made capital flight possible, which
policymakers claimed to want to slow down, 62 or they must have sustained
current account deficits, about which the policymakers complained.63
Policymakers will have to concede the truth of at least one of these two
uncomfortable conclusions.
In reality, the rescue operations probably did both. The ECB and the fiscal
rescue funds slowed down the structural improvement of the current account
deficits, as discussed in Chapter 4, because the alternative funding that they
provided enabled the crisis-stricken countries to postpone reforms and continue
business as usual. At the same time, the ECB credit and the rescue funds
crowded out private international credit by providing funding at below-market
conditions. Particularly egregious was the radical reduction of the ECB’s
collateral requirements, as described in Chapter 5, which effectively ditched the
idea of the singleness of monetary policy in the Eurozone and turned the ECB
into a bailout institution.
Policymakers argued, not without reason, that their interventions were a
necessary evil to give the crisis countries enough time to make the requisite
adjustments. However, while the interventions were meant to be temporary and
lead to a better equilibrium, they instead fuelled moral hazard and may have
aggravated the problems that they intended to solve. It is symptomatic that, as
Figure 4.8 showed, none of the crisis-stricken countries, except for Ireland,
carried out a sizeable real depreciation, and some did not depreciate at all, during
the first six years of the crisis. Ireland, whose bubble had burst two years before
the Lehman debacle, initially had not been given the possibility of running
Target deficits to solve its problems with the printing press. Only after the
collapse of Lehman Brothers did the ECB hand over the keys to the local
printing presses. In the initial years, Ireland had to fend for itself and accept the
austerity imposed by the markets. The country started to cut its prices in
response as early as 2007, a process that gradually made it competitive again.
By contrast, according to the data shown in Figure 4.9, Spain increased the
wages of its public employees by 19% in the first three years, and Portugal by
10% in the first two years, after the start of the crisis in the summer of 2007, and
Greek public sector wages even jumped by 28% in the first two years. Private
wages rose somewhat more moderately, but they did rise despite the emergence

of the crisis and only began to decline as of 2010, which in most cases only
meant that this decline offset the wage increases seen during the first years of the
crisis. To be sure, the real crisis intensified afterwards, and more recent data
show that a moderate real depreciation is finally underway in Spain and Greece
(though not in Portugal, see Figure 4.8); however, depreciation did not start to
occur until a full five years after the crisis hit. The alternative credit provision by
the ECB and the official rescue packages may have delayed the necessary
structural improvements in competitiveness through real depreciation by half a
decade.
The other crisis-stricken countries not only adjusted more slowly than Ireland,
but also more slowly than comparable non-euro EU countries that were also tied
to a fixed exchange rate regime. As indicated in Chapter 4, and as was also
shown by Daniel Gros and Cinzia Alcidi, the so-called BELL countries in
eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia), whose exchange rate
relative to the euro was fixed and which did not receive support from the ECB,
adjusted much quicker than the southern euro countries.64 The authors attribute
this to the fact that the rescue operations ‘created an environment in which the
pressure for a quick adjustment was much weaker’.
This does not mean that the ECB should not have provided liquidity when the
financial crisis broke out in Europe. The ECB’s policy was probably the right
one in the autumn of 2008, when the collapse of the Lehman Brothers
investment bank threw the markets into a panic. In the opinion of many
observers, a meltdown of the world economy was imminent and was averted at
the last second by flooding the markets with freshly printed money.65 But this
justification faded away in the autumn of 2009, or by the spring of 2010 at the
latest, when the world economy recovered with surprising vigour and it became
clear that some European countries were not simply victims of a global crisis
with temporary liquidity problems, but were also suffering from a fundamental
lack of competitiveness, if not outright insolvency, as in the case of Greece. At
that time, the markets charged significantly higher interest rates (refer also to
Figure 2.2) or abstained entirely from financing some countries.
The rationale for the spring 2010 rescue decisions is disputable, because they
delayed insolvency, bailed out the existing creditors, and helped countries to be
spared the risk premia that the markets were charging, thus eroding new
investors’ returns on savings.
In the first instance, the rescue operations did not merely replace fleeing
capital, but made the capital flight itself possible. If the ECB, applying a
rigorous refinancing policy, had prevented excessive credit from being drawn

from the local printing presses, and if no fiscal rescue credit had been available,
private capital would hardly have been able to flee. The quantity of central bank
money necessary to redeem the investors’ credit claims by issuing international
payment orders would simply not have been available, and investors would have
been forced to accept the sort of haircuts that were eventually applied much later
(in March 2012 to Greek debt and in March 2013 to Cypriot bank debt). By
delaying bankruptcy, the ECB and the rescue funds helped Greece and Cyprus to
delay the necessary reforms, and helped the banks and other investors to recoup
their money, because the public credit provided the funds needed to redeem
private credit. As Figure 5.1 showed, the great beneficiaries of the bailout policy
were the banks of France, Germany, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium,
and Switzerland, in that order.
In the second instance, the rescue operations, in particular the ECB’s
loosening of collateral requirements and the granting of maturity extensions to
facilitate access to refinancing credit, helped the borrowing countries, including
those that did not apply for official rescue funds, by providing them with cheap
finance under conditions at which they would not have been able to borrow in
the market. The ECB’s rescue policies helped both the debtors and their
creditors, but inflicted losses on new savers by underbidding the capital market
with the printing press and crowding private investors out of what otherwise
could have been lucrative markets. Those who planned to entrust their savings to
German life insurance companies, for example, in the hope of receiving a good
pension later, definitely suffered from this, since the companies were forced to
reduce the guaranteed minimum returns they had been offering. The observation
reported in Figure 4.2 that the interest on net foreign debt paid by the GIPSIC
countries declined during the crisis, despite the fact that both the stock of foreign
debt and market interest rates increased dramatically, offers clear evidence of
this effect.
The irony is that the ECB triggered even more capital flight when it tried to
counteract it by making its own credit more affordable. Arguably, the events that
occurred from summer 2011 to summer 2012, when huge amounts of capital fled
Spain and Italy, can be interpreted in this way. The Big Bazooka, or the one-
trillion-euro long-term refinancing credit decided upon by the ECB Governing
Council in December 2011, was motivated by the attempt to fight capital
flight.66 However, as Figures 6.2 and 7.1 through 7.4 showed, this decision
dramatically boosted the Target balances, which measure the capital flight, even
further. The Big Bazooka was akin to attempting to extinguish a fire with
gasoline.
The ECB and the community of states alleviated the immediate pain of market

austerity, but at the same time they threw the usual self-equilibrating processes
of market economies off kilter. For if capital begins to shy away from a country,
the country’s interest rates, net of risk premia, must go up in order to keep the
capital from leaving as well as to reduce the demand for credit, thus equilibrating
the local capital market. Alternatively, if the country has arrived at a Stiglitz-
Weiss kind of scenario where it is unable to convince creditors to stay put by
offering higher interest rates, it must declare insolvency, in line with one of the
fundamental rules of the Maastricht Treaty (article 125 TFEU).67 Obviously, the
attempt to maintain the same nominal interest rates everywhere in the Eurozone
by providing unlimited liquidity and undercutting the market rates sent huge
waves of destabilizing private capital flows washing across the member states of
the currency union. These capital flows would not have been possible had there
been a settlement mechanism to keep local money supply tight and allow for
equilibrating interest rate differentials.
The presence of such a settlement mechanism would certainly have led to a
period of disinflation or outright deflation in the crisis countries, which would
have brought about the necessary realignment of prices and wages earlier,
paving the way for new growth and prosperity in those countries. Or it would
have induced the countries, for which such a process would have been too
painful, to leave the euro. But policymakers preferred to delay the costs of the
necessary adjustments, prolonging the competitiveness crisis in the southern
countries and turning their economic diseases into scleroses.
1 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die riskante Kreditersatzpolitik der EZB’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 103,
4 May 2011, p. 10, available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-schuldenkrise/target-
kredite-die-riskante-kreditersatzpolitik-der-ezb-1637926.html>; H.-W. Sinn, ‘The ECB’s Stealth Bailout’,
VoxEU, 1 June 2011, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/ecb-s-stealth-bailout>; H.-W. Sinn and T.
Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’,
International Tax and Public Finance 19, 2012, pp. 468–508, specifically section 9, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/sinn-itax-2012-target.pdf>; the latter appeared as CESifo Working
Paper No. 3500, June 2011, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp3500.pdf> and as
NBER 
Working 
Paper 
No. 
17626, 
November 
2011, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/NBER_wp17626_sinn_wollm.pdf>; S. Homburg, ‘Anmerkungen zum Target2-Streit’, ifo
Schnelldienst 
64, 
No. 
16, 
31 
August 
2011, 
p. 
46, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2011_16_9.pdf>; G. Milbradt, ‘Die EZB auf der schiefen Bahn’, ifo Schnelldienst
64, 
No. 
16, 
31 
August 
2011, 
p. 
39, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2011_16_8.pdf>.
2 Bulgaria, Denmark, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Romania have an associate status with the
Eurosystem. They are allowed to hold Target claims, but not to incur Target liabilities. This, however, is
only a minor item.

3 This chapter uses and expands the methodology of H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans,
Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012.
4 Another break-down of the rescue credits is shown in Figure 8.2 in the next chapter. Note that that
figure also takes into account that the GIPSIC countries hold a small claim against the rest of the Eurozone
because they issued an underproportionate stock of banknotes. This is not included in the analysis of this
chapter since this claim, unlike the Target balances, does not lead to entries in the countries’ official
balance-of-payments statistics.
5 See European Central Bank, Consolidated Financial Statement of the Eurosystem as at 31 December
2013, 
press 
release, 
8 
January 
2014, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/wfs/2014/html/fs140108.en.html>. 
Assumption: 
The 
GIPSIC 
NCBs
participated in the purchase according to their share in ECB capital.
6 The respective data for 2013 were not yet available as of this writing.
7 The capital flight was documented in the various versions of the Sinn-Wollmershäuser Target paper,
once the respective data had become available. Ireland: June 2011 CESifo version; Italy: November 2011
NBER version; Spain: May 2012. See H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account
Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012.
8 For an early assessment of this capital flight see H.-W. Sinn, ‘Italy’s Capital Flight’, Project Syndicate,
25 October 2011, available at: <http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/italy-s-capital-flight>.
9 Various authors have claimed that Sinn and Wollmershäuser posited such a positive correlation, going
on to show that it does not exist. However, the claim is simply not true. Saying that a current account deficit
was financed with Target credit rather than private credit from abroad is logically not a statement about
correlation. See H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital
Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, 2012.
10 Auer shows, however, that from a longer-term perspective there is a statistically significant positive
correlation between current account deficit and Target deficit. See R. A. Auer, ‘What Drives Target2
Balances? Evidence from a Panel Analysis’, CESifo Working Paper No. 4216, April 2013, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp4216.pdf>.
11 The allocation of the stock of purchased assets to different countries has only become known for two
points in time, 31 December 2012 and 31 December 2013. See European Central Bank, Details on
Securities Holdings Acquired under the Securities Markets Programme, press release, 21 February 2013,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2013/html/pr130221_1.en.html>, and European Central
Bank, Annual Accounts of the ECB for 2013, press release, 20 February 2014, available at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2014/html/pr140220.en.html>. These are the figures published: 31
December 2012: Italy: book value € 99.0 billion (47.4%); Spain: book value € 43.7 billion (20.9%); Greece:
book value € 30.8 billion (14.8%); Portugal: book value € 21.6 billion (10.3%); Ireland: book value € 13.6
billion (6.5%); 31 December 2013: Italy: book value € 86.8 billion (48.5%); Spain: book value € 38.4
billion (21.5%); Greece: book value € 25.4 billion (14.2%); Portugal: book value € 19.0 billion (10.6%);
Ireland: book value € 9.2 billion (5.1%). In addition, there is a private estimate of the county breakup as
shown in the next chapter Figure 8.1. However, it ends in February 2012 and does not incorporate the
partial sterilization that has taken place in the meantime.
12 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions,
Balance of Payments Statistics and International Investment Positions, Balance of Payments by Country.

13 From November 2012 to December 2013, the Greek Target liability fell by € 57 billion, while the
stock of fiscal rescue credit Greece had received increased by € 64 billion.
14 See also H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital
Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility’, in particular CESifo Working Paper No. 3500 of June 2011, which
elaborated on the special role played by Ireland.
15 See Chapter 2, Figure 2.2, and the related discussion.
16 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Italy’s Capital Flight’, 2011. An early prediction of the difficulties to come can be
found in H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism. How the Financial Crisis Came About and What Needs to Be
Done Now, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2010, chapter 10: Will the West Retain its Stability?, section:
Will Greece and Italy Have to be Bailed Out?
17 The calculation is explained in a footnote to Figure 7.1.
18 See P. De Grauwe, Economics of Monetary Union, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2012, for a
thorough analysis of confidence building and confidence destruction in the capital market.
19 See Banco de España, Boletín Estadístico, Net Lending to Credit Institutions and its Counterparts,
Net 
Lending 
in 
Euro, 
Open 
Market 
Operations, 
LTROs, 
table 
8.1.b, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bde.es/webbde/es/estadis/infoest/e0801e.pdf>; and Banco de España, Boletín Estadístico,
Credit Institutions, Aggregated Balance Sheet from Supervisory Returns, Assets, Securities, Domestic,
General 
Government, 
Total, 
Table 
4.4, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bde.es/webbde/es/estadis/infoest/a0404e.pdf>.
20 See Banca d’Italia, Central Bank: Assets—Lending to Euro-Area Financial Sector Counterparties
Denominated in Euros: Longer-Term Refinancing Operations, Base Informativa Pubblica, Supplements to
the Statistical Bulletin, Bank of Italy Balance-Sheet Aggregates: Assets, June 2012, available at:
<http://bip.bancaditalia.it/4972unix/homebipentry.htm?dadove=corr&lang=eng>.
21 See Banca d’Italia, General Government: Securities Held by Other Monetary Financial Institutions
Base Informativa Pubblica, Supplements to the Statistical Bulletin, The Public Finances, Borrowing
Requirement and Debt, General Government Debt: By Holding Sector, June 2012, available at:
<http://bip.bancaditalia.it/4972unix/homebipentry.htm?dadove=corr&lang=eng>.
22 See ‘Italy Senate Passes Monti’s Austerity Package’, BBC News Europe, 22 December 2011,
available at: <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-16301956>.
23 See ‘Monti bringt Arbeitsmarktreform durchs Parlament’, Handelsblatt, 27 June 2012, available at:
<http://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/international/italien-monti-bringt-arbeitsmarktreform-durchs-
parlament/6807276.html>.
24 See OECD, Economic Outlook 2013, No. 94, Statistical Annex, table 25.
25 See H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, chapter 8: The Extent of the Damage, Figure 8.6.
26 See Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2010, available at:
<http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1009.htm>.
27 The share of German investors in EFSM bonds amounts to 29.4%, that of French investors to 11.1%,
and that of the Benelux to 8.5% (see European Union, Investor Presentation, February 2014, p. 20, available
at: <http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/eu_borrower/documents/eu_investor_presentation_en.pdf>). The

share of German investors in EFSF Bonds and ESM Bonds is not known. However, Eurozone investors
hold 46% of the largest EFSF Bond issue, and 39% of the first ESM Bond issue (see European Financial
Stability Facility & European Stability Mechanism, Investor Presentation, November 2013, p. 23 and 25,
available 
at:
<http://www.esm.europa.eu/pdf/EFSF%20ESM%20New%20Investor%20presentation%2027%20November
28 Compare with Section The Timing Problem in Chapter 2.
29 The investors seem to have been predominantly British financial institutions. See S. G. Cecchetti, R.
N. McCauley, and P. M. McGuire, ‘Interpreting TARGET2 Balances’, BIS Working Papers No. 393,
December 2012, available at: <http://www.bis.org/publ/work393.pdf>. While the point Cecchetti et al.
make is correct, they misrepresent the work by T. Wollmershäuser and the author by implying that we had
argued that the Target imbalances were caused by current account imbalances. This is a false interpretation.
We analysed the role of capital flight and current account imbalances in the context of the Target balances
in all our papers, and we always made clear that the current account imbalances, which had developed
earlier and for other reasons, now needed an alternative source of financing. We also documented capital
flight from the outset, as explained in footnote 7.
30 See W. Kohler, ‘The Eurosystem in Time of Crisis: Greece in the Role of a Reserve Currency
Country?’, CESifo Forum 13, Special Issue, January 2012, pp. 14–22, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/forum-0112-special-3.pdf>, and C. B. Blankart, ‘The Euro 2084’, CESifo Forum 13,
Special Issue, January 2012, pp. 23–28, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/forum-0112-
special-4.pdf>. For a comparison with the Mexico crisis, see A. Tornell and F. Westermann, ‘Greece: The
Sudden Stop that Wasn’t’, VoxEU, 28 September 2011, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/greece-
sudden-stop-wasn-t>. For a comparison of the Bretton-Woods system with the European Monetary System
and a discussion of Target in the context of Bretton Woods, see also H. James, ‘The Multiple Contexts of
Bretton-Woods’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 28, 2010, pp. 411–430. For an analysis which draws
an analogy between today’s international financial system and the Bretton Woods system, see B.
Eichengreen, Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods, MIT Press, Cambridge 2006.
31 See R. D. Hormats, The Price of Liberty: Paying for America’s Wars, Henry Hold and Company,
New York 2007, in particular p. 255.
32 For this and a further discussion of the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, see T. Mayer, Europe’s
Unfinished Currency, Anthem Press, London 2012, especially chapter 3: A History of Failures.
33 See letter of Bundesbank President Karl Blessing, dated 30 March 1967, to the President of the
Federal Reserve System, W. M. Martin Jr., available at: < http://www.mmnews.de/index.php/gold/7201-
der-blessing-brief>.
34 For a comparative work on the EPU versus the EMU, see J. C. Martínez Oliva, ‘The EMU versus the
EPU. A Historical Perspective on Trade, Payments and the European Financial Crisis’, World Economics
14, 2013, pp. 126–144.
35 For a detailed study of the European Payment Union, see E. Tuchtfeldt, Die europäische
Zahlungsunion, Forschungsstelle Völkerrecht und Recht, Frankfurt am Main 1953.
36 See C.-L. Holtfrerich, ‘Geldpolitik bei festen Wechselkursen’, in Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), 50
Jahre Deutsche Mark—Notenbank und Währung in Deutschland seit 1948, Beck, Munich 1998, in
particular p. 400. After the establishment of the EPU in July 1950, the portion to be settled in gold or dollars
was only 25%, from 1954 it was 50%, and since 1955, 75%.

37 See C.-L. Thiele, Pressegespräch ‘Deutsche Goldreserven’, Presentation, 16 January 2013, available
at: 
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Presse/Publikationen/
2013_01_16_thiele_praesentation_pressegespraech_gold.pdf?__blob= publicationFile>.
38 C.-L. Thiele, Pressegespräch ‘Deutsche Goldreserven’, and Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistics, Time
Series Databases, Macroeconomic Time Series, Time Series BBK01.EU8201: External Position of the
Bundesbank 
up 
to 
1998/Gold, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/Macro_economic_time_series
tsId=BBK01.EU8201&listId=www_s201_b1005.>; see also P. Bernholz, ‘Die Bundesbank und die
Währungsintegration in Europa’, in Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), 50 Jahre Deutsche Mark—Notenbank und
Währung in Deutschland seit 1948, Beck, Munich 1998, in particular p. 828, for a chronology of European
monetary integration; and J. H. Furth, ‘The European Monetary Agreement’, Review of Foreign
Developments, 6 September 1955.
39 A total of 7 million Troy ounces, or 218 tonnes, of gold were transferred to the ECB, out of a total
stock of 119 million Troy ounces at the end of 1998. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Annual Report 1999, 6
April 
2000, 
in 
particular 
p. 
168, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publications/Annual_Report/1999_annual_report.pd
__blob=publicationFile>; as well as Deutsche Bundesbank, Annual Report 1998, 1 April 1999, in particular
p. 
176, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publications/Annual_Report/1998_annual_report.pd
__blob=publicationFile>.
40 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Annual Report 2011, 13 March 2012, in particular p. 142, available at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publications/Annual_Report/2011_annual_report.pd
__blob=publicationFile>; as well as Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistics, Time Series databases,
Macroeconomic Time Series, Time Series BBK01.TUB600: Gold und Goldforderungen Bundesbank, July
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/Macro_economic_time_series
tsId=BBK01.TUB600>; and C.-L. Holtfrerich, ‘Geldpolitik bei festen Wechselkursen’, in particular p. 351;
and Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series BBK01.EU8201: External Position of the Bundesbank up to
1998/Gold.
41 
See 
M. 
Burda, 
‘Hume 
on 
Hold?’, 
VoxEU, 
17 
May 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.voxeu.org/article/hume-hold-consequences-not-abolishing-eurozone-national-central-banks>;
M. D. Bordo and H. James, ‘The European Crisis in the Context of the History of Previous Financial
Crises’, NBER Working Paper No. 19112, June 2013.
42 At the end of 1968, the Bundesbank’s gold reserves stood at 18.156 billion deutschmarks, equivalent
to 3.4% of GDP, which at the time was 553.71 billion deutschmarks. The dollar reserves amounted then to
8.561 billion deutschmarks, or 1.6% of GDP. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series BBK01.EU8201:
External Position of the Bundesbank up to 1998/Gold; Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistics, Time Series
Databases, Macroeconomic Time Series, Time Series BBK01.EU8215: External Position of the
Bundesbank 
up 
to 
1998/Foreign 
Exchange 
Reserves/US 
dollar 
Assets, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/Macro_economic_time_series
tsId=BBK01.EU8215>; as well as German Federal Statistical Office, Gross Domestic Product, Gross
National Income, and Net National Income at Factor Cost.
43 € 2, 644.2 billion: Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, National Accounts.
44 See P. J. J. Welfens, Market-oriented Systemic Transformations in Eastern Europe, Springer, Berlin

1992, especially p. 151.
45 See P. B. Kenen, ‘Transitional Arrangement for Trade and Payments Among the CMEA Countries’,
IMF Staff Papers 38, June 1991, pp. 235–267, especially p. 238.
46 See L. S. Goldberg, B. W. Ickes, and R. Ryterman, ‘Departures from the Rouble Zone: The
Implications of Adopting Independent Currencies’, World Economy 17, 1994, pp. 293–322.
47 See L. S. Goldberg, B. W. Ickes, and R. Ryterman, ‘Departures from the Rouble Zone: The
Implications of Adopting Independent Currencies’, p. 303.
48 See A. Åslund, ‘Why a Collapse of the Eurozone Must Be Avoided’, VoxEU, 21 August 2012,
available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/why-collapse-eurozone-must- be-avoided-almost-any-cost>.
49 See T. Wolf and J. Odling-Smee, ‘Financial Relations among Countries of the Former Soviet Union’,
IMF Economic Reviews, 1994, and A. Åslund, ‘Why a Collapse of the Eurozone Must Be Avoided’, 21
August 2012.
50 See P. Conway, ‘Currency Proliferation: The Monetary Legacy of the Soviet Union’, Princeton
Essays in International Finance 197, June 1995.
51 The Swiss central bank holds an estimated 100 billion francs in German sovereign bonds and thus
finances between 7% and 8% of the German federal debt. See H. Schöchli, ‘Standfest hinter der
Nationalbank’, 
Neue 
Zürcher 
Zeitung, 
18 
July 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.nzz.ch/aktuell/wirtschaft/wirtschaftsnachrichten/standfest-hinter-der-nationalbank-
1.17368206>.
52 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Ohne Wettbewerbsfähigkeit zerbricht der Euro’, Interview by A. Trentin, Finanz
und Wirtschaft, No. 47, 13 June 2012, p. 20, available at: <http://www.fuw.ch/article/ohne-
wettbewerbsfahigkeit-zerbricht-der-euro/>.
53 For a comparative analysis of the US versus the EMU system, see also H. James, ‘Designing a Federal
Bank’, VoxEU, February 2013, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/designing-federal-bank>.
54 The Federal Reserve System Open Market Account (SOMA) is a portfolio of US Treasury and
Federal Agency securities, foreign currency investments and reciprocal currency arrangements. It is used
for the open market operations of the Federal Reserve System. Detailed information on activities and
composition can be found at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York website, available at:
<http://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed27.html>.
55 
See 
Federal 
Reserve, 
Federal 
Reserve 
Bulletin, 
1 
June 
1915, 
available 
at:
<http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/docs/publications/FRB/pages/1915-1919/19705_1915-1919.pdf>.
56 The Gold Reserve Act of 30 January 1934 transferred the entire stock of monetary gold in the United
States, including gold and gold certificates held by the Federal Reserve banks, to the US Treasury. See
Federal 
Reserve, 
Monthly 
Bulletin, 
February 
1934, 
p. 
67, 
available 
at:
<http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/docs/publications/FRB/1930s/frb_021934.pdf>, as well as United States,
Statutes at Large of the United States of America from March 1933 to June 1934, Part 1, pp. 337–344,
Government Printing Office, Washington 1934.
57 The government sells its bonds to investors throughout the US territories and uses the proceeds for
government expenditure, which is widely dispersed throughout the US territories, so that no ISA balances
emerge in net terms. The reader may think of the metaphor of paying for the federal government’s expenses

throughout the country with government bonds rather than money, which also would leave no traces in the
ISA balances.
58 Cf. European Economic Advisory Group (EEAG), The EEAG Report on the European Economy:
Rebalancing Europe, chapter 4: US Precedents for Europe, CESifo, Munich 2013, Figure 4.5, p. 105,
available at: < http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/EEAG-2013.pdf>. For a different explanation in terms
of providing weaker districts with particular help from the Federal Reserve System, drawing a parallel with
the ECB’s help to particular regions, see P. Cour-Thimann, ‘Target Balances and the Crisis in the Euro
Area’, CESifo Forum 14, Special Issue, April 2013, figure 16, p. 30, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/Forum-Sonderheft-Apr-2013.pdf>.
59 In 2009, the St. Louis District Fed President was paid $ 276, 800, while the President of the San
Francisco Fed received $ 410, 800. See S. Reddy, ‘Fed Salaries: It Pays to be Private’, Wall Street Journal
Real Time Economics, 24 May 2010, available at: <http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2010/05/24/fed-
salaries-it-pays-to-be-private/>, and EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European Economy: Rebalancing
Europe, 2013, p. 106.
60 See EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European Economy: Rebalancing Europe, 2013, Figure 4.3, p.
103.
61 This view was, for instance, expressed by IMF Chief Economist Olivier Blanchard; see also I. Madár
and K. Kovács, ‘Blanchard: Eurozone Integration Needs to Go Forward or go Back, but it Can’t Stay Here’,
Portfolio.hu, 
3 
October 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.portfolio.hu/en/equity/blanchard_eurozone_integration_needs_to_go_forward_or_go_back_but
see also Z. Darvas, J.-P. Pisani-Ferry, and A. Sapir, ‘A Comprehensive Solution for the Euro Crisis’,
VoxEU, 28 February 2011, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/three-part-plan-tackle-eurozone-
debt-crisis>; IMF, ‘Greece. 2013 Article IV Consultation’, IMF Country Report No. 13/154, June 2013,
available at: <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13154.pdf>; IMF, ‘Spain. 2013 Article IV
Consultation’, 
IMF 
Country 
Report 
No. 
13/244, 
August 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13244.pdf>; P. De Grauwe, ‘In Search of Symmetry in the
Eurozone’, CEPS Policy Brief, No. 268, May 2012; Z. Darvas, J. Pisani-Ferry, and G. B. Wolff, ‘Europe’s
Growth Problem (and What to Do About It)’, Bruegel Policy Brief, No. 03/2013, April 2013.
62 See M. Draghi, ‘The Euro, Monetary Policy and the Design of a Fiscal Compact’, Ludwig Erhard
Lecture, 
Berlin, 
15 
December 
2011, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2011/html/sp111215.en.html>.
63 See M. Draghi, ‘Competitiveness of the Euro Area and within the Euro Area’, Le Monde, and
Association of Private French Companies (AFEP), Les défis de la compétitivité, Paris, 13 March 2012,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120313.en.html>.
64 See D. Gros and C. Alcidi, ‘Country Adjustment to a Sudden Stop: Does the Euro Make a
Difference?’, 
European 
Commission 
Economic 
Papers 
492, 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/economic_paper/2013/pdf/ecp492_en.pdf>.
65 See H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism, 2010, p. 58.
66 At his press conference ahead of the second tender of the Big Bazooka, on 9 February 2012, ECB
President Draghi called the LTRO operations an ‘unquestionable success’ insofar as, among others, the
‘money market funds, which were the first to take flight from the euro’, came back on 8 March 2012. See
also Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB,
and 
Vítor 
Constâncio, 
Vice-President 
of 
the 
ECB, 
9 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:

<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120209.en.html> and Introductory Statement to the Press
Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of
the ECB, 8 March 2012, available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120308.en.html>.
67 J. E. Stiglitz and A. Weiss, ‘Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information’, American
Economic Review 71, 1981, pp. 393–410.

CHAPTER 8
Stumbling Along
The Six Steps of the Crisis—Buying Government Bonds: The SMP—No Risk to Taxpayers?
—ESM & Co—Overview of Rescue Funds—The Liability Risk—The OMT Controversy—The
Statement of the German Constitutional Court—Banking Union: Bail-in or Bailout?—The Plan
—Bailing out the ECB—Undermining the Market Economy and Democracy
The Six Steps of the Crisis
The euro has turned into a trap for the European states that adopted it. The
southern states are trapped because the inflationary credit bubble brought about
by the euro deprived them of their competitiveness, and the northern states are
trapped in a liability spiral. The first of these traps was extensively analysed in
Chapters 2 and 4. This chapter studies the liability spiral resulting from a
sequence of public bailout operations, following the bailout with the printing
press discussed above.
Unfortunately, the sequence of measures to combat the crisis is not planned,
and no one has a notion of where this all will lead. Instead Europe is left
stumbling from one crisis to the next. At each level of the crisis the idea to date
has been to find new sources of public funding to protect prior private and public
debtors from defaulting. The new sources, however, only solve the financial
problems for a while, until they are exhausted and the loop of the crisis resumes.
Politicians always claim that the worst is now over, but this is their usual
propaganda. The truth is that the next crisis will again crop up in a corner of the
economy where it is not expected. Again, given prior policy decisions, new
decisions are made to avoid another immediate collapse.
The political choices at each step are not irrational. There is always some
compelling logic and urgency rationalizing the actual decisions taken.
Nevertheless, each step along this path dependency set by the immediate history
may lead to political structures in Europe that no one ever wanted and that
undermine the basis of a free market economy, and even of democracy.
These are the six steps of the vicious spiral that have become apparent to date,
some of which have already been discussed in this book. They are summarized
here to give an overview of what happened. A more detailed analysis of the new

steps will follow.
Step 1: The Implicit Bailout Promise (The Euro)
The announcement and introduction of the euro eliminated the exchange rate
risk, but the risk of state bankruptcies that came in its stead was downplayed by
EU institutions, even though the Maastricht Treaty’s no-bailout clause (article
125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, TFEU) clearly
stated that investors would have to accept haircuts if a state could not repay its
debt. As explained in Chapter 2, the EU’s interpretation of the Basel regulation
that treated all banks and all governments of the Eurozone alike, regardless of
their credit ratings, requiring only minuscule or no equity holding as a
counterpart buffer on the balance sheet, was a major mistake. It thoroughly
contradicted the spirit of the no-bailout clause and had dramatic consequences
for market behaviour, eliminating the care, caution, and scepticism that capital
markets need to allocate scarce economic resources efficiently among competing
uses and to avoid overheating.
In addition, the construction of the ECB system, with unlimited overdraft
facilities for international payment orders, the extensive possibility for credit
facilities in the form of Emerging Liquidity Assistance (ELA), and the pooling
of profits and losses from refinancing credit that the NCBs provided to their
local banking systems made it likely that, if worst came to worst, the ECB would
be able to act as a lender of last resort, bailing out the debtors and their creditors.
The almost unlimited firepower of the ECB was intended to create a maximum
of financial stability and trust, but it induced opportunistic behaviour among
both borrowers and lenders, causing the inflationary credit bubble that deprived
the southern European countries of their competitiveness and drove them into
intolerable mass unemployment.
Step 2: Lending of the Printing Press (Target)
The US subprime crisis swept over to Europe in 2007/2008. As investors shied
away from financing over-indebted countries, the ECB allowed these countries
to solve their problems with the printing press by dramatically reducing
collateral requirements, extending the maturity for refinancing credit and
allowing NCBs to provide extensive ELA credit to their national banking
systems. This made it possible for the GIPSIC countries to issue net payment
orders to other countries for the purpose of buying goods and assets, and for
redeeming private debt. As discussed in Chapters 5–7, the credit strategy was a
stealth bailout that basically amounted to lending the printing press from the

north to the south (and west) of the Eurozone. This satisfied the financial needs
of stricken countries for a while, but pulled the ECB deeper and deeper into
insufficiently covered risk positions.
Step 3: Buying Collateral (SMP)
When the spreads for some countries soared in the spring of 2010 and the market
value of assets plummeted accordingly (refer also to Figures 2.2 and 2.3), the
ECB had a problem, since the value of the collateral it had received for its
generous provision of refinancing credit swiftly eroded. As the ECB could not
react by withholding refinancing credit without risking a collapse of the southern
banking systems, it decided to buy the collateral in order to preserve its market
value. This can be seen as an important motivation for the ECB’s Securities
Markets Programme (SMP), which will be discussed below, even if the stated
purpose was to preserve the transmission of the low policy interest rates to the
wider economy. Another motivation was the attempt to help the distressed states
by shielding the interest rates for government bonds from ‘erroneous’ market
forces and improving the transmission of monetary policy signals. With the ECB
buying their government bonds, the states could issue new ones without driving
up the yields they had to offer.
Step 4: Change of Shift (ESM & Co)
The decision of the ECB Governing Council to buy government bonds appeared
to conflict with article 123 of the TFEU, which forbids monetary state financing
(in a direct form or in a way which circumvents such prohibition, as will be
discussed below), and with the above-mentioned no-bailout article 125, both of
which were Germany’s essential conditions for signing the Maastricht Treaty
and giving up the deutschmark. This prompted the president of the Bundesbank
to object strongly to the SMP, ultimately leading to his resignation.
The Bundesbank’s objection and the questionable legality of the ECB’s rescue
operations were a major reason for the uneasiness, at least among German
politicians, in readily endorsing them. The general opinion was: yes, we accept
the actions the ECB has taken, because no one else could have undertaken
similar rescue operations fast enough to calm the markets, but now we have to
shift gear. If someone must provide credit to other countries, it must be us! To
this end, we need an institution that is democratically controlled, rather than
having the ECB Governing Council making such decisions. This indeed was the
compelling political logic that led to the intergovernmental rescue operations for
Greece, the establishment of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF),

the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM), IMF support, and, last
but not least, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a permanent rescue
fund.1
But there were other motives as well. The ECB also wanted to be relieved of
the burden of rescuing states, and naturally the stricken countries and their
creditors wanted to be bailed out. The latter actually saw the fiscal bailout
activities as add-ons to, rather than substitutes for, the SMP.
And even without the SMP, the parliaments of the northern euro countries
would have had to agree to the fiscal rescue activities in order to prevent a
breakup of the Eurozone that would have cost them their Target claims, as will
be explained in this chapter.
Step 5: Unlimited Promises (OMT)
One problem with relying exclusively on the fiscal rescue operations was, in the
eyes of analysts, that the politicians were too parsimonious and imposed too
many constraints on the use of potential funds to really impress the markets. As
the capital flight from Spain and Italy continued despite the preparation of the
ESM (see Figure 7.4), on 6 September 2012 the ECB promised unlimited
government bond purchases for distressed countries that submitted themselves to
the rules of the ESM, calling its promise Outright Monetary Transactions
(OMT).
This programme generated fresh confidence and induced capital to return to
the crisis countries, bringing about a further decline in the Target balances in
addition to that directly induced by the fiscal rescue operations. The ECB
President’s promise to ‘do whatever it takes’ to save the euro, made concrete
with the OMT announcement, has proven very effective in calming the markets,
without the ECB having had to buy any additional government bonds to date.2
Step 6: Banking Union
While the OMT stabilized the market value of government bonds and hence the
banks that held them, it made no contribution to stabilizing the value of the other
assets in the banks’ balance sheets that had come under pressure during the
crisis. Mortgage claims in particular have often become toxic due to the collapse
of the property markets in the crisis-stricken countries (see Figure 2.11). This
posed a particular problem to the ECB, since it had provided an enormous
volume of additional funds to the banking sectors of the crisis countries against
poor-quality collateral, as explained in Chapters 5 and 6, which by August 2012

led to € 1, 002 billion in Target liabilities for these countries. Given that the
entire Eurosystem, i.e. the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) together,
had an equity capital of only half of this sum (€ 496 billion by August 2012), the
Eurosystem itself was at risk.
To help the banks and avoid the write-off losses for the central banks of the
Eurozone, the EU Summit of 29 June 2012 in Brussels decided to make the ESM
funds, which originally had been foreseen for the support of governments only,
available for bank recapitalization as well.3 As of this writing, this step is still in
progress, and it is not clear what will be decided in the end. Two sections of this
chapter will discuss the issue in more detail.
Other steps will certainly follow, when new problems emerge. For example, it
is possible that Eurobonds will ultimately be introduced if the ECB keeps its
promise to buy large amounts of government bonds. Alternatively, a recent
statement of the German Constitutional Court that deems the OMT illegal might
stop the drive towards debt mutualization. While the Court’s statement has not
yet been cast in the form of a binding ruling, it will probably terminate the OMT.
The following sections will consider Steps 3–5 in more detail, before a final
section discusses what all this might mean for the European future.
Buying Government Bonds: The SMP
The Securities Markets Programme (SMP) was announced on 10 May 2010 by
the ECB, together with a voluminous fiscal rescue programme that will be
discussed in the next section. The Greek interest spreads over German
government bonds had increased sharply in the preceding months, while the
market value of Greek government bonds had plummeted (see Figures 2.2 and
2.3). The yield for two-year Greek government bonds temporarily jumped to
38% on 28 April 2010. This pushed the Greek state to the brink of bankruptcy,
and with it the Greek banking system, which had drawn much refinancing credit
in exchange for government bonds.
Commercial banks holding Greek government bonds not only suffered huge
write-off losses but the erosion of their collateral for refinancing credit as well.
They faced both a solvency and a liquidity problem. When the rating agencies
deprived Greek government bonds of their investment grade, the ECB tried to
help by waiving the requirement that government bonds possess an investment
rating in order to preserve their eligibility as collateral (see Chapter 5). However,
this could not stop the erosion of the value of collateral as such, since it
depended on how the market assessed it.

At the time many experts thought that Greece should default, as contemplated
in the Maastricht Treaty (article 125 TFEU), and even in the Eurosystem itself
there were voices and vocating Greece’s exit from the Eurozone. ECB President
Jean-Claude Trichet, however, strongly objected to the idea of a default, as he
feared contagion effects via the financial markets that could not be contained.4
After all, the government bonds of Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy were also
in danger. France, whose banking system was heavily exposed to most of these
countries, also vigorously objected to this idea.5 Trichet successfully pushed for
the SMP in the ECB Governing Council and had the Eurozone buy over € 200
billion worth of Greek, Irish, Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian government
bonds.
The decisions regarding the SMP were taken against the votes of ECB Chief
Economist Jürgen Stark and Bundesbank President Axel Weber. Both wanted to
resign immediately but were convinced to stay on. They nevertheless resigned a
year later in an open protest against the government bond purchases carried out
by the Eurosystem.6 Luxembourg and the Netherlands also voiced opposition
against the Council’s decision.7 Trichet’s opponents feared contagion via the
political decision processes in Europe, arguing that a bailout of Greece was
forbidden by the Maastricht Treaty and that it would send the wrong signals to
other indebted countries, undermining the incentives to solve the problem by
raising taxes.8
The purchases began in May 2010 with Greek and Irish government bonds.
Portuguese bonds followed in June 2011. When the purchases stopped in
February 2012, the Eurosystem had bought a total of about € 83 billion from
these three countries. In August 2011, the central banks of the Eurosystem also
began to buy huge quantities of Italian and Spanish government bonds to support
their market price. By the end of the programme, € 94 billion had been spent on
Italian and € 47 billion on Spanish government bonds, bringing the total of all
government bond purchases to € 223 billion.9 Figure 8.1 gives an overview of
the evolution of such purchases over time. After that, the stocks held by the ECB
gradually declined, presumably as some of the bonds purchased matured or were
re-sold to the markets. By the end of 2012, the value of the stock of government
bonds held by central banks had declined to € 209 billion, and by the end of
2013 to € 179 billion.10

Figure 8.1 Eurosystem’s purchases of government bonds under the SMP
Sources: Barclays Capital, ‘ECB SMP: Marking to market’, Interest Rates Research, 6 January 2012; M.
De Pooter, R. F. Martin, and S. Pruitt, ‘The Liquidity Effects of Official Bond Market Intervention’,
Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 2013.
Based on press reports, one might think that the ECB itself had purchased the
bonds. But that is not quite right. The ECB’s own purchases amounted to just €
13 billion.11 The ECB primarily acted as a coordination centre that told the
national central banks (NCBs) in the Eurosystem what they were to do. Ninety-
three percent of the actual purchases were carried out by the NCBs in
accordance with their corresponding shares in the ECB capital, and only 7% by
the ECB itself. The NCBs, in turn, bought the government bonds in strict

proportion to their capital keys. While these purchases were not perfectly
synchronized, as some NCBs went a bit ahead of others, the synchronization
according to the capital keys took place within days or weeks. Thus, for
example, the Bundesbank had participated in the purchases to the tune of € 48
billion, the Banca d’Italia of € 32 billion, and the Banque de France of € 36
billion.
While the purchases partially stabilized the interest rates, the NCBs in the
Eurosystem took on high risks of default in the process, since if a country
defaults, they would have to write off the associated claims, with the write-offs
eating into the NCBs’ capital. In the case of the Bundesbank, for instance, if the
government bonds it has purchased were to lose their value, the Bundesbank
would lose 52% of the € 93.1 billion in capital (including reserves) that it had at
the end of December 2013.
There is a debate over whether or not the ECB should attempt to hold
seniority claims over private investors. In the case of the Greek default of 2012,
this was indeed the case. The bonds purchased by the ECB were first converted
into new bonds, which were then exempted from the haircuts. However, this
procedure was legally possible only because nearly all Greek bonds happened to
be issued under Greek law. The extent to which this procedure can be
generalized to other countries is unclear. In fact, as the haircut came along with a
bond conversion under British law, a repetition of the trick will not be possible.
This is why the ECB gave up its seniority claim when it announced its OMT
programme, the successor of the SMP, as will be discussed below.
No Risk to Taxpayers?
Sometimes it is argued that losses of a central bank are virtual and of no real
importance, given that a central bank can operate with negative equity capital.
After all, according to the statutes of the Eurosystem, governments are not
obliged to recapitalize their NCBs. The statutes just say that losses are deducted
from retained earnings and current interest revenue, but they do not include an
obligation for national governments to endow their NCBs with new equity if
needed.12 It would be nice if such a miracle were possible in a world of scarce
resources, but of course it isn’t.
While it is true that an NCB can operate with negative equity capital, it is
certainly not true that the losses are virtual. Write-offs on assets always mean
that the owner of these assets loses interest and principal repayments, whose
present value is equal to the value of the assets. Thus the losses erode the normal

equity and the seignorage wealth of the NCB resulting from credit provision to
commercial banks, and as such they have to be borne entirely by the treasuries of
the euro states that are entitled to receive the annual seignorage profit.13 The
reader may recall from Chapter 1 that the sum of normal equity and seignorage
wealth in a dynamic calculation has been estimated to be € 3.4 trillion.
A counter argument that could be raised is that no interest losses would arise
if the SMP were financed by additional money creation by the purchasing central
banks. However, such a policy would be inflationary and simply shift the losses
to money holders, while the advantage would lie with those countries whose
government bonds were bought and then written off. The ECB has, however,
declared over and over again that it will not resort to inflationary measures and
that it will sterilize the increase in the monetary base resulting from the SMP.14
Moreover, the sterilization is more or less automatic in the full-allotment mode,
as banks in the northern countries compensate for the extra liquidity by taking
less refinancing credit from their central banks or lending them the funds they do
not need. This was discussed in the section Crowding out Refinancing Credit in
the North in Chapter 6. The government bond purchases, therefore, simply
replace a corresponding amount of refinancing credit or asset purchases and
reduce the interest income flow that would have resulted from them. If this
interest flow is not replaced by the interest on government bonds because the
issuers default, a permanent loss of seignorage would indeed occur for the
finance ministries of the Eurozone countries and the taxpayers who stand behind
them. This seignorage loss would equal the write-off losses. Not even central
banks operate in a land of Cockaigne where resources can be created out of
nothing.
Since all the NCBs in the Eurosystem must partake of such purchases in
proportion to the allocation key of the ECB capital, the socialization of the
Eurosystem’s losses would be no help either. Each participating NCB, and with
it its sovereign, would shoulder all of the losses from the bonds it purchased plus
its share in the losses from bonds bought by the ECB. The effect would be
identical if the respective sovereign itself had to write off assets it bought.
In Germany, in particular, the purchases are regarded with great scepticism
because they resemble the monetizing of German sovereign debt that occurred
during and after World War I, which gave rise to the hyperinflation that affected
Germany during that period. Back then the Reichsbank financed the government
by purchasing government bonds and paying for them with freshly printed
money, with the consequence that the amount of money in circulation increased
steadily. The currency lost so much value that by 1923 the banknotes were

ultimately worth no more than the paper they were printed on. The petit
bourgeois, people with too little wealth to invest in real assets, lost their savings
and became radicalized, with dire consequences a decade later.
This is indeed a potential danger, but there is no need to think of such
extremes. The default risk threatening the taxpayers of the still-solvent European
countries is reason enough to be concerned about this sort of monetary state
financing.
ESM & Co
Supported by the urging of US President Barack Obama, ECB President Jean-
Claude Trichet successfully convinced Europe’s politicians in the spring of 2010
to come up with fiscal rescue programmes. On 2 May the governments of the
euro countries, together with the IMF, agreed to establish a € 110 billion
intergovernmental rescue programme for Greece (€ 80 billion from the Eurozone
countries and € 30 billion from the IMF).15
Moreover, they agreed on 10 May to establish a separate rescue fund, the
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) located in Luxembourg, that, with
the guarantees of the community of euro states, was to issue bonds and lend out
the revenue to needy countries that commit to undertaking reforms.16 The EFSF
had a maximum lending volume of € 440 billion and was limited to three years.
The corresponding national laws implementing it were quickly adopted in the
following weeks by the Eurozone members’ parliaments.
Furthermore, the EU governments agreed on 11 May 2010 to set up the
European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM).17 This agreement gave
the EU the possibility to borrow and distribute up to € 60 billion in credit
according to article 122 of the TFEU; this article actually refers explicitly to
natural catastrophes beyond the control of individual countries.
The IMF was counted upon to be part of the rescue operations. It contributed
funds and participated in defining the conditions that the recipient countries
would have to satisfy.
But all this was insufficient to really calm the markets. For that reason, a
permanent rescue fund under the name European Stability Mechanism (ESM)
was agreed on at the EU Summit on 24/25 March 2011 in Brussels, and ratified
by European parliaments in the following year. The ESM was to be endowed
with a paid-in equity capital of € 80 billion, but the euro states were obliged to
replenish any losses in equity capital of up to a total of € 700 billion if necessary.
Up to this writing (February 2014), € 64.3 billion of the € 80 billion have been

paid in. The ESM member states provide the paid-in capital in five instalments
of € 16 billion each, of which the first four have been made. The final instalment
is scheduled for April 2014.18
The ESM can borrow in the market by issuing bonds and lend the money to
needy countries after they sign a memorandum of understanding about a reform
agenda. The interest rate charged is above the rate at which the ESM can borrow,
to cover administration costs, but below the market rate for the respective
country. In the case of default, the ESM has a preferred creditor status over other
creditors. The ESM’s lending volume was limited to € 500 billion. However, it
was agreed that the Governing Council can decide on extensions of the equity
capital and the lending volume with a qualified majority of 85%, this majority
being computed on the basis of the countries’ shares in the ECB capital. Such a
qualified majority is also necessary for other major decisions, such as acceptance
of the memorandum of understanding.
Although the ESM was first announced as a replacement of the EFSF, it
ultimately was decided as a complement, with both funds being able to operate
simultaneously until the middle of 2013.
As a complement to the ESM, a Fiscal Compact was agreed by the EU
countries that would impose more rigorous debt constraints on governments than
the Stability and Growth Pact of 1996.19 Basically, the Fiscal Compact required
the countries to lift the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact to primary
law at the country level. Moreover, the countries committed themselves to
reducing their debt-to-GDP ratio at an average rate of 1/20 per annum of the
difference between their initial ratio and the Maastricht ceiling of 60%, with
somewhat more restrictive penalty rules being agreed upon. However, this
compact has not really been taken seriously by anyone except Germany, which
had demanded it as a quid pro quo to its agreeing to the ESM. Less than half a
year after the Compact was ratified, France, Spain, Portugal, Slovenia, the
Netherlands, and Poland asked for and were granted exceptions from its rules.20
In addition to providing credit to the programme countries, the ESM can also
buy their government bonds with funds borrowed in the market, for which
purpose it set up the so-called Secondary Markets Support Facility (SMSF).
While the € 500 billion limit on the lending volume neither applies to the SMSF
nor to the volume of funds that the ESM borrows for the purpose of buying
government bonds, the limited liability of the shareholders implicitly constrains
the volume of the SMSF. For the countries to be rescued the SMSF is more
attractive than direct ESM credit, since the SMSF does not have preferred
creditor status. As of this writing, however, the SMSF has not yet been activated.

Its parallels with the ECB’s OMT programme will be explored below.
There was some uncertainty in Germany about the implementation of the
ESM Treaty, with a number of appeals against the ESM at the Constitutional
Court inducing the German President Joachim Gauck to postpone his signature.
This uncertainty was removed on 12 September 2012 when the Court rejected
such appeals in a preliminary ruling.21 The plaintiffs were nonetheless successful
inasmuch as the Court imposed a number of constraints on Germany’s
participation. It required the German representative to the ESM Governing
Council to seek the agreement of the Bundestag before funding decisions are
taken, 22 thus excluding the possibility of secret ESM decisions as foreseen in
the Treaty, 23 and it asked the German government to demand a declaration from
the other countries, binding under international law, that would exclude an
interpretation of the ESM as involving joint and several liability that seemed to
follow from certain ambiguities in its formulation.24 After this declaration was
given by all Eurozone countries with the exception of Estonia, by 27 September
2012, the ESM Treaty finally became effective on 1 October 2012.
Overview of Rescue Funds
Figure 8.2 gives an overview of the entire public credit that flowed until end-
2013 to the GIPSIC countries from the fiscal sources mentioned. It basically
summarizes information about rescue measures as provided in the previous
chapter, presenting it in a somewhat different way. Greece was the first country
needing support. It received € 53 billion in intergovernmental rescue credit,
based on an agreement that anticipated the formal rescue funds. Greece, Ireland,
Portugal, Spain, and Cyprus together have received € 210 billion from the EFSF
and ESM, of which Greece alone accounts for € 134 billion (EFSF).
Furthermore, they received € 74 billion from the IMF and € 38 billion from the
EU’s natural catastrophe fund, EFSM. The graph shows how these fiscal rescue
credits break down by country. As in the previous chapter, all figures are
calculated net of the countries’ explicit or implicit contributions to rescue
activities such as contributions to the EU budget or mutual participation in the
formal rescue funds. In all, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Cyprus received
€ 367 billion net of their own contributions, while Italy contributed € 27 billion
without receiving fiscal credit. Altogether, the GIPSIC countries (including
Italy) received € 339 billion, or 11% of their 2013 GDP, with another € 41
billion earmarked in their favour. Excluding Italy, the other five crisis-stricken
countries received € 367 billion, or 24% of their 2013 GDP, net of their own

contributions.
Figure 8.2 Public credit provided to the GIPSIC countries (December 2013, € billion)
* The sum includes a share of the € 13.0 billion in direct ECB purchases which have been allocated to the
NCBs according to their respective capital keys. Source: Ifo Institute calculations.
In addition, the chart shows the credit provided to the GIPSIC countries by
other countries’ NCBs via the SMP (€ 113 billion) and via the local printing
presses, as measured by the Target balances (€ 613 billion).25 Italy is included in
the list because it received the lion’s share of the SMP, as shown in Figure 8.1,
even though it received no fiscal rescue credit.
An item subtracted from the credit received is a € 61 billion intra-Eurosystem
claim of the GIPSIC countries from their slightly underproportionate issuance of

banknotes. This is a topic similar to the Target balances. The money created in a
country by way of asset purchases and refinancing operations may serve external
financing needs not only by way of electronic payment orders, but also by being
physically transported abroad. That is why an over-proportionate issuance of
banknotes incurs an intra-Eurosystem liability, just like a Target liability, and an
underproportionate issuance of banknotes, an intra-Eurosystem claim. As this
interpretation of over-and underproportionate banknote issuance rivals other
interpretations relating to different national payment habits, unlike the Target
balances the intra-Eurosystem claims and liabilities related to banknotes are not
recorded within the national balance-of-payments statistics and were therefore
not considered in last chapter’s analysis. Nevertheless, they are reported in
Figure 8.2 in order not to overstate the public credit received by the GIPSIC
countries. Their claim from a slightly underproportionate issuance of banknotes
is treated as a credit that they provided to other Eurosystem countries, and is thus
subtracted from the ECB credit provided to them.
All told, the GIPSIC countries by the end of 2013 had received € 1, 004
billion from the various sources, net of their banknote claims and net of their
own contributions. At the peak of the crisis, in August 2012, they had received €
1.339 trillion, or € 10, 000 per capita.
The figure does not show the credit potentially provided to the GIPSIC
countries via the Covered Bonds Purchase Programmes (CBPP), as the details
necessary to carry out a similar calculation have not been published. However,
based on the considerations made in Chapter 7 in the context of Figure 7.1, it can
be surmised that another € 36 billion might have to be added to the overall
public credit figure of € 1, 004 billion given in the diagram.
It is noteworthy that even without that qualification, the ECB’s help is much
larger than the help provided directly by the community of states, including the
IMF. As depicted by the curly brackets central banks have provided 66% of the
help given to the crisis countries, of which the lion’s share corresponds to Target
credit. Only the remaining 34% was subject to parliamentary approval.
Considering that the ECB Council is not a democratic body (see Chapter 1,
Figure 1.6), a legitimacy problem arises. While parliaments only agreed to these
rescue measures with much trepidation, the ECB Governing Council, in which
the creditor countries are in a minority, decides on such matters by a simple
majority based on the one-country-one-vote principle, and in the case of ELA
credit, even with a share of one-third of the votes (see Chapter 5).
Table 8.1 relates the rescue funds to the recipient countries’ GDP levels and
breaks down further the data shown in Figure 8.2. The second column in Table
8.1 shows the nominal Target-debt-to-GDP ratio, the third column the ratio of

over-proportionate (or, if negative, underproportionate) issuance of banknotes,
the fourth the ratio of government bonds held by non-GIPSIC central banks and
the ECB itself, the fifth the ratio of fiscal rescue credit provided by other states
and international organizations, and the sixth the sum of all these items, i.e. the
overall public credit provided to a country relative to its GDP. The numbers in
brackets to the right of this column show the respective absolute values of the
credit granted.
Table 8.1 International public credit relative to the recipient country’s GDP (December 2013, %)
Sources: National central bank balance sheets according to H.-W. Sinn and T. Wollmershäuser, ‘Target
Loans, Current Account Balances and Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility, ’ International Tax and
Public Finance 19, 2012, pp. 468–508, figure 1, updated; Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance,
Annual National Accounts; and Government Finance Statistics, Deficit and Debt; European Commission,
Economic and Financial Affairs, Financial Assistance in EU Member States, Greece.
Note: For fiscal rescue credit see note to Figure 7.1.
The results show that the GIPSIC countries together, by the end of 2013,
received 32% of their joint GDP as public rescue credit from other countries. As
Table 8.1 shows, the € 214 billion overall rescue credit provided by foreign
countries to Spain, at 21% of GDP, is not too far from the GIPSIC average of
32% in relative terms. The rescue credit to Portugal and Ireland, by contrast,
amounted to 67% and 83% of their respective GDP.

The outlier obviously is Greece. It received € 211 billion in terms of fiscal
credit from abroad and € 77 billion from other central banks, which amounts to
157% of its GDP. If Greece also receives the € 32 billion already earmarked for
it after approval by the Troika, this percentage will increase to 175% of 2013
Greek GDP.
All this money helped not only the recipient countries themselves, but to the
extent it exceeded the cumulative current account deficit as shown in Figure 7.1,
it also financed a capital flight, mostly a flight back home by investors from
other countries. This was discussed in detail in the last chapter.
The rescue programmes were controversial because they contradicted the no-
bailout clause of article 125 TFEU, as discussed in Chapter 1. The reader may
recall the quote of Christine Lagarde, then Finance Minister of France, that it
was clear to the European leaders that the ground-breaking decisions of May
2010 were in outright contradiction to the Maastricht Treaty. That explained the
considerable opposition from experts in Germany. Not only Bundesbank
President Axel Weber and ECB Chief Economist Jürgen Stark resigned, as
mentioned earlier, but some suspect that even the resignation of German
President Horst Köhler on 30 May 2010, submitted shortly after the Bundestag
had passed the law accompanying the EFSF and for which no clear explanation
was given, should be seen in this context.26 Köhler, ex-IMF president and ex-
state secretary in the Ministry of Finance under the Helmut Kohl government,
had been one of the key figures in the Maastricht Treaty negotiations, insisting
on the no-bailout clause and the exclusion of monetary state financing. The
German government bypassed him when they prepared the EFSF and the rescue
package for Greece.
The Liability Risk
The beneficiaries of the rescue policy were the crisis-stricken countries
themselves, as well as those creditors who otherwise might not have got their
money back, not least the powerful German and French banks and insurance
companies. New creditors suffered because they now had to compete with the
local printing presses and the rescue funds. Those likely to suffer most are the
taxpayers of Europe’s still-solvent countries. They will have to absorb all the
risks and may, in the end, have to foot the bill. This is despite the fact that the
Maastricht Treaty promised to protect them from this fate and that they never
agreed by qualified majority, or even referenda, to the kind of constitutional
change that the decisions of May 2010 implied, and particularly not to the

voluminous rescue operations decided upon by the ECB Governing Council.
The reader may recall the quote from German Chancellor Helmut Kohl in
1998, cited in Chapter 1, in which he promised his fellow countrymen, repeating
his words with gravitas, that the Maastricht Treaty protected them against
liabilities from commitments of other euro countries and ruled out any financial
transfers.
The taxpayers do not feel the burden imposed on them yet, because for the
time being it is merely a liability. Since the losses have not yet materialized, will
only occur in the future, and will fall on their victims in a diffuse and opaque
way that is difficult to anticipate, the general public opposition has thus far been
limited.27 The political forces of governments and of financial institutions that
needed the funds, because they would otherwise have faced immediate
difficulties, prevailed in the political process, following Olson’s theory that in a
distributional conflict the smaller group tends to win out over the larger one
because its gains and losses per capita are larger, which provides stronger
incentives for collective lobbying action.28
Where the losses will occur depends, of course, on the circumstances. There
will very probably be a flurry of camouflage activity by politicians when the
losses become imminent. Clever accountants will shift them from one public
institution to the next, and they will try to postpone the losses to future
generations, by reducing and postponing the interest payments and extending the
maturities of the liabilities instead of realizing the losses, which would have to
be shown as write-offs in the accounts. As discussed in Chapter 5, this has been
the case with the Irish ELA credit, originally meant as short-term liquidity
support that then was converted into Irish government bonds with an average
maturity of 34 years. The trick was also used when Greece’s public creditors
accepted a rescheduling of their credit titles on 26 and 27 November 2012.29
Among other things, the maturity of EFSF and intergovernmental credit was
extended to the years 2041/2042, the interest payments on EFSF credit were
waived for 10 years, the interest rates for the rest of the period were significantly
reduced, and new EFSF credit was given to buy back old government debt from
the market. Taken together, the measures were equivalent, in present value
terms, to an immediate write off of public credit worth € 43 billion in favour of
Greece.30 None of this was booked in the public accounts of the countries that
imposed the burden on their taxpayers.
Although it is not possible to predict the political camouflage that will follow,
the public credit volumes shown in Figure 8.2, not counting the credit volumes
earmarked (available if programme countries satisfy the conditions controlled by

a troika of EU, IMF, and ECB) and the still-unused capacity of the rescue
systems, represent a potential risk for the taxpayers. Table 8.2 gives an overview
of the results of two calculations of the public losses in absolute and per capita
terms for a selected number of euro countries, assuming two alternative worst-
case scenarios:
i) default and exit of the GIPSIC countries, and
ii) default of the GIPSIC countries and dissolution of the euro.
These scenarios are not foreseen in any treaty, but they are not entirely
implausible, as the lively public debate and various market indicators show. The
two scenarios do not differ with regard to the fiscal credits provided, but they do
differ concerning Target credit. The details of the calculations for the fiscal
credit are spelled out in a note to the table. The role of Target credit is discussed
below.
Table 8.2 Potential losses for selected euro countries after a GIPSIC default, two alternative worst-case
scenarios (December 2013)

1) Target-like claim on the Eurosystem from an underproportionate banknote issue.
Note: The potential losses for the individual countries were calculated as follows. Fiscal credit: country
shares in the first intergovernmental package for Greece. EFSM credit according to the country shares in the
revenue of the EU. EFSF credit according to ECB capital key shares, adjusted for the exclusion of the
GIPSIC countries, which in the EFSF are treated as ‘stepping out guarantors’. ESM credit according to

ECB capital shares. IMF credit according to country shares in IMF capital. SMP according to ECB capital
shares. The calculation of the Target and banknote losses and gains is explained in the text.
The table shows the potential losses for the creditor countries from the fiscal
aid programmes discussed above, from the SMP, and from Target credit, net of
claims and liabilities from non-proportionate banknote issuance.
The last but one column gives the overall exposure showing, for example, that
Germany faces a risk of € 401 billion, France of € 302 billion and the
Netherlands of € 85 billion if the GIPSIC countries default and leave the
Eurozone. Should the euro itself be dissolved, Germany may even stand to lose €
450 billion, while the French potential loss would fall to € 193 billion. The
reader should keep in mind that these calculations do not refer to expected or
probable losses, but just show exposure levels in the sense of maxima of
potential losses.
In the case of mere exits, all countries shown will suffer from similar potential
per capita losses of around five thousand euros, the slight differences resulting
primarily from the fact that the ECB capital shares, which are relevant for the
distribution of losses, are not only determined by population shares in the euro
area but also by GDP shares. If, on the other hand, the euro ceases to exist, Finns
and Dutch will face the largest potential losses, with € 6, 900 per capita,
followed by the Germans, with € 5, 500. The differences stem from the Target
and banknote risks.
For many it is not at all obvious that a loss of Target claims is a real loss;
indeed, the view is often voiced that Target balances are irrelevant statistical
items that have no wealth implications whatsoever.31 The key to understanding
the Target losses is to recall, as shown in Chapters 5 and 6, that Target balances
measure the relocation of refinancing credit (and similarly, funds provided by
asset purchases) across borders. A country with a Target liability has issued
more than its normal share of the Eurosystem’s monetary base through the
provision of credit by its NCB to the private banking sector. This extra credit
enabled the emission of net payment orders to other countries, which had the
effect of crowding out the respective refinancing credit being provided there, as
shown in Chapter 6. With the relocation of refinancing credit, the source of the
Eurosystem’s seignorage, in terms of interest on this credit, was also being
relocated between the countries. Since seignorage is pooled in the Eurosystem
and redistributed according to country size (the ECB capital key), this relocation
has no implications for the profit distribution of individual NCBs to their finance
ministries if all banks service and repay their debts. However, if a country’s
banking sector defaults, which was an imminent risk for Greece, Ireland, and

Cyprus (avoided and mitigated only by other rescue measures), the reallocation
of the Eurosystem’s seignorage revenue between countries can have severe
consequences.
If banks default and cannot repay their refinancing credit, the permanent
interest stream on such credit is no longer available for redistribution as
seignorage, and the Eurosystem bears a loss whose present value is equal to the
write-offs on the refinancing credit itself. If all countries keep the euro, each one
of them shares in this loss according to its share in the ECB capital. Unless the
ECB wants to accept more inflation, this loss cannot be avoided by issuing new
refinancing credit, since that would increase the monetary base. There is thus a
loss of the permanent interest stream on the chain of short-term refinancing
credit interrupted by a default.
In principle, the size of this loss is not limited to the Target balances, as it
might also occur with normal refinancing credit within the scope of a country’s
provision of inside money. However, as shown in Chapter 5, the creation of
extra refinancing credit, which led to Target balances and outside money in other
countries, resulted from a rather extreme lowering in the ECB’s collateral
standards, which naturally entails a higher default risk. Thus, the Target balances
are a rough indicator of the potential losses stemming from a lowering of the
collateral standards.
They are an exact indicator of such losses if an NCB whose banking sector
collapses defaults and leaves the Eurosystem, for then the legal relationship
between the Eurosystem and the commercial banks of the exiting country is
severed and only the Target claim on the respective NCB remains. This claim
equals the credit the Eurosystem gave to the respective countries and thus the
present value of the returns that this system would be entitled to receive. If the
NCB defaults, then all or some of this return flow will never materialize.
To understand this better, it is useful to first think of a symmetrical situation
where each country issued, by way of providing refinancing credit, an amount of
money strictly in proportion to its size. In that case, the interest revenue
collected by a particular NCB would flow into the Eurosystem pool and exactly
the same amount would be returning from the pool to that NCB. If in such a
situation an NCB defaults because of a collapse of the national banking system
and the country exits the Eurozone, there would be no seignorage losses for the
rest of the Eurozone, since all remaining Eurosystem NCBs would continue to
collect seignorage from their own banks, pass it on to the remaining pool and
receive it back from there. The finance ministry of the exiting NCB, however,
would bear a loss, since it would no longer participate in the collection of the
interest revenue earned by the Eurosystem.

This is actually one of the reasons why uncompetitive countries cling to the
euro. If they stay in the Eurosystem after a collapse of their banking system, the
seignorage losses will be shared by all other countries in proportion to their
capital keys, while the country in question will continue to receive its share of
the seignorage collected elsewhere.
Consider now a deviation from this symmetric case where one country issues
and lends out more money at the expense of others, which brings about Target
imbalances. This asymmetry implies that this country’s banks will have to
deliver a net flow of returns to the NCBs of other countries. If the NCB of this
particular country and its banking system default and the country exits the euro,
the rest of the Eurosystem will potentially lose the present value of this net flow
of returns, which is measured by the country’s Target liability. All remaining
NCBs will now share this potential loss according to the capital allocation key.
Since the allocation key is roughly in line with the relative population sizes, 32
the potential per capita losses of all countries are similar, as the upper right-hand
columns of Table 8.2 shows.
Things are different when the Eurosystem as such breaks up, because this
means that the pooling mechanism would no longer be available, a country’s
loss being then measured by its Target claim against the Eurosystem rather than
by its share in another country’s Target liability. The Target claim results from
the shifting of this country’s refinancing credit to other countries, and hence
measures the present value of the return flow from this credit to which this
country is entitled. However, after the breakdown of the euro this would be a
claim against a system that no longer exists. The country would thus lose its
Target claim. The second part of the table refers to this case. As mentioned
previously, Germany would be the biggest loser in absolute terms and Finland
the biggest in per capita terms.
The fifth column takes account of the fact that a country’s stock of refinancing
credit may deviate from the level proportionate to its size, not because it made
net payment orders to other countries, but also because it issued more or less
than the normal quantity of banknotes, generating intra-Eurosystem claims or
liabilities. This effect is particularly large in Germany. While Germany held a €
510 billion Target claim in December 2013, it incurred a € 224 billion liability
from over-proportionate banknote issuance. Only the difference between these
amounts, € 286 billion, can be interpreted as the present value of the interest
return from other countries to which Germany is entitled, and only this
difference would be potentially lost if the euro were dismantled.
Germany’s over-proportionate banknote issuance largely results from the fact
that the euro replaced the large, and growing, stock of deutschmark banknotes

once circulating outside Germany, in particular in eastern Europe and Turkey.33
The seignorage wealth resulting from the issuance of these banknotes was
socialized upon the introduction of the euro and such issuance has since then
been counted as a liability of the Bundesbank. It is unlikely that the Bundesbank
would be able to reverse this socialization should the euro come to an end. It will
be obliged to exchange the euro banknotes issued into deutschmark banknotes,
while maintaining a latent liability with the Eurosystem. It will not be possible,
however, to force the Bundesbank to honour this liability when the euro ceases
to exist, since there is no clear legal base for it and since the Bundesbank holds
the Target claims, the settlement of which would lack a legal base either if the
euro is defunct. Thus, the Bundesbank’s € 286-billion net claim will in all
likelihood be lost.
The OMT Controversy
The fifth step of the crisis was the ECB’s OMT programme, with OMT standing
for ‘Outright Monetary Transactions’. The term does not convey what this
programme really is, namely the promise to infinitely extend the government
bond purchases of the SMP type, limited to bonds which mature in one to three
years. If a country needs help, submits itself to the rules of the ESM, and still has
access to markets, the ECB may decide, and in fact promised, to buy its
government bonds to preserve their market value and keep the interest rates low.
President Draghi announced it with words that have become historical:34
What I said exactly is that—and I repeat what I said in London the first time—we will do
whatever it takes within our mandate—within our mandate—to have a single monetary policy in
the euro area, to maintain price stability in the euro area, and to preserve the euro. And we say
that the euro is irreversible.
He alluded with these words to a prior speech made on 26 July at an investors’
conference at which, however, he did not mention the OMT.35 In addition to the
ESM, the OMT programme successfully calmed down the markets from
September 2012 on and instilled fresh confidence among investors buying
southern European bonds.
According to Figure 6.2, the Target balances did indeed decline. While it is
true that, as shown in Figure 7.1 and the subsequent discussion in Chapter 7,
29% of the rapid decline in Target balances from summer 2012 to summer 2013
can be explained by additional fiscal rescue credit being disbursed, which
reduced the Target balances on a one-to-one basis, 71% of the decline may be

attributable to the OMT.
It is worth noting in this context, however, that according to Figure 2.2 the
decline in interest spreads actually began much earlier, in the winter of
2011/2012 (Spain: December 2011; Portugal: February 2012; Greece: March
2012). This points to the three-year Long-Term Refinancing Operations
(LTROs) as well as to the ESM, rather than the OMT, as the major explanations
for reduced tensions. After all, at the time there was no talk of the OMT.
Meanwhile the three-year LTROs provided massive funds to banks, which in
turn bought government bonds. Moreover, there were intense debates about the
ESM throughout that winter, and the SMP was fully operative. Still, it cannot be
denied that the OMT as of September 2012 also calmed the markets and helped
convince investors to resume lending to the crisis-stricken countries. The
President of the Swiss National Bank, Philipp Hildebrand, expressed this
pointedly in the following statement:
The ECB’s OMT is a game changer. OMT’s soothing power stems from the fact that market
participants in effect see them as a commitment to the mutualisation of liabilities across the euro
zone: countries standing together behind the debts of the vulnerable.36
From the viewpoint of the debtor countries and their creditors, a particular
advantage of the OMT over the ESM’s rescue credit was that the ECB explicitly
declared that it would give up its preferred creditor status.37 This is plausible
insofar as its rank follows from the covenants attached to the respective
government bonds, which are independent of who holds such bonds. Thus, it is
understandable that the applause from international investors was deafening.
Some economists who signed a public appeal even argued that the OMT was
the ‘most skilful and successful policy communication in decades’. What they
liked in particular was the fact that ‘without spending a single euro’ it was
possible to calm the markets and drive down the interest rates at which the
debtor countries could continue to borrow. They maintained that, among
multiple equilibria, the OMT produced the better one.38
However, things are not that simple.39 Firstly, the OMT is the successor
programme to the SMP and should be seen in this context. Secondly, in
economic terms the OMT is tantamount to credit insurance provided free of
charge by the ECB at the taxpayer's risks who, as explained above in the context
of the SMP, would have to bear the cost of write-off losses. Thirdly, and most
importantly, the Maastricht Treaty may not allow such credit insurance. The
following sections will take a deeper look into these aspects.
As to the first issue, it is misleading to argue that no money has been spent,

since the OMT is basically a continuation of the SMP. True, the differences are
the changed conditionality, the announcement of unlimited purchases and the
explicit relinquishment of seniority rights. However, purchases amounting to €
223 billion have been performed, as shown in Figure 8.1.
Secondly, it is certainly true that creditors and debtors like the free insurance
that the OMT provides. It solves the creditors’ problem that debtors may not be
able to repay, and it helps debtors to continue borrowing. Creditors enjoy
investment safety, and debtors can borrow at lower rates. The two parties can
continue lending and borrowing as if the competitiveness and debt crisis
resulting from the credit bubble had never occurred. There is indeed a different
equilibrium than would have been reached if no such free credit insurance had
been available. This does not necessarily mean, however, that the resulting
equilibrium is ‘better’ in the sense of the economic theory of multiple equilibria,
where anchoring expectations may prevent disastrous cumulative processes.40 It
just means another equilibrium, as there is always another equilibrium if a
government institution intervenes in the market by subsidizing particular
activities. This other equilibrium entails another distribution of income and
wealth within the group of people living today, and between the present and
future generations.
Given that a market for the kind of insurance that the OMT offers is already
available, it could well be that the public intervention leads to a worse
equilibrium. If creditors wished to have safer investments, they could buy CDS
insurance in the market (credit default swaps). If they refrain because the ECB
provides this insurance for free, they might lend excessively as they did in the
years before the crisis, continuing the misallocation of resources that created
Europe’s mess in the first place.
It is a basic principle of a market economy that if someone uses a service, s/he
has to pay for it. The payment ensures that the benefit to the user of the service is
large enough to compensate the person who provides the service. This principle
ensures allocative efficiency in the Pareto sense, and it explains the superiority
of a market economy over a centrally planned one. The insurance market is no
exception to this principle. Thus, government intervention in terms of providing
credit insurance free of charge cannot be justified by simply pointing out that
creditors and debtors like it, while the taxpayers, unaware of the risks imposed
on them, remain calm.
Figure 8.3 shows how the premia for credit insurance of the GIPSIC countries,
measured as a percentage of the capital insured, have developed in recent years.
It demonstrates first of all that the insurance as such is a precious economic good
with a sizeable market price. Thus the observation that ‘not a single euro’ was

spent to achieve an economic effect is rather hollow. The protection of an
insurance contract is a valuable economic good even if the damage does not
occur and the insurance company does not spend a euro. Based on the logic of
the OMT defenders, one could ask insurance companies to insure risks without
receiving an insurance premium as long as the damage has not materialized,
which obviously would be an absurd implication.
Had the taxpayers wished to absorb the risk imposed on them by the ECB
decisions, they could have bought CDS contracts in the worldwide market for
such contracts, which currently has a volume of about $ 27 trillion.41 By doing
so they probably could have earned an annual income of many dozens of billions
of euros.
The chart, moreover, demonstrates that the calming of the markets through the
fiscal rescue measures and the OMT announcement significantly reduced the
CDS premia for most of the GIPSIC countries. Only Greek government bonds
can no longer be meaningfully insured, because the default of Greece is no
longer a random event. The decline of the CDS premia began in autumn 2011
and continued well into 2013. Based on the Q4 2011 premium, the insurance of,
say, the 2013 ‘IPSIC’ government debt (without Greece) would have cost 4.1%,
or € 143 billion, at the rates reported in the chart. Two years later, by Q4 2013,
the premium was only 1.9%, and the insurance for the same debt would have
cost only € 68 billion. Thus, even if no rescue euro has actually been lost, the
free insurance provided was worth € 75 billion a year, a bit more than ‘a single
euro’.42

Figure 8.3 Trends in CDS premia for 10-year GIPSIC government bonds
Source: Datastream, Thomson Reuters CDS.
Note: the price of CDS protection against a Greek state bankruptcy increased until February 2012 to over
10, 000 basis points (100%) and then ceased to be quoted on the market.
The defenders of the OMT would probably argue that the situation in Europe
was already too critical and close to collapse for such allocative considerations,
and that without the free insurance provided by the OMT and other public rescue
operations there might have been bank runs and bankruptcies creating contagion
externalities that destabilize the markets. This, in principle, is a valid argument,
but it is certainly not sufficient to make the case for the OMT.
For one thing, no one is able to prove how dangerous the situation really was.

The financial industry always paints horror scenarios of contagion that would
make the world fall apart unless investors are bailed out with public money.
This, in a sense, is their business model. They undertake overly risky activities,
collect the profits as long as things go well, and ask for the taxpayer to foot the
bill when losses occur. This is the kind of artificial incentive to risk-taking and
of artificial source of profits on which the capital market has nourished for so
long.43 Such apocalyptic stories were told before the Greek haircut of March
2012, the biggest in history, and before the haircut and bail-in of Laiki Bank in
Cyprus, but catastrophic contagion effects failed to materialize in either case.
Cyprus has solved the problem with capital controls and limits on cash
withdrawals from banks. Admittedly, these are measures one would have liked
to avoid in a common currency area, but they nevertheless effectively prevented
the bank-runs the defenders of the OMT are afraid of, and they were definitely
cheaper for the taxpayers than bailing out the banking systems.
For another, there are political contagion and moral hazard effects that could
be much more dangerous, in terms of increasing the incentive for states to over-
borrow and of infecting the public budgets of the still-solvent states in the north,
than a mere crisis of financial markets. Only a few of the states of Europe have
sound finances, most have debt levels above the Maastricht line, and most suffer
from a distorted age pyramid that, taken by itself, is enough to trigger budgetary
crises around 2025 to 2030, when the baby boomers of major central European
countries go into retirement. Adding to this the losses from rescue credits that
will not be serviced would be a recipe for disaster. Thus, even with a substantial
contagion risk concerning financial markets, the case for the OMT cannot be
made unless it is shown that the political contagion weighs less than the financial
one, that the damage done to financial institutions weighs more than the damage
inflicted on fiscal systems, and, consequently, on entire societies.
Thirdly, whatever the truth about these economic considerations, the main
problems are on the legal side. While many central banks around the world buy
government bonds to finance states, with the attendant redistributive
implications, the Eurosystem has been constructed around a more limited
mandate for its central bank, because it is a common currency area without a
common state, which is an unusual arrangement. Because a common state with
redistributive functions has not been created and was, in part, vigorously rejected
by those who pushed for a currency union (see Chapter 1), the Maastricht Treaty
excludes the possibility of monetary state financing.
Apart from that, even with the central banks of federations like the USA or
Switzerland, the kind of regional fiscal policy that the ECB developed during the
crisis is unthinkable. While it is true that the US Federal Reserve buys federal

government bonds, it would never act a lender of last resort for single states.44 It
would not even touch the bonds of near-insolvent states like California or
Illinois. Equally, it is unthinkable that the Swiss National Bank would bail out
single cantons. The liability principle has thus far been respected in the US and
Switzerland. If states or cantons over-borrow, they are left to go bankrupt, and
no central political institution, let alone the central bank, is going to help. This,
in turn, prevents over-borrowing and reckless lending in the first place. This will
be studied in more detail in Chapter 9.
If someone finds the present rule of law in the Eurosystem inappropriate, s/he
should demand that it be changed by rewriting the Maastricht Treaty. It is not
possible to have it changed by force majeure by technocratic institutions that
take the liberty of self-defining the scope of their mandate. The ECB is
independent within the set of rules granted to it by democratic institutions, but
not in the sense that it can itself change these rules or redefine their limits. The
ECB Governing Council was intentionally designed upon the basis of the one-
country-one-vote principle regardless of country size because the scope of its
mandate was limited to a narrowly defined monetary policy and the pursuit of
price stability. It was not meant to carry out policies with serious fiscal
implications. If the Governing Council nevertheless makes such policy
decisions, it subjects itself to what lawyers call the ultra vires offense, the
offense of overstepping its mandate and misusing its power.
Even the Bank of England, which can pursue its monetary policy
independently, always takes monetary policy decisions with fiscal implications
to the Treasury to obtain democratic backing for them, as its ex-president
Mervyn King emphasized in his farewell address.45
The two special rules that distinguish the Eurosystem from other monetary
systems, and which were Germany’s conditions for giving up the deutschmark,
are laid down in articles 123 and 125 of the TFEU. The former excludes
monetary state financing, the latter spells out the no-bailout clause, as discussed
in Chapter 1.
In the meantime, article 125 of the TFEU has effectively been modified by
political decisions of the EU parliaments when they set up the various fiscal
rescue schemes discussed above. Lawyers are still debating intensely whether
these decisions were compatible with the Maastricht Treaty or whether a
revision of that Treaty would have been necessary.46
In the context of the SMP and OMT, article 123 of the TFEU is even more
important, however, than article 125. It reads:47
Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility with the European Central Bank or with the

central banks of the Member States (hereinafter referred to as ‘national central banks’) in favour
of Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, central governments, regional, local or other
public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States
shall be prohibited, as shall the purchase directly from them by the European Central Bank or
national central banks of debt instruments.
The intention of this article is clearly the exclusion of monetary state
financing. However, it does leave a small loophole with the word ‘directly’ in
the last sentence. Strictly speaking, only direct purchases of government bonds
from governments are forbidden, while indirect purchases are allowed. The ECB
reads this as meaning that purchases in secondary markets are allowed.48
However, this interpretation is not convincing, because if it were true, the
ECB and a member country could always circumvent it by first channelling
government bonds through a commercial bank, perhaps even one that belongs to
the government, before the ECB buys them. This risk was seen early enough by
the European Council. It therefore ruled in a 1993 Council Regulation that
‘purchases made on the secondary market must not be used to circumvent the
objective of (...) article 104’ of the Maastricht Treaty, which is now article 123
of the TFEU, and only secondary market purchases of government bonds of EU
countries not belonging to the Eurosystem were allowed as exceptions.49
Instead of secondary market purchases, what might also and primarily have
been meant by the indirect purchases allowed, are purchases through the banking
system by providing banks with ECB’s refinancing credit. After all, the ECB
lends money to banks against collateral, and the latter use the money to buy
government bonds that they then submit as collateral for their credit. As
explained in Chapter 5, this sort of indirect monetary state finance has played a
major role in the crisis. It is problematic enough in itself, given that banks bear
the risk of state default and that the Eurosystem partakes of the risk of bank
defaults. Nevertheless, banks can be expected to exhibit more care and caution in
buying government bonds when they have to actually hold them than when they
can sell them on to the Eurosystem after a waiting period of only a few days.50 It
is not at all plausible that the signatories of the Maastricht Treaty wanted to ban
monetary state financing with a meticulous description of all the variants being
forbidden, and then using the one little and innocuously sounding adverb
‘directly’ to open up a giant loophole with obvious circumvention possibilities
that allow for a reshuffling of financial risks on the order of hundreds of billions
of euros among the nations of the Eurosystem.
To defend the ECB’s interpretation, President Draghi pointed out that article
18 paragraph 1 of the Protocols of the Maastricht says that the ECB can operate
in the financial markets by buying and selling ‘marketable instruments’, without

there being a limitation to private assets.51 However, this is just a general clause
clarifying that the ECB can perform open market operations, which has never
been disputed. The general clause is narrowed down and specified by article 125
TFEU, which for that purpose has been repeated with identical wording in article
21 of the Protocol of the Maastricht Treaty, which is one of the special articles of
that protocol that cannot be changed by either the EU Commission or the EU
parliament.52
A major legal problem of the OMT lies in its similarity with the Secondary
Markets Support Facility (SMSF) of the ESM, as described above. The latter is
an announcement to buy government bonds of a distressed country if necessary,
without the ESM holding a seniority status, provided that the country submits
itself to a formal reform programme agreed with the ESM. As explained, the
ECB implicitly gave up its preferred creditor status when it announced the OMT
but requires a beneficiary country to be part of an ESM programme. The OMT is
therefore basically identical to the SMSF.
The only difference is that the supporting countries’ liability is strictly limited
by the ESM’s equity capital of € 700 billion, while via the ECB, the countries’
liability is unlimited or, to be precise, limited by the sum of the Eurosystem’s
equity capital and seignorage wealth, which is a much larger figure. As
explained in Chapter 1, under static conditions the Eurosystem can absorb losses
of up to € 1.615 trillion (€ 1.262 trillion monetary base and € 353 billion equity
by 31 December 2013) and in a dynamic calculation, where future increases in
the monetary base are taken into account, it might be able to absorb losses of up
to € 3.4 trillion.53
It is not reasonable to allow the ECB Governing Council, a technocratic body
of monetary specialists pursuing a limited mandate, to incur such enormous
liability risks through simple majority voting while the ESM, controlled by
parliaments and with 85% qualified majority voting, commands a much smaller
sum to carry out exactly the same operations.
Apart from that, the parallelism between the OMT and the SMSF implies an
ultra vires problem for at least one of the two institutions, the ESM or the ECB.
If the government bond purchases are fiscal operations, the ECB is overstepping
its mandate. If, on the other hand, they are monetary operations as the ECB
claims, then the ESM is overstepping its mandate, since it is not allowed to carry
out monetary policy. For logical reasons, at least one of the two institutions is
operating ultra vires.
The ECB itself should have detected these problems and could therefore have
been hesitant to announce the OMT programme. After all, its bylaws stipulate

that the ECB’s General Council must assess the compatibility of the ECB’s
policy with article 123 TFEU in an annual report to the Governing Council. The
report is not published but is handed out to other EU institutions, among them
the EU Commission. However, as always, the results of self-assessment are
different from those of outside assessment.
The Statement of the German Constitutional Court
In February 2014, shortly before the final version of this manuscript went to
print, the German Constitutional Court gave an outside assessment of the OMT
in the context of its ruling over various appeals against the permanent rescue
fund ESM, bundling tens of thousands of plaintiffs.54 In its preliminary ruling of
12 September 2012, 55 the Court had rejected appeals for an injunction and
allowed the German President Joachim Gauck to sign the ESM Treaty.
However, at the time it also said that the cumulative effects of all rescue
operations are to be seen as a whole, and that it will therefore also comment on
the ECB’s rescue policies in its main judgement, in particular on whether the
ECB is overstepping its mandate when pursuing its OMT programme.
For the international press, the most important aspect of the German
Constitutional Court’s recent announcement was the Court’s declaration that it
would consult the European Court of Justice concerning the OMT. The press
interpreted this as being good news for investors and the ECB. After all, the
European Court of Justice is known for its proclivity towards European
institutions so as to facilitate the European integration process. Thus, it is
generally expected that it will wave the OMT through.
However, this is a misinterpretation of the situation, as the German Court did
not hand over the case, but just asked the European Court for an opinion.56 And
it did not ask it whether or not the OMT is legal, but about what measures the
European Court would suggest to make it legal, given that in its opinion this is
not the case. In fact, the German Court has made it utterly clear that the ECB
overstepped its mandate with the OMT programme, and that this programme
violates EU primary law.
These are the Court’s main views on the OMT:57
(1) The OMT programme may lead to a significant redistribution of wealth
among the states of Europe if the bonds acquired are held until maturity.
The ECB is not empowered to bring about such a redistribution of
wealth.

(2) The selective purchase of the government bonds of crisis-afflicted
countries is an economic policy measure. The ECB is not authorized to
participate in economic policy measures.
(3) A procedure that differentiates between individual EU member states is
fundamentally alien to the European Central Bank system.
(4) The OMT programme is the functional equivalent of the corresponding
EFSF and ESM bailout programmes, but is not subject to any democratic
controls.
(5) The ECB’s intention to reduce differences in interest rates on government
bonds supports the contention that the OMT constitutes monetary state
financing, which is prohibited by article 123 of TFEU.
(6) Interest differentials are essential ingredients of a functioning capital
market and should therefore not be mitigated by the ECB.
The German Court does make suggestions as to how the OMT could be
modified in order to make it compatible with EU primary law. In particular, it
suggests a capping of the programme’s volume and, most importantly, an
assurance that the ECB would not incur any losses on government bonds should
the issuing state become insolvent. Thus, the ECB cannot promise to do
‘whatever it takes’, and it cannot hold government debt up to maturity and
accept a pari passu position with private investors upon insolvency. Obviously,
both of these provisions would kill the OMT, since the feature that made this
programme so effective in terms of calming the market was precisely the
implicit promise to buy the government bonds before maturity and unload the
write-off losses onto the shoulders of taxpayers.
It remains to be seen how the European Court of Justice will respond. Rather
than aiming for a showdown, it will probably try to find a compromise and
negotiate with the German Constitutional Court. If not, a major constitutional
conflict will erupt in Europe that could escalate in a way that could be
detrimental to the euro. The German Court may then ask the Bundesbank not to
participate in the OMT and the German government to renounce the EU Treaty.
Of course, it is more than understandable that other countries in Europe regard
this possibility with concern. However, the European Court of Justice has no
jurisdiction over whether or not European treaties are compatible with the
constitutions of the member states. Should Germany have misinterpreted the
Maastricht Treaty’s no-bailout rule and the exclusion of monetary state financing
because the European Court of Justice interprets it differently to the German
Constitutional Court, the latter has the right to force the German government and
parliament to take action.

In all likelihood, the German institutions are already being forced to change
their attitudes. After all, the Court’s opinion was revealed by the published
statement, without having to wait until the final ruling out. The Court said very
clearly, and with considerable emphasis, that the German parliament, the
German government, and the Bundesbank are not only forbidden to participate
in actions of European institutions that overstep their mandates, but must
actively oppose the abuse of power by such institutions.58 Moreover, it gave
every German citizen the right to appeal to the Constitutional Court should these
institutions not take the required actions.59
The Bundesbank therefore cannot be expected to participate in the OMT
programme should the ECB Governing Council decide to activate it. It has been
argued that this would not matter, as other central banks could in this case buy
the government bonds, and the Bundesbank would still be participating in any
write-off losses in the ECB system. This argument is valid if the euro survives
the bankruptcies. However, if it doesn’t, the risk-sharing will end, and it would
be a matter of fierce negotiations whether or not the write-off losses on
government bond purchases with dubious legal justification would be shared.
The situation would be very similar to the negotiation about the sharing of
Target risks. Apart from that, the political signal of the Bundesbank’s not
participating in the OMT programme would have its own implications for
markets.
Optimistic investors and pessimistic taxpayers may think that all this is not
very relevant as the German government, which holds a two-thirds majority in
parliament, could amend the Maastricht Treaty in a way that makes the OMT
and similar debt mutualization activities legal, even if they aren’t under the
current formulation. However, this may turn out not to be the case, since the
Court declared that the German parliament does not have the right to make
decisions that would empower European institutions to decide themselves about
their mandate, barring it furthermore from agreeing to automatic decision
procedures that would give European institutions access to the German budget,
reducing the scope of discretion for future German parliaments.60 Only case-by-
case rescue decisions are possible for the German parliament, given the current
legal architecture of the EU and given the German constitution. The
implementation of redistribution mechanisms would call for a new German
Constitution which, however, could only be based on the decisions of a new
constitutional assembly or a referendum.61
Banking Union: Bail-in or Bailout?

The last step to be taken in the crisis so far is the creation of a banking union in
the Eurozone. There is general agreement that the banking union needs a
common banking supervision and common resolution rules to keep moral hazard
incentives to national authorities in check. Indeed, it is not advisable to pool the
risks from the ECB’s refinancing credit and mutually stand in for additional
bank risks through fiscal rescue funds, while leaving it to national authorities to
regulate and supervise the banks on their territory.62 Risk-sharing and
redistribution necessarily require common behavioural constraints for the banks
involved, as well as common supervision and resolution authorities.
The banking union was agreed upon at the EU Summit of 28 and 29 July 2012
with the following wording:63
When an effective single supervisory mechanism is established, involving the ECB, for banks in
the euro area the ESM could, following a regular decision, have the possibility to recapitalize
banks directly.
Thus, first a common banking supervision under the control of the ECB is to
be established and then community money is to be made available to the banks
to cover their write-off losses from toxic investments.64 The banking union with
a central authority for recapitalizing banks with community funds is a quantum
leap in the rescue philosophy, because not only are states to stand by each other,
but private economic activity is to be mutually insured and subsidized through
public channels.65
While it is theoretically conceivable that the recapitalization of banks to which
the governments agreed was meant to compensate for future write-off losses
resulting under a new regulatory regime, the urgency of the calls for a banking
union and the enormous political pressure imposed on Germany by the
governments of France, Spain, and Italy as well as the ECB and the EU
Commission makes it clear that another issue is at stake: sharing the legacy of
the bursting asset bubble in terms of write-off losses on toxic assets accumulated
in the banks’ balance sheets in the years before the crisis.
Most of these write-off losses resulted from the banks’ investing in very risky
ventures during the credit bubble, ranging from overpriced real estate to overly
indebted governments, and which now threaten the existence of these banks.
Thus far, a significant proportion of the necessary write-off losses do not yet
show up in the books, but as bonds and credit claims mature and debtors turn out
not to be able to repay, the truth will gradually become visible in the balance
sheets. Debtors who cannot repay include real-estate investors, normal business
firms, private households, and states that are currently being kept afloat with

community funds and which may need debt relief.
The causes of the misinvestment by banks were discussed in Chapters 4, 5,
and 7. They include the political ties between national governments and national
central banks, the excessively liberal interpretations of the Basel Accords that
induced banks to load their balance sheets with government bonds, as well as the
expectation of being bailed out with the local printing press, if necessary. All
these factors stimulated the excessive foreign lending that induced the
inflationary credit bubbles in the first place. In addition, there was much political
arm-twisting during the crisis to have local banks, in particular in Spain and
Italy, use the voluminous long-term refinancing credit the ECB offered in winter
2011/2012, which Mario Draghi called the ‘Big Bazooka’, to buy their
governments’ bonds to ensure the continuation of deficit financing.
There was also the problem of competition in laxity of local regulatory efforts
that allowed banks to engage in overly risky activities.66 A lax regulation attracts
banking business and creates jobs in the financial industry. In addition, it opens a
channel for cheap credit for domestic uses. The possibility of reaping these
benefits while shifting the risk of bankruptcy to other nations—or, even better,
while others come to rescue to prevent the bankruptcy—is an irresistible
temptation in particular for countries with their back against the wall, which see
no chance of repaying their foreign debt anyway.
The distorted incentives on which the Eurosystem was built have melted the
governments and banks of some European countries into an alloy of sorts, with
dangerous implications for systemic stability. The vicious circle between
hazardous state and bank finance created by the mutual interconnections
between commercial banks, local central banks, and local governments has
meanwhile backfired by increasing the financing costs of private business
located in the GIPSIC countries, which in the end will have to foot at least some
of the extra tax burden necessary to save the states in whose territories they
reside. This has led to the demand to pool even more of the private investment
risks through ECB actions.67
The EU Commission, the ECB, and the southern and western states of the
Eurozone want to cut the toxic links between banks and their local governments
by distributing the losses of banks among European taxpayers. However, this is
certainly not the only possibility. An alternative is imposing the losses on the
banks’ creditors, which is often called a ‘bail-in’. Given that the creditors made
conscious investment decisions and enjoyed good returns for many years, they
should stand up for the consequences of their decisions.
Understandably, this alternative has not been met with great enthusiasm by the

financial industry. Thus, in the early stages of the European discussions about a
banking union, a bail-in with haircuts for creditors was dismissed as too
dangerous for the stability of capital markets and, if anything, left for the future.
Accordingly, the European Commission in 2012 proposed protecting the banks’
creditors from any haircuts until 2018.68
The argument for the bailout was that the fire is burning and needs to be
extinguished. Yes, haircuts would punish those who made the decisions to invest
and induce them to lend less recklessly in the future. But for the moment
survival was more important than long-run efficiency. Without a bailout, the
boat would sink with all passengers. As already explained, that is the usual
knock-out argument used in every crisis by representatives of the financial
industry to close the debate and open taxpayers’ wallets. However, at a time
when the crisis is completing its seventh year, this argument has lost the sense of
urgency it had when the crisis began.
While applauded by the financial industry, the EU proposal hardly met with
unanimous approval in Europe.69 When two groups of German economists, 480
signatories in total, launched two separate but largely identical appeals, rejecting
the idea of bailing out creditors on the grounds that this would distort future
investment incentives and violate the liability principle, many politicians were
alerted to the problem and pushed for a correction of the Commission’s
proposals. Interestingly enough, these were often politicians from the left.
Solidarity made them agree to rescuing states with community funds, but not
rich plutocrats who had misinvested their money.
The normal method of carrying out bailins is debt-equity swaps, i.e. the
conversion of credit claims into bank shares. To be sure, banks have lost much
equity capital during the crisis and now need to replenish it to be able to operate
well. But instead of burdening the taxpayers, this equity capital could be
supplied by the banks’ creditors. Creditors could be asked to accept haircuts on
their claims and receive shares in the bank instead. This would impose the losses
first of all on the shareholders, who are actually supposed to bear the risk, and if
the equity is not enough for that, on the creditors as well. Starting with hybrid
capital earmarked for such losses and moving progressively from senior to junior
credit claims, the creditors would have to accept the haircuts without any
compensation.
A strong argument in favour of such a solution is the sheer size of the
potential write-off losses and the large volume of bank debt which could be used
as a buffer. Table 8.3 gives an overview of various estimates of the maximum
potential write-off losses on toxic assets held by the banking sectors of the

GIPSIC countries. Averaging the reports reviewed suggests that maximum
write-offs on the order of around € 680 billion would have to be reckoned with,
which is 65% of the € 1, 035 billion aggregate stock of equity capital (including
reserves) of the GIPSIC banking systems and many times more than the market
value of this stock, which is only € 229 billion.70 The range of the estimates is
not very large. Adding the most pessimistic estimates yields a maximum joint
write-off loss of € 735 billion, and adding the most optimistic estimates produces
a sum of € 618 billion. The figures are truly alarming, as they reveal that in a
worst-case scenario the write-off losses might wipe out over half the equity
capital of the GIPSIC banks, and in Greece and Cyprus more or less all of it.
Since banks tend to hold only slightly more equity capital than is required by
regulators, the write-off losses would drive the average bank into insolvency. Of
course, individual banks can be perfectly safe despite the catastrophic averages,
but the more such safe banks there are, the more devastating the situation for the
others must be, given the average write-off figures.
Table 8.3 Maximum potential write-off losses for GIPSIC banks

Sources: M. Melchiorre, ‘With Cyprus, The EU Needs To Urgently Erase Europe’s ‘Nobody Loses’
Mentality’, Forbes Capital Flows, 22 March 2013 (Greece, Italy, Cyprus), available at: <http://elibrary-
data.imf.org/Report.aspx?Report=4160276> (accessed on 27 March 2014); International Monetary Fund,
FSIs and Underlying Series (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Cyprus); N. Panigirtzoglou, S.
MacGorain, M. Lehmann, L. Evans and J. Vakharia, ‘Flows & Liquidity. NPL Timebomb’, J. P. Morgan,
Global Asset Allocation, 10 May 2013 (Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy); G. Höhler, ‘Die Last der faulen
Kredite’, Handelsblatt, 27 May 2013, p. 31; Ernst & Young, ‘Outlook for Financial Services’, Ernst &

Young Eurozone Forecast, Winter Edition 2012/13 (Spain, Italy); F. Goria, ‘Sulle banche italiane un
macigno da 250 miliardi’, Linkiesta, 16 July 2013; Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Database, Time
series 
MFI 
(Greece, 
Ireland, 
Portugal, 
Spain, 
Italy, 
Cyprus), 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/time_series_databases.html>.
Note: The figures show non-performing loans as an estimate of maximum potential write-off losses.
The maximum potential write-off losses are not only large relative to bank
equity but also relative to the equity of the ESM, which would be utterly
insufficient to cover them. As explained above, the paid-in equity capital of the
ESM as of this writing (February 2014) is € 64.3 billion of the € 80 billion
contemplated if all countries pay in their shares. In addition, € 620 billion are to
be paid in later on demand, such that a total equity stock of € 700 billion will
theoretically be available. This would be enough to just cover the maximum
potential write-off losses of the GIPSIC banks, but if the money were used for
this purpose, little would be left for the principal function of the ESM, namely
helping states rather than banks.
The debt of the banks themselves, on the other hand, would be more than
sufficient, as it is more than ten times larger than the maximum potential write-
off losses or than the ESM capacity, for that matter. This is shown in Figure 8.4,
which provides an overview of the public and banking debt of the crisis
countries. The upper left column depicts their public debt, which by the end of
2013 added up to € 3.798 trillion. The longer column on the right depicts the
debt of the banking sector, i.e. the money that the banks have borrowed in the
market to finance their own lending and other investment. The bank debt totals €
8.163 trillion.
The bank debt is divided into three categories, shown as a dotted area, in grey
and in white. White represents sight deposits, immediately accessible. Grey is
savings deposits. Dotted represents all other kinds of bank debt, including, for
example, interbank credit and bank debentures. The refinancing credit that banks
receive from their own NCBs is included here as well.

Figure 8.4 GIPSIC government and bank debt (December 2013, € billion)
Source: European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Databases and Indicators,
AMECO – The annual macroeconomic database; Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Database, Time series
MFI (Monetary Financial Institutions); Ifo Institute calculations.
Note: The portion of the banks’ deposits by Eurozone residents (excluding monetary financial institutions
and governments) is depicted in white and grey, white standing for sight deposits and grey for savings
deposits. Since the figures shown have been rounded, they do not add up to the round figure shown for the
sum of the exact individual figures. Government debts 2013: European Commission forecast, November
2013.
Given that the € 8.163 trillion of bank debt comes from the consolidated
national bank accounts, the liabilities that a bank has vis-à-vis other domestic
banks have already been deducted. This sum is thus the net debt of the respective

national banking systems. The cross-linkages among the crisis countries,
however, could not be disentangled. Therefore, the figure shown for the overall
debt of the GIPSIC banking systems must be interpreted with some caution.
Part of the debt of the banking sector was used to finance the holding of
government bonds. This part of the inter-linkages, € 1.160 trillion, has been
accounted for and is represented by the overlap between both columns.71 If it is
subtracted, the sum of GIPSIC banking and public debts amounted to € 10.801
trillion by December 2013, as depicted by the figure above the dashed line. This
represents 347% of the combined GDP of the crisis countries. In view of this
truly staggering magnitude, it seems courageous to try to protect both the
creditors of the GIPSIC governments and of their banks with taxpayer money
from the still-solid economies of the Eurozone.
On the other hand, for exactly that reason, moderate haircuts to the debts of
the banks of around 8.2% on average would be sufficient to cover the average of
the maximum potential write-off losses. If sight deposits are to be excluded,
10.1% would be sufficient, and if savings deposits were also to be excluded, the
necessary haircut would be 14.9%. These are certainly unpleasant figures for
markets, but not exactly catastrophic. The situation is as it is. Shifting the losses
to government budgets of the still-solvent countries in Europe would not make
them smaller. Such a strategy would, for example, increase the average public
debt-to-GDP ratio of the non-GIPSIC countries by ten percentage points, from
83% to 93%, if taxpayers were to be spared temporarily. (Later they will have to
foot the bill anyway.) Alternatively, the maximum potential write-off losses
would absorb one-seventh of today’s VAT revenue of the non-GIPSIC countries
for ten years (equivalent to increasing the public deficits by 1.0 % of GDP each
year). The tax solutions would not only create wrong incentives for borrowers
and lenders, they would also result in severe economic distortions due to tax
avoidance and evasion activities, creating a considerable excess burden beyond
the mere financial one.
These considerations have not remained hidden from the European
Commission. After months of internal debates, the EC, on the occasion of the
Cypriot crisis, changed the official strategy of postponing bailins until 2018 that
it had proclaimed in June 2012. When the Cypriot banking system defaulted in
March 2013, there was little political support for bailing out the Russian
oligarchs and other rich investors who had parked their money there. The new
head of the Eurogroup, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, and EU Commissioner Michel
Barnier declared that henceforth there would be bailins following a clear pecking
order for the losses to be allocated to different kinds of claimants.72

The Plan
Guidelines for the bail-in procedure and further details of the banking union
were laid down by the EU Council and the EU Commission, serving as a basis
for further negotiations with the European Parliament aimed at finalizing a
regulation that is to be enacted before the end of the legislative period in May
2014, before this book is published.73 The proposed legislation stipulates that
shareholders and holders of convertible or junior bonds are to be bailed in first,
up to 8% of a bank’s (non-risk weighted) assets. Secondly, a Single Resolution
Fund (SRF) to be endowed by the banks of the Eurozone is to be set up that
would cover up to 5% of the bank’s total assets should the 8% bail-in turn out to
be insufficient.74
The 8% rule is proclaimed by politicians as a bail-in tool that protects
taxpayers, but it is less protective than it sounds, as the 8% is to include the
bank’s equity.75 Equity, whose normal function is to bear the losses, normally
covers between 2% to 5% of a bank’s total assets. Thus, the bail-in tool
effectively means that creditor losses are limited to between 3% and 6% of a
bank’s balance sheet, not 8%.
Moreover, the priority of a bail-in is watered down because a surprisingly
long list of exceptions is foreseen.76 For example, deposits of up to € 100, 000
are excluded, which is about the wealth of a median Dutch household or twice
the wealth of a median German household.77 The list of exceptions comprises
pension claims, salaries of bank employees, liabilities from utility fees and taxes,
short-term interbank liabilities with a maturity of less than seven days, and a
number of further items.
Next to the deposits, the most important item excepted from the bail-in is
covered loans, i.e. loans collateralized with other assets, ranging from real estate
(mortgage backed securities like the German Pfandbrief) to interbank credit
claims.78 While this exception looks quite natural at first glance, it is actually
surprising, given that the collateral itself is already meant to secure the loans.
The exception therefore provides a double security and is likely to bring in
community funds if the collateral itself loses value. Thus, with this double
security, EU institutions obviously want to create a class of super-safe assets
ultimately protected by all participating countries.
Not much economic theory is necessary to predict that this would create grave
moral hazard effects in the future. One such moral hazard effect would be
circular trading among banks to artificially create collateral out of thin air. If
people lend unsecured funds to their banks and the banks go bust, they would

not normally get their money back. But suppose a number of banks had mutually
exchanged debentures of equal value, which would make none of them richer or
poorer and would not even result in net cash flows between them. Then each
bank could give its outside creditors the debentures as collateral, and the
creditors would then automatically be exempt from haircuts should these banks
default. As explained in Chapter 5, banks used this trick to generate collateral for
drawing refinancing credit from central banks. They could obviously also use it
to protect their private creditors from bailins so as to be able to borrow at very
low rates.
Apart from that, banks would be able to use mediocre collateral to borrow at
artificially low rates to finance the inferior real investment projects as they did in
the years before the crisis. This would help preserve the asset values and avoid
losses, to the benefit of wealth owners in general, but it would also imply that
the burning of capital that had characterized the pre-crisis period in southern
Europe can continue. The inefficient use of scarce savings capital would result in
many years of continued stagnation of the Eurozone.
German Landesbanks, state-owned investment banks that used to play an
important role in the German capital market, show what kinds of inefficiencies
can be expected. As the Landesbanks’ creditors enjoyed unlimited state
guarantees (Gewährträgerhaftung), they recklessly endowed the Landesbanks
with low-interest funds which the Landesbanks then invested in often dubious
assets throughout the world.79 The EU Commission deprived these banks of
their privileges in a landmark decision in 2002, 80 forcing them to abandon their
business model. This led to serious troubles for most of them. WestLB,
Germany’s third biggest Landesbank, had to be liquidated because the European
Commission forbade the state of North Rhine-Westphalia to subsidize it. Given
this justified and tough stance of the Commission, it is all the more surprising
that this same institution now advocates similar kinds of guarantees for all banks
of the Eurozone. North Rhine-Westphalian taxpayers are not allowed to bail out
their own state bank, but they may have to participate in bailing out banks in
other euro countries.
The big questions on the banking union are how to endow the SRF, and under
what conditions it will help the banks’ creditors. The Commission proposes a
gradual transition to a common resolution system. It stipulates that each country
is to establish a national resolution fund, and that the national funds will then
gradually merge over a period of ten years. In the first year, the cost of resolving
a bank—after the 8% bail-in and up to 5% of the balance sheet—is entirely
borne by the national fund, but with each consecutive year an additional part of

the cost is to be shared by all other funds in proportion to their size finally the
cost of resolution would be fully shared by all national funds. The national
funds, in turn, are to be set up with contributions by the banking industry and, if
insufficient, by national governments. The target is to eventually endow the SRF
with funds equivalent to 1% of deposits, a sum of around € 55 billion.81
There are many unresolved questions at this stage. One is what happens if a
country’s banks, or the country itself, are unable to endow the national resolution
fund. There are plans to solve this problem by allowing the SRF to leverage its
budget by borrowing funds in the market under the joint protection of
taxpayers.82 This could turn the SRF into a further community fund similar to
the ESM.
The biggest problem is that the volume envisioned for the SRF is tiny relative
to the maximum potential write-off losses of the GIPSIC banks, which could
amount to up to € 680 billion, as reported in Table 8.3. If the write-off losses
were spread equally across all GIPSIC banks, that would not be a problem, since
these losses, as mentioned above, account for just 8.3% of the sum of all GIPSIC
bank debt, which is equivalent to 7.4% of all GIPSIC bank assets (their
aggregate balance sheet). Thus, the 8% bail-in rule could take care of all the
losses in such a symmetric case. However, the write-off losses will certainly not
be spread equally, but instead be concentrated on certain individual banks, where
they may reach high percentages of these banks’ balance sheets. Suppose, for
example, that only five banks in the GIPSIC countries, with a joint balance sheet
of € 1 trillion and an equity-asset ratio of 5%, lose half of their assets. Then the
bail-in rule will yield a maximum of € 80 billion, of which creditors would bear
€ 30 billion in losses provided the exceptions from the bail-in are not binding,
leaving an uncovered loss of at least € 420 billion, about eight times the entire
SRF volume.
The European Commission has foreseen this difficulty and therefore
advocates the build-up of a common backstop fund for the SRF, which it labels
‘alternative financing sources’. This could be endowed by the ESM, bringing us
back to the discussion of the last section. But it is entirely unclear, and still
subject to negotiations at this writing, whether the ESM or a new kind of
community fund will be brought into the mechanism.83
All in all, the impression from the preparations for the banking union is that,
while nominally adhering to the principle of creditor bail-in, decisions are being
prepared that would in fact bail them out at the expense of taxpayers. Given the
long list of exemptions, the banks and their creditors will probably try to
restructure the debt so that practically all creditors are protected. Taxpayers will

then ultimately have no other choice but to foot most of the bill.
The community of states should protect itself against such a scenario by
imposing rules on the minimum amount of liable equity and debt. First of all the
equity-asset ratios should be significantly increased. The eight percent equity
relative to risk-weighted assets—which typically is not more than two percent of
total assets—that the Basel III agreement requires is definitely not enough.84 It is
also not enough to require in addition a minimum equity-asset ratio of three
percent from 2018 onwards, as has been stipulated by the Basel III
agreement.85In reality, equity provisions that would avoid fiscal externalities
being imposed on debtors and taxpayers would have to be a multiple of this.86
In addition, banks could be forced to attract hybrid capital endowed with a
junior rank. The so-called CoCos (Contingent Convertible Bonds) would be
ideal for that purpose. If a bank incurs losses that exceed certain threshold
fractions of its equity, CoCos would automatically be converted into equity
capital, according to pre-specified rules, to fill the gap.87
Unfortunately, however, no such rules beyond the overly weak Basel rules
will be introduced, since some countries, notably France, have objected to a
common minimum regulation for hybrid capital and insist that each country
implement the necessary rules at its own discretion.88 While there are strong
economic reasons for a banking union in the sense of regulating the banks
jointly, and weak reasons for pooling the losses, the political process seems to be
moving exactly in the opposite direction, namely towards much pooling and
weak regulation.
Bailing out the ECB
While there is broad agreement among economists that common banking
supervision and resolution rules are necessary in the Eurozone, there is less
agreement on the question of who should be responsible for these tasks.
This issue is important insofar as the ECB decisions on collateral and
refinancing policy analysed in the previous chapters are evidence that collective
decision-making is by no means sufficient to exclude moral hazard effects.
Majority decisions are no protection against the exploitation of minorities, and
when the voting rights are unrelated to country size, they may not even be
democratic. Care must thus be taken to endow the decision-making bodies with
democratic representation and to agree to a sufficiently large quorum so as to
protect minorities against exploitation by majorities.
According to a decision of the European Parliament and the European

Commission of 19 March 2013, the supervisory function shall be given to an
authority named the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), led by the ECB.89
Within the SSM, the ECB ensures the consistent application of uniform
supervisory standards and is responsible for key tasks concerning the prudential
supervision of banks. In principle, the ECB is to supervise all 6, 000 banks in the
Eurozone, but for the time being it will be responsible for the largest ones only,
those with a balance sheet total of at least € 30 billion. The other banks would
continue to be supervised nationally, but national supervision would be
monitored by the ECB.
The ECB would also participate in deciding when a bank needs to be wound
up by the so-called Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). There is a very
complex decision structure involving the Single Resolution Board (SRB), the
ECB Governing Council, the European Commission, the EU Council, and
national resolution authorities. While the SRB would have the leading voice, the
ECB, as the supervisory authority, proposes initiating a resolution and also
participates in the SRB together with the European Commission and the relevant
national authority.90
Before the SSM and SRM initiate their activities, a stress test for European
banks will be conducted to ensure, so its proponents say, that no banks will
smuggle toxic legacy assets into the banking union, forcing national authorities
or the ESM to bear more losses than they assumed. 91 The stress test will be
carried out by the European Banking Authority (EBA), an independent EU
institution that is part of the European System of Financial Supervision, based on
a prior asset quality review by the ECB. The review, which has been conducted
since November 2013, is expected to take a year.92 Given that the ECB will need
to hire about 1, 000 personnel and mould it into an efficient organization to
perform this task, the undertaking seems fairly challenging.93
The decision to involve the ECB is problematic insofar as the ECB Governing
Council is not a democratically controlled institution and is the biggest creditor
of the banks of the crisis-stricken countries, given that it bailed them out with the
printing press against bad collateral. In fact, it must be feared that the ECB has
only weak incentives to act against the smuggling of toxic assets into the
banking union, given that write-off losses showing up before the establishment
of the banking union might severely hit the ECB itself, and given that the
occurrence of such losses inside the banking union could be cushioned with
community funds. It must be feared, therefore, that the ECB will conduct a
rather lax asset quality review, in particular with regard to the assets of the
GIPSIC countries, because it is the banks of these countries to which it lent out

three quarters of its monetary base (see Figure 6.7). It may let a few banks fail so
as to preserve its credibility, but measures to thoroughly clean the balance sheets
of banks cannot be expected. The incentives for truly cleaning the balance sheets
could have been expected from an institution like the ESM, which would suffer
from the asset smuggling, not from the ECB, which would benefit from it.
In this regard it is important to note that the covered loans protected from a
bail-in described above include the ECB’s refinancing credit, which was
collateralized with increasingly bad assets during the crisis: as explained in
Chapter 5, these were often non-investment grade assets. It will likely even
include ELA credit that NCBs handed out, allegedly at their own risk, against
self-defined collateral. The collateral and ELA policies resulted in the € 613
billion in GIPSIC Target liabilities by December 2013, which is quite a sizeable
sum when compared to the € 353 billion overall equity capital of the central
bank system available at that time. The reputation, if not the functioning, of the
Eurosystem would be severely damaged if central banks had to bear their share
in the write-off losses of the GIPSIC’s banking system (see Table 8.3). This
could explain why the ECB has insisted in the negotiations on the banking union
that the ESM acts as a backstop for the losses. The ESM may then ultimately
have to bear the cost of the ECB’s overly lax collateral policy to maintain the
illusion that the money on display is necessary to establish the right equilibrium
without it ever being taken.
For the taxpayers of the still-sound euro economies, repackaging of write-off
losses from the ECB to the ESM should not matter, since they would have to
bear them anyway—through the ECB’s reduction of seignorage distribution or
through ESM equity losses. However, the ECB would keep its hands clean and
feel justified to continue with its problematic refinancing strategy.
In well-intended speeches, politicians proclaimed that community funds are to
come in only to protect against future bank losses occurring under the joint
responsibility of a common Eurozone supervisory system. However, this would
not solve the ECB’s and the banks’ immediate problems. Thus, the ESM in
practice may also have to assume the losses stemming from the banks’ legacy
assets that accrued prior to the establishment of the banking union, when
national authorities were responsible for regulating the banks and when the ECB
helped out with hundreds of billions of euros in cheap refinancing credit. The
new rules propounded by the Eurogroup might boil down to bailing out the ECB
with ESM funds.
This bail out strategy complements the entire rescue architecture, as explained
above. When private creditors shied away from financing southern European
banks and sovereigns, the ECB provided the six crisis-stricken countries with

about one trillion euros in extra credit from the local printing presses (see
Figures 6.2 and 6.3) and asked non-GIPSIC NCBs to buy about € 100 billion
worth of government bonds under its Securities Markets Programme (see Figure
8.1). The parliaments and other political institutions then had to bail out the ECB
with the fiscal rescue packages EFSF, EFSM and ESM, as well as IMF money.
However, while this help went to the sovereigns rather than the banks, the
banking union is intended to bail out the ECB in an even more direct way, by
bailing out the banks or by serving as a backstop offering insurance to private
investors brave enough to finance the banks under the protection of the ESM.
Undermining the Market Economy and Democracy
For more than half a decade now, the ECB and the fiscal rescue funds have been
pumping fresh public capital and escorting private capital with the open or
hidden protection of taxpayers to places where private investors, who realized
that it was a mistake to follow the regulatory incentives, had no longer wanted to
invest. This is probably the largest regional investment steering programme in
history.
The very first steps of this programme have prevented the collapse of parts of
the Eurozone and were therefore defensible. When the collapse of the global
financial system at the time of the Lehman crisis was imminent, the rescue
measures helped to avert disaster.
However, when the world economy recovered in 2009 and it became clear
that southern Europe suffered from structural competitiveness problems and
over-indebtedness rather than a mere temporary lack of market trust that caused
liquidity problems, the European policies became objectionable. As the Irish and
eastern European recovery stories showed, less public support would have meant
more reforms, earlier wage cuts, and even some deflation, improving the
competitiveness of such economies.94 While Chapter 4 argued that an overly
rigorous deflation strategy is dangerous because it would drive private and
public debtors into bankruptcy, it was certainly not appropriate that all southern
countries kept inflating for years after the outbreak of the crisis as if nothing had
happened. Inflation of the GDP price level in Greece only stopped in Q3 2010,
and then turned into a slight deflation. However, in Portugal and Italy inflation
of GDP prices has not yet stopped up to this writing (Q3 2013). In fact, Portugal
recently inflated even faster than the average of the Eurozone (see Figure 4.8).
Only Cyprus and Spain entered a sizeable real devaluation after Q3 2012
(Cyprus), and Q1 2013 (Spain) respectively.95

The steering of capital flows is not generally appropriate for a capitalist
market economy, because its allocative superiority over socialist systems results
primarily from the fact that the allocation of the factors of production is
determined by market forces rather than politics. Behind each unit of capital
invested in the real economy, generating output and enhancing wage
productivity, stands a wealth owner and financial investor who carefully tries to
optimize his or her asset portfolio so as to keep risks small and earn a high rate
of return. The caution and sleepless nights of this investor are the driving force
of capitalism and a major reason for its allocative efficiency relative to other
systems tried in history.
In view of this general presumption, interventions by public authorities that
effectively change the spatial allocation of capital relative to what the market
would have chosen need very strong arguments that substantiate the existence of
externalities or other market failures. And not only that. As Public Choice theory
has convincingly demonstrated, policymakers also bear the burden of proving
that the political distortions from which their interventions usually suffer weigh
less than the market distortions they intend to correct.96 The risk is too large that
seemingly justified interventions may turn out to be rent-seeking machinery.97
The ECB does not deliver much in this respect. It defends its policies as being
of a monetary nature, although the fiscal implications are obvious, arguing that
they are necessary to maintain the monetary transmission process within the
Eurozone.98 Its basic premise is that the nominal short-term interest rates for
collateralized credit should be equal everywhere in a common currency area,
since the underlying collateral is perfectly safe. However, in view of the truly
extreme lowering of collateral standards described in Chapter 5, in particular the
scope given to individual NCBs in defining their own national standards, this is
unconvincing. The banks of the GIPSIC countries definitely were more than
satisfied with the combination of interest rates, maturities, and collateral
standards that the ECB offered, since otherwise the Target balances could not
have ballooned. The Target balances are proof of the ECB’s systematic
undercutting of market conditions in some of the euro countries.
The ECB might even acknowledge that such was the case because, in its view,
markets fail and need to be corrected. Since it maintains that the haircuts it
applies daily to the collateral are sufficient to make the refinancing credit safe,
the markets are at fault if they do not believe that this is the case and thus refrain
from providing interbank credit under similar conditions.
This reasoning is also applied to government bonds. While the ECB accepts
that there are risk premia for longer-term government bonds, it argues that the

risk premia charged by markets are not justified to the extent that they stem from
a redenomination risk (and other forms of overpricing of risks by the markets).
Markets are pricing in a redenomination risk related to a potential breakup of the
euro which is not justified.99 Thus, it intervenes with the OMT to keep the
interest spreads low.
However, this argument is not convincing insofar as the risk of a euro breakup
as such cannot explain differential risk premia between the euro countries; it can
at best explain a risk premium of Eurozone assets relative to those of other
currency areas with more inherent stability. Differential risk premia result from
the expectation that some countries, after returning to their own currencies,
would depreciate relative to others, but if so, this is because the price levels of
these countries are too high, as discussed in Chapter 4, and need a realignment to
regain competitiveness and debt-sustainability. Thus, the risk premia the ECB
wants to eliminate are not the result of market failure but of rational and correct
expectations on the part of investors. After all, investors will, with some
probability, be repaid with a devalued currency, and the debtors’ burden will be
relieved insofar as their real repayment obligation in terms of internationally
tradeable goods is reduced after a redenomination of their debt. They would be
better off than in the case where their country had to undergo a real depreciation
within the Eurozone by cutting wages and prices, because such a real
depreciation would not reduce their debt burden. An outright currency
depreciation after a euro break up that comes along with a conversion of debt
into national currency means that both the creditor’s interest return and the
debtor’s interest burden in real terms are reduced. It is therefore rational and
efficient that both parties compensate for that possibility by settling for higher
nominal interest rates.
This point touches on some of the first principles of economics, as it is one of
the fundamental efficiency conditions of capital markets that capital be allocated
among rival uses in a way that makes the sum of the marginal rate of return and
the rate of expected price increase of an asset, measured in terms of a common
numéraire, identical across all assets.100 Following this rule ensures that a
society’s available stock of capital is allocated among competing uses in a
Pareto-optimal way, i.e. in a way that maximizes present consumption without
imposing a disadvantage on future generations. Thus, it is mandatory for the
redenomination risk to be fully reflected in nominal interest rates, in the sense
that the nominal rate minus the expected currency depreciation (minus a
potential default probability) is equated across all countries and assets, in order
to avoid wasting resources and to stimulate Eurozone growth. The ECB’s

interpretation of interest spreads resulting from redenomination risk as evidence
market failure is simply wrongheaded.
For the same reason, there is nothing wrong with markets pricing the
redenomination risk into the yields private companies have to pay. The
considerations of the ECB to counteract such risk premia through the
establishment of an actively managed ABS market for company risk are as
flawed as the attempts to reduce the risk premia of states by way of its OMT
programme.101
When the ECB advocates its policies in terms of easing monetary policy
transmission it understandably tries to demonstrate that it remains within the
tight legal mandate that it has been given. In fact, however, it is carrying out a
regional fiscal policy that effectively subsidizes capital flows from northern to
southern Europe by offering free-of-charge insurance for these flows. In the
absence of a valid economic justification, this can be expected to distort the
optimal allocation of resources and hamper growth in Europe, thus maintaining
the Eurozone’s laggard position relative to the rest of the world (see Figure 1.1).
The policy of forcing markets to compete with the printing press, also known
as financial repression, can also be criticized because it deprives savers of some
of the returns on their investment.102 Rather than being able to earn risk-
commensurate rates of return in countries that have over-borrowed, they have to
content themselves with the conditions that the ECB Governing Council deems
appropriate. Instead of lending directly, they offer their savings to their NCBs,
which absorb the liquidity created by the corresponding Target balances. The
Eurosystem thus effectively operates like a public purchasing organization that
acquires savings from the north and determines the conditions under which these
savings can be delivered to the south.
While this policy has helped the over-indebted states to reduce their budget
deficits and the commercial banks of the crisis countries to recapitalize without
having to hand over shares to those who provided the new capital, it has
burdened the savers and their institutions. The capital-exporting banks of the
north have suffered from a severe profit squeeze; worker pension funds have run
into difficulties; charitable foundations, which must live on interest income and
cannot use their endowments, have had to cut their budgets; and life insurance
companies have been forced to lower the guaranteed minimum interest. All of
this has severely undermined trust in financial markets and supported a re-
orientation towards the traditional pay-as-you-go pension system, which will be
unable to cope with Europe’s foreseeable demographic quagmire.
Europeans cannot live from hand to mouth for the simple reason that the ratio

of mouths to hands will double in many countries by the middle of the century.
Germany’s baby boomers, for example, are about 50 years old as of this writing,
but they have very few children. In fifteen to twenty years, when they realize
that their private savings are insufficient, they will demand more from the next
generation than it can fulfil. Ugly distributional clashes are all but preordained.
Figure 4.2 showed that the interest advantage that the GIPSIC countries
enjoyed as a result of the rescue operations by the ECB and the community of
states, as well as a profit squeeze on multinationals, amounted to € 209 billion in
the five crisis years 2008–2012, of which the last year alone accounted for € 67
billion, or about 3% of GIPSIC net foreign debt. This sum was calculated by
comparing the actual net investment income flowing from the GIPSIC countries
to the rest of the world with a hypothetical income resulting from multiplying
the net foreign debt position of these countries, as built up through current
account deficits, with the average interest rate paid on net foreign debt in Q4
2007, before the explosion of market rates. Repeating a similar calculation for
Germany, Europe’s biggest creditor country, shows an investment income loss
of € 197 billion in the five years from 2008 to 2012, and € 58 billion for the year
2012 alone. The latter sum amounts to about 5.3% of Germany’s net foreign
asset position, which itself shrank during the five years by € 336 billion euros
due to write-off losses on foreign assets resulting from the dramatic increase in
the market rates of interest, as discussed in Chapter 2 (Section The Foreign Debt
Problem).
The path Europe has taken with the ESM and, in particular, the extensive ECB
interventions, leads away from a market economy towards a system in which
central planning authorities allocate funds across regions, using dubious
ideological arguments when explaining their policies to the public. By doing so,
these institutions behave like the typical bureaucratic organization, as described
in the Public Choice textbooks, caught in rent-seeking activities.103
In Europe it is no longer the portfolio decisions of wealth owners but political
forces that determine the spatial allocation of investment capital. This not only
has grave negative implications for the dynamism and efficiency of the
continent, but it is also creating political power centres that may undermine
democracy. It is true that the ECB came into existence through democratic
decisions. However, its current decisions are made by a technocratic body whose
voting rules are not compatible with the idea of democracy, which gives every
citizen the same weight in the decision-making process while protecting
minority rights. A truly democratic decision-making process would need
permanent democratic control over all decisions that have grave fiscal
implications and are more than just narrowly defined monetary policies aimed at

keeping the price level constant. To satisfy the rules of democracy, it is not
sufficient for an institution to have once been established by a democratic
decision.
The power wielded by the ECB is particularly problematic, since this
institution is able to pre-determine future democratic decisions by limiting the
scope of fiscal policy options available to parliaments. This is the path-
dependence described in the introduction to this chapter which, parallel to the
GIPSIC countries’ competitiveness trap, leads to a liability trap for the other
euro countries.
After the ECB allowed the GIPSIC countries to solve their financial needs
with the printing press, turning the northern euro countries into Target creditors
to the tune of € 1, 002 billion in the summer of 2012, and after the Eurosystem
had purchased over € 200 billion worth of government bonds through the SMP,
democratically elected policymakers were no longer free to refrain from bailing
out the GIPSIC countries and their banks with community funds, because this
was effectively a policy of bailing out the ECB itself. Had they objected to doing
so, the euro might have collapsed, the ECB would have been bankrupt, and the
northern countries would have lost their Target claims. Obviously, the prior
decisions of the ECB Governing Council forced the subsequent decision of
European parliaments to set up the ESM to rescue the states and banks of the
GIPSIC countries as well as their creditors, including the ECB. When
parliaments were finally asked, no other alternative was left. They effectively
bowed to the ECB Governing Council. The Governing Council put the gold
credit card on the table, parliaments were annoyed to see that it was maxed out,
and saw themselves forced to place the platinum card next to it to avoid
surpassing the credit limit.
A similar risk will now occur with the OMT. Currently, the OMT is an
insurance contract that has not yet paid out any indemnification, but the day will
come when the ECB will have to keep its promise and buy huge quantities of
GIPSIC government bonds to dampen the next wave of the crisis. When this
happens, the Eurosystem’s balance sheets will become loaded with government
bonds, and the Eurosystem will have to reduce its refinancing credit to sterilize
the impact on the money supply, possibly even to the negative range by
borrowing funds from the banks in net terms. More and more NCBs will turn
from net creditors to net debtors vis-à-vis their banking systems, following the
example of Germany and Finland, whose central banks were pushed into this
situation through the Target credit that they had to provide (see Figure 6.8). In
this situation, it will be very tempting for the Eurosystem to stop the sterilization
and resort to inflationary financing, and hard for the parliaments to say no to

Eurobonds, which would allow the ECB to refrain from buying the government
bonds.
Eurobonds are jointly guaranteed bonds that the individual states issue to
finance their budgets and to redeem maturing old debt. Thanks to the joint
guarantees, all states pay the same rate of interest, regardless of whether they
will be able to redeem the bonds. Eurobonds will enable the ECB to get rid of
the government bonds it holds on its books by reassuring investors who buy such
bonds that they will get their money back.
The OMT insurance promise has effectively turned the government bonds of
the Eurozone countries into a kind of Eurobond, since the repurchase promise
involves the same kind of risk mutualization that Eurobonds offer. From a legal
perspective, the step from the OMT to Eurobonds may be large, but from an
economic perspective it is very small, and given that it is so small, it would not
be a big deal for parliaments to sanction what has already become common
practice.
While those who have always wanted Eurobonds might welcome this
development, they must acknowledge that in this situation, too, parliaments will
no longer be free to accept or decline their adoption. Today, there is strong
opposition to Eurobonds in some Eurozone parliaments, and in Germany’s in
particular. This opposition will vaporize as soon as the ECB begins any large-
scale purchases of government bonds of southern countries. Whether the
outcome is eventually right or wrong, the decision procedure certainly is not
right. Europe would move towards debt mutualization because a technocratic
body, where Malta has the same voting power as Germany or France,
foreordains the decision.
Unfortunately, things will not stop there, since Eurobonds will probably lead
to even more borrowing, given that countries that over-borrow know that they
can no longer be punished by capital markets demanding higher yields. The
inability of certain parts of the European community to repay their debts will
result in a situation whereby the compelling logic of stumbling from one wave of
the crisis to the next by doing just enough to avoid disaster will ultimately
require converting the Eurozone into a transfer union.
Again, the necessary steps will be decided democratically by the parliaments
of the day, but the policymaking’s path-dependency will already have severely
reduced the scope for possible actions. What appears to be a democratic decision
will, in fact, be a consequence of the prior decisions taken by the ECB
Governing Council. Thus parliaments become vicarious agents of the ECB
Governing Council, which is the true hegemon of the Eurozone.
The OMT has calmed down the situation by shifting the investment risk from

investors to ordinary people: taxpayers, state pensioners, and other people whose
livelihood depends on the state. Since investors are well-informed optimizers,
who are always on guard and shy away after the slightest hint of trouble, while
ordinary people tend to be slow to react, trust the state, and believe in the
protection it offers, this redistribution has poured oil onto troubled waters for the
time being. However, when ordinary people realize the burden imposed on the
state that they have to finance and from which they receive their pensions and
incomes, their mood may change and they may be spurred into taking action.
That could be far more dangerous to the stability of the western world than a
temporary financial crisis. To be specific: the foreseeable dangers of Europe’s
demography problem fifteen to twenty years from now are already immense.
Adding the liability risk of avoiding a financial crisis with taxpayer money to
this demographic problem is a recipe for potential political turmoil and disaster,
which dwarfs the horrors of a mere financial crisis.
At best, Europe will turn into an economic system in which some countries
and regions permanently rely on transfers from others, such as eastern Germany
or the Italian Mezzogiorno today, and suffer from a permanent Dutch Disease, a
situation where their goods are permanently overpriced, unemployment is high,
and transfer dependence is perpetuated.104
This fate should be averted by rethinking the euro construct. Ferdinand
Kirchhof, Vice President of the German Constitutional Court, expressed this
with words to which little needs to be added:105
We must not jump from this problem to that problem, but should, with prudence, rethink the
overall concept of the euro and the European Union....The union has to re-organize its inner
structure, sharpen the relationship between itself and the member states and, above all, become
more democratic.
1 The German Federal Constitutional Court declined appeals against the ESM on 12 September 2012, as
will be explained below.
2 See Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the
ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 6 September 2012, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120906.en.html#qa>.
3 See Council of the European Union, Euro Area Summit Statement, 29 June 2012, available at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131359.pdf>.
4 See Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of
the ECB, and Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the ECB, 8 April 2010, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2010/html/is100408.en.html>.

5 See M. Feldstein, ‘Why France and Germany Try so Hard to Delay a Greek Default’, The National, 29
September 2011, available at: <http://www.thenational.ae/business/industry-insights/economics/why-
france-and-germany-try-so-hard-to-delay-a-greek-default>.
6 As explained by Jürgen Stark on the occasion of a public lecture at Hanns-Seidel-Stiftung, 22 February
2013, in Munich. Weber immediately declared his opposition publicly on 11 May 2010; see A. Weber,
‘Kaufprogramm birgt erhebliche Risiken’, Interview with J. Schaaf, Börsen-Zeitung, 11 May 2010,
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Presse/Publikationen/interview_mit_bundesbankprae
__blob=publicationFile>; see also ‘Brandbrief: Ex-Währungshüter Stark attackiert EZB-Kurs’, Der Spiegel,
No. 3, 14 January 2012, available at: <http://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/soziales/brandbrief-ex-
waehrungshueter-stark-attackiert-ezb-kurs-a-809199.html>.
7 See A. Kunz, ‘EZB-Chefvolkswirt Stark tritt zurück’, Wirtschaftswoche, 9 September 2011, available
at: 
<http://www.wiwo.de/politik/ausland/europaeische-zentralbank-ezb-chefvolkswirt-stark-tritt-
zurueck/5212924.html>.
8 See P. Bernholz, N. Berthold, C. B. Blankart, A. Börsch-Supan, F. Breyer, J. Eekhoff, C. Fuest, J. von
Hagen, S. Homburg, K. Konrad, A. Ritschl, F. Schneider, H.-W. Sinn, V. Vanberg, R. Vaubel, C. C. von
Weizsäcker, Ökonomen-Erklärung, 16 September 2011, and P. Plickert, ‘Ökonomen unterstützen
Wirtschaftsminister Rösler’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 16 September 2011, available at:
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-schuldenkrise/insolvenz-griechenlands-in-betracht-ziehen-
oekonomen-unterstuetzen-wirtschaftsminister-roesler-11228684.html>. W. Franz, C. Fuest, M. Hellwig,
and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Zehn Regeln zur Rettung des Euro’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 138, 18 June
2010, p. 10, available at: <http://www.ifo.de/de/10_regeln/w/3rXTZnXx3>.
9 See Barclays Capital, ‘ECB SMP: Marking to Market’, Interest Rates Research, 6 January 2012; and
M. De Pooter, R. F. Martin, and S. Pruitt, ‘The Liquidity Effects of Official Bond Market Intervention’,
Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 2013.
10 See European Central Bank, Details on Securities Holdings Acquired under the Securities Markets
Programme, press release, 21 February 2013, and see also European Central Bank, Annual Accounts of the
ECB for 2013, press release, 20 February 2014.
11 See European Central Bank, Annual Accounts of the ECB 2013, 20 February 2014, p. 19.
12 See ‘Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank’, Official Journal of the European Union, C 83/230 EN, 30 March 2010, available at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/c_08320100330en_ecb_statute.pdf>, in particular article 33
paragraph 2. Also, the related discussion of write-offs on ELA credit in Chapter 5.
13 It is a bit surprising that the ECB on request informed the German Constitutional Court that a default
of government bonds owned by the ECB would not incur any risk for national budgets on the grounds that it
had enough risk provisions and could net the losses with its revenues in the years to come. See Federal
Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 2728/13, 14 January 2014, Absatz-Nr. (1 - 105), Sachbericht, article
12, available at: <http://www.bverfg.de/entscheidungen/rs20140114_2bvr272813.html> .
14 See European Central Bank, Monetary Policy, Instruments, Open Market Operations, 24 May 2010,
available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omo/html/index.en.html>.
15 See European Commission, ‘The Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece’, Occasional Papers
61, 
May 
2010, 
available 
at:

<http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/occasional_paper/2010/pdf/ocp61_en.pdf>. 
Slovakia
objected to these payments from the outset and did not participate. After the second tranche Ireland ceased
its payment, with Portugal following suit after the fourth tranche.
16 
See 
EFSF 
Framework 
Agreement, 
available 
at:
<http://www.efsf.europa.eu/attachments/20111019_efsf_framework_agreement_en.pdf>.
17 See Council of the European Union, ‘Council Regulation (EU) No 407/2010 of 11 May 2010
Establishing a European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism’, Official Journal L 118/1, 12 May 2010,
available 
at: 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:L:2010:118:0001:0001:EN:PDF>.
18 See Federal Ministry of Finance, European Financial Assistance: ESM, 10 July 2013, available at:
<http://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Europe/Articles/Stabilising_th
financial-assistance-esm.html?view=renderPrint>.
19 See also EU, ‘Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary
Union’, 
(Fiscal 
Compact), 
2 
March 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/1478399/07_-_tscg.en12.pdf>.
20 See European Commission, Commission Takes Steps under the Excessive Deficit Procedure,
MEMO/13/463, 29 May 2013, available at: <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-13-463_en.htm>.
21 See Federal Constitutional Court, 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1421/12, 2 BvR 1438/12, 2 BvR 1439/12, 2
BvR 
1440/12, 
2 
BvE 
6/12, 
12 
September 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/entscheidungen/rs20120912_2bvr139012en.html>.
22 See Federal Constitutional Court, Headnotes to the Judgment of the Second Senate of 7 September
2011, 2 BvR 987/10, 2 BvR 1485/10, 2 BvR 1099/10, 7 September 2011, available at:
<http://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/entscheidungen/rs20110907_ 2bvr098710en.html>.
23 See EU, ‘Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)’, article 10 paragraph 1.
24 See Federal Constitutional Court, 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1421/12, 2 BvR 1438/12, 2 BvR 1439/12, 2
BvR 1440/12, 2 BvE 6/12, 12 September 2012; S. Homburg, ‘Retten ohne Ende’, Frankfurter Allgemeine
Sonntagszeitung, 
29 
July 
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-
schuldenkrise/schuldenkrise-retten-ohne-ende-11832561.html>.
25 
For 
a 
detailed 
description, 
see 
Ifo 
Exposure 
Level, 
available 
at:
<http://www.cesifogroup.de/ifoHome/policy/Haftungspegel.html>.
26 The Bundestag ratified the EFSF law on 21 May 2010, and Köhler signed it on 22 May 2010. For the
relationship between this and the resignation, see P. Gauweiler, ‘Erklären Sie sich!’, open letter from CSU
Bundestag member Peter Gauweiler to former German President Horst Köhler, Der Spiegel, No. 25, 21
June 2010, p. 27, available at: <http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-71029975.html>.
27 The Taxpayers Association of Europe, however, has voiced its protest. See Taxpayers Association of
Europe (TAE), Stop the ESM! EU Citizens Have to Pay the Bill!, 16 February 2012, available at:
<http://english.taxpayers-europe.com/information/new/ 
34-statements/150-stop-the-esm-eu-citizens-have-
to-pay-the-bill.html>.
28 See M. Olson, The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge 1965.

29 
See 
Eurogroup 
Statement 
on 
Greece, 
27 
November 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ecofin/133857.pdf>.
30 The present value of the cost reductions for Greece was calculated at a rate of interest of 1.5%
(interest rate on ten-year German government bonds in November 2012). The maturity extension by 15
years and the waiving of interest for 10 years results in a present value advantage of € 32 billion. The
interest reduction by 100 basis points for the bilateral rescue credits accounts for an advantage of € 8
billion, and the reduction of EFSF credit fees of € 3 billion.
31 For a prominent voice arguing that the losses are non-existent due to the fact that in a modern
economy money always is fiat money, see P. De Grauwe and Y. Ji, ‘What Germany Should Fear Most is Its
Own Fear’, VoxEU, 18 September 2012, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/how-germany-can-
avoid-wealth-losses-if-eurozone- breaks-limit-conversion-german-residents>. The counterargument along
the lines given here was provided in H.-W. Sinn, ‘Target Losses in Case of a Euro Breakup’, VoxEU, 22
October 2012, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/target-losses-case-euro-breakup>.
32 Strictly speaking, it is the average of a country’s population and GDP shares.
33 See H. Feist and H.-W. Sinn, ‘Eurowinners and Eurolosers: The Distribution of Seignorage Wealth in
the EMU’, European Journal of Political Economy 13, 1997, pp. 665–689; E. Wenger, ‘Nicht 90, sondern
150 Milliarden Verlust durch den Euro’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 141, 21 July 1997, p. 12.
34 See Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the
ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 6 September 2012. For details on the OMT, see
European Central Bank, Technical Features of Outright Monetary Transactions, press release, 6 September
2012, available at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1.en.html>.
35 See also M. Draghi, Speech at the Global Investment Conference in London, 26 July 2012, available
at: <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html>. There he said: ‘Within our
mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it will be enough’.
36 P. Hildebrand, ‘France’s Economy Needs to Become more German’, Financial Times online, 2 May
2013, available at: <http://blogs.ft.com/the-a-list/2013/05/02/frances-economy-needs-to-be-become-more-
german/?#axzz2VLGgwKY0>.
37 See European Central Bank, Technical Features of Outright Monetary Transactions, 6 September
2012, and Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the
ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 6 September 2012. In the press conference, Draghi
confirmed: ‘[...] we will accept pari passu treatment with the other creditors.’ Cf. also D. Gros, C. Alcidi,
and A. Giovanni, ‘Central Banks in Times of Crisis: The FED vs. the ECB’, CEPS Policy Brief 276, July
2012; S. Steinkamp and F. Westermann, ‘On Creditor Seniority and Sovereign Bond Prices in Europe’,
CESifo Working Paper No. 3944, September 2012. C. Wyplosz, ‘ECB's Outright Monetary Transactions’
in: European Parliament, Directorate-General for Internal Policies, Policy Department A: Economic and
Scientific Policy, ECB Intervention in the Euro Area Sovereign Debt Markets, Monetary Dialogue October
2012, 
Compilation 
of 
Notes, 
available 
at:
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/note/join/2012/492450/IPOL-
ECON_NT(2012)492450_EN.pdf>.
38 See A Call for Support for the European Central Bank’s OMT Programme, initiated by M. Fratzscher,
F. Giavazzi, R. Portes, B. Weder di Mauro, and C. Wyplosz, 19 July 2013, available at:
<https://berlinoeconomicus.diw.de/monetarypolicy/>. A worldwide collection of signatures from professors

of economics, analysts and students had brought 211 signatures in three weeks. The response rate in
Germany, where the appeal was launched with great effort by DIW, was meagre, except among DIW staff
members. Of the sixty-one members associated with the Monetary Theory section of the German Economic
Association (Verein für Socialpolitik), just four signed the appeal, and only one of the 113 economists
assembled in the Public Finance section, even though they all had been asked to sign. These are the relevant
sections of the Association.
39 The following considerations draw on the author’s expert testimony before the German Constitutional
Court. See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Responsibility of States and Central Banks in the Euro Crisis’, CESifo Forum 15,
2014, special issue, pp. 3–36, available at: <http://www.cesifogroup.de/DocDL/forum1-14-1.pdf>.
40 See P. De Grauwe, ‘The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone’, CEPS Working Document No. 346, May
2011, available at: <http://www.ceps.eu/book/governance-fragile-eurozone>; P. De Grauwe and Y. Ji,
‘Mispricing of Sovereign Risk and Multiple Equilibria in the Eurozone’, CEPS Working Document No.
361, January 2012, available at: <http://www.ceps.eu/book/mispricing-sovereign-risk-and-multiple-
equilibria-eurozone>; G. A. Calvo, ‘Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations’, American
Economic Review 78, 1988, pp. 647–661.
41 See International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2013, p. 59.
42 The government debt of the crisis countries, excluding Greece, totalled € 3, 476 billion at the end of
2013.
43 See H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism. How the Financial Crisis Came about and What Needs to Be
Done Now, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2010, chapter 4: Why Wall Street Became a Gambling Casino,
p. 80; H.-W. Sinn, Ökonomische Entscheidungen bei Ungewißheit, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen, 1980,
especially pp. 172–192; English edition: Economic Decisions under Uncertainty, North-Holland,
Amsterdam 1983, especially pp. 163–182; M. Dewatripont and J. Tirole, ‘Efficient Governance Structure:
Implications for Banking Regulation’, in C. Mayer and X. Vives (eds), Capital Markets and Financial
Intermediation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1993, pp. 12–35; and M. Dewatripont and J.
Tirole, Prudential Regulation of Banks, MIT Press, Cambridge 1994, pp. 97 and 113.
44 See M. Feldstein, ‘Dos and Don’ts for the European Central Bank’, Project Syndicate, 29 July 2012,
available 
at: 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/dos-and-don-ts-for-the-european-central-
bank>.
45 See M. King, ‘Threats to Central Banks and their Independence’, Presentation at the conference
Challenges to Central Banks in the 21st Century, 25 March 2013, London School of Economics.
46 See U. di Fabio, ‘Finanzstabilität und Integration: Wege aus der Krise’, Lecture given at Munich
Seminars, 
CESifo 
and 
Süddeutsche 
Zeitung, 
30 
April 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ifo.de/w/3FaZQTUnS>; and U. di Fabio, ‘Das europäische Schuldendilemma als
Mentalitätskrise’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 143, 22 June 2012, p. 9. See also M. Seidel,
‘European Currency Union and Rule of Law’, CESifo DICE Report 3, pp. 36–43, November 2012,
available at: <http://www.cesifogroup.de/DocDL/dicereport312-rr1.pdf>; P. Kirchhof, Deutschland im
Schuldensog, Beck, Munich 2012; G. Beck, ‘EZB-Urteil: Londoner Jurist erwartet “Rechtsbeugung” durch
Karlsruhe’, Deutsche Wirtschafts Nachrichten, 6 June 2013, available at: <http://deutsche-wirtschafts-
nachrichten.de/2013/06/06/ezb-urteil-londoner-jurist-erwartet-rechtsbeugung-durch-karlsruhe>.
47 See EU, ‘Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)’, Official Journal of the European
Union C 115/47, 9 May 2008, p. 99, available at: <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:C:2008:115:0058:0199:en:PDF>.

48 See European Central Bank, ‘Decision ECB/2010/5’, Official Journal L 124/8, 20 May 2010,
available 
at: 
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/l_12420100520en00080009.pdf>. 
See 
also
Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, and
Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 6 September 2012; as well as European Central Bank,
Monthly Bulletin, October 2012, in particular ‘Box 1: Compliance of Outright Monetary Transaction with
the Prohibition on Monetary Financing’, p. 7.
49 See Council of the European Union, ‘Council Regulation No. 3603/93’, Official Journal L 332, 13
December 1993, Preamble and article 2, available at: <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=CELEX:31993R3603:EN:HTML>; see also S. Homburg, ‘Der neue Kurs der Europäischen
Zentralbank’, 
Wirtschaftsdienst 
92, 
October 
2012, 
pp. 
673–677, 
available 
at:
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10273-012-1437-5>.
50 The waiting period sometimes is only three days and often less than ten days. See Request for
Information from the German Constitutional Court, 21 November 2012, and reply from the Bundesbank, 3
December 2012, Question 3. Internal documents of the Constitutional Court made available to the author in
his function as an expert for the Court. See also the ECB’s testimony before the German Constitutional
Court 
by 
its 
representative 
F. 
Schorkopf, 
Stellungnahme 
der 
Europäischen 
Zentralbank,
Verfassungsbeschwerden 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1439/12 und 2 BvR 1827/12, Organstreitverfahren 2 BvE
6/12, 16 January 2013, p. 32.
51 See M. Draghi, ‘Nichts tun wäre noch viel riskanter’, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 14 September 2012, p. 19;
and ‘Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central
Bank’, Official Journal of the European Union, C 115/230, 9 May 2008, available at:
<http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_statute_from_c_11520080509en02010328.pdf>, in particular article
18 paragraph 1.
52 While according to article 129 paragraph 3 of the Protocol quite a number of articles, including article
18, can be changed by the European Parliament and the Council, article 21 of the Protocol, and hence article
123 TFEU, is sacrosanct.
53 See W. Buiter and E. Rahbari, ‘Looking into the Deep Pockets of the ECB’, Citi Economics, Global
Economics 
View, 
27 
February 
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://blogs.r.ftdata.co.uk/money-
supply/files/2012/02/citi-Looking-into-the-Deep-Pockets-of-the-ECB.pdf>.
54 Federal Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 2728/13, 14 January 2014, Absatz-Nr. (1–105),
Sachbericht, article 12; see also Federal Constitutional Court, press release no. 9/2014, 7 February 2014.
55 See also Federal Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 1390/12, 2 BvR 1421/12, 2 BvR 1438/12, 2 BvR
1439/12, 2 BvR 1440/12, 2 BvE 6/12, 12 September 2012.
56 See H.-W. Sinn, ‘Outright Monetary Infractions’, Project Syndicate, 9 February 2014, available at:
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/hans-werner-sinn-applauds-the-german-constitutional-
court-s-ruling-on-the-ecb-s-bond-purchase-scheme>. See also W. Münchau, ‘Germany’s Constitutional
Court Has Strengthened the Eurosceptics’, Financial Times, 9 February 2014, available at:
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/8a64e3ac-8f25-11e3-be85-00144feab7de.html#axzz2uEahyERf>.
57 See also Ifo Institute, Comments by the Ifo Institute and Prof. Hans-Werner Sinn on Today’s
Statement by Germany’s Constitutional Court on the ECB’s OMT Programme, press release, 7 February
2014, available at: <http://www.ifo.de/w/3Sd4KMkse>.
58 Federal Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 2728/13, 14 January 2014, articles 45, 46 and 49.

59 Federal Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 2728/13, 14 January 2014, article 51.
60 Federal Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 2728/13, 14 January 2014, article 48. Cf. also Federal
Constitutional Court, BVerfG, 2 BvR 987/10, 7 September 2011, article 126.
61 The case for a referendum has been made by the Constitutional Court’s Vice President Ferdinand
Kirchhof, who, however, did not participate in the Court’s ruling on the ESM; see J. Gaugele, T. Jungholt
and C. C. Malzahn, ‘Verfassungsrichter für Volksabstimmung über Euro’, Interview with F. Kirchhof, Die
Welt, 
5 
February 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.welt.de/politik/deutschland/article13850704/Verfassungsrichter-fuer-Volksabstimmung-ueber-
Euro.html>. Udo di Fabio, ex-Constitutional Court judge, argued that giving the ECB what it wants may
require changing the German constitution, and if so, a referendum would be needed; see U. di Fabio, ‘Die
Zukunft einer stabilen Wirtschafts-und Währungsunion’, Stiftung Familienunternehmen, May 2013,
especially p. 53; see also J. Jahn, ‘Notfalls ist Deutschland zum Euro-Austritt verpflichtet’, Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung, 2 June 2013, available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/europas-
schuldenkrise/frueherer-verfassungsrichter-di-fabio-notfalls-ist-deutschland-zum-euro-austritt-verpflichtet-
12205592.html>.
62 For an in-depth discussion of the evolving European Banking Union, see also several articles in the
CESifo 
Forum 
13, 
No. 
4, 
Winter 
2012, 
‘European 
Banking 
Union’, 
available 
at:
<http://www.cesifogroup.de/DocDL/forum4-12-gesamt.pdf>. Cf. also S. Lautenschläger, T. Gstädtner, and
S. Steffen, ‘Wie ist das EU-Konzept zur Bankenunion zu bewerten?’, ifo Schnelldienst 66, No. 1, 17
January 2013, pp. 3–13, available at: <http://www.cesifogroup.de/DocDL/ifosd_2013_01_1.pdf>.
63 See Council of the European Union, Euro Area Summit Statement, 29 June 2012. See also W.
Mussler, ‘Krisenfonds soll Banken direkt kapitalisieren’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 150, 30 June
2012, p. 11.
64 The importance of a cross-border resolution regime and the cooperation between supervisory
institutions at the national and EU level as a precondition for recapitalization of banks through the ESM was
already pointed out by C. M. Buch, ‘From the Stability Pact to ESM. What next?’, IAW Discussion Paper
No. 85, June 2012.
65 See R. Vaubel, ‘Probleme der Bankenunion: Falsche Lehren aus der Krise’, Credit and Capital
Markets—Kredit und Kapital 46, pp. 281–302.
66 See H.-W. Sinn, The New Systems Competition, Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, Basil Blackwell, Oxford
2003, chapter 7: Limited Liability, Risk-Taking and the Competition of Bank Regulators. See also the
debate with E. Baltensperger and P. Spencer on banking regulation, H.-W. Sinn, ‘Risk-Taking, Limited
Liability and the Competition of Bank Regulators’, Finanzarchiv 59, 2003, pp. 305–329; E. Baltensperger,
‘Competition of Bank Regulators: A More Optimistic View. A Comment on the Paper by Hans-Werner
Sinn’, Finanzarchiv 59, 2003, pp. 330–335; P. Spencer, ‘Can National Banking Systems Compete? A
Comment on the Paper by Hans-Werner Sinn’, Finanzarchiv 59, 2003, pp. 336–339; and H.-W. Sinn,
‘Asymmetric Information, Bank Failures, and the Rationale for Harmonizing Banking Regulation. A
Rejoinder on Comments of Ernst Baltensperger and Peter Spencer’, Finanzarchiv 59, 2003, pp. 340–346. In
the Sinn paper in Finanzarchiv, the externality that a lax regulation imposes results from the fact that bank
failures would hurt creditors from other countries who, due to the opaqueness of regulatory systems, are
unable to distinguish between good and bad regulators. Thus, regulatory competition settles to a ‘lemon’s
equilibrium’ with too-lax standards. The special aspect added by the Eurosystem is the institutionalized
pooling of the returns from refinancing credit. See also R. S. Kroszner and R. J. Shiller, Reforming U.S.
Financial Markets, MIT Press, Cambridge 2011; A. Admati and M. Hellwig, The Bankers’ New Clothes,

Princeton University Press, Princeton 2013; and A. Admati and M. Hellwig ‘Does Debt Discipline
Bankers? An Academic Myth about Bank Indebtedness’, Rock Center for Corporate Governance at
Stanford University Working Paper 132, February 2013; C. Goodhart, ‘The Regulatory Response to the
Financial 
Crisis’, 
CESifo 
Working 
Paper 
No. 
2257, 
March 
2008, 
available 
at:
<http://www.cesifogroup.de/DocDL/cesifo1_wp2257.pdf>, and C. Goodhart, The Regulatory Response to
the Financial Crisis, Edward Elgar, Northampton 2010.
67 For an appeal to ease funding of the private sector, thereby lowering the cost of borrowing, especially
in the European periphery, see: ECB Executive Board member Benoît Coeuré in E. Kuehnen and G.
Prodhan, ‘Europe Must Do More on Small Business Loans’, Reuters, 25 April 2013, available at:
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/04/25/us-ecb-coeure-smallbiz-idUSBRE93O06420130425>; 
G.
Soros, ‘The Resistible Fall of Europe: An Interview with George Soros’, Project Syndicate, 15 May 2013,
available 
at: 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-resistible-fall-of-europe--an-interview-
with-george-soros>; and Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy in S. White, ‘Spain’s Rajoy Calls on ECB
to Create Bank Lending Scheme for Smaller Companies’, Reuters, 15 June 2013, available at:
<http://www.reuters.com/ article/2013/06/15/us-spain-smes-idUSBRE95E09Q20130615>; for claims to
ease funding of the private sector, thereby lowering the cost of borrowing, especially in the European
periphery.
68 See European Commission, Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
Establishing a Framework for the Recovery and Resolution of Credit Institutions and Investment Firms,
COM(2012) 
280 
final, 
6 
June 
2012, 
Preamble, 
article 
52, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:0280:FIN:EN:PDF>.
69 See Aufruf von 279 deutschsprachigen Wirtschaftsprofessoren, 5 June 2012, available at:
<http://www.statistik.tu-dortmund.de/kraemer.html> and Stellungnahme zur Europäischen Bankenunion,
12 
June 
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.macroeconomics.tu-
berlin.de/fileadmin/fg124/allgemein/Stellungnahme_zur_Europaeischen_Bankenunion.pdf>. See also H.
Hau and H.-W. Sinn, ‘The Eurozone’s Banking Union is Deeply Flawed’, Financial Times, 29 January
2013, 
p. 
9, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/47055db6-5b47-11e2-8ccc-
00144feab49a.html#axzz2bjxANyUv>. These critics of the postponement of the bail-in rule were later
joined by critical voices from Finland and the Netherlands; see J. Brunsden and R. Christie, ‘German Push
to Accelerate Bank BailIns Joined by Dutch’, Bloomberg, 5 February 2013, available at:
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-04/german-push-to-accelerate-bank-bail-ins-joined-by-dutch-
finns.html>. Ultimately, the ECB also warned that introducing the bail-in rules by 2018 would be too late
and instead proposed the year 2015; see also Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A)
by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 4 April 2013,
available at: <http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130404.en.html>.
70 Capital and reserves of the banking systems as of March 2013 amounted to € 54.9 bn in Greece, €
131.9 bn in Ireland, € 50.8 bn in Portugal, € 395.3 bn in Spain, € 388 bn in Italy, and € 13.9 bn in Cyprus.
Deutsche Bundesbank, Time Series Database, Time series MFI, Aggregated balance sheet of euro area
monetary financial institutions, excluding the Eurosystem Liabilities Capital and reserves, available at:
<http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/ESCB_Time_Series/eszb_deta
tsId=BSI.M.U2.N.A.L60.X.1.Z5.0000.Z01.E&listId=outstanding_amounts_48>. See also V. V. Acharya
and S. Steffen, ‘Falling Short of Expectations? Stress-testing the European Banking System’, VoxEU, 17
January 2014, especially table 3, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/what-asset-quality-review-
likely-find-independent-evidence>.
71 Loans to general government and holding of securities other than shares of general government in the
aggregated balance sheet of euro area monetary financial institutions, see: Deutsche Bundesbank, Time

Series Database, Time series MFI (Monetary Financial Institutions).
72 Directly after the bailout deal for Cypriot banks, Dijsselbloem suggested the Cyprus model and the
involvement of creditors contained as a possible template for future cases, see also ‘Cyprus Bailout:
Dijsselbloem 
Remarks 
Alarm 
Markets’, 
BBC 
News, 
25 
March 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-21920574>, or ‘Bomb from Brussels: Cyprus Model May Guide
Future 
Bank 
Bailouts’, 
Spiegel 
Online 
International, 
1 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/cyprus-bank-bailout-model-has-increasing-numbers-of-
adherents-in-eu-a-891849.html>. Barnier, who was responsible for drafting the proposal of the Single
Resolution Mechanism, stated a similar opinion: ‘I believe that [the public intervention] should happen only
after shareholders, and all other creditors and uninsured depositors have been bailed in’, see also N.
Chrysoloras, ‘Resolution Mechanism for Banking Union Can Be Created without Treaty Change, Says
EU’s 
Barnier’, 
Interview 
with 
M. 
Barnier, 
Ekathimerini, 
19 
May 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/4dcgi/_w_articles_wsite2_1_19/05/2013_499678>. Barnier also indicated
early on that his proposal included a pecking order for creditor participation; see also A. Roche, ‘Europe
Needs Clear Order for Loss Imposition in Bank Closures—ECB’, Reuters, 12 April 2013, available at:
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/04/12/uk-eurozone-banks-asmussen-idUKBRE93B14S20130412>.
73 See Council of the European Union, Council Agrees General Approach on Single Resolution
Mechanism, 
press 
release 
564, 
No. 
17602/13, 
18 
December 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ecofin/140190.pdf>; 
European
Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform Procedure for the
Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a Single Resolution
Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, COM(2013) 520 final, 10 July 2013, esp. article 24,
paragraph 
3 
and 
7a, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=COM:2013:0520:FIN:EN:PDF>; European Commission, A Comprehensive EU Response to the
Financial Crisis: Substantial Progress towards a Strong Financial Framework for Europe and a Banking
Union for the Eurozone, MEMO/14/57, 24 January 2014, available at: <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_MEMO-14-57_en.htm?locale=en>.
74 See European Commission, A Comprehensive EU Response to the Financial Crisis: Substantial
Progress towards a Strong Financial Framework for Europe and a Banking Union for the Eurozone, 24
January 2014, p. 5.
75 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, article 24, paragraph 7.
76 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, article 24, paragraph 3.
See also Council of the European Union, Council Agrees General Approach on Single Resolution
Mechanism, 18 December 2013.
77 See Figure 2.12.
78 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, article 24, paragraph 3.
79 For an early criticism and documentation of the Landesbanks’ reckless investment behaviour see H.-
W. Sinn, The German State Banks. Global Players in the International Financial Markets, Edward Elgar,

Aldershot 1999.
80 See European Commission, press release, Understanding on Anstaltslast and Gewährträgerhaftung 07
17 2001, available at: <http:// europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-02-343_en.doc >.
81 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, chapter 4.3: The Single
Bank Resolution Fund.
82 Cf. P. Spiegel and A. Barker, ‘ECB Blow to European Bank Backstop’, Financial Times, 18
December 2013, available at: available at: <http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/6449c452-678a-11e3-a5f9-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2uRh2lasR>.
83 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, article 24, paragraph 9.
84 See Bank for International Settlements, Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient
Banks and Banking Systems, December 2010 (revised June 2011), p. 12; H.-W. Sinn, Casino Capitalism,
2010, chapter 7: Policy Failure, p. 141.
85 See Bank for International Settlements, Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient
Banks and Banking Systems, December 2010 (revised June 2011), p. 61.
86 This is, for instance, emphasized by Admati and Hellwig, who argue that banks need much more
equity, at least on the order of 25% of their balance sheet total, which is about ten times as much as today;
see A. Admati and M. Hellwig, The Bankers’ New Clothes, 2013; and A. Admati and M. Hellwig, ‘Does
Debt Discipline Bankers? An Academic Myth about Bank Indebtedness’, February 2013.
87 See B. Rudolph, ‘Die Einführung regulatorischen Krisenkapitals in Form von Contingent Convertible
Bonds (CoCos)’, Zeitschrift für das gesamte Kreditwesen 62, 2010, pp. 1152–1155, in particular p. 1153; as
well as B. Albul, D. M. Jaffee, and A. Tchistyi, ‘Contingent Convertible Bonds and Capital Structure
Decisions’, Coleman Fung Risk Management Research Center Working Paper No. 2010-01, available at:
<http://escholarship.org/uc/item/95821712#page-2>.
88 The national authorities are allowed to individually ‘set minimum requirements for own funds and
eligible liabilities (MREL) for each institution, based on its size, risk and business model’, in order to
ensure the capacity to absorb losses, until at least 2016, when a review clause ‘would enable the
Commission, based on recommendations by the European Banking Authority, to introduce a harmonised
MREL applicable to all banks’; see Council of the European Union, Council Agrees Position on Bank
Resolution, 
press 
release 
270 
No. 
11228/13, 
27 
June 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ecofin/137627.pdf>, p. 4.
89 See Council of the European Union, ‘Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013
conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential
supervision 
of 
credit 
institutions’, 
Official 
Journal 
L 
287/63, 
available 
at: 
< 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:287:0063:0089:EN:PDF>. See also European
Commission, An Important Step Towards a Real Banking Union in Europe, Statement by Commissioner
Michel Barnier Following the Trilogue Agreement on the Creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism for
the Eurozone, MEMO/13/251, 19 March 2013, available at: <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-
13-251_en.htm?locale=en#PR_metaPressRelease_bottom>.

90 See European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation Establishing Uniform Rules and a Uniform
Procedure for the Resolution of Credit Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a
Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund, 10 July 2013, chapter 4.1: A Single
Resolution Mechanism; European Commission, Commission Proposes Single Resolution Mechanism for the
Banking Union, press release IP/13/674, 10 July 2013, available at: <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-13-674_en.htm?locale=en>.
91 Cf. Eurogroup, ESM Direct Bank Recapitalisation Instrument—Main Features of the Operational
Framework and Way Forward, p. 3, ‘A Robust Valuation’.
92 See European Central Bank, ECB Starts Comprehensive Assessment in Advance of Supervisory Role,
press 
release, 
23 
October 
2013 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2013/html/pr131023.en.html>.
93 See N. Comfort, ‘Draghi Raids Bankers in Rush to Hire 1, 000 for Supervisor’, Bloomberg News, 9
January 2014, available at: <http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-01-08/draghi-raids-bankers-in-rush-to-
hire-1-000-for-supervisor.html>.
94 See also D. Gros and C. Alcidi, ‘Country Adjustment to a Sudden Stop: Does the Euro Make a
Difference?’, 
European 
Commission 
Economic 
Papers 
492, 
April 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/economic_paper/2013/pdf/ecp492_en.pdf>.
95 See Eurostat, Database, Economy and Finance, Quarterly National Accounts, GDP and Main
Components, Price Indices, Gross Domestic Product, Seasonally Adjusted and Adjusted Data by Working
Days. Note that inflation and deflation in this book refer to changes in the GDP deflator, as this is what
matters for competitiveness. Consumer prices are less relevant, as they exclude investment goods and
include imports.
96 See W. A. Niskanen, Bureaucracy and Representative Government, Aldine-Atherton, New York
1971; H. Leibenstein, ‘Allocative Efficiency and “X-Efficiency”’, American Economic Review 56, 1966,
pp. 392–415; G. Brennan and J. M. Buchanan, The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of a Fiscal
Constitution, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1980.
97 See G. Tullock, ‘The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft’, Western Economic Journal 5,
1967, pp. 224–232.
98 See J. Asmussen, Introductory Statement by the ECB in the Proceedings before the Federal
Constitutional 
Court, 
Karlsruhe, 
11 
June 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130611.en.html>; for the detailed statement, see F.
Schorkopf, Stellungnahme der Europäischen Zentralbank, 16 January 2013.
99 See F. Schorkopf, Stellungnahme der Europäischen Zentralbank, 16 January 2013, p. 20; and A. Di
Cesare, G. Grande, M. Manna, and M. Taboga, ‘Stime recenti dei premi per il rischio sovrano di alcuni
paesi dell’area dell’euro’ (Recent estimates of sovereign risk premia for euro-area countries), Banca d’Italia
Occasional 
Paper 
128, 
September 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/quest_ecofin_2/qef128>.
100 See R. Dorfman, R. M. Solow, and P. A. Samuelson, Linear Programming and Economic Analysis,
McGraw-Hill, New York 1958.
101 ECB president M. Draghi announced on 2 May 2013 that the ECB had established a task force,
together with the European Investment Bank (EIB), to assess ways to unblock lending to SMEs, for

instance, by promoting a market for asset-backed securities (ABS) based on SME loans; see Introductory
Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, and Vítor
Constâncio, 
Vice-President 
of 
the 
ECB, 
2 
May 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ecb.int/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130502.en.html>. Whether this initiative implies that the
ECB will itself buy ABS is unknown at present but, as M. Draghi has stated, the ECB ‘is looking at all
possible options’. So far, the ECB emphasizes that it does not have a precise position on what it will do and
is ‘far from reaching any conclusion’; see also Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A)
by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, and Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 2 May 2013.
102 See S. Eijffinger, ‘The Age of Financial Repression’, Project Syndicate, 21 November 2012,
available 
at: 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/western-governments--increasing-use-of-
financial-repression-by-sylvester-eijffinger- and-edin-mujagic>.
103 See G. Brennan and J. M. Buchanan, The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of a Fiscal
Constitution, 1980, as well as M. Olson, The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of
Groups, 1965.
104 See also G. Sinn and H.-W. Sinn, Jumpstart—The Economic Unification of Germany, MIT Press,
Cambridge 1992; H.-W. Sinn, Can Germany Be Saved? The Malaise of the World’s First Welfare State,
MIT Press, Cambridge 2007, chapter 5: The Withering East, especially pp. 163–169; H.-W. Sinn and F.
Westermann, ‘Due Mezzogiorni’, L’industria 27, 2006, pp. 49–51, English version as H.-W. Sinn and F.
Westermann, ‘Two Mezzogiornos’, NBER Working Paper No. 8125, February 2001. For the Dutch
Disease, see N. M. Corden and J. P. Neary, ‘Booming Sector and De-Industrialization in a Small Open
Economy’, Economic Journal 92, 1982, pp. 825–848.
105 Interview with F. Kirchhof by J. Gaugele, T. Jungholt, and C. C. Malzahn (translated by the author).

CHAPTER 9
Rethinking the Eurosystem
Changing Course—Learning from the US—Hard Budget Constraints—Neutral Money
—Unbearable Debt—Restructuring the Debt—A Breathing Currency Union: Between Bretton
Woods and the Dollar—The Path towards Unity
Changing Course
There is no alternative to Europe. After centuries of war and tension, the further
integration of Europe towards a stronger union is imperative. Winston
Churchill’s proposal to build ‘a kind of United States of Europe’ remains valid,
despite the fact that public support for the EU has waned during the crisis.1 The
free movement of goods, capital and people, the harmonization of product
standards and tax systems, as well as a common foreign policy and defence are
important instruments in achieving the goal of securing peace and prosperity in
Europe.
However, there are many potential roads that Europe could take towards
achieving its goals.2 The road via a common currency union was obviously
stonier than expected, and it is now doubtful whether it will actually lead
towards Europe’s goals at all. A currency union automatically gives rise to joint
liabilities and is therefore prone to moral hazard effects that need to be contained
by a strong political power centre. That a currency union without a centralization
of power would not succeed has rightly been emphasized by many observers.
Joint liability for the ECB’s refinancing credit, combined with local access to
the money-printing press, created bigger wealth risks for the European taxpayers
than all other rescue operations combined. It fostered an atmosphere of over-
confidence among investors that induced reckless lending and borrowing
decisions. An excessive amount of money was lying around in the shop window,
too much liability could be shifted onto public shoulders, too many risks were
taken, and too much capital was flowing across borders. All of this contributed
to the inflationary bubbles that ultimately deprived the southern European
countries of their competitiveness, and other countries of their growth dynamics.
The currency union nevertheless had a theoretical possibility of succeeding if
those charged with steering it had abided by the stipulations of the Maastricht

Treaty. But they obviously lost sight of their goal after succumbing to
temptations encountered along the way. The no-bailout clause was undermined
by overly loose and distorting banking regulations, the Stability and Growth Pact
was simply disregarded, and when the first state bankruptcy occurred in May
2010, the Maastricht Treaty was reinterpreted, if not downright violated, by the
rescue programmes. That seemed the easier choice at the time, but by throwing
the roadmap overboard, those in the driving seat lost their bearings.
Economists call this time inconsistency. Firstly, behind the veil of ignorance,
some general rules are specified and enshrined in a treaty, but then, along the
way, decision-makers prefer to ignore the rules and make decisions at their
discretion. Following the rule of law, as Edward Prescott emphasized in his
Nobel Prize acceptance speech, may be inconvenient at a given time, but it is
better in the long run, as it is the only way to overcome the problem of time
inconsistency in policymaking.3
Stumbling along and optimizing anew from moment to moment has created a
path dependency that the signatories of the Maastricht Treaty had tried to avoid.
This path dependency is likely to bring us no closer to the aspired-for United
States of Europe, or to the peace and prosperity that everyone yearns for.
The policy decisions taken while stumbling through the euro’s dark spell have
boiled down to attempts at mutualizing debt and opening taxpayers’ wallets to
meet immediate or future needs, the decisions being taken or prepared by the
ECB Governing Council with little scope left for parliamentary action. This is a
perilous course, as the early decades of US history show.
Learning from the United States
In 1790, the first US Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, had the
federal government assume the state debts incurred during the revolution. The
debt assumption was partly compensated for with the cession of not-yet-settled
territories to the federal government (west of the Appalachians), and was to be
serviced with the revenues from the joint import duties that the country had
decided thenceforth to impose.4 Hamilton wanted the slate to be wiped clean
after the new federal country was founded, and he argued that debt mutualization
was the ‘powerful cement of our union’.5
Many think that this would also be a good model for Europe (leaving aside the
cession of territories), and, as argued above, the ECB’s OMT programme can be
seen as the first step towards a mutualization of public debt in the Eurozone.6
However, closer inspection reveals that this positive evaluation is less

compelling than at first glance.
For one thing, the US state debts had been incurred partly during the
revolutionary war to gain independence from Great Britain (1775–1783). It
therefore seemed logical to mutualize them. The euro countries’ debts, in
contrast, did not result from a common struggle, but from the consumption
decisions of individual governments. As discussed in Chapter 2, the interest-rate
advantage brought by the euro was squandered.
For another, Europe did not found a unitary state; it simply established a
common accounting unit for transactions, a view that is starkly highlighted by
the Maastricht Treaty’s no-bailout clause (article 125 TFEU).7 As discussed in
Chapter 1, notions of turning the Eurozone into a federal system have been
firmly rejected by France.
The US experience with debt mutualization was not good.8 Mutualization of
the initial debt gave rise to the expectation among the federal states that they
would also be able to unload their debt onto federal shoulders in the future,
which dramatically increased their willingness to borrow—not least because in
the years 1812 to 1814 state debts had once again been mutualized in connection
with a second war against Great Britain.9
The mechanisms were similar to those observed in the late 1980s in Argentina
and Brazil, with excessive borrowing by their regional administrations. The
provinces or states, respectively, borrowed to finance major projects, pushing
aside repayment considerations in the hope that, if things got tight, the debts
would be mutualized.10 In both countries, the result was debt restructuring
approximating a sovereign default of regional entities.
What happened in the US was not much better. State debt remained low until
the mid-1820s, but thereafter it started to rise, among other things, because the
states had started to issue tradeable bonds which had the advantage of lowering
interest rates. The rise in indebtedness resulted primarily from investments in
infrastructure such as roads, canals and, later, railroads, that consumed huge
resources. In the southern states, a great deal of debt resulted from credit given
to the owners of new private banks in order for them to pay in the required
capital.11 While the state economies prospered, bubbles developed, becoming
dangerously large in the 1830s, when the debts of individual states increased
rapidly. The bubbles eventually burst in 1837. Panic erupted in the capital
markets, coinciding with the outbreak of a deep economic crisis that also
engulfed the US’s European trading partners, Britain in particular, forcing most
states to stop salary payments to state employees and payments to suppliers.
After the panic subsided the markets calmed down somewhat, but by 1839

borrowing in the open market had practically ground to a halt and the economy
was in depression.12
In this situation, the federal government bought a great deal of bonds from the
various states to keep them solvent, in view of their lack of access to the market.
The general expectation that the federal government would prove generous
towards the overly indebted states, and ultimately assume the debt itself, seemed
to be fulfilled.13
But the support only lasted for a short time until the federal government lost
patience.14 In 1841, Florida, Mississippi, Arkansas, and Indiana formally filed
for bankruptcy. They were followed in 1842 by Illinois, Maryland, Michigan,
Pennsylvania, and Louisiana. Other states such as Alabama, New York, Ohio,
and Tennessee faced enormous financial strain and came close to bankruptcy. In
total, nine of the twenty-nine states and territories existing in 1842 had filed for
bankruptcy and four at least were bankrupt or on the brink of bankruptcy.15
The hope that the federal government would bail out the states, so that they
could forestall bankruptcy, remained unrealized. The capacity of the federal
budget proved insufficient, and the imbalances reached unbearable proportions.
Tensions and strife among the states were on the rise, which in turn reduced the
willingness to provide further support.
US historian Harold James, of Princeton University, observes that what
Hamilton meant to ‘cement’ the US fiscal union eventually turned out to be
‘dynamite’. James argues that the unresolved debt problem created tensions
among the federal states because the federal debt had to be serviced by means of
a politically divisive tariff that harmed the South while benefiting northern
manufacturers. Furthermore, he maintains that these tensions fuelled those that
resulted from other reasons and ultimately led to the American Civil War from
1861 to 1865.16
Hard Budget Constraints
The United States provides very useful lessons for Europe, since the problems
with fiscal federalism that it had to solve are similar to those now faced by the
Eurozone. The trials and tribulations of the young nation’s early decades should
serve as a warning to all those who want to reinvent the wheel of history. Europe
does not have to invent fiscal federalism, since the USA already did so a long
time ago. Through a sometimes painful iteration process that lasted for two
centuries, a state has evolved that, apart from its currently high central
government indebtedness, appears to function reasonably well. At the very least,

it provides some pointers on how Europe could evolve. Before stumbling blindly
and leaving things to chance or to the pressure of financial investors, the
architects of the new Europe would do well to learn from the US experience.
After an episode in which the USA suffered the consequences of debt
mutualization, it was clear once and for all that each state must pay its own
debts. The no-bailout principle became the universally accepted pillar of US
municipal and state finance. Many states also began to put caps on debt levels
and constitutionally prohibited extensive debt issuance. The State of New York
was the first to implement a debt ceiling (totalling $ 1 million) in 1846, with
other states following suit by 1860.17 The self-imposed constraints did not
prevent another debt crisis in the 1870s, when the world economy again fell into
a depression, but this only reinforced and confirmed the austerity attitude that
the US state governments, unlike the federal government, have shown ever
since.
California was recently on the brink of bankruptcy. The salaries of teachers
and other state employees have been deferred on several occasions and state jobs
are being given only on a time-limited basis, with a layoff announced from the
outset. In summer 2009, the Californian government paid $ 2.6 billion worth of
invoices and salaries with IOUs, because it had no funds and the banks were
giving it no further credit. The IOUs were used for a while in place of money,
since they could be endorsed to third parties.
Minnesota and Illinois are not doing much better. Their finances are in dire
straits, affected by severe fiscal crises.18 In July 2011, the government of
Minnesota halted infrastructure projects and closed state parks in the midst of the
tourist season because there was no money for park rangers. Thousands of state
employees waited for their salaries, which the state was unable to pay.19 In
Illinois, several public facilities were closed and thousands of state workers were
laid off in September 2011.20
The situation in some US states is far less precarious than it is in Greece
today. The reader may recall from Chapter 2 (Figure 2.7) that the Greek state in
2013 had a debt-to-GDP ratio of 176% (despite the fact that in 2012 it enjoyed €
105 billion in debt relief, equivalent to 58% of its 2013 GDP). By contrast, the
no-bailout principle of the US kept even the debt-to-GDP ratios of California,
Minnesota, and Illinois below 10% in 2013, because investors, who know that
no one would help them in the case of bankruptcy, become jittery at much lower
debt levels than in the European debt-friendly institutional environment.21 At a
debt level of 10%, a state insolvency is not a big issue and can be easily handled.
However, when the debt has reached Greek dimensions, the burden imposed by

capital markets is much bigger, and the situation for everyone is much more
precarious. Given that the no-bailout principle is firmly anchored in the US,
insolvency is possible and punitive for those who depend on government money.
Still, no one in the US would ever light upon the idea of organizing a common
programme to provide the crisis states with financial support or creating a
system of collective bonds that would enable these states, under the shield of
joint liability, to regain access to the markets.
A good lesson was provided by the near-bankruptcy of New York City in
1975. The city, due to its economic size, can almost be equated with the state of
New York as a whole. In the late 1960s, then-Mayor John Lindsay had tried to
set up a European-style welfare state in New York. The consequence was that
the poor throughout the US came in droves to New York in order to profit from
its social safety net. The city was pushed to the brink of insolvency. Lindsay had
to terminate his programme, but the city continued to suffer from the debts that it
had accrued. In 1975, New York was practically bankrupt and was saved at the
last minute only by a loan from the teacher union’s pension fund. The US
government refused to come to the rescue. The headline of the New York Daily
News became legendary: ‘Ford to City: Drop Dead’. It summarized the position
of then-President Gerald R. Ford.22 Ford could not quite hold his hard stance,
and in the following year the Congress provided some support from federal
funds, but that was vastly insufficient. New York managed to tap fresh money
only through the issuance of bonds collateralized with senior claims on future
tax revenue.23
Other subordinate administrative divisions in the US suffered the same fate as
New York City over the years. Time and again some go bankrupt and suspend
debt service. In 2012 alone, twelve municipalities filed for bankruptcy.24 Since
the introduction of Chapter 9 of the US Bankruptcy Code in 1937, which
provides for the reorganization of municipalities under an ordinary insolvency
procedure, there have been around 600 such filings.25 Between 1980 and 2012,
272 filings were tallied; in 2013 there were nine filings.26 This figure included
the city of Detroit, which defaulted on 18 July 2013.27 After an insolvency is
declared, an agreement is sought with the creditors to waive some of the debt,
and then the cities can operate again. That raises no hackles, since it is just as
common as a company bankruptcy.
Since resources are scarce, the US introduced a system of hard budget
constraints, after the failures of the early system of soft budget constraints. It is,
of course, painful in every individual case, as painful as economic reality can be
in the world, but it works, and also instils debt discipline without leading to a

catastrophe. No one in the USA wants to repeat the experiences of the first
decades after Hamilton.
The disastrous consequences of soft budget constraints were also evident in
the downfall of the Soviet Union. That the soft budget constraints would spell
the demise of the URSS was predicted by Hungarian economist János Kornai as
early as 1980.28 If the government wanted something, it was done. Goods were
produced without anyone paying attention to the damage caused by withdrawing
the factors of production from other uses. Politics was believed to have primacy
over the laws of economics, but in fact it was the other way round. The hard
laws of economics ultimately made the Soviet System unsustainable.
Hard budget constraints are like the brakes of a car. Going downhill, it is
tempting to let the car roll freely instead of moderating its speed, but the
consequence can be a hard braking at the end, or even an accident. When the
euro was announced and eventually introduced, the Eurozone went through a
phase of soft budget constraints. The car hurtled along—and kept going. Even
today the driver doesn’t dare hit the brakes hard. Some even want the vehicle to
keep rushing along. They are calling for Eurobonds, the mutualization of bank
debts and other measures to take the pressure off the brakes. They are thereby
risking the same type of accidents that the USA experienced in its early decades.
Neutral Money
The easy access to the local printing press, which channelled the up to one
trillion euros in extra credit from the northern central banks to the GIPSIC
countries, as measured by the Target balances, is arguably the key design flaw of
the Eurosystem and the feature that most fundamentally sets it apart from the US
monetary system. It fits the money-in-the-shop-window theory, which posits that
the Eurosystem needs sufficient firing power to stabilize the system, but
unfortunately, contradicting the theory’s prediction, the money on display has, in
fact, been taken. Some of it has been returned in the meantime, to a sizeable
extent because public credit, which reduces the Target balances on a one-by-one
basis, was provided as a replacement, but as of this writing the stock taken is still
about € 600 billion (see Figures 6.2 and 7.1). A substantial part of the extra ECB
credit will turn into losses for the taxpayers, given that the write-off losses of the
GIPSIC banking systems could be hundreds of billions of euros (see Table 8.3),
and because the bank resolution strategy defined by the European Parliament
limits the creditor bail-in to a tiny fraction of the banks’ balance sheets (see
Chapter 8’s section Banking Union).

The money in the shop window has helped to make creditors reckless, and
played a key role in feeding the inflationary credit bubble that deprived the
southern countries of their competitiveness and caused huge structural current
account imbalances in the Eurozone (see Chapter 4). The sharing of losses
arising from financing zombie banks created strong moral hazard incentives for
NCBs to opt for lowering collateral standards in the ECB Governing Council, to
individually stretch the limits set by such standards and, as shown in Chapter 5,
to extend excessive amounts of ELA credit at their own discretion, given that
ELA’s exemption from joint liability is a myth. To counteract such incentives,
binding rules and strong constraints are needed, but such constraints are missing
in the Eurosystem. It is true that without such constraints bankruptcies can be
delayed, as was the case in Greece and Cyprus (see Chapter 5), but that bloats
the burden of debt even further and shifts even more credit titles from private to
public hands, opening a fire bridge from the private to the public economy.
To avoid the crash, the logic of the liability spiral will force member NCBs to
buy even more government bonds, bringing the ESM’s bonds even closer to
Eurobonds, and to press ahead with the mutualization of bank debts to avoid the
emergence of new Target credit. This is like trying to stabilize a car without
brakes by flooring the gas pedal.
To stop the vicious liability spiral, it is essential to correct its root cause by
terminating the ECB’s regional fiscal policy that predetermines subsequent
parliamentary rescue decisions and undermines European democracy. To this
end, it is crucial to keep the Target balances in check. There are four ways to do
this.
The technically simplest option is for the ECB Governing Council to end its
policy of allowing low-quality collateral for refinancing credit (see Chapter 5). If
refinancing credit were only granted against solid collateral, the banks would see
no advantage in drawing credit from the ECB, since with good collateral they
can tap the interbank market for cheap credit at any time.
But the Bundesbank has long since pleaded for more stringent collateral
standards and has always been outvoted in the ECB Council. It is clearly
impossible to reach a solution as long as the countries that profit from Target
credit hold a majority in the Council. The issue calls for a more fundamental
approach.
In the opinion of former Bundesbank President Helmut Schlesinger, Target
credit should bear a punitive interest rate charged to the corresponding NCB,
which would, of course, be excluded from the Eurosystem’s pooling operations,
and which should be high enough to cajole the deficit generating NCBs into
reining in the refinancing credit they grant, so that market interest rates rise and

the credit that had wandered off to other countries returns.29 This is tantamount
to an attempt to reintroduce the idea of an equilibrium between supply and
demand in the local credit markets, something that characterized the internal US
system, the Bretton Woods system, and the gold standard systems, as shown in
Chapter 7. It would indeed be a suitable means, even one that presumably can be
carried out by the Eurosystem’s NCBs without having to change EU treaties.
It would be even better, though, to amend the Maastricht Treaty by applying
rules similar to those used in the US, particularly as regards the settlement of
Target balances. The most natural means of payment between countries, and
even states within a currency union, is gold. A country may run a Target deficit
for a year or more, but then it should settle its debt with the Eurosystem by
redeeming it with gold or tradeable gold-backed securities, to be handed out to
the holders of Target claims. Gold has always been used for settling balance-of-
payments imbalances between countries, and even between states within a
currency union, as the history of the US Federal Reserve, summarized in Chapter
7, has shown, and gold has remained an international means of payment to this
day. It might be argued that some countries do not have enough gold to meet
their obligations. However, this is like saying that someone who built a house
does not have enough cash on hand to redeem his debt. Since gold is an
internationally liquid asset and a globally accepted unit of account, the debtor
country always has the possibility of selling some other assets, say covered
bonds or state property, at market prices against gold to fulfil its obligations.
Of course, this may be difficult for a country that is close to insolvency. It
would of course be much more convenient to hand over some sort of debentures
or to leave the system as is, with credit slumbering on the books, if necessary
forever. But that is what hard budget constraints mean. If a country wants to run
current account deficits and temporarily absorb resources from the rest of the
world, it has to borrow or sell some of its own assets in exchange, and the
conditions at which it does so must be mutually agreeable to all parties involved.
That said, the near insolvency of some southern European countries is a fact,
and something must be done to clear the air for a prosperous future in a common
European house. A joint European debt conference might be needed to forgive
part of the crisis-stricken countries’ debt. This will be discussed in the next
section.
The settlement of balance-of-payments imbalances constrains the possibilities
of a country to have net payment orders carried out through the Eurosystem, but
not in the sense that individual payments could not be carried out beyond a
certain limit. No capital controls would need to be imposed, as was recently the
case in Cyprus, and unlike today a euro would have the same value everywhere.

The constraint operates only indirectly, in the sense that it becomes less
attractive for a given NCB to issue more money than is needed for domestic
circulation. If an NCB wants to issue more than this amount, leading to the
accumulation of Target balances, it would have to sell marketable assets to buy
the gold needed for settlement. Since such a step may prove unattractive, it
would put a limit on the issuance of new refinancing credit, the local commercial
banks then having no other option but to borrow in the European interbank
market at mutually acceptable conditions.
This is not at all a radical or constraining step. It just means imposing budget
constraints. Budget constraints do not imply that a market equilibrium with a
common currency that has an equal value everywhere is unattainable. To the
contrary, it is the prerequisite for such an equilibrium.
Softer budget constraints that allow public borrowing at below-market
conditions are dangerous for the stability of an economy, as they are likely to
lead to overspending, overheating, and inflationary credit bubbles that
undermine the competitiveness of countries. It is remarkable that the USA kept
the internal gold standard until 1975, even though the country was a solid
political federation, while it is considered self-evident by European politicians
that the Eurozone does not need such a standard, even though it is far from
becoming anything close to a federal state in the foreseeable future.
Depending on Europe’s progress in creating a common federal state with the
corresponding enforcement authority, in the distant future the gold standard
might be given up and a solution similar to the current US system, based on a
mere settlement with marketable assets, could eventually be adopted. As
explained in Chapter 7, in the US, settlement is performed by handing over
ownership shares in the Federal Reserve System Open Market Account
(SOMA). However, there are at least two caveats with such a solution. One is
that the US system of public budget constraints may also have become too soft.
History will tell whether moving away from the internal gold standard really was
a good idea. The other is that the main channel of money provision in Europe is
the granting of refinancing credit rather than open-market asset purchases. Thus,
there isn’t an analogue to the open market clearing portfolio that could be
reshuffled for the purpose of settling Target balances.
A possibility would be that all euro countries issue super-safe treasury bills
that are collateralized with gold or property, and that bear a market interest rate
appropriate for such instruments. A proposal along these lines was made by the
European Economic Advisory Group (EEAG) in its 2012 Report on the
European Economy.30 The participating countries would apply these bills to
amortize the Target liabilities accumulated by their respective NCBs. The bills

would have to be market-grade and actually traded, which presupposes that the
countries do resort to these instruments in the course of their normal borrowing.
While such measures are indispensable, they would cover only one aspect of
the US system. Another important characteristic of the US system is that the
Federal Reserve, through the Reserve Bank of New York, buys securities issued
by the federal government and federal agencies, but not those issued by
individual states, let alone those of troubled ones. As shown in Chapter 7, this
precludes the kind of regional fiscal policy that the ECB has been carrying out
with its SMP and OMT programmes. Translated into the Eurosystem, the Fed’s
policy would mean providing all NCBs with fixed refinancing lots according to
the size of their jurisdictions’ economies and, if at all, buying any national
government bonds always in proportion to the size of the economy of the issuing
countries.31 Furthermore, limited additional lots of refinancing credit through
systems similar to those available in the US could be introduced to meet
emergency liquidity needs. All of this would work to reduce the Target balances
in the first place and reduce the amounts that need to be settled.
Unbearable Debt
While a hardening of budget constraints is indispensable for a well-functioning
Eurosystem, the introduction of the new rules by themselves would hit the
GIPSIC countries hard and exacerbate their economic malaise. Before the new
rules for a viable system in the long run can be implemented, the European debt
problem needs to be resolved in the short run.
Whether a country’s debt is sustainable depends largely on its GDP growth
rate. According to the Domar formula, once developed to legitimatize Keynesian
deficit spending, a country’s public debt-to-GDP ratio, in short its debt ratio, will
converge in the long run to the ratio of its deficit share in GDP and the long-term
nominal GDP growth rate.32 Thus, with appropriate assumptions of this growth
rate, which no one actually knows or can observe today, unsustainable debt
situations can be made to look sustainable. In a remarkable document, the IMF
recently acknowledged that it had used this approach to calm the markets and
avoid stating that Greek debt is unsustainable, which would have forced it to
stop its rescue operations and might have triggered Greece’s bankruptcy.33
Unfortunately, instead of growing, some of the crisis countries may stagnate
in the years to come, or even shrink in nominal terms, because they need to
realign their relative prices, as shown in Chapter 4. If realignment takes place
rapidly, as could be achieved with courageous labour market reforms, it will

involve outright deflation. That would minimize the duration of mass
unemployment, but would also imply a period of falling nominal GDP levels. If,
on the other hand, prices prove sticky downwards and the ECB is unable or
unwilling to inflate the other euro countries, most of the GIPSIC countries will
be forced to continue shrinking in real and nominal terms. Thus, whichever of
these two scenarios materializes, some countries will experience rising debt
ratios.
The truth about the debt problem is bitter, since the artificial and inflationary
growth created by the credit bubbles in the GIPSIC countries before the crisis
struck concealed the debt problem for many years. Because countries over-
borrowed, their economies overheated, and because they overheated, their debt-
to-GDP ratios remained modest or even fell for some years, as in Spain or
Ireland. The overheating increased the denominator of the debt-to-GDP ratios
and kept the increments of the numerators small, as it implied ample tax revenue
that drove down budget deficits. Both of these effects created the illusion that the
debt problem was under control and that the countries would be able to simply
grow out of it. In fact, however, the process deprived the countries of their
competitiveness and made the debt unsustainable in a number of cases.
To understand the real danger this has engendered, it is useful to correct this
distortion by evaluating the countries’ GDP levels at competitive prices. An
attempt to do this is shown on Table 9.1. The second column gives the actual
debt-to-GDP ratios by the end of 2013, as known from Figure 2.7. The third
column gives the debt-to-GDP ratios that would have resulted if all countries’
price levels (GDP deflators) had grown at the average actual rate since the
Madrid Summit in 1995, which marked the beginning of the interest-rate
convergence that triggered the credit boom (see Chapter 2). The fourth column
gives the debt-to-GDP ratios that would result after the necessary realignment of
relative prices, as calculated by the benchmark scenario of the Goldman Sachs
study cited in Chapter 4, given the 2013 Eurozone average price level and taking
into account that a bit of the necessary price adjustment may already have taken
place.34
Table 9.1 Actual and hypothetical public debt-to-GDP ratios (December 2013, %)

* Actual public debt level in relation to GDP evaluated at prices that would have prevailed had the
country’s GDP inflation rate followed the average of the euro countries since 1995 (Madrid Summit).
** Actual debt level in relation to 2013 GDP evaluated at competitive prices according to the study by
Goldman Sachs, baseline scenario, Q3 2010, keeping the 2013 average Eurozone price level (GDP deflator)
constant. See Table 4.1.
Sources: European Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, Financial Assistance in EU Member
States, Greece; H. Pill, K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot,
and S. Graves, Goldman Sachs Global Economics, External Rebalancing: Progress, but a Sizeable

Challenge Remains, European Economics Analyst, Issue No. 13/03, January 17, 2013; Ifo Institute
calculations.
Note: Actual public debt 2013: European Commission forecast, November 2013.
While some countries such as Austria, Belgium, Finland, and Germany would
have lower debt-to-GDP ratios today if their relative goods prices had not
changed, the GIPSIC countries would have much higher ones. On average, their
debt-to-GDP ratio would be 145%, instead of the 122% shown in the official
statistics. Italy’s would be 164% instead of 133%, Spain’s 109% instead of 95%,
Portugal’s 142% instead of 128%, and Greece’s 222% instead of 176%.
Without the haircut of March 2012, which gave the Greek state a debt relief of
54% of its 2012 GDP at the expense of foreign and domestic investors, but at
today’s prices, Greece’s official debt ratio in 2013 would have been 234% of
GDP. This is shown in the first field of the second row of the Table. And without
both the haircut and the increase in Greek relative prices that took place since the
Madrid Summit, the Greek debt-to-GDP ratio would have been 294%, as shown
in the next field to the right.
Things look even more dramatic if GDP is evaluated at hypothetical prices
after the realignment that would follow from the Goldman Sachs baseline
scenario shown in Table 4.1. Without the haircut and after the required deflation,
the Greek public debt ratio would have been a whopping 315%. Recall that the
Goldman Sachs figures give a favourable impression of the need for a Greek
realignment. If the Greek price level were at the level of Turkish prices of 2011–
2013, for example, the Greek debt-to-GDP ratio in the absence of the haircut
would be 363%, and with the haircut 273%. These figures show with utmost
clarity how unbearable the Greek debt situation is.
Portugal’s debt-to-GDP ratio would be 180%, and Spain’s 130%, if the prices
were reduced in line with the Goldman Sachs baseline scenario. For both of
these countries the figures look grimmer than in the case where the price-level
correction is only made for the actual relative price increase since 1995. Ireland
and Italy, in contrast, with ratios of 122% and 148%, would look a little better.
The debt-to-GDP ratios recalculated in Table 9.1 for competitive prices refer
to official public debt, which is held by domestic and foreign investors as well as
public institutions that have provided rescue funds to the governments of the
crisis-stricken countries. A similar calculation is presented in Table 9.2 for the
public rescue funds themselves, as analysed in the previous chapter (see Figure
8.2 and Table 8.1), that were made available by foreign countries or multilateral
institutions, including the ECB, to the crisis countries’ governments and central
banks, and via the latter to the respective local commercial banking systems.35

As broken down in Table 8.1, the rescue funds include the Target debt, the
potential debt from an over-proportionate issuance of banknotes (or the potential
claim from an under-proportionate issuance), government bonds held by non-
GIPSIC central banks and the ECB itself, as well as fiscal rescue credit provided
by other countries and multilateral institutions. Note that these items could not
reasonably be added to the government debt shown in Table 9.1, since for some
countries, Greece in particular, a large fraction of the public debt is held by
international public institutions, and because the credit provided to NCBs for
distribution to commercial banks overlaps with sovereign debt in the same
measure as banks use refinancing credit to buy local government bonds, and then
submit these bonds as collateral for the refinancing credit.
While the second column of Table 9.2 simply repeats the figures relative to
current GDP from Table 8.1, the third one provides a recalculation based on
GDP evaluated at average Eurozone prices, or, to be more precise, at the prices
that would have prevailed in 2013 if the countries’ GDP deflators had increased
in line with the average since the Madrid Summit in 1995. The fourth column, as
in Table 9.1, shows the public credit-to-GDP ratios that would result if GDP
were to be calculated at Goldman Sachs ‘competitive’ relative prices as specified
above, keeping the Eurozone average GDP deflator constant at its 2013 level.
Table 9.2 Public credit provided by other governments or multilateral institutions relative to the recipient
country’s actual or hypothetical GDP (December 2013, %)

* Actual public credit level in relation to GDP, net of the countries’ own contributions to collective rescue
activities, evaluated at prices that would have prevailed had the countries’ GDP inflation rate followed the
average of the euro countries since 1995 (Madrid Summit).
** Actual public credit level in relation to GDP, net of the countries’ own contributions to collective rescue
activities, evaluated at competitive prices according to the study by Goldman Sachs, baseline scenario, Q3
2010, keeping the 2013 average Eurozone price level (GDP deflator) constant. See Table 4.1.
Sources: See Tables 8.1 and 9.1.
Note: For the interpretation and the decomposition of the first column of this table, see Tables 8.1. The
percentages shown give the sum of Target debt, debt from an over-proportional issue of banknotes,
government bonds held by non-GIPSIC NCBs, and intergovernmental fiscal credit, net of own contributions
and credit repayments.
Consider Greece. Greece has thus far received public credit from abroad
(multilateral, bilateral and ECB), net of its own contributions to international
rescue activities, equal to 157% of its 2013 GDP evaluated at actual market
prices. It would have a public credit-to-GDP ratio of 198% if its GDP in real
terms were the same as in 2013, while its prices had only increased in line with
the Eurozone average since 1995. If, on the other hand, Greece’s 2013 GDP is
evaluated at Goldman Sachs-type competitive prices, this ratio would even be
212%. Portugal would also look worse, albeit much less dramatically, if its GDP
were to be evaluated at such prices.
For Ireland, in contrast, the price correction produces a somewhat less
problematic result. While Ireland’s actual public credit-to-GDP ratio was 83% in
2013 and would have been 92% had Irish prices not increased faster than the
Eurozone average since 1995, its public credit-to-GDP ratio would ‘only’ be
81% if Irish GDP were evaluated at Goldman Sachs competitive prices.
All in all, the calculations presented in this section have a somewhat
ambiguous policy implication. On the one hand, they are based on the view that
the path towards foreign debt sustainability goes through a temporary increase in
debt-to-GDP ratios, because a realignment of prices is necessary to generate the
structural current account surpluses that would enable the countries to service
their foreign debt. On the other hand, some of the resulting figures are truly huge
and obliterate the hope that the countries will be able to manage their debt
problems without help in the foreseeable future.
Greece in particular may need another haircut, this time at the expense of its
public creditors, to reduce its debt burden. The first Greek haircut of March 2012
cost foreign and Greek private investors € 105 billion, and the restructuring of
November 2012 meant wealth losses for other Eurozone states amounting to €
43 billion in present-value terms, as shown in Chapter 8, 36 and yet a further
restructuring of Greek debt might be in order. Portugal’s situation is not quite as
bad, but, evaluated at non-distorted competitive prices, it has a public debt-to-

GDP ratio of between 142% and 180%, and the public credit it received from
other countries is between 74% and 94% of its GDP. Portugal might also be a
candidate for debt restructuring.
Restructuring the Debt
Debt restructuring has by no means been unusual in history. Since the 1950s, a
haircut forcing private creditors to accept the exchange of their government or
bank bonds has been applied no less than 186 times by ninety-five countries.37
Figure 9.1 provides an overview of haircuts and sovereign defaults since 1978.
The vertical axis shows the portion of the claims that were lost as a result of the
haircut, while the size of the circles shows the absolute volume of the haircut.
The haircuts applied by many developing countries in the early 1980s are clearly
evident, as well as the debt restructuring performed by Russia in 1997 and 2000
and the bankruptcies of Argentina in 1987, 1993, and 2005.

Figure 9.1 Full and partial sovereign defaults (1978–2010/2012)
Abbreviations: ALB: Albania, DZA: Algeria, ARG: Argentina, BLZ: Belize, BOL: Bolivia, BIH: Bosnia-
Herzegovina, BRA: Brazil, BGR: Bulgaria, CMR: Cameroon, CHL: Chile, COG: Republic of Congo, CRI:
Costa Rica, CIV: Ivory Coast, HRV: Croatia, COD: Democratic Republic of Congo, DOM: Dominican
Republic, DMA: Dominica, ECU: Ecuador, ETH: Ethiopia, GRC: Greece, GRD: Grenada, GUY: Guyana,
HND: Honduras, IRQ: Iraq, JAM: Jamaica, JOR: Jordan, MDG: Madagascar; MEX: Mexico, MDA:
Moldavia, MOZ: Mozambique, NIC: Nicaragua, NER: Niger, NGA: Nigeria, PAK: Pakistan, PAN:
Panama, PER: Peru, PHL: Philippines, POL: Poland, ROU: Romania, RUS: Russia, SRB: Serbia and
Montenegro/Yugoslavia, SYC: Seychelles, SLE: Sierra Leone, SVN: Slovenia, ZAF: South Africa, SDN:
Sudan, TZA: Tanzania, TUR: Turkey, UGA: Uganda, UKR: Ukraine, URY: Uruguay, VEN: Venezuela,
VNM: Vietnam, YEM: Yemen,
Sources: J. Cruces and C. Trebesch, ‘Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts’, CESifo Working Paper
No. 3604, October 2011; J. Zettelmeyer, C. Trebesch, and M. Gulati, ‘The Greek Debt Restructuring: An
Autopsy’, CESifo Working Paper No. 4333, July 2013.
Note: The chart covers 181 sovereign haircuts over the 1978–2010 period, including the Greek partial
bankruptcy of 2012. The vertical axis shows the percentage the haircut amounted to in relation to the
market value of the government bonds in question, while the size of each circle denotes the absolute

magnitude of each haircut.
Argentina had also demanded debt restructurings in 1956, 1962, and 1965. Its
post-war history has been characterized by a long series of similar events. The
first Argentine debt restructuring was negotiated by the military dictatorship
under Pedro Eugenio Aramburu Cilveti, as soon as the dictatorship came to
power in 1956. While it did try to repay the debt, it negotiated better terms than
originally agreed. The negotiations with the creditors at the time took place in
Paris, and they led to the foundation of the Paris Club. The Paris Club is an
informal group of nineteen official creditors that organizes debt restructuring
according to a set of rules that have evolved from experience. The Club has
since been often involved in renegotiations between debtors and creditors, the
latest event being the debt relief negotiated in January 2013 for Myanmar after
the fall of the military junta in 2011. Altogether, 400 debt agreements settled
under the guidance of the Paris Club have been recorded.38
The Paris Club could also be involved in organizing a debt conference for
joint negotiations between the GIPSIC countries and their creditor countries,
along the lines of prior debt conferences in the 1920s, 1930s, and 1950s whose
task was the settlement of war debt and reparation payments. The task of the
new debt conference could be to reset the Eurozone’s financial system by
clearing the balance sheets and restoring the transparency and trust that the
capital market needs to operate smoothly.39 The debt conference would have to
deal with three kinds of debt: state debt, bank debt, and Target debt, since they
are all interrelated and have common origins.
Given the huge levels of interrelated debt, a solution that just prolongs
maturities and reduces interest rates, as was chosen in the case of Greece and
Ireland, is not advisable. That is not really a solution, but an attempt at
camouflage that allows creditors to avoid write-off losses in their balance sheets
and pretend to have more equity than they actually do. While it helps the banks
and governments of the debtor countries, it makes the creditors vulnerable by
allowing them to conduct their businesses with less capital than they show in
their books. They should instead be forced to recapitalize by bringing in more
equity capital from outside. The European financial industry could become a
hollow shell with the camouflage strategy the EU has begun. It is much better
for the long-run stability and prosperity of the European economy if the debt
restructuring is honest, in the sense of going for outright debt reductions and
imposing a more parsimonious strategy on the economy, with more private
savings and investment, and less consumption.
The public debt reductions will not only hit private investors but also creditor

governments and their ESM and EFSF rescue funds, which will have to be
recapitalized with more equity injections by governments. In the early stages of
the crisis, governments could have avoided these losses, but now that they have
bailed out private investors and taken over large parts of their portfolios, they
will have to foot the bill. Nowadays, 80% of the Greek public debt is held by
external public institutions and only 20% privately.40 Moreover, the privately
held debt is nearly exclusively located in the balance sheets of Greek
commercial banks, which have used it as collateral for drawing refinancing
credit from the Greek NCB.41 This shows the nature of the problem. Taxpayers
are already trapped. They should acknowledge this fate and write off their losses,
rather than let their politicians continue along this path, which is merely
dragging them ever deeper into the trap.
Private banks could be recapitalized by way of debt-equity swaps, along the
lines discussed in Chapter 8. In principle, the EU proposals are on the right track
by advocating a bail-in of shareholders and creditors to protect taxpayers, and by
establishing a pecking order for how to allocate the losses. However, the list of
exemptions is long. That, together with the cap set for the bail-in of shareholders
and creditors combined at just 8% of a bank’s balance sheet, and the proposal of
using the resolution fund and/or the ESM as a public backstop, comes perilously
close to a ruse. It is much more a recipe for a bailout rather than bail-in. To
really protect taxpayers, the bail-in percentage should be much higher, and the
list of exceptions much shorter.
For one thing, exempting deposits of € 100, 000 each seems far too lenient,
given that this is the median household wealth in the Netherlands and twice the
median household wealth in Germany, for example. If there is to be such an
exemption, it should be financed by the respective state and its national deposit
insurance, so as to avoid the moral hazard effects that would necessarily result
from international mutualization of responsibilities. Unfortunately, such restraint
is not discernible in the European solutions, as the plans published at this writing
anticipate a socialized solution with a gradual transition period. Moreover, some
of the states that might wish to provide such a guarantee are themselves close to
bankruptcy and would need community funds to do so. Thus, the exemption of
deposits of this order of magnitude is hardly possible. Setting up a deposit
insurance scheme in which one country guarantees another’s deposits up to its
own median wealth, or more, seems wholly out of proportion.
For another, there is no excuse for exempting covered loans from the liability
hierarchy. To the extent that they are covered, such loans are protected by the
respective collateral. If the collateral fails, be it a government bond, a private

security or any other kind of private asset, the holders of covered bonds should
bear the losses rather than ask community funds to step in, as the EU proposal
envisages. Exempting covered loans from bail-ins would blow away creditors’
caution when lending to zombie banks, prompting them to content themselves
with low yields, as even bad collateral will probably be enough to enjoy the
backup protection. Circular trading of bonds among banks to generate the
necessary collateral out of nothing would also be a possibility, as it would
provide the banks’ creditors with common protection and would enable the
banks to borrow at low interest rates. Moral hazard and the misallocation of
resources are pre-programmed with this strategy.
Excluding covered loans from the bail-in exemption would, of course, hurt the
ECB. After all, a rationale behind the exemption for covered bonds may have
been the attempt to protect the ECB from the consequences of its overly lax
collateral policy (see Chapter 5). But there is no point in protecting the ECB
with the ESM or other community instruments, since it would just mean
repackaging the potential write-off losses from one public budget to another,
with no benefit to taxpayers. To the contrary, it would be in the interest of
Europe’s voters and taxpayers to avoid this ploy and show openly in the NCBs’
balance sheets which risks have arisen from the problematic collateral policies
adopted by the ECB Governing Council. This would put a stop to the reckless
lending strategy out of local printing presses, which in effect is little more than a
regional fiscal policy riddled with negative allocative implications and doubtful
democratic legitimation.
Along with writing off some of the ECB’s credit claims on banks, debt relief
should naturally also be given for unrecoverable Target claims on indebted
NCBs, as the Target debt resulted from the NCBs’ excessive lending of freshly
created money. The unavoidable write-off losses will have to be booked in the
NCBs’ balance sheets by shifting the Target claims from near-insolvent
countries to the still-sound euro countries in proportion to their ECB capital
keys. This relief should come together with the move to harder budget
constraints in the Eurozone, in particular the move to the gold standard for future
Target settlement proposed above.
Despite the need to forgive some of the debt, the countries themselves could
make a significantly greater effort to redeem their debt. One possibility would be
the sale of state property. Greece, for example, has state-owned property
(excluding real-estate holdings) worth 85% of GDP in 2010, and additional real-
estate holdings worth an estimated 87% to 130% of Greek GDP.42 The Greek
government had promised the Troika (ECB, IMF, EU), in a memorandum of
understanding dated 2 July 2011, that it would privatize state property worth €

50 billion.43 Its efforts have been rather scanty, however. By the end of 2012 its
privatization receipts were only € 1.6 billion.44 As of this writing, the Greek
Finance Ministry’s privatization website is still empty. Recall in this context that
Alexander Hamilton’s debt mutualization of 1790 came in exchange for handing
over western territories. It is not plausible to solve all of Greece’s debt problems
without the country itself making a contribution.
Further measures that could be considered include wealth levies or mandatory
government bond purchases by property owners.45 After all, there is substantial
private wealth in the crisis-hit countries, as revealed by a survey conducted by
the ECB (see Figure 2.12). Even when differences in household size are taken
into account, Italians and Spaniards, for instance, are on average 14% wealthier
than Germans, 40% wealthier than Finns and 42% wealthier than Dutchmen.
The wealth of Italians was emphasized by then-Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi
long before the ECB published its statistics.46
Other troubled countries score similarly. There is much to be said for taking
part of this wealth to help repay some of the debt, particularly in those countries
whose debt also resulted from the fact that governments substituted debt
financing for tax financing because a substantial fraction of private activities
were carried out on the black market. Incidentally, the relative size of the black
economy is strongly correlated with the debt-to-GDP ratio.47
The right mixture of debt relief, privatization, and wealth levies could be
jointly negotiated in a Paris Club debt conference convened to reset the
Eurozone. The European debt crisis has many causes, and creditors and debtors
alike share the responsibility. A way to distribute the burden fairly should thus
be sought—and it is important that it be found soon. Speed has at least two
advantages. One is that confidence would be quickly restored and the period of
uncertainty for investors that is currently paralyzing economic activity would
come to an end. The other is that it would keep the cost to taxpayers in check.
Currently Europe is in a phase of substituting public creditors of southern
countries for private ones, as the number cited for the Greek public debt showed.
The more time elapses, the larger the portion of the portfolio of GIPSIC assets
owned by governmental institutions, and the larger therefore the haircut loss
affecting the taxpayers and the general population, who actually bear the least
responsibility for the mess, and the larger the risk that investors would like to
repeat the game after the haircut. Investors must learn their lesson, and to this
end, it is essential to let them bear the losses arising from their poor investment
decisions. There is no ethical or economic case for having investors protected by
European states––the latter have enough on their plate as it is.

A Breathing Currency Union: Between Bretton Woods and the
Dollar
In addition to the debt problem, the competitiveness problem also urgently needs
to be tackled. Both problems are related, but not identical. Some countries, such
as Italy, have a considerable public debt problem, but since the government debt
is largely held by Italians, this is not a foreign debt problem. Italy may not need
more than a 10% real devaluation to attain a situation in which its foreign debt is
sustainable and the economy is competitive (see Table 4.1). On the other hand, it
is difficult to imagine that Greece, Portugal, and Spain would be out of the
woods if their public debt problem were resolved. As discussed in Chapter 4,
Greece needs to depreciate by 36% to reach the Turkish price level and Portugal
needs a depreciation of 29%. In various scenarios by Goldman Sachs, Spain,
Greece and Portugal would have to devalue by 20% to 30% to achieve debt
sustainability. Manufacturing wages in Spain are more than three times, and in
Greece more than twice, as high as in Poland (Figure 4.12). Portugal’s wages are
about 60% higher. These countries will not be able to achieve sufficient degrees
of depreciation in the foreseeable future, not least because only a very moderate
realignment of their relative prices has taken place during the crisis (see Figure
4.8).
The spectrum of economists who consider it impossible to try to achieve a real
depreciation of the required magnitude through a wage and price squeeze ranges
from Friedman to Keynes. As explained in Chapter 4, one problem is that the
labour unions are trying to block this development, since a symmetrical wage
and price cut cannot convincingly be orchestrated, given that millions of
contracts would have to be changed simultaneously. Another problem is the
potential distortion of the balance sheets of the country’s borrowers and lenders
that could push many borrowers into bankruptcy.
Compliance with ‘austerity conditions’ attached to fresh public credit, which
initially brings about a political lull, should not be confused with a real
depreciation, which is the only mechanism that can reinstate competitiveness.
Even now the supposed austerity programmes, which are nothing more than a
restriction on new net borrowing, are deemed unbearable, and yet they haven’t
managed to bring about any sizeable reductions in relative price levels, as Figure
4.8 shows. To be sure, if one insists on hard expenditure cuts by not giving
further credit and calling due old debts, it would be possible to induce a
deflation, but the social systems of the affected countries would probably break
under the strain and plunge the countries into chaos. Germany’s experience at
the time of the Weimar Republic, when prices sank by 23% from 1929 to 1933,

because the Treaty of Versailles and the Dawes Plan tied it to the gold standard,
should be warning enough, as discussed in Chapter 4.
The alternative solution, contemplated by many, is inflation in the core. To
some extent that is indeed necessary. However, the ECB’s primary mandate of
ensuring price stability rules out this possibility. In addition, it would be difficult
to overcome Germany’s deep-seated trauma stemming from the hyperinflation
from 1914 to 1923, which led to impoverishment and radicalization of the
middle class. Only a small amount of extra inflation will be possible in the core,
but that will be far from sufficient to allow for the necessary realignment of
relative prices in a foreseeable time.
Apart from that, the Japanese example, mentioned in Chapter 4, has shown
that it may not be easy to generate inflation. When the Japanese property bubble
burst in 1990, the country’s banks ran into serious difficulties. In the early years
they were able to hide the write-off losses, but as loans matured and were not
serviced, around 1997, the truth came out. About 40% of the banks were in
trouble and had to be rescued or taken over by the state. Since 1998, at least
prima facie, monetary policy has been extremely loose, with short-term rates
hovering most of the time between zero and 0.5%.48 Extreme Keynesian debt
policies increased the debt-to-GDP ratio from 67% of GDP in 1990 to 244% of
GDP in 2013. And yet, GDP prices have fallen since 1998. The Japanese GDP
deflator now stands at the same level as 1980. So even if the ECB wanted to
trigger inflation, it is entirely unclear that it would ever succeed in doing so. A
deflating economy has an unlimited appetite for liquidity, and it may prove
impossible to get it going again by pumping even more money into it. The
Japanese example proves that economists’ age-old fear of deflation might be
justified.49
So, the only options remaining are permanent transfers—or exits.50 The perils
of permanent transfers, which range from the Dutch Disease to the contagion
effects upon other countries that want the same treatment, have already been
mentioned in this book. The transfers make countries addicted, the wrong price
vectors are cemented, and the countries never become competitive. The negative
experiences with German reunification and the Italian Mezzogiorno, which
despite huge, continuous transfers have not yet managed to develop competitive
and self-sustaining economies, should serve as a warning.51
The catastrophic developments in the southern European labour markets
depicted in Chapter 1 also show that such a strategy is a dead end. As was shown
in Tables 8.1 and 9.2, Greece had received public credit of around € 288 billion,
or 157% of 2013 GDP, by December 2013. Had Greek prices not increased

faster than the Eurozone average since the Madrid Summit of 1995, that ratio
would be 198% of GDP, given Greece’s actual real 2013 GDP level. In relative
terms, that sum is about forty times as large as the help the Marshall Plan
provided to Germany after the war which, aggregated over the years, amounted
to a credit equal to 5.2% of Germany’s GDP for 1952.52 In addition, Greece has
benefited from an open haircut on public debt at the expense of private foreign
investors of around € 65 billion, or 36% of its 2013 GDP (€ 105 billion including
domestic investors). The implicit haircut represented by interest relief at the
expense of other states, furthermore, benefited Greece to the tune of € 43 billion,
or 24% of its 2013 GDP. A further € 32 billion in rescue credit, equivalent to
18% of Greece’s 2013 GDP, has already been earmarked for the country and
will be disbursed if Athens satisfies the Troika conditions. All of this has merely
kept the patient alive, but has obviously not been able to cure it. Greek
unemployment rates in 2013 were more than twice as high as those prevailing in
May 2010, when the official rescue operations for Greece began. It is time to
reconsider the therapy.
The only option that offers a faster way to regain competitiveness without
riots and strife is an exit followed by devaluation of the new currency. On the
basis of data made available by Reinhart and Rogoff, the Ifo Institute arrived at
the conclusion, after studying 71 currency crises, that the current account
balance of the countries that devalued their currency improved quite markedly
within one or two years of devaluation, with their GDP rallying as well.53 By the
third year, their export growth already typically lay about two percentage points
above the trend.
Three case studies conducted by the Ifo Institute, addressing the Argentine
devaluation of 2002, its Thai counterpart of 1997, and the Italian devaluation of
1992, show the quick economic recovery that followed devaluation. In
Argentina, the economy perked up as early as two quarters after devaluation, and
in Thailand the upturn came six quarters later. Even Italy, where the devaluation
process covered a longer period, quickly returned to growth. Indeed, all three
countries had current account surpluses one year after starting their depreciation.
No member country, however, should be pressed into exiting the monetary
union. The decision must be adopted by the corresponding governments and
parliaments. Conversely, it cannot be accepted that countries that do not dare an
exit, or that rule it out altogether, can assume as a matter of course that they will
continue to be financed by other countries. Membership in the Eurozone does
not include the right to be propped up with transfers from abroad when a country
loses its competitiveness. The legal conditions for membership were laid out

very clearly by the Maastricht Treaty.
Letting distressed countries remain members of the Eurozone on permanent
life support does not really help them. While it protects the rich, who own
government bonds and other assets, against wealth losses, and helps the
government to finance its expenditure, the ordinary population gains very little
from this strategy. The jobless young, in particular, stand to suffer from such a
policy. If young people cannot enter the labour force and learn a trade, this will
have strong negative implications for their entire life. One generation of Greeks
and Spaniards may be lost by the countries’ desperate attempt to stay in the
Eurozone.
In view of the catastrophic situation that the euro has brought about in some
countries and which drags on despite support from the community of nations, the
question arises as to how much longer the respective populations of the countries
affected can bear to follow this course. How long will the populations of Spain
and Greece be willing to accept the bitter reality that one in two youths not in
education is unemployed—one more year, two or three? Nobody knows. Tough
political decisions must be made. Ultimately, no parliament will be able to avoid
having to choose between radical social reforms that include wage cuts and an
exit from the Eurozone.
If a country does decide to exit, the community of nations should make every
attempt to ensure that this is an orderly process. It should support the process by
helping to lessen the social burdens resulting from the recapitalization of banks,
using debt-equity swaps. Moreover, an emergency programme with community
funds should be instituted to secure basic services and energy provision to
compensate for the expected increase in import prices.
Most of all, the stigma of a permanent separation should be removed. This can
be accomplished by setting up a breathing currency union that recognizes the
status of an associated member possessing a return option.54 The associated
member would have the advantage that it could adjust its exchange rate quickly
to restore competitiveness, without having to fight for years with the unions and
other interest groups, sparing itself the attendant economic malaise and massive
unemployment that could bring the entire country to the brink of collapse.
An existing arrangement, the longstanding European Exchange Rate
Mechanism II, could provide the basis for such a currency ‘association’. ERM II
is the successor to ERM I, to which all EU currencies, with the exception of
those of the new members from eastern Europe, formally belonged from 1979 to
late 1998. It was replaced by ERM II on 1 January 1999, with the introduction of
the euro. Conceived for EU member states that have not yet introduced the euro,
ERM II at present includes Denmark and Lithuania. All countries that have

adopted the euro since 2000 have done so on condition of spending a two-year
period within ERM II without stress, staying within a range of ±15% with
respect to a central rate against the euro. This mechanism could be expanded to
allow it to also harbour, after a transition period, countries that left the Eurozone
and plan to re-enter.
With such rules the Eurozone could become a breathing, open currency union,
something between a currency union of the Bretton Woods type and a firm
conglomerate like the US dollar zone. While the latter might in the end be
desirable, as will be discussed in the last section of this book, the political will to
form a federal state with a power centre that could enforce the rules needed to
avoid the moral hazard problems associated with a common currency does not
yet exist. Given this limitation, Europe needs a currency union that is more
flexible than the dollar, allowing the necessary realignment of relative prices
through exchange rate adjustments, and at the same time more rigid than a
system of separate currencies with fixed exchange rates.
Exits from the euro would, of course, be a source of market irritation and
turmoil. Every economist can spell out the contagion effects this might create.
But the turmoil would be the result of the chaos created precisely by the fact that
no orderly exit path has been defined; wild speculation about what might happen
would trigger capital flight.
In practical terms, this is how an orderly exit could take place. The new
currency would have to be prepared in secret and introduced as the new legal
tender over a weekend, when the banks are closed. All deposits and all contracts
between domestic partners denominated in euros, including wage contracts,
loans, rental contracts, pensions, and even price lists, would be converted
immediately, keeping the numerical values, into the new currency.
Naturally, the new currency will quickly come under devaluation pressure.
The forecasts point to a devaluation for Greece of about a half to two-thirds.55
But the exchange rate will eventually find its equilibrium. Once stable, the
country can formally join the ERM II. The exchange rate may oscillate
thereafter, but only within the specified range. Since the ECB is obliged under
the ERM II to help through interventions, the country will be able to fulfil this
requirement. In addition, it must meet the other normal requirements for
readmission to the monetary union, in particular the posting of sufficiently small
deviations in yields and inflation compared to the Eurozone average, as well as
meeting all indebtedness criteria.
Furthermore, it would be advisable to agree to a reform agenda with the
country in question that would have to be fulfilled before a re-entry is possible.
Nothing will convince the country’s political forces of the necessity of reform

more than the hope of their making possible a return to the euro.
There will, of course, be a host of technical problems. If the planned exit is
leaked ahead of time, there will be bank runs, since depositors will try to
withdraw all their money in order not to be affected by the currency conversion.
In such a case, the conversion must proceed immediately and, if necessary,
capital controls and a limitation of withdrawals from bank accounts have to be
introduced, just as they were in 2013 in Cyprus. However, capital controls would
not be necessary for long, for as soon as the conversion has taken place and the
currency has depreciated, there would be no point in leaving the country, as the
investors’ wealth loss would have already occurred and could not be avoided by
leaving. On the contrary, if the currency depreciation were to overshoot initially,
as many believe it would, it would be attractive to bring funds whisked abroad
back home to buy cheap domestic assets. If Cyprus exited the euro today, it
could remove all of its capital controls tomorrow.
Fortunately, nowadays many if not most payments can be carried out
electronically. Thus, the conversion of bank accounts, which can be carried out
overnight, would achieve a fair amount of the necessary task. Nevertheless, bank
notes are still of great importance to everyday life in most economies, especially
in southern Europe. Their conversion is the most difficult part of the exit.
Basically, there are three options for such a conversion:
The first option would be for the central bank to try to collect all the euro
banknotes and exchange them for the new currency. But since the euro would
continue to operate in the rest of the Eurozone, this option would necessitate
permanent currency management, border controls, and a great deal of
bureaucracy, since everyone would try to hoard euros and bring them out of the
country. These problems mean that this option is not feasible.
The second option would be that all euro banknotes in the entire Eurozone,
except for those of the exiting country, could be exchanged for new banknotes
over a limited period. (Technically, old bank notes could be reused by being
stamped accordingly.) Currency controls would only need to be in place by the
end of the exchange period.
The third option would be to allow the euro as a parallel currency in the
exiting country, in a similar fashion as is currently the case in eastern Europe or
Turkey.56 This would simplify the transition problem enormously. The new
currency would be the only legal tender. All prices, wages, and debt contracts
would be denominated in it, and it would be used for all electronic payment
orders. However, cash transactions could still be conducted in euros, applying
the new exchange rate. In this way, even if it proves infeasible to print all the
necessary new-currency banknotes on time, cash transactions would still be

possible.
One of the advantages of this solution would be that there would be no point
in hoarding euros or even trying to bring them out of the country. Thus, no
border controls and no capital controls like in Cyprus would be necessary. The
danger of capital flight exists only before the conversion, but since this
conversion is only virtual and does not affect the banknotes, it can be carried out
over a weekend.
The new domestic banknotes, once printed, would in time crowd out most of
the circulating euro banknotes, which would be used for purchases outside the
new-currency country. The euros thus spent in the rest of the Eurozone would, in
turn, crowd out the euros created there through refinancing credit and asset
purchases. The economic effects would be very similar to those observed in the
northern euro countries resulting from the extra refinancing credit that leads to
net payment orders and Target debt, as discussed in Chapter 6. Thus, it would be
appropriate to add the banknotes remaining in circulation after a currency
conversion to a country’s Target debt.
Let us consider the case of a Greek exit. In December 2013, the Greek Target
debt amounted to € 50.0 billion, while its monetary base was € 37.9 billion. The
latter included € 25.4 billion in statutory banknotes and € 10.8 billion in over-
proportionate banknote issuance, as measured by Greece’s intra-Eurosystem
liability. If Greece were to exit, with statutory banknotes being exchanged into
drachma, assuming that the rest had already diffused to other countries, the
Greek central bank would have a € 60.8 billion liability vis-à-vis the Eurozone
(= € 50.0 billion + € 10.8 billion). If, on the other hand, Greece were to keep the
statutory euro banknotes, which could be used for purchases in the rest of the
Eurozone after the printing of drachmas, the Greek central bank’s liability would
increase by an additional € 25.4 billion. While this sum is not peanuts, it is small
relative to the Target and intra-Eurosystem liabilities it has already incurred, and
even smaller relative to all the funds lent to Greece so far, including the
intergovernmental, IMF and EU funds which, as summarized in Table 8.1,
amount to € 288 billion. If Greece defaults on its debt, the question of whether or
not it also defaults on its statutory banknote liability is obviously of secondary
importance.
A major issue is its foreign debt, since it is denominated in euros, but that is
not something particular to an exit and an open depreciation. As discussed in
Chapter 4, in terms of foreign debt there is no difference between an internal
depreciation through price and wage cuts and an external depreciation after
introducing a new currency. The increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio would be the
same in either case. And it bears emphasizing once again: as difficult as the debt

situation might appear after such a depreciation, it is the only possible way for
the debtor country to develop a structural current account surplus and to pay
back at least some of its debt. The road back to repaying foreign debt is always
via a depreciation and, therefore, always via an initial rise in the debt ratio.
A plausible way to handle the debt of the exiting country would be to apply
the lex monetae, according to which the country has the right to convert its
foreign debt into domestic currency. While this is more difficult for Greece
today than it was before, given that the haircut of 2012 implied a restructuring of
Greek debt under English law, the new EU rules to be specified for this case
would probably govern these agreements.
There is some concern regarding a surge of inflation after a devaluation that
could wipe out the devaluation effect almost immediately. Some economists
have argued that a depreciation for that reason is no help for the exiting
country.57 This concern would be justified if the depreciation occurred in an
initial situation of competitive goods prices, but such is not the case with the
Eurozone’s distressed countries. These countries, through the inflationary credit
bubble brought about by the euro, actually became too expensive, and are now
stuck in the Eurozone with downward-rigid prices that are far above the
equilibrium prices. Since an open depreciation removes a locking bolt that
prevents prices in euro terms from falling to their equilibrium values, a bouncing
back of the drachma prices nullifying this effect is not to be feared. Open
depreciation would lead to inflation only if this depreciation went too far,
pushing prices below their equilibrium level. However, if there were to be some
inflation of drachma prices correcting this, there still would be a depreciation in
net terms, helping the exiting country’s economy.
Once depreciation and the necessary reforms had been conducted, a return
from the ERM II to full euro membership would be relatively easy, because the
banknote-exchange problem would not occur in the same form. After all, nobody
would want to hide the national currency if it could not be used anywhere else;
instead, those holding national notes would head for the bank to exchange them
for euros. New euros sufficient for serving domestic liquidity needs could
therefore be given to the country without incurring a liability to the Eurosystem.
The possibility of conducting an open devaluation is of crucial importance to
the functioning of the Eurozone. On the one hand, the Eurosystem needs
firepower in order to tackle balance-of-payments problems with fresh liquidity
from the printing press. On the other hand, however, it needs hard budget
constraints and interest spreads commensurate with each member country’s
creditworthiness in order to prevent excessive public and private borrowing and
the emergence of economic bubbles. Both objectives evidently cannot be

mutually reconciled within the Eurozone, as presently structured.
The ECB has denied the dilemma to date by pursuing a corner solution. It has
disregarded the perverse incentives to the real economy and has merely tried to
calm the markets by granting the countries experiencing balance-of-payments
problems credit at ever lower rates of interest and with ever lower-quality
collateral using the printing press, a policy which has subsequently led to
numerous other fiscal and quasi-fiscal rescue operations. The anticipation of this
policy by market investors triggered excessive borrowing in both the private and
the public sectors in the first place, which, in turn, led to a loss of
competitiveness among a significant number of member countries, turning them
into a bottomless pit for the still-solid economies in the currency union.
Pursuing such a one-dimensional policy goal has been a serious policy error,
because in the presence of rival objectives, but lacking separate policy
instruments, a middle way would have been more sensible. This error can only
be corrected if limits are set to financial support and if the possibility of self-help
is opened through a temporary exit accompanied by devaluation. For this reason,
it would be useful if the Eurozone became a more open currency union with an
ordered procedure for temporary exits and subsequent readmission. This is the
only way for the troubled countries to restore their economies to good health,
and arguably the best way for the Eurozone as a whole to overcome its balance-
of-payments crisis.
In addition to the economic advantages, there would be political advantages as
well. No member country would be expelled or have to feel that its chances were
slipping away for good. If the exit option were portrayed as a practical policy
measure, rather than the end of the world, it could be managed and implemented
in such a way so as to be advantageous for almost everyone concerned, with the
possible exception of some financial investors. It would strengthen both
cohesion in Europe and the peaceful coexistence of its peoples.
A building that can only be entered but not exited is a trap. The euro has
turned out to be such a trap for southern European countries. They were lured in
by low interest rates, enjoyed some growth, and then experienced the
inflationary credit bubbles that deprived them of their competitiveness; now they
are having great difficulties in bringing about the necessary real depreciation. A
breathing currency union would open an escape route, providing a space where
the dwellers live in peace with each other.
The Path Towards Unity58

The motto of the United States of America is ‘E pluribus unum’: ‘Out of many,
one’. Europe’s motto is ‘In varietate Concordia’: ‘Harmony in diversity’, which
is officially translated as ‘United in diversity’. It is hard to express the
differences between the US and the European model any more clearly than this.
The USA is a melting pot. Uncountable ethnic groups fused into a homogeneous
American composite. Immigrants arrive and leave their nationality at the border,
and metamorphose into a quintessential American. Europe, on the other hand, is
a mosaic of different peoples and cultures that have developed over the course of
its long, turbulent history, who strive for good neighbourly relations and share
common traditions that range from science to religion. People tend to stay where
they grew up, speak their own language, and cling to their birth place.
These differences raise the question of whether a United States of Europe is
worth striving for. Many refuse to accept this concept because they do not
believe in the possibility of a unified European identity. A single political system
like the USA’s presupposes a common language and a single nationality.
Europe, for that reason, could not be anything but a confederation for the
foreseeable future.59
That view may be too pessimistic, though. After all, in the heart of Europe, the
Swiss Confederation proves that different languages and cultures can live
alongside peacefully and prosperously in a common nation.60 Switzerland grew
from a defence union into a decentralized state with strong cantons and limited
fiscal power allocated to the centre, and of course it also has a common
currency. Like the US, Switzerland is based on the no-bailout principle and has
little redistribution between the regions. Up to this day, a common foreign policy
and a common army are the central pillars of the Confederation.
The achievement of the EU itself should not be downplayed. It has allowed
Europe to overcome its horrible past and has generated a long period of peace
and prosperity that few people after the war would have dared dream of. The
Common Market has brought about a better division of labour, with gains from
trade for everyone. Small countries in particular have profited, as the market
integration helped to overcome the disadvantages of smallness and allowed them
to participate in the economies of large scale formerly reserved for the bigger
countries. The common political system helped to establish the rule of law
everywhere and brought many practical advantages for everyone despite the
cultural diversity. These advantages include the right to move freely across
borders, the free movement of goods and services, legal certainty for cross-
border economic activities, an infrastructure that does not end at national
borders, and, last but not least, common security interests. These advantages

have attained such an overwhelming importance in the lives of many Europeans
that there is no reason to call European integration as such into question.
Incidentally, a good deal of European identity has emerged in the EU, coupled
with respect for mutual cultural achievements, that should not be overlooked.
To be sure, the subsidiarity principle enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty61
states that the economic decisions should be left to the lowest possible level,
ideally even to the individual level. Only in justifiable cases may decisions be
elevated to a collective level, but even then to the lowest possible level in that
category. If the individual is not to decide, then the family; if not the family, the
community; if not the community, the state or province; then the country; and at
the very end, the European institutions. Only close to the grassroots is the
knowledge available that is needed for a proper solution, and only when the
decisions are made at that level is the individual right to freedom guaranteed.
However, there are many justifiable exceptions that call for collective action.
Along with the provision of infrastructure, defence, and basic economic
freedom, there is the regulation of economic activities—after all, there is not
much reason to hope that the competition among regulatory systems will select
the best. More likely, the laxest will prevail.
The field of banking regulation is the most topical example. It was addressed
in Chapter 8 in the section on banking union. If the rules and restrictions that
banks must abide by are set at a national level, but banking risks are partially
pooled by sharing the profits and losses from refinancing credit and asset
purchases in the Eurosystem, the national regulatory bodies and the NCBs will
always have an incentive to establish loose standards and provide generous
credit, thus inducing excessive risk-taking, because the potential benefits accrue
at home, while some of the potential losses fall on other jurisdictions. Regulatory
competition degenerates into a competition in laxity. There are many similar
examples from the fields of norms, taxation or income redistribution policies that
have been examined in the fiscal federalism literature.62 Therefore, many
fundamental considerations speak for a deepening of the European integration
process all the way to the establishment of a European confederation like
Switzerland.
The perils of such a path always lie in the fact that collective decision bodies
not only provide collective services that are useful for everyone, but can also
abuse their power to redistribute resources between the participating countries.
Democratic decision-making bodies are not immune. On the contrary, they make
it possible for minorities to be exploited by the majority. In order to tackle this
problem, special rules are needed to protect the minorities, such as a requirement

for qualified majority or unanimity in decision-making. The fiscal decisions of
the ECB Council discussed in this book represent a particularly dramatic
example of this problem, because they are adopted by simple majority—and in
the case of ELA credit fewer—by a body that is not democratically structured.
This has led to a massive redistribution among the countries of Europe and from
non-involved taxpayers in the still-stable economies to creditors around the
world.
Redistribution can be understood as providing a collective benefit to all
countries if it takes the form of protective insurance. After all, at its core every
type of insurance is a redistribution system that transfers the resources of those
who have been lucky so far to those suffering damages. But for this
interpretation to hold, it is mandatory that the corresponding decision be adopted
behind the veil of ignorance, i.e. before catastrophe strikes and before it is
known who was lucky and who wasn’t.
This is definitely not the case with the current redistribution decisions in the
Eurozone, since they are being adopted after the damages have become apparent.
In addition, such an insurance scheme was explicitly ruled out from the outset, in
the Maastricht Treaty negotiations, by the no-bailout clause (article 125 of the
TFEU).63
The Eurozone’s course towards joint liability—which follows on from the
ECB’s prior decisions to extend generous refinancing credit to banks by
dramatically reducing collateral standards and by deciding to buy government
bonds through its SMP and OMT programmes—does not lead to the
establishment of a federal state in the real sense of the word, i.e. to a union of
equals who by their own will, decide to come together and provide mutual
assistance. Instead it leads, if anywhere at all, to a unitary state that will come
into being through a disregard of the wishes of the population and through the
actions forced upon them by a technocratic body that acts wholly independently
and that predetermines parliaments’ subsequent decisions.
This path cannot lead to the establishment of a United States of Europe
because a large proportion of Europe’s people do not agree to it. Both in the
northwest and the east the largest countries do not want this, and it can be safely
assumed that they will never voluntarily agree to the joint-liability union now in
the making. In Denmark, the enthusiasm for joining has cooled just as much as it
has in Poland, while in the Czech Republic and Sweden the dismissive attitude
towards the Eurosystem has become even stronger. The assertion that the
Eurosystem can lead to the establishment of the United States of Europe is
unconvincing. The road towards a joint-liability union is more likely to lead to
deep divisions in Europe.

That is the problem with the mutualization initiatives of the European
institutions during this crisis. Insurance is demanded without having previously
entered into an insurance contract, because, in denial of the Maastricht Treaty, it
is assumed that the Eurosystem implicitly represents such a contract. In order to
justify the sweeping collectivization measures that are currently being called for,
a unitary political state would have had to have been established, one whose
cohesive power goes even beyond that of the United States or Switzerland, since
these countries rule out the mutualization of state debts.64
Whoever cites Hamilton, and calls for Europe’s still-solid economies to
assume the debts of the crisis-hit countries, must perforce establish a European
federal state with the full consent of its citizens first. At the very least, those
footing the bill today must be able to assume that their children and
grandchildren will be able to count on similar protection from the other member
countries in a hundred years, when they themselves may be in need of support.
Only a unitary state can credibly justify and guarantee such long-term
commitments, ensuring that today’s net recipients of help will not renege on
granting their reciprocal support in future, when the need arises. The constitution
of this state is the insurance contract.65
A federal state needs a common legal system, a common army to protect it
from external threats, and a central power that ensures that the rules and
obligations of the insurance contract are met. It needs a common government, a
parliament built on the one-man-one-vote principle, and a second chamber
representing the individual states. Fiscal equalization and interpersonal transfer
systems can only be established once these conditions have been satisfied,
because only then can they be perceived as mutual insurance. The greater the
redistribution tasks, the higher the system’s centrifugal forces and the stronger
the central power needed to hold everything together. Learning from US and
Swiss experience, debt mutualization should never be part of such a system.
There is absolutely no willingness to create such a federal state in Europe
today. The common legal system and army, which are the first and foremost
perquisites of such a state, will not be forthcoming as long as Europe is not
threatened by external enemies who force it to unite. The French state would not
agree to communitarizing its Force de Frappe. For the foreseeable future, the
EU will remain an alliance of states devoid of a strong central power.
The EU has remained stable without a central power to date because no
significant redistribution between the states has taken place. The entire EU
budget amounts to just 1% of GDP, which was perceived as advantageous all
round, making everyone happy to go along with it. This seems to have been

forgotten by many of those who advocate a transfer union without first founding
a national state.
Those who advocate redistribution through the introduction of a fiscal union
should be warned by the fate of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union needed
force to ensure cohesion despite the redistribution, but, as history has shown, this
force contained the seeds of its own destruction. The Soviet Union was no fair
mutual insurance system, whereby each state could bank on enjoying transfers
from other states at some point.66
The USA and Switzerland, and not the Soviet Union, should be regarded as
models for Europe. The USA has spent over 200 years developing its present
system, Switzerland over 500. After their difficult initial years, they have
evolved into fair, functional systems that largely respect fundamental freedoms,
dispense with a debt union, and therefore function without an excessively strict
central authority.
Whoever wishes to develop the Eurozone into a transfer and debt union that is
even in a position to prevent state insolvencies should know that this will require
much more central power than is available in the USA or Switzerland. Under
such a system there would not be much room for freedom and the free will of the
federal states. In the USA and Switzerland, the central governments cannot
effectively limit the budgets of individual states or cantons. Instead, the regional
bodies are left to settle up with their creditors alone if they have overcommitted
themselves, and are ultimately left to declare insolvency. As paradoxical as this
may sound, the risk of insolvency in fact is the stabilizing principle that holds
everything together, because it invokes sufficient debt discipline to avoid
insolvency in the first place, or to keep the debt small enough to make it
manageable should an insolvency nevertheless occur. If regional entities borrow
too much, investors will ask for higher interest rates, putting a brake on further
borrowing and avoiding the kind of inflationary credit bubble that wrecked the
southern European and Irish economies. Without such a self-correcting
mechanism to prevent excessive capital flows, the currency union will never be
able to stabilize itself. Political agreements among independent states will not be
able to exert a similar kind of discipline as markets are able to enforce. It is
utopian to believe that opportunistic, abusive behaviour in a debt union can be
avoided by establishing a mere fiscal union.
Those wishing to start the formation of a European central state with a transfer
and debt union that is only limited by a fiscal compact are playing a dangerous
game. This path conjures up the threat of major conflicts and brings peril, which
is anything but a contribution to peaceful coexistence. It turns friendly neighbour
nations into debtors and creditors. The conflict between debtors and creditors,

which heretofore has always been solved in Europe at the private level using
legal means, would be elevated to the level of states. This path does not lead to
the wished-for United States of Europe, but to chaos, and brings enduring
discredit to the European ideal. It would jeopardize the cooperation and
integration achieved so far in Europe. The better Europeans are not the
romantics, but those who seek realistic solutions that accord with the free will of
the people, the laws of economics, and the free decisions of parliaments, without
the latter being predetermined by technocratic bodies overstretching their
mandate, and solutions that can be applied without a forced redistribution of
wealth.
During its first few decades, the USA committed a number of dangerous
errors that Europe would do well to avoid. Anybody who wants a United States
of Europe should seek to replicate the economic principles of the United States
of America as they are today, and not to repeat the errors of the past. Europeans
should waste no time in setting off along this path.
1 See W. Churchill, Speech at the University of Zurich, 19 September 1946, Council of Europe, available
at: < http://aei.pitt.edu/14362/1/S2-1.pdf>, and I. Traynor, ‘Crisis for Europe as Trust Hits Record Low’,
The Guardian, 24 April 2013, available at: < http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/24/trust-eu-falls-
record-low>.
2 Some are presented by W. R. Cline, ‘Alternative Strategies for Resolving the European Debt Crisis’, in
W. R. Cline and G. B. Wolff (eds), Special Report 21: Resolving the European Debt Crisis, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Bruegel, Washington 2012, pp. 197–234; by G. B. Wolff, ‘The Euro
Area Crisis: Policy Options Ahead’, in W. R. Cline and G. B. Wolff (eds), Special Report 21: Resolving the
European Debt Crisis, 2012, pp. 235–252; or by H. Uhlig, Exiting the Eurozone Crisis, Presentation Given
at 
the 
Advantage 
Financial 
Conference 
in 
Milan, 
13 
May 
2013, 
available 
at:
<http://home.uchicago.edu/~huhlig/papers/uhlig.milan.2013.pdf>.
3 E. C. Prescott, The Transformation of Macroeconomic Policy and Research, Nobel Prize Lecture
delivered 
at 
Stockholm 
University, 
8 
December 
2004, 
p. 
374, 
available 
at:
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2004/prescott-lecture.pdf>; see also
F. E. Kydland and E. C. Prescott, ‘Rules rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans’,
Journal of Political Economy 85, 1977, pp. 473–492.
4 A. Hamilton, J. Jay, and J. Madison, The Federalist: A Commentary on the Constitution of the United
States, in J. and A. McLean (eds), The Federalist: A Collection of Essays Written in Favour of the New
Constitution, New York 1788, reprinted in The Modern Library, New York 2001.
5 R. E. Wright, ‘Cementing the Union’, Financial History, Spring 2008, pp.14–18, in particular p. 15.
6 German Council of Economic Experts, Stable Architecture for Europe—Need for Action in Germany,
Annual Report 2012/2013, pp. 111–113.
7 See EU, ‘Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)’, Official Journal of the European

Union 
C 
115/47, 
9 
May 
2008, 
article 
125, 
available 
at: 
<http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2008:115:0058:0199:en:PDF>.
8 See J. Rodden, Hamilton’s Paradox: The Promise and Peril of Fiscal Federalism, Cambridge
University Press, New York 2006; T. Sargent, United States Then, Europe Now, Nobel Prize Lecture
delivered 
at 
Stockholm 
University, 
8 
December 
2011, 
available 
as 
video: 
available 
at:
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2011/sargent-lecture.html>; 
H.
James, ‘Lessons for the Euro from History’, Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance, 19
April 
2012, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.princeton.edu/jrc/events_archive/repository/inaugural-
conference/Harold_James.pdf>; H. James, ‘Alexander Hamilton’s Eurozone Tour’, Project Syndicate, 5
March 2012, available at: <http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/alexander-hamilton-s-eurozone-
tour>; EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European Economy: Rebalancing Europe, CESifo, Munich 2013,
chapter 
4: 
US 
Precedents 
for 
Europe, 
pp. 
95–107, 
available 
at: 
<https://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/EEAG-2013.pdf>.
9 See B. U. Ratchford, American State Debts, Duke University Press, Durham 1941, in particular p. 74f.
10 J. Rodden, Hamilton’s Paradox, 2006, in particular chapter 8; and A. Markiewicz, M. D. Bordo, and
L. Jonung, ‘A Fiscal Union for the Euro: Some Lessons from History’, CESifo Delphi Conference, Hydra,
23–24 September 2012, NBER Working Paper No. 17380, September 2011.
11 B. U. Ratchford, American State Debts, 1941, p. 89.
12 B. U. Ratchford, American State Debts, 1941, p. 80.
13 B. U. Ratchford, American State Debts, 1941, p. 85, in particular footnote 22.
14 B. U. Ratchford, American State Debts, 1941, pp. 98–100; see also A. Grinath, J. J. Wallis, and R. E.
Sylla, ‘Debt, Default and Revenue Structure: The American State Debt Crisis in the Early 1840s’, NBER
Working Paper No. 97, March 1997.
15 See A. Grinath, J. J. Wallis, and R. E. Sylla, ‘Debt, Default and Revenue Structure: The American
State Debt Crisis in the Early 1840s’, March 1997; and W. B. English, ‘Understanding the Costs of
Sovereign Default: American State Debts in the 1840’s’, American Economic Review 86, 1996, pp. 259–
275.
16 H. James, ‘Lessons for the Euro from History’, 19 April 2012; see also EEAG, The EEAG Report of
the European Economy: Rebalancing Europe, 2013.
17 See A. Grinath, J. J. Wallis, and R. E. Sylla, ‘Debt, Default and Revenue Structure: The American
State Debt Crisis in the Early 1840s’, March 1997; see also J. von Hagen, ‘Monetäre, fiskalische und
politische Integration: Das Beispiel der USA’, Bankhistorisches Archiv Beiheft 30, 1996, pp. 35–51; J. von
Hagen, ‘Monetary Union and Fiscal Union: A Perspective from Fiscal Federalism’, in P. R. Masson and M.
P. Taylor (eds), Policy Issues in the Operation of Currency Unions, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 1993, pp. 264–296.
18 For Minnesota, see K. Dolak, ‘Minnesota Government Shuts Down Amid Debt Fallout’, abcNews, 1
July 2012; and for Illinois, see State Budget Crisis Task Force, Report of the State Budget Crisis Task
Force. Illinois Report, October 2012, available at: <http://www.statebudgetcrisis.org/wpcms/wp-
content/images/2012-10-12-Illinois-Report-Final-2.pdf>.
19 See K. Dolak, ‘Minnesota Government Shuts Down Amid Debt Fallout’, 1 July 2012.

20 See also J. Erbentraut, ‘Quinn to Announce Thousands of Layoffs, Facility Closures’, Huffington
Post, 6 September 2011, available at: <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/09/06/quinn-to-announce-
thousan_n_950654.html>.
21 See also C. Chantrill, ‘Comparison of State and Local Government Spending in the United States.
Fiscal 
Year 
2013’, 
US 
Government 
Spending, 
available 
at:
<http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/compare_state_spending_2013pH0D>.
22 F. Van Riper, ‘Ford to New York: Drop Dead. Vows He’ll Veto BailOut in Speech Attacking City’,
Daily News, 30 October 1975.
23 New York City tax revenue was declared state tax revenue for this purpose, and it was transferred to a
special-purpose organization, the Municipal Assistance Corporation (MAC) as collateral for the emission of
securities to provide financing for the city. See L. Capodilupo, ‘Municipal Assistance Corporation for the
City of New York (MAC)’, William and Anita Newman Library and Baruch College, City University of
New 
York, 
April 
2002, 
available 
at:
<http://newman.baruch.cuny.edu/digital/2003/amfl/mac/mac_finding_aid_index.htm> and R. Dunstan,
‘Overview of New York City’s Fiscal Crisis’, California Research Bureau Note 3, No. 1, 1 March 1995, p.
4, available at: <http://www.library.ca.gov/crb/95/notes/V3N1.PDF>.
24 T. Barghini and C. Parsons, ‘Factbox: Recent U.S. Municipal Bankruptcies’, Reuters, 18 July 2013,
available 
at: 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/18/us-usa-detroit-cities-factbox-
idUSBRE96H1BR20130718>.
25 M. De Angelis and X. Tian, ‘United States: Chapter 9 Municipal Bankruptcy—Utilization, Avoidance
and Impact’, in O. Canuto and L. Liu (eds), Until Debt Do Part Us: Subnational Debt, Insolvency and
Markets, World Bank Publications, Washington 2013, pp. 311–351, especially p. 312.
26 American Bankruptcy Institute, Statistics from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, Chapter
9 Filings (1980-Current), available at: <http://news.abi.org/statistics>; and United States Courts, Statistics,
Bankruptcy Statistics, 2013 Bankruptcy Filings, Filings by Chapter and Nature of Debt, by District (table F-
2), available at: <http://www.uscourts.gov/Statistics/BankruptcyStatistics/2013-bankruptcy-filings.aspx>.
27 M. Dolan, ‘Record Bankruptcy for Detroit’, Wall Street Journal, 19 July 2013, available at:
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323993804578614144173709204.html>.
28 J. Kornai, ‘“Hard” and “Soft” Budget Constraint’, Acta Oeconomica 25, 1980, pp. 231–246.
29 H. Schlesinger, ‘Die Zahlungsbilanz sagt es uns’, ifo Schnelldienst 64, No. 16, 31 August 2011, pp. 9–
11, in particular p. 11; and for the English version, ‘The Balance of Payments Tells us the Truth’ in H.-W.
Sinn (ed.), The European Balance of Payments Crisis, CESifo Forum 13, Special Issue, January 2012, pp.
11–13, in particular p. 13.
30 EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European Economy: The Euro Crisis, CESifo, Munich 2012,
Chapter 2: The European Balance-of-Payments Problem, in particular pp. 75–79, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/EEAG-2012.pdf>.
31 See M. Feldstein, ‘Dos and Don’ts for the European Central Bank’, Project Syndicate, 29 July 2012,
available 
at: 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/dos-and-don-ts-for-the-european-central-
bank>.
32 E. D. Domar, ‘The “Burden of the Debt” and the National Income’, American Economic Review 34,

1944, pp. 798–827.
33 International Monetary Fund, ‘Greece: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2010
Stand-By Arrangement’, IMF Country Report No. 13/156, June 2013, in particular pp. 2, 21 and 33,
available at: <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13156.pdf>; see also K. Schrader, D. Bencek
and C.-F. Laaser, ‘IfW-Krisencheck: Alles wieder gut in Griechenland?’, Kieler Diskussionsbeiträge No.
522/523, June 2013, in particular figure 17, p. 31.
34 H. Pill, K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and A.
Paul, Goldman Sachs Global Economics, ‘Achieving Fiscal and External Balance (Part 1): The Price
Adjustment Required for External Sustainability’, European Economics Analyst No. 12/01, 15 March 2012;
H. Pill, K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot, and S. Graves,
Goldman Sachs Global Economics, ‘External Rebalancing: Progress, but a Sizeable Challenge Remains’,
European Economics Analyst No. 13/03, 17 January 2013.
35 The percentages shown in Table 9.2 are partly included in the public debt figures of Table 9.1.
However, the credit provided to national central banks for distribution to commercial banks, which resulted
in Target debt and the debt from an over-proportionate banknote issuance, is not included. This credit
established a liability of the respective national central bank and is therefore a sovereign debt. While not
included in the official public debt figures, the Target debt (though not the banknote debt) is included in a
country’s official net foreign asset position (see Chapter 6).
36 See Section The Liability Risk.
37 U. S. Das, M. G. Papaioannou, and C. Trebesch, ‘Sovereign Debt Restructurings 1950–2010:
Literature Survey, Data, and Stylized Facts’, IMF Working Paper No. 203, August 2012. For an overview
of sovereign defaults over the centuries, see E. Streissler, ‘Honi soit qui mal y pense?’, Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, August 2011. Explicit lessons for the Euro Area from the numerous restructurings in the
emerging market countries are drawn in J. Zettelmeyer, ‘How to Do a Sovereign Debt Restructuring in the
Euro Area: Lessons from Emerging-Market Debt Crisis’, in W. R. Cline and G. B. Wolff (eds), Special
Report 21: Resolving the European Debt Crisis, 2012, pp. 165–186. The legal details of a sovereign debt
restructuring are covered in many articles by L. Buchheit. See for example L. Buchheit, ‘Sovereign Debt
Restructuring: The Legal Context’, in W. R. Cline and G. B. Wolff (eds), Special Report 21: Resolving the
European Debt Crisis, 2012, pp. 187–196.
38 See U. S. Das, M. G. Papaioannou, and C. Trebesch, ‘Sovereign Debt Restructurings 1950–2010’,
2012, appendix.
39 This proposal was made in H.-W. Sinn in his article, ‘Rescuing Europe from the Ground Up’, Project
Syndicate, 21 December 2013, available at: <www.ifo.de/rescuing_europe/w/SvTE7mC2>. See also T.
Beck and C. Trebesch, ‘A Bank Restructuring Agency for the Eurozone – Cleaning Up the Legacy Losses’
VoxEU, 18 November 2013, available at: <http://www.voxeu.org/article/eurozone-bank-restructuring-
agency>. In the early stages of the crisis it had seemed that a gradual process of moving from liquidity help
to piecemeal debt restructuring through maturity extensions would be effective, being expected to create
proper incentives for governments to stop borrowing. See EEAG, The EEAG Report of the European
Economy, CESifo, Munich 2011, chapter 2: A New Crisis Mechanism for the Euro Area, pp. 71–96. Time
has moved beyond this proposal. Today, a more radical reset approach seems advisable.
40 J. Zettelmeyer, C. Trebesch and M. Gulati, ‘The Greek Debt Restructuring: An Autopsy’, CESifo
Working Paper No. 4333, available at: <http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/cesifo-wp4333.pdf>.
41 See European Banking Authority, EU-wide Transparency Exercise 2013 Summary Report, available

at: 
<http://stress-test.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/526027/ 
20131216_EU-
wide+Transparency+Summary+Report.pdf >, p. 13, and EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European
Economy: The Road Towards Cohesion, CESifo, Munich 2014, available at: <http://www.cesifo-
group.de/DocDL/EEAG-2014.pdf>, chapter 4: Banking Union: Who Should Take Charge?, Figure 4.1, p.
93.
42 See International Monetary Fund, Greece: Second Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement,
December 2010, p. 52.
43 See European Commission, The Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece: Fourth Review, Spring
2011, p. 94.
44 See European Commission, The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece: Third Review,
July 2013, p. 26.
45 A similar proposal has been made by W. F. Richter, ‘Zwangsanleihen—Ein Beitrag zur
Konsolidierung’, 
Handelsblatt, 
25 
November 
2011, 
available 
at: 
<http://www.wiso.tu-
dortmund.de/wiso/of/Medienpool/veroeffentlichungen_richter/WR_Veoeffentlichungen_Stand_Oktober_09/
46 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Economic Outlook No. 91, 2012,
Statistical Annex, table 58; see ‘Berlusconi: “Non facciamoci del male” / E sulla crisi: “Noi, i più ricchi
d’Europa”’ [‘We, the richest in Europe’], La Repubblica, 20 June 2010, available at:
<http://www.repubblica.it/politica/2010/06/20/news/berlusconi-popolarita-4996320/>.
47 A. Prinz and H. Beck, ‘In the Shadow of Public Debt: Are there Relations between Public Debt and
the Shadow Economy?’, Economic Analysis & Policy 42, 2012, pp. 221–236.
48 It has been argued though that the policy was not as loose as it seemed, as the low interest rate was not
accompanied by a large growth in monetary aggregates. See M. Friedman, ‘Reviving Japan’, Hoover Digest
2, 30 April 1998, available at: <http://www.hoover.org/publications/hoover-digest/article/6549>; A. H.
Meltzer, ‘Time for Japan to Print Money’, American Enterprise Institute Online, 17 July 1998, available at:
<http://www.aei.org/issue/foreign-and-defense-policy/regional/asia/time-for- japan-to-print-money/>; D.
Laidler, ‘Monetary Policy after Bubbles Burst: The Zero Lower Bound, the Liquidity Trap and the Credit
Deadlock’, Canadian Public Policy 30 (3), September 2004, pp. 333–340.
49 See A. Hansen, Full Recovery or Stagnation, Norton, New York 1938. A. C. Pigou, Employment and
Equilibrium: A Theoretical Discussion, Macmillan, London 1941. D. Patinkin, Money, Interest, and Prices:
An Integration of Monetary and Value Theory, University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1956.
50 Se also A. Hughes-Hallett and J. C. Martínez Oliva, ‘The Importance of Trade and Capital Imbalances
in the European Debt Crisis’, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 13-01,
January 2013.
51 H.-W. Sinn and F. Westermann, ‘Due “Mezzogiorni”’, L’industria 27, 2006, pp. 49–51, and H.-W.
Sinn and G. Sinn, Jumpstart. The Economic Unification of Germany, MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass., and
London, England 1992.
52 H. Berger and A. Ritschl, ‘Die Rekonstruktion der Arbeitsteilung in Europa. Eine neue Sicht des
Marshall-Plans in Deutschland 1947–1951’, Vierteljahreshefte für Zeitgeschichte 43, 1995, pp. 473–519,
table p. 479. Germany, in turn, was granted debt relief in the London Debt Agreement of 1953 of 30 billion
deutschmarks (including forgiving the Marshall Plan credit), which was 22% of West German GDP for
1952. See C. Buchheim, ‘Das Londoner Schuldenabkommen’, in L. Herbst (ed), Westdeutschland 1945–

1955. Unterwerfung, Kontrolle, Integration, Oldenbourg, Munich 1986, pp. 219–229.
53 B. Born, T. Buchen, K. Carstensen, C. Grimme, M. Kleemann, K. Wohlrabe, and T. Wollmershäuser,
Austritt 
Griechenlands 
aus 
der 
Europäischen 
Währungsunion: 
historische 
Erfahrungen,
makroökonomische Konsequenzen und organisatorische Umsetzung, Ifo Institute, Munich 2012; C.
Reinhart, ‘This Time is Different Chartbook: Country Histories on Debt, Default, and Financial Crises’,
NBER Working Paper No. 15815, 2010; and C. Reinhart and K. S. Rogoff, This Time is Different: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press, Princeton 2009.
54 These passages are based on H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die offene Währungsunion’, Wirtschaftswoche, No. 29, 16
July 2012, p. 39, available at: <http://www.ifo.de/de/Sinn_WiWo_2012/w/4FAADYipx>; H.-W. Sinn and
F. L. Sell, ‘Der neue Euro-Club’, Süddeutsche Zeitung, No. 169, 24 July 2012, p. 19, available at:
<http://www.ifo.de/de/Sinn_Sell_SZ_2012/w/3qGgteRuJ>; and H.-W. Sinn and F. L. Sell, ‘Our Opt-in
Opt-out 
Solution 
for 
the 
Euro’, 
Financial 
Times, 
31 
July 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/b2c75538-da35-11e1-b03b-00144feab49a.html#axzz25VFxZZXs>. 
A
similar proposal was made in 2010 by Martin Feldstein. See M. Feldstein, ‘Let Greece Take a Eurozone
“Holiday”’, Financial Times, 16 February 2010, available at: <http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/72214942-
1b30-11df-953f-00144feab49a.html#axzz25VFxZZXs>.
55 Citi Research, Global Economic Outlook and Strategy, 25 July 2012, p. 7, available at:
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/brokeragesreport/WJWC3Wprr48>; 
M. 
Voss, 
‘Citigroup
erwartet Griechenlands Euro-Austritt zum 1. Januar 2013’, Focus, 26 July 2012, available at:
<http://www.focus.de/finanzen/news/staatsverschuldung/90-prozent-wahrscheinlichkeit-fuer-grexit-
citigroup-erwartet-griechen-austritt-am-1-januar-2013_aid_787927.html>; and D. Eckert, ‘Was passiert,
wenn 
die 
Troika 
den 
Stecker 
zieht’, 
Die 
Welt, 
27 
July 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.welt.de/finanzen/article108401579/Was-passiert-wenn-die-Troika-den-Stecker-zieht.html>.
56 There are numerous other proposals for parallel currencies. For example, the proposal to allow
payment of all invoices in both the old and the new currency: B. Lucke and M. J. M. Neumann, ‘Drachme
als 
zweite 
Landeswährung 
einführen’, 
Handelsblatt, 
21 
May 
2012, 
available 
at:
<http://www.handelsblatt.com/meinung/gastbeitraege/gastbeitrag-drachme-als-zweite-landeswaehrung-
einfuehren/6656530.html>; and T. Mayer, ‘Der Geuro’, DB Research, 23 May 2012, available at:
<http://www.dbresearch.de/PROD/DBR_INTERNET_DE-PROD/PROD0000000000288868.pdf>. Another
example is the Matheo solution, according to which all Eurozone countries have a currency parallel to the
euro in which domestic debt contracts and prices are denominated. See A. ten Dam, ‘“The Matheo Solution
(TMS)” kann den Euro retten’, ifo Schnelldienst 64, No. 23, 9 December 2011, pp. 22–25, available at:
<http://www.cesifo-group.de/DocDL/ifosd_2011_23_2.pdf>.
57 See B. Eichengreen, ‘The Euro: Love it or Leave it?’, VoxEU, 4 May 2010, available at:
<http://www.voxeu.org/article/eurozone-breakup-would-trigger-mother-all-financial-crises>; M. Jacobides,
‘Greece could become “the North Korea of Europe”’, London Business School News, 16 May 2012,
available 
at:
<http://www.london.edu/newsandevents/news/2012/05/Greece_could_become_%E2%80%9Cthe_North_Ko
58 This text contains passages, with the authorization of the publisher, from: H.-W. Sinn, ‘Die
europäische Fiskalunion’, Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 13, 2012, pp. 137–178.
59 J. Limbach, ‘Es gibt keine europäische Identität’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 26 August 2012,
available at: <http://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/debatten/europas-zukunft/jutta-limbach-ueber-europas-
zukunft-es-gibt-keine-europaeische-identitaet-11868798.html>; R. Herzog, ‘Die dürfen nur nicken’,
Interview by T. Hildebrandt and H. Wefing, Die Zeit, 25 September 2011, available at:

<http://www.zeit.de/2011/39/Interview-Herzog/seite-2>; and R. Brüderle, ‘BRÜDERLE-Interview für die
Rheinische Post’, Interview by M. Bröcker, Rheinische Post, 4 July 2012, available at:
<http://www.liberale.de/content/bruederle-interview-fuer-die-rheinische-post-7>.
60 EEAG, The EEAG Report on the European Economy: The Road Towards Cohesion, Munich 2014,
chapter 2: Switzerland: Relic of the Past, Model for the Future?.
61 See EU, ‘Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)’, 9 May 2008, article 5.
62 See H.-W. Sinn, The New Systems Competition, Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, Basil Blackwell, Oxford
2003.
63 See EU, ‘Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)’, 9 May 2008, article 125.
64 Compared to other integrated economic areas, the Eurozone was designed as a confederation with
little collective risk sharing and almost no delegation of sovereignty. Through the rescue measures it moved
in the direction of collective risk sharing without increasing the delegation of sovereignty, leaving the path
of stable degrees of integration because of the missing implementation of strong fiscal contracts and rules,
as described in H. Berger, ‘Die Logik der Währungsunion’, in K. Konrad, R. Schön, M. Thum, and A.
Weichenrieder (eds), Die Zukunft der Wohlfahrtsgesellschaft—Festschrift für Hans-Werner Sinn, Campus,
Frankfurt 2013, pp. 57–76.
65 An early proposal for such a constitution was made by A. Spinelli and E. Rossi, The Ventotene
Manifesto. For a Free and United Europe, Milan 1943. For a more recent, explicit and restrictive draft of
such a constitution, based on the EU’s current decision-making structures, see European Constitutional
Group, 
A 
Proposal 
for 
a 
Revised 
Constitutional 
Treaty, 
April 
2006, 
available 
at:
<http://www.freiheit.org/files/600/A_Proposal_for_a_Revised_Constitutional_Treaty_10.04.06.pdf>.
66 See also F. Heisbourg, ‘EU arbeitet hart daran zu verschwinden’, Interview, Der Standard, 17 April
2012.

NAME INDEX
Amato, Giuliano 60
Anastasiades, Nicos 173–174
Aramburu Cilveti, Pedro E. 337
Auerbach, Alan J. i, 361
Baltensperger, Ernst i
Barnier, Michel 302
Barroso, José M. 83
Berlusconi, Silvio 3, 60, 111, 226, 229, 342
Bernholz, Peter i
Bhagwati, Jagdish N. i, 361
Bitterlich, Joachim 32
Blanchard, Olivier 251
Blessing, Karl 240
Bolkestein, Frits 1
Breyer, Friedrich i
Bröcker, Michael 354
Brüderle, Rainer 354
Brüning, Heinrich 138
Buffet, Warren 160
Bush, George H. W. 28
Cameron, David 8
Chirac, Jacques 28, 30
Churchill, Winston 137
Chrysochoidis, Michalis 130
Chrysoloras, Nikos 302
Coeuré, Benoît 296
Costa, Cordalis 30
Dahrendorf, Ralph 22
D’Alema, Massimo 60
Darnstädt, Thomas 22
de Gaulle, Charles 240
Demetriades, Panicos 173
Dessloch, Hubertus 29
Diekmann, Kai 83
Dijsselbloem, Jeroen 302
Dini, Lamberto 58–60
Draghi, Mario 34, 154, 166, 173, 201, 295
Dunz, Kristina 15
Ehlers, Fiona 16
Emerson, Michael 10

Ford, Gerald R. 326
Friedman, Milton 343
Gauck, Joachim 45, 269, 290
Gaugele, Jochen 293, 318
Giscard d’Estaing, Valéry 26
Gorbachev, Mikhail 28
Grillo, Beppe 3, 17
Hamilton, Alexander 321, 323, 327, 357
Haughey, Charles J. 15
Haveman, Robert ii, 361
Heisbourg, François 358
Herzog, Roman 354
Hildebrandt, Tina 354
Hitler, Adolf 18, 138
Hoeren, Dirk 83
Homburg, Stefan ii
Howitt, Peter W. ii, 361
Hoyng, Hans 16
Hume, David 242
Issing, Ottmar ii, 7, 361
Juncker, Jean-Claude 2, 7, 16
Jungholt, Thorsten 293, 318
Kaiser, Stefan 18
Kashyap, Anil K. ii, 361
Katsanevas, Theoduros 3
Keynes, John M. 138, 343
Kirchhof, Ferdinand 293, 318
Kohl, Helmut 29–32, 273–274
Köhler, Horst 273
Kubilius, Andrius 132
Lagarde, Christine 21, 100, 273
Laidler, David ii, 361
Le Pen, Marie 3, 17
Leick, Romain 22
Letta, Enrico 60, 230
Lindsay, John 325
Lucke, Bernd 3, 17
Malzahn, Claus C. 293, 318
Martens, Michael 130
Martin Jr., William M. 240
Mayer, Thomas 177
Meltzer, Allan H. iii, 361
Merkel, Angela 3, 15, 18, 23, 97

Mitterrand, François 29–30
Monti, Mario 16, 17, 18, 60, 229–230
Müller von Blumencron, Mathias 18
Nathe, Hartwig 28
Neumann, Manfred J. M. iii, 361
Nordhaus, Wiliam D. iii, 362
Obama, Barack 267
Oschwald, Hanspeter 28
Prodi, Romano 60
Renzi, Matteo 3, 60, 230
Rogoff, Kenneth S. iii, 361
Ronaldo, Cristiano 160
Ruhkamp, Stefan 201
Schaaf, Jürgen 262
Schirrmacher, Frank iii, 362
Schlesinger, Helmut iv, 177, 194
Schmidt, Helmut 26
Schmitz, Gregor P. 18
Schoenholtz, Kim 10
Schröder, Gerhard 56, 89, 97, 123
Sinn, Hans-Werner 135, 177, 238, 244
Solow, Robert M. iv, 362
Soros, George 18, 19
Stark, Jürgen 32, 166, 262, 273
Steltzner, Holger 201
Streissler, Erich W. iv
Tietmeyer, Hans 22
Trentin, Alexander 244
Trichet, Jean-Claude 24, 225, 262, 267
Tsipras, Alexis 3
Uhlig, Harald iv
Waigel, Theo 32–33
Weber, Axel 166, 262, 273
Weber-Lamberdière, Manfred 28
Wefing, Heinrich 354
Weidmann, Jens 166, 178–179
Wilders, Geert 3
Wollmershäuser, Timo 177, 238

SUBJECT INDEX
2+4 negotiations 29
ABS; see asset-backed securities
ACC; see Additional Credit Claims Framework
Activating Social Assistance 88, 96; see also labor market reform
Additional Credit Claims Framework (ACC) 155, 163; see also collateral
AfD; see Alternative für Deutschland
age pyramid 285; see also population trend
Agenda 2010 57, 82, 89, 96, 102, 123; see also labor market reform
agricultural products 127
Alabama 323
Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) 3
Anglo Irish Bank 58, 174
Argentina 322, 337–338, 346
devaluation 346
Arkansas 323
asset-backed securities (ABS) 92, 155–156, 158–160, 162–163, 245, 314
retail mortgage-backed securities 164
Audi 134
austerity 3–4, 14, 16–19, 21, 78, 105–106, 117, 125, 129–132, 138, 140, 226, 229, 253, 255, 324, 344
Austria 14, 36, 43, 56, 62, 72, 87, 90, 113, 116, 185, 191–192, 276, 333–334, 337
baby boomers 104, 286, 315
backstop 145, 305–306, 310, 340; see also European Stability Mechanism
bail-in 257, 285, 294, 297–298, 302–306, 309–310, 340–341
exemptions 340–341; see also banking union
bailout 4, 6–7, 19–21, 29, 35, 57, 74–76, 94, 172, 175, 177, 181, 187, 205, 208, 210, 247, 252–254, 257–
260, 262, 273, 287, 291–292, 294, 297, 302, 305, 320–321, 324–325, 340, 354, 356
no bailout clause 6, 19–21, 75–76, 258, 273, 287, 320–321, 356; see also Maastricht Treaty
balance of payments 39–40, 62, 68, 88, 91, 101, 108–109, 121, 146, 176–179, 181, 183–189, 191–199, 201,
203, 205, 207, 209, 213, 215–216, 221, 232, 235, 239–240, 242–244, 246, 251, 270, 329–330, 352
equilibrium 183–184
Balassa-Samuelson effect 114, 119, 121
Baltics 105, 130–131, 133–134, 140
Banca d’Italia 164
Banco de España 67, 188, 193, 200, 229, 235
Banco de Valencia 58
Banco Espirito Santo 94
Banco Financiere y de Ahorros (BFA) 58
bank:
bad 57–58, 165, 174
French 21, 93–94, 162, 184, 230–232, 274
German 21, 89, 93–94, 98, 146, 187, 231, 233
recapitalization 261, 294–295, 347

resolution 76, 174, 303–308, 328; see also banking union
run 140, 142, 285, 349
supervision 78, 294, 307–309; see also regulation
US 2, 76, 92, 143
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 145–146, 240
Bank Geniki 94
Bank of America 248
Bank of England 18, 33, 36, 142, 287
Bank of Finland; see Suomen Pankki
Bank of Ireland 172, 174, 225
Bank of Japan 137
Banque de France 160–162, 192, 232, 239, 264
Banque Nationale de Paris 94
banking union 164, 185, 257, 260–261, 294–295, 297, 302–310, 328, 340, 355
banknote 42, 92, 147–149, 182–183, 188, 199–200, 206, 216, 266, 270–272, 275–279, 335–336, 349–352
banknote liability 351
base money 147, 149, 172, 203–204; see also central bank money
Basel Accords 76–78, 81, 295
Basel III 78, 306
bazaar economy 89
Bear Stearns 45, 142
Belarus 243
Belgium 31, 33, 36, 43, 55–56, 62, 66, 72, 86–87, 90, 93–94, 113, 116, 144, 189, 191–192, 230, 254, 276,
333–334
Benelux countries 184
BFA; see Banco Financiere y de Ahorros
Big Bazooka 154, 228–229, 255, 295; see also Long-term refinancing operation
bilateral overdraft limits 243
BIS; see Bank for International Settlements
black economy 342
BMW Stiftung Herbert Quandt 132
BNL 94
BNP Paribas 44
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 245
book money 147–149
bond:
covered 147, 216, 271, 329, 341
own-use 155, 163
self-made 162
boom:
construction 67–70, 82, 97–98, 202
consumption 54
inflationary 67; see also inflation
Brazil 145, 322, 338
Bretton Woods 7, 24, 209, 238–240, 242, 244, 247, 249, 319, 329, 343, 348; see also gold
bubble:
credit 4, 74, 112, 114, 119, 140, 147, 152, 189, 209, 257–258, 282, 295, 328, 330, 332, 352–353, 358
housing 114, 136, 228
inflationary 6, 80, 320; see also inflation
internet 10

budget constraint:
hard 324–327, 329, 352
soft 6, 80, 327
Bulgaria 134–135, 145, 192, 211, 253, 338
BulwienGesa-Immobilienindex 99
Bundesbank 18, 27–29, 31, 33, 80, 163, 166, 171, 179, 182, 192, 195, 207, 235, 237, 239, 240–242, 259,
264–265, 279–280, 288, 292–293, 328
President 22, 166, 177–179, 240, 262, 273, 328
Bundestag 45, 85, 292–293, 296, 273
business climate 45
Cajas 92
California 247, 286, 324–326, 361
government 324
capital:
account 177, 186, 211
controls 47, 140, 224, 285, 330, 349–350
export 39–40, 82, 87–88, 91–94, 100–103, 145–146, 176, 187, 196, 212, 232–234, 238, 252, 314
hybrid 298, 307
import 39–40, 47, 49, 64, 87, 94, 101, 180, 186, 210, 212, 215, 217–218, 220, 222, 226–228, 232, 242,
249
key 34, 36, 149, 171–172, 177, 195, 263–264, 271, 276–279, 341
paid-in 34, 213, 268
reallocation of 38, 135
steering of capital flows 311
Caribbean 145
Cariparma 94
cash withdrawal rate 149
casino capitalism 44, 58, 76–77, 79, 92, 143, 150, 158–159, 226, 231, 254, 285, 306
Catalunya Banc 58
CBPP; see Covered Bonds Purchase Programme
CDS; see credit
central bank money 37, 149–150, 152, 195, 198–200, 206, 210, 254
Central Bank of Greece 158, 168, 173, 351
Central Bank of Russia 243
China 11, 87–88, 235, 240
circular trading 163
City of London 94
civil war 139, 246, 323
clearing:
house 194
portfolio 250, 330
system 23
CMEA; see Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
CoCo; see Contingent Convertible Bond
collateral 68, 142, 147, 150–180, 190, 193, 199, 202, 207, 214, 216–217, 225, 236, 245, 247, 252, 254,
258–259, 261, 278, 288, 304, 307, 309–310, 312, 326, 328, 330, 335, 340–341, 352, 356
agency-rated 153
national eligibility criteria 164–165
risk of under-collateralization 165

collective action clause 168
collectivization 356; see also debt mutualization
Comecon; see Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
common-pool problem 167; see also moral hazard
contagion 228, 262–263, 285–286, 345, 348
Contingent Convertible Bond (CoCo) 307
convergence:
criteria 29; see also Maastricht Treaty
interest rate 25–26, 41–47, 50, 58–59, 63, 80, 102, 114, 143, 332
living standards 30
corruption 112
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or Comecon) 243
Council of the European Union 78
Covered Bonds Purchase Programme (CBPP) 216, 271
credit:
bubble 4, 74, 112, 114, 119, 140, 147, 152, 189, 209, 257–258, 282, 295, 328, 330, 332, 352–353, 358
Credit Default Swap (CDS) 282–284
crunch 205
inflows 72, 117
insurance 282–283; see also Credit Default Swap (CDS)
intergovernmental rescue 208, 210, 212, 220, 252, 275; see also fiscal rescue
rescue 5, 51, 119, 170, 173, 181, 190, 212–238, 254, 270–273, 275–276, 280–281, 286, 335, 346; see
also fiscal rescue
Crédit Agricole 94
cross-country banking exposure 145; see also write-off
crowding out 176, 201–207, 266, 277
crowning theory 27–28
Cuba 243
currency:
conversion 140, 349–350
open currency union 348, 353
parallel 1, 350
reserve 192, 220
snake 26
speculation 27
union 5, 7, 9, 22, 25–28, 41, 43, 48, 55, 79–80, 84, 130, 135, 140, 152, 177, 182, 256, 286–287, 319–320,
324, 329, 343, 347–348, 352–353, 358
current account 5, 38–40, 47–49, 61–66, 100–110, 117, 119–122, 127–128, 141, 146–147, 152–153,
176–178, 181–189, 191, 198, 200, 205–224, 226–228, 230–239, 242, 249–252, 272–273, 315,
328–329, 336, 345–346, 351
and capital account (definition) 99–102, 176–187
sluggishness 47–49, 212, 236
and Target balances 177, 180, 187, 196–197, 209–219
Cyprus 3, 11–14, 36, 38–40, 42–44, 46–47, 54–56, 62, 65, 68, 71–73, 82–85, 87, 90, 93, 95, 106–107,
110–111, 113, 116, 119, 134–135, 143, 145, 155, 157, 163, 170, 172–173, 189, 191–192, 200, 209,
213, 220–222, 224, 236, 254, 270–272, 277, 284–285, 298–299, 301–302, 311, 328, 330, 333, 336,
349–350
crisis 302
Czech Republic 134–135, 356

D-mark; see also Germany
Dawes Plan 138, 344
Day of Action and Solidarity 17
De Nederlandsche Bank 193, 205, 207, 237
debt:
conference 7, 329, 339, 343
external 64–68, 108, 122, 136, 201, 225, 228, 232, 250
internal 140
interrelated 339
moratorium 168
mutualization 19–20, 281, 293, 324, 340, 342
relief 65, 126, 295, 325, 334, 339, 341, 343, 345
rescheduling 75, 275
restructuring 158, 319, 322, 337–340
sustainability 5, 122, 230, 313, 336, 343
debt-equity swap 298, 340, 347
debt-to-asset ratio 140
debt-to-GDP ratio 31–32, 51, 55–60, 66, 140–141, 268, 272, 302, 325, 331–337, 342–344, 351
default risk 41, 266, 278
deficit:
criterion 54, 57; see also Maastricht Treaty
ratio 31, 53
deflation 105, 112, 117–119, 135–140, 256, 311, 332–334, 344–345: see also real depreciation
Delors Plan 27–28
¡Democracia real ya! 16
democracy 59, 258, 310–318, 328
Denmark 34, 86, 192, 211, 230, 348, 356
deposit:
demand 147, 150, 199–200, 202
facility 154, 202
insurance 340–341; see also banking union
term 142, 148–149, 164, 202, 234, 300–301
Detroit 326
Deutsche Bank 177
Deutsche Reichsbank 266
Dexia 57
Dimokratiki Aristera 17
discount window 245
District Fed 245–248, 250–251; see also Federal Reserve
Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW) 282
DIW; see Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW)
Domar formula 331
double-dip 111, 128
Drachme Five Stars 3
Dublin Summit 52
Dutch Disease 130, 318, 345
Dutch Freedom Party 3
E pluribus unum 353
eastern European countries 4, 10, 132, 243

EBA; see European Banking Authority
EBF; see European Banking Federation
EC; see European Commission
ECB; see European Central Bank
ECB Board; see Executive Board of the ECB
ECB Governing Council 2, 33–36, 147, 153, 156–157, 159, 163–164, 166–167, 169–170, 172–173, 217,
245, 255, 259–260, 262–263, 268, 274, 283, 286–287, 290, 293, 308–309, 314, 316–317, 321, 328,
341
ECB General Council 290
ECOFIN Council 53
Economic Advisory Council to the Federal Ministry of Economics 96, 177
effective public international credit 212, 215, 218–219
effective rate of interest 41–47
EIB; see European Investment Bank
EFSF; see European Financial Stability Facility
EFSM; see European Financial Stabilization Mechanism
ELA; see Emergency Liquidity Assistance
Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) 79, 142, 168–174, 225, 258–259, 265, 272, 275, 309, 328, 355
Emnid 20
Emporiki Bank 94
EMU; see European Monetary Union
Enhanced Credit Support Programme 150
equity-asset ratio 306
EPU; see European Payment Union
ERM; see European Exchange Rate Mechanism
ESCB; see European System of Central Banks
ESFS; see European System of Financial Supervision
ESM; see European Stability Mechanism
Estonia 36, 43, 56, 62, 65–66, 87, 90, 95, 113, 116, 130–135, 191, 253, 269, 333
EU; see European Union
EU Summit 9, 69, 261, 267, 294
Euribor 161
EURIBOR-EBF 161
euro:
break-up 313
history 1, 19–20, 31, 75
Eurobond 19, 51, 261, 317, 327–328; see also debt mutualization
Euroclear Bank 162
Euroclear France 162
Eurogroup 310, 328
European Banking Authority (EBA) 307, 309
European Banking Federation (EBF) 161
European Central Bank (ECB) (overview) 33–37
balance sheet 170, 225
Harmonized Rating Scale 153; see also rating
mandate 2, 34, 118–119, 280, 286–293, 314, 344
system 291
European Commission (EC) 17, 82, 125–126, 174, 289–290, 295–296, 302, 304–305, 308, 328
European community 317
European Council 27, 288

European Court of Justice 2, 291–292
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) 26–27, 79, 115, 130, 140, 348–349, 352; see also exchange
rate
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) 180, 213–214, 259, 267–268, 270, 273, 275–276, 291, 310,
340
European Financial Stabilization Mechanism (EFSM) 213–214, 234, 259, 267, 270, 276, 310
European institutions 10, 291–293, 355–356
European interbank market 67, 77, 142, 145, 189, 230, 330
European integration 7–8, 28–31, 291, 354–355
European Investment Bank (EIB) 314
European Monetary Agreement 241
European Monetary System 179, 239
European Monetary Union (EMU) 1, 240, 245
European Mortgage Federation 67
European Parliament (EU Parliament) 78, 268, 287, 289, 303, 308, 316, 328
European Payment Union (EPU) 240–241
European Recovery Program 240
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) 14, 17, 45, 178, 180, 210, 213–214, 218–219, 228, 232–234, 238,
257, 259–261, 267–270, 274, 276, 280–281, 289, 290–291, 293–294, 300, 304–306, 309–310, 315–
316, 328, 340–341
Governing Council 269
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) 35, 136, 169, 172, 265, 289, 298
European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS) 309; see also banking union
European tango 99–102
European Union (EU) 1, 3, 10, 12, 32, 75–76, 78, 105, 135, 155, 157, 213–214, 258, 267, 275–276,
293–294, 297, 319, 342, 354, 357–358
Eurostat 58, 63, 216
exchange rate:
appreciation 113–117, 120–122, 126, 137, 244; see also real appreciation
depreciation 4, 24–25, 40, 43, 51, 80, 90, 113–114, 120, 117–122, 125–132, 137–141, 169, 230, 236,
253, 312, 343–346, 349, 351–353; see also real depreciation
fixed 7, 23, 48, 139, 177, 211, 253, 348
flexible 23, 43, 48, 119, 139, 186, 211
regime 244, 253
turbulence 25
uncertainty 23–24, 26, 41, 43, 89–90
union 26
Executive Board of the ECB 34–35, 118, 170
external debt 64–68, 108, 122, 128, 136, 180, 201, 225, 228, 232, 250; see also debt
Fed; see Federal Reserve
Federal Constitutional Court; see German Federal Constitutional Court
Federal European State 20; see also fiscal union
Federal government 245, 247–248, 286, 321, 323, 331
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 245
Federal Reserve (Fed):
Bank of New York 192, 239, 245–249, 251, 281
Bank of San Francisco 248
Bank of St. Louis 248
Banks 201, 245, 247

Board of Governors; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
District Fed 245–248, 250–251
System 5, 201, 240, 245–249, 330
Federal unemployment system 185
Fiat 111
financial account 146, 178, 186
and capital account (definition) 186
Finland 31, 36, 43, 55–56, 62, 66, 72–73, 86–87, 90, 113, 116, 178, 188–189, 191–192, 197, 206–207, 209,
237–238, 276, 279, 297, 316, 333–334
central bank; see Suomen Pankki
markka 27
fiscal:
discipline 18, 38, 52–53; see also austerity
equalization scheme 185
federalism 322, 324, 355
integration 27
union 8, 28, 185, 322–324, 358; see also political union
US fiscal union 323
Fiscal Compact 18, 252, 268, 359
fiscal rescue:
facility 5, 151, 176, 178, 181, 187–189, 191, 200–201, 205–207, 210–224, 249, 272
fund 5–6, 12, 17–18, 106, 110, 123, 126, 167, 173–175, 190, 214, 218–219, 225, 228, 234, 252, 254, 257,
260, 267–268, 270–274, 290, 294, 310, 334–335, 340
operation 106, 223, 227, 231–232, 259–260, 352
package 15, 130, 173, 180–181, 213, 223, 225, 252–253, 273, 310
programme 215, 219, 225, 228, 261, 267
Fitch 153, 230; see also rating
Florida 323
FOMC; see Federal Open Market Committee
Fondo de reestructuración ordenada bancaria (FROB) 58
force de frappe 29, 357
force majeure 286
Forza Italia 3
Fourth Reich 18
France 2–3, 6, 14–15, 17, 20–21, 24–32, 34–36, 42–44, 52–57, 62, 70–73, 80, 82–84, 86–88, 90, 93–96,
100, 102–103, 110–111, 113, 116, 120, 122, 124–126, 140, 144–145, 152, 160–162, 164, 183–185,
189, 191–192, 209, 230–232, 234, 239–240, 252, 254, 262, 264, 268, 273–277, 281, 295, 307, 317,
321, 333, 357
central bank; see Banque de France
finance minister 21, 100
franc 24, 80
franc-fort 24
National Assembly 15
National Front 3, 17
President 26, 28, 240
French-German axis 28
FROB; see Fondo de reestructuración ordenada bancaria
full allotment policy 150, 154–156
future generations 15, 59, 274, 283, 313

GDP deflator 84, 113–116, 120, 124–125, 137, 311, 332–336, 345
General Theory 137, 139; see also Keynesian
German Constitutional Court; see German Federal Constitutional Court
German Council of Economic Experts 89
German Democratic Republic 30
German economists 22, 297
German Federal Constitutional Court 2, 14, 17, 170, 206–261, 290–292
German Federal Statistical Office 91
Germany 3, 13–15, 17–21, 24–25, 27–36, 39, 42–43, 45, 50–51, 53–57, 62, 66–68, 70–73, 76, 82–97,
99–104, 110–111, 113–114, 116–117, 119–120, 122–128, 134, 136, 138–139, 142–146, 177–178,
182–185, 187–192, 196–198, 201–202, 205–207, 209, 226, 230, 232–237, 239, 244, 254, 259, 262,
266, 268–269, 273, 275–277, 279, 282, 287, 291–293, 295, 305, 315–318, 321, 333–334, 340,
344–345, 361
banking law of 1924 138; see also banking regulation
central bank; see Bundesbank
deutschmark 20, 24, 26–30, 80, 115–116, 136, 148, 182–183, 239, 241–242, 259, 279, 287, 345
east 32, 50
Finance Minister 33
government 18, 21, 31, 83, 244, 261, 269, 273, 275, 292–293
government bond 244, 261, 275
institutions 292
labor market 97; see also labor market reform
Landesbank 57–58, 91, 304
life insurer 91; see also insurance company
parliament; see Bundestag
reunification 9, 26, 28–30, 54, 79, 86
welfare system 97, see also welfare state
GIIPS (definition) 93
GIPSIC (definition) 11
gold:
backed 238, 240, 329
certificate 246–247
parity 241
peg 138
Reserve Act 247; see also Federal Reserve
reserves 33, 241–242, 247
settlement 246, 329–330, 341; see also Federal Reserve
standard 137–139, 240, 329–330, 341, 344; see also Bretton Woods
Golden Age 9
Goldman Sachs 121–122, 126, 136, 230, 332–333, 335–336, 343
government guarantee 155, 163–164
government failure (vs. market failure) 74–81
Great Britain 8, 31, 94, 137–138, 145, 235, 254, 321–323; see also United Kingdom (UK)
pound 27, 138
Great Depression 2, 11, 111, 138
Great Recession 11, 82, 86, 106, 111, 150
Greece 2–3, 11–14, 17–19, 21, 30–31, 34, 36, 38–40, 42–44, 46–47, 50–51, 53–56, 61–63, 65, 68–69,
71–73, 75–76, 82–85, 87, 90, 93–95, 106–107, 110–111, 113, 116, 119–122, 124–129, 134–137,
139, 144–145, 155, 157, 170, 172–173, 178, 182–185, 187, 189, 191–192, 195–198, 200, 209,
213–214, 220–226, 228, 231, 234, 238–239, 252–254, 259, 262–264, 267, 270–273, 275–277, 281,

284–285, 298–299, 301, 311, 325, 328, 332–336, 338–339, 341–343, 345–348, 351
central bank; see Central Bank of Greece
drachma 101, 373–374
Finance Ministry 342
government bond 46–47, 74, 158, 168, 259, 261–262, 284
haircut 42, 46, 63, 120–121, 285, 333, 336; see also haircut
Minister of Economics 130
parliament 168
Greek Alpha Bank 94
guarantor liability / Gewährträgerhaftung 57, 304
haircut 16, 42, 46–47, 63, 75, 104, 114–115, 120–121, 124, 156, 160, 165, 167–168, 254, 258, 265, 285,
297–298, 301, 304, 312, 333–334, 336–338, 343, 346, 351
Hanns-Seidel-Stiftung 262
Hartz Commission 96
hedge funds 44, 46, 145–146
Hong Kong 11
Hungary 134
Hypo Real Estate 57–58
Hypovereinsbank 57
IBEC; see International Bank for Economic Co-operation
IBRC; see Irish Bank Resolution Corporation
Iceland 78, 163
Ifo; see Ifo Institute
Ifo Institute 88, 176, 190, 195
IKB; see Industriekreditbank
Illinois 247, 286, 323–325
IMF; see International Monetary Fund
import-substitution effect 126
in varietate concordia 353
Indiana 323

Industriekreditbank (IKB) 44
IndyMac 143
inflation:
hyper 136, 266, 344
in the core 344
pressure 114
rate 50, 60, 102, 113–114, 119, 125, 135–136, 195, 202
risk 41, 47
Institute for New Economic Thinking 19
insurance:
companies 78, 89, 92, 98, 145, 149, 255, 274, 283, 315
market 283
mutual insurance system 358
national deposit 340–341; see also banking union
public 45, 106
Interdistrict Settlement Account (ISA) 224, 246–251; see also Federal Reserve
interest burden 43, 49–52, 60, 109–110, 121, 128, 313
interest revenue 148, 171, 195, 265, 278; see also seignorage
interest-rate spread 41, 256
intergovernmental aid 174, 214, 234; see also fiscal rescue
intergovernmental rescue 4–5, 14, 121, 130, 147, 173, 175, 189, 234, 260, 267, 270; see also fiscal rescue
International Bank for Economic Co-operation (IBEC) 243
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 3, 11, 17, 34, 155, 157, 174, 186, 189, 213, 225, 259, 267, 270, 272,
275, 310, 331, 342, 351
Intesa Sanpaolo 94
investment:
foreign direct 91–92, 134, 210
private 35, 46, 90–91, 98, 152, 166, 210, 255, 265, 292, 296, 310, 337, 340
public 90–91
IOU (I owe you) 186
Ipsos 20
Ireland 5, 11–14, 21, 31, 36, 38–39, 41–43, 46, 50, 54–57, 61–62, 65, 68–73, 76–77, 82–87, 90, 93–95,
105–107, 110, 112–113, 116, 119–120, 122, 124, 126–131, 134, 137, 140, 144, 155, 157, 159, 170,
172, 174, 189, 191–192, 196–197, 200, 202, 209, 213–214, 217, 221, 224–225, 228, 231–232, 236,
253, 262, 264, 267, 270–273, 277, 284, 298–299, 301, 332–336, 339
central bank; see Bank of Ireland
government bond 263, 275
President 15
Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC) 174
Iron Curtain 89
ISA; see Interdistrict Settlement Account
Israel 127
Italy 2–3, 11–18, 24–25, 27, 31–32, 34–36, 38–39, 42–43, 46, 49–52, 54–56, 58–60, 62, 66, 68, 71–73,
82–88, 90, 93–94, 96, 106–107, 110–111, 113, 115–117, 120, 122, 124–125, 129, 134–135, 144,
163, 188–189, 191–192, 196–197, 209, 217–218, 221, 225–229, 236, 255, 260, 262, 264, 270, 272,
284, 295, 298–299, 301, 311, 333–334, 336, 343, 346
devaluation 346
lira 24, 27, 79, 115–116, 122
Mezzogiorno 318, 345

Japan 6, 10–11, 75, 87–88, 93–94, 136–138, 144, 239, 344–345
central bank; see Bank of Japan
Japanese disease 6, 136–137, 344–345
JPMorgan Chase 45
Keynesian 4, 198, 331, 344; see also General Theory
Korea 11
labor:
cost 89, 115, 123, 131–141
income 92, 129
market reform 332; see also market
productivity 97, 103, 112–117, 123, 311
Laiki Bank 47, 173, 224, 285
Landesbank; see also Germany
Landesbank Sachsen; see Saxony state bank 142
Land of Cockaigne 266
Latin America 11, 69, 145, 229, 236
Latvia 34, 130–135, 137, 169, 211, 253
Prime Minister 132
law of capitalism 102
law of one price 41
Le Figaro 29
Lehman Brothers 39–40, 45, 69–70, 130, 143, 149, 150, 153, 217, 225, 253, 254
Lehman crisis 6, 39, 42, 46, 90, 93, 144, 165, 311; see subprime crisis
lemon equilibrium 296
lender of last resort 35, 79, 175, 258, 286
lex monetae 351
liability:
hierarchy 341
implicit 172
joint 59, 320, 325, 328, 356; see also debt mutualization
limited 79, 269, 295; see also moral hazard
spiral 257, 328
trap 316
Liberia 145
Liechtenstein 78
liquidity:
crisis 153, 198; see also solvency crisis
shortage of 199
short-term 152, 275
trap 136, 345
unlimited 150, 256; see also full allotment policy
Lisbon Agenda 9
Lithuania 34, 130–135, 137, 192, 211, 253, 348
Prime Minister 132
loan:
car 159; see also asset-backed securities (ABS)
collateralized 68
leasing and consumer 159; see also asset-backed securities (ABS)

non-performing 298–300
residential mortgage 155, 159; see also asset-backed securities (ABS)
small and medium-size enterprises (SME) 155, 159, 314; see also asset-backed securities (ABS)
London Debt Agreement 345; see also debt
Long-term refinancing operation (LTRO) 147, 154–155, 228–229, 255, 281
Louisiana 323
LTRO; see Long-term refinancing operation
Luxembourg 2, 31, 36, 43, 56, 62, 66, 72, 86–87, 90, 113, 116, 178, 188–189, 191–192, 234, 262, 267, 333
Maastricht Treaty 6, 15, 18–20, 22, 29, 31, 34–35, 53, 55–56, 74–75, 77, 136, 179, 255, 258–259, 262–263,
273–274, 282, 286–289, 292–293, 320–321, 329, 347, 354, 356; see also Treaty of the European
Union (TEU)
Madrid Summit 42–43, 49–50, 63–65, 67, 70, 84–85, 88, 103, 112, 115–116, 123, 136, 332–336, 345
main refinancing rate 148, 171, 195, 220, 235
Malta 34–36, 43, 52, 56, 72, 82, 86–87, 90, 95, 116, 191, 317
market:
dictated austerity 78; see also austerity
failure 74–75, 312–313
incomplete 75
interbank 42, 44, 49, 67, 77, 82, 105, 125, 142–143, 145, 149–153, 164–165, 189, 230, 232, 328, 330
non-regulated 155, 160–161
property 260
real estate 70–71, 151
regulated 160–161
sanctions 51
Short-term European Paper (STEP) 155, 160–162
undercutting of market conditions 312
Marshall Islands 145
Marshall Plan 345
Maryland 323
Matheo solution 350
MBS; see mortgage backed securities
memorandum of understanding 268, 342
mercantilism 102
Michigan 323
Middle East and North Africa 11
minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) 307
minimum reserve requirement 149
Minnesota 324–325
Mississippi 323
Moldova 243
monetary:
easing 106
policy transmission 150, 314
state financing 259, 267, 273, 286–289, 292
money:
base; see base money
inside 190, 197, 199–200, 202–204, 206–208, 239, 278
money-in-the-shop-window theory 327
outside 190–191, 199–200, 203–205, 207–208, 239, 278

money creation 34, 37, 147–148, 153, 179, 199, 201, 210, 245–248, 266; see also printing press
money-in-the-shop-window theory; see money
mortgage backed securities (MBS) 304
Moody’s 153, 230; see also rating
moral hazard 63, 165–169, 253, 285, 294, 304, 307, 320, 328, 340–341, 348; see also common pool
MREL; see minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities
multiple equilibria 5, 282–283
Munich Economic Summit 132, 187
Munich Seminar 22, 208, 287
Municipal Assistance Corporation 326
Myanmar 339
national banking system 93, 143, 258, 278, 300
national central bank (NCB) 5, 33–37, 147–153, 156, 159, 162–173, 179–181, 186–187, 189–190,
192–196, 198–200, 202, 204, 206, 208, 210–211, 213–216, 218, 226, 236, 242, 245–247, 258–259,
261–266, 270–272, 277–279, 287, 295, 300, 309–310, 312, 314, 316, 328–331, 335–336, 340–341,
355
National Front; see also France
NCB; see national central bank
NCG Banco 58
Nea Dimokratia 17
net foreign asset position 61–68, 103–104, 119–122, 183, 196–197, 132–133, 137, 315, 335
net foreign debt 61–68, 108–109, 119–122, 128, 196, 209, 212–213, 216–217, 222–231, 255, 315
net investment income 106–109, 128, 220, 315
net payment orders (and Target balances) 183–185, 193, 199, 204–206, 210, 218, 254, 258, 277, 279, 329,
350
Netherlands 2, 14, 31, 36, 43, 55–56, 62, 66, 72–73, 87–88, 90, 93–94, 110, 113, 116, 127, 130, 144, 178,
188–189, 191–193, 196–197, 207, 209, 230, 237–238, 254, 262, 268, 275–276, 297, 333, 340
central bank; see De Nederlandsche Bank
New Statesman 18
New York 240, 247, 323–326
New York Daily News 326
New York Fed; see Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Nobel Prize 22, 320
non-marketable asset 163–164
North Africa 11, 69
Northern Rock 44, 142
North-Rhine Westphalia 305
northern euro countries 1, 4, 23, 189–191, 202, 237, 316
Norway 78
OECD; see Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Ohio 323
Old World 9–10
OMT; see Outright Monetary Transactions
one-country-one-vote 272, 286
one-man-one-vote 357
open market operation 289
ordinary insolvency procedure 326; see also debt
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 86, 90, 121

Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) 2, 5, 14, 42, 45–46, 118, 147, 157, 190, 201, 218–219, 225,
233–234, 238, 257, 260–261, 265, 269, 280–293, 313–314, 316–317, 321, 331, 356
Panellinio Sosialistiko Kinima 17
pari passu 281, 292; see also haircut
Paris Club 339, 343; see also debt
peace 1, 3, 7, 9, 14–15, 30, 319–320, 353–354, 359
European 7, 15
pecking order 302, 340
Pennsylvania 323
pension system 313, 315
retirement age 104, 229
Poland 4, 134–135, 192, 211, 268, 338, 343, 356
political:
independence 34
integration 23, 30
union 15, 27, 30; see also fiscal union
population trend 86; see also age pyramid
portfolio:
balance approach 48
decision 210, 315
reallocation 40
reallocation and current account 47–49
structure 48
Portugal 2–3, 11–14, 17, 21, 36, 38–40, 42–43, 46, 50, 53–56, 61–63, 65, 68–69, 71–73, 76, 82–87, 90,
93–95, 106–107, 110–111, 113, 116, 119–122, 124, 126, 128–129, 134–137, 139, 144, 155, 157,
160, 162, 189, 191–192, 196–197, 200, 209, 213–214, 220–224, 228, 231, 253, 262, 264, 267–268,
270–273, 281, 284, 298–299, 301, 311, 333–337, 343
Constitutional Court 17
post-war period 7, 10, 150, 238
price; see also GDP deflator:
adjustment 5, 120–122, 137, 334; see also realignment
consumer 53, 113, 138, 311
property 38, 68, 70–72
stability 35, 118, 136, 280, 286, 344
transmission 114
Primary Dealer Credit Facility 245; see also Federal Reserve
printing press (definition) 147–152; see also money creation
privatization 32, 342–343
profit share 97, 102
PSA Peugeot Citroën 111
Public Choice 312, 315
qualified majority 268, 274, 290, 355
rating:
AAA 142
agency 77, 157–158, 177, 230, 261
investment grade 77, 153, 157, 159, 168, 247, 261, 309
junk status 156

minimum 153, 155–157, 159, 168–169; see also collateral
non-investment grade 157, 247, 309
single A 153, 155–156, 158–159; see also ECB Harmonized Rating Scale
triple B 153, 155–156, 158–159; see also ECB Harmonized Rating Scale
real appreciation 114–122; see also inflation
real effective exchange rate 116, 124–126
real depreciation 102, 113, 117–122, 125, 127, 129–130, 132, 137–140, 230, 253, 313, 343–344, 351, 353;
see also deflation
real estate boom 69–70
realignment 115–122, 126, 135–137, 221, 256, 313, 332–334, 336, 343–344, 348; see also price adjustment
Real Madrid 160
red railway lantern 85; see also sick man of Europe
re-entry into a currency union 349
referendum 8, 293
refinancing policy 151
regulation:
bank 76, 320, 355; see also banking supervision
competition 296, 355
competition in laxity 295, 355
system 78, 296, 355
Reichsmark 138
Renault 111
rent seeking 312, 315
reparation payments 339; see also Treaty of Versailles
return option 347
revaluation 33, 37, 61–66, 108–109, 115–116, 122, 143, 149, 172, 214, 216
risk:
assessment 41, 77, 142
bankruptcy 26, 74, 152
investment 3, 41, 296, 317
premium 41–46, 74, 76–78, 151, 174, 193, 199, 254–255, 312–314
redenomination 312–314
state default 276, 288
wealth 320; see also wealth
risk-weighted asset 76, 306
Romania 69, 134–135, 145, 192, 211, 338
Rouble Zone 243
Russia 28, 87–88, 138, 182, 243, 302, 337–338
central bank; see Central Bank of Russia
oligarch 302
President 28
Sachsen LB Europe 142; see also special purpose vehicle, Saxony state bank
safe haven 143, 217, 229, 231, 238
Salomon Smith Barney 10
San Francisco Fed; see Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
SAREB; see Sociedad de Gestión de Activos procedentes de la Reestructuración Bancaria
Saudi Arabia 87–88
savings 40, 48, 52, 58–59, 67, 103–104, 109, 136, 151–153, 198, 234–235, 254–255, 266, 340
books 92

capital 90–91, 102, 208, 304
deposit 300–301
flow 87–97, 145, 149, 208, 230, 314
Saxony state bank 14
Scandinavia 138
Scientific Advisory Group of the German Ministry of Economics; see Economic Advisory Council to the
Federal Ministry of Economics
Seat 24, 34, 134, 320
Secondary Markets Support Facility (SMSF) 269, 289–290
Securities Markets Programme (SMP) 12, 157, 166, 178, 192, 212, 215–216, 218–219, 221, 232, 234, 257,
259–266, 270, 275–276, 281–282, 287, 316, 331, 356
seignorage 37, 148–149, 171, 173, 182–183, 245, 265–266, 277–279, 289, 310; see also interest revenue
Serbia 135, 145, 337
settlement:
mechanism 194, 256
of imbalances 241
procedure 246–247
sick man of Europe 95; see also red railway lantern
Singapore 11
Single Resolution Board (SRB) 308, 338; see also banking union
Single Resolution Fund (SRF) 303, 305–306, 340; see also banking union
Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) 302–306, 308; see also banking union
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 294, 308; see also banking union
Skoda 134
Slovakia 36, 43, 56, 62, 65–66, 72, 82, 87, 90, 95, 113, 116, 134–135, 191, 267, 333
Slovenia 36, 43, 56, 62, 65–66, 72, 86–87, 90, 95, 113, 116, 134–135, 191, 268, 333, 338
SMP; see Securities Markets Programme
SMSF; see Secondary Market Support Facility
Sociedad de Gestión de Activos procedentes de la Reestructuración Bancaria (SAREB) 58
Société Générale 94
Sohmen Lecture 98
solvency crisis 153; see also liquidity crisis
Solvency II 78
SOMA; see System Open Market Account
South Africa 11
sovereign default 79, 173, 230, 264, 288, 322–323, 337–338
Soviet Union 28, 243, 327, 358
Spain 2–3, 11–16, 19, 21, 24–25, 36, 38–40, 42–43, 46, 50–51, 54–58, 61–62, 64–65, 67–73, 76, 82–85,
87–88, 90, 93–95, 99, 106–107, 110–111, 113–114, 116, 119–120, 122, 124, 126, 128–129,
134–137, 139, 144–145, 160, 162, 188–189, 191–193, 196–197, 209, 213, 217, 221, 225–228, 231,
235–236, 252–253, 255, 260, 262, 264, 268, 270–273, 281, 284, 295–296, 298–299, 301, 311,
332–334, 336, 342–343, 347
central bank; see Banco de España
government bond 91, 228, 263
inquisition 168
peseta 24, 27
Prime Minister 296
Saving Banks; see Cajas
special purpose vehicle (SPV) 142
speculative attack 80, 252

SPV; see special purpose vehicle
SRB; see Single Resolution Board
SRF; see Single Resolution Fund
SRM; see Single Resolution Mechanism
SSM; see Single Supervisory Mechanism
St. Louis District Fed; see Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Stability and Growth Pact 52–57, 80–81, 268, 320; see also Maastricht Treaty
Standard & Poor’s 153, 157, 230; see also rating
state insolvency; see sovereign default
stealth bailout 177, 181, 201, 205, 208, 210, 259
STEP market; see Short-term European Paper market
stress test 308–309
structured assets 92, 158, 230
subprime crisis 44, 92, 112, 258; see Lehman crisis
Sub-Saharan Africa 11
subsidiarity principle 354
Suomen Pankki 206, 238
Swastika 16, 18
Sweden 26, 356
krona 27
Switzerland 71–72, 122–123, 222, 232, 264, 332–333, 335–336
Canton 286, 354, 358
central bank, see Swiss National Bank
commercial bank 244
franc 25, 244
Swiss Confederation 8, 354
Swiss National Bank 244, 281, 286
Syriza 3, 17
System Open Market Account (SOMA) 245–248, 251, 330; see also clearing
TAE; see Taxpayers Association of Europe
Tajikistan 243
Taiwan 11
Target; see Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer System
Taxpayers Association of Europe (TAE) 194, 274
Taylor rule 35
Tennessee 323
Term Auction Facility 245; see also Federal Reserve
term deposit; see deposit
Term Securities Lending Facility 245; see also Federal Reserve
term to maturity 42, 65, 67, 153–155, 164, 174, 275–280, 304
TEU; see Treaty of the European Union
TFEU; see Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Thailand 346
trade:
barter 243
imbalance 250
infrastructure 47
union 3, 137
Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer System (Target):

balance 37, 92, 176–180, 188, 192–196, 204, 233, 246, 270
claim 91, 188–193, 196, 207, 211–215, 233–237, 276, 278–279
and current account; see current account and Target balances
as international credit 5, 181, 194–196, 205–207, 210–212, 214–215, 218–221, 223–228, 272, 275, 316,
328
deficit 181–186, 220, 253, 329
liability 189–194, 196, 200, 203, 211–213, 220, 222–238, 247, 261, 270–272, 277, 279, 309, 331
risk 178, 277, 293
surplus 181, 220
transfer rouble; see also Rouble Zone
transfer union 31, 167, 317, 358, see also fiscal union
Treaty of the European Union (TEU) 35; see Maastricht Treaty
Treaty of Versailles 29, 138, 344
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) 20, 74, 136, 173, 255, 258–259, 262, 267,
273–274, 287–290, 292, 321, 354, 356
Treuhand 32, 54, 56; see also Germany reunification
Troika 3, 17–18, 173, 273, 275, 342, 346, 349
Turkey 120–122, 135, 145, 148, 182, 279, 338, 350
UK; see United Kingdom
ultra vires 287, 290
unemployment 2–4, 8, 10, 12–14, 16–18, 35, 70, 82, 94–97, 102, 105, 119, 122–123, 126–127, 129,
137–139, 149, 185, 228, 230, 258, 318, 332, 346, 348
Unemployment Benefit II 97; see also Agenda 2010
youth 2, 12–14
unions 3, 17, 123, 128, 136–137, 139, 229, 344, 347
United Kingdom (UK) 27, 34, 88, 93–94, 138, 145, 152, 230; see also Great Britain
central bank; see Bank of England
United States (US) 7–8, 19, 21, 30, 143, 185, 201, 245, 247, 319–322, 324–326, 353, 356–357, 359
Bankruptcy Code 326
central bank; see Federal Reserve
dollar 242, 348
government 242, 325–326
monetary system 251, 327; see also Federal Reserve
payment system 194, 246, 251, 329, 330–331
President 28, 267
Secretary of the Treasury 321
Treasury 239, 245, 247
Treasury Bills 239
United States of Europe 7–8, 21, 319–320, 353, 356, 359; see also fiscal union
unit labor cost 123; see also labor cost
University of Piraeus 3
Unnim Banc 58
US; see United States
US Council of Economic Advisors 22
value added tax (VAT) 52
VAT; see value added tax
Verein für Socialpolitik 282
Vietnam 240, 243, 338

vocational training 13
Volkswagen 134
wage:
cut 137, 139
hourly 134
low-wage competition 135
reduction 128, 132
restraint 90, 117, 123, 129, 132
rise 103, 114
War of Secession; see civil war
wealth:
levy 342–343
private 38, 72–74, 226, 298, 303, 340–342
Weimar Republic 138–139, 344
welfare state 139, 325
Wells Fargo 248
Werner Plan 26, 31
WestLB 305
World War 18–19, 28, 266
write-off:
gain 65
loss 19, 44–45, 65, 69, 143, 166, 170–174, 230, 261–262, 266, 282, 292–295, 298–302, 305–306,
308–310, 315, 328, 339, 341, 344
X-Efficiency 312

AUTHOR AND EDITOR INDEX
Abelshauser, W. 139
Abraham, F. 31
Acharya, V. V. 298
Admati, A. 44, 296, 307
Advisory Council to the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology 96
Aichele, R. 101
Akerlof, G. A . 44, 74
Albul, B. 307
Alcidi, C. 253, 281, 311
Alesina, A. 114
Alexander, R. 18
Algemeen Dagblad online 1
Alloway, T. 163
American Bankruptcy Institute 326
Arrow, K. 75
Asdrubali, P. 185
Åslund, A. 243
Asmussen, J. 170, 312
Auer, R. A. 179, 220
Augstein, R. 29
Badinger, H. 35
Balázs, É. 114
Baltensperger, E. 295
Banca d’Italia 62, 68, 188, 200, 213, 229, 299
Banco de España 67, 188, 200, 229
Banco de Portugal 200
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 21, 93, 94, 144, 231, 306
Bank of Finland 206, 207
Bankenverband–Bundesverband Deutscher Banken 20
Banque de France 164
Barclays Capital 263, 264
Barghini, T. 326
Barker, A. 305
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 78
BBC News 111, 160, 302
BBC News Europe 17, 229
Beck, G. 287
Beck, H. 342
Beck, T. 339
Bencek, D. 332
Benito, A. 120, 124, 333, 334
Bensel, N. 96

Bérégovoy, P. 15
Berger, H. 345, 357
Bernanke, B. S. 201
Bernholz, P. 178, 241, 263
Berschens, R. 174
Berthold, N. 263
Bindseil, U. 178
Bini-Smaghi, L. 3
Blanchard, O. 38, 114
Blankart, C. B. 167, 178, 238, 263
Blessing, K. 240
Blinder, A. S. 143
Bloomberg 111, 112
Boadway, R. 186
Borchardt, K. 138
Bordo, M. D. 242, 322
Born, B. 346
Börsch-Supan, A. 263
Braasch, B. 80
Braunberger, G. 80
Brendel, M. 162, 165
Brennan, G. 312, 315
Brennan, J. 163
Breyer, F. 263
Brown, A. J. G. 89
Brunsden, J. 297
Buch, C. M. 294
Buchanan, J. M. 312, 315
Buchen, T. 346
Buchheim, C. 346
Buchheit, L. 337
Buiter, W. 37, 171, 290
BulwienGesa AG 99
Bundesagentur für Arbeit 97
Burda, M. 242
Buti, M. 28
Calvo, G. A. 49, 283
Canuto, O. 326
Capodilupo, L. 326
Carney, B. 21
Carstensen, K . 346
Cecchetti, S. G. 238
Central Bank of Cyprus 71, 170, 200
Central Bank of Greece 71, 170, 200
Central Bank of Ireland 170, 174, 200
Chantrill, C. 325
Christie, R. 297
Churchill, W. 319
Citi Research 348

Cline, W. R. 319, 337
Comfort, N. 309
Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union 27
Constâncio, V. 45, 255, 260, 280, 281, 288, 297, 314
Conway, P. 243
Corden, N. M. 130, 318
Council of the European Union 52, 53, 105, 261, 267, 288, 294, 303, 307, 308
Courchene, T. 31
Cour-Thimann, P. 178, 179, 180, 189, 192, 248
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economics Policy Analysis 110
Cruces, J. 338
Dabilis, A. 17
D’Alessio, G. 73
Daly, K. 120, 124, 333, 334
Darvas, Z. 251, 252
Das, U. S. 337, 339
Dawes, C. G. 138
De Angelis, M. 326
De Grauwe, P. 74, 228, 252, 277, 283
De Nederlandsche Bank 188
De Pooter, M. 263, 264
Demongeot, A. 120, 124, 333, 334
Deutsche Bundesbank 24, 27, 69, 88, 91, 101, 146, 179, 188, 207, 233, 241, 242, 298, 299, 300, 301
Deutscher Bundestag 85
Dewatripont, M. 79, 285
Di Cesare, A. 313
di Fabio, U. 287, 293
Diamond, P. 75
Dokumente zur Deutschlandpolitik 29
Dolak, K. 324, 325
Dolan, M. 326
Dolls, M. 186
Domar, E. D. 331
Dombrovskis, V. 132
Dorfman, R. 313
Dornbusch, R. 48
Draghi, M. 45, 118, 180, 252, 255, 260, 280, 281, 288, 289, 297, 314
Drèze, J. 75
Drine, I. 114
Dübel, H.-J. 173
Dubey, P. 75
Duffie, D. 75
Dunstan, R. 326
Eberl, J. 154, 165
Eckert, D. 349
Economic and Social Committee 80
Economist, The 31, 86, 106
Eekhoff, J. 263

Eichengreen, B. 11, 239, 351
Eijffinger, S. 166, 314
ekathimerini.com 127
Engelen, K. C. 173
English, W. B. 323
Erbentraut, J. 325
Ernst & Young 299
Eurogroup 275, 309
European Banking Authority (EBA) 340
European Central Bank (ECB) 4, 33, 36, 37, 45, 67, 71, 72, 73, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162,
163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 169, 170, 182, 189, 192, 194, 200, 204, 213, 216, 221, 263, 266, 280, 281,
288, 309
European Commission (EC) 31, 36, 39, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 60, 69, 83, 84, 87, 101, 116, 124, 126, 213,
267, 268, 269, 272, 297, 301, 303, 304, 305, 306, 308, 333, 342
European Constitutional Group 357
European Council 53
European Economic Advisory Group (EEAG) 121, 248, 322, 323, 330, 339, 340, 354
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) 213, 234, 267
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) 78
European Mortgage Federation 67
European Parliament 9
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) 213, 234
European Union (EU) 20, 29, 32, 136, 234, 268, 269, 287, 321, 354, 356
Eurostat 12, 13, 25, 39, 43, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 62, 68, 69, 83, 84, 87, 90, 95, 101, 107, 108,
109, 110, 113, 129, 131, 133, 135, 197, 213, 221, 242, 272, 311
Evans, L. 299
Fahrholz, C. 178
Federal Constitutional Court (German Constitutional Court or German Court) 18, 45, 265, 269, 290, 292,
293
Federal Ministry of Finance 268
Federal Reserve 246, 247
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 245
Feist, H. 148, 183, 279
Felbermayr, G. 101
Feldstein, M. 22, 201, 262, 286, 331, 347
Ferguson, N. 138
Fiedler, J. 96
Fischer, H. 96
Fischer, S. 48
Fisher, I. 139
Focus online 136
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (F.A.Z.) 22, 154
Franz, W. 263
Fratzscher, M. 282
Freytag, A. 178
Friedman, A. 10
Friedman, M. 22, 139, 205, 344
Fuceri, D. 31
Fuest, C. 186, 263

Furth, J. H. 241
Gahlen, B. 80
Galí, J. 114
Gambacorta, R. 73
Garber, P. M. 177
Gasse, P. 96
Gauweiler, P. 273
Geanakoplos, J. 75
Geiger, H. 80
German Council of Economic Experts 88, 96, 321
German Federal Statistical Office 54, 71, 98, 99, 134, 138, 242
Giavazzi, F. 38, 114, 282
Giesbert, F.-O. 29
Giovanni, A. 281
Gluch, E. 99
Goldberg, L. S. 243
González-Páramo, J. M. 118
Goodhart, C. 31, 296
Goria, F. 299
Governo Italiano 60
Grande, G. 313
Granville, B. 138
Graves, S. 120, 124, 333, 334
Greek Ministry of Finance 168
Grimme, C. 346
Grinath, A. 323, 324
Gros, D. 185, 253, 281, 311
Grossman, S. J. 75
Gstädtner, T. 294
Guardian, The 8
Gulati, M. 338, 340
Gumpel, P. 10
Gurley, J. G. 190
Hamilton, A. 321
Handelsblatt 160, 230
Hansen, A. 137, 345
Hart, O. 74, 75
Hartz, P. 96
Hasan, M. 18
Hau, H. 297
Heiland, I. 101
Hellwig, M. 44, 263, 296, 307
Henderson, D. W. 48
Henkel, H.-O. 88
Henzler, H. 10
Herbst, L. 346
Heremans, D. 31
Hesse, H. 80

Heyde, P. 138
Hildebrand, P. 281
Hofmann, C. 154
Höhler, G. 299
Holboell Nielsen, L. 120, 124, 333, 334
Holtfrerich, C.-L. 241, 242
Holzner, C. 89, 96
Homburg, S. 178, 187, 210, 263, 269, 288
Hoogduin, L. 166
Hormats, R. D. 240
Hughes-Hallett, A. 345
Ickes, B. W. 243
Ifo Institute (Ifo) 54, 98, 184, 270, 291
Il Giornale 18
Ilardi, G. 73
Instituto National de Estadística 115
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 11, 88, 188, 200, 206, 207, 213, 252, 284, 299, 332, 342
Jacobides, M. 351
Jaffee, D. M. 307
Jahn, J. 294
James, H. 14, 239, 242, 245, 322, 323
Jann, W. 96
Jay, J. 321
Ji, Y. 277, 283
Jolis, A. 21
Jones, E. 185
Jonung, L. 322
Jost, S. 162, 165
Juncker, J.-C. 15
Kaletsky, A. 19
Kemp, M. C. 75
Kenen, P. B. 243
Keynes, J. M. 137, 139
King, M. 287
Kirchhof, P. 287
Kleemann, M. 346
Kloß, M. 50
Kohl, H. 15, 20, 27
Kohler, W. 178, 238
Koll, R. 10, 26, 38
König, P. J. 178
Konrad, K. 263, 357
Koo, G. 158
Kornai, J. 6, 327
Kovács, K. 251
Kraljic, P. 96
Kroszner, R. S. 296

Krugman, P. 135
Kuehnen, E. 296
Kunkel-Weber, I. 96
Kunz, A. 262
Kydland, F. E. 320
Laaser, C.-F. 332
Laidler, D. 345
Lautenschläger, S. 294
Lehmann, M. 158, 299
Lehmann, R. 50
Leibenstein, H. 312
Lerner, A. P. 48
Lewis, M. 163
Limbach, J. 354
Lipponer, A. 178
Liu, L. 326
Lommatzsch, K. 114
Lucke, B. 350
Luft, K. 96
MacGorain, S. 158, 299
Madár, I. 251
Maddison, A. 139
Madison, J. 321
Magee, St. P. 48
Magill, M. 75
Majocchi, A. 31
Manna, M. 313
Markiewicz, A. 322
Marshall, A. 48
Martin, R. F. 263, 264
Martinez Oliva, J. C. 240, 345
Martinuzzi, E. 163
Mas-Colell, A. 75
Masson, P. R. 324
Mayer, C. 79, 285
Mayer, T. 31, 178, 179, 240, 350
McCauley, R. N. 238
McGuire, P. M. 238
McKenna, R. 138
McLean, A. 321
McLean, J. 321
Meister, W. 89, 96
Melchiorre, M. 299
Meltzer, A. H. 344
Merkel, A. 83, 100
Merkl, C. 89
Meyer, D. 167
Michels, J. 171

Milbradt, G. 178, 210
Ministero dell’Interno 17
Mitterrand, F. 15
MMNews 32
Möbert, J. 178
Moesen, W. 31
Moody’s 157, 178
Müller, J. H. 138
Münchau, W. 44, 143, 291
Murswiek, D. 22
Mussler, W. 294
Neary, J. P. 130, 318
Neumann, M. J. M. 22, 166, 178, 350
Niskanen, W. A. 312
Nitsch, V. 35
Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaften 85
Noyer, C. 10
Obstfeld, M. 31
Ochel, W. 89, 96
Odling-Smee, J. 243
Olson, M. 274, 315
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 50, 54, 110, 120, 230, 342
Panigirtzoglou, N. 158, 299
Papademos, L. 118, 262
Papaioannou, M. G. 337, 339
Par Faure, M. 24
Parsons, C. 326
Patinkin, D. 345
Paul, A. 120, 124, 334
Pauly, C. 165
Peichl, A. 186
Peri, G. 31
Petzina, D. 139
Pigou, A. C. 345
Pill, H. 120, 124, 333, 334
Pisani-Ferry, J. 179, 251, 252
Plickert, P. 83, 263
Portes, R. 282
Potrafke, N. 179, 190
Prescott, E. C. 320
Prinz, A. 342
Prodhan, G. 296
Proissl, W. 29
Projektgruppe Gemeinschaftsdiagnose 98
Prud’homme, R. 31
Pruitt, S. 263, 264

Quinzii, M. 75
Radner, R. 75
Ragnitz, J. 50
Rahbari, E. 37, 171, 290
Rajoy, M. 296
Ramser, H. J. 80
Ratchford, B. U. 322, 323
Rault, C. 114
Reddy, S. 248
Reeh, K. 178
Reiermann, C. 57
Reimon, M. 32
Reinhart, C. 44, 74, 346
Reischmann, M. 179, 190
Repubblica, La 342
Reutter, M. 114
Richter, R. 22
Richter, W. F. 342
Ritschl, A. 263, 345
Roche, A. 302
Rocholl, J. 165
Rodden, J. 322
Rogoff, K. S. 44, 74, 114, 346
Rose, K. 114
Rossi, E. 357
Rudolph, B. 307
Ruhkamp, S. 166, 179
Ryterman, R. 243
Samuelson, P. A. 313
Santos, M. 75
Sapir, A. 251
Sargent, T. 322
Sauer, B. 178
Sauer, I. 178
Sauernheimer, K. 114
Sauga, M. 20, 29
Schartau, H. 96
Schickler, W. 96
Schlesinger, H. 178, 179, 194, 329
Schleyer, H.-E. 96
Schmid, G. 96
Schmitz, G. P. 18
Schneider, F. 31, 263
Schöchli, H. 244
Schön, R. 357
Schorkopf, F. 289, 312, 313
Schrader, K. 332
Schröder, G. 96

Schumacher, D. 120, 124, 333, 334
Seidel, M. 287
Sell, F. L. 178, 347
Shah, A. A. 186
Shaw, E. S. 190
Shiller, R. J. 44, 74, 296
Sibert, A. 166
Simons, S. 20, 29
Sinn, G. 318, 345
Sinn, H.-W. 10, 14, 19, 26, 38, 41, 44, 48, 53, 57, 58, 75, 76, 77, 79, 85, 86, 89, 91, 92, 96, 98, 114, 117,
123, 125, 135, 143, 146, 148, 150, 158, 159, 176, 177, 178, 181, 183, 187, 188, 189, 191, 200, 205,
206, 207, 208, 210, 214, 217, 218, 219, 224, 226, 231, 249, 254, 263, 272, 277, 279, 282, 285, 291,
295, 297, 304, 306, 318, 329, 339, 345, 347, 353, 355
Sirletti, S. 163
Smith, S. 31
Snower, D. 89
Solow, R. M. 313
Sorensen, B. E. 185
Soros, G. 19, 296
Spahn, B. 31
Spaventa, L. 38
Spencer, P. 295
Spiegel online 135
Spiegel Online International 2, 145, 201, 302
Spiegel, Der 20, 22, 27, 32, 160, 262
Spiegel, P. 305
Spinelli, A. 357
Standard & Poor’s 157
Standard, Der 125
Starbatty, J. 22
Stark, J. 174
State Budget Crisis Task Force 324
Steffen, S. 294, 298
Steinkamp, S. 281
Stiglitz, J. E. 255
Streissler, E. 337
Sylla, R. E. 323, 324
Szarek, D. 168
Taboga, M. 313
Taxpayers Association of Europe (TAE) 194, 274
Taylor, M. P. 324
Tchistyi, A. 307
ten Dam, A. 350
Thiele, C.-L. 241
Thomson Reuters Datastream 42, 46, 284
Thum, M. 357
Tian, X. 326
Tiefensee, W. 96
Tirole, J. 79, 285
Tornell, A. 167, 178, 201, 206, 238

Traynor, I. 319
Trebesch, C. 337, 338, 339, 340
Trichet, J.-C. 118, 150, 156, 208, 262
Tuchtfeldt, E. 240
Tullock, G. 312
Uhlig, H. 28, 114, 319
Ulbrich, J. 178
United States 247
United States Courts 326
Untiedt, G. 50
Vakharia, J. 299
Valla, N. 120, 124, 333, 334
Van Riper, F. 326
Van Rompuy, H. 106
Van Rompuy, P. 31
Vanberg, V. 263
Vaubel, R. 263, 294
Vives, X. 79, 285
Vogel, W. 30
von Hagen, J. 185, 263, 324
von Weizsäcker, C. C. 263
Voscherau, E. 96
Voss, M. 348
Wallis, J. J. 323, 324
Walsh, C. 31
Weber, C. 154, 165
Weder di Mauro, B. 282
Weichenrieder, A. 357
Weiss, A. 255
Weistroffer, C. 178
Welfens, P. J. J. 243
Wenger, E. 279
Werding, M. 89, 96
Westermann, F. 167, 178, 201, 206, 238, 281, 318, 345
White, A. 161
White, S. 296
Whittaker, J. 177, 182
Wiegard, W. 89
Wiegrefe, K. 20, 29, 57
Winkler, A. 178
Wohlrabe, K. 346
Wolf, M. 1, 187
Wolf, T. 243
Wolff, G. B. 252, 319, 337
Wollmershäuser, T. 146, 176, 178, 181, 187, 188, 189, 191, 200, 205, 206, 207, 210, 214, 217, 219, 224,
249, 272, 346
World Bank, The 86

World Trade Organization (WTO) 127
Wright, R. E. 321
Wyplosz, C. 281, 282
Yosha, O. 185
ZDF heute-journal 83
Zeit Online 112
Zeitler, F.-C. 178
Zettelmeyer, J. 337, 338, 340
Zöttle, I. 32

