
The Translator’s Invisibility
 
The Translator’s Invisibility provides a thorough and critical examination
of translation from the seventeenth century to the present day. It shows
how fluency prevailed over other translation strategies to shape the
canon of foreign literatures in English, and it interrogates the
ethnocentric and imperialist cultural consequences of the domestic
values that were simultaneously inscribed and masked in foreign texts
during this period.
In tracing the history of translation, Lawrence Venuti locates
alternative translation theories and practices which make it possible to
counter the strategy of fluency, aiming to communicate linguistic and
cultural differences instead of removing them. Using texts and
translations from Britain, America and Europe he elaborates the
theoretical and critical means by which translation can be studied and
practiced as a locus of difference, recovering and revising forgotten
translations to establish an alternative tradition.
Lawrence Venuti is Professor of English at Temple University,
Philadelphia, and has been a professional translator for the past fifteen
years. He is the editor of Rethinking Translation: Discourse, Subjectivity,
Ideology.

Translation Studies
General editors: Susan Bassnett and André Lefevere
In the same series:
Translation, Rewriting, and the Manipulation of Literary Fame
André Lefevere
Translation, Poetics and the Stage
Six French Hamlets
Romy Heylen
Translation/History/Culture
A Sourcebook
Edited by André Lefevere
Translation as Social Action
Russian and Bulgarian Perspectives
Edited and translated by Palma Zlateva

The Translator’s Invisibility
A History of Translation
Lawrence Venuti
London and New York

First published 1995
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.
 
© 1995 Lawrence Venuti
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Venuti, Lawrence.
The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation/Lawrence
Venuti.
p.
cm.—(Translation studies)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Translating and interpreting—History. 2. English language—
Translating—History. I. Title. II. Series: Translation studies
(London, England)
P306.2.V46 1995
418' .02' 09–dc20
94–6477
ISBN 0-203-36006-0 Master e-book ISBN
 
 
 
ISBN 0-203-37262-X (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0-415-11537-X (hbk)
0-415-11538-8 (pbk)

Contents
General editors’ preface
vii
Preface and acknowledgements
ix
1 Invisibility
1
2 Canon
43
3 Nation
99
4 Dissidence
148
5 Margin
187
6 Simpatico
273
7 Call to action
307
Notes
314
Bibliography
324
Index
345


General editors’ preface
The growth of translation studies as a separate discipline is a success
story of the 1980s. The subject has developed in many parts of the
world and is clearly destined to continue developing well into the
twenty-first century. Translation studies brings together work in a wide
variety of fields, including linguistics, literary study, history,
anthropology, psychology, and economics. This series of books will
reflect the breadth of work in translation studies and will enable
readers to share in the exciting new developments that are taking place
at the present time.
Translation is, of course, a rewriting of an original text. All
rewritings, whatever their intention, reflect a certain ideology and a
poetics and as such manipulate literature to function in a given society
in a given way. Rewriting is manipulation, undertaken in the service
of power, and in its positive aspect can help in the evolution of a
literature and a society. Rewritings can introduce new concepts, new
genres, new devices, and the history of translation is the history also
of literary innovation, of the shaping power of one culture upon
another. But rewriting can also repress innovation, distort and
contain, and in an age of ever increasing manipulation of all kinds,
the study of the manipulative processes of literature as exemplified by
translation can help us toward a greater awareness of the world in
which we live.
Since this series of books on translation studies is the first of
its kind, it will be concerned with its own genealogy. It will
publish texts from the past that illustrate its concerns in the
present, and will publish texts of a more theoretical nature
immediately addressing those concerns, along with case studies
illustrating manipulation through rewriting in various literatures.
It will be comparative in nature and will range through many
literary traditions, both Western and non-Western. Through the

viii
General editors’ preface
concepts of rewriting and manipulation, this series aims to tackle
the problem of ideology, change and power in literature and
society and so assert the central function of translation as a
shaping force.
Susan Bassnett
André Lefevere

Preface and acknowledgements
The Translator’s Invisibility originates in my own work as a professional
translator since the late 1970s. But any autobiographical elements are
subsumed in what is effectively a history of English-language
translation from the seventeenth century to the present. My project is
to trace the origins of the situation in which every English-language
translator works today, although from an opposing standpoint, with
the explicit aim of locating alternatives, of changing that situation. The
historical narratives presented here span centuries and national
literatures, but even though based on detailed research, they are
necessarily selective in articulating key moments and controversies,
and frankly polemical in studying the past to question the marginal
position of translation in contemporary Anglo-American culture. I
imagine a diverse audience for the book, including translation
theorists, literary theorists and critics, period specialists in various
literatures (English-language and foreign), and reviewers of
translations for periodicals, publishers, private foundations, and
government endowments. Most of all, I wish to speak to translators
and readers of translations, both professional and nonprofessional,
focusing their attention on the ways that translations are written and
read and urging them to think of new ones.
A project with this sort of intention and scope will inevitably come
to rely on the help of many people in different fields of literary and
critical expertise. Assembling the list of those who over the past several
years read, discussed, criticized, or otherwise encouraged my work is
a special pleasure, making me realize, once again, how fortunate I was:
Antoine Berman, Charles Bernstein, Shelly Brivic, Ann Caesar, Steve
Cole, Tim Corrigan, Pellegrino D’Acierno, Guy Davenport, Deirdre
David, Milo De Angelis, Rachel Blau DuPlessis, George Economou,
Jonathan Galassi, Dana Gioia, Barbara Harlow, Peter Hitchcock, Susan
Howe, Suzanne Jill Levine, Philip Lewis, Harry Mathews, Jeremy

x
Preface and acknowledgements
Maule, Sally Mitchell, Daniel O’Hara, Toby Olson, Douglas Robinson,
Stephen Sartarelli, Richard Sieburth, Alan Singer, Nigel Smith, Susan
Stewart, Robert Storey, Evelyn Tribble, William Van Wert, Justin
Vitiello, William Weaver, Sue Wells, and John Zilcosky. Others assisted
me by providing useful and sometimes essential information:
Raymond Bentman, Sara Goldin Blackburn, Robert E.Brown, Emile
Capouya, Cid Corman, Rob Fitterman, Peter Glassgold, Robert Kelly,
Alfred MacAdam, Julie Scott Meisami, M.L.Rosenthal, Susanne Stark,
Suzanna Tamminen, Peter Tasch, Maurice Valency, and Eliot
Weinberger. Of course none of these people can be held responsible for
what I finally made of their contributions.
For opportunities to share this work with various audiences in the
United States and abroad, I thank Carrie Asman, Joanna Bankier, Susan
Bassnett, Cedric Brown, Craig Eisendrath, Ed Foster, Richard Alan
Francis, Seth Frechie and Andrew Mossin, Theo Hermans, Paul
Hernadi, Robert Holub, Sydney Lévy, Gregory Lucente, Carol Maier,
Marie-josé Minassian, Anu Needham, Yopie Prins, Marilyn Gaddis
Rose, Sherry Simon, William Tropia, and Immanuel Wallerstein. I am
grateful to the staffs of the libraries where much of the research was
carried out: the British Library; the Archive for New Poetry,
Mandeville Department of Special Collections, University of
California, San Diego; Rare Books and Manuscripts, Butler Library,
Columbia University; the Library Company, Philadelphia; the
Nottingham City Archive; the Inter-Library Loan Department, Paley
Library, Temple University; and the Collection of American Literature,
Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University. I am
especially thankful to Bett Miller of the Archive for New Poetry, who
did a special job of helping me secure copies of many documents in the
Paul Blackburn Collection, and to Adrian Henstock of the Nottingham
City Archive, who enabled me to consult Lucy Hutchinson’s common-
place book. Philip Cronenwett, Chief of Special Collections at
Dartmouth College Library, kindly answered my questions about the
Ramon Guthrie papers.
Various individuals and institutions have granted permission to
quote from the following copyrighted materials:
Excerpts from Mary Barnard, Sappho: A New Translation, copyright ©
1958 by The Regents of the University of California, © renewed 1984 by
Mary Barnard; and from Assault on Mount Helicon: A Literary Memoir,
copyright © 1984 by Mary Barnard.
Excerpts from Paul Blackburn’s correspondence, translations, and
nonfiction, copyright © 1995 by Joan Miller-Cohn. Excerpts from The

General editors’ preface
xi
Collected Poems of Paul Blackburn, copyright © 1985 by Joan Blackburn.
Reprinted by permission of Persea Books, Inc.
Excerpts from the writings of Macmillan employees: editor Emile
Capouya’s letter to John Ciardi, Capouya’s letter to Ramon Guthrie,
Guthrie’s report on Paul Blackburn’s Anthology of Troubadour Poetry.
Reprinted by permission of Macmillan College Publishing Company,
New York: 1958. All rights reserved.
Excerpts from End of the Game and Other Stories by Julio Cortázar,
translated by Paul Blackburn, copyright © 1967 by Random House, Inc.
Reprinted by permission of Pantheon Books, a division of Random
House, Inc.
Excerpts from “Translator’s Preface” by Robert Fagles, from Homer:
The Iliad, translated by Robert Fagles, translation copyright © 1990 by
Robert Fagles. Introduction and notes copyright © 1990 by Bernard
Knox. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin
Books USA, Inc.
Excerpts from Poems from the Greek Anthology, translated by Dudley
Fitts, copyright © 1938, 1941, 1956, by New Directions Publishing
Corporation.
Excerpts from Dudley Fitts’s essay, “The Poetic Nuance,” reprinted
by permission from On Translation edited by Reuben A.Brower,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, copyright ©
1959 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.
Excerpts from Ramon Guthrie’s poetry and translations, used by
permission of Dartmouth College. Eugenio Montale’s poem, “Mottetti
VI,” is reprinted by permission from Tutte le poesie edited by Giorgio
Zampa, copyright © 1984 by Arnoldo Mondadori Editore SpA, Milano.
Excerpts from the works of Ezra Pound: The ABC of Reading, all
rights reserved; Literary Essays, copyright © 1918, 1920, 1935 by Ezra
Pound; The Letters of Ezra Pound 1907–1941, copyright © 1950 by Ezra
Pound; Selected Poems, copyright © 1920, 1934, 1937 by Ezra Pound; The
Spirit of Romance, copyright © 1968 by Ezra Pound; Translations,
copyright © 1954, 1963 by Ezra Pound. Used by permission of New
Directions Publishing Corporation and Faber & Faber Ltd. Previously
unpublished material by Ezra Pound, copyright © 1983 and 1995 by
the Trustees of the Ezra Pound Literary Property Trust; used by
permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation and Faber &
Faber Ltd, agents.
The tables, “U.S. Book Exports, 1990,” “U.S. Book Exports to Major
Countries, 1989–1990,” and “World Translation Publications: From
Selected Languages, 1982–1984.” Reprinted (as Tables 1 and 2) from the

xii
Preface and acknowledgements
5 July 1991 issue of Publishers Weekly, published by Cahners Publishing
Company, a division of Reed Publishing USA. Copyright © 1991 by
Reed Publishing USA.
The Best Seller List for Fiction from The New York Times Book Review,
9 July 1967, copyright © 1967 by The New York Times Company.
Reprinted by permission.
Excerpts from the agreement between myself and Farrar, Straus &
Giroux for the translation of Delirium by Barbara Alberti, used by
permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc.
Grateful acknowledgement is made to the following journals, where
some of this material appeared in earlier versions: Criticism, Journal of
Medieval and Renaissance Studies, SubStance, Talisman: A Journal of
Contemporary Poetry and Poetics, Textual Practice, To: A Journal of Poetry,
Prose, and the Visual Arts, and TTR Traduction, Terminologie, Rédaction:
Etudes sur le texte et ses transformations. An earlier version of chapter 4
appeared in my anthology, Rethinking Translation: Discourse,
Subjectivity, Ideology (Routledge, 1992). My work was supported in part
by a Research and Study Leave, a Summer Research Fellowship, and a
Grant in Aid from Temple University. My thanks to Nadia Kravchenko,
for expertly preparing the typescript and computer disks, and to Don
Hartman, for assisting in the production process.
The graphs displaying patterns in translation publishing (Figures 1
and 2) were prepared by Chris Behnam of Key Computer Services,
New York City.
All unattributed translations in the following pages are mine.
Come la sposa di ogni uomo non si sottrae a una teoria del tradurre
(Milo De Angelis), I am reduced to an inadequate expression of my
gratitude to Lindsay Davies, who has taught me much about English,
and much about the foreign in translation.
L.V.
New York City
January 1994

Chapter 1
Invisibility
I see translation as the attempt to produce a text so transparent that it
does not seem to be translated. A good translation is like a pane of glass.
You only notice that it’s there when there are little imperfections—
scratches, bubbles. Ideally, there shouldn’t be any. It should never call
attention to itself.
Norman Shapiro
I
“Invisibility” is the term I will use to describe the translator’s
situation and activity in contemporary Anglo-American culture. It
refers to two mutually determining phenomena: one is an
illusionistic effect of discourse, of the translator’s own manipulation
of English; the other is the practice of reading and evaluating
translations that has long prevailed in the United Kingdom and the
United States, among other cultures, both English and foreign-
language. A translated text, whether prose or poetry, fiction or
nonfiction, is judged acceptable by most publishers, reviewers, and
readers when it reads fluently, when the absence of any linguistic or
stylistic peculiarities makes it seem transparent, giving the
appearance that it reflects the foreign writer’s personality or
intention or the essential meaning of the foreign text—the
appearance, in other words, that the translation is not in fact a
translation, but the “original.” The illusion of transparency is an
effect of fluent discourse, of the translator’s effort to insure easy
readability by adhering to current usage, maintaining continuous
syntax, fixing a precise meaning. What is so remarkable here is that
this illusory effect conceals the numerous conditions under which
the translation is made, starting with the translator’s crucial
intervention in the foreign text The more fluent the translation, the

2
The Translator’s Invisibility
more invisible the translator, and, presumably, the more visible the
writer or meaning of the foreign text.
The dominance of fluency in English-language translation becomes
apparent in a sampling of reviews from newspapers and periodicals.
On those rare occasions when reviewers address the translation at all,
their brief comments usually focus on its style, neglecting such other
possible questions as its accuracy, its intended audience, its economic
value in the current book market, its relation to literary trends in
English, its place in the translator’s career. And over the past fifty years
the comments are amazingly consistent in praising fluent discourse
while damning deviations from it, even when the most diverse range
of foreign texts is considered.
Take fiction, for instance, the most translated genre worldwide. Limit
the choices to European and Latin American writers, the most translated
into English, and pick examples with different kinds of narratives—novels
and short stories, realistic and fantastic, lyrical and philosophical,
psychological and political. Here is one possible list: Albert Camus’s The
Stranger (1946), Françoise Sagan’s Bonjour Tristesse (1955), Heinrich Böll’s
Absent Without Leave (1965), Italo Calvino’s Cosmicomics (1968), Gabriel
García Márquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude (1970), Milan Kundera’ss
The Book of Laughter and Forgetting (1980), Mario Vargas Llosa’s In Praise
of the Stepmother (1990), Julia Kristeva’s The Samurai (1991), Gianni Celati’s
Appearances (1992), Adolfo Bioy Casares’s A Russian Doll (1992). Some of
these translations enjoyed considerable critical and commercial success
in English; others made an initial splash, then sank into oblivion; still
others passed with little or no notice. Yet in the reviews they were all
judged by the same criterion—fluency. The following selection of excerpts
comes from various British and American periodicals, both literary and
mass-audience; some were written by noted critics, novelists, and
reviewers:
 
Stuart Gilbert’s translation seems an absolutely splendid job. It is
not easy, in translating French, to render qualities of sharpness or
vividness, but the prose of Mr. Gilbert is always natural, brilliant,
and crisp.
(Wilson 1946:100)
 
The style is elegant, the prose lovely, and the translation
excellent.
(New Republic 1955:46)

Invisibility
3
In Absent Without Leave, a novella gracefully if not always flawlessly
translated by Leila Vennewitz, Böll continues his stern and
sometimes merciless probing of the conscience, values, and
imperfections of his countrymen.
(Potoker 1965:42)
 
The translation is a pleasantly fluent one: two chapters of it have
already appeared in Playboy magazine.
(Times Literary Supplement 1969:180)
 
Rabassa’s translation is a triumph of fluent, gravid momentum, all
stylishness and commonsensical virtuosity.
(West 1970:4)
 
His first four books published in English did not speak with the
stunning lyrical precision of this one (the invisible translator is
Michael Henry Heim).
(Michener 1980:108)
 
Helen Lane’s translation of the title of this book is faithful to Mario
Vargas Llosa’s—“Elogio de la Madrastra”—but not quite idiomatic.
(Burgess 1990:11)
 
The Samurai, a transparent roman à clef, fluently translated by
Barbara Bray, chronicles Ms. Kristeva’s—and Paris’s—intellectual
glory days.
(Steiner 1992:9)
 
In Stuart Hood’s translation, which flows crisply despite its
occasionally disconcerting British accent, Mr. Celati’s keen sense of
language is rendered with precision.
(Dickstein 1992:18)
 
Often wooden, occasionally careless or inaccurate, it shows all the
signs of hurried work and inadequate revision. […] The Spanish
original here is 10 words shorter and incomparably more elegant.
(Balderston 1992:15)
 
The critical lexicon of post-World War II literary journalism is filled
with so many terms to indicate the presence or absence of a fluent
translation discourse: “crisp,” “elegant,” “flows,” “gracefully,”

4
The Translator’s Invisibility
“wooden.” There is even a group of pejorative neologisms designed to
criticize translations that lack fluency, but also used, more generally, to
signify badly written prose: “translatese,” “translationese,”
“translatorese.” In English, fluent translation is recommended for an
extremely wide range of foreign texts—contemporary and archaic,
religious and scientific, fiction and nonfiction.
 
Translationese in a version from Hebrew is not always easy to
detect, since the idioms have been familiarised through the
Authorized Version.
(Times Literary Supplement 1961:iv)
 
An attempt has been made to use modern English which is lively
without being slangy. Above all, an effort has been made to avoid
the kind of unthinking “translationese” which has so often in the
past imparted to translated Russian literature a distinctive,
somehow “doughy,” style of its own with little relation to anything
present in the original Russian.
(Hingley 1964:x)
 
He is solemnly reverential and, to give the thing an authentic
classical smack, has couched it in the luke-warm translatese of one
of his own more unurgent renderings.
(Corke 1967:761)
 
There is even a recognizable variant of pidgin English known as
“translatorese” (“transjargonisation” being an American term for a
particular form of it).
(Times Literary Supplement 1967:399)
 
Paralysing woodenness (“I am concerned to determine”), the dull
thud of translatese (“Here is the place to mention Pirandello
finally”) are often the price we more or less willingly pay for access
to great thoughts.
(Brady 1977:201)
 
A gathering of such excerpts indicates which discursive features
produce fluency in an English-language translation and which do not.
A fluent translation is written in English that is current (“modern”)
instead of archaic, that is widely used instead of specialized
(“jargonisation”), and that is standard instead of colloquial (“slangy”).

Invisibility
5
Foreign words (“pidgin”) are avoided, as are Britishisms in American
translations and Americanisms in British translations. Fluency also
depends on syntax that is not so “faithful” to the foreign text as to be
“not quite idiomatic,” that unfolds continuously and easily (not
“doughy”) to insure semantic “precision” with some rhythmic
definition, a sense of closure (not a “dull thud”). A fluent translation
is immediately recognizable and intelligible, “familiarised,”
domesticated, not “disconcerting[ly]” foreign, capable of giving the
reader unobstructed “access to great thoughts,” to what is “present in
the original.” Under the regime of fluent translating, the translator
works to make his or her work “invisible,” producing the illusory
effect of transparency that simultaneously masks its status as an
illusion: the translated text seems “natural,” i.e., not translated.
The dominance of transparency in English-language translation
reflects comparable trends in other cultural forms, including other
forms of writing. The enormous economic and political power
acquired by scientific research during the twentieth century, the
postwar innovations in advanced communications technologies to
expand the advertising and entertainment industries and support
the economic cycle of commodity production and exchange—these
developments have affected every medium, both print and
electronic, by valorizing a purely instrumental use of language and
other means of representation and thus emphasizing immediate
intelligibility and the appearance of factuality.1 The American poet
Charles Bernstein, who for many years worked as a “commercial
writer” of various kinds of nonfiction—medical, scientific,
technical—observes how the dominance of transparency in
contemporary writing is enforced by its economic value, which sets
up acceptable “limits” for deviation:
 
the fact that the overwhelming majority of steady paid employment
for writing involves using the authoritative plain styles, if it is not
explicitly advertising; involves writing, that is, filled with
preclusions, is a measure of why this is not simply a matter of
stylistic choice but of social governance: we are not free to choose
the language of the workplace or of the family we are born into,
though we are free, within limits, to rebel against it.
(Bernstein 1986:225)
 
The authority of “plain styles” in English-language writing was of
course achieved over several centuries, what Bernstein describes as

6
The Translator’s Invisibility
“the historical movement toward uniform spelling and grammar, with
an ideology that emphasizes nonidiosyncratic, smooth transition,
elimination of awkwardness, &c.—anything that might concentrate
attention on the language itself” (ibid.:27). In contemporary Anglo-
American literature, this movement has made realism the most
prevalent form of narrative and free, prose-like verse the most
prevalent form of poetry:
 
in contrast to, say, Sterne’s work, where the look & texture—the
opacity—of the text is everywhere present, a neutral
transparent prose style has developed in certain novels where
the words seem meant to be looked through—to the depicted
world beyond the page. Likewise, in current middle of the road
poetry, we see the elimination of overt rhyme & alliteration,
with metric forms retained primarily for their capacity to
officialize as “poetry.”
(ibid.)2
 
In view of these cultural trends, it seems inevitable that transparency
would become the authoritative discourse for translating, whether the
foreign text was literary or scientific/technical. The British translator
J.M.Cohen noticed this development as early as 1962, when he
remarked that “twentieth-century translators, influenced by science-
teaching and the growing importance attached to accuracy […] have
generally concentrated on prose-meaning and interpretation, and
neglected the imitation of form and manner” (Cohen 1962:35). Cohen
also noticed the domestication involved here, “the risk of reducing
individual authors’ styles and national tricks of speech to a plain
prose uniformity,” but he felt that this “danger” was avoided by the
“best” translations (ibid.:33). What he failed to see, however, was that
the criterion determining the “best” was still radically English.
Translating for “prose-meaning and interpretation,” practicing
translation as simple communication, rewrites the foreign text
according to such English-language values as transparency, but
entirely eclipses the translator’s domesticating work—even in the eyes
of the translator.
The translator’s invisibility is also partly determined by the
individualistic conception of authorship that continues to prevail in
Anglo-American culture. According to this conception, the author
freely expresses his thoughts and feelings in writing, which is thus
viewed as an original and transparent self-representation,

Invisibility
7
unmediated by transindividual determinants (linguistic, cultural,
social) that might complicate authorial originality. This view of
authorship carries two disadvantageous implications for the
translator. On the one hand, translation is defined as a second-order
representation: only the foreign text can be original, an authentic copy,
true to the author’s personality or intention, whereas the translation is
derivative, fake, potentially a false copy. On the other hand,
translation is required to efface its second-order status with
transparent discourse, producing the illusion of authorial presence
whereby the translated text can be taken as the original. However
much the individualistic conception of authorship devalues
translation, it is so pervasive that it shapes translators’ self-
presentations, leading some to psychologize their relationship to the
foreign text as a process of identification with the author. The
American Willard Trask (1900–1980), a major twentieth-century
translator in terms of the quantity and cultural importance of his
work, drew a clear distinction between authoring and translating.
When asked in a late interview whether “the impulse” to translate “is
the same as that of someone who wants to write a novel” (a question
that is clearly individualistic in its reference to an authorial
“impulse”), Trask replied:
 
No, I wouldn’t say so, because I once tried to write a novel. When
you’re writing a novel […] you’re obviously writing about people or
places, something or other, but what you are essentially doing is
expressing yourself. Whereas when you translate you’re not
expressing yourself. You’re performing a technical stunt. […] I
realized that the translator and the actor had to have the same kind
of talent. What they both do is to take something of somebody else’s
and put it over as if it were their own. I think you have to have that
capacity. So in addition to the technical stunt, there is a
psychological workout, which translation involves: something like
being on stage. It does something entirely different from what I
think of as creative poetry writing.
(Honig 1985:13–14)
 
In Trask’s analogy, translators playact as authors, and translations pass
for original texts. Translators are very much aware that any sense of
authorial presence in a translation is an illusion, an effect of
transparent discourse, comparable to a “stunt,” but they nonetheless
assert that they participate in a “psychological” relationship with the

8
The Translator’s Invisibility
author in which they repress their own “personality.” “I guess I
consider myself in a kind of collaboration with the author,” says
American translator Norman Shapiro; “Certainly my ego and
personality are involved in translating, and yet I have to try to stay
faithful to the basic text in such a way that my own personality doesn’t
show” (Kratz 1986:27).
The translator’s invisibility is thus a weird self-annihilation, a way
of conceiving and practicing translation that undoubtedly reinforces
its marginal status in Anglo-American culture. For although the past
twenty years have seen the institution of translation centers and
programs at British and American universities, as well as the founding
of translation committees, associations, and awards in literary
organizations like the Society of Authors in London and the PEN
American Center in New York, the fact remains that translators
receive minimal recognition for their work—including translators of
writing that is capable of generating publicity (because it is prize-
winning, controversial, censored). The typical mention of the
translator in a review takes the form of a brief aside in which, more
often than not, the transparency of the translation is gauged. This,
however, is an infrequent occurrence. Ronald Christ has described the
prevailing practice: “many newspapers, such as The Los Angeles Times,
do not even list the translators in headnotes to reviews, reviewers
often fail to mention that a book is a translation (while quoting from
the text as though it were written in English), and publishers almost
uniformly exclude translators from book covers and advertisements”
(Christ 1984:8). Even when the reviewer is also a writer, a novelist, say,
or a poet, the fact that the text under review is a translation may be
overlooked. In 1981, the American novelist John Updike reviewed two
foreign novels for The New Yorker, Italo Calvino’s If On a Winter’s Night
a Traveller and Günter Grass’s The Meeting at Telgte, but the lengthy
essay made only the barest reference to the translators. Their names
appeared in parentheses after the first mention of the English-
language titles. Reviewers who may be expected to have a writerly
sense of language are seldom inclined to discuss translation as
writing.
The translator’s shadowy existence in Anglo-American culture is
further registered, and maintained, in the ambiguous and unfavorable
legal status of translation, both in copyright law and in actual
contractual arrangements. British and American law defines
translation as an “adaptation” or “derivative work” based on an
“original work of authorship,” whose copyright, including the

Invisibility
9
exclusive right “to prepare derivative works” or “adaptations,” is
vested in the “author.”3 The translator is thus subordinated to the
author, who decisively controls the publication of the translation
during the term of the copyright for the “original” text, currently the
author’s lifetime plus fifty years. Yet since authorship here is defined
as the creation of a form or medium of expression, not an idea, as
originality of language, not thought, British and American law
permits translations to be copyrighted in the translator’s name,
recognizing that the translator uses another language for the foreign
text and therefore can be understood as creating an original work
(Skone James et al. 1991; Stracher 1991). In copyright law, the
translator is and is not an author.4
The translator’s authorship is never given full legal recognition
because of the priority given to the foreign writer in controlling the
translation—even to point of compromising the translator’s rights as
a British or American citizen. In subscribing to international copyright
treaties like the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works, the United Kingdom and the United States agree to
treat nationals of other member countries like their own nationals for
purposes of copyright (Scarles 1980:8–11). Hence, British and
American law holds that an English-language translation of a foreign
text can be published only by arrangement with the author who owns
the copyright for that text—i.e., the foreign writer, or, as the case may
be, a foreign agent or publisher. The translator may be allowed the
authorial privilege to copyright the translation, but he or she is
excluded from the legal protection that authors enjoy as citizens of the
UK or US in deference to another author, a foreign national. The
ambiguous legal definition of translation, both original and
derivative, exposes a limitation in the translator’s citizenship, as well
as the inability of current copyright law to think translation across
national boundaries despite the existence of international treaties. The
Berne Convention (Paris 1971) at once assigns an authorial right to the
translator and withdraws it: “Translations, adaptations, arrangements
of music and other alterations of a literary or artistic work shall be
protected as original works without prejudice to the copyright in the
original work” held by the foreign “author,” who “shall enjoy the
exclusive right of making and of authorising the translation” (articles
2(3), 8).5 Copyright law does not define a space for the translator’s
authorship that is equal to, or in any way restricts, the foreign author’s
rights. And yet it acknowledges that there is a material basis to
warrant some such restriction.

10
The Translator’s Invisibility
Translation contracts in the postwar period have in fact varied
widely, partly because of the ambiguities in copyright law, but also
because of other factors like changing book markets, a particular
translator’s level of expertise, and the difficulty of a particular
translation project. Nonetheless, general trends can be detected
over the course of several decades, and they reveal publishers
excluding the translator from any rights in the translation.
Standard British contracts require the translator to make an out-
and-out assignment of the copyright to the publisher. In the United
States, the most common contractual definition of the translated
text has not been “original work of authorship,” but “work made
for hire,” a category in American copyright law whereby “the
employer or person for whom the work was prepared is considered
the author […] and, unless the parties have expressly agreed
otherwise in a written instrument signed by them, owns ail the
rights comprised in the copyright” (17 US Code, sections 101, 201
(6)). Work-for-hire contracts alienate the translator from the
product of his or her labor with remarkable finality. Here is the
relevant clause in Columbia University Press’s standard contract
for translators:
 
You and we agree that the work you will prepare has been specially
ordered and commissioned by us, and is a work made for hire as
such term is used and defined by the Copyright Act. Accordingly,
we shall be considered the sole and exclusive owner throughout the
world forever of all rights existing therein, free of claims by you or
anyone claiming through you or on your behalf.
 
This work-for-hire contract embodies the ambiguity of the translator’s
legal status by including another clause that implicitly recognizes the
translator as an author, the creator of an “original” work: “You
warrant that your work will be original and that it will not infringe
upon the copyright or violate any right of any person or party
whatsoever.”
Contracts that require translators to assign the copyright, or that
define translations as works made for hire, are obviously
exploitative in the division of earnings. Such translations are
compensated by a flat fee per thousand English words, regardless
of the potential income from the sale of books and subsidiary rights
(e.g., a periodical publication, a license to a paperback publisher,
an option by a film production company). An actual case will make

Invisibility
11
clear how this arrangement exploits translators. On 12 May 1965,
the American translator Paul Blackburn entered into a work-for-
hire arrangement with Pantheon in which he received “$15.00 per
thousand words” for his translation of End of the Game, a collection
of short stories by the Argentine writer Julio Cortázar.6 Blackburn
received a total of $1200 for producing an English-language
translation that filled 277 pages as a printed book; Cortázar
received a $2000 advance against royalties, 7.5 percent of the list
price for the first 5000 copies. The “poverty level” set by the
Federal government in 1965 was an annual income of $1894 (for a
male). Blackburn’s income as an editor was usually $8000, but to
complete the translation he was forced to reduce his editorial work
and seek a grant from arts agencies and private foundations—
which he failed to receive. Ultimately, he requested an extension of
the delivery date for the translation from roughly a year to sixteen
months (the contracted date of 1 June 1966 was later changed to 1
October 1966).
Blackburn’s difficult situation has been faced by most freelance
English-language translators throughout the postwar period:
below-subsistence fees force them either to translate sporadically,
while working at other jobs (typically editing, writing, teaching), or
to undertake multiple translation projects simultaneously, the
number of which is determined by the book market and sheer
physical limitations. By 1969, the fee for work-for-hire translations
increased to $20 per thousand words, making Blackburn’s Cortázar
project worth $1600, while the poverty level was set at $1974; by
1979, the going rate was $30 and Blackburn would have made
$2400, while the poverty level was $3689.7 According to a 1990
survey conducted by the PEN American Center and limited to the
responses of nineteen publishers, 75 percent of the translations
surveyed were contracted on a work-for-hire basis, with fees
ranging from $40 to $90 per thousand words (Keeley 1990:10–12; A
Handbook for Literary Translators 1991:5–6). A recent estimate puts
the translation cost of a 300-page novel between $3000 and $6000
(Marcus 1990:13–14; cf. Gardam 1990). The poverty level in 1989
was set at $5936 for a person under 65 years. Because this economic
situation drives freelance translators to turn out several
translations each year, it inevitably limits the literary invention and
critical reflection applied to a project, while pitting translators
against each other—often unwittingly—in the competition for
projects and the negotiation of fees.

12
The Translator’s Invisibility
Contracts since the 1980s show an increasing recognition of the
translator’s crucial role in the production of the translation by
referring to him or her as the “author” or “translator” and by
copyrighting the text in the translator’s name. This redefinition has
been accompanied by an improvement in financial terms, with
experienced translators receiving an advance against royalties,
usually a percentage of the list price or the net proceeds, as well as
a portion of subsidiary rights sales. The 1990 PEN survey indicated
that translators’ royalties were “in the area of 2 to 5 percent for
hardcover and 1.5 to 2.5 percent for paperback” (Handbook 1991:5).
But these are clearly small increments. While they signal a growing
awareness of the translator’s authorship, they do not constitute a
significant change in the economics of translation, and it remains
difficult for a freelance translator to make a living solely from
translating. A typical first printing for a literary translation
published by a trade press is approximately 5000 copies (less for a
university press), so that even with the trend toward contracts
offering royalties, the translator is unlikely to see any income
beyond the advance. Very few translations become bestsellers; very
few are likely to be reprinted, whether in hardcover or paperback.
And, perhaps most importantly, very few translations are published
in English.
As Figures 1 and 2 indicate, British and American book
production increased fourfold since the 1950s, but the number of
translations remained roughly between 2 and 4 percent of the
total—notwithstanding a marked surge during the early 1960s,
when the number of translations ranged between 4 and 7 percent of
the total.8 In 1990, British publishers brought out 63,980 books, of
which 1625 were translations (2.4 percent), while American
publishers brought out 46,743 books, including 1380 translations
(2.96 percent). Publishing practices in other countries have
generally run in the opposite direction. Western European
publishing also burgeoned over the past several decades, but
translations have always amounted to a significant percentage of
total book production, and this percentage has consistently been
dominated by translations from English. The translation rate in
France has varied between 8 and 12 percent of the total. In 1985,
French publishers brought out 29,068 books, of which 2867 were
translations (9.9 percent), 2051 from English (Frémy 1992). The
translation rate in Italy has been higher. In 1989, Italian publishers
brought out 33,893 books, of which 8602 were translations (25.4

Invisibility
13
Figure 2 American publishing: Total book ouput vs. translations
Figure 1 British publishing: Total book output vs. translations

14
The Translator’s Invisibility
percent), more than half from English (Lottman 1991:S5). The
German publishing industry is somewhat larger than its British
and American counterparts, and here too the translation rate is
considerably higher. In 1990, German publishers brought out 61,015
books, of which 8716 were translations (14.4 percent), including about
5650 from English (Flad 1992:40). Since World War II, English has been
the most translated language worldwide, but it isn’t much translated
into, given the number of English-language books published annually
(Table 1 provides the most recent data).
These translation patterns point to a trade imbalance with serious
cultural ramifications. British and American publishers travel every
year to international markets like the American Booksellers
Convention and the Frankfurt Book Fair, where they sell translation
rights for many English-language books, including the global
bestsellers, but rarely buy the rights to publish English-language
translations of foreign books. British and American publishers have
devoted more attention to acquiring bestsellers, and the formation of
multinational publishing conglomerates has brought more capital to
Table 1 World translation publications: from selected languages,
1982-1984
aSwedish, Danish, Norwegian, Islandic
Source: Grannis 1991, p.24

Invisibility
15
support this editorial policy (an advance for a predicted bestseller is
now in the millions of dollars) while limiting the number of
financially risky books, like translations (Whiteside 1981; Feldman
1986). The London literary agent Paul Marsh confirms this trend by
urging publishers to concentrate on selling translation rights instead
of buying them: “any book with four or five translation sales in the
bag at an early stage stands a good chance of at least nine or 10 by
the end of the process” (Marsh 1991:27). Marsh adds that “most
translation rights deals are done for a modest return” (ibid.), but the
fact is that British and American publishers routinely receive
lucrative advances for these deals, even when a foreign publisher or
agent pressures them to consider other kinds of income (viz.
royalties). The Milan-based Antonella Antonelli is one such agent,
although the figure she cites as an imprudent Italian investment in
an English-language book—“If you pay a $200,000 advance, you
can’t make it back in Italy”—actually suggests how profitable
translation rights can be for the publishers involved, foreign as well
as British and American (Lottman 1991:S6). The sale of English-
language books abroad has also been profitable: in 1990, American
book exports amounted to more than $1.43 billion, with the export—
import ratio at 61 to 39.
The consequences of this trade imbalance are diverse and far-
reaching. By routinely translating large numbers of the most varied
English-language books, foreign publishers have exploited the global
drift toward American political and economic hegemony in the postwar
period, actively supporting the international expansion of Anglo-
American culture. This trend has been reinforced by English-language
book imports: the range of foreign countries receiving these books and
the various categories into which the books fall show not only the
worldwide reach of English, but the depth of its presence in foreign
cultures, circulating through the school, the library, the bookstore,
determining diverse areas, disciplines, and constituencies—academic
and religious, literary and technical, elite and popular, adult and child
(see Table 2). British and American publishing, in turn, has reaped the
financial benefits of successfully imposing Anglo-American cultural
values on a vast foreign readership, while producing cultures in the
United Kingdom and the United States that are aggressively
monolingual, unreceptive to the foreign, accustomed to fluent
translations that invisibly inscribe foreign texts with English-language
values and provide readers with the narcissistic experience of
recognizing their own culture in a cultural other. The prevalence of fluent

16
The Translator’s Invisibility
domestication has supported these developments because of its
economic value: enforced by editors, publishers, and reviewers, fluency
results in translations that are eminently readable and therefore
consumable on the book market, assisting in their commodification and
insuring the neglect of foreign texts and English-language translation
discourses that are more resistant to easy readability.
The translator’s invisibility can now be seen as a mystification of
troubling proportions, an amazingly successful concealment of the
Table 2 US book exports to major countries, 1990: shipments valued
at $ 2500 or more
Source: Grannis 1991, pp. 21 and 22

Invisibility
17
multiple determinants and effects of English-language translation,
the multiple hierarchies and exclusions in which it is implicated. An
illusionism produced by fluent translating, the translator’s
invisibility at once enacts and masks an insidious domestication of
foreign texts, rewriting them in the transparent discourse that
prevails in English and that selects precisely those foreign texts
amenable to fluent translating. Insofar as the effect of transparency
effaces the work of translation, it contributes to the cultural
marginality and economic exploitation that English-language
translators have long suffered, their status as seldom recognized,
poorly paid writers whose work nonetheless remains indispensable
because of the global domination of Anglo-American culture, of
English. Behind the translator’s invisibility is a trade imbalance that
underwrites this domination, but also decreases the cultural capital
of foreign values in English by limiting the number of foreign texts
translated and submitting them to domesticating revision. The
translator’s invisibility is symptomatic of a complacency in Anglo-
American relations with cultural others, a complacency that can be
described—without too much exaggeration—as imperialistic abroad
and xenophobic at home.
The concept of the translator’s “invisibility” is already a cultural
critique, a diagnosis that opposes the situation it represents. It is
partly a representation from below, from the standpoint of the
contemporary English-language translator, although one who has
been driven to question the conditions of his work because of
various developments, cultural and social, foreign and domestic.
The motive of this book is to make the translator more visible so as
to resist and change the conditions under which translation is
theorized and practiced today, especially in English-speaking
countries. Hence, the first step will be to present a theoretical basis
from which translations can be read as translations, as texts in their
own right, permitting transparency to be demystified, seen as one
discursive effect among others.
II
Translation is a process by which the chain of signifiers that
constitutes the source-language text is replaced by a chain of
signifiers in the target language which the translator provides on the
strength of an interpretation. Because meaning is an effect of
relations and differences among signifiers along a potentially

18
The Translator’s Invisibility
endless chain (polysemous, intertextual, subject to infinite linkages),
it is always differential and deferred, never present as an original
unity (Derrida 1982). Both foreign text and translation are derivative:
both consist of diverse linguistic and cultural materials that neither
the foreign writer nor the translator originates, and that destabilize
the work of signification, inevitably exceeding and possibly
conflicting with their intentions. As a result, a foreign text is the site
of many different semantic possibilities that are fixed only
provisionally in any one translation, on the basis of varying cultural
assumptions and interpretive choices, in specific social situations, in
different historical periods. Meaning is a plural and contingent
relation, not an unchanging unified essence, and therefore a
translation cannot be judged according to mathematics-based
concepts of semantic equivalence or one-to-one correspondence.
Appeals to the foreign text cannot finally adjudicate between
competing translations in the absence of linguistic error, because
canons of accuracy in translation, notions of “fidelity” and
“freedom,” are historically determined categories. Even the notion
of “linguistic error” is subject to variation, since mistranslations,
especially in literary texts, can be not merely intelligible but
significant in the target-language culture. The viability of a
translation is established by its relationship to the cultural and social
conditions under which it is produced and read.
This relationship points to the violence that resides in the very
purpose and activity of translation: the reconstitution of the foreign
text in accordance with values, beliefs and representations that
preexist it in the target language, always configured in hierarchies of
dominance and marginality, always determining the production,
circulation, and reception of texts. Translation is the forcible
replacement of the linguistic and cultural difference of the foreign
text with a text that will be intelligible to the targetlanguage reader.
This difference can never be entirely removed, of course, but it
necessarily suffers a reduction and exclusion of possibilities—and an
exorbitant gain of other possibilities specific to the translating
language. Whatever difference the translation conveys is now
imprinted by the target-language culture, assimilated to its positions
of intelligibility, its canons and taboos, its codes and ideologies. The
aim of translation is to bring back a cultural other as the same, the
recognizable, even the familiar; and this aim always risks a
wholesale domestication of the foreign text, often in highly self-
conscious projects, where translation serves an appropriation of

Invisibility
19
foreign cultures for domestic agendas, cultural, economic, political.
Translation can be considered the communication of a foreign text,
but it is always a communication limited by its address to a specific
reading audience.
The violent effects of translation are felt at home as well as
abroad. On the one hand, translation wields enormous power in the
construction of national identities for foreign cultures, and hence it
potentially figures in ethnic discrimination, geopolitical
confrontations, colonialism, terrorism, war. On the other hand,
translation enlists the foreign text in the maintenance or revision of
literary canons in the target-language culture, inscribing poetry and
fiction, for example, with the various poetic and narrative discourses
that compete for cultural dominance in the target language.
Translation also enlists the foreign text in the maintenance or
revision 
of 
dominant 
conceptual 
paradigms, 
research
methodologies, and clinical practices in target-language disciplines
and professions, whether physics or architecture, philosophy or
psychiatry, sociology or law. It is these social affiliations and
effects—written into the materiality of the translated text, into its
discursive strategy and its range of allusiveness for the target-
language reader, but also into the very choice to translate it and the
ways it is published, reviewed, and taught—all these conditions
permit translation to be called a cultural political practice,
constructing or critiquing ideology-stamped identities for foreign
cultures, affirming or transgressing discursive values and
institutional limits in the target-language culture. The violence
wreaked by translation is partly inevitable, inherent in the
translation process, partly potential, emerging at any point in the
production and reception of the translated text, varying with specific
cultural and social formations at different historical moments.
The most urgent question facing the translator who possesses this
knowledge is, What to do? Why and how do I translate? Although I
have construed translation as the site of many determinations and
effects—linguistic, cultural, economic, ideological—I also want to
indicate that the freelance literary translator always exercises a choice
concerning the degree and direction of the violence at work in any
translating. This choice has been given various formulations, past and
present, but perhaps none so decisive as that offered by the German
theologian and philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher. In an 1813
lecture on the different methods of translation, Schleiermacher argued
that “there are only two. Either the translator leaves the author in

20
The Translator’s Invisibility
peace, as much as possible, and moves the reader towards him; or he
leaves the reader in peace, as much as possible, and moves the author
towards him” (Lefevere 1977:74). Admitting (with qualifications like
“as much as possible”) that translation can never be completely
adequate to the foreign text, Schleiermacher allowed the translator to
choose between a domesticating method, an ethnocentric reduction of
the foreign text to target-language cultural values, bringing the author
back home, and a foreignizing method, an ethnodeviant pressure on
those values to register the linguistic and cultural difference of the
foreign text, sending the reader abroad.
Schleiermacher made clear that his choice was foreignizing
translation, and this led the French translator and translation
theorist Antoine Berman to treat Schleiermacher’s argument as an
ethics of translation, concerned with making the translated text a
place where a cultural other is manifested—although, of course, an
otherness that can never be manifested in its own terms, only in
those of the target language, and hence always already encoded
(Berman 1985:87–91).9 The “foreign” in foreignizing translation is
not a transparent representation of an essence that resides in the
foreign text and is valuable in itself, but a strategic construction
whose value is contingent on the current target-language situation.
Foreignizing translation signifies the difference of the foreign text,
yet only by disrupting the cultural codes that prevail in the target
language. In its effort to do right abroad, this translation method
must do wrong at home, deviating enough from native norms to
stage an alien reading experience—choosing to translate a foreign
text excluded by domestic literary canons, for instance, or using a
marginal discourse to translate it.
I want to suggest that insofar as foreignizing translation seeks to
restrain the ethnocentric violence of translation, it is highly desirable
today, a strategic cultural intervention in the current state of world
affairs, pitched against the hegemonic English-language nations and
the unequal cultural exchanges in which they engage their global
others. Foreignizing translation in English can be a form of resistance
against ethnocentrism and racism, cultural narcissism and
imperialism, in the interests of democratic geopolitical relations. As a
theory and practice of translation, however, a foreignizing method is
specific to certain European countries at particular historical moments:
formulated first in German culture during the classical and romantic
periods, it has recently been revived in a French cultural scene
characterized by postmodern developments in philosophy, literary

Invisibility
21
criticism, psychoanalysis, and social theory that have come to be
known as “poststructuralism.”10 Anglo-American culture, in contrast,
has long been dominated by domesticating theories that recommend
fluent translating. By producing the illusion of transparency, a fluent
translation masquerades as true semantic equivalence when it in fact
inscribes the foreign text with a partial interpretation, partial to
English-language values, reducing if not simply excluding the very
difference that translation is called on to convey. This ethnocentric
violence is evident in the translation theories put forth by the prolific
and influential Eugene Nida, translation consultant to the American
Bible Society: here transparency is enlisted in the service of Christian
humanism.
Consider Nida’s concept of “dynamic” or “functional
equivalence” in translation, formulated first in 1964, but restated and
developed in numerous books and articles over the past thirty years.
“A translation of dynamic equivalence aims at complete naturalness
of expression,” states Nida, “and tries to relate the receptor to modes
of behavior relevant within the context of his own culture” (Nida
1964:159). The phrase “naturalness of expression” signals the
importance of a fluent strategy to this theory of translation, and in
Nida’s work it is obvious that fluency involves domestication. As he
has recently put it, “the translator must be a person who can draw
aside the curtains of linguistic and cultural differences so that people
may see clearly the relevance of the original message” (Nida and de
Waard 1986:14). This is of course a relevance to the target-language
culture, something with which foreign writers are usually not
concerned when they write their texts, so that relevance can be
established in the translation process only by replacing source-
language features that are not recognizable with target-language ones
that are. Thus, when Nida asserts that “an easy and natural style in
translating, despite the extreme difficulty of producing it […] is
nevertheless essential to producing in the ultimate receptors a
response similar to that of the original receptors” (Nida 1964:163), he
is in fact imposing the English-language valorization of transparent
discourse on every foreign culture, masking a basic disjunction
between the source-and target-language texts which puts into
question the possibility of eliciting a “similar” response.
Typical of other theorists in the Anglo-American tradition,
however, Nida has argued that dynamic equivalence is consistent
with a notion of accuracy. The dynamically equivalent translation
does not indiscriminately use “anything which might have special

22
The Translator’s Invisibility
impact and appeal for receptors”; it rather “means thoroughly
understanding not only the meaning of the source text but also the
manner in which the intended receptors of a text are likely to
understand it in the receptor language” (Nida and de Waard
1986:vii–viii, 9). For Nida, accuracy in translation depends on
generating an equivalent effect in the target-language culture: “the
receptors of a translation should comprehend the translated text to
such an extent that they can understand how the original receptors
must have understood the original text” (ibid.:36). The dynamically
equivalent translation is “interlingual communication” which
overcomes the linguistic and cultural differences that impede it
(ibid.:11). Yet the understanding of the foreign text and culture
which this kind of translation makes possible answers
fundamentally to target-language cultural values while veiling this
domestication in the transparency evoked by a fluent strategy.
Communication here is initiated and controlled by the target-
language culture, it is in fact an interested interpretation, and
therefore it seems less an exchange of information than an
appropriation of a foreign text for domestic purposes. Nida’s theory
of translation as communication does not adequately take into
account the ethnocentric violence that is inherent in every
translation process—but especially in one governed by dynamic
equivalence.
Nida’s advocacy of domesticating translation is explicitly grounded
on a transcendental concept of humanity as an essence that remains
unchanged over time and space. “As linguists and anthropologists
have discovered,” Nida states, “that which unites mankind is much
greater than that which divides, and hence there is, even in cases of
very disparate languages and cultures, a basis for communication”
(Nida 1964:2). Nida’s humanism may appear to be democratic in its
appeal to “that which unites mankind,” but this is contradicted by the
more exclusionary values that inform his theory of translation,
specifically Christian evangelism and cultural elitism. From the very
beginning of his career, Nida’s work has been motivated by the
exigencies of Bible translation: not only have problems in the history
of Bible translation served as examples for his theoretical statements,
but he has written studies in anthropology and linguistics designed
primarily for Bible translators and missionaries. Nida’s concept of
dynamic equivalence in fact links the translator to the missionary.
When in Customs and Cultures: Anthropology for Christian Missions
(1954) he asserted that “a close examination of successful missionary

Invisibility
23
work inevitably reveals the correspondingly effective manner in
which the missionaries were able to identify themselves with the
people—‘to be all things to all men’—and to communicate their
message in terms which have meaning for the lives of the people”
(Nida 1975:250), he was echoing what he had earlier asserted of the
Bible translator in God’s Word in Man’s Language (1952): “The task of
the true translator is one of identification. As a Christian servant he
must identify with Christ; as a translator he must identify himself
with the Word; as a missionary he must identify himself with the
people” (Nida 1952:117). Both the missionary and the translator must
find the dynamic equivalent in the target language so as to establish
the relevance of the Bible in the target culture. But Nida permits only
a particular kind of relevance to be established. While he disapproves
of “the tendency to promote by means of Bible translating the cause
of a particular theological viewpoint, whether deistic, rationalistic,
immersionistic, millenarian, or charismatic” (Nida and de Waard
1986:33), it is obvious that he himself has promoted a reception of the
text centered in Christian dogma. And although he offers a nuanced
account of how “diversities in the backgrounds of receptors” can
shape any Bible translation, he insists that “translations prepared
primarily for minority groups must generally involve highly
restrictive forms of language, but they must not involve substandard
grammar or vulgar wording” (ibid.:14). Nida’s concept of dynamic
equivalence in Bible translation goes hand in hand with an
evangelical zeal that seeks to impose on English-language readers a
specific dialect of English as well as a distinctly Christian
understanding of the Bible. When Nida’s translator identifies with the
target-language reader to communicate the foreign text, he
simultaneously 
excludes 
other 
target-language 
cultural
constituencies.
To advocate foreignizing translation in opposition to the Anglo-
American tradition of domestication is not to do away with
cultural political agendas—such an advocacy is itself an agenda.
The point is rather to develop a theory and practice of translation
that resists dominant target-language cultural values so as to
signify the linguistic and cultural difference of the foreign text.
Philip Lewis’s concept of “abusive fidelity” can be useful in such
a theorization: it acknowledges the abusive, equivocal relationship
between the translation and the foreign text and eschews a fluent
strategy in order to reproduce in the translation whatever features
of the foreign text abuse or resist dominant cultural values in the

24
The Translator’s Invisibility
source language. Abusive fidelity directs the translator’s attention
away from the conceptual signified to the play of signifiers on
which it depends, to phonological, syntactical, and discursive
structures, resulting in a “translation that values experimentation,
tampers with usage, seeks to match the polyvalencies or
plurivocities or expressive stresses of the original by producing its
own” (Lewis 1985:41). Such a translation strategy can best be called
resistancy, not merely because it avoids fluency, but because it
challenges the target-language culture even as it enacts its own
ethnocentric violence on the foreign text.
The notion of foreignization can alter the ways translations are
read as well as produced because it assumes a concept of human
subjectivity that is very different from the humanist assumptions
underlying domestication. Neither the foreign writer nor the
translator is conceived as the transcendental origin of the text, freely
expressing an idea about human nature or communicating it in
transparent language to a reader from a different culture. Rather,
subjectivity is constituted by cultural and social determinations that
are diverse and even conflicting, that mediate any language use,
and, that vary with every cultural formation and every historical
moment. Human action is intentional, but determinate, self-
reflexively measured against social rules and resources, the
heterogeneity of which allows for the possibility of change with
every self-reflexive action (Giddens 1979:chap. 2). Textual
production may be initiated and guided by the producer, but it puts
to work various linguistic and cultural materials which make the
text discontinuous, despite any appearance of unity, and which
create an unconscious, a set of unacknowledged conditions that are
both personal and social, psychological and ideological. Thus, the
translator consults many different target-language cultural
materials, ranging from dictionaries and grammars to texts,
discursive strategies, and translations, to values, paradigms, and
ideologies, both canonical and marginal. Although intended to
reproduce the source-language text, the translator’s consultation of
these materials inevitably reduces and supplements it, even when
source-language cultural materials are also consulted. Their sheer
heterogeneity leads to discontinuities—between the source-language
text and the translation and within the translation itself—that are
symptomatic of its ethnocentric violence. A humanist method of
reading translations elides these discontinuities by locating a
semantic unity adequate to the foreign text, stressing intelligibility,

Invisibility
25
transparent communication, the use value of the translation in the
target-language culture. A symptomatic reading, in contrast, locates
discontinuities at the level of diction, syntax, or discourse that reveal
the translation to be a violent rewriting of the foreign text, a strategic
intervention into the target-language culture, at once dependent on
and abusive of domestic values.
This method of symptomatic reading can be illustrated with the
translations of Freud’s texts for the Standard Edition, although the
translations acquired such unimpeachable authority that we
needed Bruno Bettelheim’s critique to become aware of the
discontinuities. Bettelheim’s point is that the translations make
Freud’s texts “appear to readers of English as abstract,
depersonalized, highly theoretical, erudite, and mechanized—in
short, ‘scientific’—statements about the strange and very complex
workings of our mind” (Bettelheim 1988:5). Bettelheim seems to
assume that a close examination of Freud’s German is necessary to
detect the translators’ scientistic strategy, but the fact is that his
point can be demonstrated with no more than a careful reading of
the English text. Bettelheim argues, for example, that in The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1960), the term “parapraxis”
reveals the scientism of the translation because it is used to render
a rather simple German word, Fehlleistungen, which Bettelheim
himself prefers to translate as “faulty achievement” (Bettelheim
1983:87). Yet the translator’s strategy may also be glimpsed through
certain peculiarities in the diction of the translated text:
 
I now return to the forgetting of names. So far we have not
exhaustively considered either the case-material or the motives
behind it As this is exactly the kind of parapraxis that I can from
time to time observe abundantly in myself, I am at no loss for
examples. The mild attacks of migraine from which I still suffer
usually announce themselves hours in advance by my forgetting
names, and at the height of these attacks, during which I am not
forced to abandon my work, it frequently happens that all proper
names go out of my head.
(Freud 1960:21)
 
The diction of much of this passage is so simple and common
(“forgetting”), even colloquial (“go out of my head”), that
“parapraxis” represents a conspicuous difference, an inconsistency
in word choice which exposes the translation process. The

26
The Translator’s Invisibility
inconsistency is underscored not only by Freud’s heavy reliance on
anecdotal, “everyday” examples, some—as above—taken from his
own experience, but also by a footnote added to a later edition of
the German text and included in the English translation: “This book
is of an entirely popular character; it merely aims, by an
accumulation of examples, at paving the way for the necessary
assumption of unconscious yet operative mental processes, and it
avoids all theoretical considerations on the nature of the
unconscious” (Freud 1960:272n.). James Strachey himself
unwittingly called attention to the inconsistent diction in his preface
to Alan Tyson’s translation, where he felt it necessary to provide a
rationale for the use of “parapraxis”: “In German ‘Fehlleistung,’
‘faulty function.’ It is a curious fact that before Freud wrote this book
the general concept seems not to have existed in psychology, and in
English a new word had to be invented to cover it” (Freud
1960:viiin.). It can of course be objected (against Bettelheim) that the
mixture of specialized scientific terms and commonly used diction
is characteristic of Freud’s German, and therefore (against me) that
the English translation in itself cannot be the basis for an account of
the translators’ strategy. Yet although I am very much in agreement
with the first point, the second weakens when we realize that even
a comparison between the English versions of key Freudian terms
easily demonstrates the inconsistency in kinds of diction I have
located in the translated passage: “id” vs. “unconscious”; “cathexis”
vs. “charge,” or “energy”; “libidinal” vs. “sexual.”
Bettelheim suggests some of the determinations that shaped the
scientistic translation strategy of the Standard Edition. One important
consideration is the intellectual current that has dominated Anglo-
American psychology and philosophy since the eighteenth century:
“In theory, many topics with which Freud dealt permit both a
hermeneutic—spiritual and a positivistic—pragmatic approach.
When this is so, the English translators nearly always opt for the latter,
positivism being the most important English philosophical tradition”
(Bettelheim 1983:44). But there are also the social institutions in which
this tradition was entrenched and against which psychoanalysis had
to struggle in order to gain acceptance in the post-World War II period.
As Bettelheim concisely puts it, “psychological research and teaching
in American universities are either behaviorally, cognitively, or
physiologically oriented and concentrate almost exclusively on what
can be measured or observed from the outside” (ibid.:19). For
psychoanalysis this meant that its assimilation in Anglo-American

Invisibility
27
culture entailed a redefinition, in which it “was perceived in the
United States as a practice that ought to be the sole prerogative of
physicians” (ibid.:33), “a medical specialty” (ibid.:35), and this
redefinition was carried out in a variety of social practices, including
not only legislation by state assemblies and certification by the
psychoanalytic profession, but the scientistic translation of the
Standard Edition:
 
When Freud appears to be either more abstruse or more dogmatic in
English translation than in the original German, to speak about
abstract concepts rather than about the reader himself, and about
man’s mind rather than about his soul, the probable explanation
isn’t mischievousness or carelessness on the translators’ part but a
deliberate wish to perceive Freud strictly within the framework of
medicine.
(ibid.:32)
 
The domesticating method at work in the translations of the Standard
Edition sought to assimilate Freud’s texts to the dominance of
positivism in Anglo-American culture so as to facilitate the
institutionalization of psychoanalysis in the medical profession and in
academic psychology.
Bettelheim’s book is of course couched in the most judgmental
of terms, and it is his negative judgment that must be avoided (or
perhaps rethought) if we want to understand the manifold
significance of the Standard Edition as a translation. Bettelheim
views the work of Strachey and his collaborators as a distortion
and a betrayal of Freud’s “essential humanism,” a view that points
to a valorization of a concept of the transcendental subject in both
Bettelheim and Freud. Bettelheim’s assessment of the
psychoanalytic project is stated in his own humanistic versions for
the Standard Edition’s “ego,” “id,” and “superego”: “A reasonable
dominance of our I over our it and above-I—this was Freud’s goal
for all of us” (Bettleheim 1983:110). This notion of ego dominance
conceives of the subject as the potentially self-consistent source of
its knowledge and actions, not perpetually split by psychological
(“id”) and social (“superego”) determinations over which it has no
or limited control. The same assumption can often be seen in
Freud’s German text: not only in his emphasis on social
adjustment, for instance, as with the concept of the “reality
principle,” but also in his repeated use of his own experience for

28
The Translator’s Invisibility
analysis; both represent the subject as healing the determinate split
in its own consciousness. Yet insofar as Freud’s various psychic
models theorized the ever-present, contradictory determinations of
consciousness, the effect of his work was to decenter the subject,
to remove it from a transcendental realm of freedom and unity and
view it as the determinate product of psychic and familial forces
beyond its conscious control. These conflicting concepts of the
subject underlie different aspects of Freud’s project: the
transcendental subject, on the one hand, leads to a definition of
psychoanalysis as primarily therapeutic, what Bettelheim calls a
“demanding and potentially dangerous voyage of self-discovery
[…] so that we may no longer be enslaved without knowing it to
the dark forces that reside in us” (ibid.:4); the determinate subject,
on the other hand, leads to a definition of psychoanalysis as
primarily hermeneutic, a theoretical apparatus with sufficient
scientific rigor to analyze the shifting but always active forces that
constitute and divide human subjectivity. Freud’s texts are thus
marked by a fundamental discontinuity, one which is “resolved” in
Bettelheim’s humanistic representation of psychoanalysis as
compassionate therapy, but which is exacerbated by the scientistic
strategy of the English translations and their representation of
Freud as the coolly analyzing physician.11 The inconsistent diction
in the Standard Edition, by reflecting the positivistic redefinition of
psychoanalysis in Anglo-American institutions, signifies another,
alternative reading of Freud that heightens the contradictions in
his project.
It can be argued, therefore, that the inconsistent diction in the
English translations does not really deserve to be judged erroneous;
on the contrary, it discloses interpretive choices determined by a
wide range of social institutions and cultural movements, some (like
the specific institutionalization of psychoanalysis) calculated by the
translators, others (like the dominance of positivism and the
discontinuities in Freud’s texts) remaining dimly perceived or
entirely unconscious during the translation process. The fact that the
inconsistencies have gone unnoticed for so long is perhaps largely
the result of two mutually determining factors: the privileged status
accorded the Standard Edition among English-language readers and
the entrenchment of a positivistic reading of Freud in the Anglo-
American psychoanalytic establishment. Hence, a different critical
approach with a different set of assumptions becomes necessary to
perceive the inconsistent diction of the translations: Bettelheim’s

Invisibility
29
particular humanism, or my own attempt to ground a symptomatic
reading of translated texts on a foreignizing method of translation
that assumes a determinate concept of subjectivity. This sort of
reading can be said to foreignize a domesticating translation by
showing where it is discontinuous; a translation’s dependence on
dominant values in the target-language culture becomes most visible
where it departs from them. Yet this reading also uncovers the
domesticating movement involved in any foreignizing translation
by showing where its construction of the foreign depends on
domestic cultural materials.
Symptomatic reading can thus be useful in demystifying the
illusion of transparency in a contemporary English-language
translation. In some translations, the discontinuities are readily
apparent, unintentionally disturbing the fluency of the language,
revealing the inscription of the domestic culture; other translations
bear prefaces that announce the translator’s strategy and alert the
reader to the presence of noticeable stylistic peculiarities. A case in
point is Robert Graves’s version of Suetonius’s The Twelve Caesars.
Graves’s preface offered a frank account of his domesticating
translation method:
 
For English readers Suetonius’s sentences, and sometimes even
groups of sentences, must often be turned inside-out. Wherever
his references are incomprehensible to anyone not closely
familiar with the Roman scene, I have also brought up into the
text a few words of explanation that would normally have
appeared in a footnote. Dates have been everywhere changed
from the pagan to the Christian era; modern names of cities used
whenever they are more familiar to the common reader than the
classical ones; and sums in sesterces reduced to gold pieces, at
100 to a gold piece (of twenty denarii), which resembled a British
sovereign.
(Graves 1957:8)
 
Graves’s vigorous revision of the foreign text aims to assimilate the
source-language culture (Imperial Rome) to that of the target language
(the United Kingdom in 1957). The work of assimilation depends not
only on his extensive knowledge of Suetonius and Roman culture
during the Empire (e.g. the monetary system), but also on his
knowledge of contemporary British culture as manifested by English
syntactical forms and what he takes to be the function of his

30
The Translator’s Invisibility
translation. His “version,” he wrote in the preface, was not intended to
serve as a “school crib,” but to be readable: “a literal rendering would
be almost unreadable” (ibid.:8) because it would adhere too closely to
the Latin text, even to the Latin word order.
Graves sought to make his translation extremely fluent, and it is
important to note that this was both a deliberate choice and culturally
specific, determined by contemporary English-language values and
not by any means absolute or originating with Graves in a
fundamental way. On the contrary, the entire process of producing the
translation, beginning with the very choice of the text and including
both Graves’s textual moves and the decision to publish the translation
in paperback, was conditioned by factors like the decline in the study
of classical languages among educated readers, the absence of another
translation on the market, and the remarkable popularity of the novels
that Graves himself created from Roman historians like Suetonius—I,
Claudius and Claudius the God, both continuously in print since 1934.
Graves’s version of The Twelve Caesars appeared as one of the “Penguin
Classics,” a mass-market imprint designed for both students and
general readers.
As J.M.Cohen has observed, the translations in Penguin Classics
were pioneering in their use of transparent discourse, “plain prose
uniformity,” largely in response to cultural and social conditions:
 
The translator […] aims to make everything plain, though without
the use of footnotes since the conditions of reading have radically
changed and the young person of today is generally reading in far
less comfortable surroundings than his father or grandfather. He has
therefore to carry forward on an irresistible stream of narrative.
Little can be demanded of him except his attention. Knowledge,
standards of comparison, Classical background: all must be
supplied by the translator in his choice of words or in the briefest of
introductions.
(Cohen 1962:33)
 
Graves’s version of Suetonius reflects the cultural marginality of
classical scholarship in the post-World War II period and the growth
of a mass market for paperback literature, including the bestselling
historical novels by which he made a living for many years. His
translation was so effective in responding to this situation that it too
became a bestseller, reprinted five times within a decade of
publication. As Graves indicated in an essay on “Moral Principles in

Invisibility
31
Translation,” the “ordinary” reader of a classical text (Diodorus is
his example) “wants mere factual information, laid out in good
order for his hasty eye to catch” (Graves 1965:51). Although
Apuleius “wrote a very ornate North African Latin,” Graves
translated it “for the general public in the plainest possible prose.”
Making the foreign text “plain” means that Graves’s translation
method is radically domesticating: it requires not merely the
insertion of explanatory phrases, but the inscription of the foreign
text with values that are anachronistic and ethnocentric. In the
preface to his Suetonius, Graves made clear that he deliberately
modernized and Anglicized the Latin. At one point, he considered
adding an introductory essay that would signal the cultural and
historical difference of the text by describing key political conflicts
in late Republican Rome. But he finally omitted it: “most readers,”
he felt, “will perhaps prefer to plunge straight into the story and
pick up the threads as they go along” (Graves 1957:8), allowing his
fluent prose to turn transparent and so conceal the domesticating
work of the translation.
This work can be glimpsed in discontinuities between Graves’s
translation discourse and Suetonius’s particular method of historical
and biographical narrative. Graves’s reading of Suetonius, as sketched
in his preface, largely agreed with the contemporary academic
reception of the Latin text. As the classicist Michael Grant has pointed
out, Suetonius
 
gathers together, and lavishly inserts, information both for and
against [the rulers of Rome], usually without adding any
personal judgment in one direction or the other, and above all
without introducing the moralizations which had so frequently
characterized Greek and Roman biography and history alike.
Occasionally conflicting statements are weighed. In general,
however, the presentation is drily indiscriminate. […] the
author’s own opinions are rarely permitted to intrude, and
indeed he himself, in collecting all this weird, fascinating
material, appears to make little effort to reach a decision about
the personalities he is describing, or to build up their
characteristics into a coherent account. Perhaps, he may feel,
that is how people are: they possess discordant elements which
do not add up to a harmonious unity.
(Grant 1980:8)
 

32
The Translator’s Invisibility
Grant’s account suggests that the Latin text does not offer a coherent
position of subjectivity for the reader to occupy: we are unable to
identify with either the author (“the author’s own opinions are rarely
permitted to intrude”) or the characters (“the personalities” are not
given “a coherent account”). As a result, Suetonius’s narrative may
seem to possess a “relatively high degree of objectivity,” but it also
contains passages that provoke considerable doubt, especially since
“his curiously disjointed and staccato diction can lead to obscurity”
(ibid.:7–8). Graves’s fluent translation smooths out these features of the
Latin text, insuring intelligibility, constructing a more coherent
position from which the Caesars can be judged, and making any
judgment seem true, right, obvious.
Consider this passage from the life of Julius Caesar:
 
Stipendia prima in Asia fecit Marci Thermi praetoris
contubernio; a quo ad accersendam classem in Bithyniam missus
desedit apud Nicomeden, non sine rumorem prostratae regi
pudicitiae; quern rumorem auxit intra paucos rursus dies
repetita Bithynia per causam exigendae pecuniae, quae
deberetur cuidam libertino clienti suo. reliqua militia secundiore
fama fuit et a Thermo in expugnatione Mytilenarum corona
civica donatus est.
(Butler and Cary 1927:1–2)
 
 
Caesar first saw military service in Asia, where he went as aidede-
camp to Marcus Thermus, the provincial governor. When
Thermus sent Caesar to raise a fleet in Bithynia, he wasted so
much time at King Nicomedes’ court that a homosexual
relationship between them was suspected, and suspicion gave
place to scandal when, soon after his return to headquarters, he
revisited Bithynia: ostensibly collecting a debt incurred there by
one of his freedmen. However, Caesar’s reputation improved later
in the campaign, when Thermus awarded him the civic crown of
oak leaves, at the storming of Mytilene, for saving a fellow
soldier’s life.
(Graves 1957:10)
 
Both passages rest on innuendo instead of explicit judgment, on
doubtful hearsay instead of more reliable evidence (“rumorem,”
“suspicion”). Yet the English text makes several additions that offer

Invisibility
33
more certainty about Caesar’s motives and actions and about
Suetonius’s own estimation: the translation is not just slanted against
Caesar, but homophobic. This first appears in an inconsistency in the
diction: Graves’s use of “homosexual relationship” to render
“prostratae regi pudicitiae” (“surrendered his modesty to the king”)
is an anachronism, a late nineteenth-century scientific term that
diagnoses same-sex sexual activity as pathological and is therefore
inappropriate for an ancient culture in which sexual acts were not
categorized according to the participants’ sex (OED; Wiseman
1985:10–14). Graves then leads the reader to believe that this
relationship did in fact occur: not only does he increase the innuendo
by using “suspicion gave place to scandal” to translate “rumorem
auxit” (“the rumor spread”), but he inserts the loaded “ostensibly,”
entirely absent from the Latin text. Graves’s version implicitly equates
homosexuality with perversion, but since the relationship was with a
foreign monarch, there are also political implications, the hint of a
traitorous collusion which the ambitious Caesar is concealing and
which he may later exploit in a bid for power: the passage
immediately preceding this one has the dictator Sulla associating
Caesar with his archenemy Marius. Because the passage is so charged
with lurid accusations, even the conclusive force of that “however,”
promising a rehabilitation of Caesar’s image, is finally subverted by
the possible suggestion of another sexual relationship in “saving a
fellow soldier’s life.”
Suetonius later touches on Caesar’s sexual reputation, and here too
Graves’s version is marked by a homophobic bias:
 
Pudicitiae eius famam nihil quidem praeter Nicomedis
contubernium laesit.
(Butler and Cary 1927:22)
 
 
The only specific charge of unnatural practices ever brought against
him was that he had been King Nicomedes’ catamite.
(Graves 1957:30)
 
Where the Latin text makes rather general and noncommittal
references to Caesar’s sexuality, Graves chooses English words that
stigmatize same-sex sexual acts as perverse: a question raised about
“pudicitiae eius famam” (“his sexual reputation”) becomes a “specific
charge of unnatural practices,” while “contubernium” (“sharing the

34
The Translator’s Invisibility
same tent,” “companionship,” “intimacy”) makes Caesar a “catamite,”
a term of abuse in the early modern period for boys who were the
sexual objects of men (OED). As an archaism, “catamite” deviates from
the modern English lexicon used throughout this and other Penguin
Classics, a deviation that is symptomatic of the domesticating process
in Graves’s version. His prose is so lucid and supple that such
symptoms can well be overlooked, enabling the translation to fix an
interpretation while presenting that interpretation as authoritative,
issuing from an authorial position that transcends linguistic and
cultural differences to address the English-language reader. Graves’s
interpretation, however, assimilates an ancient Latin text to
contemporary British values. He punctures the myth of Caesar by
equating the Roman dictatorship with sexual perversion, and this
reflects a postwar homophobia that linked homosexuality with a fear
of totalitarian government, communism, and political subversion
through espionage. “In the Cold War,” Alan Sinfield notes,
“prosecutions for homosexual ‘offences’ rose five times over in the 15
years from 1939,” and “communist homosexual treachery was witch-
hunted close to the heart of the high-cultural establishment” (Sinfield
1989:66, 299). Graves’s fluently translated Suetonius participated in
this domestic situation, not just by stigmatizing Caesar’s sexuality, but
by presenting the stigma as a historical fact. In the preface, Graves
remarked that Suetonius “seems trustworthy,” but he also suggested
inadvertently that this Roman historian shared sexual and political
values currently prevailing in Britain: “his only prejudice being in
favour of firm mild rule, with a regard for the human decencies”
(Graves 1957:7).
Foreignizing translations that are not transparent, that eschew
fluency for a more heterogeneous mix of discourses, are equally partial
in their interpretation of the foreign text, but they tend to flaunt their
partiality instead of concealing it. Whereas Graves’s Suetonius focuses
on the signified, creating an illusion of transparency in which linguistic
and cultural differences are domesticated, Ezra Pound’s translations
often focus on the signifier, creating an opacity that calls attention to
itself and distinguishes the translation both from the foreign text and
from prevailing values in the target-language culture.
In Pound’s work, foreignization sometimes takes the form of
archaism. His version of “The Seafarer” (1912) departs from modern
English by adhering closely to the Anglo-Saxon text, imitating its
compound words, alliteration, and accentual meter, even resorting to
calque renderings that echo Anglo-Saxon phonology: “bitre

Invisibility
35
breostceare”/“bitter breast-cares”; “merewerges”/ “mere-weary”;
“corna caldast”/“corn of the coldest”; “floodwegas”/“flood-ways”;
“hægl scurum fleag”/“hail-scur flew”; “mæw singende fore
medodrince”/“the mews’ singing all my mead-drink.” But Pound’s
departures from modern English also include archaisms drawn from
later periods of English literature.
 
ne ænig hleomæga   
feasceaftig fer  frefran meahte.
Forpon him gelyfe  lyt, se pe ah lifes wyn
gebiden in burgum, bealosipa hwon,
wlonc ond wingal, hu ic werig oft
in brimlade bidan sceolde.
(Krapp and Dobbie 1936:144)   
Not any protector   
May make merry man faring needy.
This he littles believes, who aye in winsome life
Abides ’mid burghers some heavy business,
Wealthy and wine-flushed, how I weary oft
Must bide above brine.
(Pound 1954:207)
 
The word “aye” (“always”) is a Middle English usage that later
appeared in Scottish and northern dialects, while “burghers” first
emerges in the Elizabethan period (OED). The words “’mid” (for
“amid”) and “bide” are poeticisms used by such nineteenth-century
writers as Scott, Dickens, Tennyson, Arnold, and Morris. Pound’s
lexicon in fact favors archaisms that have become poetical: “brine,”
“o’er,” “pinion,” “laud,” “ado.”
Such textual features indicate that a translation can be
foreignizing only by putting to work cultural materials and agendas
that are domestic, specific to the target language, but also, in this
case, anachronistic, specific to later periods. “The Seafarer” is
informed by Pound’s knowledge of English literature from its
beginnings, but also by his modernist poetics, by his favoring,
notably in The Cantos, an elliptical, fragmentary verse in which
subjectivity is split and determinate, presented as a site of
heterogeneous cultural discourses (Easthope 1983:chap. 9). The
peculiarities of Pound’s translation—the gnarled syntax, the

36
The Translator’s Invisibility
reverberating alliteration, the densely allusive archaism—slow the
movement of the monologue, resisting assimilation, however
momentarily, to a coherent subject (whether “author” or “seafarer”)
and foregrounding the various English dialects and literary
discourses that get elided beneath the illusion of a speaking voice.
This translation strategy is foreignizing in its resistance to values
that prevail in contemporary Anglo-American culture—the canon
of fluency in translation, the dominance of transparent discourse,
the individualistic effect of authorial presence.
And yet Pound’s translation reinscribes its own modernist brand
of individualism by editing the Anglo-Saxon text. As the medievalist
Christine Fell has remarked, this text contains “two traditions, the
heroic, if we may so define it, preoccupation with survival of honour
after loss of life—and the Christian hope for security of tenure in
Heaven” (Fell 1991:176). However these conflicting values entered
the text, whether present in some initial oral version or introduced
during a later monastic transcription, they project two contradictory
concepts of subjectivity, one individualistic (the seafarer as his own
person alienated from mead-hall as well as town), the other
collective (the seafarer as a soul in a metaphysical hierarchy
composed of other souls and dominated by God). Pound’s
translation resolves this contradiction by omitting the Christian
references entirely, highlighting the strain of heroism in the Anglo-
Saxon text, making the seafarer’s “mind’s lust” to “seek out foreign
fastness” an example of “daring ado,/So that all men shall honour
him after.” In Susan Bassnett’s words, Pound’s translation represents
“the suffering of a great individual rather than the common
suffering of everyman […] a grief-stricken exile, broken but never
bowed” (Bassnett 1980:97). The archaizing translation strategy
interferes with the individualistic illusion of transparency, but the
revisions intensify the theme of heroic individualism, and hence the
recurrent gibes at the “burgher” who complacently pursues his
financial interests and “knows not […] what some perform/Where
wandering them widest draweth” (Pound 1954:208). The revisions
are symptomatic of the domestic agenda that animates Pound’s
foreignizing translation, a peculiar ideological contradiction that
distinguishes modernist literary experiments: the development of
textual strategies that decenter the transcendental subject coincides
with a recuperation of it through certain individualistic motifs like
the “strong personality.” Ultimately, this contradiction constitutes a
response to the crisis of human subjectivity that modernists

Invisibility
37
perceived in social developments like monopoly capitalism,
particularly the creation of a mass work force and the
standardization of the work process (Jameson 1979:110–114).
The examples from Graves and Pound show that the aim of a
symptomatic reading is not to assess the “freedom” or “fidelity” of
a translation, but rather to uncover the canons of accuracy by which
it is produced and judged. Fidelity cannot be construed as mere
semantic equivalence: on the one hand, the foreign text is susceptible
to many different interpretations, even at the level of the individual
word; on the other hand, the translator’s interpretive choices answer
to a domestic cultural situation and so always exceed the foreign
text. This does not mean that translation is forever banished to the
realm of freedom or error, but that canons of accuracy are culturally
specific and historically variable. Although Graves produced a free
translation by his own admission, it has nonetheless been judged
faithful and accepted as the standard English-language rendering by
academic specialists like Grant. In 1979, Grant published an edited
version of Graves’s translation that pronounced it accurate, if not
“precise”:
 
[It] conveys the peculiarities of Suetonius’s methods and
character better than any other translation. Why, then, have I
been asked to “edit” it? Because Robert Graves (who explicitly
refrained from catering for students) did not aim at producing
a precise translation—introducing, as he himself points out,
sentences of explanation, omitting passages which do not
seem to help the sense, and “turning sentences, and
sometimes even groups of sentences, inside-out.” […] What I
have tried to do, therefore, is to make such adjustments as
will bring his version inside the range of what is now
generally regarded by readers of the Penguin Classics as a
“translation”—without, I hope, detracting from his excellent
and inimitable manner.
(Grant 1980:8–9)
 
In the twenty-two years separating Graves’s initial version from the
revised edition, the canons of accuracy underwent a change, requiring
a translation to be both fluent and exact, to make for “vivid and
compulsive reading” (ibid.:8), but also to follow the foreign text more
closely. The passages quoted earlier from the life of Caesar were
evidently judged accurate in 1979, since Grant made only one revision:

38
The Translator’s Invisibility
“catamite” was replaced by “bedfellow” (ibid.:32). This change brings
the English closer to the Latin (“contubernium”), but it also improves
the fluency of Graves’s prose by replacing an archaism with a more
familiar contemporary usage. The revision is obviously too small to
minimize the homophobia in the passages.
Pound’s version of “The Seafarer” also cannot be simply
questioned as too free because it is informed by the scholarly
reception of the Anglo-Saxon text. As Bassnett has suggested, his
omission of the Christian references, including the homiletic
epilogue (ll. 103–124), is not so much a deviation from the text
preserved in the Exeter Book, as an emendation that responds to a
key question in historical scholarship: “Should the poem be
perceived as having a Christian message as an integral feature, or are
the Christian elements additions that sit uneasily over the pagan
foundations?” (Bassnett 1980:96). In English Literature from the
Beginning to the Norman Conquest, for example, Stopford Brooke
asserted that “it is true, the Seafarer ends with a Christian tag, but
the quality of its verse, which is merely homiletic, has made capable
persons give it up as a part of the original poem” (Brooke 1898:153).
Pound’s translation can be considered accurate according to early
twentieth-century academic standards, a translation that is
simultaneously a plausible edition of the Anglo-Saxon text. His
departures from the Exeter Book assumed a cultural situation in
which Anglo-Saxon was still very much studied by readers, who
could therefore be expected to appreciate the work of historical
reconstruction implicit in his version of the poem.
The symptomatic reading is an historicist approach to the study of
translations that aims to situate canons of accuracy in their specific
cultural moments. Critical categories like “fluency” and “resistancy,”
“domesticating” and “foreignizing,” can only be defined by referring
to the formation of cultural discourses in which the translation is
produced, and in which certain translation theories and practices are
valued over others. At the same time, however, applying these critical
categories in the study of translations is anachronistic: they are
fundamentally determined by a cultural political agenda in the
present, an opposition to the contemporary dominance of transparent
discourse, to the privileging of a fluent domesticating method that
masks both the translator’s work and the asymmetrical relations—
cultural, economic, political—between English-language nations and
their others worldwide. Although a humanist theory and practice of
translation is equally anachronistic, inscribing the foreign-language

Invisibility
39
text with current domestic values, it is also dehistoricizing: the various
conditions of translated texts and of their reception are concealed
beneath concepts of transcendental subjectivity and transparent
communication. A symptomatic reading, in contrast, is historicizing: it
assumes a concept of determinate subjectivity that exposes both the
ethnocentric violence of translating and the interested nature of its
own historicist approach.
III
The project of the present book is to combat the translator’s invisibility
with a history of—and in opposition to—contemporary English-
language translation. Insofar as it is a cultural history with a professed
political agenda, it follows the genealogical method developed by
Nietzsche and Foucault and abandons the two principles that govern
much conventional historiography: teleology and objectivity.
Genealogy is a form of historical representation that depicts, not a
continuous progression from a unified origin, an inevitable
development in which the past fixes the meaning of the present, but
a discontinuous succession of division and hierarchy, domination and
exclusion, which destabilize the seeming unity of the present by
constituting a past with plural, heterogeneous meanings. In a
genealogical analysis, writes Foucault, “what is found at the historical
beginnings of things is not the inviolable identity of their origin; it is
the dissension of other things. It is disparity” (Foucault 1977:142). The
possibility of recuperating these “other” meanings explodes the
pretense of objectivity in conventional historiography: its teleological
emphasis betrays a complicity with the continuance of past
domination and exclusion into the present. Thus, history is shown to
be a cultural political practice, a partial (i.e., at once selective and
evaluative) representation of the past that actively intervenes into the
present, even if the interests served by that intervention are not
always made explicit or perhaps remain unconscious. For Foucault, a
genealogical analysis is unique in affirming the interested nature of
its historical representation, in taking a stand vis-à-vis the political
struggles of its situation. And by locating what has been dominated
or excluded in the past and repressed by conventional historiography,
such an analysis can not only challenge the cultural and social
conditions in which it is performed, but propose different conditions
to be established in the future. History informed by genealogy,
Foucault suggests, “should become a differential knowledge of

40
The Translator’s Invisibility
energies and failings, heights and degenerations, poisons and
antidotes. Its task is to become a curative science” (ibid.:156). By
constructing a differential representation of the past, genealogy both
engages in present cultural debates and social conflicts and develops
resolutions that project utopian images.
The Translator’s Invisibility intervenes against the translator’s
situation and activity in contemporary Anglo-American culture by
offering a series of genealogies that write the history of present. It
traces the rise of transparent discourse in English-language
translation from the seventeenth century onward, while searching
the past for exits, alternative theories and practices in British,
American, and several foreign-language cultures—German,
French, Italian.12 The chapters form an argument pursued
chronologically, showing that the origins of fluent translating lie in
various kinds of cultural domination and exclusion, but also that
translation can serve a more democratic agenda in which excluded
theories and practices are recovered and the prevailing fluency is
revised. The acts of recovery and revision that constitute this
argument rest on extensive archival research, bringing to light
forgotten or neglected translations and establishing an alternative
tradition that somewhat overlaps with, but mostly differs from,
the current canon of British and American literature.
This book is motivated by a strong impulse to document the
history of English-language translation, to uncover long-obscure
translators and translations, to reconstruct their publication and
reception, and to articulate significant controversies. The
documentary impulse, however, serves the skepticism of
symptomatic readings that interrogate the process of
domestication in translated texts, both canonical and marginal,
and reassess their usefulness in contemporary Anglo-American
culture. The historical narratives in each chapter, grounded as they
are on a diagnosis of current translation theory and practice,
address key questions. What domestic values has transparent
discourse at once inscribed and masked in foreign texts during its
long domination? How has transparency shaped the canon of
foreign literatures in English and the cultural identities of English-
language nations? Why has transparency prevailed over other
translation strategies in English, like Victorian archaism (Francis
Newman, William Morris) and modernist experiments with
heterogeneous discourses (Pound, Celia and Louis Zukofsky, Paul
Blackburn)? What would happen if a translator tried to redirect the

Invisibility
41
process of domestication by choosing foreign texts that deviated
from transparent discourse and by translating them so as to signal
their linguistic and cultural differences? Would this effort establish
more democratic cultural exchanges? Would it change domestic
values? Or would it mean banishment to the fringes of Anglo-
American culture?
Throughout, the emphasis is on “literary” translation in a broad
sense (mainly poetry and fiction, but also including biography,
history, and philosophy, among other genres and disciplines in the
human sciences), as opposed to “technical” translation (scientific,
legal, diplomatic, commercial). This emphasis is not due to the fact
that literary translators today are any more invisible or exploited
than their technical counterparts, who, whether freelance or
employed by translation agencies, are not permitted to sign or
copyright their work, let alone receive royalties (Fischbach 1992:3).
Rather, literary translation is emphasized because it has long set the
standard applied in technical translation (viz. fluency), and, most
importantly for present purposes, it has traditionally been the field
where innovative theories and practices emerge. As Schleiermacher
realized long ago, the choice of whether to domesticate or foreignize
a foreign text has been allowed only to translators of literary texts,
not to translators of technical materials. Technical translation is
fundamentally constrained by the exigencies of communication:
during the postwar period, it has supported scientific research,
geopolitical negotiation, and economic exchange, especially as
multinational corporations seek to expand foreign markets and thus
increasingly require fluent, immediately intelligible translations of
international treaties, legal contracts, technical information, and
instruction manuals (Levy 1991:F5). Although in sheer volume and
financial worth technical translation far exceeds the translation of
literary texts (a recent estimate values the corporate and government
translation industry at $10 billion), literary translation remains a
discursive practice where the translator can experiment in the choice
of foreign texts and in the development of translation methods,
constrained primarily by the current situation in the target-language
culture.
The ultimate aim of the book is to force translators and their readers
to reflect on the ethnocentric violence of translation and hence to write
and read translated texts in ways that seek to recognize the linguistic
and cultural difference of foreign texts. What I am advocating is not an
indiscriminate valorization of every foreign culture or a metaphysical

42
The Translator’s Invisibility
concept of foreignness as an essential value; indeed, the foreign text is
privileged in a foreignizing translation only insofar as it enables a
disruption of target-language cultural codes, so that its value is always
strategic, depending on the cultural formation into which it is
translated. The point is rather to elaborate the theoretical, critical, and
textual means by which translation can be studied and practiced as a
locus of difference, instead of the homogeneity that widely
characterizes it today.

Chapter 2
Canon
Words in One Language Elegantly us’d
Will hardly in another be excus’d,
And some that Rome admir’d in Caesars Time
May neither suit Our Genius nor our Clime.
The Genuine Sence, intelligibly Told,
Shews a Translator both Discreet and Bold.
Earl of Roscommon
 
 
Fluency emerges in English-language translation during the early
modern period, a feature of aristocratic literary culture in
seventeenth-century England, and over the next two hundred
years it is valued for diverse reasons, cultural and social, in
accordance with the vicissitudes of the hegemonic classes. At the
same time, the illusion of transparency produced in fluent
translation enacts a thoroughgoing domestication that masks the
manifold conditions of the translated text, its exclusionary impact
on foreign cultural values, but also on those at home, eliminating
translation strategies that resist transparent discourse, closing off
any thinking about cultural and social alternatives that do not
favor English social elites. The dominance of fluency in English-
language translation until today has led to the forgetting of these
conditions and exclusions, requiring their recovery to intervene
against the contemporary phase of this dominance. The following
genealogy aims to trace the rise of fluency as a canon of English-
language translation, showing how it achieved canonical status,
interrogating its exclusionary effects on the canon of foreign
literatures in English, and reconsidering the cultural and social
values that it excludes at home.

44
The Translator’s Invisibility
I
In 1656, Sir John Denham published a translation with the running
title, The Destruction of Troy, An Essay upon the Second Book of Virgils
Æneis. Written in the year, 1636. The title page is one among many
remarkable things about this book: it omits any sign of authorship
in favor of a bold reference to the gap between the dates of
composition and publication. Most early seventeenth-century
translations of classical texts are published with a signature, if not
a full name (John Ashmore, John Ogilby, Robert Stapylton, John
Vicars), then at least initials and some indication of social position,
“Sir T: H:,” “W.L., Gent.” Denham’s omission of his name may be
taken as the self-effacing gesture of a courtly amateur, presenting
himself as not seriously pursuing a literary career, not asserting any
individualistic concept of authorship (the title page presents the
translation as no more than an “essay”) and thus implying that his
text is the fruit of hours idle, not spent in the employ of royal
authority, in political office or military service.1 Denham’s title page
presented his text as a distinctively aristocratic gesture in literary
translation, typical of court culture in the Tudor and Stuart periods,
and this is clear even in the imprint, For Humphrey Moseley, one of
the most active publishers of elite literature during the seventeenth
century and a staunch royalist who advertised his political views in
the prefaces to his publications. Once the social conditions of
Denham’s book are recognized, the temporal gap indicated by the
dates on the title page fills with significance from his own activities
in support of the royalist cause, both in the royal government and
army during the civil wars and for the exiled royal family and court
during the Interregnum. Perhaps the omission of his name should
also be taken as an effort to conceal his identity, a precaution taken
by royalist writers who intended their work to be critical of the
Commonwealth (Potter 1989:23–24).
“Written in 1636” proclaimed a continuity between Denham’s
translation and the years when court poetry and drama were setting
the dominant literary trends in England, when the Caroline
experiment in absolutism reached its apex, and when Denham
himself, the twenty-year-old son of a baron of the Exchequer, was
preparing for a legal career at Lincoln’s Inn, dabbling in literary
pursuits like translating the Aeneid. The Destruction of Troy was
revised and published much later, in 1656—after Denham returned
from several years of exile with the Caroline court in France, soon

Canon
45
after he was arrested in the Commonwealth’s campaign to suppress
royalist insurgency, a suspect in a military counterplot, and just a
year after the second edition of the text by which he is best
remembered today, Coopers Hill (1642), a topographical poem that
offers a politically tendentious evocation of English history on the
eve of the civil wars (O’Hehir 1968; Underdown 1960). At this later
juncture, Denham’s translation assumes the role of a cultural
political practice: “Written in 1636” it functions partly as a nostalgic
glance back toward less troubled times for royal hegemony and
partly as a strategic cultural move in the present, wherein Denham
plans to develop a royalist aesthetic in translation to be implemented
now and for the future, when hegemony is regained. “The hope of
doing [Virgil] more right,” Denham asserted in his preface, “is the
only scope of this Essay, by opening this new way of translating this
Author, to those whom youth, leisure, and better fortune makes
fitter for such under-takings” (Denham 1656:A2v). Denham saw his
audience as the coming generations of English aristocracy, who,
unlike him, would have the “better fortune” of escaping social
displacement in civil wars.
The aristocratic affiliation would have also been perceived by
contemporary readers, from various classes and with differing
political tendencies. The translation was cited in “An
Advertisement of Books newly published” that appeared in
Mercurius Politicus, the widely circulated newsweekly licensed by
Parliament to present a propagandistic survey of current events
(Frank 1961:205–210, 223–226). The notice revealed the translator’s
identity and used the title “Esquire,” indicating not only his status
as a gentleman, but perhaps his legal education as well: “The
Destruction of Troy, an Essay upon the second Book of Virgils Æneis.
Written by JOHN DENHAM, Esquire” (Mercurius Politicus: 6921).
The social functioning of Denham’s translation becomes clear when
his preface is considered in a broader context of translation theory and
practice during the seventeenth century. The first point to observe is
that Denham’s “way of translating” was hardly “new” in 1656. He was
following Horace’s dictum in Ars Poetica that the poet should avoid
any word-for-word rendering: “For, being a Poet, thou maist feigne,
create,/Not care, as thou wouldst faithfully translate,/To render word
for word”—in Ben Jonson’s un-Horatian, line-by-line version from
1605 (Jonson 1968:287). But where Horace took translation as one
practice of the poet, Denham took poetry as the goal of translation,
especially poetry translation: “I conceive it a vulgar error in translating

46
The Translator’s Invisibility
Poets, to affect being Fides Interpres” he wrote, because poetic discourse
requires more latitude to capture its “spirit” than a close adherence to
the foreign text would allow (Denham 1656:A2v–A3r). Denham’s term
“fides interpres” refers to translations of classical poetry that aim for
such an adherence, made not by poets, but by scholars, including
scholarly poets (Jonson’s Horace) and teachers who translate to
produce school textbooks. John Brinsley described his 1633 prose
version of Virgil’s Eclogues as
 
Translated Grammatically, and also according to the proprietie of
our English tongue, so farre as Grammar and the verse will well
permit. Written chiefly for the good of schooles, to be used
according to the directions in the Preface to the painfull
Schoolemaster.
 
Denham’s slur against this method is tellingly couched in class terms:
“I conceive it a vulgar error.”
Still, in recommending greater freedom against the grammarians,
Denham was advocating a classical translation method that reemerged
in England decades before he published his version of Virgil (Amos
1920). Thomas Phaer, whose translations of the Aeneid date back to 1558,
asserted that he “followed the counsell of Horace, teaching the duty of
a good interpretour, Qui quae desperat nitescere possit, relinquit, by which
occasion, somewhat, I haue in places omitted, somewhat altered”
(Phaer 1620:V2r). A freer translation method was advocated with
greater frequency from the 1620s onward, especially in aristocratic and
court circles. Sir Thomas Hawkins, a Catholic who was knighted by
James I and whose translations of Jesuit tracts were dedicated to Queen
Henrietta Maria, prefaced his 1625 selection of Horace’s odes by
fending off complaints that he did not imitate classical meters:
 
many (no doubt) will say, Horace is by mee forsaken, his Lyrick
softnesse, and emphaticall Muse maymed: That in all there is a
generall defection from his genuine Harmony. Those I must tell, I
haue in this translation, rather sought his Spirit, then Numbers; yet
the Musique of Verse not neglected neither.
(Hawkins 1625: Ar–Av; DNB)
 
In a 1628 version of Virgil’s eclogues that imposed a courtly aesthetic
on the Latin text, “W.L., Gent.” felt compelled to justify his departures
with a similar apology:

Canon
47
Some Readers I make no doubt they wil meet with in these dainty
mouth’d times, that will taxe them, for not comming resolved word
for word, and line for line with the Author […] I used the freedome
of a Translator, not tying myselfe to the tyranny of a Grammatical
construction, but breaking the shell into many peeces, was only
carefull to preserve the Kernell safe and whole, from the violence of
a wrong, or wrested Interpretation.
(Latham 1628:6r; Patterson 1987:164–168)
 
As early as 1616, Barten Holyday, who became chaplain to Charles I
and was created doctor of divinity at the king’s order, introduced his
translation of Persius by announcing that “I haue not herein bound my
selfe with a ferularie superstition to the letter: but with the ancient
libertie of a Translator, haue vsed a moderate paraphrase, where the
obscuritie did more require it” (Holyday 1635:A5r–A5v; DNB). Holyday
articulated the opposition to the grammarians that Denham would
later join, and with a similarly Latinate tag, calling close translation “a
ferularie superstition,” belief propagated with the rod (ferula), school
discipline—a joke designed especially for a grammarian.
In 1620, Sir Thomas Wroth, a member of the Somerset gentry who
affected the literary pursuits of a courtly amateur (he called his
epigrams The Abortive of an Idle Houre), anticipated Denham in several
respects (DNB). Wroth likewise chose to translate the second book of
the Aeneid and to call it The Destruction of Troy, but he also defined his
translatorly “freedome” in “A Reqvest to the Reader”:
 
Giue not vp your casting verdict rashly, though you find mee
sometimes wandring (which I purposely do) out of the visible
bounds, but deliberately take notice that I stray not from the scope
and intent of the Author, iustified by the best Commentaries: and so
I leaue you to reade, to vnderstand, and to encrease.
(Wroth 1620:A2v)
 
Wroth’s freer method ultimately rested on a scholarly rationale
(“Commentaries”) reminiscent of Jonson’s neoclassicism. And indeed
Wroth’s farewell to the reader (“to reade, to vnderstand, and to
encrease”) echoed the exhortation with which Jonson opened his
Epigrammes (1616): “Pray thee, take care, that tak’st my booke in hand,/
To reade it well: that is, to understand” (Jonson 1968:4). In 1634, Sir
Robert Stapylton, a gentleman in ordinary of the privy chamber to the
Prince of Wales, published a version of Book Four of the Aeneid in

48
The Translator’s Invisibility
which he anticipated Denham both by questioning any close
translation of poetry and by assigning the freer method the same class
affiliation:
 
It is true that wit distilled in one Language, cannot be transfused
into another without losse of spirits: yet I presume such graces are
retained, as those of the Noblest quality will favour this Translation,
from an Original, that was sometimes the unenvied Favourite of the
greatest Roman Emperour
(Stapylton 1634:A4v; DNB)
 
Denham consolidated the several-decades-long emergence of a
neoclassical translation method in aristocratic literary culture. It may
have seemed “new” to him, not because it did not have any previous
advocates, but because it did: it was a modern revival of an ancient
cultural practice, making Denham’s translation a simulacral “Copy”
of Virgil’s true “Original,” rationalized with a Platonic theory of
translation as the copy of a copy of the truth: “I have made it my
principal care to follow him, as he made it his to follow Nature in all
his proportions” (Denham 1656:A3v). But Denham’s sense of his own
modernity was less philosophical than political, linked to a specific
class and nation. Coming back from exile in France, he may have
found his translation method “new” in the sense of foreign, in fact
French. French translation in the 1640s was characterized by theories
and practices advocating free translation of classical texts, and
Denham, among such other exiled royalist writers as Abraham
Cowley and Sir Richard Fanshawe, was no doubt acquainted with the
work of its leading French proponent, Nicolas Perrot d’Ablancourt, a
prolific translator of Greek and Latin.2 D’Ablancourt’s freedom with
Tacitus set the standard. In his preface to his version of the Annals, he
wrote that
 
la diversité qui se trouve dans les langues est si grande, tant pour
la construction et la forme des périodes, que pour les figures et les
autres ornemens, qu’il faut à tous coups changer d’air et de visage,
si l’on ne veut faire un corps monstreux, tel que celuy des
traductions ordinaires, qui sont ou mortes et languissantes, ou
confuses, et embroüillées, sans aucun ordre ny agréement. the
diversity that one finds among languages is so great, in the
arrangement and shape of the periods, as in the figures and other
ornaments, that it is always necessary to change the air and

Canon
49
appearance, unless one wishes to create a monstrous body, like
those in ordinary translations, which are either dead or
languishing, or obscure, and muddled, without any order or
gracefulness.
(D’Ablancourt 1640)
 
Compare Denham’s preface: “Poesie is of so subtle a spirit, that in
pouring out of one Language into another, it will all evaporate;
and if a new spirit be not added in the transfusion, there will
remain nothing but a Caput mortuum” (Denham 1656:A3r).
Denham echoed D’Ablancourt’s body/soul metaphor, although
following Stapylton’s example (“wit distilled in one Language,
cannot be transfused into another without losse of spirits”) he
imagined translation alchemically, as a distillation in which the
residue was termed a caput mortuum (OED; Hermans 1985:122).
The alchemical image indicated that a free translation effected a
radical change, in which what “was borne a Forraigner” can now
be “esteeme[d] as a Native”—or, in this case, English (Stapylton
1634:A2r).
The “new spirit” that is “added” with this translation method
involves a process of domestication, in which the foreign text is
imprinted with values specific to the target-language culture.
D’Ablancourt called it “changer d’air et de visage.” The elliptical,
discontinuous discourse of Tacitus must be translated
 
sans choquer les delicatesses de nostre langue & la justesse du
raisonnement. […] Souvent on est contraint d’adjoûter quelque
chose à sa pensée pour l’éclaircir; quelquefois il en faut retrancher
une partie pour donner jour à tout le reste.
without offending the delicacy of our language and the correctness
of reason. […] Often one is forced to add something to the thought
in order to clarify it; sometimes it is necessary to retrench one part
so as to give birth to all the rest.
(D’Ablancourt 1640)
 
Henry Rider reverted to a clothing metaphor in the preface of his 1638
translation of Horace:
 
Translations of Authors from one language to another, are like
old garments turn’d into new fashions; in which though the

50
The Translator’s Invisibility
stuffe be still the same, yet the die and trimming are altered,
and in the making, here something added, there something
cut away.
(Rider 1638:A3r)
 
Denham’s formulation used a similar metaphor while nodding toward
the classical author with whom D’Ablancourt pioneered the free
method:
 
as speech is the apparel of our thoughts, so are there certain Garbs
and Modes of speaking, which vary with the times […] and this I
think Tacitus means, by that which he calls Sermonem temporis istius
auribus accommodatum […] and therefore if Virgil must needs speak
English, it were fit he should speak not only as a man of this Nation,
but as a man of this age.
(Denham 1656:A3r)
 
Denham’s advocacy of free translation was laden with a nationalism
that, even if expressed with courtly self-effacement, ultimately led to a
contradictory repression of the method’s parallels and influences,
foreign as well as English:
 
if this disguise I have put upon him (I wish I could give it a better
name) fit not naturally and easily on so grave a person, yet it may
become him better than that Fools-Coat wherein the French and
Italian have of late presented him.
(Denham 1656:A3v)
 
Denham sought to distinguish his translation from burlesque versions
of the Aeneid that were fashionable on the Continent, Paul Scarron’s
Virile Travesti (1648–1649) and Giovanni Battista Lalli’s Eneide Travestita
(1633) (Scarron 1988:10). He, like other translators associated with the
exiled Caroline court, was following another French fashion in
translation, although one linked closer to a monarchy whose absolutist
experiment proved effective: D’Ablancourt’s version of the Annals was
dedicated to the powerful royal minister Cardinal Richelieu. Denham’s
translation of Virgil in fact reflects the strong resemblance between
English and French translation methods during the period. But the
deep nationalism of this method works to conceal its origins in another
national culture—a contradiction that occurs in Denham’s case because
the method answers so specifically to an English problem: the need for

Canon
51
a “new” cultural practice that will enable the defeated royalist segment
of the Caroline aristocracy to regain its hegemonic status in English
culture. In his commendatory verses “To Sir Richard Fanshawe upon
his Translation of Pastor Fido” (1648), Denham calls free translation “a
new and nobler way” (Steiner 1975:63). Given the political significance
of this method, it is important for Denham to translate a text in a genre
that treats nobility, the epic, and refuse the French burlesques that
debased Virgil’s aristocratic theme by treating social inferiors in the
epic manner.
Denham’s intention to enlist translation in a royalist cultural politics
at home is visible both in his selection of the foreign text and in the
discursive strategies he adopted in his version. The choice to translate
Virgil’s Aeneid in early modern England could easily evoke Geoffrey of
Monmouth’s legend that Brute, the grandson of Aeneas, founded
Britain and became the first in a succession of British monarchs.
Although this like the Arthurian legends was losing credibility among
historians and antiquarians, the matter of Troy continued to be the
cultural support of a strong nationalism, and it was repeatedly revised
from different and often conflicting ideological standpoints in a wide
range of texts—from William Camden’s Britannia (1586) to Jonson’s
Speeches at Prince Henry’s Barriers (1609) to Thomas Heywood’s Life of
Merlin (1641).3 The early Stuart kings were often given a Trojan
genealogy. Anthony Munday’s contribution to the royal progress
through London, The Triumphs of Re-united Britannia (1605), referred to
James I as “our second Brute”; Heywood described his narrative as “a
Chronographicall History of all the Kings and memorable passages of
this kingdom, from Brute to the Reigne of our Royall Soveraigne King
Charles” (Parsons 1929:403, 407). In the political debates during the
Interregnum, a Trojan genealogy could be used to justify both
representative government and absolute monarchy. In 1655, the
parliamentarian polemicist William Prynne interpreted the
significance of the legend as “1. A Warre to shake off Slavery, and
recover publick Liberty. 2. A kinde of Generall Parliamentary Councell
summoned by Brute”; whereas in a legal commentary published in
1663 Edward Waterhouse argued that Brute “by his consent to reward
the valour and fidelity of his Companions” instituted laws “both
touching his Royal Prerogative, and their civil Security in life, member,
goods and Lawes” (Jones 1944:401, 403).
Denham’s own appropriation of the Brute legend in Coopers Hill
swells with patriotic fervor, but it also possesses the awareness that
the Trojan genealogy is a legend, increasingly under attack yet able

52
The Translator’s Invisibility
to function in cultural political struggles, and even, somewhat
contradictorily, true. In a passage that reflects on the vista of
London and environs, Denham writes that “The Gods great
Mother,” Cybele,
 
cannot boast   
Amongst that numerous, and Celestiall hoast,
More Hero’s than can Windsor, nor doth Fames
Immortall booke record more noble names.
Not to look back so far, to whom this Ile
Owes the first Glory of so brave a pile,
Whether to Caesar, Albanact, or Brute,
The Brittish Arthur, or the Danish Knute,
(Though this of old no lesse contest did move,
Than when for Homers birth seven Cities strove)
[…]
But whosoere it was, Nature design’d
First a brave place, and then as brave a minde.
(Denham 1969:67)
 
The mention of “contest” in the parenthetical remark seems at first to
question the credibility of heroic genealogies for English kings,
whether historical or literary: “contest” as a reference to the
historiographical “controversy” or “debate.” But the couplet quickly
shifts the issue from credibility to social effectivity: even if of
questionable authenticity, poetic genealogies (“Homers birth”) are
cultural capital and can motivate political and military conflict. In
England’s case, however, the heroic genealogies are metaphysically
validated, by “Nature design’d.” For Denham, the Brute legend
constituted a strategic move in an ideological cultural practice, poetry
in the service of a specific political agenda. But, like many of his
contemporaries, he was apt to mask these material conditions with
providentialist claims and appeals to natural law that underwrite a
notion of racial superiority.
Denham’s choice of Virgil’s Aeneid was uniquely suited to the
nationalistic leanings of his domesticating translation method. And in
line with the recurrent Trojan genealogies of English kings, his choice
of an excerpt he entitled The Destruction of Troy allowed him to suggest,
more directly, the defeat of the Caroline government and his support
for monarchy in England. Denham’s political designs can be seen, first,
in his decision to prepare Book II for publication. In 1636, he had

Canon
53
written a version of the Aeneid II–VI, and in 1668, he revised and
published part of IV under the title, The Passion of Dido for Aeneas. In
1656, he chose to issue the excerpt whose “argument,” the fall of Troy,
better lent itself to topicality. The topical resonance of his version
becomes strikingly evident when it is juxtaposed to the Latin text and
previous English versions. Book II had already been done in several
complete translations of the Aeneid, and it had been singled out twice
by previous translators, Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and Sir Thomas
Wroth. Yet both of them had rendered the entire book (some eight
hundred lines of Latin text). Denham, in contrast, published an
abbreviated translation (some 550 lines) that ended climactically with
Priam’s death.
 
haec finis Priami fatorum, hic exitus illum
sorte tulit Troiam incensam et prolapsa uidentem
Pergama, tot quodam populis terrisque superbum
regnatorem Asiae. iacet ingens litore truncus,
auulsumque umeris caput et sine nomine corpus.
(Mynors 1969:ll. 554–558)
 
Thus fell the King, who yet surviv’d the State,
With such a signal and peculiar Fate.
Under so vast a ruine not a Grave,
Nor in such flames a funeral fire to have:
He, whom such Titles swell’d, such Power made proud
To whom the Scepters of all Asia bow’d,
On the cold earth lies th’unregarded King,
A headless Carkass, and a nameless Thing.
(Denham 1656:ll. 542–549)
 
By removing the character and place names in the Latin text
(“Priami,” “Troiam,” and “Pergama,” the citadel at Troy) and
referring only to “the King,” Denham generalizes the import of the
passage, enabling Priam’s “headless Carkass” to metamorphose
into a British descendant’s, at least for a moment, inviting the
contemporary English reader to recall the civil wars—although
from a decidedly royalist point of view. Denham’s translation
shared the same impulse toward political allegory that
characterized, not only the various revisions of Coopers Hill, but
also royalist writing generally during the years after Charles’s
defeat, including Fanshawe’s translation of Guarini’s Il Pastor Fido

54
The Translator’s Invisibility
(1647) and Christopher Wase’s translation of Sophocles’ Electra
(1649).4
The one place name Denham includes in his version of Priam’s
death, “Asia,” may be taken as an allusion to the Orientalism in
Caroline court culture. Denham had himself contributed to this
trend with The Sophy (1642), a play intended for court production
and set in Persia. But the allusiveness of the translation is more
specific. “The Scepters of all Asia bow’d” to Charles in court
masques where the king and queen enacted a moral conquest of
foreign rulers by converting their nations to Platonic love. In
Aurelian Townshend’s Tempe Restor’d (1632), the royal couple
preside over the reformation of Circe’s sensual reign, figured in “all
the Antimasques, consisting of Indians and Barbarians, who
naturally are bestiall, and others which are voluntaries, but halfe
transformed into beastes” (Townshend 1983:97).
Yet more striking is Denham’s curious addition to the Latin text:
“Thus fell the King, who yet survived the State,/With such a signal
and peculiar Fate.” Virgil’s omission of any reference to the dead
king’s afterlife reveals Denham’s own belief in the continuing vitality
of the Stuart monarchy after the regicide. Although Charles I was
executed, the monarchy “survived the State” instituted by Parliament,
initially a Commonwealth governed by a Council of State, which was
later redefined to function as an advisor to a Lord Protector; this was
a “signal and peculiar” survival for the king because it took the form
of a court in exile and royalist conspiracy at home, because, in other
words, the king lived on but not in his kingdom. In the political
climate of the 1650s, with the Protectorate resorting to oppressive
measures to quell royalist insurgency, it would be difficult for a
Caroline sympathizer not to see any parallel between the
decapitations of Priam and Charles. But in this climate it would also
be necessary for a royalist writer like Denham to use such an oblique
mode of reference as an allusion in an anonymous translation.
Translation was particularly useful in royalist cultural politics, Lois
Potter suggests, because it was viewed as “transcendence, the healing
wholeness that removes controversy and contradiction” (Potter
1989:52–53). In Denham’s translation, the monarchy “survived” its
destruction.
The fact that Denham intended his translation to serve a royalist
function is borne out by a comparison with his predecessors, which
highlights the subtle changes he introduced to bring the Latin text
closer to his political concerns:

Canon
55
Of Priamus this was the fatal fine,
The wofull end that was alotted him.
When he had seen his palace all on flame,
With the ruine of his Troyan turrets eke,
That royal prince of Asie, which of late
Reignd over so many peoples and realmes,
Like a great stock now lieth on the shore:
His hed and shoulders parted ben in twaine:
A body now without renome, and fame.
(Howard 1557:ciiv)
 
 
See here King Priams end of all the troubles he had knowne,
Behold the period of his days, which fortune did impone.
When he had seene his Citie raz’d, his Pallace, Temples fir’d,
And he who to th’Imperiall rule of Asia had aspir’d,
Proud of his Territories, and his people heeretofore,
Was then vnto the sea side brought, and headlesse in his gore:
Without respect his body lay in publike view of all.
(Wroth 1620:E3r)
 
This was king Priams end, this his hard fate,
To live to see Troy fir’d, quite ruinate:
Even he, who once was Asia’s Keisar great,
Mightiest in men, and spacious regall seat:
A despicable trunk (now) dead on ground,
His head cut off, his carcasse no name found.
(Vicars 1632:48)
 
So finish’d Priams Fates, and thus he dy’d,
Seeing Troy burn, whose proud commands did sway
So many powerful Realms in Asia;
Now on the strand his sacred body lyes
Headless, without a Name or Obsequies.
(Ogilby 1654:217, 219)5
 
Denham clearly exceeds his predecessors in the liberties he takes with
the Latin text. His addition about the “signal and peculiar Fate”
becomes more conspicuous and historically charged in such a
comparison, as does his deletion of local markers, including the Latin
“litore” (1.557), a word that situates Priam’s fall near the sea and is

56
The Translator’s Invisibility
rendered by most of the other translators (“shore,” “sea side,”
“strand”). Denham’s translation not only allows the death to be shifted
inland, but throughout he makes a noticeable effort to domesticate
architectural terms, likening the Trojan structures to the royal buildings
in England. Consider this passage where the Greeks are forcing their
way into Priam’s palace:
 
Automedon   
And Periphas who drove the winged steeds,
Enter the Court; whom all the youth succeeds
Of Scyros Isle, who flaming firebrands flung
Up to the roof, Pyrrhus himself among
The foremost with an Axe an entrance hews
Through beams of solid Oak, then freely views
The Chambers, Galleries, and Rooms of State,
Where Priam and the ancient Monarchs sate.
At the first Gate an Armed Guard appears;
But th’Inner Court with horror, noise and tears
Confus’dly fill’d, the womens shrieks and cries
The Arched Vaults re-echo to the skies;
Sad Matrons wandring through the spacious Rooms
Embrace and kiss the Posts: Then Pyrrhus comes
Full of his Father, neither Men nor Walls
His force sustain, the torn Port-cullis falls,
Then from the hinge, their strokes the Gates divorce:
[…]
Then they the secret Cabinets invade,
(Denham 1656:ll. 453–480, 491)
 
Denham’s “Chambers, Galleries, and Rooms of State,” “Inner Court,”
“Arched Vaults,” “secret Cabinets” render various Latin terms, but the
Latin is much less defined, and it noticeably refers to a different
architecture: “domus intus,” “domus interior” (“the house within”),
“atria longa” (“long halls”), “penetralia” (“interior”), “cauae” (“hollow
places”), “thalami” (“the women’s bed-rooms”) (ibid.:ll. 484–7, 503).
Although the renderings used by Denham’s predecessors display a
degree of domestication as well, they do not match the extremity of his:
“the house, the court, and secret chambers eke,” “the palace within,”
“the hollow halles” (Howard 1557:civ); “the roomes, and all that was
within,” “the spacious pallace” (Wroth 1620:Er); “the rooms within,
great halls and parlours faire,” “the rooms within” (Vicars 1632:45);

Canon
57
“the house within,” “long halls,” “Priams bed-chamber,” “arched
Sielings” (Ogilby 1654:215). And Denham is alone in using “Portcullis”
for the Latin “postes” (“door-posts”), refusing such previous and likely
renderings as “pillars,” “gates,” and “posts” for a word that conjures
up the architectural structure most closely associated with aristocracy
and monarchy, the castle. Denham’s architectural lexicon permits the
description of the Greek attack to evoke other, more recently besieged
castles, like Windsor Castle stormed by the parliamentary armies, or
perhaps Farnham Castle, where in 1642 Denham was forced to
surrender the royal garrison he commanded there. Denham’s
domesticating translation casts the destruction of Troy in a form that
resonates with certain moments in English history, those when
aristocratic rule was dominant (the medieval past) or allied, however
tenuously, with the monarchy (the absolutist experiment of the 1630s),
or decisively defeated and displaced (the civil wars and Interregnum).
There are other senses in which Denham’s decision to translate Book
II of the Aeneid addressed the displaced royalist segment of the
Caroline aristocracy. By choosing this book, he situated himself in a
line of aristocratic translators that stretched back to Surrey, a courtly
amateur whose literary activity was instrumental in developing the
elite court cultures of the Tudor and Stuart monarchs. From Tottel’s
Miscellany (1557) on, Surrey was recognized as an important innovator
of the sonnet and love lyric, but his work as a translator also possessed
a cultural significance that would not have been lost on Denham:
Surrey’s translation of Virgil proved to be a key text in the emergence
of blank verse as a prevalent poetic form in the period. Following
Surrey’s example, Denham turned to Book II to invent a method of
poetry translation that would likewise prove culturally significant for
his class. His aim was not only to reformulate the free method
practiced in Caroline aristocratic culture at its height, during the 1620s
and 1630s, but to devise a discursive strategy for translation that would
reestablish the cultural dominance of this class: this strategy can be
called fluency.
A free translation of poetry requires the cultivation of a fluent
strategy in which linear syntax, univocal meaning, and varied meter
produce an illusionistic effect of transparency: the translation seems as
if it were not in fact a translation, but a text originally written in
English.6 In the preface to his 1632 Aeneid, John Vicars described “the
manner, wherein I have aimed at these three things, Perspicuity of the
matter, Fidelity to the authour, and Facility or smoothnes to recreate
thee my reader” (Vicars 1632: A3r). In Denham’s words, the translation

58
The Translator’s Invisibility
should “fit” the foreign text “naturally and easily.” Fluency is
impossible to achieve with close or “verbal” translation, which inhibits
the effect of transparency, making the translator’s language seem
foreign: “whosoever offers at Verbal Translation,” wrote Denham,
 
shall have the misfortune of that young Traveller, who lost his
own language abroad, and brought home no other instead of it:
for the grace of Latine will be lost by being turned into English
words; and the grace of the English, by being turned into the Latin
Phrase.
(Denham 1656:A3r)
 
Denham’s privileging of fluency in his own translation practice
becomes clear when his two versions of Aeneid II are compared. The
1636 version is preserved in the commonplace book of Lucy
Hutchinson, wife of the parliamentary colonel, John Hutchinson, with
whom Denham attended Lincoln’s Inn between 1636 and 1638
(O’Hehir 1968:12–13). The book contains Denham’s translation of
Aeneid II–VI—complete versions of IV–VI, partial ones of II and III.
Book II is clearly a rough draft: not only does it omit large portions of
the Latin text, but some passages do not give full renderings, omitting
individual Latin words. There is also a tendency to follow the Latin
word order, in some cases quite closely. The example cited by Theodore
Banks is the often quoted line “timeo Danaos et dona ferentes,” which
Denham rendered word for word as “The Grecians most when
bringing gifts I feare” (Denham 1969:43–44). The convoluted syntax
and the pronounced metrical regularity make the line read awkwardly,
without “grace.” In the 1656 version, Denham translated this line more
freely and strove for greater fluency, following a recognizably English
word-order and using metrical variations to smooth out the rhythm:
“Their swords less danger carry than their gifts” (Denham 1656:l. 48).
Denham’s fluent strategy is most evident in his handling of the
verse form, the heroic couplet. The revision improved both the
coherence and the continuity of the couplets, avoiding metrical
irregularities and knotty constructions, placing the caesura to reinforce
syntactical connections, using enjambment and closure to subordinate
the rhyme to the meaning, sound to sense:
 
1636   
While all intent with heedfull silence stand
Æneas spake O queene by your command

Canon
59
My countries fate our dangers & our feares
While I repeate I must repeate my feares   
1656   
While all with silence & attention wait,
Thus speaks Æneas from the bed of State:
Madam, when you command us to review
Our Fate, you make our old wounds bleed anew
(ll. 11–4)
 
1636   
We gave them gon & to Micenas sayld
from her long sorrow Troy herselfe unvaild
The ports throwne open all with ioy resort
To see ye Dorick tents ye vacant port   
1656   
We gave them gone, and to Mycenae sail’d,
And Troy reviv’d, her mourning face unvail’d;
All through th’unguarded Gates with joy resort
To see the slighted Camp, the vacant Port;
(ll. 26–29)
 
1636   
Guilt lent him rage & first possesst
The credulous rout with vaine reports nor ceast
But into his designes ye prophett drew
But why doe I these thanklesse truths persue   
1656   
Old guilt fresh malice gives; The peoples ears
He fills with rumors, and their hearts with fears,
And them the Prophet to his party drew.
But why do I these thankless truths pursue;
(ll. 95–98)
1636   
While Laocoon on Neptunes sacred day
By lot designed a mighty bull did slay
Twixt Tenedos & Troy the seas smooth face
Two serpents with their horrid folds embrace
Above the deepe they rayse their scaly crests

60
The Translator’s Invisibility
And stem ye flood wth their erected brests
Then making towards the shore their tayles they wind
In circling curles to strike ye waves behind   
1656   
Laocoon, Neptunes Priest, upon the day
Devoted to that God, a Bull did slay,
When two prodigious serpents were descride,
Whose circling stroaks the Seas smooth face divide;
Above the deep they raise their scaly Crests,
And stem the floud with their erected brests,
Their winding tails advance and steer their course,
And ’gainst the shore the breaking Billow force.
(ll. 196–203)
 
Denham’s fluent strategy allowed the 1656 version to read more
“naturally and easily” so as to produce the illusion that Virgil wrote
in English, or that Denham succeeded in “doing him more right,”
making available in the most transparent way the foreign writer’s
intention or the essential meaning of the foreign text. Yet Denham
made available, not so much Virgil, as a translation that signified a
peculiarly English meaning, and the revisions provide further
evidence for this domestication. Thus, the 1636 version translated
“Teucri” (l. 251) and “urbs” (l. 363) as “Trojans” and “Asias empresse,”
whereas the 1656 version used just “The City” (ll. 243, 351), suggesting
at once Troy and London. And whereas the 1636 version translated
“sedes Priami” (l. 437) as “Priams pallace” and “domus interior” (l.
486) as “roome,” the 1656 version used “the Court” and “th’Inner
Court” at these and other points (ll. 425, 438, 465, 473). Even
“Apollinis infula” (l. 430), a reference to a headband worn by Roman
priests, was more localized, turned into a reference to the episcopacy:
in 1636, Denham rendered the phrase as “Apollos mitre,” in 1656
simply as “consecrated Mitre” (l. 416). The increased fluency of
Denham’s revision may have made his translation seem “more right,”
but this effect actually concealed a rewriting of the Latin text that
endowed it with subtle allusions to English settings and institutions,
strengthening the historical analogy between the fall of Troy and the
defeat of the royalist party.
Fluency assumes a theory of language as communication that, in
practice, manifests itself as a stress on immediate intelligibility and
an avoidance of polysemy, or indeed any play of the signifier that

Canon
61
erodes the coherence of the signified. Language is conceived as a
transparent medium of personal expression, an individualism that
construes translation as the recovery of the foreign writer’s intended
meaning. As Denham’s preface asserted, “Speech is the apparel of
our thoughts” (Denham 1656:A3r). Now it will be worthwhile to
recall the recurrent metaphors used in the translators’ prefaces, the
analogy of translation as clothing in which the foreign author is
dressed, or the translated text as the body animated by the foreign
writer’s soul. The assumption is that meaning is a timeless and
universal essence, easily transmittable between languages and
cultures regardless of the change of signifiers, the construction of a
different semantic context out of different cultural discourses, the
inscription of target-language codes and values in every
interpretation of the foreign text. “W.L., Gent.” noted that his
versions of Virgil’s eclogues involved their own violence against the
foreign texts, “breaking the shell into many peeces,” but he was
nonetheless “carefull to preserve the Kernell safe and whole, from
the violence of a wrong, or wrested Interpretation.” Some translators
gave more of a sense that they faced a welter of competing
“Commentaries” (Wroth 1620) from which they selected to
rationalize their translation strategy. But none was sufficiently aware
of the domestication enacted by fluent translation to demystify the
effect of transparency, to suspect that the translated text is
irredeemably partial in its interpretation. Denham admitted that he
was presenting a naturalized English Virgil, but he also insisted that
“neither have I anywhere offered such violence to his sense, as to
make it seem mine, and not his” (Denham 1656:A4r).
Fluency can be seen as a discursive strategy ideally suited to
domesticating translation, capable not only of executing the
ethnocentric violence of domestication, but also of concealing this
violence by producing the effect of transparency, the illusion that this
is not a translation, but the foreign text, in fact, the living thoughts of
the foreign author, “there being certain Graces and Happinesses
peculiar to every Language, which gives life and energy to the words”
(Denham 1656:A3r). Transparency results in a concealment of the
cultural and social conditions of the translation—the aesthetic, class,
and national ideologies linked to Denham’s translation theory and
practice. And this is what makes fluent translation particularly
effective in Denham’s bid to restore aristocratic culture to its dominant
position: the effect of transparency is so powerful in domesticating
cultural forms because it presents them as true, right, beautiful,

62
The Translator’s Invisibility
natural. Denham’s great achievement, in his translations as well as his
poems, was to make the heroic couplet seem natural to his successors,
thus developing a form that would dominate English poetry and
poetry translation for more than a century.
Later writers like John Dryden and Samuel Johnson recognized that
the truly “new” thing in Denham was the stylistic refinement of his
verse. They were fond of quoting Denham’s lines on the Thames in
Coopers Hill and commenting on their beauty, always formulated as
prosodic smoothness, what Dryden in the “Dedication of the Æneis”
(1697) called their “sweetness” (Dryden 1958:1047).7 And both Dryden
and Johnson saw Denham as an innovator in translation: they were
fond of quoting his commendatory verses to Fanshawe’s Il Pastor Fido,
singling out for praise the lines where Denham advocated the free
method:
 
That servile path, thou nobly do’st decline,
Of tracing word by word and Line by Line;
A new and nobler way thou do’st pursue,
To make Translations, and Translators too:
They but preserve the Ashes, thou the Flame,
True to his Sence, but truer to his Fame.
(Denham 1969:ll. 15–16, 21–24)
 
Dryden joined Denham in opposing “a servile, literal Translation”
because, he noted in his preface to Ovid’s Epistles (1680), such
translation is not fluent: “either perspicuity or gracefulness will
frequently be wanting” (Dryden 1956:116).
Dryden also followed Denham, most importantly, in seeing the
couplet as an appropriate vehicle for transparent discourse. In the
preface to his play The Rival Ladies (1664), Dryden asserted that Coopers
Hill, “for the majesty of the style is and ever will be, the exact standard
of good writing” and then proceeded to argue that rhyme does not
necessarily inject a note of artificiality to impede transparency (Dryden
1962:7). Any noticeably artificial use of rhyme rather shows the writer’s
lack of skill:
 
This is that which makes them say rhyme is not natural, it being
only so when the poet either makes a vicious choice of words, or
places them for rhyme sake, so unnaturally as no man would in
ordinary speaking; but when ’tis so judiciously ordered that the first
word in the verse seems to beget the second, and that the next […]

Canon
63
it must then be granted, rhyme has all the advantages of prose
besides its own. […] where the poet commonly confines his sense to
his couplet, [he] must contrive that sense into such words that the
rhyme shall naturally follow them, not they the rhyme.
(Dryden 1962:8)
 
Denham’s work was canonized by later writers because his use of the
couplet made his poetry and poetry translations read “naturally and
easily” and therefore seem “majestic,” in an appropriately royal
metaphor, or “more right,” more accurate or faithful as translations—
but only because the illusion of transparency concealed the process of
naturalizing the foreign text in an English cultural and social
situation. The ascendancy of the heroic couplet from the late
seventeenth century on has frequently been explained in political
terms, wherein the couplet is viewed as a cultural form whose marked
sense of antithesis and closure reflects a political conservatism,
support for the restored monarchy and for aristocratic domination—
despite the continuing class divisions that had erupted in civil wars
and fragmented the aristocracy into factions, some more accepting of
bourgeois social practices than others. Robin Grove is particularly
sensitive to the social implications of the discursive “flow” sought by
the writers who championed the couplet: “The urbanity of the style,”
he observed,
 
incorporates the reader as a member of the urbanely-responsive
class. […] literature announces itself as a social act, even as the
‘society’ it conjures around it is an increasingly specialized/
stratified fiction: a fiction which indeed relates to historical fact
(provided we don’t just coagulate the two), but for whose purposes
the ideas of Sense, Ease, Naturalness (cf. An Essay on Criticism, 68–
140) contained a rich alluvial deposit of aspirations and meanings
largely hidden from view.
(Grove 1984:54)8
 
The fact that for us today no form better than the couplet epitomizes
the artificial use of language bears witness, not just to how deeply
transparency was engrained in aristocratic literary culture, but also to
how much it could conceal.
It is Dryden in particular who found Denham’s translation of Virgil
so important for the rise of this cultural discourse. In the “Dedication
of the Æneis,” he stated that “’tis the utmost of my Ambition to be

64
The Translator’s Invisibility
thought [the] Equal” of Caroline translators like “Sir John Denham, Mr.
Waller, and Mr. Cowley” (Dryden 1958:1051). He admired Denham’s
version of Book II so much that he absorbed no fewer than eighty lines
of it in his own version of the Aeneid. A typical example is his rendering
of the account of Priam’s death, where, as Dryden acknowledged in a
footnote, Denham’s climactic line is repeated:
 
Thus Priam fell: and shar’d one common Fate
With Troy in Ashes, and his ruin’d State:
He, who the Scepter of all Asia sway’d,
Whom monarchs like domestick Slaves obey’d.
On the bleak Shoar now lies th’abandon’d King,
A headless Carcass, and a nameless thing.
(Dryden 1958:ll. 758–763)
 
Dryden’s dedicatory essay makes clear his advocacy of Denham’s
free translation method, which he similarly asserts with
nationalistic pronouncements (“I will boldly own, that this English
Translation has more of Virgil’s Spirit in it, than either the French,
or the Italian” (ibid.:1051)) while finally confessing its likeness to
French models:
 
I may presume to say, and I hope with as much reason as the
French Translator, that taking all the Materials of this divine
Author, I have endeavour’d to make Virgil speak such English, as
he wou’d himself have spoken, if he had been born in England,
and in this present Age. I acknowledge, with Segrais, that I have
not succeeded in this attempt, according to my desire: yet I shall
not be wholly without praise, if in some sort I may be allow’d to
have copied the Clearness, the Purity, the Easiness and the
Magnificence of his Stile.
(ibid.:1055)
 
As with Denham, the domestication of Dryden’s translation method is
so complete that fluency is seen to be a feature of Virgil’s poetry instead
of the discursive strategy implemented by the translator to make the
heroic couplet seem transparent, indistinguishable from “the
Clearness, the Purity, the Easiness and the Magnificence of his Stile.”
And, much more explicitly than Denham, Dryden links his fluent,
domesticating translation to aristocratic culture. Thus, he explains his
avoidance of specialized terminology in his version of the Aeneid—“the

Canon
65
proper terms of Navigation, Land-Service, or […] the Cant of any
Profession”—by arguing that
 
Virgil has avoided those proprieties, because he Writ not to
Mariners, Souldiers, Astronomers, Gardners, Peasants, but to all in
general, and in particular to Men and Ladies of the first Quality:
who have been better Bred than to be too nicely knowing in the
Terms. In such cases, ’tis enough for a Poet to write so plainly, that
he may be understood by his Readers.
(ibid.:1061)
 
Dryden’s remark is a reminder that the free translation method was
modelled on poetry, that Denham was using translation to distinguish
a literary elite from “them who deal in matters of Fact, or matters of
Faith” (Denham 1656:A3r), and that this valorization of the literary
contributed to the concealment of the cultural and social conditions of
translation, including Dryden’s own. For, as Steven Zwicker has
shown, Dryden also designed his Virgil to intervene into a specific
political struggle: it “is a meditation on the language and culture of
Virgil’s poetry, but it is also a set of reflections on English politics in the
aftermath of the Glorious Revolution,” argued Zwicker, “a time when
William III’s reign was not fixed with the certainty it assumed late in
the decade, a time when Stuart restoration might still be contemplated,
and not wholly as fantasy” (Zwicker 1984:177). The triumph of the
heroic couplet in late seventeenth-century poetic discourse depends to
some extent on the triumph of a neoclassical translation method in
aristocratic literary culture, a method whose greatest triumph is
perhaps the discursive sleight of hand that masks the political interests
it serves.
II
In Dryden’s wake, from Alexander Pope’s multi-volume Homer (1715–
1726) to Alexander Tytler’s systematic Essay on the Principles of
Translation (1791), domestication dominated the theory and practice of
English-language translation in every genre, prose as well as poetry. It
was allied to different social tendencies and made to support varying
cultural and political functions. Pope’s Homer continued the
refinement of a transparent poetic discourse in the heroic couplet, still
a literary elitism among the hegemonic classes, dependent less on
court patronage than on publishers with subscription lists that were

66
The Translator’s Invisibility
now increasingly bourgeois as well as aristocratic. It became
fashionable to subscribe to Pope’s translation: over 40 percent of the
names on the lists for his Iliad were titled, and the MPs included both
Tories and Whigs.9 Fluent translating remained affiliated with the
British cultural elite, and its authority was so powerful that it could
cross party lines. Pope described the privileged discourse in his
preface:
 
It only remains to speak of the Versification. Homer (as has been
said) is perpetually applying the Sound to the Sense, and varying
it on every new Subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite
Beauties of Poetry, and attainable by very few: I know only of
Homer eminent for it in the Greek, and Virgil in Latine. I am sensible
it is what may sometimes happen by Chance, when a Writer is
warm, and fully possest of his Image: however it may be
reasonably believed they designed this, in whose Verse it so
manifestly appears in a superior degree to all others. Few Readers
have the Ear to be Judges of it, but those who have will see I have
endeavoured at this Beauty.
(Pope 1967:20–21)
 
Pope manifests the distinctive blind spot of domesticating
translation, confusing, under the illusion of transparency, the
interpretation/translation with the foreign text, even with the foreign
writer’s intention, canonizing classical writing on the basis of
Enlightenment concepts of poetic discourse, a metrical facility
designed to reduce the signifier to a coherent signified, “perpetually
applying the Sound to the Sense.” The fluency of Pope’s Homer set
the standard for verse translations of classical poetry, so that, as
Penelope Wilson notes,
 
we find the ancient poets emerging from the mill of decorum in
more or less undifferentiated batches of smooth rhyme, or blank
verse, and elegant diction. They are generally met by reviewers with
correspondingly vague commendations such as ‘not less faithful
than elegant’; and when they are condemned, they are more often
condemned on stylistic grounds than on those of accuracy.
(Wilson 1982:80)
 
In the eighteenth century, stylistic elegance in a translation can
already be seen as symptomatic of domestication, bringing the

Canon
67
ancient text in line with literary standards prevailing in Hanoverian
Britain.
During this crucial moment in its cultural rise, domesticating
translation was sometimes taken to extremes that look at once oddly
comical and rather familiar in their logic, practices a translator might
use today in the continuing dominion of fluency. William Guthrie, for
instance, in the preface to his version of The Orations of Marcus Tallius
Cicero (1741), argued that “it is living Manners alone that can
communicate the Spirit of an Original” and so it is sufficient if the
translator has made
 
it his Business to be as conversant as he cou’d in that Study and
Manner which comes the nearest to what we may suppose his
Author, were he now to live, wou’d pursue, and in which he wou’d
shine.
(Steiner 1975:98)
 
This was Guthrie’s reason for casting his Cicero as a member of
Parliament, “where,” he says, “by a constant Attendance, in which I
was indulg’d for several Years, I endeavour’d to possess my self of the
Language most proper for this translation” (ibid.:99). Guthrie’s
translation naturalized the Latin text with the transparent discourse he
developed as a reporter of parliamentary debates for the Gentleman’s
Magazine.
It is important not to view such instances of domestication as
simply inaccurate translations. Canons of accuracy and fidelity are
always locally defined, specific to different cultural formations at
different historical moments. Both Denham and Dryden
recognized that a ratio of loss and gain inevitably occurs in the
translation process and situates the translation in an equivocal
relationship to the foreign text, never quite faithful, always
somewhat free, never establishing an identity, always a lack and a
supplement. Yet they also viewed their domesticating method as
the most effective way to control this equivocal relationship and
produce versions adequate to the Latin text. As a result, they
castigated methods that either rigorously adhered to source-
language textual features or played fast and loose with them in
ways that they were unwilling to license, that insufficiently
adhered to the canon of fluency in translation. Dryden “thought it
fit to steer betwixt the two Extreams, of Paraphrase, and literal
Translation” (Dryden 1958:1055), i.e., between the aim of

68
The Translator’s Invisibility
reproducing primarily the meanings of the Latin text, usually at
the cost of its phonological and syntactical features, and the aim of
rendering it word for word, respecting syntax and line break. And
he distinguished his method from Abraham Cowley’s “imitations”
of Pindar, partial translations that revised and, in effect,
abandoned the foreign text. Dryden felt it was Denham “who
advis’d more Liberty than he took himself” (Dryden 1956:117),
permitting Denham’s substantial liberties—the editing of the Latin
text, the domestic lexicon—to pass unnoticed, refined out of
existence, naturalized by the majesty of the style. The ethnocentric
violence performed by domesticating translation rested on a
double fidelity, to the source-language text as well as to the target-
language culture, and especially to its valorization of transparent
discourse. But this was clearly impossible and knowingly
duplicitous, accompanied by the rationale that a gain in domestic
intelligibility and cultural force outweighed the loss suffered by
the foreign text and culture.
This trend in English-language translation gets pushed to a new
extreme at the end of the eighteenth century, in Alexander Fraser
Tytler’s Essay on the Principles of Translation (1791). Tytler’s influential
treatise is a key document in the canonization of fluency, a digest of its
“principles,” “laws,” and “precepts” which offers a plethora of
illustrative examples. His decisive consolidation of earlier statements,
French as well as English, constituted a theoretical refinement, visible
in the precision of his distinctions and in the philosophical
sophistication of his assumptions: domestication is now recommended
on the basis of a general human nature that is repeatedly contradicted
by an aesthetic individualism.
For Tytler, the aim of translation is the production of an equivalent
effect that transcends linguistic and cultural differences:
 
I would therefore describe a good translation to be, That, in which the
merit of the original work is so completely transfused into another
language, as to be as distinctly apprehended, and as strongly felt, by a
native of the country to which that language belongs, as it is by those who
speak the language of the original work.
(Tytler 1978:15)
 
The “merit” of the foreign text, and the “excellencies and defects” of
attempts to reproduce it in translation, are accessible to all, because, in
so far as reason and good sense afford a criterion, the opinion of all

Canon
69
intelligent readers will probably be uniform. But, as it is not to be
denied, that in many of the examples adduced in this Essay, the
appeal lies not so much to any settled canons of criticism, as to
individual taste; it will not be surprising, if in such instances, a
diversity of opinion should take place: and the Author having
exercised with great freedom his own judgment in such points, it
would ill become him to blame others for using the same freedom
in dissenting from his opinions. The chief benefit to be derived
from all such discussions in matters of taste, does not so much
arise from any certainty we can obtain of the rectitude of our
critical decisions, as from the pleasing and useful exercise which
they give to the finest powers of the mind, and those which most
distinguish us from the inferior animals.
(ibid.:vii–viii)
 
For Tytler, it is possible both to translate successfully and to evaluate
translations because he assumes that linguistic and cultural
differences do not exist at a fundamental level, invoking a universal
“reason and good sense” that distinguishes a public sphere of
cultural consensus (“readers”) but extends to the species,
“intelligent” human beings.10 Yet he subsequently narrows this
sphere, first excluding consensus (“settled canons of criticism”) and
then appealing to the “freedom” of “individual taste.” Tytler’s
“common sense” approach to translation rests on a liberal
humanism that is stated with a fugitive democratic gesture (a public
sphere of cultural debate), but lapses ultimately into an individualist
aesthetics with skeptical consequences: “in matters where the
ultimate appeal is to Taste, it is almost impossible to be secure of the
solidity of our opinions, when the criterion of their truth is so very
uncertain” (ibid.:11).
The strain of individualism in Tytler’s treatise is so powerful,
however “uncertain” the contours of subjectivity may seem, that he
never shows the slightest skepticism about aesthetic judgment and
in fact constructs a concept of “correct taste” based on “exquisite
feeling.” The translator’s every choice should be governed by it—
even to the point of violating the “laws” for good translation. These
include, first, “That the Translation should give a complete
transcript of the ideas of the original work,” and, second, “That the
style and manner of writing should be of the same character with
that of the original” (Tytler 1978:16). The “man of exquisite feeling,”
however, is invested with the “liberty” of “adding to or retrenching

70
The Translator’s Invisibility
the ideas of the original,” as well as the “privilege” of “correcting
what appears to him a careless or inaccurate expression of the
original, where that inaccuracy seems materially to affect the sense”
(ibid.:54). Of course, what is “correct” is always a domestic value,
including the discursive effect that dominates English culture at
that moment, transparency. Hence, Tytler’s third and final “law” is
“That the Translation should have all the ease of original
composition” (ibid.:15).
Good translators implement fluent strategies: they avoid
syntactical fragmentation, polysemy (“which, by the bye, is always
a defect in composition” (Tytler 1978:28)), sudden shifts in
discursive registers. Tytler praises Henry Steuart, “Esq.,” “the
ingenious translator of Sallust,” for his “version of a most difficult
author, into easy, pure, correct, and often most eloquent language”;
Steuart recognized “the fruitlessness of any attempt to imitate the
abrupt and sententious manner” of the Latin text (ibid.:188–189). Of
Arthur Murphy’s Tacitus, Tytler remarks, “We most admire the
judgment of the translator in forbearing all attempt to rival the
brevity of the original, since he knew it could not be attained but
with the sacrifice both of ease and perspicuity” (ibid.:186–187). “To
imitate the obscurity or ambiguity of the original, is a fault; and it
is still a greater, to give more than one meaning” (ibid.:28–29).
Thomas May and George Sandys “manifested a better taste in
poetical translation” because they “have given to their versions [of
Lucan and Ovid] both an ease of expression and a harmony of
numbers, which make them approach very near to original
composition,” masking both the second-order status of the
translation and its domestication of the foreign text. For these
translators who produced the sense of originality “have everywhere
adapted their expression to the idiom of the language in which they
wrote” (ibid.:68). The governing “precept,” Tytler states, is “That the
translator ought always to figure to himself, in what manner the
original author would have expressed himself, if he had written in
the language of the translation” (ibid.:201). But the translator must
also conceal the figural status of the translation, indeed confuse the
domesticated figure with the foreign writer.
Tytler’s recommendations of fluency lead to the inscription of the
foreign text with a rather conservative set of social representations.
These include a squeamishness about physical references that enables
his concept of “correct taste” to function as a cultural discourse by which
the bourgeoisie and a bourgeois aristocracy express their superiority to

Canon
71
lower classes. As Peter Stallybrass and Allon White have shown,
 
within the symbolic discourse of the bourgeoisie, illness, disease,
poverty, sexuality, blasphemy and the lower classes were
inextricably connected. The control of the boundaries of the body (in
breathing, eating, defecating) secured an identity which was
constantly played out in terms of class difference.
(Stallybrass and White 1986:167)
 
Thus, Tytler finds that Homer betrays a tendency “to offend, by
introducing low images and puerile allusions. Yet how admirably is
this defect veiled over, or altogether removed, by his translator Pope”
(Tytler 1978:79). Pope is praised for omitting “an impropriety,”
Homer’s “compliment to the nurse’s waist”—in Tytler’s translation her
“waist was elegantly girt”—as well as “one circumstance extremely
mean, and even disgusting,” a “nauseous image” of Achilles as a child:
in Tytler’s translation, “When I placed you on my knees, I filled you
full with meat minced down, and gave you wine, which you vomited
upon my bosom” (ibid.:49–50, 89–90). At other points, the process of
domestication is explicitly class-coded, with the translator advised to
inscribe the foreign text with elite literary discourses while excluding
discourses that circulate among an urban proletariat:
 
If we are thus justly offended at hearing Virgil speak in the style of
the Evening Post or the Daily Advertiser, what must we think of the
translator, who makes the solemn and sententious Tacitus express
himself in the low cant of the streets, or in the dialect of the waiters
of a tavern?
(ibid.:119)
 
Transparency, the “ease of original composition” in translation, was a
genteel literary effect that avoided the “licentiousness” of popular oral
genres:
 
The most correct taste is requisite to prevent that ease from
degenerating into licentiousness. […] The most licentious of all
translators was Mr Thomas Brown, of facetious memory, in whose
translations from Lucian we have the most perfect ease; but it is the
ease of Billingsgate and of Wapping.
(ibid.:220–221)

72
The Translator’s Invisibility
Ultimately, Tytler’s bourgeois valorization of transparent discourse to
the exclusion of what Mikhail Bakhtin called the “carnivalesque”
reveals a class anxiety about the simulacral status of the translated text
and the threat it poses to an individualistic concept of authorship
(Bakhtin 1984). Stallybrass and White facilitate this critique of Tytler’s
translation theory with their Bakhtinian history of the construction of
authorship in England:
 
Jonson, Dryden, Pope and Wordsworth, each sought to legitimate
his claim to the vocation of master-poet by disengaging himself
from the carnivalesque scene so as to stand above it, taking up a
singular position of transcendence. The traces of this labour, of this
act of discursive rejection, are marked out by nothing so much as the
poet’s attempt to found an illusory unity above and beyond the
carnival. In each case, however, this apparently simple gesture of
social superiority and disdain could not be effectively accomplished
without revealing the very labour of suppression and sublimation
involved.
(Stallybrass and White 1986:123–124)
 
Translation threatens the transcendental author because it submits his
text to the infiltration of other discourses that are not bourgeois,
individualistic, transparent. In Tytler’s case, there is a special concern
that classical texts should not be carnivalized and degraded by
translation strategies that do not implement canonical readings of
those texts—colloquializing “the solemn and sententious Tacitus,” for
example, or trashing the “strength united with simplicity” that is
“characteristic of the language of Homer” by rendering his vulgarities.
The very labour of suppression and sublimation involved in Tytler’s
theory can be glimpsed in his willingness to risk compromising the
canonicity of classical texts, admitting that they must be edited to fit his
chastening, bourgeois readings of them. Insofar as Tytler’s
neoclassicism comprehends a free translation method, it at once
expresses and declares impossible a nostalgic dream of originality, the
ancients’ proximity to “Nature,” representation and expression free of
its discursive conditions.
For Tytler, the threat posed by translation to the author’s
transcendence is answered by liberal humanism, the contradiction
between a general human nature and the individualist aesthetics
embodied in the concept of “correct taste.” His explicit intention is to
address “the subject of translation considered as an art, depending on

Canon
73
fixed principles” (Tytler 1978:4, my italics). The translator with
“correct taste” is in fact an artist, an author: “none but a poet can
translate a poet” (ibid.:208); “an ordinary translator sinks under the
energy of his original; the man of genius frequently rises above it”
(ibid.:42). And it is transparency that signifies the translator’s
authorship in the text: the ease of originality occurs in “specimens of
perfect translation, where the authors have entered with exquisite
taste into the manner of their originals” (ibid.:142). The translator’s
authorship hinges on a sympathetic identification with the foreign
author—“to use a bold expression, [the translator] must adopt the
very soul of his author, which must speak through his own organs”
(ibid.:212)—but in the translation what gets expressed is less the
foreign author’s “soul” than the translator’s: “With what superior
taste has the translator heightened this simile, and exchanged the
offending circumstance for a beauty”; “in such instances, the good
taste of the translator invariably covers the defect of the original”
(ibid.:89, 88). The anxiety that translation complicates authorial self-
expression by mediating the foreign text with “low” discourses is
allayed by Tytler’s erasure of the distinction between translator and
author, largely on the basis of an illusionistic effect of textuality, now
the sign of “correct taste.”
Tytler (1747–1813), a Scottish lord who practiced law and
pursued various historical, literary, and philosophical interests,
published his treatise anonymously in 1791 and then issued two
more editions, in 1797 and 1813, expanding the book to more than
three times its initial size by adding many, many examples, driven
by the empiricist conviction that they would make his concept of
“taste” seem true, right, obvious. The treatise was very favorably
received by reviewers and readers, confirming Tytler’s sense that
he was addressing a public sphere of cultural consensus, even if
that sphere was limited to a like-minded bourgeois literary elite.11
The European Magazine, which announced itself as “a general
Vehicle, by which the literati of the Whole Kingdom may converse
with each other and communicate their Knowledge to the World,”
concluded its review “with wonder at the variety of our Author’s
reading, with praise of the justness of his judgment and the
elegance of his taste” (European Magazine 1793:282). Tytler’s
treatise prompted the Monthly Review to reflect on “the gradual
progress of taste among our English writers” as evidenced in the
rise of fluent translation (Monthly Review 1792:361). The
anonymous reviewer asserted that “the author’s observations are,

74
The Translator’s Invisibility
for the most part, so evidently dictated by good sense, and so
consonant to correct taste, as to admit of little dispute; and the
examples, by which they are illustrated, are very judiciously
selected and properly applied,” “sufficient to convince every
reader of good taste, that the volume will repay the trouble of a
diligent perusal of the whole” (ibid.:363, 366).
Although both of these reviewers expressed some doubts about
Tytler’s recommendation that the translator edit or “improve” the
foreign text, neither found this editing questionable because of the
domestication it involved. On the contrary, the question was the
specific nature of the domestication, with both offering reasons
firmly grounded in domestic translation agendas. The reviewer for
the Monthly Review suggested that Tytler’s “improvements” of the
foreign text might interfere with the improvement of taste
performed by translation, “the great end of which undoubtedly is to
give the unlearned reader a correct idea of the merit of the original”
(Monthly Review 1792:363). The reviewer for the European Magazine
was less didactic but equally snobbish in his wish to preserve the
classical text in a pure, unmediated state: “Such ornaments appear
to us like modern gilding laid upon one of the finest statues of
antiquity” (European Magazine 1792:188). This antiquarianism,
although based on an idealized concept of the past, was actually
serving contemporary social interests, labouring, somewhat
contradictorily, under the valorization of transparent discourse in
elite literary culture, recommending translations that seem to
reproduce the foreign text perfectly: “the sober sense of criticism
[…] bids a translator to be the faithful mirror of his original”
(ibid.:189).
Tytler’s importance in the canonization of fluent translation
is perhaps most clearly indicated by George Campbell’s
adherence to the same “principles” in his two-volume version
of the Gospels. Campbell’s was undoubtedly one of the most
popular English translations of its time: between 1789, when it
was first issued, and 1834, fifteen editions appeared in Britain
and the United States. The massive first volume contained
Campbell’s “Preliminary Dissertations” on such issues as “The
chief Things to be attended to in translating” (“Dissertation the
Tenth,” 445–519). The closeness to Tytler’s recommendations is
remarkable:

Canon
75
The first thing, without doubt, which claims [the translator’s]
attention, is to give a just representation of the sense of the
original. This, it must be acknowledged, is the most essential of
all. The second thing is, to convey into his version, as much as
possible, in a consistency with the genius of the language which
he writes, the author’s spirit and manner, and, if I may so
express myself, the very character of his style. The third and last
thing is, to take care, that the version have at least, so far the
quality of an original performance, as to appear natural and
easy, such as shall give no handle to the critic to charge the
translator with applying words improperly, or in a meaning not
warranted by use, or combining them in a way which renders
the sense obscure, and the construction ungrammatical, or even
harsh.
(Campbell 1789:445–446)
 
To recommend transparency as the most suitable discourse for the
Gospels was indeed to canonize fluent translation. Tytler, who
claimed not to know of Campbell’s work before publishing his own,
made use of it in later editions of the Essay, drawing on the
“Preliminary Dissertations” for additional examples and joining
Campbell in rejecting translations that were either too literal or too
free, that deviated too far from fluency and from dominant
interpretations of the sacred text. “Dr. Campbell has justly remarked,
that the Hebrew is a simple tongue,” observed Tytler, agreeing with
the Bible translator’s rejection of Sebastianus Castalio’s version for
its “elegant Latinity,” for “substituting the complex and florid
composition to the simple and unadorned” (Tytler 1978:111, 112).
Campbell’s description of his own discursive strategy recommended
fluency: “As to the Language, particularly of the version itself,
simplicity, propriety, and perspicuity, are the principal qualities at
which I have aimed. I have endeavoured to keep equally clear of the
frippery of Arias, and the finery of Castalio” (Campbell 1789:xx). In
Campbell’s view, Arias Montanus erred because his Latin version
“appears to have been servilely literal,” offering obscure
etymological renderings and “preserving uniformity, rendering the
same word in the original, wherever it occurs, or however it is
connected, by the same word in the version” without “attending to
the scope of the author, as discovered by the context” (ibid.:449, 450,
451). Fluency requires the translator’s lexicon to be varied enough
not to call attention to itself as a lexicon, to the artificiality of the

76
The Translator’s Invisibility
translation, or ultimately to the fact that the translator has created
a target-language “context” to support his estimation of “the scope
of the author.”
Campbell’s condemnation of close translation is a sharp reminder
that any advocacy of transparent discourse conceals an investment in
domestic cultural values—in his case, a Christian dogmatism with
anti-Semitic overtones:
 
A slavish attachment to the letter, in translating, is originally the
offspring of the superstition, not of the Church, but of the
synagogue, where it would have been more suitable in Christian
interpreters, the ministers, not of the letter, but of the spirit, to have
allowed it to remain.
(Campbell 1789:456–457)
 
Like Tytler, however, Campbell also assumed the existence of a public
sphere governed by universal reason. In an exchange of letters,
Campbell took the self-congratulary view that the similarity of their
ideas constituted “evidence” for “a concurrence in sentiment upon
critical subjects with persons of distinguished ingenuity and
erudition” (Alison 1818:27). Yet the elite and exclusionary nature of
this cultural consensus becomes evident, not merely in Campbell’s
Christian dogmatism, but also in his initial reaction to Tytler’s treatise:
Campbell wrote to the publisher to learn the author’s name because,
although he was “flattered not a little to think, that he had in these
points the concurrence in judgment of a writer so ingenious,” he
nonetheless voiced “his suspicion, that the author might have
borrowed from his Dissertation, without acknowledging the
obligation” (Alison 1818:27; Tytler 1978:xxxii). Campbell too was a
translator with a sense of authorship—at once Christian and
individualistic—that could be ruffled by other translations and
translation discourses, provoking him to reactions that ran counter to
his humanist assumptions.
By the turn of the nineteenth century, a translation method of
eliding the linguistic and cultural difference of the foreign text was
firmly entrenched as a canon in English-language translation, always
linked to a valorization of transparent discourse. The canonicity of
domesticating translation was so far beyond question that it survived
the disintegration of the bourgeois public sphere, “now much less one
of bland consensus than of ferocious contention,” in which English
literary periodicals constituted cultural factions with explicit political

Canon
77
positions (Eagleton 1984:37). In 1820, John Hookham Frere, who would
later publish his own translations of Aristophanes, unfavorably
reviewed Thomas Mitchell’s versions of The Acharnians and The Knights
in the staunchly conservative Quarterly Review, Tory defender of
neoclassical literary theory and the traditional authority of aristocracy
and the Anglican Church (Sullivan 1983b:359–367). For Frere, the
principal “defect” of Mitchell’s translation was that it cultivated an
archaic dramatic discourse, “the style of our ancient comedy in the
beginning of the 16th century,” whereas
 
the language of translation ought, we think, as far as possible, to
be a pure, impalpable and invisible element, the medium of
thought and feeling, and nothing more; it ought never to attract
attention to itself; hence all phrases that are remarkable in
themselves, either as old or new; all importations from foreign
languages and quotations, are as far as possible to be avoided. […]
such phrases as [Mitchell] has sometimes admitted, ‘solus cum
solo,’ for instance, ‘petits pates,’ &c. have the immediate effect of
reminding the reader, that he is reading a translation, and […] the
illusion of originality, which the spirited or natural turn of a
sentence immediately preceding might have excited, is instantly
dissipated by it.
(Frere 1820:481)
 
Frere advocated the now familiar fluent strategy, in which the
language of the translation is made to read with a “spirited or natural
turn,” so that the absence of any syntactical and lexical peculiarities
produces the “illusion” that the translation is not a translation, but the
foreign text, reflecting the foreign writer’s intention: “It is the office, we
presume, of the Translator to represent the forms of language
according to the intention with which they are employed” (ibid.:482).
The reviewer for the Edinburgh Review, a magazine whose liberal,
Whiggish politics called the Quarterly Review into existence,
nonetheless agreed that Mitchell’s Aristophanes was defective, and for
the same reason: he “devoted too much time to working in the mines
of our early dramatists, instead of undergoing the greater trouble it
would have cost him to form a style of his own more suited to the
exigency” (Edinburgh Review 1820:306).12 The reviewer defined this
“exigency” in terms of the stylistic feature repeatedly attributed to
classical texts throughout the eighteenth century, asserting that
“simplicity should never be forgotten in a translation of Aristophanes”

78
The Translator’s Invisibility
(ibid.:307). Yet the reviewer also suggested that the simplicity should
be considered a feature of Mitchell’s style as well (“a style of his own”),
showing unwittingly that fluent translation domesticates the foreign
text, making it intelligible in an English-language culture that values
easy readability, transparent discourse, the illusion of authorial
presence.
Once again, the domestication enacted by a fluent strategy was not
seen as producing an inaccurate translation. The usually contentious
periodicals agreed that William Stewart Rose’s 1823 version of
Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso was both fluent and faithful. Blackwood’s, a
magazine that pursued Tory conservatism to reactionary extremes,
called Rose’s translation “a work which, of necessity, addresses itself to
the more refined classes,” since “never was such scrupulous fidelity of
rendering associated with such light dancing elegance of language”
(Blackwood’s 1823:30).13 The London Magazine, which sought to maintain
an independent neutrality amid its politically factious competitors,
similarly found that Rose “generally combined the garrulous ease and
unpremeditated manner of the original with a terse and equable flow
of numbers” (London Magazine 1824:626; Sullivan 1983b:288–296). The
Quarterly Review took Rose’s version as an opportunity to restate the
canons of fluent translation:
 
the two characteristics of a good translation are, that it should be
faithful, and that it should be unconstrained. Faithful, as well in
rendering correctly the meaning of the original, as in exhibiting the
general spirit which pervades it: unconstrained, so as not to betray
by its phraseology, by the collocation of its words, or construction of
its sentences that it is only a copy.
(Quarterly Review 1823:53)
 
A fluent strategy can be associated with fidelity because the effect
of transparency conceals the translator’s interpretation of the foreign
text, the semantic context he has constructed in the translation
according to target-language cultural values. Rose’s fluent
translation was praised for “rendering correctly the meaning of the
original” because it assimilated the Italian text to English values, not
only the valorization of “unconstrained” language, but also the
interpretation of Ariosto’s poem that currently prevailed in the
target culture. And, once again, the dominion of fluency entailed
that canonical texts, the ancient and modern texts in which the sense
of original authorship was felt to be most pronounced, would

Canon
79
possess stylistic simplicity. The reviewer for the London Magazine
declared that Orlando Furioso is characterized by “this exquisite
simplicity, which bears the distinctive mark of a superior genius”
(London Magazine 1824:626).
In Frere’s case, fluency meant a linguistic homogenization that
avoided, not merely archaism, but “associations exclusively belonging
to modern manners,” generalizing the foreign text by removing as
many of the historically specific markers as possible. The translator
must,
 
if he is capable of executing his task upon a philosophic principle,
endeavour to resolve the personal and local allusions into the
genera, of which the local or personal variety employed by the
original author, is merely the accidental type; and to reproduce them
in one of those permanent forms which are connected with the
universal and immutable habits of mankind.
(Frere 1820:482)
 
Frere rationalized these admitted “liberties” by appealing to a
“philosophic principle”:
 
The proper domain of the Translator is, we conceive, to be found
in that vast mass of feeling, passion, interest, action and habit
which is common to mankind in all countries and in all ages; and
which, in all languages, is invested with its appropriate forms of
expression, capable of representing it in all its infinite varieties, in
all the permanent distinctions of age, profession and
temperament.
(ibid.:481)
 
In Frere’s view, a fluent strategy enables the translation to be a
transparent representation of the eternal human verities expressed by
the foreign author.
The principle on which Frere’s theory rests is the principle that can
now be recognized as central to the history of fluent translation: liberal
humanism, subjectivity seen as at once self-determining and
determined by human nature, individualistic yet generic, transcending
cultural difference, social conflict, and historical change to represent
“every shade of the human character” (Frere 1820:481). And, like
preceding versions of this principle, Frere’s may appear to be
democratic in its appeal to what is “common to mankind,” to a

80
The Translator’s Invisibility
timeless and universal human essence, but it actually involved an
insidious domestication that allowed him to imprint the foreign text
with his conservative sexual morality and cultural elitism. He made
plain his squeamishness about the physical coarseness of Aristophanic
humor, its grotesque realism, and felt the need to explain it away as
inconsistent with the author’s intention: the “lines of extreme
grossness” were “forced compromises,” “which have evidently been
inserted, for the purpose of pacifying the vulgar part of the audience,
during passages in which their anger, or impatience, or
disappointment, was likely to break out” (ibid.:491). Hence, “in
discarding such passages,” Frere asserted, “the translator is merely
doing that for his author, which he would willingly have done for
himself”—were he not “often under the necessity of addressing
himself exclusively to the lower class” (ibid.:491), Frere’s advocacy of
a fluent strategy was premised on a bourgeois snobbery, in which the
moral and political conservatism now ascendant in English culture
resulted in a call for a bowdlerized Aristophanes that represented the
“permanent” class divisions of humanity, what Frere described as “that
true comic humour which he was directing to the more refined and
intelligent part of his audience” (ibid.:491). For Frere, “the persons of
taste and judgment, to whom the author occasionally appeals, form, in
modern times, the tribunal to which his translator must address
himself” (ibid.:491).
The Edinburgh Review criticized Mitchell’s Aristophanes on the
basis of similar philosophical and political assumptions, although
formulated with an explicitly “liberal” difference. The reviewer’s
Aristophanes approached his audience with a democratic
inclusiveness—“The smiles of the polite few were not enough for the
comedian,—he must join them to the shouts of the million”—and
since “for all tastes he had to cater,” the playwright came to assume
several social functions, “Public Satirist,” “State Journalist,”
“Periodical Critic” (Edinburgh Review 1820:280)—an Aristophanes
modelled on the Edinburgh’s own self-image as a liberal magazine.
Unlike Frere, this reviewer sighs with relief that Mitchell “does not
mean to publish a Family Aristophanes,” alluding to the title of
Thomas Bowdler’s expurgated edition of Shakespeare (Bowdler
1818), and no offense was taken at Mitchell’s language. The problem
for the Edinburgh reviewer was rather Mitchell’s description of
Aristophanes’ “audience as usually made up of a mere ‘rabble,’ ripe
for nothing but ‘the nonsense of holiday revelry,’ and totally unfit
to appreciate merit of an higher order” (Edinburgh Review 1820:275).

Canon
81
Here the reviewer’s “liberal” stance reveals the same contradiction
between humanism and cultural elitism that emerged in Frere:
Aristophanic comedy “could not be altogether without attractions
for the philosophic mind, that explores the principles of human
nature, or the cultivated taste, that delights in the triumph of genius”
(ibid.:277). Not unexpectedly, the “qualities” that distinguish
Aristophanes as “somewhat above the coarse apprehension of a
mere mob, and fit to gain applause more precious than the
unintellectual roar of plebeian acclamation,” are characteristic of
transparent discourse: “both clear and perspicuous,—terse and yet
magnificent,—powerful and ethical,” “that unfailing fluency and
copiousness” (ibid.:278, 282).
III
The canonization of fluency in English-language translation
during the early modern period limited the translator’s options
and defined their cultural and political stakes. A translator could
choose the now traditional domesticating method, an
ethnocentric reduction of the foreign text to dominant cultural
values in English; or a translator could choose a foreignizing
method, an ethnodeviant pressure on those values to register the
linguistic and cultural differences of the foreign text. Around the
turn of the nineteenth century, the values in question, although
stated somewhat contradictorily in various treatises, translators’
prefaces, and reviews, were decidedly bourgeois—liberal and
humanist, individualistic and elitist, morally conservative and
physically squeamish. The ways in which they constrained the
translator’s activity, the forms of submission and resistance that
a translator might adopt under their domination, become
strikingly evident with the first book-length translations of
Catullus into English, the versions of Dr. John Nott (1795) and the
Honourable George Lamb (1821).
Before these translations appeared, Catullus had long occupied a
foothold in the canon of classical literature in English. Editions of the
Latin text were available on the Continent after the fifteenth century,
and even though two more centuries passed before it was published
in England, Catullus had already been imitated by a wide range of
English poets—Thomas Campion, Ben Jonson, Edmund Waller,
Robert Herrick, among many others (McPeek 1939; Wiseman
1985:chap. VII). Still, Catullus’s place in English literary culture,

82
The Translator’s Invisibility
even if supported by such culturally prominent writers, was rather
minor. There were few translations, usually of the same small group
of kiss and sparrow poems, showing quite clearly that he was
virtually neglected by English translators in favor of Homer, Virgil,
Ovid, Horace: these were the major figures, translated in the service
of diverse aesthetic, moral, and political interests. Catullus’s
marginality was partly an issue of genre, with epic privileged over
lyric in English poetry translation during this period. But there was
also the issue of morality, with English writers at once attracted and
disturbed by the pagan sexuality and the physically coarse language,
entertaining a guilty fixation on the poet’s scandalous affair with
“Lesbia.”
The first substantial selected translation, the anonymous
Adventures of Catullus, and History of His Amours with Lesbia (1707),
was itself a translation from the French, Jean de la Chapelle’s Les
Amours de Catulle. It consisted of several narrative sections, some in
the voices of Catullus and Lesbia, punctuated by versions of the
Latin texts, all arranged to support “a train of Historical Conjectures
[which] have so great a foundation in the poet’s own Verses” (The
Adventures of Catullus 1707:A2r). For the English editor, the book was
didactic, “one of the severest Lessons against our Passions and
Vices”; but since it was described as “a just Representation of the
Nobility of Antient Rome, in a private Life, in their Friendships,
Conversation, and Manners within Doors,” the editor was also
assimilating Roman aristocratic culture to bourgeois values like
emotional intimacy and moral propriety and perhaps questioning
the “private life” of the British aristocracy: the book was dedicated
to the earl of Thomond (ibid.:A2v–A3v). In his Lives of the Roman Poets
(1733), Lewis Crusius, anxiously feeling the need for a “justification
of this Writer [who] has been very much censured for the Lewdness
of some of his Pieces,” asked the English reader to respect the
historical and cultural difference of Catullus’s poetry, its different
sexual morality:
 
We would not be understood by any means to vindicate this
conduct in our Author, but barely to shew, that Obscenity, according
to the Antients, was not only allowable in these sorts of
Compositions, but when artfully drest up, was esteemed one of its
greatest beauties.
(Crusius 1733:28)
 

Canon
83
In the end, however, Crusius bared only his moral refinement,
concluding that the Latin texts should continue to be censored:
 
Many things more might be brought to shew the allowableness of
this practice among the Greeks as well as Romans; but as we think it
in the highest degree criminal and offensive in itself, and of most
pernicious consequence to the Readers, especially the youth of both
sexes, into whose hands such pieces may happen to fall, we shall say
no more on this Head.
(ibid.:29)
 
The appearance of two complete translations of Catullus’s poetry
within roughly a generation signalled a revision of the classical
canon in English, the emergence of a new taste for short poems,
mainly epigrams and lyrics, and especially those of an erotic nature.
The cultural and social factors that made this revision possible
included, not any relaxation of bourgeois moral norms, but the
canonization of transparency in English poetry and poetry
translation. Crusius had sounded this note early when he praised the
“easy unaffected elegance and pleasantry that enlivens this Poet’s
Style” (Crusius 1733:28). By the beginning of the nineteenth century,
Catullus’s poetry was routinely assimilated to transparent discourse,
considered to offer an especially strong effect of authorial presence,
and this occasionally weakened the critics’ prudery, leading them to
mitigate the coarse language they found so offensive. The work of
rehabilitation was evident in Charles Abraham Elton’s Specimens of
the Classic Poets (1814), a three-volume anthology of verse
translations from Greek and Latin. Elton felt that Catullus’s poetry
was rather thin—“pieces of gallantry or satirical epigrams, with a
few poems of a more elevated cast”—but he excused this defect by
assuming that “much of the poetry of Catullus appears to have been
lost” (Elton 1814:I, 30–31). What recommends the extant texts is their
“ease” and “simplicity”:
 
They, who turn with disgust from the coarse impurities that sully his
pages, may be inclined to wonder, that the term of delicacy should
ever have been coupled with the name of Catullus. But to many of
his effusions, distinguished both by fancy and feeling, this praise is
justly due. Many of his amatory trifles are quite unrivalled in the
elegancy of their playfulness; and no author has excelled him in the
purity and neatness of his style, the delightful ease and racy

84
The Translator’s Invisibility
simplicity of his manner, and his graceful turns of thought and
happinesses of expression. Some of his pieces, which breathe the
higher enthusiasm of the art, and are coloured with a singular
picturesqueness of imagery, increase our regret at the manifest
mutilation of his works.
(ibid.:ll:31)
 
In 1818, Blackwood’s published an essay that remarked on the fluency of
Catullus’s verse, finding it a mirror of the poet: “This language is
uniformly unlaboured. […] His versification is careless, but graceful.
His feeling is weak, but always true. The poet has no inclination to
appear any thing but what he is” (Blackwood’s 1818:487). The essayist
then ventured to connect Catullus to a canonical English figure,
suggesting that the “obscenity is seldom introduced altogether for its
own sake. Like that of Swift, it is only the weapon of satire” (ibid.:488).
The final verdict, however, was
 
that it is quite impossible to read his verses without regretting that
he happened to be an idler, a man of fashion, and a debauchee. […]
he might have bequeathed to posterity works fitted to inspire
sentiments of virtue and morality, instead of a book, the greater part
of which must for ever remain sealed to all those who have any
principle of human delicacy in their composition.
(ibid.:489)
 
The translators of the first book-length versions of Catullus, Nott and
Lamb, shared the prevailing assessment of the Latin poet, but it shaped
their work very differently. Nott too thought that “strength and
simplicity, elegance and perspicuity mark the stile of Catullus” (Nott
1795:I, xxiii), while Lamb wrote of “the poet’s natural felicity of
expression,” “the same natural tone which Catullus rarely or rather
never lost” (Lamb 1821:I, xl, xlii). The most remarkable difference
between the translators occurred on the question of morality: Nott
sought to reproduce the pagan sexuality and physically coarse
language of the Latin text, whereas Lamb minimized or just omitted
them.
Nott was aware that “Those indecencies occurring so frequently in
our poet, which I have constantly preserved in the original, and
ventured in some way to translate, may be thought to require apology”
(Nott 1795:I, x). His initial reason—to satisfy “the inquisitive scholar
[who] might wish to be acquainted with the ribaldry, and gross

Canon
85
lampoon of Roman times” (ibid.)—would not be persuasive to his
contemporaries, since such a reader already had access to the Latin
text; perhaps the claim should be viewed less as a rationale than as a
reflection of Nott’s own scholarly bent, his wish to address an
academic audience. His main concern seems to have been twofold: to
ward against an ethnocentric response to the Latin text and preserve its
historical and cultural difference:
 
When an ancient classic is translated, and explained, the work may
be considered as forming a link in the chain of history: history
should not be falsified, we ought therefore to translate him fairly;
and when he gives us the manners of his own day, however
disgusting to our sensations, and repugnant to our natures they may
sometimes prove, we must not endeavour to conceal, or gloss them
over, through a fastidious regard to delicacy.
(ibid.:x–xi)
 
Nott’s sense of historical accuracy assumed a mimetic concept of
translation as a representation adequate to the foreign text. In 1795, this
mimetic assumption was beginning to seem dated in English poetic
theory, a throwback to an older empiricism, challenged now by
expressive theories of poetry and original genius.14 And yet Nott’s
adherence to a residual theoretical assumption enabled him to resist
the pressure of bourgeois moral values on his translation.
In 1821, Lamb possessed a more contemporary, romantic sense of
authorial authenticity that projected an expressive concept of
translation as adequately communicating the foreign author’s
psychological state. Catullus’s “compositions, few as they are,
probably express his feelings upon every important event of his short
career,” Lamb believed, and this led him to conclude that the Latin
poet “seems to have been as little sullied by the grossness of the age, as
was possible […] pure indeed must that mind naturally have been,
which, amidst such coarseness of manners, could preserve so much
expressive delicacy and elevated refinement” (Lamb 1821: I, xlii–xliii).
Lamb’s expressive poetics underwrote not only his belief in the poet’s
purity, both moral and stylistic, but also his advocacy of a free
translation method that effected the illusion of transparency while
domesticating the Latin text. Explicitly situating himself in the main
tradition of fluent translation from Denham to Johnson, Lamb stated
that “the natural course of translation is, first to secure its fidelity, and
then to attempt the polish of elegance and freedom” (ibid.:lviii). Hence,

86
The Translator’s Invisibility
he handled the “objectionable expressions” by developing strategies of
“omission and amplification,” recognizing “the necessity of making
every attempt to veil and soften before entire omission could be
justified,” revising on the assumption that Catullus was “a genius
orignally pure, however polluted by the immorality of its era”
(ibid.:lix, xli).
Lamb’s translation submitted to the bourgeois values that
dominated English culture, inscribing the Latin text with a
conservative morality and a fetish for transparent poetic discourse.
Nott worked under the same cultural regime, but he rather chose to
resist those values in the name of preserving the difference of the Latin
text. Nott foreignized Catullus, although foreignization does not mean
that he somehow transcended his own historical moment to reproduce
the foreign, unmediated by the domestic. On the contrary, if Nott’s
translation presented any element of Roman culture during the late
Republic, it could only be in English-language cultural terms, making
the foreign here not so much “Roman” as a marked deviation from
current English values.
The various aspects of Nott’s foreignized Catullus stand out
conspicuously against Lamb’s domestication. Nott’s bilingual
edition, intended to give “the whole of Catullus without reserve”
(Nott 1795:I, x), consisted of 115 poems attributed to the Latin
poet; Lamb’s English-only edition included 84 (Lamb 1821). Nott
translated texts that referred to adulterous affairs and
homosexual relationships, as well as texts that contained
descriptions of sexual acts, especially anal and oral intercourse.
Lamb either omitted or bowdlerized them, preferring more
refined expressions of hetero-sexual love that glanced fleetingly
at sexual activity. Catullus’s satiric epigram on the “Verbenni,”
for instance, is a poem that Lamb excluded. Here is the Latin text
with Nott’s translation:
 
O furum optime balneariorum
Vibenni pater et cineade fili,
(nam dextra pater inquinatiore,
culo filius est voraciore)
cur non exilium malasque in oras
itis? quandoquidem patris rapinae
notae sunt populo, et natis pilosas,
fili, non potes asse venditare.

Canon
87
Old Vibennius of all your bath-rogues is the first;
Nor less noted his boy for unnatural lust:
The hands of the former are ever rapacious,
The latter’s posterior is full as voracious:
Then, o why don’t ye both into banishment go,
And deservedly wander in deserts of woe?
Not a soul but the fathers mean rapines must tell;
And thou, son, canst no longer thy hairy breech sell.
(Nott 1795:I, 90–91)
 
Nott’s translation deviated from English literary and moral values in
several ways. Not only did he choose to include the Latin text and
translate the sexual references, but his choices (“unnatural lust,”
“posterior,” “breech”) render the Latin quite closely (“cinaede,” “culo,”
“natis”), refusing the traditional free method and thus minimizing the
risk of euphemism and expurgation. Nott’s translation is equally un-
English in being no more than intermittently fluent. The text opens with
a false rhyme (“first”/“lust”). The twelve-syllable line, a departure from
the pentameter standard, is metrically irregular and rather cumbersome,
handled effectively only in the second couplet. And the syntax is
elliptical, inverted, or convoluted in fully half of the lines.
Nott’s violations against moral and stylistic propriety are also
apparent when his translations are juxtaposed to Lamb’s. Both
translated Catullus’s apology for his love poetry, but their treatments
of the opening lines are significantly different:
 
Pedicabo ego vos et irrumabo,
Aureli pathice et cinaede Furi,
qui me ex versiculis meis putastis,
quod sunt molliculi, parum pudicum.
I’ll treat you as ’tis meet, I swear,
Notorious pathics as ye are!
Aurelius, Furius! who arraign
And judge me by my wanton strain.
(Nott 1795:I, 51)
 
And dare ye, Profligates, arraign
The ardour of my sprightly strain,
And e’en myself asperse?
(Lamb 1821:I, 35)

88
The Translator’s Invisibility
Neither version went as far as the Latin text in specifying the nature of
the sexual acts: Catullus’s “pedicabo” and “irrumabo” indicate anal and
oral intercourse. But Nott’s “pathics” was obviously much closer to the
Latin than Lamb’s “profligates.” The word “pathics” was a term of abuse
used since the seventeenth century to mean “a man or boy upon whom
sodomy is practised; a catamite” (OED). Hence, its abusiveness (even if
homophobic by late twentieth-century standards) conveyed Catullus’s
Roman assumption that a male who submitted to anal and oral
intercourse—whether willingly or not—was humiliated whereas, “the
penetrator himself was neither demeaned nor disgraced” (Wiseman
1985:11). Lamb’s choice of “profligates” effectively expurgated the Latin
text, but his bourgeois sense of propriety was so intense that he felt
compelled to mention the expurgation in a footnote, where he also sought
to excuse the coarseness of Catullus’s language: it was seen as expressing
the intensity of his hurt feelings:
 
This poem is a very free imitation of the original, which could not be
tolerated if translated literally. Pezay says, this poem being addressed by
Catullus to his two great friends, should be looked upon “comme une
petite gaité.” The tone is rather of serious indignation at the comments
on his poems; and he may have been the more exasperated at such
treatment from those whom he had considered his friends and defenders.
The sacred bard, to Muses dear,
Himself should pass a chaste career.
This assertion of the purity of character which a loose poet should
and may preserve has been brought forward both by Ovid, Martial,
and Ausonius, in their own defence.
(Lamb 1821:II, 141)
 
Lamb’s version was a paragon, not just of propriety, but of fluency too.
Nott used another false rhyme (“swear”/“ye are”) and created a
somewhat ungainly movement from one couplet to the next, abruptly
shifting from declarative statement to epithet to apostrophe. Lamb
evidently borrowed Nott’s one true rhyme in the passage, but he put it
to much more elegant use by making the syntax more continuous and
varying the meter more subtly.
There is perhaps no better illustration of the translators’ different
methods than their versions of Carmen V, the object of innumerable
English translations and imitations since the sixteenth century:

Canon
89
Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus,
rumoresque senum severiorum
omnes unius aestimemus assis.
soles occidere et redire possunt:
nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
nox est perpetua una dormienda.
da mi basia mille, deinde centum,
dein mille altera, dein secunda centum,
deinde usque altera mille, deinde centum,
dein, cum milia multa fecerimus,
conturbabimus illa, ne sciamus,
aut ne quis malus invidere possit,
cum tantum sciat esse basiorum.
Let’s live, and love, my darling fair!
And not a single farthing care
     For age’s babbling spite;
Yon suns that set again shall rise;
But, when our transient meteor dies,
     We sleep in endless night:  Then first a thousand kisses give,
An hundred let me next receive,
     Another thousand yet;
To these a second hundred join,
Still be another thousand mine,
     An hundred then repeat:
Such countless thousands let there be,
Sweetly confus’d; that even we
     May know not the amount;
That envy, so immense a store
Beholding, may not have the pow’r
     Each various kiss to count.
(Nott l795:I, 17)
 
Nott’s first stanza possesses considerable fluency, with its continuous
syntax woven through a moderately intricate rhyme scheme, but in the
second stanza the false rhymes proliferate, and the third fairly creaks
with syntactical inversions and suspensions and the jarring rhyme on
“store”/“pow’r.” Nott’s suggestive revisions of the Latin text stress the
opposition between the morality of age (“babbling spite”) and the
passion of youth (“transient meteor”) and include a couple of mildly

90
The Translator’s Invisibility
sexual references, the erotic pleasure signified by “sweetly confus’d”
and the experienced sexuality hinted in “various” kinds of “kisses.”
Nott’s second stanza also revises the Latin (by shifting from “give” to
“receive”), creating the rakish image of the male lover passively
receiving Lesbia’s kisses and thus exaggerating, somewhat comically,
the male fantasy of female sexual aggressiveness in Catullus’s text.
Nott’s masculinist translation is a humorous, slightly prurient, and not
entirely felicitous celebration of the lovers’ youth and sexuality against
age and moral strictness. Its sexual frankness conflicts with Lamb’s
more decorous version, in which the lovers are given to shameful
“blushing”:
 
Love, my Lesbia, while we live;
     Value all the cross advice
That the surly greybeards give
     At a single farthing’s price.
Suns that set again may rise;
     We, when once our fleeting light,
Once our day in darkness dies,
     Sleep in one eternal night.
Give me kisses thousand-fold,
     Add to them a hundred more;
Other thousands still be told
     Other hundreds o’er and o’er.
But, with thousands when we burn,
     Mix, confuse the sums at last,
That we may not blushing learn
     All that have between us past.
None shall know to what amount
     Envy’s due for so much bliss;
None—for none shall ever count
     All the kisses we will kiss.
(Lamb 1821:I, 12–13)
 
Compared to Nott’s, Lamb’s translation is distinguished by an extreme
fluency: the quatrains unwind quickly, driven by a smoothly varied
trochaic meter, and they parcel out the meaning in precise syntactical

Canon
91
units, recurring with a regularity that threatens to call attention to its
artificial quality, but remains unobtrusive, easy, light. Lamb’s additions
to the Latin text at once make more explicit the sexual nature of the
theme (“burn”) and point to the lovers’ modesty (“blushing”), a
contradiction that is symptomatic of the translator’s labor of
domestication. Lamb’s version, unlike Nott’s, is cast as a seduction
(“Love, my Lesbia”) and thus follows the traditional English treatment
of the Latin text: in Jonson’s Volpone (1605), for instance, an imitation of
Catullus’s poem is used by Volpone to seduce the chaste Celia. And
since Lamb’s “greybeards,” unlike Nott’s “age,” reproduces the male
gender that Catullus assigns to the voice of morality, the relationship
between the lovers takes on the form of a family romance, with the
male lover locked in an oedipal struggle against the patriarchs for
control over Lesbia’s sexuality. Lamb’s final stanza borrows another of
Nott’s rhymes (“amount”/“count”), and once again this borrowing
reveals the different values shaping their translations: in Nott’s, the
kissing is seen by the envious (“beholding”), the affair treated as public
knowledge, whereas in Lamb’s the kissing seems to be shielded by
privacy (“none shall know,” “none shall ever count”). Both versions
domesticate the Latin text to some degree, most obviously in their
choice of verse form and their use of “farthing” to render the Latin for
a bronze coin (“assis”); but Lamb’s is traced by various bourgeois
values—fluency, moral propriety, the patriarchal family, privacy—
whereas Nott’s constitutes a significant deviation, if not simply a
violation of them.
This is in fact the reading that emerges in a survey of contemporary
responses to the translations. In the late 1790s, Nott’s seemed so
foreign to English tastes, it provided such an uncomfortably alien
reading experience, that it was repeatedly damned on moral and
stylistic grounds. The reviewer for the Gentleman’s Magazine made clear
how moral offense could be a bourgeois gesture of social superiority by
linking Nott’s translation to the popular taste for the Gothic novel, its
sensationalized sexuality: “How any man could have presumed to
debauch the minds of his countrymen by translating ‘indecencies so
frequent in this lascivious poet, which the chaste reader must think
best omitted,’ […] is a problem which only those who have read such
novels as ‘The Monk’ can solve” (Gentleman’s Magazine 1798:408).
The disapproval of Nott’s “lascivious” translation was general in
the literary periodicals, crossing factional lines and thus revealing
their common bourgeois assumptions. The British Critic, a Tory
magazine started by Anglican clergymen who opposed parliamentary

92
The Translator’s Invisibility
reform, asserted that “We object, from moral principles, to the
translator’s plan” and insisted that the translation “should be
sedulously removed from youth and from females” (British Critic
1798:672); whereas the liberal Monthly Review added a carefully
worded comment that at once admitted the possibility of another
reading of Catullus and refused to sanction it: “though we may appear
fastidious to the present translator, we confess that in our opinion a
judicious selection of his poems would have been more acceptable to
the public” (Monthly Review 1797:278).15
Nott’s translation was neglected by the periodicals, with the first
reviews appearing several years after publication and in very small
number. Lamb’s translation was widely reviewed as soon as it was
published; and even though judgments were mixed, they were stated
in the same bourgeois terms and tended to be much more favorable
than Nott’s. The usually contentious reviewers turned not so much
nonpartisan, as class-conscious in their embrace of Lamb’s version.
The liberal Monthly Magazine, which announced itself in its first
number as “an enterprise on behalf of intellectual liberty against the
forces of panic conservatism” (Sullivan 1983b:314–319), praised
Lamb’s expurgation of Catullus’s text:
 
the more correct moral feeling of modern times, would never permit
a complete version of many of those objectionable passages in
which he abounds. This portion of his task Mr. Lamb has executed
with considerable judgment, and we need not fear that our delicacy
may be wounded in perusing the pages of his translation.
(Monthly Magazine 1821:34)
 
The reactionary Anti-Jacobin Review enlisted Lamb in its struggle
against the opponents of church, state, and nation:
 
The extreme impropriety of many Poems written by Catullus, has
obliged Mr. Lamb to omit them, and had he turned his attention
wholly to some purer author, it would have honoured his powers of
selection. At this hour of contest between the good and evil principle
among us, when so many are professedly Atheists, and blasphemy
is encouraged by subscription, and sedition supported by charities,
no patriot and christian would assist vice by palliating its excesses,
or render them less offensive by a decent veil. […] Mr. Lamb is
entitled to both the above characters of patriot and christian.
(Anti-Jacobin Review 1821:14)

Canon
93
Reviewers also faulted Nott’s translation for lacking fluency. The
Monthly Review remarked that “we would praise this translator for his
general correctness with respect to the English version, yet his
inattention to rhime is too gross and too frequent not to incur censure”
(Monthly Review 1797:278). The British Critic complained of “great
irregularities both with regard to the spirit, correctness, and harmony”
(British Critic 1798:671–672). Lamb’s prosody was apparently not
spirited enough for several reviewers—his versions of the “minor
pieces” get described as “languid,” or devoid of “poetical ease and
beauty”—but at least one magazine, the Monthly Review, found that he
“preserved no small portion of the spirit and dignity of the original,”
singling out Lamb’s rendering of Carmen V for special praise as “the
best which we have seen, with the exception only of Ben Jonson’s,”
recognizing Lamb’s Catullus as a peculiarly English phenomenon,
indicative of the dominance of fluency in poetry translation (Monthly
Review 1822:11, 9).
We can more fully understand the translators’ different motives and
methods by considering their translations in the context of their other
work, their lives, and their different historical moments. A practicing
physician who was constantly engaged in literary projects, Nott (1751–
1825) published a number of books that drew impressively on the
tradition of the love lyric in classical, European, and Oriental
languages (Gentleman’s Magazine 1825:565–566; DNB). Late in his
career, he wrote a prose romance entitled Sappho (1803), made a
selection from Robert Herrick’s Hesperides (1810), and edited a
miscellany of sixteenth-century English poetry beginning with Sir
Thomas Wyatt (1812). The bulk of his work, however, was translation,
and over a thirty-year period he produced book-length translations of
Johannes Secundus Nicolaius (1775), Petrarch (1777), Propertius (1782),
Hafiz (1787), Bonefonius (1797), Lucretius (1799), and Horace (1803).
The Catullus translation (1795) was an obvious choice for a translator
with Nott’s interests and energies.
He was so prolific because he felt that more was at stake in
translating than literary appreciation, even though aesthetic values
always guided his choices as well. The mimetic concept of translation
that made him choose a foreignizing method to preserve the difference
of the foreign text also made him think of his work as an act of cultural
restoration. This was the rationale he often gave in his prefatory
statements. His “Attempt to transfer unblemished into the English
language the numberless Beauties with which the Basia of Secundus
abound” was intended to draw “a deserving Author from that

94
The Translator’s Invisibility
Oblivion in which he has been so long buried” (Nott 1778:vii). Finding
it “astonishing, considering his merit,” that Propertius had never been
translated into English, Nott intended his version “to repair this
neglect” (Nott 1782: iii–iv). For Nott, translation performed the work of
cultural restoration by revising the canon of foreign literature in
English, supporting the admission of some marginalized texts and
occasionally questioning the canonicity of others. In his preface to his
selection from the Persian poet Hafiz, Nott boldly challenged the
English veneration of classical antiquity by suggesting that western
European culture originated in the east:
 
we lament, whilst years are bestowed in acquiring an insight into
the Greek and Roman authors, that those very writers should have
been neglected, from whom the Greeks evidently derived both the
richness of their mythology, and the peculiar tenderness of their
expressions.
(Nott 1787:v–vi)
 
Nott attacked any Anglocentric dismissal of Oriental poets like Hafiz,
arguing the importance of “not judging of the glow of Eastern dialogue
by the standard of our colder feelings and ideas,” and he went so far
as to suggest that “the more exact rules of English criticism and taste”
were complicit in English imperialism:
 
Was it not probable to suppose, when a fatal ambition had
determined us to possess a country, our distance from which made
the attempt unnatural; and when, under the pretence of commerce,
we became the cruel invaders of another’s right; that we should at
least have made ourselves acquainted with the language of the
conquered? This was necessary, whether to distribute justice, or to
exercise compassion. But private avarice and extortion shut up the
gates of public virtue.
(ibid.:vii)
 
Of course Nott’s foreignizing translation method could never be
entirely free of domestic values and agendas, including the
development of a national culture: he felt, for example, that the failure
to translate Propertius caused “some degradation to English literature”
(Nott 1782:iv). But he was sufficiently sensitive to the ethnocentric
violence involved in any encounter with a cultural other to question
the imposition of bourgeois canons and interests, whether at home, in

Canon
95
translations of foreign literary texts, or abroad, in economic and
political relations with foreign countries.
Nott’s frequent travel, including a stint on a colonial expedition,
no doubt increased his willingness to resist domestic values. After
studying medicine in Paris as well as London, he spent years on the
Continent as physician to English travellers (1775–1777, 1786–1788,
1789–1793) and made a trip to China as surgeon on a vessel of the
East India Company (1783–1786). The class in which Nott travelled
must also be included among the conditions of his cultural work: the
aristocracy. His father held an appointment in the household of
George III, and Nott’s patients were generally aristocrats. This class
affiliation is important because it indicates a domestic motive for his
interest in foreignizing translation. As a physician, Nott was on
intimate terms with a group whose sexual practices, far from
exhibiting any bourgeois sense of moral propriety, rivalled those of
Catullus’s Rome in their variousness and sheer frequency, even if
they were discussed less openly and with greater refinement—
“gallantry” often served as a euphemism for adultery during this
period. Lawrence Stone has referred to “plenty of evidence that there
was a great deal of extramarital sexual activity among many
aristocratic husbands and some aristocratic wives at least as late as
the first decade of the nineteenth century” (Stone 1977:534; Perkin
1989:89–96).
In Nott’s case, we can be more specific. A confirmed bachelor
himself, he served as physician to Georgiana Cavendish, Duchess
of Devonshire, when she travelled on the Continent between 1789
and 1793 (Posonby 1955; DNB). The fashionable, trend-setting
Duchess had been banished abroad by her husband William, the
fifth Duke, because gambling losses had driven her deep into debt.
In 1792, the Duchess gave birth to a daughter who was assumed
to be the offspring of her adultery with Charles Grey, an aggressive
young politician who led the Whig party and later became Prime
Minister. The Duke himself fathered three illegitimate children, one
by a woman with whom he had an affair at the time of his
marriage, two by Lady Elizabeth Foster, who separated from her
own husband in 1782 and was befriended by the Duke and
Duchess. Nott’s interest in erotic literature, his refusal to expurgate
Catullus’s poetry, even the sexual frankness of his translations,
were due in some part to the casual sexual morality that
characterized his aristocratic milieu during the late eighteenth
century. His foreignization of the Latin text did in fact answer to

96
The Translator’s Invisibility
domestic values, however different from those that influenced the
periodical reviewers and Lamb.
George Lamb (1784–1834) was born into the same aristocratic
milieu as Nott, but thirty years later. The fourth and youngest son
of Penniston, Viscount Melbourne, he practiced law for a short
While, but left it to pursue various literary and theatrical interests,
reviewing for the Edinburgh, contributing prologues to revivals at
the Drury Lane, and writing a comic opera that was staged at
Covent Garden (Gentleman’s Magazine 1834:437–438; DNB). He
eventually entered politics, first as an MP in the Duke of
Devonshire’s interest and then, on the accession of the Whig
ministry, as Under Secretary of State to his brother William, Lord
Melbourne. In 1809, George married Caroline St. Jules, one of the
Duke of Devonshire’s illegitimate children with Lady Foster;
George’s own birth was illegitimate, the result of Lady
Melbourne’s adultery with the Prince of Wales. Everyone
concerned knew of these relations.16 It was Lamb who informed
Caroline of her father’s identity a few years before their marriage.
The Duke gave her a dowry of £30,000; Lamb’s response was that
“I can only thank him by devoting my future life to Caroline’s
happiness” (Posonby 1955:4). The knowledge of these relations
extended past the family. In the obituary on Lamb in the
Gentleman’s Magazine, Caroline was described as “a relation of the
Duke of the Devonshire” (Gentleman’s Magazine 1834:438). Still,
everything was treated very discreetly. Lady Foster concocted a
genealogy to explain Caroline’s unusual name, “a certain obscure
Comte de St. Jules being the supposed father” (Posonby 1955:4).
The most public scandal in Lamb’s family did not involve him: in
1812, Lady Caroline Lamb, his brother William’s wife, was engaged
in a notorious affair with Byron. George himself seems to have
been happily married. His obituary referred to “the tranquillity of
his domestic life,” stating that with the “estimable” Caroline, “of
a character entirely assorting with his own, he enjoyed the truest
domestic felicity” (Gentleman’s Magazine 1834:438).
Lamb’s life attests to the fact that the increasing moral conservatism
of English society during this period was affecting not only the middle
and working classes, but the aristocracy as well. This bourgeois
cultural movement toward moral reform, spurred by the rise of
Evangelical Christianity and accompanied by the institution of various
philanthropic “societies,” led to the proliferation of moral and religious
tracts and continued the bowdlerization of literary texts that

Canon
97
characterized English poetry translation at least since Pope (Quinlan
1941; Perkin 1989:90, 120–121, 240).17 Lamb’s first-hand knowledge of
the casual sexual morality among the Whig aristocracy may have made
him more receptive to the emergent conservatism in English culture,
since there can be no doubt that he contributed to it. His work in the
theatre included an adaptation of Shakespeare’s Timon of Athens (Lamb
1816), whose goal, he announced in an “Advertisement,” was “to
restore Shakespeare to the stage, with no other omissions than such as
the refinement of manners has rendered necessary.” Lamb omitted this
dialogue, for example, between Timon and “the churlish Philosopher”
Apemantus:
 
Tim.
Wilt thou dine with me, Apemantus?
Apem.
No; I eat not lords.
Tim.
And thou shouldst, thou’dst anger ladies.
Apem.
O they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
Tim.
That’s a lascivious apprehension.
Apem.
So thou apprehend’st it; take it for thy labour.
(Shakespeare 1959:I.i.203–208)
 
Lamb treated Shakespeare just as he did Catullus, expurgating the
text of any coarse language, and his like-minded contemporaries
approved of his work, with one commentator observing that “much
is omitted in the dialogue, and generally with propriety” (Genest
1832:584). Lamb saw no contradiction between professing liberalism
as a Whig politician and censoring canonical literary texts. He
followed what David Cecil has called the “canons of Whig
orthodoxy. All believed in ordered liberty, low taxation and the
enclosure of land; all disbelieved in despotism and democracy”
(Cecil 1965:7).18
Lamb’s calculated omission of the carnivalesque in his literary
projects must be taken as another gesture of social superiority by a
member of the hegemonic class. Lamb’s elitism, however, was couched
in terms that were belletristic instead of social: he viewed a poetry
translation or a theatrical adaptation as a refined form of
entertainment, an exercise in aesthetic appreciation performed during
periods of leisure, often in private. He prefaced his Catullus translation
with a poem entitled “Reflections before Publication,” wherein he
presented his work, not as an engaged act of cultural restoration or
canon revision, but as the “pleasing” diversion of an amateur who is
now contemplating whether to share it with others:

98
The Translator’s Invisibility
The pleasing task, which oft a calm has lent
To lull disease and soften discontent;
Has still made busy life’s vacations gay,
And saved from idleness the leisure day:
In many a musing walk and lone retreat,
That task is done;—I may not say complete.
Now, have I heart to see the flames devour
The work of many a pleasurable hour?
Deep in some chest must I my offspring thrust,
To know no resurrection from the dust;
Or shall I, printing in this age of paper,
Add to th’unnumber’d stars another taper?
(Lamb 1821:I, ix–x)
 
Lamb was one of those future aristocrats for whom Sir John Denham
developed the domesticating method of translating classical poetry,
shrinking from the prospect of publication because poetry translation
was not the serious work of politics or government service. And with
an appropriateness that Denham would have appreciated, Lamb’s
courtly self-effacement was cast in fluent heroic couplets.
In the thirty years that separated Nott’s Catullus from Lamb’s, the
Whiggish aristocratic milieu in which they lived and worked
underwent a substantial change that influenced the fate of their
translations and translation methods. Fluent, domesticating
translation was valorized in accordance with bourgeois moral and
literary values, and a notable effort of resistance through a foreignizing
method was decisively displaced. Nott’s translation foreignized
Catullus by assimilating the Latin text to cultural values that were
residual in the 1790s and marginal by the 1820s: a mimetic concept of
translation grounded in the paradigm of representation was yielding
to a communicative concept of translation grounded in the paradigm
of expression; and the casual sexual morality of the aristocracy was
challenged by a movement toward moral reform that affected both
aristocrat and bourgeois. Nott and Lamb exemplify the two options
available to translators at a specific moment in the canonization of
fluency. Perhaps most importantly, they show that in foreignizing
translation, the difference of the foreign text can only ever be figured
by domestic values that differ from those in dominance.

Chapter 3
Nation
The translator who attaches himself closely to his original more or
less abandons the originality of his nation, and so a third comes into
existence, and the taste of the multitude must first be shaped
towards it.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (trans. André Lefevere)
 
The search for alternatives to fluent translation leads to theories and
practices that aim to signify the foreignness of the foreign text. At the
turn of the nineteenth century, foreignizing translation lacked cultural
capital in English, but it was very active in the formation of another
national culture—German. In 1813, during the Napoleonic wars,
Friedrich Schleiermacher’s lecture Ueber die verschiedenen Methoden des
Uebersetzens (“On the Different Methods of Translating”) viewed
translation as an important practice in the Prussian nationalist
movement: it could enrich the German language by developing an
elite literature and thus enable German culture to realize its historical
destiny of global domination. And yet, surprisingly, Schleiermacher
proposed this nationalist agenda by theorizing translation as the locus
of cultural difference, not the homogeneity that his ideological
configuration might imply, and that, in various, historically specific
forms, has long prevailed in English-language translation, British and
American. Schleiermacher’s translation theory rested on a
chauvinistic condescension toward foreign cultures, a sense of their
ultimate inferiority to German-language culture, but also on an
antichauvinistic respect for their differences, a sense that German-
language culture is inferior and therefore must attend to them if it is
to develop.
These contradictory tendencies are peculiar to the vernacular
nationalist movements that swept through Europe during the early

100
The Translator’s Invisibility
nineteenth century, and they indicate that Schleiermacher’s translation
theory can be detached from the ideological purpose it was intended to
serve and be put to other uses. The central contradiction of vernacular
nationalist movements is that they are at once made possible and
vulnerable by language. As Benedict Anderson has observed, “seen as
both a historical fatality and as a community imagined through
language, the nation presents itself as simultaneously open and
closed” because “language is not an instrument of exclusion: in
principle, anyone can learn any language” (Anderson 1991:134, 146).
Language forms the particular solidarity that is the basis of the nation,
but the openness of any language to new uses allows nationalist
narratives to be rewritten—especially when this language is the target
of translations that are foreignizing, most interested in the cultural
difference of the foreign text.
If, as Schleiermacher believed, a foreignizing translation method can
be useful in building a national culture, forging a foreign-based
cultural identity for a linguistic community about to achieve political
autonomy, it can also undermine any concept of nation by challenging
cultural canons, disciplinary boundaries, and national values in the
target language. This is borne out by the English translation
controversy that pitted Francis Newman’s foreignized Iliad (Newman
1856) against Matthew Arnold’s Oxford lectures On Translating Homer
(1860): Newman’s theory of foreignization requires the development of
translation strategies that deviate from Victorian standards of
transparent discourse, but also from an Arnoldian concept of the
national culture that favors an academic elite. The following genealogy
reconstructs a foreignizing translation tradition, partly German, partly
English, examines the specific cultural situations in which this
tradition took shape, and evaluates its usefulness in combating
domesticating translation in the present.
I
For Schleiermacher, “the genuine translator” is a writer
 
who wants to bring those two completely separated persons, his
author and his reader, truly together, and who would like to bring
the latter to an understanding and enjoyment of the former as
correct and complete as possible without inviting him to leave the
sphere of his mother tongue.
(Lefevere 1977:74)1

Nation
101
Antoine Berman has called attention to the hermeneutical paradigm
introduced here, the emphasis on translation as an object of textual
interpretation and a means of interpersonal communication, “a
method of intersubjective encounter” (“un processus de rencontre
intersubjectif”) (Berman 1984:235). And this makes communication
the criterion by which methodological choices are validated and
authentic 
translation 
distinguished 
from 
inauthentic.
Schleiermacher in fact finds only two methods of effecting the
domestic reader’s understanding of the foreign author: “Either the
translator leaves the author in peace, as much as possible, and
moves the reader towards him; or he leaves the reader in peace, as
much as possible, and moves the author towards him” (74).
Schleiermacher privileges the first method, making the target-
language reader travel abroad, and he describes the authentic
translator’s “aim” in social terms, with translation offering an
understanding of the foreign text that is not merely ethnocentric, but
relative to a specific social group:
 
the translator must therefore take as his aim to give his reader
the same image and the same delight which the reading of the
work in the original language would afford any reader educated
in such a way that we call him, in the better sense of the word,
the lover and the expert (“Leibhaber und Kenner/amateur et
connaisseur”), the type of reader who is familiar with the foreign
language while it yet always remains foreign to him: he no
longer has to think every single part in his mother tongue, as
schoolboys do, before he can grasp the whole, but he is still
conscious of the difference between that language and his
mother tongue, even where he enjoys the beauty of the foreign
work in total peace.
(Lefevere 1977:76)
 
The translator aims to preserve the linguistic and cultural difference of
the foreign text, but only as it is perceived in the translation by a
limited readership, an educated elite. This means, first, that translation
is always ethnocentric: even when a translated text contains discursive
peculiarities designed to imitate a foreign text, even when the
translation seems, in Schleiermacher’s (English translator’s) words,
“bent towards a foreign likeness” (78–79; “zu einer fremden
Aehnlichkeit hinübergebogen” (227)), it never escapes the hierarchy of
cultural values inscribed in the target language. These values mediate

102
The Translator’s Invisibility
every move in the translation and every target-language reader’s
response to it, including the perception of what is domestic or foreign:
André Lefevere’s English version—“bent toward a foreign likeness”—
domesticates Schleiermacher’s German by submitting its syntax to the
dominant fluent strategy, whereas “toward a foreign likeness bent,” a
discursive peculiarity that resists fluency by marking the English
translation as archaic for the contemporary Anglo-American reader,
foreignizes English by bending it toward the German syntax.
Interestingly, to imitate the German this closely is not to be more
faithful to it, but to be more English, that is, consistent with an English
syntactical inversion that is now archaic.
Schleiermacher’s theory anticipates these observations. He was
keenly aware that translation strategies are situated in specific
cultural formations where discourses are canonized or
marginalized, circulating in relations of domination and exclusion.
Thus, the translation method that cultivates discursive peculiarities
to imitate the foreignness of the foreign text “cannot thrive equally
well in all languages, but only in those which are not the captives of
too strict a bond of classical expression outside of which all is
reprehensible”; the ideal site for this method is “languages which
are freer, in which innovations and deviations are tolerated to a
greater extent, in such a way that their accumulation may, under
certain circumstances, generate a certain characteristic mode of
expression” (79–80). This linguistic and cultural freedom is
complexly determined: not only is it defined against the “bonded
languages” of other national cultures, but the “innovations and
deviations” of foreignizing translation are defined against the norm
set by other translation discourses in the target-language culture.
And since Schleiermacher’s advocacy of the foreignizing method
was also an advocacy of discourses specific to an educated elite, he
was investing this limited social group with considerable cultural
authority, going so far as to assign it a precise social function—to
“generate a certain characteristic mode of expression,” developing a
national language, “influencing the whole evolution of a culture”
(80–81; “die gesammte Geistesentwikkelung” (231)). Here it
becomes clear that Schleiermacher was enlisting his privileged
translation method in a cultural political agenda: an educated elite
controls the formation of a national culture by refining its language
through foreignizing translations.
Schleiermacher’s lecture permits a much more detailed social
and historical specification of this agenda. He concludes with

Nation
103
some explicit references to “we Germans,” remarking that “our
nation,” “because of its respect for what is foreign and its
mediating nature” (88; “seiner vermittelnden Natur” (243)),
uniquely satisfies the “two conditions” necessary for foreignizing
translation to thrive, namely “that understanding foreign works
should be a thing known and desired and that the native
language should be allowed a certain flexibility” (81). This is the
understanding of foreign works sought by educated “Germans”
like Schleiermacher, a university professor and minister in the
Reformed church, who feels that the German language possesses
the “flexibility” to support foreignizing translation since it is
undeveloped, lacking a definite “mode of expression,” not yet
“bonded” to the “classical,” a “partial mother tongue”: “our
language, because we exercise it less owing to our Nordic
sluggishness, can thrive in all its freshness and completely
develop its own power only through the most many-sided
contacts with what is foreign” (88). Since the category “foreign”
here is determined by the educated, Schleiermacher is using
translation to mark out a dominant space for a bourgeois minority
in early nineteenth-century German culture.
As Albert Ward observes of this period,
 
literature was […] a predominantly bourgeois art, but it was only a
small part of this section of the community that responded most
readily to the classical writers of the great age of German literature.
[…] Writers like Goethe and Schiller found their public in the
Honoratioren of the large towns, in the university-trained
professional men, the ministers of religion, teachers, doctors, and
lawyers, in what might be termed the elite of middle-class society.
“High literature” was then even more than now a thing for a small
group of scholars.
(Ward 1974:128)2
 
Ward demonstrates the cultural and economic marginality of German
“literature,” both classical and romantic, by referring to sizes of
editions and sales figures amid some striking testimonies from
contemporaries in the publishing industry:
 
Karl Preusker, who came to Leipzig as a bookseller’s apprentice in
1805, names in his autobiography the authors most in demand at
that time; the most classical (as we understand the term today) of

104
The Translator’s Invisibility
the authors on his list is Zschokke, “whereas the works of Schiller
and Goethe were sold in only meagre quantities.”
(ibid.:132)
 
Schleiermacher, who associated with the leading German romantics,
briefly shared a Berlin apartment with Friedrich Schlegel, and
contributed to the Schlegel brothers’ small-circulation journal, the
Athenaeum, was entirely in agreement with Goethe when developing
his theory of foreignizing translation. In an essay on “Wieland’s
brotherly memory” published in February of 1813, four months before
Schleiermacher’s lecture, Goethe wrote:
 
there are two maxims in translation: one requires that the author of
a foreign nation be brought across to us in such a way that we can
look on him as ours; the other requires that we should go across to
what is foreign and adapt ourselves to its conditions, its use of
language, its peculiarities, The advantages of both are sufficiently
known to educated people through perfect examples. Our friend,
who looked for the middle way in this, too, tried to reconcile both,
but as a man of feeling and taste he preferred the first maxim when
in doubt.
(Lefevere 1977:39)
 
In siding with this “feeling and taste” for “what is foreign,”
Schleiermacher was valorizing an elite bourgeois cultural discourse of
literary refinement against the larger, more heterogeneous culture of
the middle and working classes. “The average middle-class reader,”
Ward points out, “wanted works which were within his own
experience and range of emotion, reflecting his own interests and not
conflicting with the demands of his morality” (Ward 1974:133).
Whereas Schleiermacher’s lecture on translation is quite scholarly in
citing only Greek and Latin writing (Plato, Cicero, Tacitus, Grotius, and
Leibniz), the wider middle-class readership favored Gothic tales,
chivalric romances, realistic novels both sentimental and didactic,
biographies of exemplary men, travel literature. This audience was
reading translations as well, but the greatest percentage consisted of
translations from French and English novels, including the work of
Choderlos de Laclos and Richardson. Schleiermacher himself had
translated Plato, while other romantics—Voss, August Wilhelm
Schlegel, Hölderlin—translated Homer, Sophocles, Dante, and
Shakespeare. They were very much aware that they were translating

Nation
105
for a relatively narrow audience, even a coterie, and like
Schleiermacher, they saw this social fact as a value that improved their
“literature” and endowed it with cultural authority. Friedrich Schlegel
boasted that “[readers] are forever complaining that German authors
write for such a small circle, often in fact for themselves as a group. I
find this a good thing. German literature gains more and more in spirit
and character because of it” (Ward 1974:191 n.46).
Schlegel’s comment shows that this is not only a bourgeois, but a
nationalist concept of literature—“German.” And Schleiermacher’s
theory of foreignizing translation reveals a similar ideological
configuration: it is also pitched against a German nobility that was not
literary and had long lain under French cultural domination.
Aristocratic culture eschewed scholarly research and wide reading in
past and contemporary literature; “the few courts which did take an
active interest in literary affairs,” Ward notes, “were characterized by
a predominantly bourgeois atmosphere” (Ward 1974:128). In
aristocratic education, “the accent was on languages, particularly
French, and often to such an extent that many noblemen could express
themselves better in that language than in their mother tongue”
(ibid.:123). In a letter from 1757, the aesthetician and dramatist Johann
Christoph Gottsched described an audience with Frederick II, during
which he informed the Prussian king of the serious threat to literary
culture posed by the Gallicized nobility:
 
When I said that German writers did not receive sufficient
encouragement, as the aristocracy and the courts spoke too much
French and understood too little German to be able to grasp and
appreciate fully anything written in German, he said: that is true, for
I haven’t read no German book since my youth, and je parle comme
un cocher, but I am an old fellow of forty-six and have no time for
such things.
(ibid.:190n.)
 
Some fifty years later, Schleiermacher’s lecture on translation engages
in the cultural struggle for a German literature with an equally bold
criticism of Frederick II. Schleiermacher represents the king, however,
not as Gottsched’s anti-intellectual oaf, but as a German intellect
limited by his utter dependence on French:
 
Our great king received all his finer and higher thoughts in a foreign
language, which he had most intimately appropriated for this field.

106
The Translator’s Invisibility
He was incapable of producing in German the literature and
philosophy he produced in French. It is to be deplored that the great
preference for England which dominated a part of the family could
not have taken the direction of familiarizing him from childhood on
with the English language, whose last golden age was then in
bloom, and which is so much closer to German. But we may hope
that he would have preferred to produce literature and philosophy
in Latin, rather than in French, if he had enjoyed a strict scholarly
education.
(Lefevere 1977:83)
 
Here the vernacular nationalism in Schleiermacher’s cultural politics
becomes more evident: the king is taken to task not so much because
he is not “scholarly” (he is in fact portrayed as being genuinely
interested in “literature and philosophy”), but because he doesn’t write
in German, or in a language “closer to German” than French. Whereas
Gottsched seems to be lamenting the dearth of literary patronage
(“sufficient encouragement”) because the Prussian aristocracy is
Francophone, Schleiermacher is more concerned about the unequal
cultural production in German and French: “He was incapable of
producing in German.”
Schleiermacher’s criticism of the king is a nationalist protest against
French domination in Germany, and it is consistent with his intense
activity in the Prussian movement for German unification during the
Napoleonic wars. As Jerry Dawson makes clear,
 
the war between France and Prussia in 1806, with the resulting
collapse of the Prussian armies and the humiliating peace terms
dictated to Prussia by Napoleon, proved to be the final factor
needed to turn [Schleiermacher] to nationalism with a complete and
almost reckless abandon.
(Dawson 1966:51)3
 
“Germany” did not actually exist at this time: West of the Rhine were
several petty principalities, which, after 1806, Napoleon organized into
a “confederation”; east was the dominant German-speaking
monarchy, Prussia, now dominated by the French. The Prussian defeat
caused Schleiermacher to lose his appointment at the University of
Halle, and he fled to Berlin, the Prussian capital, where he lectured at
the university and preached at various churches. His sermons urged
political and military resistance against the French armies, developing

Nation
107
a cultural concept of nationality based on the German language and
legitimized with Protestant theology. In 1813, three months before his
lecture on translation at the Berlin Akademie der Wissenschaften and
eight months before Napoleon was finally defeated at the Battle of
Leipzig, Schleiermacher delivered a sermon entitled “A Nation’s Duty
in a War for Freedom,” in which he represented the war with France as
a struggle against cultural and political domination. If victorious, he
exhorted the congregation, “we shall be able to preserve for ourselves
our own distinctive character, our laws, our constitution and our
culture” (Schleiermacher 1890:73).
In June, the month of his lecture, Schleiermacher wrote a letter to
Friedrich Schlegel in which his nationalism turned utopian:
 
My greatest wish after liberation, is for one true German Empire,
powerfully representing the entire German folk and territory to the
outside world, while internally allowing the various Länder and
their princes a great deal of freedom to develop and rule according
to their own particular needs.
(Sheehan 1989:379)
 
This vision of Germany as a union of relatively autonomous
principalities was partly a compensation for the then prevailing
international conflict, and it is somewhat backward-looking, traced
with a nostalgia for the domestic political organization that prevailed
before the French occupation. Napoleon had introduced social
innovations achieved by the revolution, abolishing feudalism in
Prussia and promoting “enlightened” despotism. Schleiermacher
himself was a member of a bourgeois cultural elite, but his nationalist
ideology is such that it admits aristocracy, monarchy, even an
imperialist tendency—but only when they constitute a national unity
resistant to foreign domination.
Presented to the Prussian academic establishment on 24 June
1813, at the height of the conflict with France, Schleiermacher’s
lecture constructs a role for translation in a nationalist cultural
politics. His theory of foreignizing translation should be seen as
anti-French because it opposes the translation method that
dominated France since neoclassicism, viz. domestication, making
the foreign author travel abroad to the target-language reader.
When surveying the limited acceptance of foreignizing translation
in Western culture, Schleiermacher reserves his most withering
sarcasm for France:

108
The Translator’s Invisibility
The ancients obviously translated little in that most real sense and
most moderns, deterred by the difficulties of true translation, also
seem to be satisfied with imitation and paraphrase. Who would
want to contend that nothing has ever been translated into French
from the classical languages or from the Germanic languages! But
even though we Germans are perfectly willing to listen to this
advice, we should not follow it.
(Lefevere 1977:88)
 
French exemplifies those languages that are “captives of too strict a
bond of classical expression outside of which all is reprehensible,”
especially the innovations and deviations introduced by foreignizing
translation. In a satiric dialogue from 1798, A.W.Schlegel had already
made explicit the nationalist ideology at work in identifying French
culture with a domesticating translation method:
 
Frenchman:
The Germans translate every literary Tom, Dick,
and Harry. We either do not translate at all, or else
we translate according to our own taste.
German:
Which is to say, you paraphrase and you disguise.
Frenchman: We look on a foreign author as a
stranger in our company, who has to dress and
behave according to our customs, if he desires to
please.
German:
How narrow-minded of you to be pleased only by
what is native.
Frenchman:
Such is our nature and our education. Did the
Greeks not hellenize everything as well?
German:
In your case it goes back to a narrow-minded nature
and a conventional education. In ours education is
our nature.
(ibid.:50)4
 
Schlegel’s dialogue indicates the metaphysical underpinnings of
German nationalism, its assumption of a biological or racial
essence from which the national culture issues: “education is our
nature.” This agrees both with Schleiermacher’s view that “our
nation” possesses a “mediating nature” and with the organic
metaphor he uses to describe the effect of foreignizing translation
on German:
 

Nation
109
Just as our soil itself has no doubt become richer and more fertile
and our climate milder and more pleasant only after much
transplantation of foreign flora, just so we sense that our
language, because we exercise it less owing to our Nordic
sluggishness, can thrive in all its freshness and completely
develop its own power only through the most many-sided
contacts with what is foreign.
(ibid.:88)
 
Schleiermacher’s nationalist theory of foreignizing translation aims to
challenge French hegemony not only by enriching German culture, but
by contributing to the formation of a liberal public sphere, an area of
social life in which private individuals exchange rational discourse and
exercise political influence:
 
If ever the time should come in which we have a public life out
of which develops a sociability of greater merit and truer to
language, and in which free space is gained for the talent of the
orator, we shall be less in need of translation for the development
of language.
(ibid.:89)
 
Yet Schleiermacher’s public sphere manifests the contradiction that
characterized the concept from its emergence in eighteenth-century
aesthetics. As Peter Uwe Hohendahl puts it, “although in principle the
capacity to form an accurate opinion is considered present in everyone,
in practice it is limited to the educated” (Hohendahl 1982:51). So in
Schleiermacher: although the work of foreignizing translation on the
German language is seen as creating a national culture free of French
political domination, this public space is open explicitly for “the talent
of the orator,” a literary elite.
Because this is a strongly nationalist elite, it employs foreignizing
translation in a remarkable project of German cultural imperialism,
through which the linguistic community “destined” for global
domination achieves it. Here nationalism is equivalent to
universalism:
 
An inner necessity, in which a peculiar calling of our people
expresses itself clearly enough, has driven us to translating en
masse; we cannot go back and we must go on. […] And
coincidentally our nation may be destined, because of its respect for

110
The Translator’s Invisibility
what is foreign and its mediating nature, to carry all the treasures of
foreign arts and scholarship, together with its own, in its language,
to unite them into a great historical whole, so to speak, which would
be preserved in the centre and heart of Europe, so that with the help
of our language, whatever beauty the most different times have
brought forth can be enjoyed by all people, as purely and perfectly
as is possible for a foreigner. This appears indeed to be the real
historical aim of translation in general, as we are used to it now.
(Lefevere 1977:88)
 
Thus, readers of the canon of world literature would experience the
linguistic and cultural difference of foreign texts, but only as a
difference that is Eurocentric, mediated by a German bourgeois
elite. Ultimately, it would seem that foreignizing translation does
not so much introduce the foreign into German culture as use the
foreign to confirm and develop a sameness, a process of fashioning
an ideal cultural self on the basis of an other, a cultural narcissism,
which is endowed, moreover, with historical necessity. This
method of translation “makes sense and is of value only to a nation
that has the definite inclination to appropriate what is foreign”
(ibid.:80).
The ideological ensemble in Schleiermacher’s cultural politics
precipitates contradictory permutations (elite literature/national
culture, bourgeois minority/“Germany,” foreignizing/Germanizing),
so we should not be surprised to find him speaking for and against
foreign imports in German culture—in that same turbulent year, 1813.
His bourgeois nationalism shapes both his advocacy of “many-sided
contacts with the foreign” in the translation lecture and his
xenophobic condescension in the patriotic sermon: “Every nation, my
dear friends, which has developed a particular, or clearly defined
height is degraded also by receiving into it a foreign element”
(Schleiermacher 1890:73–74). This assumes, contrary to the lecture,
that German culture has already attained a significant level of
development, presumably in classical and romantic literature, which
must be protected from foreign contamination and imposed
universally, through a specifically German foreignization of world
literature. Schleiermacher’s translation theory intervenes in “die
gesammte Geistesentwikkelung,” a phrase that may seem restricted
nationally in Lefevere’s English, “the whole evolution of a culture”
(Lefevere 1977:81), but is shown to have worldwide application in
Berman’s French: “le processus global de la formation de I’esprit”

Nation
111
(Berman 1985:333). And only Berman discloses the idealist
metaphysics at work in the German text by choosing “esprit” for
“Geist.”
Schleiermacher’s theory is shaky ground on which to build a
translation ethics to combat ethnocentrism: his lecture does not
recognize any contradiction in asserting that “our nation” is
distinguished by “respect for what is foreign” while envisioning the
geopolitical domination of a German bourgeois cultural elite. It also
does not recognize antinomies in its thinking about language and
human subjectivity which are likewise determined by a bourgeois
nationalism. Schleiermacher evinces an extraordinarily clear sense of
the constitutive properties of language, those that make representation
always an appropriative activity, never transparent or merely adequate
to its object, active in the construction of subjectivity by establishing
forms for consciousness. The “proper field” of the translator,
Schleiermacher states, consists of
 
those mental products of scholarship and art in which the free
idiosyncratic combinatory powers of the author and the spirit of the
language which is the repository of a system of observations and
shades of moods are everything, in which the object no longer
dominates in any way, but is dominated by thoughts and emotions,
in which, indeed, the object has become object only through speech
and is present only in conjunction with speech.
(Lefevere 1977:69–70)
 
At the same time, however, Schleiermacher’s concept of “free
idiosyncratic combinatory powers” signals a move toward an
autonomous subject whose “thoughts and emotions” transcend
linguistic determinations. “On the one hand,” Schleiermacher asserts,
 
every man is in the power of the language he speaks, and all his
thinking is a product thereof. […] Yet on the other hand every freely
thinking, mentally self-employed human being shapes his own
language. […] Therefore each free and higher speech needs to be
understood twice, once out of the spirit of the language of whose
elements it is composed, as a living representation bound and
defined by that spirit and conceived out of it in the speaker, and
once out of the speaker’s emotions, as his action, as produced and
explicable only out of his own being.
(ibid.:71)

112
The Translator’s Invisibility
The “spirit of the language” determines every speech act, is binding on
every subject, but part of that action nevertheless answers only to an
individual “being.” At one point, the priority of language over subject
is tellingly reversed, with the author becoming the sole origin of the
“spirit”: the readers of a foreignizing translation are said to
“understand” when they “perceive the spirit of the language which
was the author’s own and [are] able to see his peculiar way of thinking
and feeling” (ibid.:72). As Berman points out, Schleiermacher’s lecture
manifests the late eighteenth-century shift from representation to
expression as the conceptual paradigm for language, and hence subject
displaces object as the basis of interpretation (Berman 1984:233).
Schleiermacher’s thinking about language is informed by romantic
expressive theory, grounded in the concept of free, unified
consciousness that characterizes bourgeois individualism.
As his exposition proceeds, it turns to metaphor and illustration,
defining the “spirit of the language” in ethnic terms, yet without
abandoning the transcendental subject:
 
We understand the spoken word as an act of the speaker only
when we feel at the same time where and how the power of
language has taken hold of him, where in its current the lightning
of thought has uncoiled, snake-like, where and how the roving
imagination has been held firm in its forms. We understand the
spoken word as a product of language and as an expression of its
spirit only when we feel that only a Greek, for instance, could
think and speak in that way, that only this particular language
could operate in a human mind this way, and when we feel at the
same time that only this man could think and speak in the Greek
fashion in this way, that only he could seize and shape the
language in this manner, that only his living possession of the
riches of language reveals itself like this, an alert sense for
measure and euphony which belongs to him alone, a power of
thinking and shaping which is peculiarly his.
(Lefevere 1977:72)
 
The metaphors—“lightning,” “snake-like,” “roving”—continue the
individualistic strain by depicting the subject as a coherent essence,
radically independent of language, given to serpentine, potentially
subversive “thought,” possessing a free “imagination” that takes
on various accidental “forms” (obviously, “lightning” and “snake-
like” also resonate with mythological and theological allusions,

Nation
113
especially in a lecture by a classical scholar and Protestant
minister—but these possibilities will not be pursued here). The
most striking move in this passage may well be Schleiermacher’s
example, which initiates a discontinuous series of specifications
and revisions, putting the individual in command, first, of a
national culture with a literary canon (“the riches of language”; cf.
the international “treasures of foreign arts and scholarship”
[ibid.:88]), then a specifically literary, even scholarly appreciation
of the Greek language (“measure and euphony”), and finally a
cognitive “power” that is “peculiarly his,” self-expressive and
fundamentally self-determining.
The passage is a reminder that Schleiermacher is setting up the
understanding of language associated with a particular national
cultural elite as the standard by which language use is made
intelligible and judged. Hence, in the case of foreignizing translation,
“the reader of the translation will become the equal of the better reader
of the original only when he is able first to acquire an impression of the
particular spirit of the author as well as that of the language in the
work” (Lefevere 1977:80). Yet the author-orientation in
Schleiermacher’s theory, his anthropomorphosis of translation from an
intertextual to an intersubjective relationship, psychologizes the
translated text and thus masks its cultural and social determinations.
This is the much criticized move in Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics: he
tends to evaporate the determinate nature of the text by articulating a
two-fold interpretive process, both “grammatical” and “technical or
psychological.”5 A grammatical explanation of the objective
“connection between the work and the language” combines with a
psychological explanation of the subjective “connection between the
work and the thought involved in it” (Szondi 1986:103).
Schleiermacher, however, sometimes collapses this distinction, as in his
aphorisms on hermeneutics from 1809–1810, which refer to
“combining the objective and subjective so that the interpreter can put
himself ‘inside’ the author” (Schleiermacher 1977:64). In the case of
German foreignizing translation, then, the translator enables the
German-language reader to understand the individuality of the
foreign author so as to identify with him, thereby concealing the
transindividual, German-language ideologies—cultural (literary
elitism), class (bourgeois minority), national (“German”)—that
mediate the foreignized representation of the foreign author. Such
thinking about language and subjectivity is clearly more consistent
with domesticating translation, oriented toward conformity with

114
The Translator’s Invisibility
target-language cultural values, and so can do little to question the
dominance of transparent discourse in translation today. On the
contrary, Schleiermacher’s psychologization of the text assumes
transparency, the illusory presence of the foreign author in the
translation.
There is another kind of thinking in his lecture that runs counter
to this idealist strain, even if impossibly caught in its tangles: a
recognition of the cultural and social conditions of language and a
projection of a translation practice that takes them into account
instead of working to conceal them. Schleiermacher sees translation
as an everyday fact of life, not merely an activity performed on literary
and philosophical texts, but necessary for intersubjective
understanding, active in the very process of communication, because
language is determined by various differences—cultural, social,
historical:
 
For not only are the dialects spoken by different tribes belonging to
the same nation, and the different stages of the same language or
dialect in different centuries, different languages in the strict sense
of the word; moreover even contemporaries who are not separated
by dialects, but merely belong to different classes, which are not
often linked through social intercourse and are far apart in
education, often can understand each other only by means of a
similar mediation.
(Lefevere 1977:68)
 
This observation clearly requires Schleiermacher to revise his
nationalist concept of “the spirit of the language”: he understands it
as “the repository of a system of observations and shades of mood,”
but this is too monolithic and too psychologistic to admit the concept
of “different classes,” a social hierarchy of cultural discourses, each so
distinctively class-coded as to impede communication.
Schleiermacher even finds it “inevitable that different opinions
should develop as to” foreignizing translation strategies, “different
schools, so to speak, will arise among the masters, and different
parties among the audience as followers of those schools,” but he
ultimately individualizes the “different points of view,” reducing
them to the translator’s consciousness, transforming cultural
practices with social implications into self-centered eccentricities:
“each one in itself will always be of relative and subjective value
only” (ibid.:81).

Nation
115
It is cultural difference, however, that guides Schleiermacher’s
prescriptions for the foreignizing translator, for the invention of
discursive peculiarities to signify the foreignness of the foreign text.
The translator must reject the discourse that is used most widely in
the target-language culture, what he calls the “colloquial” (78;
“alltäglich” (227)), refusing “the most universally appealing beauty
each genre is capable of” in the language and instead risking the
compassionate smile of “the greatest experts and masters who could
not understand his laborious and ill-considered German if they did
not supplement it with their Greek and Latin” (79). Once again, the
cultural difference marked by Schleiermacher’s foreignizing translator
runs between an educated elite and the uneducated majority: when
the translator bends his language to a foreign likeness, he is not doing
it with “each genre,” “universally,” but with literary and scholarly
texts in Greek and Latin, so that only “experts and masters” will be
able to “understand” his deviant use of language. Schleiermacher’s
translator avoids the “colloquial,” unlearned language use, popular
literary forms.
And yet, despite the questionable ideological determinations of
Schleiermacher’s lecture—its bourgeois individualism and cultural
elitism, its Prussian nationalism and German universalism—it does
contain the (inadvertent) suggestion that foreignizing translation can
alter the social divisions figured in these ideologies, can promote
cultural change through its work on the target language:
 
every freely thinking, mentally self-employed human being shapes
his own language. For in what other way—except precisely by
means of these influences—would it have developed and grown
from its first raw state to its more perfect elaboration in scholarship
and art? In this sense, therefore, it is the living power of the
individual which creates new forms by means of the plastic material
of language, at first only for the immediate purpose of
communicating a passing consciousness; yet now more, now less of
it remains behind in the language, is taken up by others, and reaches
out, a shaping force.
(Lefevere 1977:71)
 
This passage reverses its logic. At first language is taken to exist
in an unmediated “raw state,” worked by a transcendental subject
who “shapes his own language,” who is the origin of linguistic
and cultural innovation and development. By the end, however,

116
The Translator’s Invisibility
the determinate nature of language emerges as the “shaping
force” of subjects. In the interval, the materiality of language is
socialized: no longer “raw,” it contains “new forms” invented by
“the individual,” but exceeding the function they were intended
to serve, the communication of “consciousness,” because they
have been derived from pre-existing forms used by “others.” This
indicates that subjectivity is neither self-originating nor the origin
of language and culture, that its cultural values (e.g. “scholarship
and art”) are pre-given and constantly reworked (“elaboration”),
and that therefore the subject can be considered self-determining
only insofar as it ranks these values—or revises them and alters
an established ranking. The discursive innovations and
deviations introduced by foreignizing translation are thus a
potential threat to target-language cultural values, but they
perform their revisionary work only from within, developing
translation strategies from the diverse discourses that circulate in
the target language.
Schleiermacher’s concept of foreignizing translation constitutes a
resistance to dominant cultural values in German at the turn of the
nineteenth century. The foreign in foreignizing translation then meant
a specific selection of foreign texts (literary, philosophical, scholarly)
and a development of discursive peculiarities that opposed both
French cultural hegemony, especially among the aristocracy, and the
literary discourses favored by the largest segment of readers, both
middle- and working-class. Schleiermacher’s translation project
depends on an idealist concept of literature that is at once elitist and
nationalist, individualistic yet socially determinate, defined in
opposition to capitalist economic practices: “the interpreter plies his
trade in the field of commerce; the translator proper operates mainly in
the fields of art and scholarship” (Lefevere 1977:68).
It is this ideological ensemble that must be jettisoned in any revival
of foreignizing translation to intervene against the contemporary
ascendancy of transparent discourse. Today, transparency is the
dominant discourse in poetry and prose, fiction and nonfiction,
bestsellers and print journalism. Even if the electronic media have
weakened the economic, political, and cultural hegemony of print in
the post-World War II period, the idealist concept of literature that
underwrites that discourse continues to enjoys considerable
institutional power, housed not only in the academy and in the literary
cultures of various educated elites, but in the publishing industry and
the mass-audience periodical press. The distinction that

Nation
117
Schleiermacher perceived between the field of commerce and the fields
of art and scholarship has been eroded—if it ever existed as more than
a fiction designed to consolidate literature as a transcendental cultural
concept. Transparent discourse is eminently consumable in the
contemporary cultural marketplace, which in turn influences
publishing decisions to exclude foreign texts that preempt
transparency.
Schleiermacher shows that the first opportunity to foreignize
translation occurs in the choice of foreign text, wherein the translator
can resist the dominant discourse in Anglo-American culture by
restoring excluded texts and possibly reforming the canon of foreign
literatures in English. Schleiermacher also suggests that foreignizing
translation puts to work a specific discursive strategy. He opposes
the foregrounding of the signified by which fluent translation
produces the effect of transparency; for him a translation can be
foreignized only by approximating the play of signifiers in the
foreign text: “the more closely the translation follows the turns taken
by the original, the more foreign it will seem to the reader” (Lefevere
1977:78).
Schleiermacher’s lecture provides the tools for conceptualizing a
revolt against the dominance of transparent discourse in current
English-language translation. Yet the effects of this dominance have
included, not only the widespread implementation of fluent
strategies, but the marginalization of texts in the history of
translation that can yield alternative theories and practices—like
Schleiermacher’s lecture. With rare exceptions, English-language
theorists and practitioners of English-language translation have
neglected Schleiermacher. His lecture has been recognized as a key
“modern” statement in translation theory only recently, and it was
not translated into English until 1977.6 And even its translator, André
Lefevere, felt compelled to question Schleiermacher’s value: “his
requirement that the translation should ‘give the feel’ of the source
language must […] strike us increasingly as odd” (Lefevere 1977:67).
Lefevere argued that translation should be domesticating, as “most
theoreticians” recommended, and he specifically referred to Eugene
Nida’s version of this theory, quoting Nida to criticize
Schleiermacher:
 
In effect, we are faced here with a not-illogical and very spirited
defence of what we know now as “translationese” or, with
another phrase: “static equivalence,” and which is still very

118
The Translator’s Invisibility
much with us, in spite of the fact that most theoreticians would
now subscribe to the concept of dynamic equivalence, which
“aims at complete naturalness of expression and tries to relate the
receptor to modes of behavior relevant within the context of his
own culture.”
(Lefevere 1981:11)7
 
Schleiermacher’s concept of foreignizing translation seems odd to
Lefevere only because the latter prefers to submit to the contemporary
regime of fluency—in Nida’s words, “complete naturalness of
expression.” The canonicity of fluent translation during the post-
World War II period coincides with the emergence of the term
“translationese” to designate unidiomatic language in a translated
text (OED). Lefevere approves of Nida’s “dynamic equivalence,” a
concept that now, with the increasing recognition of Schleiermacher’s
contemporary importance, must be viewed as an egregious
euphemism for the domesticating translation method and the cultural
political agendas it conceals. Because this method is so entrenched in
English-language translation, Lefevere is unable to see that the
detection of unidiomatic language, especially in literary texts, is
culturally specific: what is unidiomatic in one cultural formation can
be aesthetically effective in another. Any dismissive treatment of
Schleiermacher maintains the forms of domestication in English-
language translation today, hindering reflection on how different
methods of translating can resist the questionable values that
dominate Anglo-American culture. Schleiermacher can indeed offer a
way out.
II
With Schleiermacher’s lecture untranslated, however, this way was
open to few English-language translators during the nineteenth
century. A translator could of course formulate a theory of foreignizing
translation, whether or not inspired by the German tradition, but the
theory would be a response to a peculiarly English situation, motivated
by different cultural and political interests. Such was the case with
Francis Newman (1805–1897), the accomplished brother of the
Cardinal. In the 1850s, Newman challenged the main line of English-
language translation, arguing that “Cowper’s attempt to translate
Homer had proved as great a failure as Pope’s” and suggesting that “a
sensible change is taking place, from our recent acquaintance with the

Nation
119
extent to which the Germans have carried poetical translation”
(Newman 1851:371).8 This “acquaintance” with the German tradition
apparently made Newman the first in a small group of Victorian
translators who developed foreignizing strategies and opposed the
English regime of fluent domestication.
A classical scholar who taught for many years, first at
Manchester New College, then University College, London,
Newman was a prolific writer on a variety of topics, some
scholarly, others religious, many of urgent social concern. He
produced commentaries on classical texts (Aeschylus, Euripides)
and dictionaries and vocabularies for oriental languages and
dialects (Arabic, Libyan). He wrote a spiritual autobiography and
many religious treatises that reflected his own wavering belief in
Christianity and the heterodox nature of that belief (e.g. Hebrew
Theism: The Common Basic of Judaism, Christianity and
Mohammedanism). And he issued a steady stream of lectures, essays,
and pamphlets that demonstrated his intense involvement in a
wide range of political issues. Newman argued for decentralized
government, land nationalization, women’s suffrage, the abolition
of slavery. He criticized English colonialism, recommending
government reforms that would allow the colonized to enter the
political process. His Essays on Diet advocated vegetarianism, and
on several occasions he supported state enforcement of sobriety,
partly as a means of curbing prostitution.
The ideological configuration of Newman’s writing uneasily
combined liberalism with a paternalistic investment in bourgeois
moral values, and this also played into his translation projects,
which were fundamentally pedagogical and populist. He
published Latin versions of the popular literature he assigned his
students for class translation exercises: Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow’s narrative poem Hiawatha (1862) and Daniel Defoe’s
novel Robinson Crusoe (1884). The readership he imagined for his
translations of Horace (1853) and the Iliad (1856) did not know
Latin and Greek or were too busy or bored to maintain languages
they learned at university—in Newman’s words, “the unlearned
English reader,” “those who seek solely for amusement,” including
“men of business,” “commercial England,” but also the socially
diverse audience of “Dickens and Thackeray” (Newman 1853:iii–
v). Compared to Schleiermacher, Newman enlisted translation in a
more democratic cultural politics, assigned a pedagogical function
but pitched deliberately against an academic elite. For Newman,

120
The Translator’s Invisibility
the aim of education was to foster liberal democracy. In his lecture
On the Relations of Free Knowledge to Moral Sentiment, he argued that
the study of “political economy” teaches a respect for cultural
differences that militates against imperialism, nationalism, and
class domination:
 
political economy has demonstrated that the laws which morality
would dictate as just are also the laws of physical well being for
nations and for classes; that no cunning regulations will enable a
State to prosper at the expense of foreigners; and that the interests of
classes and of nations are so knit up, that one cannot permanently
be depressed without injury to others. It rescues the patriot from the
temptation of being unjust to the foreigner, by proving that that does
not conduce to the welfare of his own people.
(Newman 1847b:18–19)
 
Newman similarly urged the study of history, literary as well as
political, because it can “deepen our knowledge of mankind, and our
insight into social and political interests” (ibid.:8). Here too the
“practical uses” of this knowledge required the recognition of cultural
differences. In Four Lectures on the Contrasts of Ancient and Modern
History, Newman granted the central metaphysical assumption of
Enlightenment humanism—“The whole interest of History depends
upon the eternal likeness of human nature to itself”—but only to give
it a more materialist revision, mindful of historical change: “it is
equally needful to be aware of the points at which similarity ceases,
and contrast begins; otherwise our applications of history to practical
uses will be mere delusive pedantry” (Newman 1847a:5–6).
Newman’s “practical” concept of education led him to criticize
academic specialization because it decreased the social value of
knowledge. In his Introductory Lecture to the Classical Course at
Manchester New College, he asserted that
 
we do not advocate any thing exclusive. A one-sided cultivation may
appear at first like carrying out the principle of division of labour,
yet in fact it does not tend even to the general benefit and progress
of truth, much less to the advantage of the individual.
(Newman 1841:7)
 
Although intended to justify the place of classics in an academic
curriculum, Newman’s lecture attacked the scholarly disdain of

Nation
121
translation, describing it as mere snobbery that ironically degraded
classical literature by limiting its audience: “It would be no honor to
the venerable productions of antiquity, to imagine that all their
excellencies vanish with translation, and only a mean exclusiveness of
spirit could grudge to impart as much as possible of their instruction to
the unlearned” (ibid.:9). To Newman, “exclusive” meant specialized,
but also elitist.
It seems clear that only foreignizing translation could answer to
Newman’s concept of liberal education, to his concern with the
recognition of cultural differences. His introductory lecture argued
that literary texts were particularly important in staging this
recognition because “literature is special, peculiar; it witnesses, and
it tends to uphold, national diversity” (Newman 1841:10). In the
preface to his version of the Iliad, he offered a concise account of his
translation method by contrasting it with the “principles which I
regard to be utterly false and ruinous to translation.” The principles
Newman opposed belonged to the fluent, domesticating method
that dominated English translation since the seventeenth century:
 
One of these is, that the reader ought, if possible, to forget that
it is a translation at all, and be lulled into the illusion that he is
reading an original work. Of course a necessary inference from
such a dogma is, that whatever has a foreign colour is
undesirable and is even a grave defect. The translator, it seems,
must carefully obliterate all that is characteristic of the original,
unless it happens to be identical in spirit to something already
familiar in English. From such a notion I cannot too strongly
express my intense dissent. I am at precisely the opposite;—to
retain every peculiarity of the original, so far as I am able, with
the greater care, the more foreign it may happen to be,—whether it
be a matter of taste, of intellect, or of morals. […] the English
translator should desire the reader always to remember that his
work is an imitation, and moreover is in a different material; that
the original is foreign, and in many respects extremely unlike
our native compositions.
(Newman 1856:xv–xvi)
 
For Newman, the “illusion” of originality that confused the translation
with the foreign text was domesticating, assimilating what was foreign
“to something already familiar in English.” He recommended a
translation method that signified the many differences between the

122
The Translator’s Invisibility
translation and the foreign text, their relative autonomy from one
another, their composition in different languages for different cultures.
Yet rejecting the illusion of originality meant opposing the discourse
that shapes most of “our native compositions”—fluency. Newman felt
that his translations were resisting a contemporary standardization of
English enforced by the publishing industry:
 
In the present day, so intensely mechanical is the apparatus of
prose-composition,—when editors and correctors of the press
desire the uniform observance of some one rule (never mind
what, so that you find it in the “standard” grammar),—every
deviation is resented as a vexatious eccentricity; and in general it
would appear, that dry perspicuity is the only excellence for
which the grammarian has struggled. Every expression which
does not stand the logical test, however transparent the meaning,
however justified by analogies, is apt to be condemned; and every
difference of mind and mind, showing itself in the style, is
deprecated.
(ibid.:xvii–xviii)
 
Since Newman developed his foreignizing method in the translation
of classical texts, for him foreignizing necessarily involved a
discourse that signified historical remoteness—archaism. In the
preface to his selection from Horace, he faulted previous English
versions because they modernized the Latin text: “Hitherto our
poetical translators have failed in general, not so much from want
of talent or learning, but from aiming to produce poems in modern
style, through an excessive fear that a modern reader will endure
nothing else” (Newman 1853:iv). In the preface to his Iliad, Newman
defined more precisely the sort of archaism Homer required. Partly
it was an effort to suggest an historical analogy between earlier
forms of Greek and English: “The entire dialect of Homer being
essentially archaic, that of a translation ought to be as much Saxo-
Norman as possible, and owe as little as possible to the elements
thrown into our language by classical learning” (Newman 1856:vi).
Homer’s “style” required a like solution: “it is similar to the old
English ballad, and is in sharp contrast to the polished style of Pope,
Sotheby, and Cowper, the best known English translators of Homer”
(ibid.:iv).
Yet Newman also made clear that he was “not concerned with the
historical problem, of writing in a style which actually existed at an

Nation
123
earlier period in our language; but with the artistic problem of
attaining a plausible aspect of moderate antiquity, while remaining
easily intelligible” (Newman 1856:x). Hence, he advocated an
artificially constructed archaism, patched together without an
excessive regard for historical accuracy or consistency, producing an
effect that he called “quaint” as opposed to “grotesque.” And he
cultivated this discourse on various levels, in the lexicon, syntax, and
prosody of his translations. He explained his use of syntactical
“inversions,” for example, as “not mere metrical expedients, but
necessities of the style; partly, to attain antiquity and elevation, partly
for emphasis or for variety” (ibid.:xi).
Newman’s translations could only be foreignizing in a culturally
specific sense, in relation to concepts of “domestic” and “foreign” that
distinguished English literary culture in the Victorian period. Thus, he
saw nothing inconsistent in faulting the modernizing tendencies of
previous Horace translators while he himself expurgated the Latin text,
inscribing it with an English sense of moral propriety. This is where
Newman’s bourgeois paternalism contradicts the democratic
tendencies of his populism:
 
I have striven to make this book admissable to the purest-minded
English lady, and could never consent to add adornment to a single
line of corrupting tendency. It exhibits, no doubt, mournful facts
concerning the relations of the sexes in Augustan Rome,—facts not
in themselves so shocking, as many which oppress the heart in the
cities of Christendom; and this, I think, it is instructive to perceive.
Only in a few instances, where the immorality is too ugly to be
instructive have I abruptly cut away the difficulty. In general,
Horace aimed at a higher beauty than did Catullus or Propertius or
Ovid, and the result of a purer taste is closely akin to that of a
sounder morality.
(Newman 1853:vi)
 
What was foreignizing about Newman’s translations was not
their morality, but their literary discourse, the strangeness of the
archaism. This too was homegrown, a rich stew drawn from
various periods of English, but it deviated from current usage and
cut across various literary discourses, poetry and the novel, elite
and popular, English and Scottish. Newman’s Horace translation
contained “viands,” for example, a word that surfaced at the
beginning of the fifteenth century and was used extensively in the

124
The Translator’s Invisibility
early modern period in various kinds of writing, literary
(Shakespeare’s plays) and nonliterary (Edward Hall’s historical
chronicles). Yet it was also used later as a distinctly poetic form,
a poeticism, in widely read Victorian writers like Tennyson
and Dickens.9 Newman’s archaic lexicon crossed, not only
historical periods, but contemporary reading constituencies.
The word “eld” appeared in his Horace translation after a
succession of different uses—in Byron’s Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage
(1812),Sir Walter Scott’s The Monastery (1820), Longfellow’s
Evangeline (1847).
Newman’s version of the Iliad increased the density of the
archaism, so that what may have been a recognizable poeticism now
risked opacity and reader incomprehension. As if anticipating this
risk, Newman appended a two-page “glossary” to the translation
that provided his definitions for the archaic words. The glossary was
a scholarly gesture that indicated the sheer heterogeneity of his
lexicon, its diverse literary origins, and his readers no doubt found
it useful when they took up other books, in various genres, periods,
dialects. Newman used “callant” (“a young man”), an eighteenth-
century word that appeared in Scott’s Waverley (1814), and “gride”
(“to cut gratingly”), a Spenserianism that appeared in Shelley’s
Prometheus Bound (1821) and Tennyson’s In Memoriam (1850). A brief
catalogue suggests the inventiveness of Newman’s lexicon, its
historical and cultural breadth, but also its occasional
impenetrability: “behight,” “bragly” (“braw, proudly fine”),
“bulkin” (“calf”), “choler,” “emprize,” “fain,” “gramsome”
(“direful”), “hie,” “lief,” “noisome,” “ravin,” “sith,” “whilom,”
“wight,” “wend.” There were even some Scottish words drawn from
Burns and Scott, like “skirl,” meaning “to cry shrilly,” and “syne,”
as in “lang syne” (“long ago”).
The foreignizing discourse of Newman’s translations definitely
registered on contemporary readers. The London Quarterly Review
included Newman’s Horace in two review essays that surveyed
English versions of the odes, past and present. Although these essays
were published more than fifteen years apart (1858 and 1874), they
both disapproved of Newman’s strategies and expressed a preference
for a modernized Horace, rendered fluently, in immediately intelligible
English:
 
It is an all-prevading and persistent fault in this translation, that
obscure and antiquated forms of expression are used, instead of

Nation
125
simple and modern English. Thus we find, in the very first Ode,
such expressions as “Lydian eld,” “quirital mob.” Elsewhere we find
such phrases as “tangled fields” (whatever this means), “the sage
thrice-aged.”
(London Quarterly Review 1874:17)
 
This was a criticism that crossed political lines, appearing not only in
the Tory London Quarterly, but the liberal National Review, to which
Newman was a contributor (Sullivan 1984:237–242). The reviewer of
Newman’s Iliad for the National expressed some agreement with him,
admitting that “a style in some sort archaic is no doubt desirable, and
even necessary, to represent a poet such as Homer” (National Review
1860:292). But Newman’s archaism was attacked for deviating too far
from the familiar, the transparent:
 
we cannot but consider that Mr. Newman’s diction is needlessly
antiquated and uncouth; and that, although he has not admitted any
expressions which are unintelligible from their antiquity, he has
omitted to observe the further caution, that archaism should not
appear plainly to be constrained or assumed, lest a laboured, artificial
style of English should suggest the idea of a laboured, artificial style
of Greek, than which nothing can be more opposite to Homer.
(ibid.:292)
 
The reviewer preferred a reading experience that allowed the English
version to pass as a true equivalent of “Homer” while repressing the
status of Newman’s text as a translation, the sense that the archaism
was calculated by the translator, “assumed.”
As this passage suggests, however, Newman’s translations seemed
foreign, not only because their “strained archaic quaintness”
preempted the illusion of transparency, but also because they
constituted a reading of the foreign text that revised prevailing critical
opinion. Newman’s decision to translate Horace into unrhymed verse
with various accentual meters ignored what the London Quarterly
Review called “the dignity and the music of the Latin,” “the grace and
sweetness of the original” (London Quarterly Review 1858:192; 1874:18).
As a result, Newman’s version appeared “somewhat quaint and
harsh,” whereas “the rhymed versions of Lord Ravensworth and of
Mr. Theodore Martin” possessed “the qualities of easy elegance, of
sweetness of cadence” (London Quarterly Review 1858:192–3; 1874:16,
19). The reviewers looked for a fluent, iconic meter, sound imitating

126
The Translator’s Invisibility
sense to produce a transparent poem, but they also assumed that
Horace would have agreed:
Now and then Professor Newman surprises us with a grateful [sic]
flow of verse:—
   “Me not the enduring Sparta
Nor fertile-soil’d Larissa’s plain
     So to the heart has smitten
     As Anio headlong tumbling,
Loud-brawling Albuneia’s grot,
     Tiburnus’ groves and orchards
     With restless rivulets streaming.”
There is something of the rush of cool waters here. But what would
Horace say, if he could come to life, and find himself singing the two
stanzas subjoined?—
   “Well of Bandusia, as crystal bright,
Luscious wine to thee with flowers is due;
     To-morrow shall a kid
Thine become, who with horny front
Budding new, designs amours and war.
Vainly: since this imp o’ the frisky herd
     With life-blood’s scarlet gush
Soon shall curdle thy icy pool.”
This is hard to read, while the Latin is as pleasant to the ear as the
fountain which it brings before us to the imagination.
(London Quarterly Review 1858:193)
 
The reviewers’ negative evaluations rested on a contradiction that
revealed quite clearly the domestic cultural values they privileged. In
calling for a rhymed version, they inscribed the unrhymed Latin text
with the verse form that dominated current English poetry while
insisting that rhyme made the translation closer to Horace. The
reviewers were articulating a hegemonic position in English literary
culture, definitely slanted toward an academic elite: Horace’s text can
be “pleasant to the ear” only for readers of Latin. Yet this academic
reading was also presented in national cultural terms, with the
reviewers assimilating Horace to traditional English prosody:

Nation
127
To discard the old machinery of recurrent rhymes, which has grown
with the growth and strengthened with the strength of our poetical
language, to set aside the thousand familiar and expected effects of
beat, and pause, and repetition, and of the modulation of measure-
sound that makes the everchanging charm of lyrical verse—to set
aside all this for the disappointing, unfamiliar machinery of verses,
each with a different ending, unrelieved by any new grace of
expression, any new harmony of sound, is simply the work of a
visionary, working not for the enjoyment of his readers, but the
gratification of a crotchety and perverted taste.
(London Quarterly Review 1874:15)
 
This call for a domesticated Horace was motivated by a nationalist
investment in “the strength of our poetical language.” Newman’s
version was “perverted” because it was un-English: “to have to break
up all our English traditions for something utterly novel and yet
mediocre, is a severe demand to make from the great public which
reads for pleasure” (London Quarterly Review 1858:193). Newman tested
the reviewers’ assumption that the English reading audience wanted
every foreign text to be rewritten according to dominant literary
values. Yet the very heterogeneity of his translations, their borrowings
from various literary discourses, gave the lie to this assumption by
pointing to the equally heterogeneous nature of the audience.
Newman’s foreignized texts were challenging an elitist concept of a
national English culture.
The cultural force of his challenge can be gauged from the reception
of his Iliad. Newman’s foreignizing strategy led him to choose the
ballad as the archaic English form most suitable to Homeric verse. And
this choice embroiled him in a midcentury controversy over the
prosody of Homeric translations, played out both in numerous reviews
and essays and in a spate of English versions with the most different
verse forms: rhymed and unrhymed, ballad meter and Spenserian
stanza, hendecasyllabics and hexameters. Here too the stakes were at
once cultural—competing readings of the Greek texts—and political—
competing concepts of the English nation.
Newman used ballad meter for his Iliad because he sought “a
poetry which aims to be antiquated and popular” (Newman 1856:xii).
“The style of Homer,” he argued, “is direct, popular, forcible, quaint,
flowing, garrulous, abounding with formulas, redundant in particles
and affirmatory interjections, as also in grammatical connectives of
time, place, and argument” (ibid.:iv). He defined the “popular” aspect

128
The Translator’s Invisibility
of the Greek text historically, as the product of an oral archaic culture
at a rudimentary level of literary development, “a stage of the national
mind in which divisions of literature were not recognized [,] even the
distinction of prose and poetry” (ibid.:iv). But he also located
contemporary “popular” analogues, English as well as Greek. In
choosing the ballad, Newman recalled, “I found with pleasure that I
had exactly alighted on the metre which the modern Greeks adopt for
the Homeric hexameter” in what he called “the modern Greek epic”
(ibid.:vii–viii). The texts in question were actually ballads sung by
nineteenth-century mountain brigands in the Peloponnese, “Klephts,”
who fought in the Greek resistance against the Turkish Empire.10
The English analogues Newman cited were equally “modern”—
contemporary versions of archaic forms. He argued that “our real old
ballad-writers are too poor and mean to repesent Homer, and are too
remote in diction from our times to be popularly intelligible”
(Newman 1856:x). To secure this “popular” intelligibility, his
translation reflected the archaism in the English historical novel and
narrative poem: he thought Scott would have been an ideal translator
of Homer. Yet Newman’s discourse was also explicitly oral, unlearned,
and English, His syntactical inversions approximated current English
speech:
 
in all lively conversation we use far more inversion than in the style
of essay-writing; putting the accusative before the verb, beginning a
sentence with a predicate or with a negative, and in other ways
approaching to the old style, which is truly native to every genuine
Englishman.
(ibid.:xi)
 
This was a concept of “the old style” that was nationalist as well as
populist. Newman’s “Saxo-Norman” lexicon “owe[d] as little as
possible to the elements thrown into our language by classical
learning” (ibid.:vi). And the “several old-fashioned formulas” he used
opposed academic prescriptions for English usage:
 
In modern style, our classical scholars at an early period introduced
from Latin a principle which seems to me essentially unpopular,
viz., to end a clause with than he, than thou, than she, &c., where they
think a nominative is needed. […] I cannot listen to unsophisticated
English talk, without being convinced that in old English the words
me, thee, him, &c., are not merely accusatives, but are also the isolated

Nation
129
form of the pronoun, like moi, toi, lui. In reply to the question, “Who
is there?” every English boy or girl answers Me, until he or she is
scolded into saying I. In modern prose the Latinists have prevailed;
but in a poetry which aims to be antiquated and popular, I must
rebel.
(ibid.:xi–xii)
 
The “popular” in Newman’s translation was a contemporary
construction of an archaic form that carried various ideological
implications. It drew on an analogous Greek form affiliated with a
nationalist movement to win political autonomy from foreign
domination (or, more precisely, a criminal fringe of this movement, the
Klepht resistance). And it assumed an English culture that was
national yet characterized by social divisions, in which cultural values
were ranged hierarchically among various groups, academic and
nonacademic. Newman’s archaism constituted the democratic
tendency in his concept of the English nation because it was populist,
assigning popular cultural forms a priority over the academic elite that
sought to suppress them. He thought of the ballad as “our Common
Metre” (Newman 1856:vii).
Newman’s Iliad received little attention in the periodicals—until,
several years later, Matthew Arnold decided to attack it in a lecture
series published as On Translating Homer (1861). Arnold, then Professor
of Poetry at Oxford, described the lectures as an effort “to lay down the
true principles on which a translation of Homer should be founded,”
and these were principles diametrically opposed to Newman’s (Arnold
1960:238). Arnold wanted translation to transcend, rather than signify,
linguistic and cultural differences, and so he prized the illusionism of
transparent discourse, using the “strange language” of mystical
transcendence to describe the process of domestication:
 
Coleridge says, in his strange language, speaking of the union of the
human soul with the divine essence, that this takes place
Whene’er the mist, which stands ’twixt God and thee,
Defecates to a pure transparency;
and so, too, it may be said of that union of the translator with
his original, which alone can produce a good translation, that it
takes place when the mist which stands between them—the mist
of alien modes of thinking, speaking, and feeling on the

130
The Translator’s Invisibility
translator’s part—“defecates to a pure transparency,” and
disappears.
(ibid.:103)
 
In this remarkable analogy, Arnold’s translation “principles” assumed
a Christian Platonic metaphysics of true semantic equivalence,
whereby he demonized (or fecalized) the material conditions of
translation, the target-language values that define the translator’s
work and inevitably mark the source-language text. Current English
“modes of thinking, speaking, and feeling” must be repressed, like a
bodily function; they are “alien” excrement soiling the classical text.
This is an antiquarianism that canonized the Greek past while
approaching the English present with a physical squeamishness.
Arnold didn’t demonize all domestic values, however, since he was
in fact upholding the canonical tradition of English literary
translation: following Denham, Dryden, Tytler, Frere, he
recommended a free, domesticating method to produce fluent,
familiar verse that respected bourgeois moral values. The difference
between the foreign text and English culture “disappears” in this
tradition because the translator removes it—while invisibly inscribing
a reading that reflects English literary canons, a specific interpretation
of “Homer.” In Arnold’s case,
 
So essentially characteristic of Homer is his plainness and
naturalness of thought, that to the preservation of this in his own
version the translator must without scruple sacrifice, where it is
necessary, verbal fidelity to his original, rather than run any risk of
producing, by literalness, an odd and unnatural effect.
(Arnold 1960:157–158)
 
For Arnold, what determined familiarity of effect was not merely
transparent discourse, fluency as opposed to “literalness,” but the
prevailing academic reading of Homer, validated by scholars at Eton,
Cambridge, and Oxford. Indeed, Arnold’s main contention—and the
point on which he differed most from Newman—was that only readers
of the Greek text were qualified to evaluate English versions of it: “a
competent scholar’s judgment whether the translation more or less
reproduces for him the effect of the original” (Arnold 1960:201).
Throughout the lectures Arnold repeatedly set forth this “effect” in
authoritative statements: “Homer is rapid in his movement, Homer is
plain in his words and style, Homer is simple in his ideas, Homer is

Nation
131
noble in manner” (ibid.:141). Using this explicitly academic reading,
Arnold argued that various translators, past and present, “have failed
in rendering him”: George Chapman, because of “the fancifulness of
the Elizabethan age, entirely alien to the plain directness of Homer’s
thought and feeling”; Pope, because of his “literary artificial manner,
entirely alien to the plain naturalness of Homer”; William Cowper,
because of his “elaborate Miltonic manner, entirely alien to the flowing
rapidity of Homer”; and, finally, Newman, whose “manner” was
“eminently ignoble, while Homer’s manner is eminently noble”
(ibid.:103). Here it becomes clear that Newman’s translation was
foreignizing because his archaism deviated from the academic reading
of Homer:
 
Why are Mr. Newman’s lines faulty? They are faulty, first, because,
as a matter of diction, the expressions “O gentle friend,” “eld,” “in
sooth,” “liefly,” “advance,” “man-ennobling,” “sith,” “any-gait,”
and “sly of foot,” are all bad; some of them worse than others, but
all bad: that is, they all of them as here used excite in the scholar,
their sole judge,—excite, I will boldly affirm, in Professor Thompson
or Professor Jowett,—a feeling totally different from that excited in
them by the words of Homer which these expressions profess to
render.
(ibid.:133)
 
Arnold’s critique of Newman’s translation was informed by a
concept of English culture that was nationalist as well as elitist. To
demonstrate the effect of familiarity that a scholar experiences
before the Greek text, Arnold gave examples of English
“expressions” that he called “simple,” transparently intelligible, but
that also constituted Anglocentric stereotypes of foreign cultures,
implicitly racist:
 
[Greek] expressions seem no more odd to [the scholar] than the
simplest expressions in English. He is not more checked by any
feeling of strangeness, strong or weak, when he reads them, than
when he reads in an English book “the painted savage,” or, “the
phlegmatic Dutchman.”
(ibid.:123)
 
In Arnold’s view, Newman’s translation demonstrated the need for an
academic elite to establish national cultural values:

132
The Translator’s Invisibility
I think that in England, partly from the want of an Academy, partly
from a national habit of intellect to which that want of an Academy
is itself due, there exists too little of what I may call a public force of
correct literary opinion, possessing within certain limits a clear
sense of what is right and wrong, sound and unsound, and sharply
recalling men of ability and learning from any flagrant misdirection
of these their advantages. I think, even, that in our country a
powerful misdirection of this kind is often more likely to subjugate
and pervert opinion than to be checked and corrected by it.
(ibid.:171–172)
 
The social function Arnold assigned translators like Newman was to
“correct” English cultural values by bringing them in line with
scholarly “opinion.” Translation for Arnold was a means to empower
an academic elite, to endow it with national cultural authority, but this
empowerment involved an imposition of scholarly values on other
cultural constituencies—including the diverse English-reading
audience that Newman hoped to reach. The elitism in Arnold’s concept
of a national English culture assumed an unbridgeable social division:
“These two impressions—that of the scholar, and that of the unlearned
reader—can, practically, never be accurately compared” (ibid.:201).
Translation bridges this division, but only by eliminating the
nonscholarly.
Arnold’s attack on Newman’s translation was an academic
repression of popular cultural forms that was grounded in a competing
reading of Homer. Where Arnold’s Homer was elitist, possessing
“nobility,” “a great master” of “the grand style,” New-man’s was
populist and, to Arnold, “ignoble.” Hence, Arnold insisted that
 
the ballad-style and the ballad-measure are eminently inappropriate
to render Homer. Homer’s manner and movement are always both
noble and powerful: the ballad-manner and movement are often
either jaunty and smart, so not noble; or jog-trot and humdrum, so
not powerful.
(Arnold 1960:128)
 
Arnold rejected the use of the “ballad-manner” in various English
translations—Chapman’s Homer, Dr. William Maginn’s Homeric
Ballads and Comedies of Lucian (1850), Newman’s Iliad—because he
found it “over-familiar,” “commonplace,” “pitched sensibly lower
than Homer’s” verse (ibid.:117, 124, 155). Newman’s archaism in

Nation
133
particular degraded the canonical Greek text by resorting to colloquial
Shakespearean expressions, like “To grunt and sweat under a weary
load”—a judgment that again revealed the strain of bourgeois
squeamishness in Arnold’s academic elitism:
 
if the translator of Homer […] were to employ, when he has to speak
of one of Homer’s heroes under the load of calamity, this figure of
“grunting” and “sweating,” we should say, He Newmanises, and his
diction would offend us. For he is to be noble; and no plea of
wishing to be plain and natural can get him excused from being this.
(ibid.:155)
 
Arnold’s notion of Homer’s “nobility” assimilated the Greek text to the
scholarly while excluding the popular. He noted that for an American
reader the ballad “has a disadvantage in being like the rhythm of the
American national air Yankee Doodle, and thus provoking ludicrous
associations” (ibid.:132). And although Arnold recommended the
hexameter as the most suitable verse form for Homeric translation, he
was careful to add that he didn’t have in mind the hexameters in
Longfellow’s “pleasing and popular poem of Evangeline,” but rather
those of “the accomplished Provost of Eton, Dr. Hawtrey,” who was
not only “one of the natural judges of a translation of Homer,” but the
author of the 1847 volume English Hexameter Translations (ibid.:149,
151). Any translation was likely to be offensive to Arnold, given his
scholarly adulation of the Greek text. Newman’s mixture of homely
colloquialism, archaism, and close rendering proved positively
alienating:
 
The end of the nineteenth book, the answer of Achilles to his horse
Xanthus, Mr. Newman gives thus:—
“Chestnut! why bodest death to me? from thee this was not
needed.
Myself right surely know also, that ’t is my doom to perish,
From mother and from father dear apart, in Troy; but never
Pause will I make of war, until the Trojans be glutted.”
He spake, and yelling, held afront the single-hoofed
horses
Here Mr. Newman calls Xanthus Chestnut, indeed, as he calls
Balius Spotted, and Podarga Spry-foot; which is as if a Frenchman
were to call Miss Nightingale Mdlle. Rossignol, or Mr. Bright M.

134
The Translator’s Invisibility
Clair. And several other expressions, too,—“yelling,” “held afront,”
“single-hoofed,”—leave, to say the very least, much to be desired.
(ibid.:134)
 
It is in fact Arnold’s habit of saying “the very least” that is most
symptomatic of the anti-democratic tendency in his critique.
Arnold refused to define his concept of “nobleness,” the one
Homeric quality that distinguished the academic reading and
justified his call for a national academy: “I do not attempt to lay
down any rules for obtaining this effect of nobleness,—the effect,
too, of all others the most impalpable, the most irreducible to rule,
and which most depends on the individual personality of the
artist” (Arnold 1960:159). Like Alexander Tytler, Arnold valued a
public sphere of cultural consensus that would underwrite the
“correct” translation discourse for Homer, but any democratic
tendency in this national agenda foundered on an individualist
aesthetics that was fundamentally impressionistic: “the presence or
absence of the grand style can only be spiritually discerned”
(ibid.:136). Unlike Tytler, Arnold could not easily accept a humanist
assumption of universal “reason and good sense” because the
English reading audience had become too culturally and socially
diverse; hence Arnold’s turn to an academic elite to enforce its
cultural agenda on the nation. As Terry Eagleton puts it, “Arnold’s
academy is not the public sphere, but a means of defense against
the actual Victorian public” (Eagleton 1984:64; see also Baldick
1983:29–31).
The “grand style” was so important to Arnold because it was active
in the construction of human subjects, capable of imprinting other
social groups with academic cultural values: “it can form the character,
it is edifying. […] the few artists in the grand style […] can refine the
raw natural man, they can transmute him” (Arnold 1960:138–139). Yet
because Homeric nobleness depended on the individual personality of
the writer or reader and could only be experienced, not described, it
was autocratic and irrational. The individualism at the root of Arnold’s
critique finally undermines the cultural authority he assigned to the
academy by issuing into contradiction: he vaguely linked nobility to
the individual personality, but he also faulted Newman’s translation
precisely because of its individualism. For Arnold, Newman indulged
“some individual fancy,” exemplifying a deplorable national trait, “the
great defect of English intellect, the great blemish of English
literature”—“eccentricity and arbitrariness” (ibid.:140).

Nation
135
Newman was stung by Arnold’s lectures, and by the end of the year
he published a book-length reply that allowed him to develop more
fully the translation rationale he sketched in his preface. At the outset
he made quite clear that his “sole object is, to bring Homer before the
unlearned public” (Newman 1861:6). Newman questioned the
authority Arnold assigned to the academy in the formation of a
national culture. He pointed out that England was multicultural, a site
of different values, and although an academic himself he sided with
the nonacademic:
 
Scholars are the tribunal of Erudition, but of Taste the educated but
unlearned public is the only rightful judge; and to it I wish to
appeal. Even scholars collectively have no right, and much less have
single scholars, to pronounce a final sentence on questions of taste
in their court.
(ibid.:2)
 
Because Newman translated for a different audience, he refused such
scholarly verse forms as the hexameters Arnold proposed:
 
The unlearned look on all, even the best hexameters, whether from
Southey, Lockhart or Longfellow, as odd and disagreeable prose. Mr.
Arnold deprecates appeal to popular taste: well he may! Yet if the
unlearned are to be our audience, we cannot defy them. I myself,
before venturing to print, sought to ascertain how unlearned
women and children would accept my verses. I could boast how
children and half-educated women have extolled them; how
greedily a working man has inquired for them, without knowing
who was the translator.
(ibid.:12–13)
 
Newman’s assessment of “popular taste” led him to write his
translation in the ballad form, which he described in terms that
obviously sought to challenge Arnold’s: “It is essentially a noble metre, a
popular metre, a metre of great capacity. It is essentially the national
ballad metre” (ibid.:22). Newman’s reply emphasized the peculiar
ideological significance of his project. His aim to produce a translation
that was at once populist and nationalist was realized in an archaic
literary discourse that resisted any scholarly domestication of the
foreign text, any assimilation of it to the regime of transparent
discourse in English:

136
The Translator’s Invisibility
Classical scholars ought to set their faces against the double heresy,
of trying to enforce, that foreign poetry, however various, shall all be
rendered in one English dialect, and that this shall, in order of words
and in diction, closely approximate to polished prose.
(ibid.:88)
 
Newman’s reply showed that translation could permit other,
popular literary discourses to emerge in English only if it was
foreignizing, or, in the case of classical literature, historicizing,
only if it abandoned fluency to signify “the archaic, the rugged,
the boisterous element in Homer” (Newman 1861:22). Because
Newman’s historiography was essentially Whiggish, assuming a
teleological model of human development, a liberal concept of
progress, he felt that Homer “not only was antiquated, relatively
to Pericles, but is also absolutely antique, being a poet of a
barbarian age” (ibid.:48).11 Newman admitted that it was difficult
to avoid judging past foreign cultures according to the cultural
values—both academic and bourgeois—that distinguished
Victorian elites from their social inferiors in England and
elsewhere. He believed that
 
if the living Homer could sing his lines to us, they would at first
move in us the same pleasing interest as an elegant and simple
melody from an African of the Gold Coast; but that, after hearing
twenty lines, we should complain of meagreness, sameness, and loss
of moral expression; and should judge the style to be as inferior to our
own oratorical metres, as the music of Pindar to our third-rate
modern music.
(ibid.:14)
 
Yet Newman nonetheless insisted that such Anglocentric judgments
must be minimized or avoided altogether: “to expect refinement and
universal delicacy of expression in that stage of civilization is quite
anachronistic and unreasonable” (ibid.:73). In arguing for a historicist
approach to translation, Newman demonstrated that scholarly
English critics like Arnold violated their own principle of universal
reason by using it to justify an abridgement of the Greek text:
 
Homer never sees things in the same proportions as we see them. To
omit his digressions, and what I may call his “impertinences,” in
order to give his argument that which Mr. Arnold is pleased to call

Nation
137
the proper “balance,” is to value our own logical minds, more than
his picturesque but illogical mind.
(ibid.:56)
 
As such statements suggest, the Whig historiography that informed
Newman’s concept of classical culture inevitably privileged Victorian
social elites as exemplars of the most advanced stage of human
development. As a result, it implicitly drew an analogy among their
inferiors—the “barbarian,” the “savage,” the colonized (“Gold Coast”),
and the popular English audience—exposing a patronizing and
potentially racist side to Newman’s translation populism (and edging
his position closer to Arnold’s). Yet Newman’s Whig historiography
also enabled him to refine his sense of literary history and develop a
translation project that both preserved the cultural difference of the
foreign text and acknowledged the diversity of English literary
discourses: “Every sentence of Homer was more or less antiquated to
Sophocles, who could no more help feeling at every instant the foreign
and antiquated character of the poetry, than an Englishman can help
feeling the same in reading Burns’s poems” (Newman 1861:35–36).
Newman’s skepticism toward dominant cultural values in English
even made him criticize Arnold’s admitted “Bibliolatry,” his reliance
on “the authority of the Bible” in developing a lexicon for Homeric
translations (Arnold 1960:165–166). Newman didn’t want the Bible’s
cultural authority to exclude other archaic literary discourses, which he
considered equally “sacred”: “Words which have come to us in a
sacred connection, no doubt, gain a sacred hue, but they must not be
allowed to desecrate other old and excellent words” (Newman
1861:89).
The publication of Arnold’s lectures made Homeric translation an
important topic of debate in Anglo-American culture, provoking not
only a reply from Newman and a coda from Arnold, but many
reviews and articles in a wide range of British and American
periodicals. The reception was mixed. Reviewers were especially
divided on the question of whether the ballad or the hexameter was
the acceptable verse form for Homeric translation.12 Yet Arnold was
definitely favored over Newman, no matter what ideological
standpoint the periodical may have established in previous
reviewing. The Edinburgh-based North British Review, although
“consistently Whiggish in politics,” possessed a religious and moral
conservatism that led to an evangelical approach in literary
reviews—and an endorsement of Arnold’s call for an academy with

138
The Translator’s Invisibility
national cultural authority (North British Review 1862:348; Sullivan
1984:276). In an article that discussed recent Homeric translations
and the Arnold/Newman controversy, the reviewer accepted
Arnold’s diagnosis of English culture as well as his dismissal of
Newman’s archaism: “at present we have nothing but eccentricity,
and arbitrary likings and dislikings. Our literature shows no regard
for dignity, no reverence for law. […] The present ballad-mania is
among the results of this licentiousness” (North British Review
1862:348).
Arnold’s case against Newman was persuasive even to The
Westminster Review, which abandoned its characteristically
militant liberalism to advocate a cultural elite (Sullivan
1983b:424–433). The reviewer remarked that lecturing in English
instead of Latin gave Arnold “the further privilege and
responsibility of addressing himself not to the few, but to the
many, not to a select clique of scholars, but to the entire reading
public” (Westminster Review 1862:151). Yet it was precisely the
literary values of a select scholarly clique that the reviewer
wanted to be imposed on the entire reading public, since he
accepted Arnold’s “proposed test of a thoroughly good
translation—that it ought to produce on the scholar the same
effect as the original poem” (ibid.:151). Hence, Arnold’s academic
reading of the Greek text was recommended over Newman’s
populist “view that Homer can be rendered adequately into any
form of ballad-metre. All ballad-metre alike is pitched in too low
a key; it may be rapid, and direct, and spirit-stirring, but is
incapable of sustained nobility” (ibid.:165).
Not every reviewer agreed with Arnold on the need for an
academic elite to establish a national English culture. But most
explicitly shared his academic reading of Homer and therefore his
criticism of Newman’s archaic translation. The Saturday Review,
advocate of a conservative liberalism opposed to democratic reform
(the labor union movement, women’s suffrage, socialism), affected
a condescending air of impartiality by criticizing both Arnold and
Newman (Bevington 1941). Yet the criteria were mostly Arnoldian.
The reviewer assumed the cultural superiority of the academy by
chastising Arnold for violating scholarly decorum, for devoting
Oxford lectures to a “bitterly contemptuous” attack on a
contemporary writer like Newman, “who, whatever his aberrations
in other ways, has certainly, as a scholar, a very much higher
reputation than Mr. Arnold himself” (Saturday Review 1861:95). Yet

Nation
139
Newman’s “aberrations” were the same ones that Arnold noticed,
especially the archaism, which the reviewer described as “a
consistent, though we think mistaken theory” (ibid.:96). The
Saturday Review’s distaste for Newman’s translation was in turn
consistent with its other literary judgments: it tended to ridicule
literary experiments that deviated from transparent discourse, like
Robert Browning’s “obscure” poetry, and to attack literary forms
that were populist as well as popular, like Dickens’s novels
(Bevington 1941:208–209, 155–167).
The liberal British Quarterly Review, a nonconformist religious
periodical edited by a Congregationalist minister, questioned
Arnold’s desire “to imitate in England the French Academy”
(British Quarterly Review 1865:292; Houghton et al. 1987:IV, 114–
125). This was considered “an intellectual foppery” since the
fundamental individualism of English culture resisted any notion
of a national academy: “Mr. Arnold seems determined to ignore the
fact that an academic style is impossible among the English, who
are by nature original” (British Quarterly Review 1865:292). Yet the
reviewer agreed “that Homeric translation demands a noble
simplicity,” adding that
 
unquestionably Mr. Arnold is right in placing Homer in a very
different class from the ballad-poets with whom he has frequently
been compared. The ballad, in its most perfect form, belongs to a
rude state of society—to a time when ideas were few. This cannot be
said of Homer. His very existence is sufficient proof of a social
development quite equal to that of Shakespeare’s time, though far
simpler in its form.
(ibid.:293)
 
The reviewer assumed both Newman’s historicist concept of the
ballad and the Whig historiography on which it was based. But
Newman’s populist reading of Homer was rejected in favor of
Arnoldian nobility. This move made a liberal periodical like the British
Quarterly Review no different from the Tory Dublin University
Magazine, in which a review of two hexameter translations inspired
by Arnold’s lectures singled out Newman’s version for special
criticism: “his unrhymed ballad metre, his quaint flat diction, and his
laughtermoving epithets” amounted to an “unlucky burlesque”
(Dublin University Magazine 1862:644; Sullivan 1983b:119–123).
Newman’s verse form was described as “the mongrel ballad measure

140
The Translator’s Invisibility
of modern Greece,” a particularly inappropriate choice for Homer’s
pure nobility.
Arnold can be said to have won this debate, even if his
recommendation of hexameters for Homeric translation took almost
a century to gain widespread acceptance—in the “free six-beat line”
of Richmond Lattimore’s immensely popular version (Lattimore
1951:55).13 The fate of Newman’s project was marginalization in his
own time and since, with critiques giving way to virtual oblivion. This
can be seen, first, in the publishing histories of the controversial
documents. Between 1861 and 1924 British and American publishers
brought out seventeen single-volume editions of Arnold’s lectures;
between 1905 and 1954 fourteen different editions of Arnold’s selected
essays contained the lectures—not to mention their inclusion in
several complete editions of Arnold’s writing. Newman’s Iliad was
reprinted only once, in 1871, and thereafter known primarily through
quotations in Arnold’s lectures. Newman’s reply too was printed only
once in the nineteenth century. During the first half of the twentieth,
it was reprinted frequently, but only in selections of Arnold’s essays,
presented as a supporting document subordinated to Arnold’s more
important lectures, a minor text included to provide cultural
background for the major author (see, for example, Arnold 1914). In
1960, the editor of Arnold’s Complete Prose Works, R.H.Super, believed
that Newman’s reply wasn’t worth reprinting:
 
His essay has achieved undeserved immortality only by being
printed in several modern editions of Arnold’s essays (e.g. Oxford
Standard Authors and Everyman’s Library); readers who wish to
see what provoked the best of Arnold’s Homeric lectures may find
it in one of those volumes.
(Arnold 1960:249)
 
Super saw Arnold’s lectures as valuable in themselves, transcending
the cultural moment that called them forth, independent of Newman’s
translation, of the entire international controversy, unquestionably
superior to the other positions in the debate. Arnold’s domesticating
translation theory, as well as the academic cultural values that
informed it, had by this point achieved canonical status in Anglo-
American literary culture.
Arnold’s ascendancy over Newman has taken other forms since the
1860s. Arnold’s lectures coined a satiric neologism for Newman’s
translation discourse—to “Newmanize”—and for the next twenty-five

Nation
141
years this word was part of the lexicon of critical terms in the literary
periodicals. In 1886, for example, The Athenaeum ran a favorable
review of Arthur Way’s translation of the Iliad, but the reviewer
nonetheless complained that “Mr. Way, in fact, is a little inclined to
‘Newmanize’” because he “sometimes falls” into a “mongrel
vocabulary,” deviating from current English usage: “Pure English of
the simple sort is amply sufficient for the translating of Homer”
(Athenaeum 1886:482–483).
A foreignizing translation method similar to Newman’s was
adopted by another socially engaged Victorian translator, William
Morris. In this case, it was Morris’s socialist investment in
medievalism that led him to cultivate an archaic lexicon drawn from
various literary forms, elite and popular (cf. Chandler 1970:209–230).
Morris’s experiments received much more appreciative reviews than
Newman’s, but they were also attacked, and for some of the same
reasons. In 1888, the Quarterly Review ran an adulatory assessment of
Arnold’s writing that extended his critique of Homeric translations to
Morris’s Odyssey (1887–8): “By this travesty of an archaic diction, Mr.
William Morris […] has overlaid Homer with all the grotesqueness,
the conceits, the irrationality of the Middle Ages, as Mr. Arnold justly
says that Chapman overlaid him” (Quarterly Review 1888:407–408).
In the same year, Longman’s Magazine, a monthly devoted to
bringing “literature of a high standard” to a mass audience, ran
an article in which Morris’s translations were cited as prime
examples of “Wardour-Street Early English—a perfectly modern
article with a sham appearance of the real antique about it”
(Ballantyne 1888:589; Sullivan 1984:209–213). This reference to the
shops in Wardour Street that sold antique furniture, both
authentic and imitation, questioned the authenticity of Morris’s
archaism while linking it to nonstandard English dialects and
marginal literary forms. The reviewer’s elitism was recognizably
Arnoldian:
 
Poems in which guests go bedward to beds that are arrayed right
meet, poems in which thrall-folk seek to the feast-hall a-winter, do
not belong to any literary centre. They are provincial; they are
utterly without distinction; they are unspeakably absurd.
(Ballantyne 1888:593)
 
The “literary centre” was fluent translation. In 1889, the Quarterly
Review likewise attacked Morris’s Aeneid (1875) because of “the sense of

142
The Translator’s Invisibility
incongruity inspired by such Wardour-Street English as eyen and clepe”
(Faulkner 1973:28, n. 81). Here the “centre” is also identified as
standard English, the language of contemporary political insitutions,
leading politicians. The Longman’s article on “Wardour-Street English”
observed that
 
if the Lord Chancellor or Mr. Speaker were to deliver one of these
solemn pronouncements in any cockney or county dialect, he would
leave upon his hearers the same sense of the grotesque and the
undignified which a reader carries away from an author who,
instead of using his own language in its richest and truest literary
form, takes up a linguistic fad, and, in pursuit of it, makes his work
provincial instead of literary.
(Ballantyne 1888:593–594)
 
Morris’s translations did no more than “pretend to be literature,”
because literary texts were written in a dialect of English that was
educated and official and thus excluded popular linguistic and literary
forms.
“Wardour-Street English” eventually came to be used as a term of
abuse for archaic diction in any kind of writing—applied to widely read
historical novels, particularly imitations of Scott, but also to nonfiction
prose, including an eccentric volume like The Gate of Remembrance (1918).
Produced by the director of the excavations at Glastonbury Abbey,
F.Bligh Bond, this was an attempt to enlist “psychical research” in the
“work of architectural exploration” (Spectator 1918:422). Bligh’s volume
presented the “automatic writing” of one “J.A.,” in which the historical
associations of the abbey were personified and given voice in various
languages: Latin (“William the Monk”), Anglo-Saxon (“Awfwold ye
Saxon”), and a mixture of Middle and Early Modern English (“Johannes,
Lapidator or Stone-Mason,” “defunctus anno 1533”). The reviewer for
the Spectator judged this linguistic experiment favorably, but got more
pleasure from the Latin, which, he felt, “is much to be preferred to the
Wardour Street English” assigned to the stonemason (ibid.:422).
Interestingly, the passage of automatic writing quoted by the reviewer
links English archaism once again to the unlearned, the subordinate: it
shows the stonemason resisting the use of Latin architectural terms
imposed on him by monkish treatises:
Ye names of builded things are very hard in Latin tongue—
transome, fanne tracery, and the like. My son, thou canst not

Nation
143
understande. Wee wold speak in the Englyshe tongue. Ye saide that
ye volte was multipartite yt was fannes olde style in ye este ende of
ye choire and ye newe volt in Edgares chappel…. Glosterfannes
(repeated). Fannes…(again) yclept fanne… Johannes lap…mason.
(ibid.:422)
 
To the reviewer, such language was “thoroughly bad,” and it marred
even a “very curious and attractive passage” about “the tomb of
Arthur” by suggesting popular literary forms: “there are obvious
reminiscences of Sir Walter Scott and Ivanhoe in this piece of most
unblushing but rather vivid Wardour Street” (ibid.).
The stigma attached to archaism involved an exclusion of the
popular that is also evident in prescriptive stylistic manuals, like
H.W.Fowler’s Dictionary of Modern English Usage (1926). Fowler
included an entry on archaism that treated it as
 
dangerous except in the hands of an experienced writer who can
trust his sense of congruity. Even when used to give colour to
conversation in historical romances, what Stevenson called tushery
is more likely to irritate the reader than to please him.
(Fowler 1965:34)
 
Fowler’s “experienced writer” was apparently not the author of
popular historical romances. And the reader he had in mind obviously
preferred transparent discourse.
In the academy, where Arnold the apologist for an academic elite
was ensconced as a canonical writer, the historicizing translations of
Newman and Morris have repeatedly been subjected to Arnoldian
thrashings. T.S.Osmond’s 1912 study of the Arnold/Newman
controversy agreed with Arnold’s “protests against the use of
ridiculous or too uncommon words” in translations because they
preempt the illusion of transparency: “One’s attention is held by the
words, instead of by the thing that is being told” (Osmond 1912:82).
In 1956, Basil Willey’s attempt to rehabilitate Newman’s reputation
focused mainly on his religious treatises, particularly The Soul (1849),
which Willey felt should be admitted to the Victorian canon,
assigned “a much higher rank in devotional literature” (Willey
1956:45). Yet although Willey gave a generally balanced account of
the translation controversy, he finally agreed with Arnold that
Newman lacked the “individual personality” to render Homer’s
“grand style”: “Newman, with all his great merits, was not a poet”

144
The Translator’s Invisibility
because “his spirit was not sufficiently “free, flexible and elastic’”
(ibid.; see also Annan 1944:191).
In 1962, J.M.Cohen, the translator of canonical writers like
Rabelais and Cervantes, published a history of English-language
translation in which he approvingly described the dominant
domesticating method and the “complete reversal of taste” that
made Victorian archaism “unreadable” (although, as we have
seen, it was definitely unreadable to many Victorians as well): “In
contrast to the Victorians and Edwardians […] craftsmen in the
last twenty years have aimed principally at interpretation in
current language” (Cohen 1962:65). Cohen himself followed this
dominant tendency toward transparent discourse, asserting that
“the theory of Victorian translation appears from our point of
view to have been founded on a fundamental error” and faulting
Morris in particular for the density of his archaism: “Even the
meaning has become obscure” (ibid.:24, 25). Cohen agreed with
Arnold in attributing what he considered the defects of Victorian
translation to its historicism. The experiments developed by
translators like Newman, Morris, Robert Browning, Dante Gabriel
Rossetti, and Edward Fitzgerald were misguided, Cohen felt,
because the translators had “adapted their authors’ styles to their
more or less erroneous pictures of the age in which these authors
lived and worked” (ibid.:29). Yet Cohen was himself making the
anachronistic assumption that the correct historical “pictures”
were in “current language,” respectful of the modern canon of
“plain prose uniformity” in translation (ibid.:33).
Finally, there is perhaps no clearer sign of Arnold’s continuing
power in Anglo-American literary culture than Robert Fagles’ 1990
version of the Iliad, winner of the Harold Morton Landon Award for
poetry translation from the Academy of American Poets. Fagles’
preface begins by acknowledging the oral quality of Homeric verse,
but then reverts to Arnold’s reading of Homer:
 
Homer’s work is a performance, even in part a musical event.
Perhaps that is the source of his speed, directness and simplicity that
Matthew Arnold heard—and his nobility too, elusive yet
undeniable, that Arnold chased but never really caught.
(Fagles 1990:ix)
A classics translator who edited Pope’s Homer and is currently
professor of Comparative Literature at Princeton, Fagles demonstrates

Nation
145
not just that Arnold’s reading still prevails today, but that it continues
to be affiliated with the academy and with the dominant tradition of
English-language translation, fluent domestication. Fagles aimed for a
version that was “literate” in an academic (i.e., Arnoldian) sense,
negotiating between the “literal” and the “literary” in a way that
implemented Dryden’s notion of “paraphrase,” producing in the end
a modernized Homer:
 
Not a line-for-line translation, my version of the Iliad is, I hope,
neither so literal in rendering Homer’s language as to cramp and
distort my own—though I want to convey as much of what he says
as possible—nor so literary as to brake his energy, his forward
drive—though I want my work to be literate, with any luck. For the
more literal approach seems too little English, and the more literary
seems too little Greek. I have tried to find a cross between the two,
a modern English Homer.
(ibid.:x)
 
Fagles also follows—even if in a flexible way—Arnold’s
recommendation of hexameters for Homeric translation: “Working
from a loose five- or six-beat line but inclining more to six, I expand at
times to seven beats […] or contract at times to three” (ibid.:xi)
III
The Victorian controversy offers several lessons that can be brought
to bear on contemporary English-language translation. Perhaps most
importantly, the controversy shows that domesticating translation can
be resisted without necessarily privileging a cultural elite. Newman
advocated Schleiermacher’s foreignizing method, but he detached it
from the cultural and political interests of a German literary coterie,
at once elitist and nationalist. Newman instead assumed a more
democratic concept of an English national culture, acknowledging its
diversity and refusing to allow a cultural minority like the academy
to dominate the nation. Newman was a scholar who truly believed
that an English translator could address diverse cultural
constituencies, satisfying scholarly canons of translation equivalence
while appealing to popular taste: “While I profess to write for the
unlearned English reader, yet I must necessarily be judged by classical
scholars on the question of fidelity and correctness” (Newman
1853:vi).

146
The Translator’s Invisibility
Yet the “foreign” in Newman’s foreignizing translations was
defined precisely by his resistance to academic literary values, by his
aim to encompass rather than exclude popular forms affiliated with
various social groups. Foreignizing translation is based on the
assumption that literacy is not universal, that communication is
complicated by cultural differences between and within linguistic
communities. But foreignizing is also an attempt to recognize and
allow those differences to shape cultural discourses in the target
language. Arnold’s advocacy of domesticating translation also did not
assume a homogeneous national culture—indeed, for him the diversity
of English literature meant chaos. Arnold’s response to cultural
differences was to repress them, hewing to the dominant tradition in
English-language translation and empowering an academic elite to
maintain it. Newman demonstrated, however, that foreignizing
translation can be a form of resistance in a democratic cultural politics.
The Victorian controversy also offers a practical lesson for
contemporary English-language translators. It shows that close
translation, what Arnold called Newman’s “literalness,” does not
necessarily lead to unidiomatic, unintelligible English. Schleiermacher
suggested that “the more closely the translation follows the turns taken
by the original, the more foreign it will seem to the reader” (Lefevere
1977:78), and Newman likewise argued that “in many passages it is of
much value to render the original line by line” (Newman 1856:viii–ix),
incurring Arnold’s satire for verbatim renderings of Homeric
epithets—“ashen-speared,” “brazen-cloaked” (Arnold 1960:165). But
Newman’s close adherence to the lineation and word-order of the
Greek text was matched by an equally close attention to a distinctly
English lexicon, syntax, and range of literary forms. Close translation
certainly risks obscure diction, awkward constructions, and hybrid
forms, but these vary in degree from one foreign text to another and
from one domestic situation to another. Detections of “translationese”
assume an investment in specific linguistic and cultural values to the
exclusion of others. Hence, close translation is foreignizing only
because its approximation of the foreign text entails deviating from
dominant domestic values—like transparent discourse.
What is “literal” about this method is that it focuses on the letter of
the translation as well as the foreign text, emphasizing the signifier, the
signifying play that routinely gets fixed in English-language
translation, reduced to a relatively coherent signified. Newman’s
foreignizing translation released this play, adding a surplus of
domestic meanings to the foreign text by encompassing various

Nation
147
English-language cultural discourses, past and present, elite and
popular, poetic and novelistic, English and Scottish. In foreignizing
translation, the ethnocentric violence that every act of translating
wreaks on a foreign text is matched by a violent disruption of domestic
values that challenges cultural forms of domination, whether
nationalist or elitist. Foreignizing undermines the very concept of
nation by invoking the diverse constituencies that any such concept
tends to elide.

Chapter 4
Dissidence
The fundamental error of the translator is that he stabilizes the
state in which his own language happens to find itself instead of
allowing his language to be powerfully jolted by the foreign
language.
Rudolf Pannwitz (trans. Richard Sieburth)
 
The search for alternatives to the domesticating tradition in English-
language translation leads to various foreignizing practices, both in
the choice of foreign texts and in the invention of translation
discourses. A translator can signal the foreignness of the foreign text,
not only by using a discursive strategy that deviates from the
prevailing hierarchy of domestic discourses (e.g. dense archaism as
opposed to fluent transparency), but also by choosing to translate a
text that challenges the contemporary canon of foreign literature in
the target language. Foreignizing translation is a dissident cultural
practice, maintaining a refusal of the dominant by developing
affiliations with marginal linguistic and literary values at home,
including foreign cultures that have been excluded because of their
own resistance to dominant values.1 On the one hand, foreignizing
translation enacts an ethnocentric appropriation of the foreign text by
enlisting it in a domestic cultural political agenda, like dissidence; on
the other hand, it is precisely this dissident stance that enables
foreignizing translation to signal the linguistic and cultural difference
of the foreign text and perform a work of cultural restoration,
admitting the ethnodeviant and potentially revising domestic literary
canons.
The translation projects of the Italian writer Iginio Ugo Tarchetti
(1839–1869) offer a provocative way to explore these issues.
Tarchetti belonged to the Milanese movement known as the

Dissidence
149
scapigliatura, a loosely associated group of artists, composers, and
writers who contested bourgeois values in their bohemianism
(scapigliato means “dishevelled”) and in their formal innovations.
The literary members of this dissident group were at variance with
the highly conservative realism that dominated Italian fiction since
Alessandro Manzoni’s I promessi sposi (The Betrothed) (1827, rev.
1840). And some of them abandoned Manzoni’s sentimental
Christian providentialism for a democratically oriented
representation of class divisions, realistic but also romantic,
historically detailed yet melodramatic, often with a topical
engagement in events surrounding the Italian Unification, like the
Austrian presence or the Italian conscript army (Carsaniga 1974).
Tarchetti’s first novel, Paolina (1865), followed a seamstress who is
persecuted by an aristocrat and ultimately raped and murdered. His
second novel, Una nobile follia (A Noble Madness) (1866–1867), a protest
against the new standing army, focused on a military officer moved
to desertion by distracted, pacifistic musings. The book caused an
uproar in the press, and copies were openly burned at many barracks.
Tarchetti’s later narratives took more experimental forms. Fosca
(1869), a semi-autobiographical novel about a pathological love affair,
mixed several fictional discourses—romantic, fantastic, realistic,
naturalistic—to counter the notion of character as a unified
subjectivity (Caesar 1987). In a number of short narratives, some of
which were posthumously published in 1869 as Racconti fantastici
(Fantastic Tales), Tarchetti deployed the conventions and motifs of
nineteenth-century fantasy to issue a fundamental challenge to realist
representation and its ideological grounding in bourgeois
individualism.
The appropriation of foreign texts was a crucial component of
Tarchetti’s dissident cultural politics. He was the first practitioner
of the Gothic tale in Italy, and most of his fantastic narratives are
based on specific texts by writers like E.T.A.Hoffmann, Edgar Allan
Poe, Gérard Nerval, Théophile Gautier, and the collaboration of
Éimile Erckmann and Louis-Alexandre Chatrian (Mariani 1967;
Rossi 1959). Tarchetti adapted fantastic motifs, reproduced scenes,
translated, even plagiarized—yet each discursive practice served
the political function of interrogating ideologies and addressing
hierarchical social relations in Italy. His fantastic narratives
mobilized foreign texts to question the hegemony of realist
discourse in Italian fiction, and yet this mobilization, insofar as it
entailed transforming foreign texts to function in a different

150
The Translator’s Invisibility
cultural formation, simultaneously critiqued them from a different
ideological standpoint. Tarchetti’s Gothic tales were foreignizing in
their appropriation of foreign texts that deviated from Italian
cultural values, initiating a reformation of the Italian literary canon
that admitted fictional discourses other than realism, whether
domestic or foreign. For the English-language translator who
would implement a foreignizing method under the regime of
fluency Tarchetti’s practices show how translation can revise
domestic cultural values by casting strategically chosen foreign
texts in the dominant language, the standard dialect.
I
Tarchetti’s first foreignizing move was his decision to appropriate
the fantastic, a foreign discourse opposed to the bourgeois realism
that prevailed in Italian fiction. The fantastic proves to be
subversive of bourgeois ideology because it negates the formal
conventions of realism and the individualistic concept of
subjectivity on which they rest. The realist representation of
chronological time, three-dimensional space, and personal identity
is based on an empiricist epistemology that privileges a single,
perceiving subject: the key assumption is that human
consciousness is the origin of meaning, knowledge, and action,
transcending discursive and ideological determinations (Watt
1957). The unity of time and space in realism points to a unified
consciousness, usually a narrator or character taken to be authorial,
and this subject-position establishes intelligibility in the narrative,
making a specific meaning seem real or true, repressing the fact
that it is an illusory effect of discourse, and thus suturing the
reading consciousness into an ideological position, an interested
ensemble of values, beliefs, and social representations. The truth-
effect of realism, the illusion of transparency whereby language
disappears and the world or the author seems present, shows that
the form itself reproduces the transcendental concept of
subjectivity in bourgeois individualism: as Catherine Belsey
indicates,
 
Through the presentation of an intelligible history which effaces its
own status as discourse, classic realism proposes a model in which
author and reader are subjects who are the source of shared
meanings, the origin of which is mysteriously extra-discursive. […]

Dissidence
151
This model of intersubjective understanding, of shared
understanding of a text which re-presents the world, is the
guarantee not only of the truth of the text but of the reader’s
existence as an autonomous and knowing subject in a world of
knowing subjects. In this way, classic realism constitutes an
ideological practice in addressing itself to readers as subjects,
interpellating them in order that they freely accept their subjectivity
and their subjection.
(Belsey 1980:72, 69)
 
The fantastic undermines the transcendental subject in realist
discourse by creating an uncertainty about the metaphysical status
of the narrative. Often this uncertainty is provoked by using the
formal conventions of realism to represent a fantastic disorder of
time, space, and character and thereby to suspend the reader
between two discursive registers, the mimetic and the marvelous.
Confronted with the fantastic, the reader experiences what Tzvetan
Todorov calls a “hesitation” between natural and supernatural
explanations: “The fantastic […] lasts only as long as a certain
hesitation: a hesitation common to reader and character, who must
decide whether or not what they perceive derives from ‘reality’ as
it exists in the common opinion” (Todorov 1975:41; cf. Jackson
1981:26–37). The unified consciousness of realism is thus split
between opposing alternatives, intelligibility gives way to doubt,
and the reader is released from the ideological positioning in the
text, invited to perceive that “the common opinion” of reality
encodes moral values and serves political interests, that
subjectivity is not transcendental but determinate, a site of
confused meanings, ideological contradictions, social conflicts. The
fantastic explodes the formal conventions of realism in order to
reveal their individualistic assumptions; but by introducing an
epistemological confusion, a fantastic narrative can also
interrogate the ideological positions it puts to work, expose their
concealment of various relations of domination, and encourage
thinking about social change. In the fantastic, Hélène Cixous
observes, “the subject flounders in the exploded multiplicity of its
states, shattering the homogeneity of the ego of unawareness,
spreading out in every possible direction, into every possible
contradiction, transegoistically”; and it is this discursive strategy
that distinguishes nineteenth-century writers like Hoffmann as
opponents of “logocentrism, idealism, theologism, all the props of

152
The Translator’s Invisibility
society, the scaffolding of political and subjective economy, the
pillars of society” (Cixous 1974:389).
Tarchetti’s thinking on the relations between fictional discourse and
ideology can be glimpsed in an essay from the very start of his career,
“Idee minime sul romanzo” (“Minimum Ideas on the Novel”),
published in the periodical Rivista minima on 31 October 1865. This
early statement shows him slipping uneasily between various
positions, advocating different kinds of fictional discourse, assuming
different concepts of subjectivity, imagining different forms of social
organization. He initially asserts a realist view of the novel, likening it
to history:
 
Dalle prime confidenze, dalle prime rivelazioni che gli uomini
fecero agli uomini, dal primo affetto, dal primo dolore, dalla prima
speranza, nacque il romanzo che è la storia del cuore umano e della
famiglia, come la storia propriamente detta è il romanzo della
società e della vita pubblica.
From the first confidences, from the first revelations men make to
men, from the first emotion, the first pain, the first hope, is born the
novel, which is the history of the human heart and the family, just
as history is properly called the novel of society and public life.
(Tarchetti 1967, II:523)
 
But then Tarchetti proceeds to argue for the priority of fictional over
historical representation by putting the truth-effect of realism into
question, characterizing the novel as an imaginary resolution to social
contradictions, a genre that fictively compensates for the “terribile
odissea di delitti” (“terrible odyssey of crimes”) in history and makes
possible a renewal of social life:
 
ebbi tra le mani un romanzo, e per poco io fui tentato di
riconciliarmi [agli uomini]; non dirò quanto mi apparissero diversi
da quelli conosciuti nelle storie, non accennerò a quel mondo
meraviglioso che mi si aperse allo sguardo: nel romanzo conobbi
l’uomo libero, nella storia aveva conosciuto l’uomo sottoposto
all’uomo.
I held a novel in my hands, and in a little while I was tempted
to reconcile myself [to men]; I shall not say how different they
appeared to me from those I encountered in histories, I shall
not note the marvelous world that opened to me at a glance: in

Dissidence
153
the novel I knew man free, in history I knew man subjected
to man.
(ibid.)
 
Discourse produces concrete social effects; the novel can alter
subjectivity and motor social change, even for a literary bohemian like
Tarchetti, whose scapigliato refusal to conform to the canons of
bourgeois respectability situated him in the margins of Italian society.
For the novel to have this social function, however, it would seem that
realism must be rejected: a realist discourse like history can represent
social life only as an “odyssey,” a wandering, an atomization in which
agents victimize one another; the novel can contribute to a social
homecoming, the reconstruction of a collective, only by representing
a “marvelous world” wherein hierarchical social relations are
resolved.
Tarchetti’s distinction between the freedom of the novel and the
subjection of history at first appears a romantic retreat from society
to culture, a transcendental aesthetic realm where the subject can
regain its self-possession, its autonomy, although at the expense of
a withdrawal from political engagement.2 Tarchetti does in fact
revert to romantic expressive theory at various points in the essay,
validating an individualistic program of authorial self-expression,
transparent discourse, illusionistic response: he favors writers
whose
 
vita intima […] rimane in un’armonia così perfetta colle loro opere,
che il lettore non è tentato di dire a se stesso: la mia commozione è
intempestiva, quell’uomo scriveva per ragionamento; buttiamo il
libro che non nacque che dall’ingegno.
inner life […] remains in such perfect harmony with their works,
that the reader is not tempted to say to himself: my emotion is
inappropriate, that man wrote to argue a position; we toss away any
book that issues only from ingenuity.
(Tarchetti 1967, II:531)
 
At other points, however, Tarchetti views the novel not as a window
onto the author, “le onde trasparenti di quei laghi che nella loro calma
lasciano scorgere il letto che le contiene”/“the transparent waves of
those lakes which in their calmness allow a glimpse of the bed
containing them” (ibid.), but rather as a historically specific “forma di

154
The Translator’s Invisibility
letteratura”/“form of literature” (ibid.:522), a genre of literary
discourse with a social significance that exceeds authorial psychology:
L’Italia composta di tanti piccoli stati, diversi tutti per leggi, per usi,
per dialetto, per abitudini sociali, e direi quasi per suolo, doveva
creare dei grandi e svariatissimi romanzi.
Italy, composed of many small states, with entirely different laws,
customs, dialects, social practices, and I dare say, soils, should create
great and extremely varied novels.
(ibid.:526)
 
And when Tarchetti describes the value of a long tradition in the novel,
he assumes that fictional discourse can never be free of social
determinations:
 
Se il romanzo fosse così antico quanto la storia, e avesse avuto
in tutti i tempi e in tutte le nazioni quella popolarità di cui ora
fruisce in Europa, quante tenebre sarebbero diradate, quanta
luce sarebbe fatta sopra molti punti ignorati, sopra le arti, le
costumanze, le leggi e le abitudini e la vita domestica di molti
popoli, cui la storia non si riferisce che per i rapporti politici con
altri popoli. Quale felicità, quale esuberanza di vita morale nel
rivivere in un passato così remoto, quanti insegnamenti per l’età
presente, quale sviluppo nelle nostre facoltà immaginative, e
direi quasi quante illusioni nella potenza della nostra fede e
delle nostre memorie, e quale rassegnazione maggiore nel nostro
destino! S’egli è vero che l’umanità progredisca lentamente, ma
in modo sicura, e che nulla possa arrestare e far retrocedere il
genio nel suo cammino, i nostri posteri, fra migliaia di anni,
vivranno moralmente della nostra vita attuale: le lettere avranno
raggiunto per essi quello scopo sublime e generale, che è di
moltiplicare ed accrescere ed invigorire nello spirito quelle mille
ed infinite sensazioni per le quali si manifesta il sentimento
gigantesco della vita.
If the novel were as ancient as history, and at all times and in all
nations had the popularity which it now enjoys in Europe, how
many shadows would have been cleared away, how much light
would have been cast on many neglected points, on the arts, the
customs, the laws and habits and domestic life of many countries
whose history refers only to political relations with other
countries. What happiness there would be, what exuberance of

Dissidence
155
moral life in reliving such a remote past, what lessons for the
present age, what development of our imaginative faculties, and
I dare say how many illusions in the power of our faith and our
memories, and what greater resignation to our fate! If it is true
that humanity progresses slowly, but steadily, and that nothing
can stop or drive genius backward in its path, our posterity, in
thousands of years, will live our current moral life: for them
letters will have reached that sublime and general goal, which is
to multiply and increase and invigorate in the spirit the thousands
and infinite sensations by which the gigantic sentiment of life is
manifested.
(ibid.:523–4)
 
The beginning of this remarkably discontinuous passage has
Tarchetti optimistically treating fictional discourse as a liberating
source of knowledge and utopian imagining, assuming a liberal
humanism in which the novel restores to subjectivity its freedom
and unity (“development of our imaginative faculties”). Yet
Tarchetti’s sudden reference to “illusions” sceptically revises this
view: the novel now becomes a source of collective mystifications
(“illusions in the power of our faith and our memories”) and
imaginary compensations for frustrated desire (“greater
resignation to our fate”), whereby the passage shifts to the
assumption that subjectivity is always situated in transindividual
conditions of which it can never be fully conscious or free. In the
end, the “progresses” of “humanity” seem measured not by a
liberal model of social life which guarantees personal identity and
autonomy, but a democratic collective characterized by subjective
difference and cultural heterogeneity (“the gigantic sentiment of
life”). Hence, the “letters” which represent and sustain this
democracy aim “to multiply and increase and invigorate in the
spirit […] thousands and infinite sensations.” The kind of fictional
discourse suggested by this aim seems less a panoramic
representation of social groups which adheres to the unities of
realism, than a social delirium which proliferates psychological
states and confounds temporal and spatial coordinates,
representing that “marvelous world” where the reader is freed
from social isolation.
In evaluating the current situation of the Italian novel,
Tarchetti’s constant theme is the moral and political failure of
realism. He laments Italy’s lack of a strong tradition in the novel

156
The Translator’s Invisibility
in contrast to other countries. Amid much praise for English,
American, German and French writers, Manzoni is degraded as
second-rate:
 
Non vi ha luogo a dubitare che I promessi sposi sieno finora il
migliore romanzo italiano, ma non occorre dimostrare come esso
non sia che un mediocre romanzo in confronto dei capolavori delle
altre nazioni.
There is no room to doubt that I promessi sposi has so far been the best
Italian novel, but it is unnecessary to demonstrate that it is a
mediocre novel compared to the masterpieces of other nations.
(Tarchetti 1967, II:528)
 
Tarchetti repeats a list of defects in Manzoni’s novel and attributes
them to its realist discourse:
 
in quanto all’accusa mossagli da taluno, che in quel libro via sia
poco cuore, che quell’eterno episodio (quantunque bellissimo)
della monaca, nuoccia più che altro al romanzo, e desti nel lettore
tanto interesse senza appagarlo, che quel Don Abbondio si faccia
piu disprezzare per la sua viltà che amare per l’amenità del suo
carattere, che quel Renzo e quella Lucia sieno due amanti
terribilmente apati e freddi, giova in parte osservare che il Manzoni
volle dipingere gli uomini quali sono, non quali dovrebbero essere,
e in ciò fu scrittore profondo e accurato.
As for the charge moved by someone, that the book contains little
heart, that the eternal episode of the nun (although very beautiful)
damages the novel more than anything else, and arouses in the
reader such interest as is not satisfied, that Don Abbondio becomes
more disparaged for his cowardice than loved for the agreeableness
of his character, that Renzo and Lucia are two terribly apathetic and
cold lovers, it is worth in part observing that Manzoni wanted to
paint men as they are, not as they should be, and in that he was a
profound and accurate writer.
(ibid.:528–9)
 
Tarchetti’s laconic defense comes off weakly against his detailed
statement of the charge, and realism appears very unattractive indeed:
it is incapable of representing extreme emotional states and contains
ideological contradictions in its representation of the priest Don

Dissidence
157
Abbondio which are symptomatic of its Christian conservatism and
bourgeois sentimentality.
Tarchetti recognizes that the canonization of I promessi sposi and the
numerous translations of contemporary French novels made realism
the dominant fictional discourse in Italy, but he concludes that Italian
culture is suffering from a “decadenza” (“decadence”) partly
maintained by the translation patterns of Italian publishers (Tarchetti
1967, II:535). He argues that the French novels
 
che vengono tradotti e pubblicati dai nostri editori, sono
generalmente tali libri che godono di nessuna o pochissima
reputazione in Francia [e] tranne alcune poche eccezioni, la loro
speculazione si è tuttor rivolta alla diffusione di romanzi osceni.
which are translated and issued by our publishers, are generally
such books as enjoy no or little reputation in France [and] with very
few exceptions, their investment is always aimed at the circulation
of obscene novels.
(ibid.:532)
 
Tarchetti singles out French novelists like the prolific Charles-Paul de
Kock (1794–1871), whose sentimental, titillating realism enjoyed
enormous popularity in Italy. Italian translations of over sixty novels
by de Kock were published between 1840 and 1865, bearing titles like
La moglie, il marito e l’amante (The Wife, The Husband and The Lover, 1853)
and Il cornuto (The Cuckold, 1854); some of these novels appeared in
different translations a few years apart from various publishers,
showing that the Italian publishing industry was scrambling to exploit
de Kock’s marketability (Costa and Vigini 1991). Tarchetti was most
concerned about the social and political implications of these cultural
developments, which he finally brands retrograde:
 
Non si voglia dimenticare che l’Italia, unica al mondo, possiede una
guida per le case di tolleranza, che i nostri romanzi licenziosi sono
riprodotti e popolari anche in Francia, che gli uomini che li scrissero
godono di tutti i diritti civili e dell’ammirazione pubblica, e che
apparatengono in gran parte alla stampa periodica [mentre] ogni
scritto politico awerso ai principi del governo, ma conforme a quelli
dell’umanità e del progresso, è tosto impedito nella sua diffusione.
It must not be forgotten that Italy, unique in the world, possesses
a guide to brothels, that our licentious novels are reproduced and

158
The Translator’s Invisibility
popular in France as well, that the men who write them enjoy
every civil right and public admiration, and belong for the most
part to the periodical press [whereas] the circulation of every
political text opposed to the principles of the government, but
consistent with those of humanity and progress, is immediately
obstructed.
(Tarchetti 1967, II:534–5)
 
Tarchetti’s experiments with the fantastic can be seen as an
intervention into this cultural situation: they were developed to resolve
the crisis he diagnosed in Italian fictional discourse, the inadequacy of
realism to serve a democratic cultural politics. The fantastic answered
Tarchetti’s call for a fiction to represent that “marvelous world” of
“sensations” which he saw as a remedy for hierarchical social relations
and his own social isolation; the freeing of subjectivity in fantastic
discourse was a freedom from subjection. Because, in Tarchetti’s view,
realism dominated Italian fiction to no politically progressive end, his
intervention took the form of writing in a foreign genre opposed to
realism, the Gothic tale. Tarchetti’s effort to write against the
Manzonian grain in fact projected a revision of the history of fiction, in
which the novel didn’t originate in Europe, but in “I’ oriente da cui si
diffuse dapprima la civiltà per tutto il mondo”/“the Orient, from
which civilization spread through all the world” (Tarchetti 1967,
II:524). The prototype of the novel became, not epic or any form of
realist discourse, but fantasy, and not the Bible or the Iliad, but The
Arabian Nights:
 
I Persiani e gli Arabi attinsero dalla varietà della loro vita nomade,
e dalla loro vergine natura, e dal loro cielo infuocato le prime
narrazioni romanzesche, onde le leggi e le abitudini di comunanza
sociale e domestica degli Arabi ci sono note e famigliari da gran
tempo, e Strabone si doleva che l’amore del meraviglioso rendesse
incerte le stone di queste nazioni.
The Persians and the Arabs drew from the variety of their nomad
life, and from their virgin nature, and from their burning sky the
first novelistic narratives, hence the laws and customs of the Arabs’
social and domestic community have been well-known and familiar
to us for a long time, and Strabo lamented that love for the
marvelous rendered uncertain the histories of these nations.
(ibid.)

Dissidence
159
Tarchetti’s Orientalist literary history clarifies the political agenda
in his use of the fantastic, but simultaneously discloses an
ideological contradiction which runs counter to that agenda. The
passage shows him actively rewriting his cultural materials so as to
transform the Orient into a vehicle for his democratic social vision.
Whereas the Arabian tales actually offer glimpses of despotic
monarchies, and the geographer Strabo describes the nomadic Arabs
as “a tribe of brigands and shepherds” who are less “civilised” than
the Syrians because their “government” is not as well “organised”
(Strabo 1930:VII, 233, 255), Tarchetti drew on Rousseau’s notion of
natural human innocence and perceived only a utopian
“comunanza,” a community or fellowship, close to “virgin nature”
and not corrupted by the hierarchical social organization of Europe.
Tarchetti also represented the Orient as exotic and phantasmagorical
(“their burning sky,” “love for the marvelous”), setting his concept
of fiction apart from the realist discourse that dominated Italy by
identifying with its other, the fantastic. Both these representations of
the Orient, however, are clearly Eurocentric: they aim to make Persia
and Arabia perform a European function, the regeneration of Italian
fiction and society, and they never escape the racist opposition
between Western rationality and Eastern irrationality. Tarchetti’s
literary history assumed the range of meanings which, as Edward
Said has observed, were typical of romantic representations of the
Orient: “sensuality, promise, terror, sublimity, idyllic pleasure,
intense energy” (Said 1978:118).
This racial ideology, obviously in conflict with Tarchetti’s
democratic politics, becomes more explicitly damaging to his
project in his closing reference to Strabo, which abruptly reverses
the logic of his argument. Tarchetti initially treated Arabian
narratives as a mirror of the Arabian social order, a reliable
representation of its “laws and customs,” but he concluded in
apparent agreement with Strabo’s complaint that these texts reflect
little more than an overheated imagination. Tarchetti’s typically
romantic Orientalism seems to result in an uncritical acceptance of
Strabo’s equation of the East with “love for the marvelous.” Yet
Strabo’s point that the “histories” of Eastern countries lack a firm
basis in reality renders “uncertain,” not only Arabian narratives,
but the democratic images that Tarchetti found in them,
questioning his earlier treatment of the novel as figuring a
“marvelous world” without social hierarchies. Tarchetti’s citation
of Strabo suggests that the utopian world of the novel may be no

160
The Translator’s Invisibility
more than a misrepresentation of its social situation, especially in
the case of the Eastern prototypes of the genre. It is worth noting
that Tarchetti in effect reiterated this view at the end of his brief
tale, “La fortuna di capitano Gubart” (“Captain Gubart’s
Fortune”), published the same year as his essay on the novel. After
demonstrating the arbitrariness of class distinctions by relating
how a poor street musician is mistakenly awarded a royal military
commission, the narrator concluded: “Questo fatto comunque
abbia una decisa analogia con quelli famosi delle novelle arabe, è
incontrastabilmente vero e conosciuto”/“This incident, despite its
decided resemblance to those famous ones of the Arabian tales, is
indisputably true and well-known” (Tarchetti 1967, I:79). This
reference to The Arabian Nights seems designed to satirize Italian
social relations as fantastic and therefore irrational, but it can make
this satiric point only by assuming the irrationality of Eastern
culture and by distinguishing Tarchetti’s narrative as “true.”
Tarchetti sought to enlist foreign fantastic texts in the democratic
cultural politics he conducted in Italy, but his Orientalism was
implicated in the key binary opposition by which Europe
subordinated, and justified its colonization of, the same foreign
countries whose texts he considered politically useful.
Given the diverse linguistic, cultural, and ideological materials
that constituted Tarchetti’s project, it can be seen as what Gilles
Deleuze and Félix Guattari call a minor utilization of a major
language:
 
Even when it is unique a language remains a mixture, a
schizophrenic mélange, a Harlequin costume in which very
different functions of language and distinct centers of power are
played out, blurring what can be said and what can’t be said; one
function will be played off against the other, all the degrees of
territoriality and relative deterritorialization will be played out.
Even when major, a language is open to an intensive utilization that
makes it take flight along creative lines of escape which, no matter
how slowly, no matter how cautiously, can now form an absolute
deterritorialization.
(Deleuze and Guattari 1986:26)
 
The major language that Tarchetti confronted was the Tuscan
dialect of Italian, the linguistic standard for Italian literature since
the Renaissance. In 1840, after more than a decade of research into

Dissidence
161
the question of a national language, Manzoni published an
extensive revision of the first version of I promessi sposi which
recast it in the Tuscan dialect, undertaking the nationalistic
project of unifying Italy through its language and literature, at
once situating his text in the Italian literary canon and
establishing a linguistic model for fiction which could be
understood by most Italian readers (Reynolds 1950). Because
Tarchetti’s fantastic narratives were written in the Tuscan dialect,
they took the major language on a line of escape that
deterritorialized the dominant fictional discourse. He used the
Italian literary standard to produce Gothic tales, a genre that was
not merely marginal in relation to realism, but that existed in
Italian culture primarily as sporadic translations of a few foreign
writers, namely Hoffmann, Poe, and Adelbert von Chamisso.3
Traced with German, English, French, even Arabic texts,
Tarchetti’s tales foregrounded what realism repressed, the
discursive and ideological determinations of subjectivity. In his
foreign-derived, fantastic narratives, the standard dialect was
turned into a political arena where the bourgeois individualism
of realist discourse was contested in order to interrogate various
class, gender, and racial ideologies. Nevertheless, Tarchetti’s
Orientalism shows that he did not have his cultural politics
entirely under control: his interrogations were democratically
directed, but they sometimes repressed the ideological
contradictions precipitated by their own materials and methods
of appropriating them.
II
Methods of cultural appropriation like translation would clearly be
useful to Tarchetti’s project of putting the major language to minor
uses. And the deterritorializing effect of this project would clearly
make his translations foreignizing in their impact on dominant
cultural values in Italian. His most intensive utilization of the
standard dialect did in fact occur in his translation of a foreign
fantastic narrative, an English Gothic tale written by Mary
Wollstonecraft Shelley. The political significance of Tarchetti’s
translation, however, is complicated by the fact that it is a plagiarism
of the English text.
In 1865, Tarchetti published a tale entitled “Il mortale immortale
(dall’inglese)” (“The Immortal Mortal (From the English)”) in the

162
The Translator’s Invisibility
Rivista minima in two installments, on 21 June and 31 August. The
first installment was unsigned; the second bore his name. These
appearances indicate Tarchetti’s authorship, and so Italian readers
have always assumed, none venturing beyond the supposition that
he adapted the fantastic motif of his tale, the elixir of immortality,
from two French texts. What Tarchetti actually published, however,
is his Italian translation of Shelley’s tale “The Mortal Immortal,”
which was first published in the English literary annual The
Keepsake in 1833. In 1868, Tarchetti had another opportunity to
acknowledge his translation, but he did not: while serving as the
editor of the periodical Emporio pittoresco, he reprinted it under his
name with a different title, “L’elixir dell’immortalità (imitazione
dall’inglese)” (“The Elixir of Immortality (An Imitation from the
English)”).
Tarchetti’s use of parenthetical subtitles (“From the English,” “An
Imitation from the English”) appears to glance at the actual nature
of his text, but this is misleading: they offer only the vaguest
indication of the relationship between his Italian version and
Shelley’s tale. Tarchetti did introduce some significant changes: he
altered a date, used different names for two main characters, omitted
a few phrases and sentences, and added some of his own, all of
which amount to a strong transformation of the English text.
Nevertheless, in sentence after sentence, paragraph after paragraph,
his Italian version is governed by the aim of reproduction: it adheres
so closely to the syntactical and lexical features of Shelley’s English
as to be less an “imitation” than an interlingual translation. By
failing to acknowledge his text as a translation, Tarchetti asserted his
authorship of Shelley’s material and therefore committed
plagiarism. And it seems certain that he was fully aware of this fact.
In 1865, he began a brief but intense period of activity in the
burgeoning Milanese publishing industry, first printing his short
fiction and serializing his novels in the periodical press, and then
issuing them in book form with several large publishers. He was also
employed to write book-length translations. In 1869, he published
his Italian versions of two English novels, one of which was
Dickens’s Our Mutual Friend (1865). In both cases, he was credited
as the translator.
Tarchetti’s financial difficulties no doubt figured into his motives to
plagiarize Shelley’s tale. The frenzied pace of his writing during the
last four years of his life demonstrates that he was producing for
immediate publication and payment. A memoir by his friend and

Dissidence
163
collaborator Salvatore Farina shows Tarchetti drifting from one
address to another, writing for several periodicals and publishers at
once, but constantly poor, shabbily dressed, ill—he died of typhus and
tuberculosis. In a letter dated 31 January 1867, Tarchetti complained to
Farina about
 
le mie solite complicazioni economiche […] che ho nulla al mondo,
che devo pensare da oggi a domani come pranzare, come vestirmi,
come ricoverarmi.
my usual economic complications […] that I have nothing in the
world, that from one day to the next I must find some way to dine,
to dress, to house myself.
(Farina 1913:37, 38)
 
The letter referred to Tarchetti’s antimilitaristic novel Una nobile follia,
which was currently being serialized in the periodical Il sole
(November 1866 to March 1867): “aspetto sempre la completazione di
quei drammi dai quali posso avere un po’ di danaro”/“every day I
expect to finish these dramas [from the military life] which should
yield me a little money” (ibid.:39).
Farina’s memoir suggests a financial motive for Tarchetti’s
plagiarism by relating an incident in which his knowledge of English
becomes the pretext of a fraudulent scheme. Living for some weeks in
a hotel in Parma, but unable to pay the bill, Tarchetti “s’improwisò
professore di lingua inglese”/“posed as a professor of English” and
 
annunziò per la via delle gazzette e alle cantonate di tutte le vie di
Parma che, trovandosi di passaggio in quella città, avrebbe dato un
corso completo di quaranta lezioni per insegnare la lingua inglese
con un suo metodo spicciativo.
announced in the newspapers and on every street corner of Parma
that since he was travelling through the city, he would give a
complete, forty-lesson course in the English language with his rapid
method.
(Farina 1913:34, 35)
 
Farina’s rather melodramatic memoir seems to be unduly minimizing
Tarchetti’s proficiency in English by limiting it to “pochissimo, appena
il tanto da intendere alla meglio Shakespeare e Byron e tradurre ad

164
The Translator’s Invisibility
orecchio Dyckens”/“very little, just enough to attain a rudimentary
understanding of Shakespeare and Byron and to translate Dickens by
ear” (ibid.:34). Tarchetti’s translation of Shelley’s tale confirms, on the
contrary, that he had an excellent reading knowledge of English. All
the same, this does not necessarily disprove Farina’s assertion that
“non parlava inglese affatto e sarebbe stato imbarazzato a sostenere
una conversazione”/“he did not speak English at all and would have
been embarrassed to sustain a conversation” (ibid.). Farina notes that
the registration for the course netted “una retata magnifica”/“a
magnificent haul” (ibid.:35), but Tarchetti gave much fewer than forty
lessons:
 
quando il professore non seppe più che cosa insegnare ai suoi
scolari, lessero insieme Shakespeare e Byron e fumarono le sigarette
che Iginio preparava sul tavolino all’ora della lezione.
when the professor no longer knew what to teach his pupils,
together they read Shakespeare and Byron and smoked the
cigarettes Iginio put out on the desk when the lesson began.
(ibid.:36)
 
This teaching scam was probably more profitable than Tarchetti’s
plagiarism. Yet since translation was poorly remunerated in
nineteenth-century Italy, with payment usually taking the form of
books as well as money, his implicit claim that his text was his creation
would have earned him a higher fee than if he had published it as a
translation (Berengo 1980:340–346). A financial motive may also
explain the curious retitling and reprinting of the text when he took
over the editorship of the Emporio pittoresco. The different title and his
signature claimed that it was his original tale being published for the
first time.
Because the legal status of translation was just beginning to be
defined in 1865, Tarchetti’s plagiarism did not in fact constitute a
copyright infringement which resulted in a financial loss for Shelley’s
estate and her English publisher. By the early nineteenth century,
many countries had developed copyright statutes which gave the
author exclusive control over the reproduction of her text for life and
beyond. But international copyright conventions were slow to emerge,
and translation rights were not always reserved for the author. In
1853, for example, a federal court in the United States held that a
German translation of Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852) which had not been

Dissidence
165
licensed by Harriet Beecher Stowe did not infringe her copyright for
the English-language text (Kaplan 1967:29). Although England
instituted the first important copyright statute at the beginning of the
eighteenth century, in 1851, the year of Shelley’s death, English law
did not give the author translation rights. It was not until 1852 that
the right of authors to license translations of their published texts was
recognized by statute, which limited it to five years from the date of
publication (Sterling and Carpenter 1986:103). A general copyright
law was not formulated in Italy until the Unification: on 25 June 1865,
four days after Tarchetti published the first installment of his
translation as his tale, the Italian government gave authors the right
to “publish, reproduce, and translate” their texts, although the
translation rights were limited to ten years from the date of
publication (Piola-Caselli 1927:22, 24, 26).
Tarchetti’s plagiarism was not so much copyright infringement
as a violation of the individualistic notion of authorship on which
copyright is based. As Martha Woodmansee shows, copyright
laws recognize the writer’s ownership of a text insofar as he is its
author or originator—“that is, insofar as his work is new and
original, an intellectual creation which owes its individuality
solely and exclusively to him” (Woodmansee 1984:446). This
notion of authorship assumes romantic expressive theory: the text
is seen as expressing the unique thoughts and feelings of the
writer, a free, unified consciousness which is not divided by
determinations that exceed and possibly conflict with his
intention. The author is assigned the sole and exclusive copyright
because his subjectivity is taken to be a metaphysical essence
which is present in his text and all its copies, but which
transcends any difference or change introduced by formal
determinations, like printing and binding, language and genre,
and by economic and political conditions, like the publishing
industry and government censorship. The very idea of authorial
copyright, however, confesses the possibility of change because it
is designed to control the form and marketing of the book by
licensing reproduction and repressing change that is not
authorized. Copyright opens up a contradiction in the
individualistic notion of authorship by demonstrating that such
law is suspended between metaphysics and materialism,
acknowledging the material contingencies of form, the possibility
of its difference from the author, but enacting its transparency
with the metaphysical assumption of authorial presence.

166
The Translator’s Invisibility
Tarchetti’s plagiarism violated this notion of authorship not by
merely copying Shelley’s tale, but by translating it. Because his
plagiarism was a translation, it introduced a decisive change in the
form of the original, specifically in its language; his assertion of
authorship simultaneously masked this change and indicated that
it was decisive enough to mark the creation of a new text which
originated with him. Tarchetti’s plagiarism covertly collapsed the
distinction that an individualistic notion of authorship draws
between author and translator, creator and imitator. Yet because his
plagiarism remained undiscovered and unrationalized—at least
until today—it continued to support this distinction; it did not
reflect or contribute to any revision of nineteenth-century Italian
opinion concerning the aesthetic and legal status of translation. All
the same, the fact that Tarchetti’s plagiarism was covert did not in
any way mitigate its violation of authorship—nor its effect as an
eminently foreignizing translation practice. Because his Italian
translation was a plagiarism, it was especially subversive of
bourgeois values in the major language. On the one hand,
Tarchetti’s text flouted bourgeois propriety and property by
fraudulently exploiting the process of literary commodification in
the Italian publishing industry; in this way, his plagiarism
exemplified the nonconformist tendency of the scapigliatura to
identify with socially subordinate groups, particularly the worker,
the poor, and the criminal, professing a dissident refusal of the
dominant by affiliating with the subcultural (Mariani 1967). On the
other hand, Tarchetti’s text deterritorialized the bourgeois fictional
discourse that dominated Italian culture precisely because it was a
plagiarism in the standard dialect, because it passed itself off not
just as an original Gothic tale, but as one written originally in the
Italian of Manzonian realism and therefore foreignizing in its
impact on the Italian literary scene.
Yet Shelley’s authorship comes back to worry the ideological
standpoint of Tarchetti’s intervention by raising the issue of
gender. To be effective as a subversion of bourgeois values that
deterritorialized the Italian literary standard, his text was required
to maintain the fiction of his authorship, referring to Shelley’s tale
only in the vaguest way (“imitation”). At the same time, however,
this fiction suppressed an instance of female authorship, so that the
theft of Shelley’s literary creation had the patriarchal effect of
female disempowerment, of limiting a woman’s social agency. This
would seem to be a consequence which Tarchetti did not anticipate:

Dissidence
167
some of his other fiction explicitly addressed male domination of
women and the social construction of gender, whether in the
graphic depiction of Paolina’s oppression or in the gender
dislocations of his fantastic experiments (Caesar 1987). Most
importantly, the tale he chose to plagiarize interrogates patriarchal
images of male power and female weakness. Grounded in an
antifeminist suppression of Shelley’s authorship, Tarchetti’s
plagiarism nonetheless circulated her feminist fictional project in
Italian culture. This ideological contradiction is further
complicated by the fact that Tarchetti’s text is a translation. In order
for Shelley’s tale to perform its political function in a different
culture, it underwent a radical transformation that was
simultaneously faithful and abusive, that both reproduced and
supplemented the English text. The clearest indication of this
uneven relationship appears in the subtle differences introduced by
the Italian version: they questioned the class and racial ideologies
which informed Shelley’s tale.
III
Shelley’s “The Mortal Immortal” is a first-person narrative in which an
assistant to the sixteenth-century alchemist Cornelius Agrippa laments
drinking the elixir of immortality. The opening sentence provokes the
distinctive hesitation of the fantastic by citing a date that glanced at the
English reader’s reality before suddenly establishing an unreal
chronology: “July 16, 1833.—This is a memorable anniversary for me;
on it I complete my three hundred and twenty-third year!” (Shelley
1976:219). The text aims to suspend the reader between the two
registers of fantastic discourse, the mimetic and the marvelous, by
representing the circumstances surrounding the assistant’s fateful
action, particularly his relationship with the woman he loves and
ultimately marries. The fantastic premise of immortality leads to a
number of satirical exaggerations by which patriarchal gender
representations are thrown into confusion.
By assigning the immortality to a male narrator, Shelley’s text turns
it into a fantastic trope for male power, initiating a critique of
patriarchy which resembles Mary Wollstonecraft’s. In A Vindication of
the Rights of Woman (1792), Wollstonecraft argues that the “bodily
strength [which] seems to give man a natural superiority over woman
[…] is the only solid basis on which the superiority of the sex can be
built” (Wollstonecraft 1975:124). Shelley’s fantastic narrative questions

168
The Translator’s Invisibility
male physical superiority by setting up the assistant as the unstable
position from which the action becomes intelligible. There is doubt
about whether he is in fact physically superior. His “story” is framed
by the fundamental question, “Am I immortal?” (Shelley 1976:219,
229), and interrupted by several inconclusive meditations on the
authenticity and effectiveness of Cornelius’s elixir. The value of male
physical superiority is unsettled by the assistant’s contradictory
representation of the alchemical science that may have made him
immortal. At first, alchemy is stigmatized as unnatural and heretical.
We hear the “report” of the “accident” involving Cornelius’s “scholar,
who, unawares, raised the foul fiend during his master’s absence and
was destroyed,” with the result that “all his scholars at once deserted
him,” and “the dark spirits laughed at him for not being able to retain
a single mortal in his service” (ibid.:219–220). The assistant seems to
accept this association of alchemy with witchcraft: “when Cornelius
came and offered me a purse of gold if I would remain under his roof,
I felt as if Satan himself tempted me” (ibid.:220). In the midst of this
passage, however, he drops the suggestion that the “report” may be
“true or false” (ibid.:219); and later in the narrative, after Cornelius
dies, this skepticism reappears to exculpate the alchemist—and
reinforce the doubt concerning the assistant’s immortality:
 
I derided the notion that he could command the powers of
darkness, and laughed at the superstitious fears with which he
was regarded by the vulgar. He was a wise philosopher, but had
no acquaintance with any spirits but those clad in flesh and
blood.
(ibid.:226)
 
The uncertainty which Shelley’s text generates about male physical
superiority is maintained by the characterization of the assistant. He is
a weak, vacillating figure, dominated by the woman he loves, at times
ridiculous, a most unlikely candidate for immortality. His name is
“Winzy,” which, as Charles Robinson observes, is related to “winze,”
the Scottish word for curse, but which also “might suggest that the
protagonist of this story is a comic character” (Shelley 1976:390). After
listening to his friends’ “dire tale” of the “accident,” Winzy’s reaction
to Cornelius’s offer of employment is sheer slapstick: “My teeth
chattered—my hair stood on end:—I ran off as fast as my trembling
knees would permit” (ibid.:220). Winzy’s characterization satirizes the
ideological basis of patriarchy in biological determinism because his

Dissidence
169
physical superiority is not innate, but an error: he drinks the elixir of
immortality only because Cornelius has deceptively told him that it is
a philter to cure love. Since part of the comedy in Winzy’s character
derives from his utter lack of psychological control, the satire also
extends to a distinctively bourgeois version of patriarchal ideology, the
link between male power and the individualistic concept of the free,
unified subject. Winzy’s fearful retreat from Cornelius’s workshop
leaves him with so little presence of mind that he lapses into poverty
and must be browbeaten by his love Bertha in order to return to work:
“Thus encouraged—shamed by her—led on by love and hope,
laughing at my late fears, with quick steps and a light heart, I returned
to accept the offers of the alchymist, and was instantly installed in my
office” (ibid.:220–221). Because Winzy is so submissive to Bertha, so
cowered by the fear of her rejection, he endures her “inconstancy” and
can gain the “courage and resolution” to act only when he is deceived
that the potion he drinks cures him of his unhappy love (ibid.:221, 224).
Winzy never possesses the inner autonomy of male power; he is in fact
a man who does not want any power, who by the end of his narrative
deeply regrets his longevity.
Shelley’s tale follows Wollstonecraft’s feminist critique most closely
in the characterization of Bertha. Just as Wollstonecraft finds male
domination most oppresssive of women in the affluent classes because
“the education of the rich tends to render them vain and helpless”
(Wollstonecraft 1975:81), so Shelley’s text marks an unfortunate change
in Bertha when her parents die and she is adopted by “the old lady of
the near castle, rich, childless, and solitary” (Shelley 1976:220). Living
in the aristocratic splendor of a “marble palace” and “surrounded by
silk-clad youths—the rich and gay,” Bertha becomes “somewhat of a
coquette in manner,” and her relationship with the poor Winzy is
endangered (ibid.:220–221). Women develop “coquettish arts,”
Wollstonecraft argues, because they assimilate the patriarchal image of
themselves as the passive object of male desire: “only taught to please,
women are always on the watch to please, and with true heroic ardour
endeavor to gain hearts merely to resign or spurn them when the
victory is decided and conspicuous” (Wollstonecraft 1975:115, 147).
Hence, Bertha’s change is manifested in her devious and perverse
manipulation of Winzy:
 
Bertha fancied that love and security were enemies, and her
pleasure was to divide them in my bosom. […] She slighted me in
a thousand ways, yet would never acknowledge herself to be in the

170
The Translator’s Invisibility
wrong. She would drive me mad with anger, and then force me to
beg her pardon. Sometimes she fancied that I was not sufficiently
submissive, and then she had some story of a rival, favoured by her
protectress.
(Shelley 1976:221)
 
As this catalogue of abuse suggests, Shelley’s tale satirizes the
patriarchal image of woman that shapes Bertha’s characterization by
transforming it into caricature. The fantastic premise of immortality
results in an exaggeration of her vanity: as Winzy remains twenty years
old and she becomes a “faded beauty” of fifty, “she sought to decrease
the apparent disparity of our ages by a thousand feminine arts—rouge,
youthful dress, and assumed juvenility of manner” (ibid.:226, 228). The
constant concern with beauty that patriarchy forces on women in
Wollstonecraft’s critique is magnified into Bertha’s ludicrous,
maddening obsession: “Her jealousy never slept,” Winzy relates,
 
Her chief occupation was to discover that, in spite of outward
appearances, I was myself growing old. […] She would discern
wrinkles in my face and decrepitude in my walk, while I bounded
along in youthful vigour, the youngest looking of twenty youths. I
never dared address another woman: on one occasion, fancying that
the belle of the village regarded me with favouring eyes, she bought
me a gray wig.
(ibid.:228)
 
Unable to maintain her attractive appearance, Bertha even goes so far
as to disparage youth and beauty:
 
she described how much more comely gray hairs were than my
chestnut locks; she descanted on the reverence and respect due to
age—how preferable to the slight regard paid to children: could I
imagine that the despicable gifts of youth and good looks
outweighed disgrace, hatred, and scorn?
(ibid.:227)
 
Tarchetti’s “L’elixir dell’immortalità” is a rather close translation
which perfectly catches the humor of Shelley’s feminist satire, but he
also made revisions which go beyond the English text. Some of the
revisions suggest a strategy of amplification designed to increase the
epistemological confusion of the fantastic for the Italian reader (the

Dissidence
171
italicized words in the Italian quotations below indicate Tarchetti’s
additions to the English text). Thus, the translation heightens the
marvelous register of Shelley’s fantastic discourse by adding a strong
tendency toward sensationalism. Tarchetti followed the English by
initiating the fantastic hesitation in the first sentence, with a date that
glanced at the Italian reader’s reality, yet he inserted slight changes that
intensify the narrator’s amazement:
 
Dicembre 16, 1867.—È questo per me un anniversario assai
memorabile. Io compio oggi il mio trecentoventinovesimo anno
di vita.
December 16, 1867.—This is a very memorable anniversary for me.
Today I complete my three hundred and twenty-ninth year of life.
(Tarchetti 1967, I:114)
 
Winzy’s first expression of doubt about his physical superiority is the
simple question, “Am I, then, immortal?” (Shelley 1976:219), whereas
the Italian version resorts to a more emphatic restatement: “Ma non
invecchierò io dunque? Sono io dunque realmente immortale?”/“But
shall I not age, then? Am I, then, really immortal?” (Tarchetti 1967, I:114).
Sometimes the amplification produces a melodramatic effect: “belief”
and “thought” (226) are inflated into the more stagy “illusione” and
“dubbio”/“dream” and “suspicion” (I:126); “sad” (224) is rendered by
“pazza”/“mad” (I:124), “fondly”—as in “my Bertha, whom I had
loved so fondly” (228)—by “pazzamente”/“madly” (I:129). And
sometimes the melodrama tips into the marvelous. When the aged
Bertha tries to salve her wounded vanity by telling Winzy that
“though I looked so young, there was ruin at work within my frame,”
the Italian version turns the “ruin” into a preternaturally abrupt
process: “quantunque io apparissi così giovane, eravi qualche cosa in
me che m’avrebbe fatto invecchiare repentimente”/“although I looked
so young, there was something in me which would make me age all of
sudden” (I:130).
At other points, Tarchetti’s translation increases the Italian reader’s
epistemological confusion by strengthening the mimetic register of
Shelley’s fantastic discourse. The main characters are rechristened
Vincenzo and Ortensia, two quite ordinary Italian names which
remove the comic improbability suggested by an immortal called
Winzy. Tarchetti’s strategy of mimetic amplification works by
accumulating verisimilar details and explanations. When Vincenzo

172
The Translator’s Invisibility
recounts the tragedy of Cornelius’s “allievo che avendo
inawertentemente evocato durante l’assenza del maestro, uno spirito
maligno, ne fu ucciso”/“pupil who having inadvertently raised a
malign spirit in his master’s absence was killed by it,” Tarchetti added
another detail to the English passage to make the incident more
plausible: “senza che alcuno avesse potuto soccorrerlo”/“before
anyone could come to his aid” (I:115). The Italian version similarly
enhances the psychological realism of the English text. When Winzy
and Bertha part after their first falling out, he tersely states that “we
met now after an absence, and she had been sorely beset while I was
away” (220). In the translation, however, the meeting is much more
histrionic, with Vincenzo physically expressing his passion for
Ortensia and emphasizing the distress caused by their separation:
 
Io la riabbracciava ora dopo un’assenza assai dolorosa; il bisogno di
confidenza e di conforti mi aveva ricondotto presso di lei. La fanciulla non
aveva sofferto meno di me durante la mia lontananza.
I embraced her again now after a very painful absence; the need for
intimacy and comfort led me back to her. The girl had not suffered less
than me during my distance.
(I:117)
 
Because the translation tends to favor extreme emotional states, this
sort of mimetic amplification easily turns a relatively realistic English
passage into overwrought fantasy. When Winzy fearfully runs away
from the allegedly satanic Cornelius, he turns to Bertha for
consolation: “My failing steps were directed whither for two years
they had every evening been attracted,—a gently bubbling spring of
pure living waters, beside which lingered a dark-haired girl” (220).
The Italian version infuses the landscape and the girl with Gothic
overtones:
 
I miei passi si diressero anche quella volta a quel luogo, a cui pel giro
di due anni erano stati diretti ogni sera, —un luogo pieno d’incanti,
una sterminata latitudine di praterie, con una sorgente d’acqua viva
che scaturiva gorgogliando malinconicamente, e presso la quale
sedeva con abbandono una fanciulla.
My steps were directed that time as well toward that place, where
for a period of two years they had been directed every evening,—a

Dissidence
173
place full of enchantments, a boundless expanse of grassland, with a
fountain of living water which gushed with a melancholy gurgling,
and beside which sat a girl with abandon.
(I:116)
 
Tarchetti’s strategy of amplification effectively reproduces Shelley’s
feminist critique by further exaggerating the patriarchal gender images
which shape the characters. When Winzy drinks what he mistakenly
assumes is a remedy for his frustrated love of Bertha, he experiences a
sudden fit of self-esteem and daring which comically confirms his
psychological weakness, thus continuing the satire of male power:
“methought my good looks had wonderfully improved. I hurried
beyond the precincts of the town, joy in my soul, the beauty of heaven
and earth around me” (223). The Italian version turns Vincenzo into a
parody of the romantic individual, narcissistic, chest-thumping,
Byronic:
 
parvemi che i miei occhi, già così ingenui, avessero acquistata una
sorprendente expressione. Mi cacciai fuori del recinto della città colla
gioia nell’anima, con quella orgogliosa soddisfazione che mi dava il
pensiero di essere presto vendicato.
it seemed to me that my eyes, previously so ingenuous, had acquired a
striking expression. I dashed beyond the city limit with joy in my
heart, with that proud satisfaction which made me think that I would soon
be avenged.
(I:122)
 
The translation likewise accentuates the caricature of female vanity.
Whereas Winzy observes that his youthfulness drove Bertha to find
“compensation for her misfortunes in a variety of little ridiculous
circumstances” (228), Ortensia is said to revert to “puerili e ridicole
circostanze”/“childish and ridiculous circumstances” (I:129). And
whereas Winzy states that Bertha “would discern wrinkles in my face
and decrepitude in my walk” (228), Vincenzo complains that Ortensia
“struggeasi di scoprire delle grinze sul mio viso, e qualche cosa di
esitante, di decrepito nel mio incesso”/“was consumed with
discovering wrinkles in my face, and something hesitant, decrepit in
my gait” (I:130).
Tarchetti’s first decisive departure from the ideological
determinations of Shelley’s tale occurs on the issue of class. Shelley

174
The Translator’s Invisibility
challenges the patriarchal assumption that gender identity is
biologically fixed by indicating that Bertha’s transformation into a
coquette is socially determined, an effect of her upward mobility.
Bertha’s class position is evidently bourgeois: “her parents, like mine,”
states Winzy, “were of humble life, yet respectable” (220). This “life”
should be seen as bourgeois even though “humble,” not only because
it is labelled “respectable,” but because it enables Winzy to be
apprenticed to an alchemist with whom he earns “no insignificant
sum of money” (221). Bertha and Winzy are “humble” in relation to
her protectress, who is an aristocrat, a “lady” living in a feudal
“castle.” Shelley’s tale thus begins by associating patriarchy with
aristocractic domination, sexual equality with the bourgeois family.
This is most clear in a striking passage which alludes explicitly to
Wollstonecraft’s treatise. When Bertha finally leaves her aristocratic
protectress and returns to Winzy’s parents, he asserts that she
“escaped from a gilt cage to nature and liberty” (224), echoing one of
Wollstonecraft’s metaphors for the self-oppression to which
patriarchal ideology subjects women: “Taught from their infancy that
beauty is woman’s sceptre, the mind shapes itself to the body, and
roaming round its gilt cage, only seeks to adore its prison”
(Wollstonecraft 1975:131).
As the narrative unfolds, however, the class logic of Shelley’s
feminist critique is undone. Although Winzy’s attack on the
aristocratic protectress implicitly equates the bourgeois family with a
natural state free of patriarchal gender representations, his own
marriage to Bertha compels her to live them out in an even more
obsessive way. They continue to be financially independent: Winzy
refers to “my farm” (Shelley 1976:227), and although at one point
“poverty had made itself felt” because his perpetual youthfulness
caused them to be “universally shunned,” they are nonetheless able
to sell off their “property” and emigrate to France, having “realised
a sum sufficient, at least, to maintain us while Bertha lived”
(ibid.:228). Thus, whether living with their parents or on their own,
after they are married, they continue to lead a “humble life, yet
respectable.” But their relationship can hardly be considered “nature
and liberty” for either of them. Bertha becomes the passive object of
Winzy’s desire:
 
We had no children; we were all in all to each other; and though, as
she grew older, her vivacious spirit became a little allied to ill-
temper, and her beauty sadly diminished, I cherished her in my

Dissidence
175
heart as the mistress I had idolized, the wife I had sought with such
perfect love.
(ibid.:227)
 
And when Bertha’s vanity drives her to ridiculous, alienating
extremes, Winzy helplessly acknowledges the gender hierarchy
established by his physical superiority: “this mincing, simpering,
jealous old woman. I should have revered her gray locks and withered
cheeks; but thus!—It was my work, I knew; but I did not the less
deplore this type of human weakness” (ibid.:228). Bertha’s return to
the bourgeoisie ultimately contradicts Winzy’s attack on the
protectress: their marriage shows that the bourgeois family is not an
egalitarian refuge from aristocratic patriarchy, but a continuation of
male dominance.
This ideological contradiction lies at the center of Shelley’s
feminism. As Anne Mellor has argued,
 
Mary Shelley was a feminist in the sense that her mother was, in that
she advocated an egalitarian marriage and the education of women.
But insofar as she endorsed the continued reproduction of the
bourgeois family, her feminism is qualified by the ways in which her
affirmation of the bourgeois family entails an acceptance of its
intrinsic hierarchy, a hierarchy historically manifested in the doctrine
of separate spheres [and] in the domination of the male gender.
(Mellor 1988:217)
 
Shelley’s characteristic valorization of marriage emerges in “The
Mortal Immortal” primarily because Winzy is the narrator: he makes
his love for Bertha and their marriage the positions from which their
actions are intelligible, and hence the bourgeois family, with its
patriarchal construction of gender, is established as the standard by
which they are judged. What the text imposes as true or obvious is that
Winzy is the devoted lover and husband, attending to their material
needs, controlling their destiny in the public sphere, whereas Bertha
controls their private life, compelled by her vanity to trifle with his
affection, envy his youthfulness, even threaten their lives. Reasoning
that Winzy’s unchanging appearance could get them executed “as a
dealer in the black art” and his “accomplice[,] at last she insinuated
that I must share my secret with her, and bestow on her like benefits to
those I myself enjoyed, or she would denounce me—and then she
burst into tears” (Shelley 1976:227).

176
The Translator’s Invisibility
Tarchetti’s translation probes the contradictions of Shelley’s
feminism by subtly revising the ideologies her tale puts to work.
The Italian follows the English in having Vincenzo assert that “io
divenni marito di Ortensia”/“I became Ortensia’s husband”
(Tarchetti 1967, I:123), but it repeatedly omits signs of their
marriage. When Bertha becomes aware of Winzy’s immortality, he
renews his conjugal vows to her: “I will be your true, faithful
husband while you are spared to me, and do my duty to you to the
last” (228). Tarchetti deletes this entire statement. And where
Winzy and Bertha address each other with “my poor wife” and
“my husband” (227, 228), Vincenzo and Ortensia say “mia buona
compagna” and “mio amico”/“my good companion” and “my
friend” (I:128). These changes show an effort to weaken, however
slightly, the valorization of marriage in Shelley’s tale and perhaps
reflect a scapigliato rejection of bourgeois respectability. Most
significantly, Tarchetti’s changes locate the very ideological
determination which qualifies Shelley’s feminist project, and they
do so by emphasizing friendship rather than marriage, hinting at
the possibility of an equal relationship between the lovers,
questioning the gender hierarchy of the bourgeois family.
At the same time, Tarchetti’s translation superimposes another
class conflict on the English text. This too requires a diminution of
Shelley’s bourgeois values. The Italian version reproduces all of those
passages which point to the main characters’ financial
independence—except the most explicit one: the description of
Vincenzo’s and Ortensia’s parents deletes “respectable” and
emphasizes “humble,” clearly suggesting that they are not bourgeois,
but members of the working class: “I suoi parenti erano, come i miei,
di assai umile condizione”/“Her parents were, like mine, of very
humble rank” (I:116). Ortensia’s adoption by the protectress thus
figures patriarchy as aristocratic domination of the working class. The
Italian version underscores this representation by encoding Ortensia’s
vain obsessions with aristocratic attitudes. Whereas Bertha, driven by
her envy of Winzy’s physical appearance to the paradoxical extreme
of disparaging beauty, tells him that “gray hairs” are “much more
comely,” and that “youth and good looks” are “despicable gifts” (227),
Ortensia expresses an aristocratic sense of social superiority: the
Italian version replaces “comely” with “gentili” (“fair,” but also
“polite,” “noble”) and “despicable” with “volgari” (“common,”
“unrefined”) (I:127, 128). With these changes, Tarchetti’s translation
forces Shelley’s tale to address the hierarchical relationship between

Dissidence
177
the aristocracy and the working class, an instance of class domination
which her bourgeois feminism represses.
This pressure in the translation to expose forms of ideological
mystification also makes itself felt in deletions which remove the
Orientalism from Shelley’s tale. Tarchetti omits Winzy’s response to
Bertha’s coquettish behavior: “I was jealous as a Turk” (221). Because
any particularly violent or aggressive show of jealousy would be
comically inconsistent with Winzy’s submissiveness, his assertion can
be seen as contributing to the satire of male power built into his
characterization. Yet once the feminist significance of the joke is
appreciated, the reader is positioned in an another ideology, European
Orientalism: the satire becomes intelligible only when the reader
thinks that Winzy’s jealousy could never possibly be as excessive as a
Turk’s, i.e., only when the reader assumes the truth of the cliché and
thus accepts an ethnic slur, drawing a racist distinction between the
West as rational and the East as irrational. Shelley’s use of the cliché to
support the feminist satire ridicules a gender hierarchy by introducing
one based on race.
The absence of this racial ideology from the Italian version might
seem insignificant, were it not that Tarchetti omits another, much more
complicated Orientalist reference in the English text: an allusion to The
History of Nourjahad, an Eastern tale written by the eighteenth-century
novelist and playwright Frances Sheridan. Near the beginning of
Shelley’s text, Winzy wistfully cites “fabled” instances of longevity
which proved much more tolerable than his:
 
I have heard of enchantments, in which the victims were plunged
into a deep sleep to wake, after a hundred years, as fresh as ever: I
have heard of the Seven Sleepers—thus to be immortal would not be
so burthensome; but, oh! the weight of never-ending time—the
tedious passage of the still-succeeding hours! How happy was the
fabled Nourjahad!
(Shelley 1976:219)
 
The extremely elliptical quality of this allusion, especially compared
to the explanatory statement that precedes the Seven Sleepers,
indicates the enormous popularity of Sheridan’s character, even as
late as 1833, when Shelley was writing her own tale. Published in
1767, a year after Sheridan’s death, The History of Nourjahad went
through at least eleven British editions by 1830, including an
illustrated abridgement for children, and it was twice adapted for the

178
The Translator’s Invisibility
stage, first as a “melodramatic spectacle” in 1802, then as a musical
production in 1813 (Todd 1985:282–284). Having already published
several tales in The Keepsake, Shelley knew that Oriental motifs were in
vogue among its readers, she seems even to have assumed that the
“fabled Nourjahad” was more familiar to them than the rather
learned allusion to the Seven Sleepers, and so she needed merely to
have her “mortal immortal” drop the character’s name to signify
immortality punctuated by “deep sleep.”4 Yet, for readers who know
The History of Nourjahad, the reference is too abrupt and unqualified to
stop resonating, so that it constitutes a disturbing point of
indeterminancy in Shelley’s text, limited only by the cultural and
social conditions under which it is read.
Sheridan’s Nourjahad is the favorite of the Persian sultan
Schemzeddin, who would like to appoint him as “first minister” but
must establish that he is worthy, innocent of the faults imputed to him
by court advisors: “youth,” “avarice,” “love of pleasure,” and
“irreligion” (Weber 1812:693). Schemzeddin tests Nourjahad by asking
him what he would like if his every desire could be satisfied, and
Nourjahad’s response confirms the advisors’ suspicions:
 
I should desire to be possessed of inexhaustible riches; and, to
enable me to enjoy them to the utmost, to have my life prolonged to
eternity, [disregarding] hopes of Paradise [in order to] make a
paradise of this earthly globe while it lasted, and take my chance for
the other afterwards.
(Weber 1812:694)
 
Nourjahad elicits the sultan’s rebuke, and that night he is visited
by his “guardian genius” who fulfills his desire for wealth and
immortality, although with the proviso that any vice he commits
will be “punished by total privation of [his] faculties,” lasting “for
months, years, nay for a whole revolution of Saturn at a time, or
perhaps for a century” (ibid.:695). Nourjahad forgets this
punishment, further alienates Schemzeddin by devoting himself to
“nothing but giving loose to his appetites” (ibid.:698), and
performs three immoral acts which are each punished by long
periods of deep sleep. While indulging himself “with an
unbounded freedom in his most voluptuous wishes,” Nourjahad,
“for the first time, got drunk,” whereupon he sleeps over four years
(ibid.:700); then he invents a “celestial masquerade” in which he
orders “the women of his seraglio to personate the houris,” while

Dissidence
179
“he himself would needs represent Mahomet; and one of the
mistresses whom he loved best […] Cadiga, the favourite wife of
the great prophet,” for which “wild and profane idea” he sleeps
forty years (ibid.:705); finally, when his “appetites palled with
abundance,” he begins to delight in “cruelty” and brutally kills
Cadiga, thereafter sleeping twenty years (ibid.:710). Upon waking
Nourjahad reforms and embarks on a vast program of
philanthropy, so profoundly regretting his wealth and immortality
that his guardian genius reappears to take them away. It is
subsequently revealed that Nourjahad’s “adventure […] was all a
deception” (ibid.:719), he did not actually kill Cadiga, he was never
wealthy or immortal, and only fourteen months have passed, not
more than sixty years. Schemzeddin had invented everything to
bring about his favorite’s moral reformation.
Shelley’s allusion to Sheridan’s tale puts into play several themes
dense with ideological significance. Nourjahad appears “happy” to
Winzy, most obviously, because the burden of his immortality was
eased by long periods of sleep and finally removed. Yet given
Winzy’s relationship to Bertha, Nourjahad would also be enviable
because he was finally reunited and married to his beloved
Mandana, “a young maid, so exquisitely charming and
accomplished, that he gave her the entire possession of his heart”
(Weber 1812:698), but was later deceived that she died in childbirth.
What distinguished Nourjahad’s relationship to Mandana was that
he chose her as his confidant—“longing to unbosom himself to one
on whose tenderness and fidelity he could rely, to her he disclosed
the marvellous story of his destiny” (ibid.)—thereby exemplifying
the eighteenth-century rise of companionate marriage, which
stressed domestic friendship, a sharing of affection and interests
between the spouses, while maintaining the husband’s authority
(Stone 1977). It was no doubt this antecedent of Shelley’s own
concept of egalitarian marriage, in addition to the fantastic premise
of immortality, that attracted her to Sheridan’s tale, especially since
it occurs within a narrative that can be read as a critique of
patriarchy. For The History of Nourjahad, like “The Mortal Immortal,”
questions a patriarchal gender image: Nourjahad represents male
physical superiority pushed to destructive extremes of violence
against women. Hence, when Winzy compares himself to
Nourjahad, Shelley’s text signals that it will address gender
differences and offers any reader of The Keepsake who could make the
comparison and shared Wollstonecraft’s thinking a feminist joke at

180
The Translator’s Invisibility
Winzy’s expense: the allusion inevitably points to the discrepancy
between his cringing weakness and Nourjahad’s potent excess,
beginning the satire of male power that is Shelley’s theme.
Yet whatever feminist design can be detected in Sheridan’s tale is
finally skewed by the racial and class ideologies that underwrite it.
In interrogating patriarchy, The History of Nourjahad is clearly
overdetermined by Orientalism: it simultaneously demonstrates and
rehabilitates the moral inferiority of the East. Nourjahad’s
characterization involves the racist procedure of naturalizing ethnic
stereotypes, grounding them in biology: “he was not of an active
temper,” “he was naturally choleric” (Weber 1812:698, 700). And
although Islam is treated reverentially, with Nourjahad receiving his
most severe punishment for blaspheming the Koran, Sheridan’s
valorization of marriage is linked to an explicit privileging of the
West and to a consistent representation of women as the object of
male sexual desire—even in the context of companionate marriage.
Thus, Mandana’s reciprocation of Nourjahad’s love is described as
“a felicity very rare among eastern husbands,” and she is revealed
to be Schemzeddin’s gift to his favorite, freed from her status as the
sultan’s “slave” because she participated in his “contrivance” by
impersonating Nourjahad’s guardian genius and later joining his
seraglio (ibid.:698, 719–720). Insofar as Schemzeddin is responsible
for Nourjahad’s reformation, moreover, the narrative affirms a
specific political institution, a despotic monarchy that relies on
paternalistic interventions. The ideological configuration of
Sheridan’s tale, what can be called an Orientalist image of
patriarchal despotism, jars against the bourgeois feminism that can
be read out of Shelley’s allusion, forcing Winzy’s exclamation to
precipitate still more contradictions in her project. “How happy was
the fabled Nourjahad”—that he lived under a despot who exercised
absolute power over his subjects? That he dominated his wife as well
as the women in his seraglio? That he was a Persian who overcame
his Oriental propensity to vice? These potential meanings would
have been accessible to readers of The Keepsake: the audience for
these expensive giftbooks was largely aristocratic and bourgeois
women, politically conservative, accustomed to prose and poetry
that was often Orientalist and filled with patriarchal constructions
of gender (Faxon 1973:xxi; Altick 1957:362–363).
Although The History of Nourjahad enjoyed some popularity on
the continent during the late eighteenth century, when it was
translated into French, Russian, and Hungarian, it seems unlikely

Dissidence
181
that Tarchetti knew it. His deletion of any reference to Nourjahad
from his translation may have been merely due to his ignorance of
Sheridan’s tale. He certainly did not remove it because he was
aware of and opposed Orientalist stereotypes, since the same racial
ideology surfaces elsewhere in his writing, even when he tries to
formulate a democratic cultural politics for Italian fiction.
Whatever Tarchetti’s motive may have been, his deletion
necessarily affects both the English text and the Italian translation.
The mere absence of the allusion at once isolates a node of
ideological contradiction in Shelley’s text and erases it, allowing
the translation to address class and gender domination in Italy
without the burden of racism and despotic monarchy. Yet the
absence also points to an antifeminist effect in the translation
because of the cultural and social functions that every allusion
performs. As Susan Stewart has argued,
 
the allusive act always bears reference to and creates tradition,
[but] it also always bears reference to and creates the situation at
hand, articulating the relation between that situation and
tradition, and articulating the varying degrees of access available
to tradition[,] levels of readership, levels of accessibility to
knowledge.
(Stewart 1980:1146, 1151)
 
Shelley’s allusion to Sheridan’s tale not only announces her own
project as a feminist critique of patriarchy, but implicitly constructs a
tradition of female authorship and feminist ideological critique, even
as the revelation of that tradition conceals its contradictory ideological
conditions in both writers’ texts. Shelley’s allusion, furthermore, makes
the tradition available to the socially prominent women who read The
Keepsake and were singled out by Wollstonecraft as most oppressed by
patriarchy. Tarchetti’s deletion quashes this act of feminist
traditionalization, entirely blocking the Italian reader’s access to the
tradition it constructs.
IV
Tarchetti’s translation sets up two discontinuous relationships, one
with Shelley’s tale, the other with Italian culture, which can best
be understood with Philip Lewis’s concept of abusive fidelity. In
this son of translation, Lewis states, the translator focuses on the

182
The Translator’s Invisibility
“abuses” of the source-language text, “points or passages that are
in some sense forced, that stand out as clusters of textual energy,”
and attempts to reproduce their abusive quality in the target-
language culture (Lewis 1985:43). The translator’s attempt at
reproduction, however, simultaneously supplements the source-
language text in an interrogative way. This concept of fidelity in
translation is abusive because it performs what Lewis calls
 
a dual function—on the one hand, that of forcing the linguistic and
conceptual system of which it is a dependent, and on the other
hand, of directing a critical thrust back toward the text that it
translates and in relation to which it becomes a kind of unsettling
aftermath (it is as if the translation sought to occupy the original’s
already unsettled home, and thereby, far from ‘domesticating’ it, to
turn it into a place still more foreign to itself).
(ibid.)
 
Lewis seems to regard abusive fidelity as a strategic choice, at least
partly within the translator’s control (“partly” because the choices are
contingent, varying from one source-language text to another, from
one target-language culture to another). Yet the foregoing treatment of
Tarchetti’s translation requires a revision of Lewis’s concept to include
translation choices that remain unarticulated and unconscious, and
that therefore can support an effect exceeding the translator’s
intention. Any of the translator’s moves, in other words, may both
reproduce and supplement the source-language text.
Tarchetti’s translation, with its formal techniques of marvelous and
mimetic amplification, reproduces the key abuse in Shelley’s feminist
fictional project, her use of the fantastic to dislocate patriarchal gender
representations; and because his translation is a plagiarism written in
the standard Italian dialect, it deterritorializes the dominant realist
discourse in Italy, where it conducts an ideological cultural practice
which is radically democratic, which combats class (aristocratic and
bourgeois), gender (patriarchal), and racial (Orientalist) ideologies.
Tarchetti’s translation moves are such that they exhibit this political
agenda even in instances (e.g. the removal of Shelley’s Orientalism)
where they seem to be uncalculated, or at least to lack a political
calculation.
The abusiveness of Tarchetti’s translation does not stop with the
target-language culture, for it also enacts an “unsettling” ideological
critique of Shelley’s tale, exposing the political limitations of her

Dissidence
183
feminism, its failure to recognize the gender hierarchy in the bourgeois
marriage and its concealment of working-class oppression and
European racism. The paradox of Tarchetti’s translation strategy is that
its abuses issue mostly from its manifold fidelities—to the standard
Italian dialect, but not the dominant realism; to the syntactical and
lexical features, fantastic discourse, and feminist ideology of the
English text, but not its bourgeois values and Orientalism. These lacks
in Tarchetti’s translation are supplied by another fidelity, to a
democratic cultural politics.
More specifically, the attention to class in Tarchetti’s translation
provides one example of how his use of the fantastic was designed
to confront class divisions that were altered but nonetheless
maintained after the Italian Unification. This social transformation
was ultimately liberalizing, not democratizing: it freed markets from
regional restrictions and encouraged the development of
professional, manufacturing, and mercantile interests, particularly
in the north, yet without markedly improving the lives of the
agrarian and industrial workers who composed the largest segment
of the population. On the contrary, the economic reorganization,
instead of weakening workers’ dependence on landowners and
employers, added the uncertainties of market conditions, of higher
prices and taxes. And the institution of a national government with
a standing army faced workers with conscription, while their
widespread illiteracy hindered their participation in the political
process (Smith 1969). Tarchetti’s translation, like his other fantastic
tales, intervenes into these social contradictions, not only by
criticizing aristocratic and bourgeois domination of the working
classes, but by adopting a fictional discourse that overturns the
bourgeois assumptions of realism. He made this intervention,
moreover, in the highly politicized cultural formation of the 1860s,
publishing his tales in Milanese periodicals that were closely allied
to the most progressive, democratic groups and thus reaching the
northern bourgeoisie who stood to benefit most from the economic
and political changes in post-Unification Italy (Portinari 1989:232–
240; Castronovo et al. 1979).
Yet Tarchetti’s reliance on plagiarism to forward his political
agenda, as well as his deletion of a literary allusion he probably did
not understand, gives a final twist to Lewis’s concept of abusive
fidelity in translation. Both moves show that the source-language
text can cause “a kind of unsettling aftermath” in the target-
language text, indicating points where the latter is “foreign” to its

184
The Translator’s Invisibility
own project or where it conflicts with the translator’s intention. As
soon as Tarchetti’s theft is known and his deletion located, Shelley’s
tale enacts an ideological critique of his translation which reveals
that he imported her feminist fiction into Italy with some violence,
suppressing her authorship and her construction of a feminist
literary tradition. The antifeminist effects of Tarchetti’s text
constitute an egregious reminder that translation, like every cultural
practice, functions under conditions that may to some extent be
unacknowledged, but that nonetheless complicate and perhaps
compromise the translator’s activity—even when it aims to make a
strategic political intervention.
For the contemporary English-language translator who seeks forms
of resistance against the regime of fluent domestication, Tarchetti
exemplifies a foreignizing translation practice that operates on two
levels, that of the signified as well as the signifier. His discursive
strategy deviated from the dominant realism by releasing the play of
the signifier: he amplified the discursive registers of Shelley’s fantastic
narrative, both mimetic and marvelous, and thus forced an
uncertainty over the metaphysical status of the representation (is the
elixir “real” or not?), preempting the illusion of transparency. Yet
Tarchetti’s plagiarism also produced the illusion of his authorship: he
effaced the second-order status of his translation by presenting it as
the first Gothic tale written in the Italian of the dominant realist
discourse, establishing his identity as an oppositional writer, fixing
the meaning of his text as dissident. Like the contemporary writer of
fluent English-language translations, Tarchetti was invisible to his
readers as a translator. Yet this very invisibility enabled him to conduct
a foreignizing translation practice in his Italian situation because he
was visible as an author.
Tarchetti’s translation practices cannot be imitated today
without significant revision. Plagiarism, for example, is largely
excluded by copyright laws that bind translators as well as
authors, resulting in contracts designed to insure that the
translation is in fact a translation, and that it does not involve the
unlicensed use of any copyrighted material. Here is a sampling of
standard clauses from recent translation contracts,5 including
those wherein the translator is termed the “author” of the
translation:
You warrant that your work will be original and that it does not
infringe upon the copyright or violate the right of any person or

Dissidence
185
party whatsoever, and you agree to indemnify and hold us and any
licensee or seller of the Work harmless against any damages
sustained in any claim, action, proceeding or recovery based on an
alleged violation of any of the foregoing warranties.
The Author warrants that he has full power to make this agreement;
that the Work has not previously been published in book form in the
English language; that all rights conveyed to the Publisher
hereunder are free of encumbrances or prior agreements; that the
Work does not violate any copyright in any way. The Author will
hold harmless and defend the Publisher and its licensees against all
claims, demands or suits related to these warranties. The Author
will compensate the Publisher […]
Author warrants that he is the sole author of the Work; that he is
the sole owner of all the rights granted to the Publisher […] Author
shall hold harmless Publisher, any seller of the Work, and any
licensee subsidiary right in the Work, against any damages finally
sustained.
 
The shrewdness and sheer audacity of Tarchetti’s plagiarism may
make it attractive to dissidents in Anglo-American literary culture—
especially dissident translators interested in upsetting current practices
in the publishing industry. Yet the fact remains that to publish an
unauthorized translation of a copyrighted foreign text is to invite legal
proceedings whose cost will far exceed the translator’s income from
even a bestselling translation.
What the contemporary English-language translator can learn from
Tarchetti is not how to plagiarize a foreign text, but how to choose one
to translate. Tarchetti shows that foreignizing translation takes the
form, not just of deviant translation strategies, but also of foreign texts
that deviate from dominant literary canons in the target-language
culture. Tarchetti’s choice to translate Shelley’s Gothic tale was
foreignizing in its introduction of a fictional discourse that challenged
the dominant realism, and his translation, along with the few other
Italian translations of foreign fantasies that had already been
published, initiated a change in literary taste that culminated in a
significant canon reformation. Other members of the scapigliatura,
notably Arrigo and Camillo Boito and Emilio Praga, published Gothic
tales in the 1860s, and Italian translations of foreign writers like Poe,
Gautier, and Erckmann-Chatrian increased rapidly during the

186
The Translator’s Invisibility
remainder of the nineteenth century. Hoffmann’s tales, for example,
appeared in eight different Italian editions between 1877 and 1898
(Costa and Vigini 1991; Rossi 1959). It is partly as a result of these
trends that the fantastic became a dominant genre in twentieth-century
Italian fiction, modernist as well as postmodernist, inspiring such
diverse canonical writers as Luigi Pirandello, Massimo Bontempelli,
Dino Buzzati, Tommaso Landolfi, and Italo Calvino (Bonifazi 1971 and
1982). The lesson Tarchetti teaches the dissident English-language
translator is that the choice of a foreign text for translation can be just
as foreignizing in its impact on the target-language culture as the
invention of a discursive strategy. At a time when deviations from
fluency may limit the circulation of a translation or even prevent it
from getting published in the first place, Tarchetti points to the
strategic value of discriminating carefully among foreign texts and
literatures when a translation project is developed.

Chapter 5
Margin
The translation of a poem having any depth ends by being one of two
things: Either it is the expression of the translator, virtually a new poem,
or it is as it were a photograph, as exact as possible, of one side of the
statue.
Ezra Pound
 
The dominance of transparent discourse in English-language
translation was decisively challenged at the turn of the twentieth
century, when modernism emerged in Anglo-American literary
culture. The experimentation that characterized the literature of this
period brought with it new translation strategies that avoided fluency
by cultivating extremely heterogeneous discourses, principally in
poetry translations, but also more widely in poetic composition.
Translation now became a key practice in modernist poetics,
motivating appropriations of various archaic and foreign poetries to
serve modernist cultural agendas in English (see, for example, Hooley
1988). At the same time, English-language translation theory attained
a new level of critical sophistication, summoned as it was to
rationalize specific modernist texts, poems that were translations as
well as translations of poems.
But translation today seems to bear little sign of these
developments. The dominance of transparent discourse has remained
so secure in English that even though modernist poetry and prose
have long been canonized in Anglo-American literary cultures, both
in and out of the academy, the innovations that distinguish modernist
translation continue to be marginal, seldom actually implemented in
an English-language translation, seldom recommended in theoretical
statements by translators or others. In the search for exits from the
dominance of transparency, it is important to assess the innovations

188
The Translator’s Invisibility
of modernist translation, interrogating the cultural functions it
performed with such force at the beginning of the century, but also
the conditions of its marginalization from mid-century onward. What
alternatives did modernist translation offer in its challenge to
transparency? Why were they relegated to the fringes of Anglo-
American culture?
I
In a review published in the Criterion in 1936, Basil Bunting
criticized E.Stuart Bates’s study Modern Translation for not keeping
the promise of its title, for failing, in fact, to present a modern
concept of translation. In Bunting’s view, Bates couldn’t
distinguish school “cribs (e.g. Loeb Classics) from translations”
that Bunting himself valued, “translations meant to stand by
themselves, works in their own language equivalent to their
original but not compelled to lean on its authority, claiming the
independence and accepting the responsibility inseparable from a
life of their own” (Bunting 1936:714). Modernism asserts the
“independence” of the translated text, demanding that it be judged
on its “own” terms, not merely apart from the foreign text, but
against other literary texts in its “own” language, accepting the
“responsibility” of distinguishing itself in the literary terms of that
language. But as soon as a modernist translation chooses these
terms, it can never be an independent work, can never be its “own”
insofar as the translation is written in a language coded with
cultural values that are fundamentally different from those
circulating in the foreign language. Modernism believes that the
responsibility of translation is to be independent, but the
responsibility assumed in this belief is actually owed to a domestic
intelligibility and cultural force that erase, somewhat irresponsibly,
the linguistic and cultural difference of the foreign text. For
Bunting, this difference wasn’t the important thing in translation,
partly because the opportunities to experience it in English seemed
to him rare, or simply nonexistent. “No one is truly bilingual,” he
wrote, “but it does not matter” (ibid.:714).
Modernism seeks to establish the cultural autonomy of the
translated text by effacing its manifold conditions and exclusions,
especially the process of domestication by which the foreign text is
rewritten to serve modernist cultural agendas. Bunting was aware of
this domestication. He praised Edward Fitzgerald’s Rubáiyát of Omar

Margin
189
Khayyám (1859) because “Fitzgerald translated a poem that never
existed, yet by an unforced, natural expansion of Dryden’s aim,
made Omar utter such things ‘as he would himself have spoken if
he had been born in England and in’ an age still slightly
overshadowed by Byron” (Bunting 1936:715). For Bunting,
Fitzgerald embodied the modernist ideal by appearing to translate
a poem that “never existed,” but paradoxically the translator drew
on preexisting materials: he followed Dryden’s domesticating
translation method (which made Virgil a Restoration English poet),
and his translation was noticeably influenced by Byron, Byronism,
the Orientalism in romantic culture. Bunting’s awareness of this
domesticating process was never sufficiently skeptical to make him
question his concept of translation, to doubt the autonomy of the
translated text, or to wonder about what happened to the
foreignness of the foreign text when it got translated. He was
interested only in translation that makes a difference at home, not
translation that signifies the linguistic and cultural difference of the
foreign text.
In modernist translation, these two kinds of difference get collapsed:
the foreign text is inscribed with a modernist cultural agenda and then
treated as the absolute value that exposes the inadequacy of
translations informed by competing agendas. In a 1928 review of
Arthur Symons’ translation of Baudelaire, T.S.Eliot acknowledged that
a translation constitutes an “interpretation,” never entirely adequate to
the source-language text because mediated by the target-language
culture, tied to a historical moment: “the present volume should
perhaps, even in fairness, be read as a document explicatory of the
’nineties, rather than as a current interpretation” (Eliot 1928:92). Eliot
assumed the modernist view that translation is a fundamental
domestication resulting in an autonomous text: “the work of
translation is to make something foreign, or something remote in time,
live with our own life” (ibid.:98). But the only “life” Eliot would allow
in translation conformed to his peculiar brand of modernism. What
made Symons’s version “wrong,” “a mistranslation,” “a smudgy
botch” was precisely that he “enveloped Baudelaire in the
Swinburnian violet-coloured London fog of the ’nineties,” turning the
French poet into “a contemporary of Dowson and Wilde” (ibid.:91, 99–
100, 102, 103). The “right” version was shaped by what Eliot
announced as his “general point of view,” “classicist in literature,
royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic in religion” (ibid.:vii). Thus, “the
important fact about Baudelaire is that he was essentially a Christian,

190
The Translator’s Invisibility
born out of his due time, and a classicist, born out of his due time”
(ibid.:103), where the “time” that matters is Eliot’s present: “Dowson
and Wilde have passed, and Baudelaire remains; he belonged to a
generation that preceded them, and yet he is much more our
contemporary than they” (ibid.:91).
Pound too privileged foreign texts that he could mobilize in a
modernist cultural politics, but his ideological standpoint was
different from Eliot’s and more than a little inconsistent. Certain
medieval poetries, notably the Provençal troubadour lyric and the
dolce stil nuovo, were to be recovered through interpretation,
translation, and imitation because they contained values that had
been lost in western culture, but that would now be restored by
modernism. Guido Cavalcanti’s poetry was assimilated to modernist
philosophical and poetic values like positivism and linguistic
precision. In Pound’s essay “Cavalcanti” (1928), “the difference
between Guido’s precise interpretive metaphor, and the Petrarchan
fustian and ornament” is that Guido’s “phrases correspond to definite
sensations undergone” (Anderson 1983:xx). This essay also made
clear the peculiarly political nature of Pound’s cultural restoration,
couching his modernist reading of Cavalcanti’s poetry in a rabid anti-
clericalism and racism:
 
We have lost the radiant world where one thought cuts through
another with clean edge, a world of moving energies “mezzo oscuro
rade” “risplende in sé perpetuale effecto” magnetisms that take form,
that are seen, or that border the visible, the matter of Dante’s
Paradiso, the glass under water, the form that seems a form seen in
a mirror, these realities perceptible to the sense, interacting, “a lui si
tiri” untouched by the two maladies, the Hebrew disease, the
Hindoo disease, fanaticisms and excess that produce Savonarola,
asceticisms that produce fakirs, St. Clement of Alexandria, with his
prohibition of bathing by women.
(Anderson 1983:208)
 
Elsewhere in the same essay Pound shifted this ideological standpoint
by linking his interest in medieval poetry to an anti-commercialism
with radical democratic leanings. Cavalcanti’s philosophical canzone,
“Donna mi prega,”
 
shows traces of a tone of thought no longer considered dangerous,
but that may have appeared about as soothing to the Florentine of

Margin
191
A.D. 1290 as conversation about Tom Paine, Marx, Lenin and
Bucharin would to-day in a Methodist bankers’ board meeting in
Memphis, Term.
(ibid.:203)
 
Pound, like Bunting and Eliot, concealed his modernist appropriation
of foreign texts behind a claim of cultural autonomy for translation. He
concluded his 1929 essay “Guido’s Relations” by briefly distinguishing
between an “interpretive translation,” prepared as an
“accompaniment” to the foreign text, and “the ‘other sort’” of
translation, which possesses an aesthetic independence:
 
The “other sort,” I mean in cases where the “translator” is definitely
making a new poem, falls simply in the domain of original writing,
or if it does not it must be censured according to equal standards,
and praised with some sort of just deduction, assessable only in the
particular case.
(Anderson 1983:251)
 
Pound drew this distinction when he published his own translations.
As David Anderson has observed, the 1920 collection Umbra: The Early
Poems of Ezra Pound ended with a “Main outline of E.P.’s works to
date,” in which Pound classified “The Seafarer,” “Exile’s Letter (and
Cathay in general),” and “Homage to Sextus Propertius” as “Major
Personae,” whereas his versions of Cavalcanti and Provençal poets like
Arnaut Daniel were labelled “Etudes,” study guides to the foreign texts
(Anderson 1983:xviii–xix). Pound saw them all as his “poems,” but
used the term “Major Personae” to single out translations that
deserved to be judged according to the same standards as his “original
writing.” The appeal to these (unnamed) standards means of course
that Pound’s translations put foreign texts in the service of a modernist
poetics, evident, for example, in his use of free verse and precise
language, but also in the selection of foreign texts where a “persona”
could be constructed, an independent voice or mask for the poet. Here
it is possible to see that the values Pound’s autonomous translations
inscribed in foreign texts included not only a modernist poetics, but an
individualism that was at once romantic and patriarchal. He
characterized the translation that is a “new poem” in the
individualistic terms of romantic expressive theory (“the expression of
the translator”). And what received expression in translations like
“The Seafarer” and “The River Merchant’s Wife: A Letter” was the

192
The Translator’s Invisibility
psychology of an aggressive male or a submissive female in a male-
dominated world.
Yet Pound’s translation theory and practice were various enough to
qualify and redirect his modernist appropriation of foreign texts, often
in contradictory ways. His concept of “interpretive translation,” or
“translation of accompaniment,” shows that for him the ideal of
cultural autonomy coincided with a kind of translation that made
explicit its dependence on domestic values, not merely to make a
cultural difference at home, but to signal the difference of the foreign
text. In the introduction to his translation, Sonnets and Ballate of Guido
Cavalcanti (1912) , Pound admitted that “in the matter of these
translations and of my knowledge of Tuscan poetry, Rossetti is my
father and my mother, but no one man can see everything at once”
(Anderson 1983:14). Pound saw Dante Gabriel Rossetti’ s versions as
the resource for an archaic lexicon, which he developed to signify the
different language and cultural context of Cavalcanti’s poetry:
 
It is conceivable the poetry of a far-off time or place requires a
translation not only of word and of spirit, but of “accompaniment,”
that is, that the modern audience must in some measure be made
aware of the mental content of the older audience, and of what these
others drew from certain fashions of thought and speech. Six
centuries of derivative convention and loose usage have obscured
the exact significance of such phrases as: “The death of the heart,”
and “The departure of the soul.”
(ibid.:12)
 
The translation of accompaniment required bilingual publication. It
signified the cultural difference of the foreign text by deviating from
current English usage and thereby sending the reader across the page
to confront the foreign language. “As to the atrocities of my
translation,” Pound wrote in “Cavalcanti,” “all that can be said in
excuse is that they are, I hope, for the most part intentional, and
committed with the aim of driving the reader’s perception further into
the original than it would without them have penetrated” (Anderson
1983:221). In a 1927 “Postscript” to his variorum edition of Cavalcanti’s
poems, Pound criticized his archaizing strategy, but felt it needed
further refinement, not abandonment, in order to suggest the generic
distinctions in the Italian texts: “the translator might, with profit, have
accentuated the differences and used for the occasional pieces a lighter,
a more Browningesque, and less heavy Swinburnian language”

Margin
193
(ibid.:5). A couple of years later, in “Guido’s Relations,” Pound crankily
condemned his earlier use of archaism, arguing that he “was
obfuscated by the Victorian language,” “the crust of dead English, the
sediment present in my own available vocabulary” (ibid.:243). But
once again he didn’t decide to abandon it. On the contrary, his idea was
that the discourses in English-language translation should be as
heterogeneous as possible: “one can only learn a series of Englishes,”
he insisted, and so “it is stupid to overlook the lingual inventions of
precurrent authors, even when they were fools or flapdoodles or
Tennysons” (ibid.:244). When, in this 1929 essay, Pound offered his
own translation of Cavalcanti as an example, he described his
discourse as “pre-Elizabethan English” (ibid.:250).
Pound’s interpretive translations display this increasing
heterogeneity, particularly since he revised them repeatedly over the
course of several decades. His debt to Rossetti was announced early, in
The Spirit of Romance (1910), where he quoted often and admiringly
from the Victorian poet’s versions of the dolce stil novisti. When Pound
wrote his own first versions of Cavalcanti’s poems, they sometimes
echoed Rossetti’s. Cavalcanti’s evocation of the angelic lady—
 
Chi è questa che vien, ch’ogni uom la mira,
Che fa di clarità l’aer tremare!
E mena seco Amor, sì che parlare
Null’uom ne puote, ma ciascun sospira?
Ahi Dio, che sembra quando gli occhi gira!
Dicalo Amor, ch’io nol saprei contare;
Cotanto d’umiltà donna mi pare,
Che ciascun’altra in vêr di lei chiam’ira.
Non si potria contar la sua piacenza,
Ch’a lei s’inchina ogni gentil virtute,
E la beltate per sue Dea la mostra.
Non fu sì alta gia la mente nostra,
E non si è posta in noi tanta salute,
Che propriamente n’abbiam conoscenza.
(Anderson 1983:42)
 
—was translated fluently by Rossetti, who resorted to a relatively
unobtrusive archaism in verse form (an Italianate sonnet) and in
diction (“thereon,” “benison,” “ne’er”)—relatively unobtrusive, that is,
in the context of Victorian poetry:
 

194
The Translator’s Invisibility
Who is she coming, whom all gaze upon,
     Who makes the air all tremulous with light,
And at whose side is Love himself? that none
     Dare speak, but each man’s sighs are infinite.
     Ah me! how she looks round from left to right,
Let Love discourse: I may not speak thereon.
Lady she seems of such high benison
     As makes all others graceless in men’s sight.
The honour which is hers cannot be said;
    To whom are subject all things virtuous,
While all things beauteous own her deity.
   Ne’er was the mind of man so nobly led,
   Nor yet was such redemption granted us
That we should ever know her perfectly.
(Rossetti 1981:223)
 
Some of Rossetti’s deviations from the Italian improve the fluency of
the translation by simplifying the syntax. “At whose side is Love
himself,” for instance, is a free rendering of “mena seco Amor” that
reads much more easily than a closer version like “she leads Love with
herself.” Rossetti also added different nuances to Cavalcanti’s
idealization of the lady, making it more moral or spiritual, even
theological, by using “benison” for “umiltà” (“humility,” “meekness,”
“modesty”), “honour” for “piacenza” (“pleasantness”), and
“redemption” for “salute” (“health,” “salvation”). Pound’s 1910
version quoted Rossetti’s, but it adhered more closely to the Italian text
and noticeably increased the archaism. Next to Rossetti’s version,
moreover, Pound’s offered a more human image of the lady by
referring to her “modesty” and “charm” and suggesting that she
commands the attention of an aristocratic elite (“noble powers”). The
lover meanwhile possesses a knightly “daring” that “ne’er before did
look so high,” spiritually or socially:
 
Who is she coming, whom all gaze upon,
Who makes the whole air tremulous with light,
And leadeth with her Love, so no man hath
Power of speech, but each one sigheth?
Ah God! the thing she’s like when her eyes turn,
Let Amor tell! ’Tis past my utterance:
And so she seems mistress of modesty
That every other woman is named “Wrath.”

Margin
195
Her charm could never be a thing to tell
For all the noble powers lean toward her.
Beauty displays her for an holy sign.
Our daring ne’er before did look so high;
But ye! there is not in you so much grace
That we can understand her rightfully.
(Anderson 1983:43)
 
The version Pound published in his 1912 collection, Sonnets and Ballate,
constituted a substantial revision, but it did not alter his basic
archaizing strategy:
 
Who is she coming, drawing all men’s gaze,
Who makes the air one trembling clarity
Till none can speak but each sighs piteously
Where she leads Love adown her trodden ways?
Ah God! The thing she’s like when her glance strays,
Let Amor tell. ’Tis no fit speech for me.
Mistress she seems of such great modesty
That every other woman were called “Wrath.”
No one could ever tell the charm she hath
For all the noble powers bend toward her,
She being beauty’s godhead manifest.
Our daring ne’er before held such high quest;
But ye! There is not in you so much grace
That we can understand her rightfully.
(ibid.:45)
 
Pound retained some of his borrowings from Rossetti and used
additional archaic forms (“adown,” “godhead,” “quest”) that
introduced a romantic medievalism traced with misogyny. The opening
characterized the lady as a Keatsian “belle dame sans merci,” implying
that she exploits her commanding beauty (“drawing all men’s gaze”) to
victimize her many admirers (“each sighs piteously”) with some
frequency (“adown her trodden ways”). There was even a hint of moral
imperfection, a potential for infidelity (“her glance strays”).
In 1932, Pound published Guido Cavalcanti Rime, a critical edition of
the Italian texts along with several translations that included a final version

196
The Translator’s Invisibility
of this sonnet. Here the archaism was pushed to an extreme, apparent not
just in Pound’s lexicon, syntax, and orthography, but also in pseudo-archaic
neologism (“herward”). The lady underwent yet another metamorphosis,
this time into a mystical image “that borders the visible”:
 
Who is she that comes, makying turn every man’s eye
And makyng the air to tremble with a bright clearnesse
That leadeth with her Love, in such nearness
No man may proffer of speech more than a sigh?
Ah God, what she is like when her owne eye turneth, is
Fit for Amor to speake, for I can not at all;
Such is her modesty, I would call
Every woman else but an useless uneasiness.
No one could ever tell all of her pleasauntness
In that every high noble vertu leaneth to herward,
So Beauty sheweth her forth as her Godhede;
Never before was our mind so high led,
Nor have we so much of heal as will afford
That our thought may take her immediate in its embrace.
(Anderson 1983:46)
 
The lady is portrayed as perceptible to the senses but unattainable in
her spirituality, a neo-Platonic Idea that exceeds even the quasi-
physical “embrace” of human “thought.” This representation
certainly pinpoints a central theme in the dolce stil nuovo, but it is also
recognizable as Pound’s modernist reading of the medieval poetries
he celebrated: “The conception of the body as perfected instrument of
the increasing intelligence pervades” (ibid.:206); “the central theme of
the troubadours, is the dogma that there is some proportion between
the fine thing held in the mind, and the inferior thing ready for instant
consumption” (ibid.:205). Just as in “Philip Massinger” (1920) Eliot
posited a unified “sensibility” in English literary culture before the
late seventeenth century, “a period when the intellect was
immediately at the tips of the senses” (Eliot 1950:185), Pound
discovered a “harmony of the sentient” in Cavalcanti, “where the
thought has its demarcation, the substance its virtù, where stupid men
have not reduced all ‘energy’ to unbounded undistinguished
abstraction” (Anderson 1983:209).

Margin
197
On the thematic level, Pound’s translations inscribed Cavalcanti’s
texts with values that differed from Rossetti’s in being both modernist
and patriarchal, notably in the representation of the lady, transformed
by his revisions from “the inferior thing ready for instant
consumption” into “the fine thing held in the mind.” But Pound’s
successive versions were also interrogative in their relation to the
Italian texts and to Rossetti’s translations, showing how the female
idealization of the dolce stil novisti and the pre-Raphaelites assumed a
female degradation, a misogynist suspicion that the lady’s value is
“inferior,” dependent on the male imagination. In fashioning himself
as a poet-translator, Pound was competing against two poetic
“fathers,” Cavalcanti and Rossetti, and this oedipal competition took
the form of revising the image of the lady.
On the level of discourse, however, Pound’s translations don’t
easily support the positivist concept of language in his modernist
readings. The dense archaism hardly produces the illusionistic
effect of transparency that he valued in the dolce stil novisti, what
he described so rapturously as the virtual invisibility of literary
form, “the glass under water” (Anderson 1983:208). The
peculiarities of Pound’s archaic text preempt any illusionism by
calling attention to the language as a specific kind of English, a
poetic discourse linked to a specific historical moment that is
neither Pound’s nor Cavalcanti’s nor Rossetti’s. The final version
of the sonnet, “Who is she that comes,” was the text Pound quoted
in “Guido’s Relations” to illustrate how “pre-Elizabethan English”
can be used to translate Cavalcanti. Pound’s rationale for this
discourse was distinctively modernist: he described the pre-
Elizabethan as “a period when the writers were still intent on
clarity and explicitness, still preferring them to magniloquence and
the thundering phrase” (ibid.:250). But Pound also knew that his
archaizing strategy resulted less in clarity and explicitness than in
a sense of oddity or unfamiliarity:
 
The objections to such a method are: the doubt as to whether one
has the right to take a serious poem and turn it into a mere exercise
in quaintness; the “misrepresentation” not of the poem’s antiquity,
but of the proportionate feel of that antiquity, by which I mean that
Guido’s thirteenth-century language is to twentieth-century Italian
sense much less archaic than any fourteenth-, fifteenth-, or early
sixteenth-century English is for us.
(ibid.:250)

198
The Translator’s Invisibility
The archaism did not achieve any greater fidelity to the Italian texts,
nor did it establish an analogy between two past cultures, one Italian,
the other English. Despite Pound’s modernist pronouncements, the
archaism could not overcome “six centuries of derivative convention
and loose usage” to communicate “the exact significances of such
phrases as: ‘The death of the heart,’ and ‘The departure of the soul’”
because it pointed to a different literary culture in a different language
at a different historical moment (Anderson 1983:12). Pound’s pre-
Elizabethan English could do no more than signify the remoteness of
Cavalcanti’s poetry, along with the impossibility of finding any exact
linguistic and literary equivalent. And the archaism did this only
because it radically departed from cultural norms that currently
prevailed in English. This is perhaps most noticeable in Pound’s
archaic prosody: as Anderson has observed, he wanted “to free the
cadence of his English versions from the Elizabethan and post-
Elizabethan iambic pentameter,” still the standard for English-
language verse at the beginning of the twentieth century (Anderson
1982:13; Easthope 1983).
Pound’s comments on his versions of Arnaut Daniel revealed his
acute awareness that current cultural norms constrained his work as a
translator. These were his most experimental translations, texts where
he developed the most heterogeneous discourses. Like the later
Cavalcanti translations, they mixed various archaic forms, mainly
“Pre-Raphaelite mediaevalism” (Pound’s notation for “Rossetti: Italian
poets” in The ABC of Reading (Pound 1960:133)) and pre-Elizabethan
English, culled mainly from Gavin Douglas’s 1531 version of the
Aeneid, but also from such early Tudor poets as Sir Thomas Wyatt
(McDougal 1972:114; Anderson 1982:13). And there were occasional
traces of twentieth-century American colloquialism and foreign
languages, particularly French and Provençal. The following
exemplary passages are excerpts from the translations Pound
published in his essay, “Arnaut Daniel” (1920):
 
When I see leaf, and flower and fruit
     Come forth upon light lynd and bough,
And hear the frogs in rillet bruit,
     And birds quhitter in forest now,
Love inkirlie doth leaf and flower and bear,
And trick my night from me, and stealing waste it,
Whilst other wight in rest and sleep sojourneth.
(Pound 1953:177)

Margin
199
So clear the flare
That first lit me
To seize
Her whom my soul believes;
If cad
Sneaks,
Blabs, slanders, my joy
Counts little fee
Baits
And their hates.
     I scorn their perk
     And preen, at ease.
Disburse
Can she, and wake
Such firm delights, that I
Am hers, froth, lees
Bigod! from toe to earring.
(ibid.:161, 163)
 
Flimsy another’s joy, false and distort,
No paregale that she springs not above. […]
Her love-touch by none other mensurate.
To have it not? Alas! Though the pains bite
Deep, torture is but galzeardy and dance,
For in my thought my lust hath touched his aim.
God! Shall I get no more! No fact to best it!
(ibid.:179, 181)
 
Pound saw these as interpretive translations that highlighted
the elaborate stanzaic forms of the Provençal texts, mimicking
their rhythms and sound effects. But he also knew that by
doing so his translations ran counter to literary values that
prevailed in modern European languages like English and
French. In the essay on Daniel, he apologized for his
deviations:
 
in extenuation of the language of my verses, I would point out
that the Provençals were not constrained by the modern
literary sense. Their restraints were the tune and rhyme-
scheme, they were not constrained by a need for certain
qualities of writing, without which no modern poem is

200
The Translator’s Invisibility
complete or satisfactory. They were not competing with De
Maupassant’s prose.
(Pound 1954:115)
 
The mention of De Maupassant indicates that Pound’s translations
could signify the difference of Daniel’s musical prosody only by
challenging the transparent discourse that dominates “the modern
literary sense,” most conspicuously in realistic fiction. To mimic an
archaic verse form, Pound developed a discursive heterogeneity that
refused fluency, privileging the signifier over the signified, risking not
just the unidiomatic, but the unintelligible. In a 1922 letter to Felix
Schelling, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania who taught
Pound English literature and unfavorably reviewed his Daniel
translations, Pound cited the cultural remoteness of troubadour poetry
as “the reason for the archaic dialect”: “the Provençal feeling is archaic,
we are ages away from it” (Pound 1950:179). And Pound measured this
remoteness on a scale of current English-language values:
 
I have proved that the Provençal rhyme schemes are not impossible
in English. They are probably inadvisable. The troubadour was not
worried by our sense of style, our “literary values,” so he could
shovel in words in any order he liked. […] The troubadour,
fortunately perhaps, was not worried about English order; he got
certain musical effects because he cd. concentrate on music without
bothering about literary values. He had a kind of freedom which we
no longer have.
(ibid.)
 
Pound’s translations signified the foreignness of the foreign text, not
because they were faithful or accurate—he admitted that “if I have
succeeded in indicating some of the properties […] I have also let
[others] go by the board” (Pound 1954:116)—but because they deviated
from domestic literary canons in English.
Pound’s first versions of Cavalcanti’s poetry did in fact look alien to
his contemporaries. In a review of the Sonnets and Ballate that appeared
in the English Poetry Review (1912), professor of Italian Arundel del Re
found the translation defective and not entirely comprehensible,
including the bilingual title: “The translation of the ‘Sonnets and
Ballate’—why not Sonetti e Ballate or Sonnets and Ballads?—show the
author to be earnestly striving after a vital idea of which one
sometimes catches a glimpse amidst the general tangle and disorder”

Margin
201
(Homberger 1972:88). Yet Del Re recognized the historicizing effect of
Pound’s archaism, quoting phrases from Pound’s own introduction to
describe it: “Notwithstanding its almost overpowering defects this is a
sincere if slip-shod attempt to translate into English the
‘accompaniment’ and ‘the mental content of what the contemporaries
of Guido Cavalcanti drew forth from certain forms of thought and
speech’” (ibid.). In John Bailey’s review for the Times Literary
Supplement, the “strangeness” of Pound’s translation also began with
the choice of foreign text: he felt that “though not belonging to the high
universal order,” Cavalcanti’s poetry does possess the “peculiar
charm” of “an escape from all that is contemporary or even actual into
[the] hortus conclusus of art” (Homberger 1972:88). But what Bailey
found unpleasantly strange about Pound’s translation was that,
compared to Rossetti’s, it was utterly lacking in fluency:
 
He is sometimes clumsy, and often obscure, and has no fine tact
about language, using such words and phrases as “Ballatet,”
“ridded,” “to whomso runs,” and others of dubious or unhappy
formation. A more serious fault still is that he frequently absolves
himself altogether from the duty of rhyming, and if an English blank
verse sonnet were ever an endurable thing it would not be when it
pretends to represent an Italian original.
(ibid.:91)
 
Bailey praised Rossetti because he “preserves” a great deal “more of
the original rhyme and movement” (ibid.:92). What constituted fluent
translation for Bailey was not just univocal meaning, recognizable
archaism, and prosodic smoothness, but a Victorian poetic discourse,
pre-Raphaelite medievalism, only one among other archaic forms in
Pound’s translations. The fact that Pound was violating a hegemonic
cultural norm is clear at the beginning of Bailey’s review, where he
allied himself with Matthew Arnold and claimed to speak for “any rich
and public-spirited statesman of intellectual tastes to-day” (ibid.:89).
Other commentators were more appreciative of Pound’s work as a
translator, but their evaluations differed according to which of his
changing rationales they accepted. In a 1920 article for the North
American Review, May Sinclair, the English novelist who was a friend of
Pound’s, offered a favorable assessment of his publications to date.
Following Pound’s sense of the cultural remoteness of Provençal
poetry, Sinclair argued that the archaism in his translations signalled
the absence of any true equivalence in modern English:

202
The Translator’s Invisibility
By every possible device—the use of strange words like “gentrice”
and “plasmatour”—he throws [Provençal poetry] seven centuries
back in time. It is to sound as different from modern speech as he
can make it, because it belongs to a world that by the very nature of
its conventions is inconceivably remote, inconceivably different
from our own, a world that we can no longer reconstruct in its
reality.
(Homberger 1972:183)
 
In a 1932 review of Guido Cavalcanti Rime for Hound & Horn, A. Hyatt
Mayor followed Pound’s modernist reading of the Italian texts, his
positivist sense of their precise language, and therefore didn’t see the
strangeness of the archaism, praising the translations instead for
establishing a true equivalence to the “freshness” of the Italian:
 
The quaint language is not a pastiche of pre-Shakespearean sonnets,
or an attempt to make Cavalcanti talk Elizabethan the way Andrew
Lang made Homer try to talk King James. Ezra Pound is matching
Cavalcanti’s early freshness with a color lifted from the early
freshness of English poetry.
(Mayor 1932:471)
 
Sinclair saw that Pound’s translations were interpretive in their use of
archaism, meant to indicate the historical distance of the foreign text,
whereas Mayor took the translations as independent literary works
that could be judged against others in the present or past, and whose
value, therefore, was timeless. “The English seems to me as fine as the
Italian,” he wrote, “In fact, the line Who were like nothing save her shadow
cast is more beautifully definite than Ma simigliavan sol la sua ombria”
(ibid.:470).
Pound’s theory and practice of interpretive translation reverse
the priorities set by modernist commentators on translation like
Mayor, Bunting, Eliot, and Pound himself. Interpretive translation
contradicts the ideal of autonomy by pointing to the various
conditions of the translated text, foreign as well as domestic, and
thus makes clear that translation can make a cultural difference at
home only by signifying the difference of the foreign text. The
discursive heterogeneity of Pound’s interpretive translations,
especially his use of archaism, was both an innovation of
modernist poetics and a deviation from current linguistic and
literary values, sufficiently noticeable to seem alien. Pound shows

Margin
203
that in translation, the foreignness of the foreign text is available
only in cultural forms that already circulate in the target language,
some with greater cultural capital than others. In translation, the
foreignness of the foreign text can only be what currently appears
“foreign” in the target-language culture, in relation to dominant
domestic values, and therefore only as values that are marginal in
various degrees, whether because they are residual, survivals of
previous cultural forms in the target language, or because they are
emergent, transformations of previous forms that are recognizably
different, or because they are specialized or nonstandard, forms
linked to specific groups with varying degrees of social power and
prestige. The foreign can only be a disruption of the current
hierarchy of values in the target-language culture, an estrangement
of them that seeks to establish a cultural difference by drawing on
the marginal. Translation, then, always involves a process of
domestication, an exchange of source-language intelligibilities for
target-language ones. But domestication need not mean
assimilation, i.e., a conservative reduction of the foreign text to
dominant domestic values. It can also mean resistance, through a
recovery of the residual or an affiliation with the emergent or the
dominated—choosing to translate a foreign text, for instance, that
is excluded by prevalent English-language translation methods or
by the current canon of foreign literature in English and thus
forcing a methodological revision and a canon reformation.
The remarkable thing about modernist translation is that, even
though in theoretical statements it insists on the cultural autonomy
of the translated text, it still led to the development of translation
practices that drew on a broad range of domestic discourses and
repeatedly recovered the excluded and the marginal to challenge
the dominant. Pound’s translations avoided the transparent
discourse that has dominated English-language translation since
the seventeenth century. Instead of translating fluently,
foregrounding the signified and minimizing any play of the
signifier that impeded communication, pursuing linear syntax,
univocal meaning, current usage, standard dialects, prosodic
smoothness, Pound increased the play of the signifier, cultivating
inverted or convoluted syntax, polysemy, archaism, nonstandard
dialects, elaborate stanzaic forms and sound effects—textual
features that frustrate immediate intelligibility, empathic response,
interpretive mastery. And by doing this Pound addressed the
problem of domestication that nags not just his own claim of

204
The Translator’s Invisibility
cultural autonomy, but also the transparent discourse dominating
English-language translation. Transparency inscribes the foreign
text with dominant English values (like transparency) and
simultaneously conceals that domestication under the illusion that
the translated text is not a translation, but the “original,” reflecting
the foreign author’s personality or intention or the essential
meaning of the foreign text; whereas modernist translation, by
deviating from transparency and inscribing the foreign text with
marginal English values, initiates a foreignizing movement that
points to the linguistic and cultural differences between the two
texts (admitting, of course, that some of the values inscribed by
modernists like Pound are neither marginal nor especially
democratic—e.g. patriarchy).
This is not a concept of translation that modernism theorized with
any consistency, but rather one that its translation theories and
practices make possible. It won’t be found in a modernist critic of
modernism like Bunting, Eliot, or Hugh Kenner, because such critics
accept the claim of cultural autonomy for the translated text. “Ezra
Pound never translates ‘into’ something already existing in English,”
wrote Kenner, “only Pound has had both the boldness and resource to
make a new form, similar in effect to that of the original” (Pound
1953:9). Yet what can now be seen is that a translation is unable to
produce an effect equivalent to that of the foreign text because
translation is domestication, the inscription of cultural values that
differ fundamentally from those in the source language. Pound’s
effects were aimed only at English-language culture, and so he always
translated into preexisting English cultural forms—Anglo-Saxon
patterns of accent and alliteration, pre-Elizabethan English, pre-
Raphaelite medievalism, modernist precision, American colloquialism.
In fact, Pound’s reliance on preexisting forms erases his distinction
between two kinds of translation: both interpretive translations and
translations that are new poems resort to the innovations of modernist
poetics, and so both can be said to offer “a photograph, as exact as
possible, of one side of the statue” (Anderson 1983:5)—the side
selected and framed by English-language modernism. The discursive
heterogeneity Pound created may have made the translated texts look
“new”—to modernists—but it was also a technique that signalled their
difference, both from dominant English values and from those that
shaped the foreign text. Modernism enables a postmodernist concept
of translation that assumes the impossibility of any autonomous
cultural value and views the foreign as at once irredeemably mediated

Margin
205
and strategically useful, a culturally variable category that needs to be
constructed to guide the translator’s intervention into the current
target-language scene.
II
By the start of the 1950s, modernist translation had achieved
widespread acceptance in Anglo-American literary culture—but only
in part, notably the claim of cultural autonomy for the translated text
and formal choices that were now familiar enough to insure a
domestication of the foreign text, i.e., free verse and precise current
language. The most decisive innovations of modernism inspired few
translators, no doubt because the translations, essays, and reviews that
contained these innovations were difficult to locate, available only in
obscure periodicals and rare limited editions, but also because they ran
counter to the fluent strategies that continued to dominate English-
language poetry translation. The first sign of this marginalization was
the reception given to the selected edition of Pound’s translations
published by the American press New Directions in 1953. This book
offered a substantial retrospective, reprinting his latest versions of
Cavalcanti and Daniel in bilingual format, as well as “The Seafarer,”
Cathay, Noh plays, a prose text by Rémy de Gourmont, and a
miscellany of poetry translations from Latin, Provençal, French, and
Italian.
At the time of this publication, Pound was an extremely
controversial figure (Stock 1982:423–424, 426–427; Homberger
1972:24–27). His wartime radio broadcasts under Mussolini’s
government got him tried for treason in the United States and
ultimately committed to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital for the Criminally
Insane in Washington DC (1946). But he was also recognized as a
leading contemporary American poet with the award of the Bollingen
Prize for The Pisan Cantos (1948), an event that prompted fierce attacks
and debates in The New York Times, Partisan Review, and the Saturday
Review of Literature, among other newspapers and magazines. In this
cultural climate, it was inevitable, not just that the translations would
be widely reviewed, but that they would provoke a range of
conflicting responses. Some recognized the innovative nature of
Pound’s work, even if they were unsure of its value; others dismissed
it as a failed experiment that was now dated, void of cultural power.
The favorable judgments came, once again, from reviewers
who shared a modernist cultural agenda. In England, the Poetry

206
The Translator’s Invisibility
Review praised the “clever versification” of the Daniel versions,
while treating their discursive heterogeneity with the sort of
elitism Pound sometimes voiced in his own celebrations of earlier
poetries: “It is said that Arnaut was deliberately obscure, so
that his songs should not be understood by the vulgar. Rather
modern” (Graham 1953:472).1 In the United States, John Edwards’
review for Poetry shared the basic assumption of his Berkeley
doctoral dissertation on Pound—namely, that this was a canonical
American writer—and so the review complained at length that
the translations deserved much better editorial treatment than
New Directions gave them (Edwards 1954:238). Edwards’ sympathy
for modernism was apparent in his unacknowledged quotation
from Kenner’s introduction to the translations (said to represent
“an extension of the possibilities of poetic speech in our language”
(ibid.:238)), but also in a remarkable description of the Cavalcanti
versions that was blind to their dense archaism:
 
One need only read Cavalcanti’s Sonnet XVI in the Rossetti version
(Early Italian Poets), then in the first Pound attempt (Sonnets and
Ballate of Guido Cavalcanti, 1912), and finally in the 1931 Pound
translation given here, and one can watch the crust falling off and
the line grow clean and firm, bringing the original over into English,
not only the words but the poetry.
(ibid.:238)
 
Edwards accepted Pound’s modernist rationale for his
translations: that Cavalcanti’s Italian texts were distinguished
by linguistic precision, and that pre-Elizabethan English
possessed sufficient “clarity and explicitness” to translate them
(Anderson 1983:250). But Edwards lacked Pound’s contrary
awareness that this strategy made the translations less “clean
and firm” than odd or unfamiliar, likely to be taken as “a mere
exercise in quaintness” (ibid.).
There were also reviewers who were more astute in understanding
the modernist agenda of the translations, but who were nonetheless
skeptical of its cultural value. In a review for the New Statesman and
Nation, the English poet and critic Donald Davie, who has attacked the
project of Pound’s poetry even while reinforcing its canonical status in
academic literary criticism,2 saw that the interpretive translations came
with a peculiarly dogmatic claim of cultural autonomy, most evident in
their archaism:

Margin
207
when he translates Cavalcanti, he aspires to give an absolute
translation—not, of course, in the sense that it is to reproduce in
English all the effects of the original, but in the sense that it is to be
Cavalcanti in English for good and all, not just for this generation or
the next few. Hence the archaic diction, sometimes with olde-
Englysshe spelling, […] Pound believes that English came nearest to
accommodating the sort of effects Cavalcanti gets in Italian, in one
specific period, late-Chaucerian or early Tudor.
(Davie 1953:264)
 
But Pound never assumed an “absolute” equivalence between
period styles. In fact, in “Guido’s Relations,” he pointed to the
impossibility of finding an exact English-language equivalent: at
least one quality of the Italian texts “simply does not occur in
English poetry,” so “there is no ready-made verbal pigment for its
objectification”; using pre-Elizabethan English actually involved
“the ‘misrepresentation’ not of the poem’s antiquity, but of the
proportionate feel of that antiquity” for Italian readers (Anderson
1983:250). What seemed too absolute for Davie was really Pound’s
rationale for using archaism: he didn’t like the translations because
he didn’t accept the modernist readings of the foreign texts (“I still
ask out of my ignorance if Cavalcanti is worth all the claims Pound
has made for him, and all the time he has given him” (Davie
1953:264)). Yet Davie did accept the modernist ideal of aesthetic
independence, erasing the distinction between interpretive
translation and new poem by evaluating all Pound’s translations
as literary texts in their own right—and finding the most
experimental ones mediocre performances. The Cavalcanti
versions “give the impression of not a Wyatt but a Surrey, the
graceful virtuoso of a painfully limited and ultimately trivial
convention” (ibid.).
George Whicher of Amherst College reviewed Pound’s translations
twice, and on both occasions the judgments were unfavorable, resting
on an informed but critical appreciation of modernist poetics. In the
academic journal American Literature, Whicher felt that the “evidence
contained in this book” did not support Kenner’s claim of cultural
autonomy: “far from making a new form, Pound was merely
producing a clever approximation to an old one” (Whicher 1954:120).
In the end, Pound’s work as a translator indicated his marginality in
the American literary canon, “somewhat apart from the tradition of the
truly creative American poets like Whitman, Melville, and Emily

208
The Translator’s Invisibility
Dickinson” (ibid.:121). Whicher measured Pound’s translations against
his call for linguistic precision and faulted their “pedantic diction”: “he
had not yet freed himself from the affectation of archaism which marks
and mars his ‘Ballad of the Goodly Frere’” (ibid.:120).3 In the New York
Herald Tribune, Whicher joined Davie in questioning Pound’s choice of
foreign texts, using the translations as an opportunity to treat
modernism as passé, perhaps once seen as “revolutionary,” but rather
“dull” in 1953:
 
It is almost impossible to realize […] how revolutionary was the
publication of “Cavalcanti Poems” in the year 1912. Here was a first
conscious blow in the campaign to deflate poetry to its bare
essentials. […] Now, however, we wonder how so excellent a
craftsman as Pound could have labored through so many dull
poems, even with the help of a minor Italian.
(Whicher 1953:25)
 
The negative reviews of these and other critics (Leslie Fiedler’s, in
a glance at Pound’s hospital confinement, called his Daniel
versions “Dante Gabriel Rossetti gone off his rocker!” (Fiedler
1962:120)) signalled a midcentury reaction against modernism that
banished Pound’s translations to the fringes of Anglo-American
literary culture (Perkins 1987; von Hallberg, 1985), The center in
English-language poetry translation was held by fluent strategies
that were modern, but not entirely modernist—domesticating in
their assimilation of foreign texts to the transparent discourse that
prevailed in every form of contemporary print culture; consistent
in their refusal of the discursive heterogeneity by which modernist
translation sought to signify linguistic and cultural differences.
The review of Pound’s translations written by the influential
Dudley Fitts exemplified this cultural situation in the sharpest
terms.
Fitts (1903–1968) was a poet and critic who from the late thirties
onward gained a distinguished reputation as a translator of classical
texts, for the most part drama by Sophocles and Aristophanes. He
translated Greek and Latin epigrams as well and edited a noted
anthology of twentieth-century Latin American poetry. As translator
and editor of translations, he produced sixteen books, mainly with
the large commercial press Harcourt Brace. His reviews of poetry
and translations were widely published in various magazines, mass
and small circulation, including some linked with modernism:

Margin
209
Atlantic Monthly, The Criterion, Hound & Horn, Poetry, Transition. The
entry on Fitts in Contemporary Authors concisely indicates the
cultural authority he wielded during the fifties and sixties, while
offering a glimpse of the canonical translation strategy his work
represented:
 
Dudley Fitts was one of the foremost translators from the ancient
Greek in this century. Differing from the procedure many scholars
follow, Fitts attempted to evoke the inherent character from the
work by taking certain liberties with the text. The result, most
reviewers agreed, was a version as pertinent and meaningful to the
modern reader as it was to the audiences of Sophocles and
Aristophanes.
(Locher 1980:152)
 
The “inherent character” of “the work,” “as pertinent and
meaningful to the modern reader as” to the Greek “audiences”—the
assumption is that appeals to the foreign text can insure a true
equivalence in the translation, transcending cultural and historical
differences and even the linguistic “liberties” taken by the translator.
This anonymous, somewhat contradictory entry makes clear that
Fitts’s authority as a translator rested on his advocacy of a free,
domesticating method that rewrote the foreign text in recognizable
terms, like “modern” English.
In the preface to his One Hundred Poems From the Palatine Anthology
(1938), Fitts described his method in some detail:
 
I have not really undertaken translation at all—translation, that
is to say, as it is understood in the schools. I have simply tried
to restate in my own idiom what the Greek verses have meant
to me. The disadvantages of this method are obvious: it has
involved cutting, altering, expansion, revision—in short, all the
devices of free paraphrase. […] In general, my purpose has been
to compose, first of all, and as simply as possible, an English
poem. To this end I have discarded poeticisms, even where (as
in Meleagros, for instance) they could have been defended.
Except in certain Dedications and in similar pieces where the
language is definitely liturgical, I have avoided such archaisms
as ‘thou’ and ‘ye’ and all their train of attendant ghosts. Less
defensibly, I have risked a spurious atmosphere of monotheism
by writing ‘God’ for ‘Zeus’ (but Mr. Leslie would have it

210
The Translator’s Invisibility
‘Jupiter’!) whenever the context admitted it without too
perilous a clash.
(Fitts 1956:xvii–xviii)
 
The first thing worth remarking is how much Fitts’s method was
indebted to modernist translation, especially Pound’s work. The
assertion of the aesthetic independence of the translation, the
practice of “altering” the foreign text and using contemporary
English, even the swipe at academic translations, presumably too
literal and therefore not literary—all this characterized Pound’s
translation theory and practice (but also earlier figures in the history
of English-language translation: some of Pound’s views, like
Bunting’s, date back to Denham and Dryden). Fitts knew and
reviewed Pound’s work, corresponded with him during the thirties,
and, at the Choate School, taught Pound’s poetry to James Laughlin,
who launched New Directions and published Fitts’s Palatine
Anthology as well as many of Pound’s books (Stock 1982:322–323;
Carpenter 1988:527–528). Fitts’s most significant departure from
Pound in this volume, a departure that was now determining
Pound’s reception both in and out of the academy, was the refusal
of different poetic discourses, including archaism. Preexisting
cultural materials fade into “ghosts” with the claim of cultural
autonomy for the translation, which can then carry out a
thoroughgoing domestication that inscribes the foreign text with
target-language values, both linguistic (fluency) and cultural (a
Judeo-Christian monotheism—“writing ‘God’ for ‘Zeus’”).
When Fitts reprinted this translation in 1956, he added a “Note”
that apologized for not revising the texts: “My theories of translation
have changed so radically that any attempt to recast the work of
fifteen or twenty years ago could end only in confusion and the
stultification of whatever force the poems may have once had” (Fitts
1956:xiii). But a few years later, when he published an essay on
translation entitled “The Poetic Nuance,” first as a “privately printed”
volume produced by Harcourt “for the friends of the author and his
publishers” (Fitts 1958), then in Reuben Brower’s Harvard University
Press anthology On Translation (Brower 1959), it was clear that Fitts’s
translation theory hadn’t changed at all. He argued the same basic
ideas, which continued to be the canons of English-language poetry
translation, made available by both trade and academic publishers
and underwritten by Fitts’s prestige as a translator and reviewer.
Thus, the point of “The Poetic Nuance” was that “The translation of

Margin
211
a poem should be a poem, viable as a poem, and, as a poem,
weighable” (Fitts 1958:12). Yet the only kind of poem Fitts recognized
was written in a fairly standard American English, punctuated by
familiar and socially acceptable colloquialisms. To present his
argument, Fitts first discussed a poem by the Mexican Enrique
González Martínez that constituted an “attack upon the spurious
elegance of poeticism” (ibid.:13); then he used his own modern
version of an epigram by Martial:
 
Quod nulli calicem tuum propinas,
humane facis, Horme, non superbe.
You let no one drink from your personal cup, Hormus,
when the toasts go round the table.
Haughtiness?
Hell, no.
Humanity.
(ibid.:25)
 
Fitts read the Latin text as Martial’s “joke” about Hormus’
unsavory “hygiene,” concluding that “his fun depends largely
upon the composure of his form, the apparent decorum of his
words” (ibid.), particularly his use of the word humane
(“Humanity”). In Fitts’s reading, “Hormus is personally so
unclean that even he has enough hygienic sense not to press upon
another a cup that he himself has been using”; hence, “his bad
manners are really humanitarianism” (ibid.22). Fitts’s translation
signified this reading by breaking the “decorum” of his English,
shifting from an extremely prosaic, almost rhythmless
colloquialism in the first two lines to a relatively formal, slightly
British abstraction (“Haughtiness”) to a staccato slang expression
(“Hell, no”). The shift from elite formality to popular slang
inscribed the Latin text with a class hierarchy, making the joke
depend on the reader’s acknowledgement that Hormus was
violating class distinctions—and improperly so. Fitts’s
translation, like his reading, constructed a socially superior
position from which to laugh at the character, but the fluency of
the English made this elitism seem natural.
Fitts evidently felt a deep ambivalence toward modernist
translation. He shared Pound’s valorization of linguistic precision in
reading and translating earlier poetries. Fitts’s enthusiastic foreward to

212
The Translator’s Invisibility
Mary Barnard’s 1958 version of Sappho praised her perception that the
Greek texts were written in a “pungent downright plain style”
requiring an appropriately “plain” English:
 
Some say a cavalry corps,
some infantry, some, again,
will maintain that the swift oars
of our fleet are the finest
sight on dark earth; but I say
that whatever one loves, is.
 
I do not see how that could be bettered. Like the Greek, it is stripped
and hard, awkward with the fine awkwardness of truth. Here is no
trace of the “sweete slyding, fit for a verse” that one expects to find
in renderings of Sappho. It is exact translation; but in its
composition, the spacing, the arrangement of stresses, it is also high
art. This, one thinks, is what Sappho must have been like.
(Barnard 1958:ix)
 
Yet Barnard’s version was “exact,” not so much because she found a
true equivalent to the Greek text—she herself later admitted that she
used “padding,” making the fragments more continuous—but rather
because she was influenced by Pound (Barnard 1984:280–284). She
corresponded with Pound during the fifties while he was confined at
St. Elizabeth’s, and she showed him her versions of Sappho, revising
them in accordance with his recommendation that she use “the LIVE
language” instead of “poetik jarg” (ibid.:282). This recommendation
dovetailed with Barnard’s reading of Sappho’s poetry, which was
partly modernist (“It was spare but musical”), partly romantic (“and
had, besides, the sound of the speaking voice making a simple but
emotionally loaded statement”). Barnard finally developed a fluent
strategy that produced the effect of transparency, seeking “a cadence
that belongs to the speaking voice” (ibid.:284), and Fitts appreciated
this illusionistic effect, taking the English for the Greek text, the poem
for the poet: “This, one thinks, is what Sappho must have been like.”
But even though both Fitts and Barnard joined in Pound’s
valorization of linguistic precision, they were unable to share his
interest in a more fragmentary and heterogeneous discourse—i.e., in a
translation strategy that preempted transparency. Thus, Barnard
ignored passages in Pound’s letters where he questioned her

Margin
213
adherence to standard English grammar (“utility of syntax? waaal the
chink does without a damLot”) as well as her cultivation of a
“homogene” language:
 
it is now more homogene/it is purrhapz a bit lax/
whether one emend that occurs wd/lax it still more ???
it still reads a bit like a translation/
what is the maximum abruptness you can get it TO?
Fordie: “40 ways to say anything”
     I spose real exercise would consist in trying them ALL.
(Barnard 1984:283)
 
Fitts, in turn, praised Barnard’s Sappho because it was “homogene,”
because it used “exact,” current English without any “spurious
poeticism, none of the once so fashionable Swinburne—Symonds
erethism”: “What I chiefly admire in Miss Barnard’s translations and
reconstructions is the direct purity of diction and versification”
(Barnard 1958:ix).
By the 1950s, Fitts had already reviewed Pound’s writing on a
few occasions, gradually distancing himself from his early
approval.4 His negative review of Pound’s translations typified the
midcentury reaction against modernism: he attacked the most
experimental versions for the distinctively modernist reason that
they didn’t stand on their own as literary texts. “When he fails,”
Fitts wrote, “he fails because he has chosen to invent a no-
language, a bric-a-brac archaizing language, largely (in spite of his
excellent ear) unsayable, and all but unreadable” (Fitts 1954:19).
Fitts revealed his knowledge of Pound’s rationale for using
archaism—namely, its usefulness in signifying the cultural and
historical remoteness of foreign texts—but he rejected any
translation discourse that did not assimilate them to prevailing
English-language values, that was not sufficiently transparent to
produce the illusion of originality:
 
True, Daniel wrote hundreds of years ago, and in Provençal. But he
was writing a living language, not something dragged out of the
remoter reaches of Skeat’s Etymological Dictionary. He said autra
gens, which is “other men,” not “other wight”; he said el bosc l’auzel,
not “birds quhitter in forest”; and so on. Pound […] may have

214
The Translator’s Invisibility
“absorb[ed] the ambience,” but he has not written a “poem of his
own”; he has simply not written a poem.
(ibid.)
 
Phrases like “living language” and “’poem of his own’” demonstrate
that Fitts was very selective in his understanding of Pound’s
translation theory and practice, that he did not share Pound’s interest
in signifying what made the foreign text foreign at the moment of
translation. On the contrary, the domesticating impulse is so strong in
Fitts’s review that foreign words (like “autra gens”) get reduced to the
most familiar contemporary English version, (“other men”) as if this
version were an exact equivalent, or he merely repeats them, as if
repetition had solved the problem of translation (“he said el bosc l’auzel,
not ‘birds quhitter in forest’”). Like Davie, Fitts ignored Pound’s
concept of interpretive translation, evaluating the Daniel versions as
English-language poems, not as study guides meant to indicate the
differences of the Provençal texts. And, again, the poems Fitts found
acceptable tended to be written either in a fluent, contemporary
English that was immediately intelligible or in a poetic language that
seemed to him unobtrusive enough not to interfere with the evocation
of a coherent speaking voice. Hence, like many other reviewers, Fitts
most liked what Pound called his “Major Personae”: “We may look
upon The Seafarer, certain poems in Cathay, and the Noh Plays as happy
accidents” (ibid.). Fitts’s work as a translator and as an editor and
reviewer makes quite clear that the innovations of modernist
translation were the casualty of the transparent discourse that
dominated Anglo-American literary culture.
These innovations were generally neglected in the decades after the
publication of Pound’s translations. British and American poets
continued to translate foreign-language poetry, of course, but Pound’s
experimental strategies attracted relatively few adherents. And those
poets who pursued a modernist experimentalism in translation found
their work dismissed as an aberration of little or no cultural value.
Perhaps no translation project in the post-World War II period better
attests to this continuing marginality of modernism than Celia and
Louis Zukofsky’s remarkable version of Catullus.
Working over roughly a ten-year period (1958–1969), the Zukofskys
produced a homophonic translation of the extant canon of Catullus’s
poetry, 116 texts and a handful of fragments, which they published in
a bilingual edition in 1969 (Zukofsky and Zukofsky: 1969).5 Celia wrote
a close English version for every Latin line, marked the quantitative

Margin
215
meter of the Latin verse, and parsed every Latin word; using these
materials, Louis wrote English-language poems that mimic the sound
of the Latin while also attempting to preserve the sense and word order.
The Zukofskys’ preface, written in 1961, offered a very brief statement
of their method: “This translation of Catullus follows the sound, rhythm,
and syntax of his Latin—tries, as is said, to breathe the ‘literal’ meaning
with him” (Zukofsky 1991:243). Refusing the free, domesticating method
that fixed a recognizable signified in fluent English, the Zukofskys
followed Pound’s example and stressed the signifier to make a
foreignized translation—i.e., a version that deviated from the dominant
transparency. This foreignizing process began in their title, where they
retained a Latin version that possessed both a scholarly elegance and
the promise of a narrow, if not inscrutable, specialization: Gai Valeri
Catulli Veronensis Liber (in a close rendering, “The Book of Gaius Valerius
Catullus from Verona”). One reviewer was moved to write that “their
no-English title offers to elucidate nothing” (Braun 1970:30).
Below is one of Catullus’s brief satiric poems, done first by Charles
Martin, whose fluent translation explicitly adopts Dryden’s free
method, and then by the Zukofskys, whose discourse is marked by
abrupt syntactical shifts, polysemy, discontinuous rhythms:
 
Nulli se dicit mulier mea nubere malle
     quam mihi, non si se Iuppiter ipse petat.
dicit: sed mulier cupido quod dicit amanti,
     in uento et rapida scribere oportet aqua.
My woman says there is no one she’d rather marry
     than me, not even Jupiter, if he came courting.
That’s what she says—but what a woman says to a passionate
     lover
  ought to be scribbled on wind, on running water
(Martin 1990:xxiv)
 
Newly say dickered my love air my own would marry me all
     whom but one, none see say Jupiter if she petted.
Dickered: said my love air could be o could dickered a man too
     in wind o wet rapid a scribble reported in water.
(Zukofsky 1991, no. 70)
 
Although both versions could be considered paraphrases that give a
fair estimation of the Latin sense, the Zukofskys’ homophonic

216
The Translator’s Invisibility
translation is obviously more opaque, frustratingly difficult to read on
its own and only slightly easier if juxtaposed to a transparent version
like Martin’s.
The opacity of the language is due, however, not to the absence of
meaning, but to the release of multiple meanings specific to English.
Jean-Jacques Lecercle (1990) describes such effects of homophonic
translation as the “remainder,” what exceeds transparent uses of
language geared to communication and reference and may in fact
impede them, with varying degrees of violence. As at least one
reviewer of the Zukofskys’ Catullus realized (the classicist Steele
Commager), homophonic translation is an analogue of a modern
French cultural practice, traduscon, translating according to sound, a
method that always results in a proliferation of ambiguities
(Commager 1971). In the Zukofskys’ version, the Latin word “dicit,”
from dicere, a verb meaning “to say,” is rendered homophonically as
the English “dickered,” which carries some of the sense of “say” if it is
taken as “haggled” or “bargained,” but which in this erotic context
becomes an obscene colloquialism for sexual forms of intercourse. The
sequence “my love air” translates “mulier” (“woman”), but the
homophonic method adds the English word “air,” and this sets going
more possibilities, especially in a text that skeptically compares the
woman’s profession of her love to wind. “Air” also puns on “ere,”
introducing an archaism into a predominantly modern English lexicon
and permitting a construction like “my love, ere my own, would marry
me.” The pun on “air” bears out Lecercle’s observation that the
remainder is the persistence of earlier linguistic forms in current usage,
“the locus for diachrony-within-synchrony, the place of inscription for
past and present linguistic conjunctures” (Lecercle 1990:215). He
acknowledges the foreignizing impulse in these effects by comparing
the homophonic translator to the speaker for whom
 
a foreign language is a treasury of strange but fascinating sounds,
and the speaker is caught between the urge to interpret them, the
pervasive need to understand language and the fascinated desire to
play with words, to listen to their sound, regardless of their
meanings.
(ibid.:73)
 
The Zukofskys’ homophonic translation didn’t “interpret” the Latin
words by fixing a univocal meaning, easy to recognize. But they did
“listen to their sound,” and what they heard was a dazzling range of

Margin
217
Englishes, dialects and discourses that issued from the foreign roots of
English (Greek, Latin, Anglo-Saxon, French) and from different
moments in the history of English-language culture.6
To signify the foreignness of Catullus’s poetry, then, Louis Zukofsky
not only sought to bend his English into conformity with the Latin text
and the diverse materials Celia provided him; he also cultivated the
discursive heterogeneity that distinguishes modernist translation,
releasing the remainder in language, recovering marginal cultural
forms to challenge the dominant. Many of the English texts are cast
into a sixteenth-century poetic language, distinctively Elizabethan,
even Shakespearean. This includes isolated words—“hie” (no. 51),
“hest” (no. 104), “bonnie” (no. 110)—but also substantial sections that
evoke the blank verse of English Renaissance drama:
 
Commend to you my cares for the love I love,
Aurelius, when I’m put to it I’m modest—
yet if ever desire animated you, quickened
to keep the innocent unstained, uninjured,
cherish my boy for me in his purity;
(Zukofsky 1991, no. 15)
 
[…] Could he, put to the test,
not sink then or not devour our patrimonies?
In whose name, in Rome’s or that of base opulence—
(ibid., no. 29)
 
 
No audacious cavil, precious quaint nostrils,
or we must cavil, dispute, o my soul’s eye,
no point—as such—Nemesis rebuffs too, is
the vehement deity: laud her, hang cavil.
(ibid., no. 50)
 
There are also strains of an eighteenth-century elegance (“perambulate
a bit in all cubicles” (no. 29), “darting his squibs of iambs” (no. 36),
“tergiversator” (no. 71), a modernist, Joycean experimentation
(“harder than a bean or fob of lapillus” (no. 23), “O quick floss of the
Juventii, form” (no. 24), and a scientific terminology taken from
biology and physics (“micturition” (no. 39), “glans” and “quantum”
(no. 88), “gingival” (no. 97)). Last but not least in effect is a rich

218
The Translator’s Invisibility
assortment of colloquialisms, some British (“a bit more bum” (no. 39)),
most American, chosen from different periods in the twentieth century
and affiliated with different social groups: “side-kick” (no. 11),
“canapes” (no. 13), “don’t conk out” (no. 23), “collared” (no. 35),
“faggots” (no. 36), “moochers” (no. 37), “hunk” (no. 39), “amigos” (no.
41), “sub-urban” (no. 44), “con” (no. 86), “bra” (no. 55), “hick” (no. 55),
“kid” (no. 56), “mug” (no. 57), “homo” (no. 81). In the homophonic
context created by the Zukofskys’ translation method, individual
words echo, becoming nodes of different dialects and discourses. In no.
70 (quoted on p. 215), “say” can also mean “for the sake of argument,”
“for example,”or even be a clipped form of the archaic “save”; “see”
can be an abbreviated form of “you see.” These possibilities give a
punchy, colloquial turn to the phrasing, gangster lingo with an
Elizabethan archness: “Newly, say, dickered”; “none, see, save Jupiter.”
A line in no. 17—“your lake’s most total paludal puke”—sounds like a
1950s teenage hipster. There is even a trace of black dialect (“pa’s true
bro” (no. 111), “they quick” (no. 56)), most pronounced in one of the
strongest translations:
 
O rem ridiculum, Cato, et iocosam,
dignamque auribus et tuo cachinno.
ride, quidquid amas, Cato, Catullum:
res est ridicula et nimis iocosa.
deprendi modo pupulum puellae
trusantem: hunc ego, si placet Dionae,
protelo rigida mea cecidi.
 
 
Cato, it was absurd, just too amusing,
fit for your ears & fit to make you cackle!
You’ll laugh if you love your Catullus, Cato:
it was absurd & really too amusing!
Just now I came across a young boy swiving
his girlfriend, and—don’t take offense now, Venus!
I pinned him to his business with my skewer.
(Martin 1990, no. 56)
 
 O ram ridicule home, Cato, the jokes some
dig, now cool your ears so the two cock in—no.
Read: they quick, kid, almost as Cato, Catullus:
raciest ridicule it may not miss jokes.

Margin
219
Prehended a mode of pupa, loon boy lay
crux on to her: and cog I, so placate Dione,
pro tale, o rig it all, me I cogged kiddie.
Zukofsky l991, no.56)
 
The narrow range of Martin’s modern lexicon is highlighted by his use
of “swiving,” which here seems less the archaism that it is (Chaucerian)
than a polite euphemism for sexual activity, comparable to “business”
or “skewer.” The Zukofskys’ homophonic version again shifts abruptly
between discursive registers, from contemporary slang (“dig,” “cool”)
to pseudo-archaic construction (“it may not miss jokes”) to scientific
term (“pupa”) to Elizabethanese (“cog”) to contemporary colloquialism
(“kiddie”). These shifts are foreignizing because, in their deviation from
transparency, they force the English-language reader to confront a
Catullus that consists of the most extreme linguistic and cultural
differences, including self-difference—a self-critical tendency that
questions the source of his own amusement (the head-shaking phrase,
“the jokes some dig”) and points to his own sexual excess, even
suggesting a homoerotic relationship between himself and Cato (“they
quick, kid, almost as Cato [and] Catullus”). This sort of self-
consciousness is so faint as to be absent from both the Latin (“ride,
quidquid amas, Cato, Catullum”) and Martin’s version (“You’ll laugh
if you love your Catullus, Cato”). Martin’s goal was the evocation of
“the poet’s voice” (Martin 1990:xiii), and this meant a fundamental
domestication that fixed a clear, modernized meaning in the Latin text
by assigning Catullus the standard English dialect dotted with some
slang; the Zukofskys’ goal of approximating the sound of the Latin led
them to sound the many voices, standard and nonstandard, that
constitute English speech and writing.
The discursive heterogeneity of the Zukofskys’ Catullus mixes the
archaic and the current, the literary and the technical, the elite and
the popular, the professional and the working-class, the school and
the street. In its recovery of marginal discourses, this translation
crosses numerous linguistic and cultural boundaries, staging “the
return within language of the contradictions and struggles that make
up the social” (Lecercle 1990:182), exposing the network of social
affiliations that get masked by the illusionistic effect of transparency.
And since the Zukofskys’ Catullus calls attention to the social
conditions of its own English-language effects, it interrogates the
unified appearance that English is given in fluent versions like
Martin’s, showing instead that

220
The Translator’s Invisibility
when we speak of “English,” we speak of a multiplicity of dialects,
registers, and styles, of the sedimentation of past conjunctures, of
the inscription of social antagonisms as discursive antagonisms, of
the coexistence and contradiction of various collective arrangements
of utterance, of the interpellation of subjects within apparatuses
embodied in linguistic practices (schools, the media).
(ibid.:229)
 
The recovery of the marginal in the Zukofskys’ Catullus challenges
the illusionism of versions like Martin’s, whereby a standard
English dialect and the dominant translation discourse (i.e.,
transparency) come to appear the right choices for the Latin text, the
means to establish a true equivalence. The Zukofskys’ translation
shows, on the contrary, that these English-language cultural forms
are not so much “right” as conservative, engaged in the
maintenance of existing linguistic norms and literary canons and
therefore exclusive of other cultural forms. The Zukofskys’ effort to
admit the marginal makes their translation seem strange in English
because it is abusive, not just of transparent discourse, but of the
Latin text as well. For there can be no doubt that their version, no
matter how “close” to the Latin, enacts an ethnocentric violence in
its imposition of translation effects that work only in English, in an
English-language literary culture.
This translation certainly seemed strange to reviewers, who with
rare exceptions criticized it in the most damning terms. And the sense
of strangeness was measured, not surprisingly, against the canons of
fluent translation, which several reviewers formulated so as to make
clear its origins in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the
Grosseteste Review, an English magazine usually sympathetic to
modernist poetics, Hugh Creighton Hill found fault with the
Zukofskys’ Catullus because it violated the domesticating translation
method favored by Johnson: “According to Samuel Johnson the duty
is one of changing one language into another while retaining the
sense, hence the main reason [to translate] would be to present the
meaning of an otherwise incomprehensible writer in recognisable
terms” (Hill 1970:21). In Arion, an academic journal devoted to
classical literature, Burton Raffel echoed a string of English translation
theorists from Dryden to Tytler when he suggested that translating
Catullus required “(a) a poet, and (b) an ability to identify with, to
almost be Catullus over a protracted period” (Raffel 1969:444). Raffel

Margin
221
praised Peter Whigham’s 1966 Catullus for achieving the
domestication that Denham and Dryden recommended: “it is
recognizably like what Catullus might have said, had he been alive
and well in London” (ibid.:441). Raffel’s valorization of transparency
permitted him to appreciate only those instances in the Zukofskys’
version where the illusionistic effect of authorial presence was the
strongest; and again the terms of his praise recalled countless English
commentators on translation during the Enlightenment: “Zukofsky’s
rendering [of 2a] is easy, graceful; it has an air of confidence, and it
warms to the touch as you read it over and over” (ibid.:437). In the
Poetry Review, Nicholas Moore agreed with Raffel—and the humanist
assumptions of their Enlightenment forebears: “To really get the spirit
of an original postulates a kinship of temperament and even style over
and beyond time, language, nationality and milieu” (Moore 1971:182).
Moore also judged the Zukofskys’ version against the eighteenth-
century reception of Catullus’s poetry, praising “the essential
simplicity” of the Latin texts while inadvertently showing the
domestication at work in this reading with a comparison to several
English poets: Catullus, Moore felt, is “a sort of mixture of Herrick and
Burns with the sharpness of Pope and freedom of the Restoration
thrown in here and there” (ibid.:180). These comments demonstrate
quite clearly that even in the late 1960s and early 1970s, the centuries-
old canons of fluent translation continued to dominate Anglo-
American literary culture.
The fact is that the Zukofskys’ Catullus posed a cultural threat to
unsympathetic reviewers, driving them to make explicit, extreme,
and somewhat contradictory statements about the value of
transparent discourse. In the literary magazine Chelsea, Daniel
Coogan, a teacher of foreign languages at the City University of New
York, asserted that he “can find little to praise in this translation”
because “it is an essential principle of poetry that it be clear”
(Coogan 1970:117). In the New Statesman, the English poet Alan
Brownjohn praised James Michie’s recent version of Catullus as “a
performance of immense lucidity and pace,” while attacking the
Zukofskys’ as “knotted, clumsy, turgid and ultimately silly”
(Brownjohn 1969:151). The demand for immediate intelligibility was
so intense in the reviews that words like “gibberish,” “unreadable,”
and “mad” get repeatedly applied to the Zukofskys’ translation. For
Robert Conquest writing in Encounter, to take their project as
“seriously” as they did “is to feel the chill wind from the abysses of
unreason” (Conquest 1970:57).

222
The Translator’s Invisibility
But the reviews also bear witness to the unreason of transparency.
After earlier stating that “I am not so naive as to believe that I do not
myself have theories of translation, too!” Raffel contradicted himself
by concluding that “translation cannot be accomplished under the
aegis of a theory, but only under the protection of the Muse, who will
tolerate theory, who can make use of madness, but who cannot excuse
failure to perform” (Raffel 1969:437, 445). Raffel questioned whether
the Zukofskys’ translation “theory” had any use at all, whether
aesthetic, scholastic or otherwise. Yet instead of rationalizing the use he
found most desirable, he reverted to an anti-intellectual assertion of
aesthetic value as self-evident, the mystifying Muse that transcends the
limitations of time and space, the differences of language and culture.
He, like Coogan and Brownjohn, was willing to license only that kind
of translation “performance” that conceals its own assumptions and
values with the illusionistic effect of transparency. Raffel’s anti-
intellectualism manifested itself, not merely in his preference for the
sweeping judgment to the theoretically nuanced argument, but also in
his rather naive assumption that transparent discourse truly represents
the foreign text, or, indeed, the foreign author: “no one should have
done this book: it does not perform, and it is neither translation nor
Catullus” (ibid.:445).
Raffel’s concern about the use value of the Zukofskys’ work
showed that he equated translation with domestication; their Catullus
was foreignized, high in abuse value. The English reviewer Nicholas
Moore similarly complained that the Zukofskys’ translation “doesn’t
relate to the present in any real way” (Moore 1971:185), ignoring the
contemporary lexicons on which it draws and failing to admit his own
deep investment in a fairly standard dialect of English tilted toward
Britishisms. He exemplified his privileged discourse by translating
several of Catullus’s poems and publishing his versions with his
review. Here is no. 89 done by him and the Zukofskys:
 
Gellius est tenuis: quid ni? cui tam bona mater
     tamque valens uiuat tamque venusta soror
tamque bonus patruus tamque omnia plena puellis
     cognatis, quare is desinat esse macer?
qui ut nihil attingat, nisi quod fas tangere non est,
     quantumuis quare sit macer invenies
Coldham is rather run-down, and who wouldn’t be!
With so kindly and sexy a mother,

Margin
223
With a sister so sweet and lovable,
With a kindly uncle and such a large circle of
Girl-friends, why should he cease to look haggard?
If he never touched any body that wasn’t taboo,
You’d still find dozens of reasons why he should look haggard!
(Moore 1971)
 
Gellius is thin why yes: kiddin? quite a bonny mater
     tom queued veil lanced viva, tom queued Venus his sister
tom queued bonus pat ‘truce unk,’ tom queued how many
plenum pullets
     cognate is, query is his destiny emaciate?
Kid if he only tingled not seeing what dangler’s there, honest
     can’t he wish where thin sit maker envious.
(Zukofsky 1991)
 
In effect, Moore was recommending a wholesale Anglicization of the
Latin text, down to using the most current English (“sexy”) and
discarding the Latin name for a British-sounding one (“Coldham”).
The Zukofskys’ version offered their estranging combination of
archaism (“bonny”), Britishism (“queued”), American colloquialism
(“bonus,” “unk”), and Latinate words, both popular (“viva,” as in
“Viva Gellius’s mother”) and scientific (“plenum”). The discursive
heterogeneity stops the reader from confusing the English text with the
Latin one, insists, in fact, on their simultaneous independence and
interrelatedness (through homophony), whereas Moore’s fluency blurs
these distinctions, inviting the reader to take a domesticated version
for the “original” and to ignore the linguistic and cultural differences
at stake here.
The marginality of modernist translation projects like the
Zukofskys’ has extended into the present, both in and out of the
academy. Not only do the innovations of modernism inspire few
English-language translators, but the critical commentary these
innovations receive is shaped by the continuing dominance of
transparent discourse—which is to say that they are treated
dismissively, even by the fledgling academic discipline of Translation
Studies. This is apparent in Ronnie Apter’s Digging for the Treasure:
Translation after Pound (Apter 1987).
Apter sought to distinguish Pound’s achievement as a poet—
translator from that of his Victorian predecessors and then measure his
influence on later English-language poetry translation, mainly in the

224
The Translator’s Invisibility
United States. But she was not fond of the most daring modernist
experiments. Although her discussion included many translators, well-
known as well as obscure (Kenneth Rexroth, Robert Lowell, Paul
Blackburn, W.S.Merwin), she totally ignored the Zukofskys’ Catullus,
preferring instead to comment on the free, colloquial version of
Catullus 8 that Louis Zukofsky included in his volume of poems, Anew
(1946). For Apter, what was valuable about this version was its
evocation of a familiar speaking voice, its illusion of transparency: “the
effect recreates Catullus’s pain as if he were alive today” (Apter
1987:56). In line with many other reviewers and critics, she also
professed greater admiration for Pound’s “Major Personae” than for
the interpretive translations in which he pushed his discourse to
heterogeneous extremes. “His translation experiments are interesting,”
Apter observed, “but not entirely successful” (ibid.:67).
The standard of “success” here is fluent, domesticating translation
where discursive shifts are unobtrusive, scarcely noticeable. Thus,
Apter praised Blackburn’s Provençal translations because “he
develops a diction in which both modern colloquialisms and deliberate
archaisms seem at home” (Apter 1987:72). But Pound’s version of
Arnaut Daniel’s “L’aura amara” “is marred by pseudo-archaic
excursions” and “ludicrous” renderings, making it “sometimes
marvelous and sometimes maddeningly awful” (ibid.:70, 71, 68). Apter
definitely shared part of the modernist cultural agenda, notably the
“emphasis on passion and intellect combined.” And she went so far as
to inscribe this agenda in Pound’s translations, calling his versions of
Daniel “Donne-like,” using T.S.Eliot’s reading of “metaphysical”
poetry to describe an English-language translation of a Provençal text
and then concluding, somewhat disingenuously, that it was Pound, not
she, who “has made a semi-successful comparison of Arnaut Daniel
and John Donne” (ibid.:71). The kind of translation Apter preferred,
however, was not modernist, but Enlightenment, not historicist, but
humanist, lacking the distancing effect of the foreign, transparent. She
praised Burton Raffel’s version of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight
because “Raffel has a knack of getting his readers to identify with the
emotions of the fourteenth-century characters,” who come to “seem all
too human” (ibid.:64).7
III
The marginalization of modernism in English-language translation
during the postwar period limited the translator’s options and

Margin
225
defined their cultural and political stakes. Most translators chose a
fluent, domesticating method that reduced the foreign text to
dominant cultural values in English, above all transparent discourse,
but also a varied range of concepts, beliefs, and ideologies that were
equally dominant in Anglo-American culture at this time (Judeo-
Christian monotheism, Enlightenment humanism, cultural elitism).
The few translators who chose to resist these values by developing a
foreignizing method, taking up the innovations pioneered by Pound
to signify the linguistic and cultural differences of the foreign text,
encountered condemnation and neglect. The ways in which this
cultural situation constrained the translator’s activity, the forms of
resistance that a modernist translator might adopt at the margins of
English-language literary culture, are pointedly illustrated by the
career of the American poet Paul Blackburn (1926–1971). The
overriding question in this assessment of Blackburn’s career is
twofold: How did his translation projects come to negotiate the
dominance of transparency and other values in postwar American
culture? And to what extent can he serve as a model of how to resist
this dominance?
Pound played a crucial role in Blackburn’s formation as a poet-
translator. It was under Pound’s influence that Blackburn began
studying Provençal troubadour poetry in 1949–1950, when he was
an undergraduate student at the University of Wisconsin.
Blackburn’s account, in an interview given some ten years later,
shared the skepticism toward academic institutions that Pound
voiced on many occasions, particularly the view that existing
curricula did not include earlier poetries validated by a modernist
cultural agenda. Blackburn cast himself as the advocate of
modernism forcing a revision in the university curriculum by
reviving older course offerings:
 
What got me started on Provençal was reading squibs of it in The
Cantos and not being able to understand it, which annoyed me. It
hadn’t been taught at Wisconsin since the 30’s, so I found Professor
[Karl] Bottke, the medievalist out there, who offered to tutor me in
it. I needed the course for credit, and to give credit he needed five
students. I got him eight and we had a very good course.
(Ossman 1963:22)
 
One of Blackburn’s classmates, Sister Bernetta Quinn, who
subsequently devoted several critical studies to Pound’s writing,

226
The Translator’s Invisibility
described the course as an effort “to act upon their master’s
counsel” in works like The Spirit of Romance (Quinn 1972:94). She
also noted that Blackburn’s imitation of the “master” evolved into a
translation project: “Many of our class assignments, refined,
appeared in 1953 in Blackburn’s Proensa, a revelation of the beauty
to be found in troubadour song ‘made new’ and a tribute to the
influence of Pound” (ibid.).
Published by the poet Robert Creeley’s Mallorca-based Divers
Press, Proensa was a bilingual translation of eleven texts by seven
Provençal poets. It was on the basis of this work that Blackburn
received a Fulbright fellowship to continue his Provençal studies at
the University of Toulouse during 1954–1955. When the fellowship
ended, he stayed in Europe for a couple more years, at first teaching
English conversation at Toulouse while researching Provençal
manuscripts and editions at French and Italian libraries, then moving
through towns in Spain and Mallorca, writing his own poems and
translating. By 1958, Blackburn had produced a substantial book-
length translation of troubadour poetry. As he put it in a postcard to
Pound (dated “IV. 17.58”),
 
I have the anthology of troubadours licked now. 105 pieces (cut fr/
150—and want to bet they’ll want to cut it more?). But the works,
fr. G[uille]m. to Cardenal, Riquier and Pedro de Aragon. (1285). 8
years on this job. I hv. an extra carbon without notes, if you will
send it back after a bit Just say you care to see it.8
 
Perhaps the most decisive moment in Blackburn’s apprentice-ship
as a modernist poet-translator was his correspondence with
Pound. Beginning in 1950 and continuing off and on until 1958,
Blackburn wrote to Pound at St. Elizabeth’s and occasionally
visited him after relocating to New York. With these letters
Blackburn frequently sent Pound his translations, seeking
detailed, word-by-word criticisms as well as answers to specific
questions about the Provençal texts. Pound’s first response,
scrawled over a single sheet of paper, encouraged Blackburn to
develop a translation discourse that “modernized off Joyce onto
Ford” (10 February 1950). Later Pound explicitly endorsed
Blackburn’s translations, instructing Dorothy Pound to write that
“you have a definite feeling for the Provençal and should stick to
it” and then arranging for the publication of one version. In a
typescript added to Dorothy’s letter, Pound wrote: “[Peire Vidal’s]

Margin
227
‘Ab l’alen’ sufficiently approved for Ez to hv/forwarded same to
editor that pays WHEN he prints” (12 August 1950).
Most importantly, Pound’s letters furthered Blackburn’s education
in the modernist cultural agenda. Pound’s first response attacked
language use in the United States from the standpoint of modernist
poetics:
 
     The fatigue,
     The”, my dear Blackpaul,
of a country where no
     exact statements are
ever made!!
(10 February 1950)
 
Pound suggested that Blackburn read certain troubadours from
modernist angles: “Pieire Cardinal was not hiding under aestheticism”
(undated; 1957?); “Try Sordello” (1 December 1950). He recommended
that Blackburn meet other modernist poets living in New York, like
Louis Dudek and Jackson MacLow (4 July 1950). And he urged
Blackburn to study cultural and economic history “to set the stuff IN
something,” to situate his Provençal translations in a historical context
(25 January 1954?). Pound repeatedly criticized academic institutions
for failing to teach a sense of history and sometimes even quizzed
Blackburn on historical figures:
 
Ignorance of history in univ/grads/also filthy. blame not the pore
stewwddent, but the goddam generations of conditioned profs/ //
/thesis fer Sister B/: absolute decline of curiosity re/every vital
problem in U,S. educ/from 1865 onward. whentell did Agassiz die?
anyhow.)
(20 March 1950)
 
The sense of history that Pound taught in these letters avoided any
wholesale reduction of the past to the present, as well as any reduction
of the present to the past. The former led to “‘modernizing’/curricula,
i.e. excluding any basic thought from ALL the goddam univs” (20
March 1950), whereas the latter led to an antiquarianism without
contemporary relevance: “merely retrospective philology LACKS
vitality” (1957?). The “vitality” came from allowing the historical
difference of earlier cultures to challenge the contemporary cultural
situation. “BLACKBURN,” Pound wrote, “might git some life into it IF

228
The Translator’s Invisibility
he/wd/extend his curiosity,” and then he provided a reference to the
historian Brooks Adams’ Law of Civilization and Decay (1895): “Vid
Brooks Adams/Civ/& Dec Knopf reissue/p. 160” (25 January 1954?).
The fact that Blackburn was learning from this correspondence is
clear in his 1953 review of Hugh Kenner’s study The Poetry of Ezra
Pound. Blackburn described Pound’s “strongest and most criticized
positions”: his “case for the honorable intelligence as against the
material cunning of usurers” and “his insistence on definition and
exactitude as against muddle, the deliberate obscuring of facts and
downright mendacity” (Blackburn 1953:217). In this rather negative
review, Blackburn affected a cranky tone that sounded remarkably like
Pound, questioning Kenner’s decision to criticize the critics of The
Cantos: “He puts a mouthful of teeth in those moth-eaten wolves,
journalism and education, and that other pack of elderly puppies who
run with what he calls ‘the upper-middle-brow literary press,’ and
then proceeds to beat them off” (ibid.:215). The question Blackburn
addressed to Kenner, as well as to every reader of Pound’s poetry, was
 
why waste time on the dunderheads? Spend your honest effort
positively, do the honest work, educate from the top, where there is
any. Kung says: “You can’t take all the dirt out of the ground before
you plant seed.”
(ibid.:216)
 
Blackburn seems to be alluding to Pound’s Confucianism in The Cantos
(“Kung says”), an allusion that casts Blackburn as Pound, establishing
a process of identification for the reviewer (an aspiring poet—
translator), yet in a way that is recognizable to the reader of the review,
understood as a pose. The correspondence further complicates the
allusion by revealing another, more competitive level of identification:
this passage from Blackburn’s review is a plagiarism; the tone, the
ideas, even the words are actually Pound’s. Blackburn was quoting
from one of Pound’s letters to him, although without
acknowledgement:
 
Acc/Kung: not necessary to take all the dirt out of
the field before yu plant seed.
Hindoo god of wealth inhabits cow dung. Del Mar: gold mining
     not
only ruins the land, it ruins it FOREVER. No reason to

Margin
229
sleep on a middan.
bombs no kulchurl value.
  
IF possible to educate from the top??
where there is any top. but at least from where one IS.
(12 August 1950)
 
Pound’s adage-like directive to Blackburn—“Acc/Kung”—seems to
suggest that preexisting cultural materials are “necessary” for
innovations, however regressive those materials might appear (“the
dirt”). And indeed this paradox is signified in Pound’s fractured
language, “Acc/Kung,” a pun on “Achtung” (“attention”) that made
the adage at once Chinese and German, a recovery of Confucianism
with a fascistic overtone—the topical resonance of “Achtung” would
have been more pronounced, and more ideologically significant, to an
English-language reader in the Cold War era. Blackburn’s review
transformed this passage from Pound’s letter into a directive that the
critic allow the current cultural situation, however regressive, to
determine the “requisite labor,” the sort of commentary that will
change that situation into one more favorable to Pound’s poetry
(Blackburn 1953:215). In the case of Kenner, this meant educating the
educators (“the top”) about Pound’s “form or technique or the
materials, or what follows from them, what they lead to” (ibid.).
Blackburn charged Kenner with “a too-simple discipleship” while he
himself presumably exemplified a more complicated one, as we now
know, apparent in his plagiarized quotations from Pound’s letters.
In this plagiarism, Blackburn at once assumed and qualified
Pound’s identity, recommending a strategic appropriation of
modernism at a moment when it occupied a marginal position in
American culture. Blackburn’s strategy required an interrogation of
Pound’s modernist cultural politics, revising it to intervene into a later
social situation. He faulted Kenner for an “uncritical” acceptance of
Pound’s modernism
 
without facing the economic and social axes of his criticism, and the
conclusions these entail. The poet, this poet, as economic and social
reformer, is a dilemma all of us must face eventually. It must be
faced before it can be worked. The problem cannot be ignored, nor
will any uncritical swallowing of the man’s facts and theories do.
And it is useless and ignorant to abuse him, simply. There is more
than one madhouse in Washington these days.
(Blackburn 1953:217)

230
The Translator’s Invisibility
The correspondence shows that Blackburn’s identity as poet-translator
was not only modernist, but masculinist. It was constructed on the
basis of an oedipal rivalry with Pound, in which Blackburn sought
approval and encouragement from his poetic father in frank, personal
letters that linked his writing to sexual relationships with women. The
oedipal nature of this rivalry shapes Blackburn’s bohemian self-
portrait in the correspondence, his deviations from bourgeois
respectability, his occasional use of obscenities (“The defense is to not
give a fuck”). His letters imitated the gruff colloquialism of Pound’s
letters, but far exceeded them in shock value (Pound doesn’t go
beyond “goddam”). After Pound wrote that he submitted Blackburn’s
version of Peire Vidal’s “Ab l’alen” to an editor (12 August 1950),
Blackburn’s response made clear the oedipal configuration of his
authorial identity:
 
THANKYOU, POUND. And the dry season is over! Have been
sitting here trying to divert me by reading. NG. Other diversions
physical better for the health et alli. Going to sources like sex and
finally getting it relaxed and fine and broke the drought in a
shower of somethingorother. Pure peace: to go into a woman
relaxed, i.e. in control of the tensions; to sit and write again, i.e. in
control of the tensions. So up and about and seeing and doing and
feeling.
(early September 1950?)
 
Although this remarkable passage opens with Blackburn
thanking Pound “for the practical encouragement” of submitting
the translation, it quickly begins to suggest that Blackburn
himself “broke the drought” in his writing through “sex.”
Blackburn does not challenge Pound in any direct way: one of the
striking things about the passage is the conspicuous omission of
any first-person pronouns that would indicate Blackburn’s
agency. This passage constructs only one subject-position,
Pound’s. Yet an agent appears in the sudden syntactical break at
“broke the drought,” which assumes an “I,” distinct from Pound,
and thus hints at the sexual competition underlying Blackburn’s
identity as poet—translator. This identity is fundamentally a
patriarchal construction requiring the female to be an object of
male sexuality so that Blackburn might regain his “control” over
his writing. A sexual exploitation of “a woman” displaces
Blackburn’s literary dependence on Pound.

Margin
231
A few months later, on his twenty-fifth birthday, Blackburn wrote a
long letter to Pound that continued this link between writing and
sexuality. This time another canonical writer is invoked, and the sexual
partners multiply:
 
A month ago, three weeks, something, I got rid of two girl friends,
picked fights, having adequate reasons, broke off. A month later
both grace my bed at intervals, much more secure because of the
honesty regained in their and my reassessments. One doesn’t
break off relationships. Stories don’t end. Shxpr knew and killed
off all his major characters, ending THEIR story: la seule methode
effectif.
(24 November 1950)
 
Blackburn is again “in control,” devising his own, sexually powerful
concept of “honesty,” writing his own narrative as well as those of his
“girl friends,” here likened to Shakespearean characters as he is to
Shakespeare.
This is the double triangle of Blackburn’s authorial identity: the
rivalry with Pound is worked out through a sexual dominance over
women and an identification with other canonical writers:
 
Funny thing, fear of death. I am twenty-five on this
date. Seen, faced, lived with, worked with, death. We
     are all
familiars with it, the twenty-five to thirty group. Somewhat,
someh o w.
The defense is to not give a fuck.
I am defenseless.
I care about too much.
Your position too. Why you are where you are.
Elective affinities. Good title. (G. was afraid of his genius.)
(Loved many worthy and unworthy women and married—his
housekeeper.)  (ibid.)
 
Blackburn’s imitation of the discontinuous writing in Pound’s letters
resulted in a suggestive free-associating that revealed not only the
height of his poetic ambitions (Goethe), but also their sexual
conditions. The rivalry with Pound, at once literary and sexual, finally
becomes explicit near the end of this letter:

232
The Translator’s Invisibility
Would you care to see more [translations]? I’ll make copies.
Reminding me I shall get you some texts of such stuff for xmas. I
want to give you something. If you need anything I could find for
you let me know. I am unreliable and faithful. If that makes sense to
you. I am faithful to two remarkable women at the same time.
(ibid.)
 
Blackburn is “faithful” to Pound in his respect for the elder writer’s
literary authority, but “unreliable” in his effort to challenge that
authority through assertions of his sexual potency (i.e., when he is
“faithful to two remarkable women at the same time”).
It is impossible to know what Pound thought of such personal
revelations. None of his letters referred to them. Still, after this last
revealing letter from Blackburn, Pound seems to have broken off the
correspondence, which was not resumed for three years. “Is anything
wrong?” Blackburn suddenly wrote in 1953, “Or is it, on your part, a
cessation of correspondence? And do you object if I write you from
time to time, if the latter shot is the case?” (4 July 1953). The
correspondence had become important enough to Blackburn’s sense of
himself as a writer that he needed merely to write to Pound, without
getting any response.
Late in the correspondence, Blackburn’s rivalry emerges in a choice
to translate an obscene Provençal text that Pound, in an access of
bourgeois squeamishness, refused to translate. This was “Puois en
Raimons e n Trucs Malecs,” written by the poet that inspired Pound’s
most innovative translations: Arnaut Daniel. In The Spirit of Romance,
Pound had called Daniel’s text a “satire too rank for the modern
palate” (Pound 1952:35). Blackburn, however, translated it, and on 3
January 1957, writing from Malaga, he sent it to Pound. Here is a
strophe:
 
Better to have to leave home, better into exile,
than to have to trumpet, into the funnel between
the griskin and the p-hole, for from that place there come
matters better not described (rust-colored). And you’d never
have the slightest guarantee that she would not leak
over you altogether, muzzle, eyebrow, cheek.
 
In a cover letter, Blackburn pronounced his translation successful, “fair
literal and the spirit is there,” and he acknowledged Pound’s earlier
sense of its obscenity by adding that “it will never be published.”

Margin
233
Blackburn viewed obscene language as the prerogative of the
modernist poet who uses a colloquial discourse, following William
Carlos Williams, and in his interview with David Ossman he treated
such language as male:
 
if you want to start from the point of view that speech, and that
common speech even, is a very fair and valid medium for poetry,
you’re going to find some people whose common speech is
commoner than most. That would include a lot of male members—
ladies usually watch their language fairly carefully, and that’s only
right.
(Ossman 1963:25)
 
In 1959, soon after Blackburn contracted with Macmillan to publish his
Provençal translation, he again wrote to Pound and suggested that
obscenity was the prerogative of the male poet—translator:
 
Macmillan bringing out the troubadours in a condensed version in
spring, if I get the intro. done. I believe I have saved the literal of
‘tant las fotei com auziretz’ but on the whole, whenever they
complained about strong language, I suggested cutting the piece
entirely from the book. Marcabru, Guillem VII etc. had no protestant
tradition to deal with. Jeanroy cutting, eliminating those stanzas
completely in his fr. literal version in the edition. His wife read the
proofs?
(5 February 1959)
 
Blackburn had rendered the Provençal fotei as “fucked.” The interest in
obscenity, expressed in the version of “Truc Malecs” as well as this
letter, illustrates how the rivalry with Pound determined Blackburn’s
translation projects, occasionally in very direct ways.
The most intensely masculinist expression of this rivalry, at once
intersubjective and intertextual, involves a text by Bertran de Born, a
celebration of feudal militarism on which both Pound and Blackburn
worked: “Bem platz lo gais temps de pascor.” Pound had done a
version of it in The Spirit of Romance, partly in verse and partly in
prose, to illustrate his claim that “De Born is at his best in the war
songs”:
 
E altresim platz de senhor
Quant es primiers a l’envazir

234
The Translator’s Invisibility
En chaval armatz, sens temor,
Qu’aissi fai los seus enardir
     Ab valen vassalatge,
E puois que l’estorns es mesclatz,
Chascus deu esser acesmatz
     E segrel d’agradatge,
Que nuls om non es re prezatz
Tro qu’a maintz colps pres e donatz.
Massas e brans elms de color
E scutz trauchar e desgarnir
Veirem a l’intrar de l’estor
E maintz vassals ensems ferir,
     Dont anaran aratge
Chaval dels mortz e dels nafratz;
E quant er en l’estorn entratz
     Chascus om de paratge,
No pens mas d’asclar chaps e bratz,
Que mais val mortz que vius sobratz.  (Thomas 1971:132)
 
 
Thus that lord pleaseth me when he is first to attack, fearless, on his
armed charger; and thus he emboldens his folk with valiant
vassalge; and then when stour is mingled, each wight should be
yare, and follow him exulting; for no man is worth a damn till he
has taken and given many a blow.
We shall see battle axes and swords, a-battering colored haumes and
a-hacking through shields at entering melee; and many vassals
smiting together, whence there run free the horses of the dead and
wrecked. And when each man of prowess shall be come into the fray
he thinks no more of (merely) breaking heads and arms, for a dead
man is worth more than one taken alive.
(Pound 1952:35)
 
Even though this is a fairly close version, Pound develops a
heterogeneous English-language discourse to indicate the historical
remoteness of the Provençal text—most obviously, an archaic lexicon.
The word “stour” renders the Provençal estorn, estor, meaning
“struggle,” “conflict” (Levy 1966). Pound’s choice is virtually a
homophonic equivalent, a caique, but it is also an English-language
archaism, meaning “armed combat,” initially in Anglo-Saxon, but

Margin
235
retained in Middle and Early Modern English as well. It appears in
Gavin Douglas’s Aeneid, among many other literary texts, prose and
poetry, “pre-Elizabethan” and Elizabethan. Pound’s curious use of
“colored haumes” for the Provençal “elms de color” (“painted
helmets”), effectively increases the archaism in the translation, but its
etymology is uncertain, and it may not strictly be an archaic English
word: it seems closer to a variant spelling of the modern French for
“helmet,” heaume, than to any archaic English variants for “helm” (cf.
OED, s.v. “helm”). What the archaism made seem foreign in this text
was the militaristic theme, which Pound at once defined and
valorized in a suggestive choice. He translated “chascus om de
paratge” as “each man of prowess,” rejecting the possibilities of
“paratge” that are more genealogical (“lineage,” “family,” “nobility”)
and more indicative of class domination, in favor of a choice that
stresses a key value of the feudal aristocracy and genders it male:
“valour, bravery, gallantry, martial daring; manly courage, active
fortitude” (OED, s.v. “prowess”).
In 1909, a year before the publication of The Spirit of Romance,
Pound had published a free adaptation of Bertran’s text, “Sestina:
Altaforte,” in which he used the same archaizing strategy. Here,
however, Pound celebrated the mere act of aggression, characterized
as distinctively aristocratic and masculinist, but devoid of any concept
of bravery:
 
The man who fears war and squats opposing
My words for stour, hath no blood of crimson
But is fit only to rot in womanish peace
Far from where worth’s won and the swords clash
For the death of such sluts I go rejoicing;
Yea, I fill all the air with my music.
(Pound 1956:8)
 
As Peter Makin has argued, Pound’s appropriations of earlier poets
like Bertran serve “as an exemplum, a demonstration of a possible way
of living,” and they are laden with various cultural and ideological
determinations (Makin 1978:42). Makin links the “phallic
aggressiveness” of “Sestina: Altaforte” to Pound’s esteem for “the
‘medieval clean line’” in architecture, as well as to his eulogies of
dictators past and present, like Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta of
Renaissance Rimini and Benito Mussolini, “a male of the species”
(Makin 1978:29–35; Pound 1954:83).

236
The Translator’s Invisibility
Blackburn included a translation of Bertran’s poem in the
troubadour anthology he mentioned to Pound in 1958. He followed
Pound’s example by pursuing a modernist translation strategy,
resorting to free verse with the most subtly intricate rhythms and
making an inventive selection of archaisms. Blackburn’s translation is
a strong performance that competes favorably against both of Pound’s
appropriations of the Provençal text:
 
     And I love beyond all pleasure, that
lord who horsed, armed and beyond fear is
forehead and spearhead in the attack, and there
  
emboldens his men with exploits. When
     
stour proches and comes to quarters
   
may each man pay his quit-rent firmly,
follow his lord with joy, willingly,
for no man’s proved his worth a stiver until
many the blows
he’s taken and given.
Maces smashing painted helms,
glaive-strokes descending, bucklers riven:
this to be seen at stour’s starting!
And many valorous vassals pierced and piercing
striking together!
And nickering, wandering lost, through
the battle’s thick,
brast-out blood on broken harness,
horses of deadmen and wounded.       
And having once sallied into the stour
no boy with a brassard may think of aught, but
the swapping of heads, and hacking off arms—
for here a man is worth more dead
than shott-free and caught!
Blackburn 1958:119–120)
 
“Quit-rent,” “vassals,” “glaive-strokes”—Blackburn created a lexicon
that was obviously medieval, and he occasionally mimicked Anglo-
Saxon patterns of rhythm and alliteration (“brast-out blood on broken
harness”). Yet his translation discourse was not only historicizing, but
foreignizing: some of the archaisms are decidedly unfamiliar, or

Margin
237
anachronistic, used in later periods than the Middle Ages. “Stiver,” a
small coin, is first used in the sixteenth century. The verb “nicker” is a
nineteenth-century usage for “neigh,” appearing in such literary texts
as Sir Walter Scott’s novel The Monastery (1820). “Brassard” is French
for “armor,” but in English it constitutes another nineteenth-century
usage, this time Victorian, adding a touch of pre-Raphaelite
medievalism to the translation. The word “proches” is also French, at
least in spelling; in Blackburn’s translation it is a pseudo-archaic
neologism, an Anglicized French word that appears to be an archaic
variant spelling of “approaches” but actually isn’t (no such spelling is
recorded in the OED).
And of course there is the borrowing from Pound, “stour,” one of
many such borrowings that recur throughout Blackburn’s translations
(Apter 1987:76–77; and Apter 1986). Apter has argued that they
constitute a “homage” to Pound “as the source of [Blackburn’s] interest
in and guide to the translation of Provençal lyrics” (1987:77). But
insofar as the borrowings insert Pound’s language in a different
context, their meaning is variable, and they can just as well signify a
competition with Pound, even a betrayal. Blackburn’s borrowing of
“stour” allows his translation to contest Pound’s appropriations of
Bertran’s poem, and the rivalry is figured, interestingly enough, in
provocative revisions that interrogate the ideological determinations of
Pound’s texts. Thus, in striking contrast to Pound, Blackburn rendered
“chascus om de paratge” as “no boy with a brassard.” The phrase
creates dizzying possibilities of meaning. It can be taken as a modern
colloquialism, an affectionate expression of male bonding. Blackburn
used “boys” in this way at the beginning of Guillem de Poitou’s
Companho, faray un vers…covinen:
 
I’m going to make a vers, boys…good enough,
But I witless, and it most mad and all
Mixed up, mesclatz, jumbled from youth and love and joy—
 
Yet the singular “boy” in the translation can be taken as another sort
of colloquialism, a masculinist expression of contempt, usually for
another’s weakness. Even taken in its most accepted meaning (“male
child”), Blackburn’s use of “boy” neatly ironizes Bertran’s euology
of feudal militarism, branding it as childish, unmanly, and deleting
the suggestion of aristocratic domination in “paratge”. What is
interesting here is that Blackburn’s oedipal rivalry with Pound,
although possessing a masculinist configuration in itself,

238
The Translator’s Invisibility
paradoxically leads to a translation that questions the poetic father’s
phallic aggressiveness, his investment in the feudal patriarchy
figured in the Provençal texts.
This rivalry drove Blackburn to exceed Pound in the development of
a translation discourse that Pound himself had pioneered. And given
the oedipal construction of their relationship, it was inevitable that the
discursive competition would get played out over the troubadour
representations of the lady. Just as Pound produced his innovative
work with Cavalcanti by challenging the pre-Raphaelite image of the
lady in Rossetti’s versions (Pound’s poetic “father and mother”), so
Blackburn increased the heterogeneity of his translations and
questioned Pound’s investment in the patriarchal images of the
Provençal love lyric.
Female characters in Provençal poetry are often the objects of
male sexual desire, but their representation varies according to their
class. Aristocratic women undergo a spiritual and physical
idealization, transformed into a passive ornament by the elaborately
worked imagery of their lovers, who meet with varying sexual
success; women of lower classes receive a more realistic treatment
involving forms of seduction that range from pleasant cajoling to
brutal intimidation. For The Spirit of Romance Pound translated
Marcabru’s “L’autrier jost’un sebissa,” which he identified as a
“pastorella,” a dialogue in which a knight riding through the
country comes upon a farm girl and attempts to seduce her. Pound’s
version is written in precise, current English, lightly archaized:
 
L’autrier jost’un sebissa
trobei pastora mestissa,
de joi e de sen massissa,
si cum filla de vilana,
cap’ e gonel’ e pelissa
vest e camiza trelissa,
sotlars e caussas e lana.
Ves lieis vinc per la planissa:
“Toza, fim ieu, res faitissa,
dol ai car lo freitz vos fissa.”
“Seigner, som dis la vilana,
merce Dieu e ma noirissa,
pauc m’o pretz sil vens m’erissa,
qu’alegreta sui e sana.”

Margin
239
“Toza, fi’m ieu, cauza pia,
destors me sui de la via
per far a vos compaignia;
quar aitals toza vilana
no deu ses pareill paria
pastorgar tanta bestia
en aital terra, soldana.”
(Dejeanne 1971:33)
 
The other day beside a hedge
I found a low-born shepherdess,
Full of joy and ready wit,
And she was the daughter of a peasant woman;
Cape and petticoat and jacket, vest and shirt of fustian,
Shoes, and stockings of wool.
I came towards her through the plain,
“Damsel,” said I, “pretty one,
I grieve for the cold that pierces you.”
“Sir,” said the peasant maid,
“Thank God and my nurse
I care little if the wind ruffle me,
For I am happy and sound.”
“Damsel,” said I, “pleasant one,
I have turned aside from the road
To keep you company.
For such a peasant maid
Should not, without a suitable companion,
Shepherd so many beasts
In such a lonely place.”
(Pound 1952:62–63)
 
Pound’s version is again rather close, and it is not distinguished by
prosodic and lexical invention. His sharpest departure from the
Provençal, however, is extremely pointed: he used the archaism
“damsel” to render the knight’s epithet for the shepherdess, “toza,”
which Emil Levy defined as “jeune fille” (“young girl”) (Levy 1966),
yet with an unsavory connotation, “fille de mauvaise vie”
(“immoral girl”). (The Provençal text also stigmatizes the girl with

240
The Translator’s Invisibility
“mestissa,” a reference to her low birth that likewise carries the
sense of “mauvais, vil.”) Pound’s use of “damsel” at once idealizes
and ironizes the image of the girl, sarcastically marking her inferior
social position and portraying the knight as a wittily devious
seducer, out to overcome her resistance with flattering appeals to
her (presumed) class aspirations.
Pound so enjoyed the knight’s predatory sexuality that he wistfully
imagined the girl yielding at last. After quoting his partial translation
of the poem, he added that “The adventure is finally brought to a
successful termination” (Pound 1952:63). But the fact is that the girl
withstands the knight’s advances and concludes the dialogue with
some cryptic wit of her own—in Frederick Goldin’s rendering,
 
“Don, lo cavecs vos ahura,
que tals bad’en la peintura
qu’autre n’espera la mana.”
“Master, that owl is making you a prophecy:
this one stands gaping in front of a painting,
and that one waits for manna.”
(Goldin 1973:77)
 
Blackburn translated Marcabru’s entire text, and his version quite
clearly borrows lines from Pound’s, while just as clearly revising the
father’s phallic aggressiveness:
 
The other day, under a hedge
I found a low-born shepherdess,
full of wit and merriment
and dressed like a peasant’s daughter:
her shift was drill, her socks were wool,
clogs and a fur-lined jacket on her.
I went to her across the field:
—Well, baby! What a pretty thing.
You must be frozen, the wind stings…
—Sir, said the girl to me,
thanks to my nurse and God, I care
little that wind ruffle my hair,
I’m happy and sound.

Margin
241
—Look, honey, I said, I turned
into here and out of my way
just to keep you company.
Such a peasant girl ought not
without a proper fellow
pasture so many beasts alone
in such a wild country.
(Blackburn 1958:24)
 
Blackburn worked hard to surpass Pound on every level. His
inventive prosody aimed to mimic the song-like sound effects of the
Provençal text, evoking the music of Christopher Marlowe’s “The
Passionate Shepherd to His Love,” especially at the end of the first
stanza. And he created a translation discourse that sampled the most
varied lexicons, past (“drill”) and present (“honey”), British (“proper
fellow”) and American (“pretty thing”), standard usage (“sir”) and
slang (“baby”). In a later version, Blackburn coarsened the
colloquialism “pretty thing” into “pretty piece,” revealing at the
outset the knight’s sexual designs on the girl and treating him (instead
of her, as in the Provençal “toza”) in the most unsavoury way, as some
sort of sex-crazed ’50s hipster given to pornographic come-ons: “Well,
baby! What a pretty piece” (Blackburn 1986:35). Blackburn continues
this ironic image of the knight by revising the Provençal text at
“pareill paria” (roughly “social equals,” “your fellows,” “your
peers”), which he translated as “proper fellow,” suggesting both the
knight’s superior social position and the moral impropriety concealed
by his “proper” accent. Blackburn’s mixture of archaism with current
usage juxtaposes the cultural representations from two periods,
allowing them to interrogate one another: the coarse contemporary
slang demystifies the more formal rhetorical effects (troubadour and
Marlovian) that mystified aristocratic domination (in medieval
Provence and Elizabethan England); and the archaism defamiliarizes
the most recent and familiar sexual terms (“pretty piece”) by exposing
their complicity with masculinist images of women in past aristocratic
literary cultures.
This interrogative effect of Blackburn’s mixed lexicons strengthens
his version of the shepherdess’s cryptic conclusion—which Pound
misread and suppressed. In Blackburn’s version, she describes the
mystifying rhetoric of feudal patriarchy as an archaic-sounding
“simple show” and then unmasks it as a distraction from the material
conditions of the seduction, not the transcendental mana in the

242
The Translator’s Invisibility
Provençal text, but the unequal social relations in which she and the
knight are involved, signified here by a colloquialism, “the lunch
basket”:
 
—Sir, the owl is your bird of omen.
There’s always some who’ll stand open-
mouthed before the simple show,
while there’s others’ll wait until
     the lunch basket comes around.
(Blackburn 1958:25)
 
Given the interrogative effects of its mixed lexicon, Blackburn’s
translation can be read as a critique of the ideological determinations,
both aristocratic and masculinist, that shape Pound’s version as well as
Marcabru’s text.
Blackburn’s Provençal translations are the distinguished achievement
of a modernist poet—translator. Taking up the innovations that Pound
developed in his versions of troubadour poets like Arnaut Daniel,
Blackburn cultivated a discursive heterogeneity to signify the linguistic
and cultural difference of the Provençal texts. And he did it by recovering
various English-language dialects and discourses—residual, dominant,
emergent. There is a rich strain of archaism, partly medieval, partly
Elizabethan, suggestive of Chaucer, Douglas, Sir Philip Sidney,
Shakespeare: “the king’s helots,” “choler,” “her soft mien,” “seisin,”
“cark,” “sire,” “wench,” “harlotry,” “puissance,” “haulberk,” “doublets,”
“thee,” “forfend,” “dolors,” “gulls,” “escutcheon,” “villeiny,” “beyond
measure.” And there is an equally rich strain of contemporary
colloquialism, occasionally British (“tart”), but mostly American,
including slang and obscenity from the 1950s, but cutting across different
periods, cultural forms (elite and mass), and social groups: “jay-dee”, (for
“juvenile delinquent”), “phonies,” “push-cart vendor,” “budged,”
“cash,” “grouch,” “make-up,” “goo,” “asshole,” “cunt,” “the doc,” “we’ll
have some lovin’,” “all of ‘em crapped out,” “balls,” “this bitch,” “hard-
up,” “shell out,” “nymphos,” “creeps,” “hide-the-salami,” “skimpy,”
“floored,” “you sound like some kind of nut,” “Mafiosi,” “garage,”
“steam-rolls,” “a pain in his backside,” “hassle,” “keep his eye peeled for
them,” “shimmy,” “90 proof.” Blackburn’s multiple lexicons are also
multilingual, including Provençal (“trobar,” “canso,” “vers,”), French
(“fosse,” “targe,” “copains,” “maistre,”), and even Gallicized pseudo-
archaism (“cavalage,” drawn from the Provençal encavalgar, “to ride a
horse”).

Margin
243
Blackburn’s various discursive strategies included syntactical
peculiarities adopted by Pound. Dudley Fitts’s review of Pound’s
translations took exception to their syntax: after quoting a line from
Pound’s Daniel, “Love inkerlie doth leaf and flower and bear,” Fitts
complained that “Those, Reader, are verbs, not nouns” (Fitts 1954:19).
Blackburn likewise used nouns as verbs, frustrating the reader’s
grammatical expectations with phrasing that was strange (“I grouch”),
but also evocative (“the night they sorcered me”).
Blackburn’s prosody owes a debt to Pound’s recommendations “as
to the use of canzoni in English, whether for composition or in
translation” (Anderson 1983:217). Pound felt that some English
“rhymes are of the wrong timbre and weight” for the intricately
rhymed stanza in Provençal and Italian, and to compensate he
developed a “rhyme-aesthetic” that differed from the foreign texts, as
well as from current stanzaic forms in English-language poetry:
“Against which we have our concealed rhymes and our semi-
submerged alliteration” (ibid.). Blackburn’s acute sense of word
placement and timing led to varying patterns of internal and end
rhyme that sometimes heightened the anachronism of his lexical mix,
the clash of different cultures, different historical periods—like the
“okay”/“atelier” rhyme in his version of Guillem de Poitou’s Ben vuelh
que sapchon li pluzor.
 
I would like it if people knew this song,
a lot of them, if it prove to be okay
when I bring it in from my atelier, all
fine and shining:
for I surpass the flower of this business,
it’s the truth, and I’ll
produce the vers as witness
when I’ve bound it in rhyme.
(Blackburn 1986:12)
 
Blackburn’s attention to the musicality of the Provençal text assumes
Pound’s discussion of “melopoeia” in the canso and canzone: “the
poems of medieval Provence and Tuscany in general, were all made to
be sung. Relative estimates of value inside these periods must take
count of the cantabile values” of the work, “accounting for its manifest
lyric impulse, or for the emotional force in its cadence” (Anderson
1983:216, 230). For Pound, this rhythm-based lyricism produced an
effect that was individualistic but also masculinist, constructing a

244
The Translator’s Invisibility
lyrical “I” in the translation that was explicitly male: “I have in my
translations tried to bring over the qualities of Guido’s rhythm, not line
for line, but to embody in the whole of my English some trace of that
power which implies the man,” what Pound later called “a robustezza,
a masculinity” (ibid.:19, 242). But Pound’s most innovative translations
tended to diverge from his modernist critical representations of the
foreign texts, principally because his translation discourse was so
heterogeneous, full of textual effects that undermined any illusionism,
any sense of the foreign author’s presence, any coherent “I.” In the
same way, Blackburn’s lyrical prosody definitely constructs a subject-
position with which the listener/ reader can identify, but the rhythms
are always varying, asymmetrical at points, and the lexical and
syntactical peculiarities are constantly foregrounding the textuality,
weakening the coherence of the speaking voice, splintering the
discourse into different cultures and periods, even different genders
(depending on the genre), now locked in a mutual interrogation. Here
is the opening of Blackburn’s version of Cercamon’s Ab lo temps qe
refrescar.
 
With the fine spring weather
that makes the world seem young again,
     when the meadows come green again
     I want to begin
     with a new song
     on a love that’s my cark and desire,
     but is so far I cannot hit her mark
     or my words fire her.
 I’m so sad nothing can comfort me,
better off dead, for foul mouths
have separated me from her, God
damn them—o,
I would have wanted her so much! Now
I grouch and shout, or weep, or sing
or walk about
like any hare-brained golden thing.
And how lovely she I sing is! more
than I know how to tell you here.
Her glance is straight, her color’s fresh
and white, white without blemish, no

Margin
245
     she wears no make-up.
They can say no hard word of her, she
is so fine and clear as an emerald.
(Blackburn 1958:17)
 
Blackburn’s odd rhythms and diction destabilize the reader’s
sympathetic identification with the lyric voice, preventing the
translation from being taken as the “original,” the transparent
expression of the foreign author, and instead insisting on its second-
order status, a text that produces effects in English, distinct from the
Provençal poem but also departing from contemporary English usage,
possessing a powerful self-difference, a sudden shifting from the
familiar to the unfamiliar, even to the unintelligible.
Blackburn’s translation of Provençal poetry is clearly more
accessible than the Zukofskys’ Catullus, requiring a less aggressive
application to appreciate because of a more inviting lyricism. But it
too follows Pound’s innovations by developing a translation
discourse that is both historicist and foreignizing, that signals the
cultural differences of the foreign texts through a linguistic
experimentalism. The project is marked by the rivalry with Pound
that formed Blackburn’s identity as a modernist poet—translator,
determining not only the choice of texts and the development of a
translation discourse, but also a revisionism that critiques Pound’s
own appropriations of the same texts, questioning their investment
in aristocracy, patriarchy, individualism—ideological determinati-
ons that also marked Blackburn’s writing in varying degrees and
across many different forms (letters, poems, translations,
interviews). Blackburn’s Provençal project was decisive in his
personal formation as a author; but since this formation occurred in
writing, the translation could also be conceived as a strategic public
intervention, a cultural political practice that was fundamentally
modernist, but that was not uncritical in its acceptance of Pound’s
modernism.
Blackburn’s rare comments on his work suggest that he saw it
along these or related lines. In a 1969 interview, he responded to the
question, “What poets have influenced your work?” by citing Pound,
Williams, Creeley, Charles Olson, whose poetry he read because “I
wanted to find out who my father was” (Packard 1987:9). Blackburn
may not have psychoanalyzed his relationship to Pound, but after
translating for some twenty years and spending many years in
analysis, he definitely possessed a psychoanalytic view of the

246
The Translator’s Invisibility
translating process, of the relationship between the translation and
the foreign text, the translator and the foreign author. This is clear in
the interview:
 
I don’t become the author when I’m translating his prose or
poetry, but I’m certainly getting my talents into his hang-ups.
Another person’s preoccupations are occupying me. They
literally own me for that time. You see, it’s not just a matter
of reading the language and understanding it and putting it
into English. It’s understanding something that makes the
man do it, where he’s going. And it’s not an entirely objective
process. It must be partially subjective; there has to be some
kind of projection. How do you know which word to choose
when a word may have four or five possible meanings in
English? It’s not just understanding the text. In a way you live
it each time, I mean, you’re there. Otherwise, you’re not
holding the poem.
(ibid.:13)
 
English translation theorists from the seventeenth century onward
had recommended a sympathetic identification between the
translator and the foreign author. In Alexander Tytler’s words, “he
must adopt the very soul of his author, which must speak through
his own organs” (Tytler 1978:212). Yet this sort of sympathy was
used to underwrite the individualism of transparent translation, the
illusion of authorial presence produced by fluent discourse: it was
Tytler’s answer to the question, “How then shall a translator
accomplish this difficult union of ease with fidelity?” Blackburn’s
modernist sense of identification acknowledged that there could
never be a perfect sympathy, that the translator developed a
“projection,” a representation, specific to the target-language
culture, that interrogated the foreign author, exposing “his hang-
ups.” When Blackburn’s translator is “there,” the sense of
immediacy comes, not from any direct apprehension of the foreign
text, but from living out an interpretation that enables the translator
to “hold the poem,” rationalize every step in the translation process,
every choice of a word.
In responding to a 1970 questionnaire from the New York Quarterly,
Blackburn used similar psychological terms to describe the textual
effects of translation, observing that the translator’s identification
changes the foreign author, but also the translator himself, who

Margin
247
increasingly becomes the site of multiple subjectivities, a deviation
from rational norms:
He must be willing (& able) to let another man’s life enter his own
deeply enough to become some permanent part of his original
author. He should be patient, persistent, slightly schizoid, a hard
critic, a brilliant editor […] We are all hundreds, maybe thousands of
people, potentially or in fact.
(Blackburn 1985:616)
 
In both the interview and questionnaire, Blackburn’s view of the
poet—translator is insistently masculinist: the process of identification
or “projection” occurs between men. In the interview, it was part of
Blackburn’s bohemian self-presentation, where he abruptly segued
from a discussion about “writing in a travel situation” to “girl-
watching”: “To come back to the city, though, the subway is an
incredible place for girl-watching. You find one face or a good pair of
legs—you can look at them for hours” (Packard 1987:14). And yet if, in
Blackburn’s account, translation multiplies subjectivities by mediating
cultural differences, it can only explode any individualistic concept of
identity, masculinist or otherwise. Blackburn felt that the range of
different demands made on the translator was extreme, resulting in
deviancy, inviting psychiatric terms or allusions to popular cultural
forms, like blues and rock-and-roll (or even more specifically the blues-
based rock of Bob Dylan’s 1965 album Bringing It All Back Home),
linking the translator to other racial and youth subcultures:
 
In your view, what is a translator?
A man who brings it all back home.
In short, a madman.
(Blackburn 1985:616)
 
Blackburn was of course aware that the psychological processes he
described so facetiously could be figured only in discursive strategies,
and these he saw as a challenge to bourgeois values, not just to
individualistic concepts of identity, but to a moralistic sense of
propriety in conduct and language. As early as 1950, in a letter to
Pound, he remarked on “the impossibility of translating poems written
in a twelfth century aristocratic vocabulary into MODERN ENGLISH
POEMS written in a twentieth century bourgeois vocabulary” (24

248
The Translator’s Invisibility
November 1950). Twenty years later, in a response to the New York
Quarterly questionnaire, Blackburn acknowledged that the translator
must draw on current English usage, but he also advocated a linguistic
experimentalism that recovered marginal discourses, even with the
most canonical of literary texts:
 
How far should a translator attempt to “modernize” an antiquarian
piece?
Try first to find a diction, a modern diction, which will translate as
many values as possible of the original. I’ve seen Latin poetry
translated into hip language that works very well for certain pieces.
Carried too far, of course, over a whole body of work, it’d be a stunt.
Some stunts, however, are brilliantly executed.
(Blackburn 1985:617)
 
Blackburn’s investment in Provençal poetry was partly due to the
troubadours’ anti-bourgeois themes, present not only in the celebration
of feudal aristocratic values, but also in a representation of the troubadours
culled partly from the biographical details in the vidas and razos. Some
troubadours were itinerant performers born to commoners—farmers,
tradesmen, merchants—but later living and working on the margins of
feudal courts; others were landless knights, somewhat migrant, their
loyalties drifting among various lords and ladies. In his poem “Sirventes”
(1956), a satire “against the city of Toulouse,” Blackburn adopts a
troubadour persona and invokes Peire Vidal, portraying him as a bohemian
poet, a beatnik, intent on offending any bourgeois sense of decency:
 
That mad Vidal would spit on it,
that I as his maddened double
do—too
changed, too changed, o
deranged master of song,
master of the viol and the lute
master of those sounds,
I join you in public madness,
in the street I piss
on French politesse
that has wracked all passion from the sound of speech. A leech
that sucks the blood is less a lesion. Speech! this imposed
imposing imported courtliness, that the more you hear it the

Margin
249
more it’s meaningless
     & without feeling.
(Blackburn 1985:89–90)
In the Provençal translations, Blackburn sometimes tilts his lexicon
heavily toward contemporary English, inscribing the troubadour
poem With a satire on capitalist economic practices, on
businessmen and lawyers. This occurs with another of Bertran de
Born’s war songs, No puosc mudar un chantar non esparga. In
Blackburn’s version, the marauding knight becomes more criminal,
more gangster-like—“A good war, now, makes a niggardly lord/
turn lavish and shell out handsomely”—but the knight is also more
business-like, given to financial planning (“expenditures”) and
living in suburbia:
 
have I not taken blows upon my targe?
And dyed red the white of my gonfalon?
Yet for this I have to suffer and pinch my purse,
for Oc-e-No plays with loaded dice.
I’m hardly lord of Rancon or Lusignan
that I can war beyond my own garage
     without an underwriter’s check.
But I’ll contribute knowledge and a good strong arm
with a basin on my head and a buckler on my neck!
(Blackburn 1958:116)
 
Blackburn actually addressed the social implications of translation on
one occasion: in “The International Word,” an article he contributed
to a special issue of The Nation devoted to culture and politics.
Published in 1962, on the eve of the Cuban Missile Crisis, when
Blackburn was serving as poetry editor of this left-wing magazine,
“The International Word” argues that a modernist cultural politics can
effectively intervene in the current global situation: in Blackburn’s
diagnosis, “the crisis of identity of the individual in a world whose
underlying realities are the cold war and the bomb” (Blackburn
1962:358), In a survey of contemporary American poetry, Blackburn
found the most politically engaged poets to be modernist: his litany
includes Pound, Williams, the Objectivists, Black Mountain, the Beats,
the New York School—figures and tendencies that had recently been
presented as oppositional in Donald Allen’s anthology, The New
American Poetry (Allen 1960). Blackburn noted Pound’s insistence “on

250
The Translator’s Invisibility
the values of bringing across other sensibilities in other languages and
from all periods of history and civilization” (Blackburn 1962:357) and
assigned translation a key geopolitical role: “the mutual insemination
of cultures is an important step in what our policy makers think of
as international understanding” (ibid.:358). In this politicized
rationale for cultural exchange, modernist translation was summoned
to resolve a domestic crisis, searching foreign cultures to supply the
lack of confidence in the “official values” of Cold War American
culture:
 
The Cold War and the possibly imminent illumination of the
world have created another reaction in poets […] There is an
affirmation, a reaffirmation, of values, a searching of the older
cultures, both American and foreign, modern and ancient, for
values to sustain the individual in a world where all the official
values have let us down entirely by being in the main hypocritical
(consider the phrase “business ethics” for a moment), the
religions attentuated to the point where even the monks are
screaming from the pinch.
(ibid.:359)
 
Blackburn’s concern about the “identity of the individual” did not
assume a liberal individualism grounded in concepts of personal
freedom, self-determination, psychological coherence; he rather saw
human identity as other-determined, a composite constructed in
relationships to “values” that were transindividual, cultural and social,
housed in institutions like the state, the church, the school. If
translation could change the contours of subjectivity, Blackburn
thought, then it could contribute to a change in values, away from “the
military stance and the profit motive” toward less strained geopolitical
relations, “perhaps breadth of understanding for other peoples, a
greater tolerance for and proficiency in other languages, combined
with political wisdom and expediency over the next two generations”
(ibid.:358).
Some of Blackburn’s remarks have come to seem much too
optimistic. He judged from “the current flood of translations in both
prose and poetry” that “The ducts of free exchange are already open
in literature” (Blackburn 1962:357, 358). But cultural exchange
through translation wasn’t then (nor ever could be) “free” of
numerous constraints, literary, economic, political, and English-
language translation certainly wasn’t free in 1962. That year the

Margin
251
number of translations issued by American publishers was actually
small, approximately 6 percent of the total books published
(Publishers Weekly 1963). We now know that American translation
rates reached their apex in the early 1960s, but they have consistently
been quite low in contrast to foreign publishing trends throughout
the postwar period, which show much higher percentages of
translating English-language books.
Blackburn’s utopianism also has a pro-American slant that seems
too uncritical after numerous subsequent developments—the Vietnam
War, the political and military interventions in El Salvador and
Nicaragua, government skittishness on ecological issues, the
emergence of multinational corporations, especially in publishing,
where the number of English-language translations has fallen to less
than 3 percent of the total books published. In 1962, however,
Blackburn imagined that
 
Perhaps even nationalism, so living a force today in Africa and the
Far East, is beginning to die a little in the affluent West. Except for
the political forms, Western Europe is on the threshold of becoming
an economic unity. Is it an impossible dream to think of a bilingual
America stretching from Tierra del Fuego to the Arctic Ocean,
comprised of eighty-three states instead of fifty? Not by conquest
but by union. How move more efficiently to raise the standard of
living of underdeveloped countries in our own hemisphere than by
removing the borders?
(Blackburn 1962:358)
 
Readers in 1962 no doubt regarded this passage as a utopian flight.
Blackburn himself called it “an impossible dream.” In the following
year, he published a somber article in Kulchur, “The Grinding Down,”
which surveyed the current poetry “scene” and found modernism
marginal and fragmented: “the Renaissance” Blackburn wrote, “didn’t
take”; it was now centered in a few small-circulation magazines,
“making a place somewhere between the outer fringe of the academic
and the inner sector of the so-called beat” (Blackburn 1963:17, 10). In
1962, Blackburn was more sanguine about the prospects of modernism,
but the emphasis on the “West” in his utopianism shows the difficulty
of imagining relations between the hemispheres during the Cold
War—even for a politically engaged poet-translator like him. The
perspective from which he anticipated future global developments was
clearly that of North American hegemony, allied with western Europe

252
The Translator’s Invisibility
in a strategic containment of Soviet expansionism, but permitted to
indulge in some hemispheric expansion of its own (“eighty-three
states”).
Blackburn’s article is valuable, not as a historical prediction or
foreign policy, but rather as a theoretical model, useful in
thinking how translation can be enlisted in a democratic cultural
politics. Blackburn saw modernist translation as an effective
intervention in American culture, based on a social diagnosis that
found hegemonic domestic values implicated in unequal or
exclusionary social relations, Blackburn’s own translations, with
their various foreignizing strategies, served a left-wing
internationalism, designed to combat the ideological forms of
exclusion in Cold War America, perhaps most evident in the
hysterical patriotism excited by hardening geopolitical positions
(Whitfield 1991). The Provençal translation was especially
subversive in this cultural situation because it revealed a broad
range of influences, foreign and historical. The clear debt to
modernism made the project vulnerable to Leslie Fiedler’s
politicized attack on Pound’s translations for lacking a “center,”
an allegiance to one national literature, American: “Our Muse is
the poet without a Muse, whom quite properly we acquit of
treason (what remains to betray?) and consign to Saint
Elizabeth’s” (Fiedler 1962:459).
Blackburn’s Provençal translation was marked, not only by a
connection to an un-American poet—translator, but by an affiliation
to popular culture through his resonant use of colloquialism. As
Andrew Ross has shown, Cold War intellectuals associated popular
culture with totalitarianism, mass thinking, brainwashing, but also
with commercialism, egalitarianism, radical democracy. As the
American government pursued a policy of Soviet containment
abroad, at home intellectuals like Fiedler constructed a national
culture of consensus that “depended explicitly upon the
containment of intellectual radicalism and cultural populism alike”
(Ross 1989:47). In Robert von Hallberg’s view, “what is important to
literary history is not only that this consensus existed but that its
maintenance and definition depended somehow upon academic
institutions. […] To the extent that poets looked to universities for
an audience, they were addressing […] the audience that felt greatest
responsibility for the refinement of taste and the preservation of a
national culture” (Von Hallberg 1985:34). Blackburn’s work with
Provençal poetry both questioned and resisted this hegemonic

Margin
253
domestic tendency. Allied to a modernist poetic movement that
defined itself as “a total rejection of all those qualities typical of
academic verse” (Allen 1960:xi), Blackburn’s translation was radical
in its ideological interrogations (of the foreign texts, previous
English-language appropriations, contemporary American culture)
and populist in its juxtaposition of elite and popular cultural
discourses.
The publishing history of Blackburn’s manuscript shows
without a doubt that the cultural and political values represented
by his translation continued to be marginal in the United States late
into the 1970s. In Blackburn’s case, however, the marginality was
not signalled by mixed reviews or bitter attacks or even media
neglect; there was never a publication to review. The manuscript
Blackburn felt was finished in 1958 did not see print until twenty
years later.
In March of 1958, the influential poetry critic M.L.Rosenthal,
who had taught Blackburn briefly at New York University (1947),
recommended the Provençal manuscript to Macmillan.9 In 1957, as
poetry editor for The Nation, Rosenthal had accepted one of
Blackburn’s translations, his Pound-inspired version of Bertran de
Born’s Bem platz to gais temps pascor. Rosenthal was now advising
Emile Capouya, an editor in Macmillan’s Trade Department, on a
series of poetry volumes. Blackburn submitted the manuscript,
tentatively entitled Anthology of Troubadours. It was a translation of
sixty-eight texts by thirty poets, considerably reduced from the
“105 pieces” that Blackburn mentioned to Pound, “cut fr/150” (17
March 1958). Capouya solicited an outside reader’s report and
then, despite a highly critical evaluation, accepted it for
publication, issuing Blackburn a contract that paid a small advance
($150) against a full author’s royalty (10 percent of the cover price,
$3.50, with a first printing of 1500 copies), plus all the income from
first serial rights (initial publications in magazines and
anthologies). Although, by October of 1958, the contracts had been
signed and countersigned, the manuscript was not complete:
Blackburn needed to submit the introduction he had planned.
Capouya scheduled the publication date for the fall of 1959, but
Blackburn did not complete the manuscript, and the project
languished until 1963, when, a few years after Capouya’s departure
from Macmillan, another editor decided to cancel the contract.
During the 1960s Blackburn tried to get his manuscript accepted by
other publishers, like Doubleday, who asked Rosenthal to evaluate

254
The Translator’s Invisibility
the project. But these attempts were sporadic and without success.
The translation at last appeared posthumously in 1978 as Proensa:
An Anthology of Troubadour Poetry, edited by Blackburn’s friend, the
medievalist and poet George Economou, for the University of
California Press.
Why didn’t Blackburn complete a project that was certain to be
published and under contractual terms that were favorable to the
translator (despite the low advance)? Different answers have been
offered for this question, ranging from Blackburn’s unsettled
personal life at the time (his divorce from his first wife, his financial
straits) to a psychoanalytic assessment that found his relations with
women, particularly his mother, the poet Frances Frost, linked to an
“obsession” with “the idealization of woman as expressed by the
Troubadours” (Eshleman 1989:19). The Macmillan episode could
only be determined by these private investments in a most public
form, which here included a harsh reader’s report. Sara Golden,
Blackburn’s second wife (1963–1967), recalled that the report “sent
Paul back to an endless spiral of revisions that never ended until his
death” (Telephone interview, 23 January 1992). Rosenthal described
Blackburn as “appalled” by the report; the poet Robert Kelly, a friend
of Blackburn’s who edited some of his posthumous books,
mentioned that “Paul was both hurt and amused by it” and would
sometimes read out the criticisms in a comically exaggerated voice
(Telephone interviews, 26 December 1991 and 23 July 1992). Taken
aback by these criticisms, after years of encouragement from writers
like Pound and Creeley and from editors at magazines like Hudson
Review, Origin, and The Nation, Blackburn did not complete the
manuscript. On the contrary, he suddenly felt that it needed an
enormous amount of work, not just an introduction and annotations,
but substantial revisions of the translation. Unfortunately, he also
lacked an editor to facilitate his completion of the project and bring
it to press.
Capouya sought evaluations from powerful poet—translators and
critics. He turned first to a poet and translator of Dante, John Ciardi,
then associated with Saturday Review, who wrote back “Anthol of
Troubadours sounds interesting” but declined because of prior
commitments. Capouya then turned to Ramon Guthrie, an American
poet who lived in France for many years and was currently professor
of French at Dartmouth. Guthrie (1896–1973) published his first
books in the 1920s: translations and adaptations of troubadour
poetry and a novel based on the texts of Marcabru. Under a

Margin
255
pseudonym, Guthrie also published The Legend of Ermengarde, what
Sally Gall has described as an “exuberantly indecent poem” inspired
by troubadour poetry (Gall 1980:184). Capouya planned to publish
Guthrie’s volume of poems, Graffitti, also recommended by
Rosenthal, who suggested that Guthrie evaluate Blackburn’s
translation. Perhaps in an effort to pique Guthrie’s interest, or to
ward off any expectations of academic fidelity to the Provençal texts,
Capouya’s letter described Blackburn’s project as “a collection of
adaptations,” not the “anthology” he mentioned to Ciardi. Guthrie,
it turned out, was actually the worst possible reader for Blackburn’s
manuscript.
In the 1920s, his own translations of Provençal texts were cast in
current English usage with a slight pre-Raphaelite archaism, in diction
and verse form (a rhymed stanza). This is the opening of “Winter-
Song,” Guthrie’s translation from Marcabru:
 
Since the withered leaves are shredded
From the branches of the trees,
Mauled and tousled and beheaded
By the bitter autumn breeze,
More I prize the sleety rain
Than the summer’s mealy guile,
Bearing wantonry and lewdness.
(Guthrie 1927a:68)
 
Although Guthrie lived in Paris during the 1920s and was fond of
evoking that modernist cultural moment in his later poetry, the poetry
itself reveals him to be more Wordsworthian than Poundian:
 
Montparnasse
that I shall never see again, the Montparnasse
of Joyce and Pound, Stein, Stella Bowen,
little Zadkine, Giacometti […] all gone in any case,
     and would I might have died, been buried there.
(Guthrie 1970:15)
 
By the 1950s, Guthrie had also become an academic, even though he
lacked a high school diploma and had received the degrees for
foreigners offered at the University of Toulouse. And this immersion
in academic culture played into his evaluation of Blackburn’s
manuscript. His response was substantial and detailed, checking

256
The Translator’s Invisibility
individual translations against the Provençal texts, giving what he
called “suggestions” in a two-page report and many marginal
comments scattered throughout the manuscript. He didn’t mind
Blackburn’s use of obscenity, although in the 1920s he himself was
sufficiently prudish to use a French pseudonym for a lewd parody and
to bowdlerize his signed translation from Guillem de Poitou: “In
which time—here we expurgate… One hundred times and eighty-
eight,/Till heart and back were both in great/Danger of breaking”
(Guthrie 1927a:59). Blackburn’s version initially read “fucked,” but
then, apparently in a moment of uncertainty about his male
bohemianism, he struck it and added “loved.” Guthrie encouraged
Blackburn to use the obscenity, which perhaps served to confirm his
own sense of masculinity, compensating for his earlier expurgation
through another translator’s work:
 
The word “loved” is too much like sneaking out the back-door. Why
not either the original word in English as was, or “f—d” or leave it
in Occitanian “las fotei?” In as legitimate a cause as this, one ought
to be able to get away with one 4 letter word.
 
What did not seem “legitimate” to Guthrie was the modernist
experimentalism of Blackburn’s translation: the foreignizing
strategies deviated too widely from prevailing domestic values in the
reception of archaic texts, especially scholarly annotation and fluent
discourse.
Guthrie’s own work with troubadour poetry in the 1920s had
assumed the modernist ideal of translation as an independent literary
text: he published his translations as poems in their own right,
identifying them as translations only in vague footnotes that omitted
any precise identification of the Provençal texts. In 1958, however,
Guthrie did not recognize Blackburn’s pursuit of this same modernist
ideal, his emphasis on the literary qualities of the translation at the
expense of annotations, which he limited to the Provençal titles and
to the vidas and razos that accompanied the texts in manuscripts.
Guthrie wanted Blackburn’s translation to have a more academic cast,
even while acknowledging “the general reader”:
 
There should be a short introduction explaining what, when and
where the troubadours were; something of the nature and
importance of their work; the formal qualities of their works and the
differences between their forms and P.B.’s rendering—also a few

Margin
257
words on P.B.’s purpose.
There should also be definitions in the appropriate places (most
of which I have marked) of such terms as “alba,” “tenson,”
“sirventes,” etc. […]
A number of poems (see pp. 163, 55, 129) need short
introductions badly.
 
Omitting annotations can of course signal the cultural difference of the
foreign texts, insisting on their foreignness with all the discomfort of
incomprehension. Most of Blackburn’s foreignizing strategies,
however, were realized in his translations, and since they constituted
notable deviations from fluent discourse, they definitely looked
strange to Guthrie. Thus, Blackburn resorted to variant spellings to
mimic the absence of standardized orthography and pronunciation in
Provençal, but for Guthrie this made the text too resistant to easy
readability:
 
For the reader’s convenience, there should be uniformity in spelling
proper nouns. It is confusing to the uninitiate to find (often on the
same page) Peitau & Poitou, Caersi & Quercy, Talhafer & Tagliaferro
(I’d translate it “Iron-Cutter,” since it is a nickname); Ventadorn &
Ventadour: Marvoill & Mareuil: Amfos & Alfons. Using the modern
names of the towns would help the general reader.
 
Blackburn’s use of variant spellings were a means of archaizing the
text, signifying its historical remoteness. Guthrie preferred current
English usage (“Iron-Cutter”), even the latest cartography.
Guthrie’s criticisms went deep to the heart of Blackburn’s project.
They touched the texts that figured in the oedipal rivalry with
Pound: Guthrie’s concern with fluency led to the suggestion that
Blackburn delete his Pound-inspired version of Bertran de Born’s
war song. “Maybe I am too harsh,” wrote Guthrie, “but from the
first line to the last, it seems forced and ineffectual compared with
either the original or with E.Pound’s Sestina drawn from the same
source.” When Guthrie reached page 135 in the 187-page
manuscript, he scrawled a somewhat exasperated criticism of
Blackburn’s mixed lexicons:
 
P.B.
No, look, if you are going to call somebody a burgesa in one line and
make the poor inhorantes go looking it up in Levy, you can’t have

258
The Translator’s Invisibility
the burgesa’s husband getting into a (since 1950) hassle nor
somebody doing somebuditch dishonor and smoting him on ye
hede in the line after.
R.G.
If one says “copains,” one cannot say in the same sentence “had
been taken ill.” It is as if one said “His buddy” (only in a foreign
language) “gave up the ghost.”
 
It is interesting to note that Guthrie repeatedly set himself up as a
spokesperson for the nonspecialist, nonacademic audience (“the
uninitiate,” “the inhorantes”), but simultaneously made the elitist
gesture of excluding popular discourses and dialects, especially
working-class colloquialisms. Guthrie’s investment in the standard
dialect came with a sense of social superiority that surfaced in his
comment on another translation, Blackburn’s version of Bernart de
Ventadorn’s Can vei la lauzeta mover, Blackburn’s text is typically
heterogeneous:
 
     Narcissus at the spring, I kill
   
this human self.
Really, though, without hope, over the ladies;
never again trust myself to them.
     I used to defend them
     but now
I’m clearing out, leaving town, quit.
Not one of them helps me against her
who destroys and confounds me,
fear and disbelieve all of them,
     all the same cut.
(Blackburn 1958:47)
 
Guthrie thought the colloquialism degraded the foreign text, which he
saw as more lofty in tone, more proper in speech, more aristocratic:
“This,” he wrote, “gets cheap, a sort of Flatbush parody on Bernart,
RG.” Blackburn’s use of “Hell” similarly departed from Guthrie’s elite
image of the troubadours: “This isn’t in accord with Bernart’s mood,
but maybe it’s more modern than ‘Alas.’” For Guthrie, marginal
translation discourses trashed canonical texts. The English he preferred
was the standard American dialect; if archaism was used, it needed to
be unobtrusive and consistent.

Margin
259
Inevitably, Blackburn’s more inventive experiments provoked
Guthrie to domesticate the translations, revising them for fluency, but
also deleting the political satire enabled by the mixed lexicon. When
Blackburn edged his version of Bertran de Born closer to contemporary
social issues by portraying feudal knights as bourgeois entrepreneurs,
“unable to war beyond my own garage/ without an underwriter’s
check” (Blackburn 1958:125), Guthrie complained about the strange
effects produced by the multilingual diction:
 
Since P.B. uses so many anachronisms on the modern side, why
“targe” for “shield.” The rime scheme of this sestina aren’t [sic]
followed in the translation anyway and, being spotty, would be
better omitted. But if a rime must be had (and God knows the
“targe—garage” is nothing to be awfully happy about), why not
“shield—field”? […] The “garage” part is bad from all angles. If
“tarja” must be “targe,” why not have Bertran too poor to fight “at
large”?
 
Guthrie seemed willing to recognize Blackburn’s attention to
prosody: free verse that was “spotty,” with the concealed rhymes and
semi-submerged alliteration that Pound had recommended for the
“cantabile values” of the Provençal text. Yet Guthrie remained
unwilling to license Blackburn’s heterogeneous discourse. By
crossing languages, cultures, historical periods, the “targe”/“garage”
rhyme preempts transparency, any illusionistic sense of an authorial
voice, and calls attention to the multiple codes that make this an
English-language translation, with a cultural political agenda.
Guthrie’s response shows that Blackburn’s translation was in part the
casualty of literary values that dominated American culture during
the Cold War, in and out of the academy, values that were elitist in
their exclusion of marginal cultural discourses, and reactionary in
their refusal of the democratic politics that animated Blackburn’s
modernist project.
After the Macmillan episode, Blackburn’s writing took various
developments. Some responded directly to Guthrie’s report; most
continued his already significant accomplishments as a modernist
poet—translator, but in new directions. Blackburn’s relationship to the
Provençal translation certainly changed. The depth of Guthrie’s impact
can be gauged from the final version of the translation: Blackburn
incorporated some of Guthrie’s suggestions—even when these
conflicted with his modernist experimentalism. At several points,

260
The Translator’s Invisibility
Blackburn followed Guthrie’s insistence on standard English: he used
Guthrie’s recommended spelling, “night,” instead of his initial choice,
the subcultural “nite”; he accepted Guthrie’s change of “like” to “as” in
the colloquialism, “like/they say” (Blackburn 1958:32; 1986:46, 47).
Here Blackburn was browbeaten by Guthrie’s distaste for grammatical
improprieties, by his rather ethnocentric assumption that the
troubadours should be held to English-language cultural norms: “That
‘like’ for ‘as’ must have Guilhem twirling in his grave,” wrote Guthrie,
“It fills me with a creeping horror.” Blackburn also abandoned the
much criticized “targe”/“garage” rhyme, adopting Guthrie’s
“shield”/“field” (Blackburn 1986:164).
Finally, however, Blackburn did not make numerous revisions in the
lexicon and syntax of the 1958 versions. Instead, he expanded the
selection of Provençal translations, including four more satires by
Marcabru that required a larger variety of obscenities. He also added
annotations that provided some of the information Guthrie requested
and sought to answer his objections. In one note Blackburn
commented on the variant spellings, revealing the different, somewhat
contradictory determinations that shaped his final version: the
historicist impulse apparent in his respect for the Provençal
manuscripts, but also his concern with the prosody of his translation,
and even his partial acceptance of Guthrie’s call for consistent, modern
spelling. Blackburn’s note specifically addresses Guthrie’s report:
 
Mareuil (Dordogne): I use the modern French spelling to
normalize the place name. In the manuscripts you’ll find Maroill,
Maruoill, Marueill, Maruelh, Marvoill, Merueil, Meruoill, Miroill,
and Miroilh. Some of these may be simply copyists’ mistakes, but
they also reflect slight differences in pronunciation from area to
area. […] The point I would make here is that neither the
pronunciation nor the orthography was particularly
standardized. Especially in the poems, I use the version that suits
my ear at that point. In the razo here I use Anfos for the king of
Aragon: the name is also Amfos, Alfons—I don’t remember using
the French Alphonse ever.
(Blackburn 1986:285)
 
The publishing history that banished Blackburn’s Provençal
translations to the margins of American literary culture, available only
in small-circulation magazines and limited-edition books, inevitably
confined the influence of their striking effects. These inspired, not the

Margin
261
work of other translators or translation theorists and critics, but
mainly Blackburn’s own poetry (Sturgeon 1990). Throughout the
1960s, the translations became a field of prosodic experiment for
Blackburn: he explored Charles Olson’s performance-oriented notion
of “projective verse,” “in which the poet manages to register both the
acquisitions of his ear and the pressures of his breath” (Allen
1960:393). Olson argued that this prosody followed the modernist
abandonment of the pentameter standard (“the experiments of
Cummings, Pound, Williams”), but it was uniquely made possible by
the typewriter, which, “due to its rigidity and space precisions,” could
produce a poem “as a script to its vocalization” (ibid.). Blackburn, in
his New York Quarterly interview, similarly took the layout of the text
as a set of notations for performance: “Punctuation serves much the
way that spacing does—that is, to indicate the length of a pause”
(Packard 1987:11).
After the Macmillan episode, Blackburn’s revisions of the
Provençal translations included more attention to their formal
qualities—punctuation, line break, spacing. Occasionally the results
were dramatic. Blackburn’s work on the opening of this text by
Marcabru developed the iconic aspect of the prosody, its imitation of
the falling leaf:
 
     When the leaf spins
     its staying power
gone,
     twists off,
     falls
     spinning
down through the branches from top limbs whence
     wind has torn it,
I watch.
It is a sign.
     The icy storm that’s brewing’s better
     than grumbling and meandering summer
     congesting us with hates and whoring.
(Blackburn 1958:30)
 
      When the leaf spins
its staying power
 
gone,

262
The Translator’s Invisibility
twists off,
falls
spinning
down through the branches
from top limbs from
which the wind has
     
torn it, I
watch.
It is a sign.
     The icy storm that’s brewing’s better
     than grumbling and meandering summer
     congesting us with hates and whoring.
(Blackburn 1986:43)
 
In the later version, Blackburn sacrificed the archaism “whence,” but
replaced it with a repetitive syntactical turn that is more evocative of
the “spinning” leaf (“from top limbs from/which the wind has”).
These prosodic experiments culminated in Blackburn’s last poems, The
Journals (1967–1971), where the autobiographical verse is
polyrhythmic—lyrical and angular, conversational and iconic, quietly
emotional and parodic—but always inventive, attuned to a reflective
music, multicoded:
 
Seaplane going over, going
     somewhere. over
     
head, the blue re
ally re
flected in this sea.
(Blackburn 1985:572)
 
The end of a distance come
so early in the morning
     where the eye stops,
   
flames
running O their tongues up thru
     along the rooftree of
     
down the coping of
     
that church in Harlem.
(ibid.:555)
 

Margin
263
The wind blowth
snow fallth
branches whip in the wind
     down, rise, forth and back
     
drifts groweth summat
It’s going to take us two days at least to
shovel out of this one, off to Buf-fa-lo, o
March, after all, Spring
cometh.
(ibid.:613)
 
The Journals is essentially an individualistic project, a verse diary
of Blackburn’s last years, travelling in Europe and the United States
with his wife Joan and son Carlos, suffering through the final
stages of his illness with cancer. Yet Blackburn’s prosodic
experiments give all this an anti-individualistic edge by pushing
the verse toward greater heterogeneity, using rhythm, punctuation,
typography to foreground the textuality and erode the coherence
of the speaking voice, now a site of diverse lexicons, cultural codes,
social affiliations, whose very juxtaposition invites a mutual
questioning.
The Provençal project was also a source of personae and themes for
Blackburn’s poems, some of which carry on the social criticism he
occasionally worked into the lexicon of the translations. His version of
Guillem de Poitou’s Ab lo dolchor del temps novel—
 
In the new season
when the woods burgeon
and birds
sing out the first stave of new song,
time then that a man take the softest joy of her
     who is most to his liking.
(Blackburn 1958:13)
 
—gets quoted in a poem contemporary to the 1958 manuscript,
“Meditation on the BMT”:
 
Here, at the beginning of the new season
before the new leaves burgeon,      on
either side of the Eastern Parkway station
     near the Botanical Gardens

264
The Translator’s Invisibility
they burn trash on the embankment, laying
barer than ever our sad, civilized refuse.  1 coffee can
without a lid
1 empty pint of White Star, the label
   faded by rain
1 empty beer-can
2 empty Schenley bottles
1 empty condom, seen from
1 nearly empty train
   empty
(Blackburn 1985:141)
 
Blackburn’s quotation uses the troubadour motif to interrogate
consumer capitalism, juxtaposing a lyrical evocation of spring to an
itemized list of “trash” visible from a New York subway. The
Provençal idealization of human sexuality as a renewing natural
pleasure emphasizes the dirty realism of contemporary sexual
practices, which come to seem less “civilized,” more emotionally
impoverished, even as they suggest that troubadour poetry is itself
suspect, a mystification of the material conditions and consequences
of sexuality.
It is worth noting, finally, that Blackburn’s experience with the
Provençal translation also bears on his other translation projects.
With the 1958 manuscript unpublished, he turned his attentions
to Latin American writing, particularly the fiction of the
Argentine Julio Cortázar. In 1959, Blackburn entered into a
contract with Cortázar that made him the Argentine writer’s
“exclusive and official literary representative (AGENT)
throughout the entire world (except in): France, Germany, Italy
and all the Spanish-speaking countries.”10 Blackburn negotiated
the publication of the first English-language versions of
Cortázar’s fiction, which were two novels: The Winners, translated
by Elaine Kerrigan in 1965, and Hopscotch, translated by Gregory
Rabassa in 1966. Late in the 1950s, Blackburn began translating
Cortázar’s poems and short stories, mostly for magazine
publication, and in 1967, the stories were issued as End of the
Game. He then translated another collection of Cortázar’s short
prose pieces, Cronopios and Famas (1969), and was the likely
translator for the next volume of Cortázar’s stories to appear in
English, All Fires The Fire (1973), but his failing health prevented

Margin
265
him from taking on this project. Blackburn’s work with Cortázar
served the modernist cultural politics that informed his Provençal
translation and his article “The International Word,” a left-wing
internationalism that viewed translation as a foreignizing
intervention in American culture. The Cortázar translations,
however, were much more effective in their dissidence,
questioning and actually changing literary canons in English.
Blackburn, among the other translators and publishers of
Cortázar’s writing, was importing the so-called “boom” in
twentieth-century Latin American fiction, a body of foreign
literature characterized by experimentalist strategies that
challenged the realism dominating British and American narrative.
The Latin American boom began circulating in English during the
1950s, when translations of writers like Jorge Luis Borges appeared
in magazines and anthologies. Among the first book-length
translations in this tendency was in fact Borges’ Ficciones (1962),
rendered by various hands, American and British. A few years
later, the reviews of the Cortázar translations repeatedly linked
him to “his countryman” Borges, and both were inserted in the
modernist mainstream of European fiction: Franz Kafka, Italo
Svevo, Günter Grass, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Michel Butor, Nathalie
Sarraute.11 Contemporary British and American fiction was for the
most part realist at this time, with narrative experimentalism
banished to the obscure fringes (Djuna Barnes, Samuel Beckett,
Flann O’Brien, William Burroughs, William Gaddis, John Hawkes,
Thomas Pynchon)—or to popular forms, like horror and science
fiction. This is reflected in The New York Times “Best Seller List” for
9 July 1967, the issue in which Blackburn’s End of the Game was
reviewed (see Table 3). The list contains mostly varieties of realism
(historical and contemporary); the only deviation is a Gothic
fantasy, an archaic popular genre modernized in Ira Levin’s novel,
Rosemary’s Baby.
The success of Latin American writers like Borges and Cortázar
was both critical and commercial, owing to numerous, mostly
favorable reviews, the support of trade publishers like Grove,
Pantheon, and New Directions, and publishing subventions issued
through the Center for Inter-American Relations, a cultural
organization funded by private foundations. The translations were
very well received. Rabassa’s version of Hopscotch won the 1966
National Book Award for Translation. Within the first six months of
publication, The Winners sold 8195 hardback copies; within five

266
The Translator’s Invisibility
months, Hopscotch sold 6965. Both novels were quickly reprinted as
paperbacks. Blackburn’s End of the Game (1967) received some
twenty enthusiastic reviews in England and the United States, and
selections appeared in The New Yorker and Vogue. Within three
months of publication, 3159 hardback copies were sold, and during
the next few years several stories were frequently anthologized. By
1974, there had been four paperback printings. The paperbacks,
ironically enough, were published by Macmillan, who retitled the
book Blow-Up to capitalize on the publicity from Michelangelo
Antonioni’s 1967 film, a free adaptation of a Cortázar story.
The cultural intervention that Blackburn failed to make with his
Provençal translation came to pass with the Cortázar—in a different
genre, in a modern language, and with a contemporary writer. The
English-language success of Latin American writing during the
1960s undoubtedly altered the canon of foreign fiction in Anglo-
American culture, not only by introducing new texts and writers, but
by validating experimentalist strategies that undermined the
assumptions of classic realism, both theoretical (individualism,
empiricism) and ideological (liberal humanism). The Latin American
boom must also be counted among the cultural tendencies that
altered the canon of British and American fiction during the 1960s,
the proliferation of diverse narrative experiments inspired by
Table 3 New York Times “Best Seller List for Fiction,” 9 July 1967
Source: New York Times Book Review 9 July 1967, p. 45

Margin
267
modernism: Donald Barthelme, Christine Brooke-Rose, Angela
Carter, Robert Coover, Guy Davenport, among many others.
Blackburn’s work with Cortázar continued the modernist cultural
politics that animated his Provençal translation: he recovered a
foreign literature that was currently marginal in Anglo-American
culture, so that it might make a cultural difference in English,
interrogating dominant literary values (realism, bourgeois
individualism) and influencing the development of new English-
language literatures.
Blackburn’s work with Cortázar displayed a foreignizing impulse
in choosing to translate marginal texts, but he also produced
translations that were foreignized enough to be compellingly strange.
The remarkable thing about the translations that supported the
canonization of Latin American fiction in English is that they are
distinguished by considerable fluency. Blackburn’s translations
smuggled Cortázar’s fiction into Anglo-American culture under the
fluent discourse that continues to dominate English-language
translation. Translating fluently, insuring the illusion of transparency
and the evocation of a coherent voice, positioning the reader in a
narrative point of view, ultimately heightens Cortázar’s modernist
effects, the discontinuities that dislodge the reader from the narrative
positioning and encourage a self-consciousness sceptical of the realist
illusion. The reviewer for the British magazine Books and Bookmen
acknowledged the foreignizing impulse in Blackburn’s choice of
Cortázar, whose “world is a strange one, and to most people, I would
think, an unfamiliar one.” But the reviewer also felt that the fluency
of Blackburn’s translation was powerful in delivering this
strangeness:
 
Ignorant of the experience to come, I opened the violet-jacketed
copy of Julio Cortázar’s short story collection, and found myself on
the other side of the Looking Glass in one minute flat. Where to begin
on this dazzling book? Perhaps with Paul Blackburn’s translation
into splendid, flexible English, whose metaphors carry the savage
accuracy of a punch in the stomach.
(Stubbs 1968:26)
 
The reviewer for The Nation described Blackburn’s reliance on current
English usage, but also pointed to a foreignizing tendency in the
lexicon, which, the reviewer suggested, would foster innovations in
English-language prose:

268
The Translator’s Invisibility
The translation, by Paul Blackburn, is properly colloquial, elegant
and eloquent, and is flavored with just enough touches of Spanish
and French phrases to spice the narrative. At this point in the
development of a freer form for prose writing, Cortázar is
indispensable.
(Stern 1967:248)
Yet perhaps this passage should read “Blackburn’s translation of
Cortázar is indispensable” to innovative prose. In the regime of
transparent discourse, where fluency routinely makes the
translator invisible, even reviewers who praise the translator by
name are likely to reduce the translation to the foreign author.
Blackburn’s translation, although fluent, is inevitably free at
points, departing from “Cortázar,” inscribing the Spanish texts
with different linguistic and cultural values, enabling them to
produce effects that work only in English. A closer look at
Blackburn’s discursive moves will reveal the effectiveness of his
Cortázar translations.
“Continuity of Parks” (“Continuidad de los Parques”) is a brief but
characteristic text from End of the Game that seamlessly shifts between
two realistic narratives, finally provoking a metaphysical uncertainty
about which is the text, which reality. A businessman sitting in an
armchair at his estate reads a novel about an unfaithful wife whose
lover goes to kill her husband; when the crime is about to be
performed, the victim is revealed as the businessman sitting in the
armchair at the opening. At the climactic end, the “real” man reading
a novel suddenly becomes a character in that novel, just as the
characters suddenly become “real” to end the man’s life. Cortázar
involves the Spanish-language reader in this conundrum by, first,
constructing the businessman as the narrative point of view and then,
without warning, abruptly shifting to the lovers. The rapid conclusion
is a bit jolting, not only because the text ends just before the murder
occurs, but because the reader was earlier positioned in the victim’s
point of view, assuming it to be reality.
Blackburn’s fluent translation enables this positioning most
obviously by using consistent pronouns. The subject of every
sentence at the opening is “he,” maintaining the realist distinction
between the man’s reality and the fictiveness of the novel he is
reading:
 
He had begun to read the novel a few days before. He had put it
down because of some urgent business conferences, opened it again

Margin
269
on his way back to the estate by train; he had permitted himself a
slowly growing interest in the plot, in the characterizations. That
afternoon, after writing a letter giving his power of attorney and
discussing a matter of joint ownership with the manager of his
estate, he returned to the book in the tranquillity of his study which
looked out upon the park with its oaks. Sprawled in his favorite
armchair, its back toward the door—even the possibility of an
intrusion would have irritated him, had he thought of it—he let his
left hand caress repeatedly the green velvet upholstery and set to
reading the final chapters.
(Cortázar 1967:63)
 
Blackburn’s translation has all the hallmarks of fluency—linear
syntax, univocal meaning, current usage—easily setting up the “he”
as the position from which the narrative is intelligible, the description
true, the setting real. The translation is also quite close to the Spanish
text, except for one telling deviation: the parenthetical remark in
Blackburn’s last sentence revises the Spanish. Cortázar’s text reads,
“de espaldas a la puerta que lo hubiera molestado como una irritante
posibilidad de intrusiones” (in a close version, “with his back to the
door which annoyed him like an irritating possibility of intrusions”).
Blackburn’s revision adds the aside, “had he thought of it,” which
suddenly shifts to a new discursive level, a different narrative point
of view, at once omniscient and authorial, identifying the “he” as a
character in Cortázar’s text and briefly undermining the realist illusion
established in the previous sentences. Blackburn’s fluent translation
possesses considerable stylistic refinement, present even in this subtle
revision, an addition to the Spanish that is very much in tune with
Cortázar’s narrative technique.
Blackburn’s choices show him strengthening the realist illusion
when the narrative suddenly shifts to the description of the novel,
positioning the reader in the lovers, erasing the line between
fiction and reality. But then—following the Spanish text closely—
he momentarily redraws that line by using literary terms to
describe the novel (“dialogue/diálogo,” “pages/páginas”) and by
making a tacit reference to the reading businessman (“one felt/
se sentía”):
 
The woman arrived first, apprehensive; now the lover came in, his
face cut by the backlash of a branch. Admirably, she stanched the
blood with her kisses, but he rebuffed her caresses, he had not

270
The Translator’s Invisibility
come to perform again the ceremonies of a secret passion,
protected by a world of dry leaves and furtive paths through the
forest. The dagger warmed itself against his chest, and under-
neath liberty pounded, hidden close. A lustful, panting dialogue
raced down the pages like a rivulet of snakes, and one felt it had
all been decided from eternity.
(Cortázar 1967:64)
 
On the one hand, Blackburn increases the verisimilitude of the
translation by adding more precise detail, like the phrase “through the
forest,” which is absent from the Spanish text (in another passage, he
similarly adds the phrase “leading in the opposite direction” to “On
the path” (ibid.:65)). On the other hand, Blackburn exaggerates the
melodramatic aspects of the scene: he uses “lustful, panting” to render
one Spanish word, anhelante (“craving,” “yearning,” “panting”), and
chooses “raced” for corría (instead of the flatter “ran”). Two other
additions to the Spanish text produce the same exaggerated effect:
“unforeseen,” in the sentence, “Nothing had been forgotten: alibis,
unforeseen hazards, possible mistakes”/“Nada había sido olvidado:
cortadas, azares, posibles errores” (Cortázar 1967:65; and 1964:10));
and “flying,” in the sentence, “he turned for a moment to watch her
running, her hair loosened and flying”/“él se volvió un instante para
verla correr con pelo suelto” (Cortázar 1967:66; and 1964:10).
Blackburn’s melodramatic lexicon reinforces the realist illusion,
making the narrative more suspenseful, suturing the reader more
tightly in the lovers’ position; yet it also classes the narrative in a
popular fictional genre, the steamy romance, encouraging the reader
to interrogate the realist illusionism that dominates English-language
fiction—most obviously in bestselling novels. Cortázar’s text
challenges individualistic cultural forms like realism by suggesting
that human subjectivity is not self-originating or self-determining, but
constructed in narrative, including popular genres. This and the fact
that it is a businessman who turns out to be living a fiction dovetail
with the critique of bourgeois values, economic and cultural, that
recurs in Blackburn’s other writing.
Blackburn’s work as a translator spanned various languages and
periods, and he published several other translation projects,
including The Cid, a selection of Lorca’s poetry, and Picasso’s prose
poems, Hunk of Skin. Still, enough has been said to sketch the main
contours of his career—and to judge it a powerful response to his
cultural situation. Blackburn followed the modernist innovations

Margin
271
that were developed by Pound but marginalized by the regime of
fluency in English-language translation. This meant cultivating an
extremely heterogeneous discourse (a rich mixture of archaism,
colloquialism, 
quotation, 
nonstandard 
punctuation 
and
orthography, and prosodic experiment) that prevented the
translation from being taken as the “original” and instead asserted
its independence as a literary text in a different language and
culture. Blackburn’s experimentalist practices were foreignizing:
their challenge to fluency, among other domestic values (academic
criticism, linguistic elitism, bourgeois propriety, realism,
individualism), enabled his translations to signal the linguistic and
cultural differences of the foreign texts. Yet Blackburn was also
appropriating these texts for domestic cultural agendas: in the
construction of his authorial identity through a rivalry with Pound;
in the prosodic and thematic development of his own poetry; and
in a dissident political intervention designed to foster a left-wing
internationalism in American culture during the Cold War, when a
foreign policy of containing ideological opponents led to a domestic
surge of nationalism that excluded cultural differences.
Blackburn’s Provençal translation intervened into this situation,
but was also constrained by it, caught between the midcentury
reaction against modernism, the academic reception of archaic
literary texts, and an elitism that marginalized nonstandard dialects
and discourses. Even twenty years later, in 1978, when the
manuscript was finally published, the reception reflected the
continuing marginality of modernist translation. In The New York
Times Book Review, the academic critic and translator Robert M.
Adams acknowledged Blackburn’s development of a translation
poetics (“Blackburn was a poet, and he responded to the poetry of
his originals”), but faulted his “pronounced stylistic mode (in
essence the labored slang of Ezra Pound)” and found George
Economou’s editing inadequate on largely scholarly grounds:
“historical and biographical information is sparse and uncommonly
confused in its presentation”; “there is never any indication in the
text of where a footnote occurs” (Adams 1979:36).
Blackburn’s own response after the Macmillan episode was to
develop new translation projects that continued to serve a modernist
cultural politics, although with different foreign literatures and
different translation discourses. As Cortázar’s agent and translator,
Blackburn worked to get Latin American fiction admitted to the canon
of foreign literature in English; and to achieve this canon reformation,

272
The Translator’s Invisibility
he, like many other English-language translators, resorted to fluency,
assimilating marginal experimental narratives to the transparent
discourse that distinguished the dominant realism. Blackburn’s career
as a modernist poet—translator shows quite clearly that translation
strategies can be defined as “foreignizing” or “domesticating” only in
relation to specific cultural situations, specific moments in the
changing reception of a foreign literature, or in the changing hierarchy
of domestic values.

Chapter 6
Simpatico
How many people today live in a language that is not their own?
Or no longer, or not yet, even know their own and know poorly
the major language that they are forced to serve? This is the
problem of immigrants, and especially of their children, the
problem of minorities, the problem of a minor literature, but also
a problem for all of us: how to tear a minor literature away from
its own language, allowing it to challenge the language and
making it follow a sober revolutionary path? How to become a
nomad and an immigrant and a gypsy in relation to one’s own
language?
Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari (trans. Dana Polan)
 
In 1978, soon after my translations of Italian poetry began appearing
in magazines, I met another American translator of Italian, an older,
widely published, and very gifted writer who commented on some
of my work and gave me advice about literary translation. Among
his many shrewd remarks was the recommendation that I translate
an Italian author of my own generation, something which he himself
had been doing for many years and with much success. He
explained that when author and translator live in the same historical
moment, they are more likely to share a common sensibility, and this
is highly desirable in translation because it increases the fidelity of
the translated text to the original. The translator works better when
he and the author are simpatico, said my friend, and by this he meant
not just “agreeable,” or “congenial,” meanings which this Italian
word is often used to signify, but also “possessing an underlying
sympathy.” The translator should not merely get along with the
author, not merely find him likeable; there should also be an identity
between them.

274
The Translator’s Invisibility
The ideal situation occurs, my friend believed, when the
translator discovers his author at the start of both their careers.
In this instance, the translator can closely follow the author’s
progress, accumulating exhaustive knowledge of the foreign
texts, strengthening and developing the affinity which he already
feels with his author’s ideas and tastes, becoming, in effect, of the
same mind. When simpatico is present, the translation process can
be seen as a veritable recapitulation of the creative process by
which the original came into existence; and when the translator
is assumed to participate vicariously in the author’s thoughts and
feelings, the translated text is read as the transparent expression
of authorial psychology or meaning. The voice that the reader
hears in any translation made on the basis of simpatico is always
recognized as the author’s, never as a translator’s, nor even as
some hybrid of the two.
My friend’s ideas about translation still prevail today in Anglo-
American culture, although they have dominated English-language
translation at least since the seventeenth century. The earl of
Roscommon’s Essay on Translated Verse (1684) recommended that the
translator
 
     chuse an Author as you chuse a Friend:
United by this Sympathetick Bond,
You grow Familiar, Intimate, and Fond;
Your Thoughts, your Words, your Stiles, your Souls agree,
No longer his Interpreter, but He.
(Steiner 1975:77)
 
Alexander Tytler’s Essay on the Principles of Translation (1798) asserted
that if the translator’s aim is fluency, “he must adopt the very soul of
his author” (Tytler 1978:212). John Stuart Blackie’s article on the
Victorian translation controversy, “Homer and his translators” (1861),
argued that “the successful translator of a poet must not only be a poet
himself, but he must be a poet of the same class, and of a kindred
inspiration,” “led by a sure instinct to recognise the author who is
kindred to himself in taste and spirit, and whom he therefore has a
special vocation to translate” (Blackie 1861:269, 271). Burton Raffel’s
review of the Zukofskys’ modernist Catullus similarly argued that the
optimal conditions for translating the Latin texts include “(a) a poet, (b)
an ability to identify with, to almost be Catullus over a protracted
period, and (c) great good luck” (Raffel 1969:444).

Simpatico
275
From this chorus of theorists, critics, and translators it seems clear
that the idea of simpatico translation is consistent with ideas about
poetry that prevail today in Anglo-American culture, although they
too were formulated centuries ago, perhaps most decisively with the
emergence of romanticism in England. From William Wordsworth to
T.S.Eliot to Robert Lowell and beyond, the dominant aesthetic in
English-language poetry has been transparency, the view, as Antony
Easthope neatly puts it in his incisive critique, that “poetry expresses
experience; experience gives access to personality, and so poetry
leads us to personality” (Easthope 1983:4–5). My friend’s notion of
simpatico was in fact a development of these assumptions to
characterize the practice of translation (it was transparent) and to
define the role of the translator (identification with the foreign
author’s personality).
I was profoundly attracted by my friend’s remarks. No doubt this
attraction was partly due to his cultural authority, his command of
publishers and his growing list of awards, the sheer success he had
achieved with his translations. But he also offered a sophisticated and
rather lyrical understanding of what I wanted to do, a position of
identification for me as translator, someone I could be when
translating—i.e., my successful friend, but also, in the process, the
author of a foreign text. I followed this advice, and as chance would
have it I came upon an Italian writer who is roughly my own age, the
Milanese poet Milo De Angelis.
Born in 1951, De Angelis made his precocious debut in 1975, when
he was invited to contribute some of his poems to L’almanacco dello
Specchio, a prestigious annual magazine centered in Milan and
published by one of Italy’s largest commercial presses, Arnoldo
Mondadori Editore. The title of the anthology, literally “The Almanac
of the Mirror,” asserts its claim to be a representative literary survey,
but the title also connects it with Mondadori’s long-standing series of
poetry volumes, called Lo Specchio, whose editorial policies the
anthology seems to share: both print recent work by canonized
twentieth-century writers, foreign and Italian, along with a few
newcomers. The issue of L’almanacco to which De Angelis contributed
also included poems by Eugenio Montale and Pier Paolo Pasolini, as
well as Italian translations from the poetry of various foreign writers,
Russian (Marina Tsvetayeva), German (Paul Celan), and American
(Robert Bly). De Angelis’s first book of poems, called Somiglianze
(“Resemblances”), appeared in 1976 from the small commercial press
Guanda, noted in the 1970s for its list of innovative contemporary

276
The Translator’s Invisibility
writing. These two titles, the assertive mirror and the tentative
resemblances, raised a range of questions about the possibility of
simpatico translation, questions about representation, canon formation,
and literary publishing, which continue to haunt my encounter with
De Angelis’s poetry.
I
As I followed De Angelis’s success in Italy, I quickly saw that he
couldn’t match it in the United States and England, at least not
today. The current canon of twentieth-century Italian poetry in
English translation hasn’t yet admitted his kind of writing, doesn’t
find it simpatico, and has in fact constrained my attempts to publish
my translations. At the center of this canon is Eugenio Montale
(1896–1981), flanked by several other Italian poets who exhibit a
stylistic affinity with his poetry or who received his admiration in
essays and reviews and, in some cases, his recommendation to
publishers. At the margins are the successive waves of
experimentalism that swept through Italian poetry in the post-
World War II period and gave rise to poets like De Angelis.
Montale’s canonical status in Anglo-American poetry translation, I
learned, cast a shadow of neglect over the legions of Italian poets
who followed him.
English translation of Montale’s poetry began early, with a 1928
appearance in Eliot’s Criterion, and it has continued to this day in
myriad magazines and anthologies. It was only in the late 1950s,
however, that book-length translations started to proliferate, so that
Montale now rivals Dante in the number of versions by different
hands to be found on publishers’ lists. Montale brought out seven
slim volumes of poetry, all of which have been englished in their
entirety or in part, some of them more than once.1 Individual
sequences of poems have frequently been lifted out of these volumes
and published as chapbooks. There have been five representative
selecteds, a book of autobiographical prose, a slim miscellany of
critical prose, and a large selection of essays (some 350 pages). At
present, thirteen English-language translations of Montale’s writing
are in print. They are published by an impressively broad range of
trade, academic, and small presses in the United States, England, and
Canada: Agenda, Boyars, Ecco, Graywolf, Kentucky, Mosaic, New
Directions, Norton, Oberlin, Oxford, Random House. And the
numerous translators include talented poets, scholars, and editors,

Simpatico
277
some of whom are internationally known: William Arrowsmith,
Jonathan Galassi, Dana Gioia, Alastair Hamilton, Kate Hughes,
Antonino Mazza, G.Singh, and Charles Wright. Italian poets linked to
Montale by influence, stylistic or otherwise, have also appeared in a
number of book-length translations since the late fifties; Guido
Gozzano (1883–1916), Giuseppe Ungaretti (1888–1970), Salvatore
Quasimodo (1901–1968), Lucio Piccolo (1903–1969), Sandro Penna
(1906–1976), Leonardo Sinisgalli (1908–1981), and Vittorio Sereni
(1913–1983). Here too the presses are varied and the translators
accomplished: Anvil, Carcanet, Cornell, Hamish Hamilton, Minerva,
New Directions, Ohio State, Princeton, Red Hill, Red Ozier; Jack
Bevan, Patrick Creagh, W.S.Di Piero, Ruth Feldman and Brian Swann,
Allen Mandelbaum, J.G.Nichols, Michael Palma, and Paul Vangelisti.
Eleven books by poets who can be described, without too much
violence, as Montale avatars in English are currently in print, a
couple with essays by him.
Compared to the increasing interest that distinguishes
Montale’s reception in Anglo-American culture, other postwar
tendencies in Italian poetry have received limited attention.
Among them, experimentalism is remarkably underrepresented,
given its importance in Italy. In a conservative estimate,
approximately fifty poets writing over four decades can be classed
in this category, making it a central movement in contemporary
Italian poetry. The first wave, sometimes called “I novissimi”
(“The Newest”) after the title of an important 1961 anthology,
includes its editor Alfredo Giuliani (1924–), Corrado Costa (1929–
), Edoardo Sanguineti (1930–), Giulia Niccolai (1934–), Nanni
Balestrini (1935–), Antonio Porta (1935–1989), Franco Beltrametti
(1937–), and Adriano Spatola (1941–1989). The second wave,
which began publishing during the 1970s, includes Nanni
Cagnone (1939–), Gregorio Scalise (1939–), Luigi Ballerini (1940–),
Angelo Lumelli (1944–), Giuseppe Conte (1945–), Cesare Viviani
(1947–), Michelangelo Coviello (1950–), and Milo De Angelis.
There are also various other poets whose careers do not coincide
with these chronologies, but whose writing is marked by a strong
experimental impulse—Andrea Zanzotto (1921–), for instance,
and Amelia Rosselli (1930–). The fact that these names are more
than likely to be meaningless to English-language readers of
poetry is symptomatic of the poets’ current marginality (and
perhaps that of any other Italian poet but Dante and Montale) in
Anglo-American writing.

278
The Translator’s Invisibility
Book-length English translations of the experimental poetry took
much longer to appear (over a decade after the Italian publication)
than English versions of Montale’s poems (within three years of his
first volume). In the 1970s, Ruth Feldman and Brian Swann did a
selected Zanzotto with Princeton, and Paul Vangelisti published his
chapbook version of Spatola’s Majakovskiiiiiiij with John McBride’s
Los Angeles-based Red Hill Press. Vangelisti and McBride built a
small library of Italian experimentalism, with nine books from
Beltrametti, Costa, Niccolai, Porta, and Spatola, as well as an
anthology that aims to map the movement, Italian Poetry, 1960–1980:
from Neo to Post Avant-garde, Porta has been the most translated: five
books altogether, including an individual volume from City Lights
and a selected from the Canadian press Guernica, rendered by
different translators. The poet Ballerini’s Out of London Press issued
bilingual volumes of Cagnone, Tomaso Kemeny, and Giovanna
Sandri, as well as an anthology that collected essays, lectures, and
poems from a conference held in New York during the late 1970s,
Thomas Harrison’s The Favorite Malice. Poets associated with the
postwar experimentalism, as well as various other contemporary
tendencies, are represented in several other anthologies from these
years—but they are conspicuously absent from William Jay Smith and
Dana Gioia’s Poems from Italy, which aims to be a representative
survey of Italian poetry from its medieval beginnings.
To date, roughly twenty English-language books relating in whole
or part to the experimentalist movement have been published, mostly
by rather obscure small presses with limited distribution. It is no
exaggeration to say that you won’t find any of these books in your local
bookstore or even in many university libraries, but you will certainly
find some of Montale’s books. Behind Montale’s monumentalization in
Anglo-American writing lies a very different poetic landscape in Italy,
one where he is canonized, to be sure, but which also includes the
canonical tendency I am calling, somewhat reductively,
“experimentalism.”
No doubt, the different reception of these Italian poetries is due
to many factors, cultural, economic, ideological. The fact that
Montale was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1975
accounts for some of his cultural capital here and abroad. But it can’t
explain the sustained attention given to his poetry by the English-
language writers who have chosen to translate it, or the relative
neglect bestowed on some forty years of experimentalism. To
understand this, I want to suggest, we must turn to the dominant

Simpatico
279
poetics in Anglo-American culture, specifically its romantic
assumptions: that the poet is a unified subjectivity freely expressing
his personal experience, and that the poem should therefore be
centered on the poetic I, evoking a unique voice, communicating the
poet’s self in transparent language, sustaining a feeling of simpatico
in the translator. Montale’s canonical status in Anglo-American
writing rests on his translators’ assimilation of his poetry to
mainstream poetics, whereas the postwar experimentalism has been
marginalized largely because it resists any such assimilation. The
Montale canonized in English is actually a domesticated version
shaped by a poet-oriented aesthetic and realized in the transparent
discourse of fluent translation.
A case in point is Dana Gioia’s version of Montale’s Mottetti, a
consecutively numbered sequence of twenty poems that forms the
centerpiece of the 1939 volume Le occasioni. Montale’s
contemporaries found these poems obscure, using the term
“hermeticism” (ermetismo) to disparage their typically modernist
poetics of indirection, their recourse to ellipsis, fragmentation,
heterogeneity. In an essay from 1950, “Due sciacalli al guinzaglio”
(“Two Jackals on a Leash”), Montale answered his critics by claiming
that the “motets” were not obscure, that although individual poems
were written at various times, they constituted “an entirely
unmysterious little autobiographical novel,” in which he deployed
some traditional cultural materials—Dante’s La Vita Nuova, the dolce
stil novisti—to represent his intermittent relationship with Irma
Brandeis, an American Dante scholar he encountered in Florence
(Montale 1982:305). Anglo-American mainstream poetics privileges
the poet, so Gioia accepts Montale’s defensive, slyly ironic essay at
face value and asserts that the poems “form a unified sequence
whose full meaning and power becomes apparent only when they
are read together” (Montale 1990:11). Any obscurity is only
apparent, an effect of the equally apparent discontinuity of the
narrative:
 
The sequence recreates isolated moments of insight, stripped of
their nonessential elements. Everything else in the story is told
by implication, and the reader must participate in the
reconstruction of the human drama by projecting his or her own
private associations to fill in the missing elements of the
narrative.
(ibid.:16, my italics)

280
The Translator’s Invisibility
It is remarkable how Gioia repeatedly locates the formal elements that
earned Montale the tag “hermetic”—only to explain away their
existence, to “fill in” the cracks of the broken text. In Gioia’s assimilation
of Montale to mainstream poetics, the most important thing is to
maintain the continuity of the poet’s representation of his experience,
insuring the coherence of the poetic subject and its control over the act
of self-expression. Hence, Gioia’s translation strategy is designed to
make versions that “would move naturally as English-language poems,”
“always preferring the emotional clarity and narrative integrity of the
whole poem in English to the lexicographical fidelity of the individual
word,” departing from Montale’s lineation so as to “integrate the
transposed elements tightly into a new whole” (ibid.:21). The departures,
however, are not seen as inaccuracies or domesticating revisions, but as
more intimate fidelities, showing that Gioia is really simpatico with
Montale, “faithful not only to the sense but also to the spirit of the
Italian” (ibid.:22). Here it becomes clear that the translator’s feeling of
simpatico is no more than a projection, that the object of the translator’s
identification is ultimately himself, the “private associations” he
inscribes in the foreign text in the hope of producing a similarly
narcissistic experience in the English-language reader.
The effect of mainstream poetics on Gioia’s translations can be seen
in his version of the sixth Italian text in the group:
 
La speranza di pure rivederti
m’abbandonava;
e mi chiesi se questo che mi chiude
ogni senso di te, schermo d’immagini,
ha i segni della morte o dal passato
è in esso, ma distorto e fatto labile,
un tuo barbaglio:
(a Modena, tra i portici,
un servo gallonato trascinava
due sciacalli al guinzaglio).
(Montale 1984a:144)
 
I had almost lost
hope of ever seeing you again;
and I asked myself if this thing
cutting me off

Simpatico
281
from every trace of you, this screen
of images,
was the approach of death, or truly
some dazzling
vision of you
out of the past,
bleached, distorted,
fading:
(under the arches at Modena
I saw an old man in a uniform
dragging two jackals on a leash).
(Montale 1990:35)
 
Gioia’s version appreciably enlarges the poet’s presence in the poem
with several alterations and additions. Montale’s opening lines—“La
speranza di pure rivederti/m’abbandonava” (in a rendering that
follows the Italian word order and lineation, “The hope of ever
seeing you again/was abandoning me”)—get reversed, with the
emphasis shifted to Gioia’s “I”: “I had almost lost.” Similarly, the
penultimate line contains another first-person reference, “I saw,”
which doesn’t appear at all in the Italian text. Gioia’s other
additions—“truly,” “vision,” “bleached,” “old man”—show an
effort to make the language more emotive or dramatic, to sketch the
psychological contours of the poetic subject, but they come off as
somewhat stagy, even sentimental (“old man”). In keeping with this
emotionalizing of Montale’s lexicon, Gioia uses the phrase
“approach of death” to translate “i segni della morte” (“signs of
death”), diminishing the element of self-reflexivity in the Italian, its
awareness of its own status as “images” and “signs,” and replacing
it with a pallid sensationalism. The English word “signs” is currently
loaded with various meanings, including a reference to controversial
foreign imports in Anglo-American literary theory that
depersonalize the text and deconstruct authorship—viz. semiotics
and poststructuralism. The avoidance of the word here produces two
notable effects: it moves the translation away from contemporary
European thinking that would question the theoretical assumptions
of mainstream poetics, and it reinforces the focus on the poet’s
emotional state, on the (re) presentation of Montale’s poem as
(Montale’s or Gioia’s?) self-expression. Gioia’s translation strategy
quite clearly seeks to efface Montale’s modernist poetic discourse, to

282
The Translator’s Invisibility
remove the formal elements that made the Italian text so strikingly
different to its first Italian audience, and that, if a translator tried to
reproduce them in English, would result in a translation just as
striking to an Anglo-American reader because of their deviation
from the dominant poet-centered aesthetic.
The Italian postwar experimentalism proves recalcitrant to this
assimilationist ideology in both form and theme. In its early
phase, it was called the “neoavantgarde” for its return to
modernist movements like Futurism, Dadaism, and Surrealism in
order to develop a highly discontinuous poetic discourse that
reflected on its cultural and social situation. In the preface to I
novissimi, Giuliani outlined the experimental project as a left-
wing cultural politics: language is fractured in a “schizomorphic
vision” (“visione schizomorfa”) which simultaneously registers
and resists the mental dislocations and illusory representations of
consumer capitalism (Giuliani 1961:xviii). Edoardo Sanguineti’s
poetry, to take one example, is a frenetic stream of episodes in the
poet’s life, allusions to contemporary figures and events, excerpts
and applications of his readings in philosophy, literature,
psychology, and social theory, punctuated with found language
and references to popular culture. The experimentalism in this
initial phase circulated widely in magazines and anthologies, a
book series with a large trade press (Feltrinelli), and several
public meetings that received substantial media attention. And
the experiments took varied forms, not only writing that was
much more plurivocal and heterogeneous than anything
produced by Montale, but also visual poetry and collage,
computer-generated texts and performance.
Experimentalism encompasses diverse poetries, and my
periodizations and cultural genealogies inevitably give too neat an
account (which, moreover, is interested on this occasion, pitched to
demonstrate a deviation from Montale). The common experimental
thread is the use of formal discontinuity to address philosophical
problems raised by language, representation, and subjectivity,
resembling in this such contemporary French developments as the
nouveau roman and the emergence of poststructuralist thinking,
especially in politicized versions, with the Tel Quel group. Indeed, the
immense importance of politics to the neoavantgarde has led
Christopher Wagstaff to suggest that “when, in 1968, Italy seemed to
offer significant opportunities for direct political action,” the
movement “saw its raison d’être disappear,” as evidenced by the demise

Simpatico
283
of a central magazine, the increasing affiliations with established
cultural and academic institutions, and, most tellingly, a theoretical
and practical redirection (Wagstaff 1984:37).
The second experimentalist phase avoided explicit political
engagement to develop more speculative projects with distinct
philosophical roots (existential phenomenology, psychoanalysis,
poststructuralism), exploring the conditions of human
consciousness and action in powerfully indeterminate texts. The
renewed emphasis on textuality was sometimes given a political
inflection in theoretical statements, particularly by members of the
first experimentalist phase. In an anthology that surveys Italian
poetry during the 1970s, Porta argued that “the reaffirmation of the
linguistic force of the I resolves the problem of the interactions
between poetry and society, between poetry and reality, because the
poetic I is never merely ‘personal’ but, just like the author, is a
linguistic-collective event” (Porta 1979:27). In general, however, the
post-1968 experimentalism didn’t resort to the left-wing
theorizations of the neoavantgarde, but rather pursued the
“enamored word,” as the title of one important anthology indicates,
turning it into a site of uncontrollable polysemy, exposing and
destabilizing the multiple determinations of subjectivity—linguistic,
cultural, social (Pontiggia and DiMauro 1978). In doing this, some
poets returned to the formal and thematic innovations of
hermeticism, its oblique means of signification, its penchant for
climactic moments. This is clear in Milo De Angelis’s case: drawing
not merely on hermeticism, but on such other European poets as
René Char and Paul Celan, he pushes modernist fragmentation to an
extreme that threatens intelligibility even while proliferating
meaning.
Perhaps a poem by De Angelis, “Lettera da Vignole” (“Letter from
Vignole”), can indicate how he at once resembles and differs from the
early Montale. It too issues from a friendship between the poet and a
woman engaged in literary activity, although not a Dantista. This is
Marta Bertamini, who collaborated with De Angelis on the
experimentalist magazine he founded, niebo (1977–1984), and on a
translation from the Latin (Claudian, The Rape of Proserpine). Vignole is
the Italian town near the Austrian border where she was born.
 
Udimmo la pioggia e quelli
che ritornavano: ogni cosa
nella calma di parlare

284
The Translator’s Invisibility
e poi la montagna, un attimo, e tutti
i morti che neanche il tuo esilio
potrà distinguere.
“Torna subito o non tornare più.”
Era questa—tra i salmi
della legge—la voce
che hai ripetuto all’inizio,
la potente sillaba, prima
di te stessa.  “Solo così ti verrò incontro, ignara
nell’inverno che ho perduto e che trovo.”
(De Angelis l985:12)
 
 
We heard the rain and those
who were returning: each thing
in the calm of speaking
and then the mountain, an instant, and all
the dead whom not even your exile
can distinguish.
“Come back at once or don’t ever come back.”
This—amid the psalms
of the law—was the voice
that you repeated at the beginning,
the potent syllable, before
you yourself.  “Only then shall I come to meet you, unaware
in the winter which I lost and find.”
 
Knowing the allusion in the title doesn’t much help to fix the meaning
of this poem. The pronouns support multiple subjectivities. A word
like “inverno” (“winter”) sets up a fertile intertextual/ intersubjective
chain: it suggests a key motif in several poets, notably Celan and
Franco Fortini (1917–), an Italian writer of politically engaged cultural
criticism and verse who early expressed his admiration of De Angelis.
Although De Angelis frequently takes specific episodes in his own life
as points of departure, his experimental poetics renders them both
impersonal and interpersonal, thickening the representation with an
intricate network of images and allusions that construct relations to

Simpatico
285
other poetic discourses, other poetic subjects, challenging any facile
reduction of the text to autobiography (whether the poet’s or the
reader’s).
Montale is undoubtedly much easier for Anglo-American
mainstream poetics to kidnap than experimentalism. In fact, it could
be said that some English-language translators are responding to the
traces 
of 
another 
poet-oriented 
aesthetic 
in 
Montale,
“crepuscolarismo,” a fin de sièclemovement (“crepuscolare” means
“twilight”) that cultivated a private voice in conversational language,
producing introspective, slightly ironic musings on prosaic
experiences (Sanguineti 1963). This would go some way toward
explaining not only Gioia’s effacement of Montale’s modernism, but
the recent American fascination with younger Italian poets who seem
to be returning to crepuscularism—Valerio Magrelli (1957–), for
instance, whom Gioia has also championed and translated (Cherchi
and Parisi 1989).
Of course, not all of Montale’s English-language translators put to
work an assimilationist ideology. William Arrowsmith’s versions were
designed precisely to respect the modernist edge of poems like
Mottetti. In the “Translator’s Preface” to The Occasions, Arrowsmith
described his method as “resisting” any domestication of the Italian
texts:
 
I have conscientiously resisted the translator’s temptation to
fill in or otherwise modify Montale’s constant ellipses, to
accommodate my reader by providing smoother transitions.
And I have done my best to honor Montale’s reticence, his
ironic qualifications, and evaded cadences. A chief aim has
been to preserve the openness of the poet’s Italian, even
though this has meant resisting the genius of English for
concreteness.
(Montale 1987:xxi)
 
Arrowsmith’s intention, however, was to validate, not revaluate,
Montale’s canonical status in Anglo-American poetry translation, and
so there was no need for him to mention the postwar Italian
experimentalism, let alone suggest that it was worth translating into
English. Indeed, he believed that
 
No Italian poet of the twentieth century has taken greater
experimental risks than Montale in this book, above all in the effort

286
The Translator’s Invisibility
to renew the Dantesque vein in terms of a sensibility that belongs so
passionately to its own time and strives tenaciously to find an
individual voice—a voice never to be repeated.
(ibid.:xx)
 
The modernist translation discourse Arrowsmith recommended may
have been resistant to certain Anglo-American literary values
(“smoother transitions,” “concreteness”), but his rationale for this
discourse agreed with mainstream poetics, the romantic valorization of
the poet’s “voice.” Obviously, Arrowsmith’s translations can do little to
question the shadow of neglect that Montale continues to cast on
Italian experimentalists—like Milo De Angelis.
II
The irony of my situation was not lost on me. In pursuing my friend’s
notion of simpatico, I discovered an Italian writer who forced me to
suspect this notion and ultimately abandon it. When I came across De
Angelis’s 1975 anthology selection and then got hold of his first book,
what struck me most was the fact that on every level—linguistic,
formal, thematic—his poems issue a decisive challenge to a poet-
centered aesthetic. Their abrupt line-breaks and syntactical
peculiarities, their obscure mixture of abstraction, metaphor, and
dialogue give them an opacity that undermines any sense of a coherent
speaking voice. They do not invite the reader’s vicarious participation
and in fact frustrate any reading that would treat them as the
controlled expression of an authorial personality or intention. Whose—
or what—voice would speak in a translation of De Angelis’s poetry?
Often, I should add, it is more of a question of which voice, since the
snippets of dialogue that punctuate his texts are impossible to pin
down to a distinct identity. De Angelis’s poetry questions whether the
translator can be (or should be thought of as being) in sympathy with
the foreign author. It rather shows that voice in translation is
irreducibly strange, never quite recognizable as the poet’s or the
translator’s, never quite able to shake off its foreignness to the reader.
As I began to translate De Angelis’s poems, I became aware that the
notion of simpatico actually mystifies what happens in the translation
process. Most crucially, it conceals the fact that in order to produce the
effect of transparency in a translated text, in order to give the reader the
sense that the text is a window onto the author, translators must
manipulate what often seems to be a very resistant material, i.e., the

Simpatico
287
language into which they are translating, in most cases the language
they learned first, their mother tongue, but now also their own.
Transparency occurs only when the translation reads fluently, when
there are no awkward phrasings, unidiomatic constructions or
confused meanings, when clear syntactical connections and consistent
pronouns create intelligibility for the reader. When the translation is a
poem in free verse, varied rhythms that avoid jogtrot meters are
needed to give the language a conversational quality, to make it sound
natural. Line-breaks should not distort the syntax so much as to hinder
the reader’s search for comprehension; they should rather support the
syntactical continuity that gets him or her to read for meaning over the
lines, pursuing the development of a coherent speaking voice, tracing
its psychological contours. These formal techniques reveal that
transparency is an illusionistic effect: it depends on the translator’s
work with language, but it hides this work, even the very presence of
language, by suggesting that the author can be seen in the translation,
that in it the author speaks in his or her own voice. If the illusion of
transparency is strong enough, it may well produce a truth-effect,
wherein the authorial voice becomes authoritative, heard as speaking
what is true, right, obvious. Translating De Angelis’s poems
demystified this illusionism for me because they so obviously resist
fluency, cultivating instead an aesthetic of discontinuity.
Consider a poem from Somiglianze, a programmatic text which gave
its title to De Angelis’s anthology selection:
 
L’idea centrale
E venuta in mente (ma per caso, per I’odore
di alcool e le bende)
questo darsi da fare premuroso
nonostante.
E ancora, davanti a tutti, si sceglieva
tra le azioni e il loro senso.
Ma per caso.
Esseri dispotici regalavano il centro
distrattamente, con una radiografia,
e in sogno padroni minacciosi
sibilanti:
“se ti togliamo ciò che non è tuo
non ti rimane niente.”
(De Angelis 1976:97)

288
The Translator’s Invisibility
The Central Idea
came to mind (but by chance, because of the scent
of alcohol and the bandages)
this careful busying of oneself
notwithstanding.
And still, in front of everybody, there was choosing
between the actions and their meaning.
But by chance.
Despotic beings made a gift of the center
absentmindedly, with an X-ray,
and in a dream threatening bosses
hissing:
“if we take from you what isn’t yours
you’ll have nothing left.”
 
The Italian poem offers glimpses of a hospital setting, ominous with
its suggestion of injury and death, but the actual incident is never
precisely defined, and the quasi-philosophical reflections on its
meaning remain abstruse, only to be further obscured by the sudden
shift to dreaming and the disturbing quotation. Not only can’t the
reader be sure what is happening, he also doesn’t quite know who is
experiencing it. Until the peremptory statement from the “padroni”
(“bosses”), the tone is natural yet impersonal, ruminative but not
actually introspective, lacking any suggestion that the voice belongs
to a particular person, let alone someone who had himself
experienced the mysterious physical danger. The text does not offer
a coherent position from which to understand it, or a psychologically
consistent voice with which to identify. On the contrary, the
fragmented syntax and abrupt line-breaks constantly disrupt the
signifying process, forcing the reader to revise his interpretations. The
opening lines are remarkable for their syntactical shifts and
contortions, which compel some synthesis of the details just to make
sense of them, but then weaken any closure with the qualification
introduced by “nonostante” (“notwithstanding”). Enjambment is
contradictory, schizoid, metamorphic. If “il centro” is given
“distrattamente,” in what sense can it be described as central? The
“padroni” who are “minacciosi” (“threatening”) turn “sibilanti,” an
Italian word often used to describe the sound of wind in the reeds,
or snakes. The result of the discontinuous form of the poem is that it
fails to create the illusionistic effect of authorial presence,
demonstrating, with degrees of discomfort that vary from reader to

Simpatico
289
reader, how much transparency depends on language, on formal
elements like linear syntax and univocal meaning.
Most interestingly, De Angelis’s abandonment of the formal
techniques used to achieve transparency occurs in a poem whose
representation of human consciousness clearly rejects romantic
individualism. This is the concept of subjectivity that underlies such
key affirmations of transparency as Wordsworth’s theory of authorial
expression in the preface to Lyrical Ballads (1800): “all good poetry is
the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings” (Wordsworth
1974:123). The same concept is also evident in Eliot’s romantic
modernism, his ultimate capitulation to the romantic cult of the
author: “[poetry] is not the expression of personality,” wrote Eliot at
the end of “Tradition and the Individual Talent” (1919), “but an escape
from personality. But, of course, only those who have personality and
emotions know what it means to want to escape from these things”
(Eliot 1950:10–11). De Angelis’s poem, in contrast, represents
consciousness, not as the unified origin of meaning, knowledge, and
action, freely expressing itself in language, but rather as split and
determined by its changing conditions—waking and dreaming,
thought and sensory impulses, meaning and action, medical
diagnoses and chance. Thus, whatever the central idea may be, it
doesn’t come to mind through the subject’s own volition; it arises only
accidentally, through various determining factors over which the
subject has limited or no control, like a smell, or the possibility of
death.
Because this is a foreign text that refuses the romantic aesthetic of
transparency which has long dominated Anglo-American poetry, it
makes any pursuit of simpatico difficult if not impossible for the
English-language translator. “L’idea centrale” is not a congenial poem
to bring into a culture that prizes individuality and self-determination
to such an extent that intentionality and self-expression decisively
shape its reflections on language and poetry. The continued
dominance of these individualistic assumptions in contemporary
Anglo-American culture inevitably makes De Angelis a minor writer
in English, marginal in relation to the major English-language
aesthetic, the transparent expression of authorial experience. Indeed,
the dominance of individualistic assumptions makes translation itself
a minor genre of writing in English, marginal in relation to writing
that not only implements the major aesthetic of transparency, but
bears the authorial imprimatur. Because transparent discourse is
perceived as mirroring the author, it values the foreign text as original,

290
The Translator’s Invisibility
authentic, true, and devalues the translated text as derivative,
simulacral, false, forcing on translation the project of effacing its
second-order status with a fluent strategy. It is here that a Platonic
metaphysics emerges from beneath romantic individualism to
construe translation as the copy of a copy, dictating a translation
strategy in which the effect of transparency masks the mediations
between and within copy and original, eclipsing the translator’s labor
with an illusion of authorial presence, reproducing the cultural
marginality and economic exploitation which translation suffers
today.2 I was definitely attracted by the difference of De Angelis’s
poetry, even if it upset the Anglo-American translation practices that
my friend had described so lyrically. Yet this difference was forcing
me to set new goals for my work. What could I hope to achieve by
translating De Angelis into English? What theory would inform my
translation strategy and govern my choices?
Certainly, I could defer to the prevailing cult of the author and
make my translation of “L’idea centrale” as fluent as possible,
perhaps with the vain hope of edging the poem closer to
transparency. Some progress in this direction can be achieved if in
line 12 of the translation the verb “were” is inserted before
“hissing,” minimizing the fragmented syntax and giving more
definition to the meaning, or if the verb “came” in the first line
were given a subject, even one as vaguely defined as “it.” Of
course, adding “were” and “it” would not go very far toward
making the text transparent, but they would at least mitigate the
grammatical uneasiness usually provoked by the omission of a
subject or verb in an English sentence.
My English version, however, refuses fluency. Taking its cue
from De Angelis’s own aesthetic, my strategy can be called
resistancy: it seeks to reproduce the discontinuity of De Angelis’s
poem. And the translation is no doubt more discontinuous with
the omission of a subject and a verb. Resistancy was also at work
in my effort to heighten the abruptness of the line-breaks, their
effect of forcing the reader to change expectations. In line 1
“scent,” so vaguely defined that it can entertain the possibility of
pleasantness, replaced two earlier choices, “smell” and “odor,”
both of which carry strong negative connotations and so gave too
much of a foretaste of the ominous “alcohol,” reducing the latter’s
power to evoke surprise and fear. The line-break allows “scent”
to release its various possible meanings, making its juxtaposition
with “alcohol” a bit more jolting. Similarly, an earlier version of

Simpatico
291
line 9 began with “carelessly,” but this was ultimately replaced by
the more resonant “absentmindedly,” which seems not only
inexplicable in the context of “gift,” but rather alarming: since the
gift carries the important cognitive associations of “center,” it
offers the reader the promise of intelligibility, of some light shed
on the title—which, however, the idea of absentmindedness
quickly betrays.
By adopting a strategy of resistancy to translate De Angelis’s
poem, I have been unfaithful to, and have in fact challenged, the
dominant aesthetic in the target-language culture, i.e., Anglo-
American culture, becoming a nomad in my own language, a
runaway from the mother tongue. At the same time, however,
implementing this strategy must not be viewed as making the
translation more faithful to the source-language text. Although
resistancy can be said to rest on the same basic assumptions about
language and subjectivity that inform De Angelis’s poetry, my
English version still deviates from the Italian text in decisive
ways that force a radical rethinking of fidelity in translation. The
kind of fidelity that comes into play here has been called
“abusive” by Philip Lewis: the translator whose “aim is to
recreate analogically the abuse that occurs in the original text”
winds up both “forcing the linguistic and conceptual system of
which [the translation] is a dependent” and “directing a critical
thrust back toward the text that it translates” (Lewis 1985:43). The
“abuses” of De Angelis’s writing are precisely its points of
discontinuity and indeterminacy. They continue to exert their
force in Italian culture, on the Italian-language reader, long after
the publication of Somiglianze. In 1983, for instance, the poet
Maurizio Cucchi began his dictionary entry on De Angelis by
stating that “pensiero e libertà dell’immagine spesso coesistono
nei suoi versi, rivelando una sottesa, insinuante inquietudine, un
attraversamento sempre arduo e perturbante dell’esperienza”/
“idea and freedom of image often coexist in his verses, revealing
a subtending, insinuating uneasiness, an always arduous and
troubling skewing of experience” (Cucchi 1983:116). My strategy
of resistancy aims to reproduce this effect in English by resorting
to analogous techniques of fragmentation and proliferation of
meaning. As a consequence, the translation establishes an abusive
fidelity to the Italian text: on the one hand, the translation resists
the transparent aesthetic of Anglo-American culture which would
try to domesticate De Angelis’s difficult writing by demanding a

292
The Translator’s Invisibility
fluent strategy; on the other hand, the translation simultaneously
creates a resistance in relation to De Angelis’s text, qualifying its
meaning with additions and subtractions which constitute a
“critical thrust” toward it.
For example, certain features of the syntax in my translation make
it stranger than De Angelis’s Italian. His first line gives a verb with no
subject—“È venuta”—which is grammatically acceptable and
intelligible in Italian because this particular tense indicates the gender
of the subject, here feminine, almost immediately leading the Italian-
language reader to the last feminine noun, which happens to be in the
title, “L’idea.” English sentences without subjects are grammatically
incorrect and often unintelligible. By following the Italian closely and
omitting the subject, therefore, I was actually moving away from the
foreign text, or at least making it more difficult, more peculiar: “È
venuta” seems fluent to the Italian-language reader, the upper-case “e”
showing that it begins a sentence, whereas the grammatical violation
in “came to mind” (with the lower case) makes it seem unidiomatic or
resistant to an English-language reader—even if this is only an initial
effect, which eventually forces a glance back toward the title for
meaning. My translation takes a syntactical subtlety in the Italian
version, the absence of any explicit subject, and distorts it, giving
exaggerated emphasis to what is only gently hinted in the Italian: that
the central idea always remains outside of the poem because it is never
explicitly stated, perhaps because it cannot be, because it questions any
form of representation, whether in language, or X-rays.
In this instance, my translation exceeds the foreign text because of
irreducible differences between the source and target languages,
syntactical differences which complicate the effort to produce
resistancy. But the excess in the translation can also be seen in the fact
that I rendered certain lines primarily on the basis of an interpretation
of the poem. Because interpretation and poem are distinct entities,
determined by different factors, serving different functions, leading
different discursive lives, my interpretive translation should be seen as
a transformation of the poem, grounded, it is true, on information
about De Angelis’s readings in literature, literary criticism, and
philosophy, but aimed at circulating this body of writing in the
English-language culture where it continues to be alien and marginal.
For what De Angelis’s poem shows Anglo-American readers, with all
the discomfort of the unintelligible, is that European culture has
decisively moved beyond romanticism, in both its nineteenth- and
twentieth-century manifestations.

Simpatico
293
In his letters to me, as well as in his essays, translations and
interviews, De Angelis has made clear that his poetry assimilates
various literary materials (European and Eastern, classical and
twentieth-century), but also that it has a distinct philosophical
genealogy: he has read widely in phenomenology and psychoanalysis,
yet revises them according to the new conceptions of language and
subjectivity that underlie the varieties of poststructuralist thinking in
contemporary French and Italian culture. An early interest in Maurice
Blanchot’s critical speculations about the creative process and the
nature of textuality led De Angelis to the study of Heidegger and
Ludwig Binswanger, and finally to a belief in the importance of
Nietzsche and Lacan for any contemporary project in poetry. This
aspect of De Angelis’s writing was partly noted by Franco Fortini in a
review of that first anthology selection: De Angelis, Fortini found, is
“fascinated with the Heideggerian vortices of origin, absence,
recurrence, and the danger of death” (Fortini 1975:1309). My
interpretation of “L’idea centrale” argues that it reflects Heidegger’s
concept of “being-towards-death,” but that De Angelis submits this
concept to a Nietzschean revision.
In Being and Time (1927), Heidegger argues that human existence is
perpetually “falling,” always already determined by concernful
relations with people and things, its identity dispersed into the
“they”—until the possibility of death appears (Heidegger 1962:219–
224). The anticipation of death, the possibility of being nothing,
constitutes a “limit-situation,” in which the subject is forced to
recognize the inauthenticity of its determinate nature and gains “a
freedom which has been released from the illusions of the ‘they,’ and
which is factical, certain of itself, and anxious” (ibid.:311). De Angelis’s
“L’idea centrale” exploits the potential for drama in this climactic
moment of truth by sketching a hospital scene. His poem depicts
being-towards-death as a state of physical and psychological extremity
where the apparent unity of lived experience is split by competing
representations, and consciousness loses its self-possession and self-
consistency. “Actions” are decentered from intentionality: “their
meaning” is never uniquely appropriate to the subject, but an
appropriation of the subject by the “they,” figured here as the “bosses”
who are so “threatening” to identity because they speak “in a dream,”
having even colonized the unconscious. The “central idea” is that
subjectivity is ultimately “nothing,” mere action on which meaning is
imposed, an ensemble of biological processes whose meaninglessness
“despotic beings” inadvertently reveal when they attempt to master it

294
The Translator’s Invisibility
and impose meaning through a scientific representation like X-rays.
The formal peculiarities of this text—the shifts from realistic detail to
abstract reflection to quoted statement, the scanty amount of
information, the fragmented syntax—mimic the identity-shattering
experience of being-towards-death by destabilizing the signifying
process, abandoning any linearity of meaning, and unbalancing the
reader’s search for intelligibility.
What does become clear, however, is that De Angelis’s
disturbingly engimatic poem carries no suggestion that being-
towards-death is the prelude to authentic existence. De Angelis
resists Heidegger’s idea of authenticity as being which is unified and
free, which is “something of its own” and can “‘choose’ itself and
win itself” (Heidegger 1962:68). In form and theme, “L’idea
centrale” rather suggests Nietzsche’s corrosive notes in The Will to
Power, where human agency is described as “no subject but an
action, a positing, creative, no ‘causes and effects’” (Nietzsche
1967:331).3 For Nietzsche, subjectivity can never be authentic,
because it can never possess an essential identity: it is always a site
of multiple determinations, whether produced by the
grammaticality of language, the need for a subject in a sentence, or
constructed by some more elaborate conceptual system or social
institution, like a psychology, morality, religion, family, or job—the
“bosses.” De Angelis’s poem calls attention to the contradictory
conditions of subjectivity, which often remain unacknowledged in
the “careful busying” of everyday life and need a limit-situation in
order to reemerge in consciousness.
This interpretation allowed me to solve certain translation
problems even as it created others. In line 3, for example, the Italian
word “premuroso” can be translated variously as “thoughtful,” or
“attentive,” or “solicitous.” I chose to avoid these more ordinary
meanings in favor of “careful,” an equally ordinary word that has
nonetheless supported a philosophical signficance in English and can
bring the text closer to what I take to be its themes: Heidegger’s
English translators use “care” to render “Sorge,” the German word
with which he characterizes the nature of everyday life (Heidegger
1962:237). Similarly, in line 5, the Italian verb “si sceglieva” is
ordinarily an impersonal form which does not require that a subject
be specified. English sentences must have subjects, and so “si
sceglieva” is often translated into English as “one chose,” or the
passive voice is used. Yet since my reading establishes a connection
with Nietzsche’s concept of human agency as subjectless action, as

Simpatico
295
will or force, neither a subject nor the passive would do: I resorted to
the slightly strange circumlocution, “there was choosing,” and
avoided any explicit subject, even in as impersonal a form as “one,”
while retaining a sense of forceful action. In both of these examples,
the translation lost some of the ordinariness that makes the language
of the foreign text especially moving and rich in possibilities—just as
the use of “bosses” to translate “padroni” excluded the latter’s
patriarchal associations, weakening the psychoanalytic resonance of
the Italian.
My interpretation undoubtedly reflects some of De Angelis’s
reading and thinking, but the translation solutions which it
rationalizes do not make my English version any more faithful to its
meaning. No, the interpretation has fixed a meaning, enabling the
translation both to go beyond and fall short of De Angelis’s poem.
Interestingly, the interpretation also points to a logical tension in the
theme, namely the contradiction of Heideggerian authenticity by
Nietzschean action. My interpretive translation in effect opens up this
contradiction in the poem, foregrounds it, and perhaps reveals an
aspect of De Angelis’s thinking of which he himself was not conscious
or which, at any rate, remains unresolved in “L’idea centrale.” My
interpretive translation exceeds the source-language text,
supplementing it with research that indicates its contradictory origins
and thereby puts into question its status as the original, the perfect
and self-consistent expression of authorial meaning of which the
translation is always the copy, ultimately imperfect in its failure to
capture that self-consistency. The fact is that the original can be seen
as imperfect, fissured by conflicting ideas, by the philosophical
materials it puts to work, and the translation has made this conflict
clearer.
This interrogative pressure in the translation surfaces in another
point of resistance, an ambiguity entirely absent from De Angelis’s
poem. Line 10, “and in a dream threatening bosses,” adheres to the
word order of the Italian text as closely as linguistic differences permit.
But because “threatening” is syntactically ambiguous, applying to
either “dream” (as a participle) or “bosses” (as an adjective), the line
releases a supplementary meaning which proves especially resonant in
the interpretive context that guided my other choices: the “bosses” can
also be seen as “threatened” by the nightmarish “dream” of
determinate subjectivity, or more generally the agents that direct social
institutions are equally determined by the hierarchical relations in
which they dominate other agents. The “dream” becomes one of

296
The Translator’s Invisibility
subversion by the dominated, and it is the dreamer who is
“threatening” and “hissing” at the “bosses.” Here the abusiveness of
the translation enacts an unsettling critique of the Italian text by
exposing its privileging of the “bosses,” its implicit representation of
power and social dominance as transcending the determinations of
human action.
A strategy of resistancy thus results in an abusive fidelity which
constructs a simultaneous relationship of reproduction and
supplementarity between the translation and the foreign text. The
precise nature of this relationship cannot be calculated before the
translation process is begun because different relationships must be
worked out for the specific cultural materials of different foreign texts
and for the specific cultural situations in which those texts are
translated. This makes translation labor-intensive, but also
serendipitous, with the translator poring over dictionaries,
developing many alternative renderings, unexpectedly finding words
and phrases that at once imitate and exceed the foreign text. “In the
work of translation,” Lewis notes,
 
the integration that is achieved escapes, in a vital way, from
reflection and emerges in an experimental order, an order of
discovery, where success is a function not only of the immense
paraphrastic and paronomastic capacities of language, but also of
trial and error, of chance. The translation will be essayistic, in the
strong sense of the word.
(Lewis 1985:45)
 
Abusive fidelity can be achieved by various strategies of
resistancy worked by various formal techniques, but more often
than not the techniques surface accidentally as possibilities are
tested, their effects evaluated only after the fact, when
rationalization occurs.
The abuses in De Angelis’s “II corridoio del treno” (“The Train
Corridor”), also from Somiglianze, offer another illustration:
 
“Ancora questo plagio
di somigliarsi, vuoi questo?” nel treno gelido
che attraversa le risaie e separa tutto
“vuoi questo, pensi che questo
sia amore?” È buoi ormai
e il corridoio deserto si allunga

Simpatico
297
mentre i gomiti, appoggiati al finestrino
“tu sei ancora lì,
ma è il tempo di cambiare attese” e passa
una stazione, nella nebbia, le sue case opache.
“Ma quale plagio? Se io credo
a qualcosa, poi sarà vero anche per te
più vero del tuo mondo, lo confuto sempre”
un fremere
sotto il paltò, il corpo segue una forza
che vince, appoggia a sé la parola
“qualcosa, ascolta,
qualcosa può cominciare.”
(De Angelis 1976:36)
 
“Again this plagiary
of resemblance—do you want this?” in the cold train
that crosses the rice fields and separates everything
“you want this—you think this
is love?” It is dark now
and the deserted corridor lengthens
while the elbows, leaning on the compartment window
“you’re still there,
but it’s time to change expectations” and a station
passes, in the fog, its opaque houses.
“But what plagiary? If I believe
in something, then it will be true for you too,
truer than your world, I confute it always”
a trembling
beneath the overcoat, the body follows a force
that conquers, leans the word against itself
“something, listen,
something can begin.”
 
The fragmentation of subjectivity in the Italian text is its strongest
and most striking point of resistance. The voice (or voices?) is
apparently engaged in a strange lover’s quarrel, both bitter and
very abstract, where desire is structured by conflicting modes of
representation, but ultimately breaks them down. Although never
defined as a distinct identity, with a definite age or gender, the
quarrelsome voice at the opening sets up an opposition between
two concepts of “love”: the first, judged false or inauthentic

298
The Translator’s Invisibility
(“plagio”), is governed by “somigliarsi” (literally “resembling each
other”), by an identity or sameness between the lovers; the second,
implicitly favored by the voice, is an alternative governed by
difference, or deviation, the invention of new “expectations”
(“attese”). Yet the Italian text is already undermining this second
alternative with “attese,” which can also mean “delays,” an
ambiguity that submits the hopefulness of “expectations” to
jaundiced skepticism. In fact, the quotation that begins “tu sei
ancora lì” (“you’re still there”) can easily signify the introduction
of a different voice, suggesting that maybe the one who hurled the
accusation of “plagio” should be changing its expectations, that
maybe the accuser should be abandoning any search for authentic
existence, any effort to avoid the dishonesty of imitation, because
desire always has contradictory determinations, frustrations,
“delays.”
The insistent questioning proceeds to the Nietzschean argument
that love is yet another form of the will to power, where two lovers
are locked in a struggle for dominance and each can disprove
(“confuto”) the other’s representation of their relationship, imposing
a “world” that “will be true” for both. At this point, the voices lose
what vague definition they may have acquired as the text unfolded,
and the two conflicting positions of intelligibility are finally
abandoned by the last voice, which implicitly calls for silence, full of
expectation for another, still unspoken “word” that will construct a
new subject-position for “the body,” a new representation for the
biological “force” that threatens the linguistic basis of every
relationship. The indeterminacy of the phrase “appoggia a sé la
parola” (“leans the word against itself”) points to the contradictory
interaction between language and desire. If “itself” is read as the
“force” (or “body”?—another indeterminacy, perhaps less
consequential here because of the connection between “force” and
“body”), the “word” receives support from, or “leans […] against,”
the “force” as the meaning of a linguistic sign depends on the linkage
between signifier and signified. Thus, desire is seen as driving
language use, but also as depending on such use for its articulation.
Yet if “itself” is read as “the word,” in the sense of language in general,
the “force” also “leans the word against” another word, circulating a
chain of signifiers which defer the signified, throwing it into internal
division. Here it is possible to glimpse Lacan’s fundamental idea that
desire is simultaneously communicated and repressed by language
(Lacan 1977).

Simpatico
299
The resistancy of the translation reproduces the formal
discontinuity of De Angelis’s poem by adhering to its line-breaks and
syntactical peculiarities. A fluent strategy could easily iron out the
syntax, for example, by correcting or completing the sentence
fragments—in line 7 with the substitution of the verb “lean” for the
participle “leaning”; in line 10 with the insertion of a verb phrase like
“go by” after the fragmentary “opaque houses.” The translation,
however, reproduces De Angelis’s challenge to transparent discourse
by using broken constructions which have the effect of throwing the
reading process off-balance, aggravating the already difficult problem
posed by the shifting positions of intelligibility, the dislocation of
voice.
It is in the quotations that the translation is most abusive of the
foreign text. To mimic the drama of this situation, I sought to make
the opening forcefully colloquial, inserting the abrupt dashes and
fracturing the questions in line 4 by omitting the auxiliary “do.” Yet
since my reading construes this text as a poststructuralist meditation
on the relationship between language and desire, I sought to increase
the philosophical abstraction of the English: “resemblance” replaced
the more ordinary, and more concrete, phrase “resembling each
other,” which is actually closer to the Italian “somigliarsi.” The
mixture of colloquial and philosophical discourses in the translation
reproduces but somewhat exaggerates the similarly discordant
materials of the Italian text, its combination of concrete and abstract
diction.
The resistant strategy is also evident in a tendency toward
archaism in the translation, specifically the dated quality of
“plagiary” and “confute” in place of the more contemporary usages,
“plagiarism” and “refute.” These archaic words make the quotations
more unusual and distancing to the English-language reader,
drawing attention to themselves as words and thus abusing the
canon of transparency. The word “plagiary” is particularly useful in
producing this effect: it introduces a point of polysemy which opens
up a metacritical register vis-à-vis the foreign text. The Italian
“plagio” signifies the action or instance of literary theft, the practice
or the text, and would ordinarily be translated into English by
“plagiarism”; the Italian for the agent, “plagiarist,” is “plagiario.”
My choice of “plagiary” condenses these words and meanings: it can
signify either “plagiarism” or “plagiarist,” the action or the agent,
the text or the subject. Combined with “resemblance” in the
translation, “plagiary” becomes a pun which in itself brands any

300
The Translator’s Invisibility
relationship based on identity as a crime against personal autonomy
and individuality, a Heideggerian inauthenticity, a person-theft,
conjuring up its Latin root plagiarius—kidnapper. But since
“resemblance” also defines a mode of representation exemplified by
transparent discourse, the pun on “plagiary” interrogates the
subjective illusionism in transparency, its fiction of personal
presence, its person-lie. The English lines, “plagiary/of
resemblance,” at once valorize and demystify the concept of
authenticity, locating within the strident voice at the opening a
different, alien voice. The strain of archaism in the translation,
finally, temporalizes De Angelis’s poem, suggesting that cultural
forms governed by “resemblance” are situated in the past, static,
unwilling to admit difference and change, but also that De Angelis’s
concept of the subject as determinate process departs from the
individualistic evocations of older, romantic and modern poetry. The
archaism in the English version goes beyond the foreign text by
adding a metacommentary on its form and theme.
III
Resistancy is thus a translation strategy by which De Angelis’s poems
become strange to the Italian poet, as well as to the Anglo-American
reader and translator. It is certain that De Angelis will not recognize
his own voice in the translations, not only because his ideas and texts
would seem to make such a way of reading unthinkable for him, but
also because he is unable to negotiate the target language. Although
he works with many languages, including Greek, Latin, French,
German, and different dialects of Italian, he finds English difficult to
master and can read my translations only with informants, usually
native Italians who have studied English. When he does this
collaborative reading, moreover, he sometimes discovers what I have
been arguing, that my English loses features of the Italian texts and
adds others which he had never anticipated.
The resistant strategy of my translations gives them a different, and
perhaps more intense, strangeness in the target-language culture.
They have enjoyed varying success with English-language readers
since the late 1970s. Most of them have appeared in literary
magazines, appealing to editors whose aesthetics normally diverge,
both mainstream and experimentalist—although my translations
have also been rejected by as many magazines.4 The complete
manuscript, a selection from De Angelis’s poetry and critical prose,

Simpatico
301
has received many rejections from American and British publishers,
including two university presses with noted translation series—
Wesleyan and P (for “prestigious”: the editor at this press would not
permit me to identify it). The anonymous readers’ reports for these
presses, written in 1987, show quite clearly that my resistant strategy
was strange because it abused the transparent discourse that
dominates Anglo-American poetry translation.
A reader for Wesleyan acknowledged the “difficulty” of De
Angelis’s Italian texts, but felt that
 
Mr. Venuti’s translation makes matters more difficult by being
faithful to this difficulty; he has chosen not to choose among the
many ambiguous levels of meaning of [De Angelis’s] dense verse.
For example, a calcio d’angolo remains a “corner kick,” no more and
no less, and, as we see clearly from its placement in the poetic line,
no compromise is made for the sake of the sound in English.5
 
The sort of fidelity Wesleyan’s reader preferred was evidently to the
canon of transparency, which here includes univocal meaning and
smooth prosody. But my translations aim to be faithful to the linguistic
and cultural differences of the Italian texts, their characteristic
discontinuity, the neologisms, syntactical shifts, staccato rhythms. The
reader’s example was taken from De Angelis’s poem “Antela,” whose
experimentalist gestures begin in the title: a neologism combining
“antenati” (“forebears”) and “ragnatela” (“spider web”). My version is
entitled “Foreweb.” The abruptness of this poem, the dizzying
succession of cryptic images, would demand considerable rewriting to
produce fluent English. It would be easier, as Wesleyan evidently
decided, to reject the entire manuscript.
 
C’è un crimine
non so se commesso o visto
in un tempo senza stile, come un’aria
di blu e di buio, che mosse
la destra. O qualcuno
che, morso dalla carie, urla.
Allora anche la mosca di pezza dà
voli indiscussi e anche
un ginocchio ferito nel calcio d’angolo
ricuce il maschio con la femmina.
(De Angelis 1985:46)

302
The Translator’s Invisibility
There is a crime
I don’t know whether committed or witnessed
in a styleless time, like a breeze
blue and dark, which moved
the right hand. Or someone
who, bitten by caries, screams.
Then even the rag-fly makes
unquestioned flights and even
a knee hurt in the corner kick
stitches male back to female.
 
P’s anonymous reader likewise expected an assimilation of De
Angelis’s experimentalism to transparent discourse. The reader’s
comments on specific translations reveal an insistence on immediate
intelligibility, criticizing archaism and polysemy in favor of current
English usage. My use of the word “plagiary” in “The Train
Corridor,” for example, was called “really obsolete and obscure.”
This reader, like the one for Wesleyan, also recommended revising
the Italian text, even when it contained a recognizable rhetorical
device: “the discontinuity (anacoluthon) between lines 2 and 3
seems excessive, however justified by the original; a little glue seems
needed.”
My translations signify the foreignness of De Angelis’s poetry by
resisting the dominant Anglo-American literary values that would
domesticate the Italian texts, make them reassuringly familiar, easy
to read. And this is the reception that the translations continue to
get. A selection was included in a 1991 anthology, New Italian Poets,
a project that was initially developed by the Poetry Society of
America and the Centro Internazionale Poesia della Metamorfosi
in Italy and later edited by Dana Gioia and Michael Palma (Gioia
and Palma 1991). The anthology received a few, generally favorable
reviews in American, British, and Italian periodicals. In Poetry
Review, however, while reflecting on the cultural differences
between British and Italian poetry, the reviewer singled out (my
translations of) De Angelis as an example of these differences at
their most alienating:
 
One feature that clearly distinguishes many of these poets from their
British contemporaries is a freewheeling associative imagery which
doesn’t feel obligated to explain itself—sudden transitions,
lacunae—or to situate itself in a familiar time and place. This is at its

Simpatico
303
most irksome in Milo De Angelis, whom Palma, introducing him,
suggests the reader should approach “with openness and
sensitivity.” If this is accomplished, the reader will be “moved by
feelings and insights that, however ineffable, are genuine and
profound.” I did my best, but was left unmoved.
(McKendrick 1991:59)
 
English-language readers will tend to be both “unmoved” and
“irked” by De Angelis’s poetry, not only because the extreme
discontinuity of the texts prevents the evocation of a coherent
speaking voice, but also because he draws on philosophical concepts
that remain foreign, even antipathetic, to Anglo-American culture.
In a polemical essay published in 1967, Kenneth Rexroth wondered,
“Why Is American Poetry Culturally Deprived?” because he “never
met an American poet who was familiar with Jean Paul Sartre’s
attempts at philosophy, much less with the gnarled discourse of
Scheler or Heidegger” (Rexroth 1985:59). Rexroth’s point, that with
few exceptions philosophical thinking is alien to twentieth-century
American poetry, applies to British poetry as well and remains true
more than twenty years later. Among the notable exceptions today
are the diverse group of so-called “L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E” writers,
such as Charles Bernstein, who has eroded the generic distinction
between poetry and essay by drawing on various European
traditions and thinkers, including Dada and Surrealism, Brecht and
the Frankfurt School, poststructuralism and postanalytical
philosophy (1986 and 1982).6 Since Bernstein’s aesthetic—
discontinuous, opaque, anti-individualistic—has earned his writing
a marginal position in American publishing, banished to the relative
obscurity of the small press and the little magazine, it demonstrates
that contemporary American culture is not likely to give a warm
reception to a poet like De Angelis, who writes with a knowledge
of the main currents in Continental philosophy (Biggs 1990). It is
only fitting, then, that in 1989 my manuscript of his work was
accepted for publication by Los Angeles-based Sun & Moon, a small
press whose list is devoted to experimentalists like Bernstein (and
whose financial problems prevented my translation from seeing
print until 1994). De Angelis in fact enjoys a considerably more
central position in Italian culture: his writing is published by both
small and larger presses and is reviewed by noted critics in a wide
range of newspapers and magazines, both local and national, little
and mass-audience.7 Perhaps the clearest sign of his canonical status

304
The Translator’s Invisibility
in Italy is that his first book, Somiglianze, was reissued in a revised
edition in 1990.
If my translations of De Angelis’s speculative poetry will not be
immediately recognizable to the English-language reader, it is also true
that I do not recognize my own voice in these translations. On the
contrary, my encounter with De Angelis’s texts has been profoundly
estranging, and for reasons specific to my situation as a translator in
contemporary Anglo-American culture: by making simpatico an
impossible goal, the formal discontinuity of the Italian has forced me
to question fluency, the dominant translation strategy in English,
exposing its link to the individualism of romantic and modern theories
of transparent discourse, dislodging me from the position constructed
for the English-language translator by his manifold relations with
editors, publishers, reviewers, and, as my friend’s advice suggests,
other translators. This estrangement can happen because the
positioning by which a discursive practice qualifies agents for cultural
production does not operate in an entirely coherent manner: a specific
practice can never irrevocably fix identity, because identity is
relational, the nodal point for a multiplicity of practices whose
incompatibility or sheer antagonism creates the possibility for change
(Laclau and Mouffe 1985:105–114). A discursive practice like
translation seems particularly vulnerable to shifts in positioning,
displacements of identity: its function is to work on linguistic and
cultural differences which can easily initiate an interrogation of the
conditions of the translator’s work. Thus, although the hegemony of
transparent discourse in contemporary Anglo-American culture has
made fluency the hegemonic strategy in English-language translation,
De Angelis’s poetry can still enlist the translator in a cultural
contradiction: I was led to implement a resistant strategy in opposition
to the discursive rules by which my work would most likely be judged,
and yet that strategy, far from proving more faithful to the Italian texts,
in fact abused them by exploiting their potential for different and
incompatible meanings.
The challenge which translating De Angelis’s poetry poses to
romantic and modern theories of discourse is quite similar to the one
posed by Paul Celan’s writing. In Celan’s speech “The Meridian”
(1960), the obscure discontinuity of his and other post-World War II
European poetry—what he calls “the difficulties of vocabulary, the
faster flow of syntax or a more awakened sense of ellipsis”—is
associated with a rethinking of the lyric poem in its romantic and
modern guises (Celan 1986:48). Celan questions the lyric project of

Simpatico
305
personal expression, of evoking an individual voice: the poem “speaks
only in its own, its very behalf,” he states, but it “has always hoped, for
this very reason, to speak also on behalf of the strange […] on behalf of
the other, who knows, perhaps of an altogether other” (ibid.). The poem,
then, does not express an authorial self, but rather liberates that self
from its familiar boundaries, becoming “the place where the person
was able to set himself free as an—estranged—I,” but where “along
with the I, estranged and free here, in this manner, some other thing is
also set free”—free from the appropriating power of the speaking “I,”
of a personal language (ibid.:46–47). The poem does not transcend but
acknowledges the contradiction between self-expression and
communication with some other, forcing an awareness of the limits as
well as the possibilities of its language.
It is this sort of liberation that resistancy tries to produce in the
translated text by resorting to techniques that make it strange and
estranging in the target-language culture. Resistancy seeks to free the
reader of the translation, as well as the translator, from the cultural
constraints that ordinarily govern their reading and writing and
threaten to overpower and domesticate the foreign text, annihilating
its foreignness. Resistancy makes English-language translation a
dissident cultural politics today, when fluent strategies and transparent
discourse routinely perform that mystification of foreign texts. In the
specific instance of Englishing De Angelis’s poetry, the political
intervention takes the form of a minor utilization of a major language.
“Even when major,” Deleuze and Guattari observe, “a language is
open to an intensive utilization that makes it take flight along creative
lines of escape which, no matter how slowly, no matter how cautiously,
can now form an absolute deterritorialization” (Deleuze and Guattari
1986:26).8 My translations of De Angelis’s poetry obviously can never
be completely free of English and the linguistic and cultural constraints
which it imposes on poetry and translation; that line of escape would
preempt any translation and is no more than a capitulation to the
major language, a political defeat. The point is rather that my
translations resist the hegemony of transparent discourse in English-
language culture, and they do this from within, by deterritorializing
the target language itself, questioning its major cultural status by using
it as the vehicle for ideas and discursive techniques which remain
minor in it, which it excludes. The models for this translation strategy
include the Czech Jew Kafka writing in German, particularly as
Deleuze and Guattari read his texts, but also the Rumanian Jew Celan,
who took German on lines of escape by using it to speak of Nazi racism

306
The Translator’s Invisibility
and Hebrew culture and by exploiting to an extreme its capacity for
compound words and syntactical fragmentation (see, for example,
Felstiner 1983 and 1984). If the resistant strategy effectively produces
an estranging translation, then the foreign text also enjoys a
momentary liberation from the target-language culture, perhaps before
it is reterritorialized with the reader’s articulation of a voice—
recognizable, transparent—or of some reading amenable to the
dominant aesthetic in English. The liberating moment would occur
when the reader of the resistant translation experiences, in the target
language, the cultural differences which separate that language and
the foreign text.
Translation is a process that involves looking for similarities
between languages and cultures—particularly similar messages and
formal techniques—but it does this only because it is constantly
confronting dissimilarities. It can never and should never aim to
remove these dissimilarities entirely. A translated text should be the
site where a different culture emerges, where a reader gets a glimpse of
a cultural other, and resistancy, a translation strategy based on an
aesthetic of discontinuity, can best preserve that difference, that
otherness, by reminding the reader of the gains and losses in the
translation process and the unbridgeable gaps between cultures. In
contrast, the notion of simpatico, by placing a premium on transparency
and demanding a fluent strategy, can be viewed as a cultural
narcissism: it seeks an identity, a self-recognition, and finds only the
same culture in foreign writing, only the same self in the cultural other.
For the translator becomes aware of his intimate sympathy with the
foreign writer only when he recognizes his own voice in the foreign
text. Unfortunately, the irreducible cultural differences mean that this
is always a mis-recognition as well, yet fluency ensures that this point
gets lost in the translating. Now more than ever, when transparency
continues to dominate Anglo-American culture, ensuring that simpatico
will remain a compelling goal for English-language translators, it
seems important to reconsider what we do when we translate.

Chapter 7
Call to action
The translator is the secret master of the difference of languages, a
difference he is not out to abolish, but rather one he puts to use as he
brings violent or subtle changes to bear on his own language, thus
awakening within it the presence of that which is at origin different in
the original.
Maurice Blanchot (trans. Richard Sieburth)
 
In the brief but provocative essay “Translating” (1971), Blanchot
inverts the conventional hierarchy wherein “the original” is superior to
the translation. He considers the foreign text, not as the unchanging
cultural monument in relation to which the translation must forever be
an inadequate, ephemeral copy, but as a text in transit, “never
stationary,” living out “the solemn drift and derivation [“dérive”] of
literary works,” constituting a powerful self-difference which
translation can release or capture in a unique way (Blanchot 1990:84).
This assumes the foreign text to be derivative, dependent on other,
preexisting materials (a point made by Sieburth’s decision to render
“dérive” as two words, “drift and derivation”), but also dependent on
the translation:
 
a work is not ready for or worthy of translation unless it harbors this
difference within itself in some available fashion, whether it be
because it originally gestures toward some other language, or
because it gathers within itself in some privileged manner those
possibilities of being different from itself or foreign to itself which
every living language possesses.
(ibid.)
 
In negotiating the dérive of literary works, the translator is an agent
of linguistic and cultural alienation: the one who establishes the

308
The Translator’s Invisibility
monumentality of the foreign text, its worthiness of translation, but
only by showing that it is not a monument, that it needs translation
to locate and foreground the self-difference that decides its
worthiness. Even “classical masterpieces,” writes Blanchot, “live
only in translation” (ibid.). And in the process of
(de)monumentalizing the foreign text, the translator precipitates
equally “violent or subtle changes” in the translating language.
Blanchot cites “Luther, Voss, Hölderlin, George, none of whom
were afraid in their work as translators to break through the
bounds of the German language in order to broaden its frontiers”
(ibid.:85).
The power of Blanchot’s suggestive observations can be released if
we translate them yet again (after Sieburth’s translation and after the
version presented in the foregoing commentary), situating them more
locally, taking into account the material determinations of cultural
practices. The difference that makes a source-language text valuable to
Blanchot is never “available” in some unmediated form. It is always an
interpretation made by the translator, not necessarily open to every
reader, gaining visibility and privileged only from a particular
ideological standpoint in the target-language culture. Every step in the
translation process—from the selection of foreign texts to the
implementation of translation strategies to the editing, reviewing, and
reading of translations—is mediated by the diverse cultural values that
circulate in the target language, always in some hierarchical order. The
translator, who works with varying degrees of calculation, under
continuous self-monitoring and often with active consultation of
cultural rules and resources (from dictionaries and grammars to other
texts, translation strategies, and translations, both canonical and
marginal), may submit to or resist dominant values in the target
language, with either course of action susceptible to ongoing
redirection. Submission assumes an ideology of assimilation at work in
the translation process, locating the same in a cultural other, pursuing
a cultural narcissism that is imperialistic abroad and conservative,
even reactionary, in maintaining canons at home. Resistance assumes
an ideology of autonomy, locating the alien in a cultural other,
pursuing cultural diversity, foregrounding the linguistic and cultural
differences of the source-language text and transforming the hierarchy
of cultural values in the target language. Resistance too can be
imperialistic abroad, appropriating foreign texts to serve its own
cultural political interests at home; but insofar as it resists values that
exclude certain texts, it performs an act of cultural restoration which

Call to action
309
aims to question and possibly re-form, or simply smash the idea of,
domestic canons.
Blanchot is theorizing an approach to translation based on
resistance, and as his examples and the occasion of his essay make
plain (it is a commentary on Walter Benjamin’s “The Task of the
Translator”), this is an approach that is specific to the German
cultural tradition. The theory and practice of English-language
translation, in contrast, has been dominated by submission, by
fluent domestication, at least since Dryden. Various alternative
approaches have indeed existed, including Dr. John Nott’s
historicist opposition to bowdlerizing, Francis Newman’s populist
archaism, and the polylingual experiments of Ezra Pound, Celia
and Louis Zukofsky, and Paul Blackburn. Judging from their
reception, however, these alternatives fell victim to their own
foreignizing tendencies: their strangeness provoked harsh criticism
from reviewers, and they went unread or even—in Blackburn’s
case—unpublished, relegated to the margins of British and
American culture, neglected by subsequent translators, translation
theorists, and literary scholars. For the most part, English-language
translators have let their choice of foreign texts and their
development of translation strategies conform to dominant
cultural values in English, and among these values transparent
discourse has prevailed, even if in varying forms.
Yet alternative theories and practices of translation are worth
recovering because they offer contemporary English-language
translators exemplary modes of cultural resistance, however qualified
they must be to serve a new and highly unfavorable scene. The
domesticating translation that currently dominates Anglo-American
literary culture, both elite and popular, can be challenged only by
developing a practice that is not just more self-conscious, but more self-
critical. Knowledge of the source-language culture, however expert, is
insufficient to produce a translation that is both readable and resistant
to a reductive domestication; translators must also possess a
commanding knowledge of the diverse cultural discourses in the target
language, past and present. And they must be able to write them. The
selection of a foreign text for translation and the invention of a
discursive strategy to translate it should be grounded on a critical
assessment of the target-language culture, its hierarchies and
exclusions, its relations to cultural others worldwide. Before a foreign
text is chosen, translators must scrutinize the current situation—the
canon of foreign literatures in English, as well as the canon of British

310
The Translator’s Invisibility
and American literature, set against patterns of cross-cultural exchange
and geopolitical relations (for a powerful example of this sort of
cultural diagnosis, see Said 1990).
The ethnocentric violence of translation is inevitable: in the
translating process, foreign languages, texts, and cultures will always
undergo some degree and form of reduction, exclusion, inscription. Yet
the domestic work on foreign cultures can be a foreignizing
intervention, pitched to question existing canons at home. A translator
can not only choose a foreign text that is marginal in the target-
language culture, but translate it with a canonical discourse (e.g.
transparency). Or a translator can choose a foreign text that is
canonical in the target-language culture, but translate it with a
marginal discourse (e.g. archaism). In this foreignizing practice of
translation, the value of a foreign text or a discursive strategy is
contingent on the cultural situation in which the translation is made.
For the translator, this value is always cast in literary terms, as a
practice of writing.
Foreignizing translation is beset with risks, especially for the
English-language translator. Canons of accuracy are quite strict in
contemporary Anglo-American culture, enforced by copyeditors and
legally binding contracts. Standard contractual language requires that
the translator adhere closely to the foreign text:
 
The translation should be a faithful rendition of the work into
English; it shall neither omit anything from the original text nor add
anything to it other than such verbal changes as are necessary in
translating into English.
(A Handbook for Literary Translators 1991:16)
 
Because of the legal risk, the considerable freedom of Robert
Graves or the editorial emendations of Pound are not likely to be
adopted by many translators today—at least not with foreign texts
whose copyright hasn’t yet entered the public domain. Since
“faithful rendition” is defined partly by the illusion of
transparency, by the discursive effect of originality, the
polylingualism of the Zukofskys and Blackburn is equally limited
in effectiveness, likely to encounter opposition from publishers and
large segments of English-language readers who read for
immediate intelligibility. Nevertheless, contemporary translators of
literary texts can introduce discursive variations, experimenting
with archaism, slang, literary allusion and convention to call

Call to action
311
attention to the secondary status of the translation and signal the
linguistic and cultural differences of the foreign text.
Contemporary translators need to develop a more sophisticated
literary practice, wherein the “literary” encompasses the various
traditions of British and American literature and the various
dialects of English. Translators committed to changing their
cultural marginality can do so only within the codes that are
specific to the target-language culture. This means limiting
discursive experiments to perceptible deviations that may risk but
stop short of the parodic or the incomprehensible, that release the
dérive of cultural discourses in the target language.
Translators must also force a revision of the codes—cultural,
economic, legal—that marginalize and exploit them. They can
work to revise the individualistic concept of authorship that has
banished translation to the fringes of Anglo-American culture,
not only by developing innovative translation practices in which
their work becomes visible to readers, but also by presenting
sophisticated rationales for these practices in prefaces, essays,
lectures, interviews. Such self-presentations will indicate that the
language of the translation originates with the translator in a
decisive way, but also that the translator is not its sole origin: a
translator’s originality lies in choosing a particular foreign text
and a particular combination of dialects and discourses from the
history of British and American literature in response to an
existing cultural situation. Recognizing the translator as an
author questions the individualism of current concepts of
authorship by suggesting that no writing can be mere self-
expression because it is derived from a cultural tradition at a
specific historical moment.
This questioning must also be conducted in the language of
contracts with publishers. Translators will do well to insist on their
authorial relation to the translated text during negotiations. They
should demand contracts that define the translation as an “original
work of authorship” instead of a “work-for-hire,” that copyright the
translation in the translator’s name, and that offer standard financial
terms for authors, namely an advance against royalties and a share of
subsidiary rights sales. In the long run, it will be necessary to effect a
more fundamental change, a revision of current copyright law that
restricts the foreign author’s control over the translation so as to
acknowledge its relative autonomy from the foreign text. The foreign
author’s translation rights should be limited to a short period, after

312
The Translator’s Invisibility
which the foreign text enters the public domain, although only for the
purposes of translation. Given the speed with which literature currently
dates as a commodity on the international book market, the prospect
that translation rights will be sold grows less likely as time passes, and
the translation of a foreign text ultimately depends on the efforts of a
translator to interest a publisher, especially in Anglo-American
publishing, where so few editors read foreign languages. If, upon
publication, a foreign text is not an instant critical and commercial
success in the culture for which it was written, it probably won’t be
sought by target-language publishers. The project to translate it,
therefore, should be controlled by the translator, who, in effect, must
invent for target-language readers a foreign text that would otherwise
be nonexistent to them.
A change in contemporary thinking about translation finally
requires a change in the practice of reading, reviewing, and teaching
translations. Because translation is a double writing, a rewriting of the
foreign text according to domestic cultural values, any translation
requires a double reading—as both communication and inscription.
Reading a translation as a translation means reflecting on its
conditions, the domestic dialects and discourses in which it is written
and the domestic cultural situation in which it is read. This reading is
historicizing: it draws a distinction between the (foreign) past and the
(domestic) present. Evaluating a translation as a translation means
assessing it as an intervention into a present situation. Reviews must
not be limited to rare comments on the style of a translation or its
accuracy according to canons that are applied implicitly. Reviewers
should consider the canons of accuracy that the translator has set in the
work, judging the decision to translate and publish a foreign text in
view of the current canon of that foreign literature in the target-
language culture.
It is in academic institutions, most importantly, that different
reading practices can be developed and applied to translations. Here a
double reading is crucial. A translation yields information about the
source-language text—its discursive structures, its themes and ideas—
but no translation should ever be taught as a transparent
representation of that text, even if this is the prevalent practice today.
Any information derived from the translation is inevitably presented
in target-language terms, which must be made the object of study, of
classroom discussion and advanced research. Research into translation
can never be simply descriptive; merely to formulate translation as a
topic in cultural history or criticism assumes an opposition to its

Call to action
313
marginal position in the current hierarchy of cultural practices. And
the choice of a topic from a specific historical period will always bear
on present cultural concerns. Yet even if research into translation
cannot be viewed as descriptive, devoid of cultural and political
interests, it should not aim to be simply prescriptive, approving or
rejecting translation theories and practices without carefully
examining their relationships to their own moments and to that of the
researcher.
The translator’s invisibility today raises such troubling questions
about the geopolitical economy of culture that a greater suspicion
toward translation is urgently needed to confront them. Yet the
suspicion I am encouraging here assumes a utopian faith in the power
of translation to make a difference, not only at home, in the emergence
of new cultural forms, but also abroad, in the emergence of new
cultural relations. To recognize the translator’s invisibility is at once to
critique the current situation and to hope for a future more hospitable
to the differences that the translator must negotiate.

Notes
1 Invisibility
1 These cultural and social developments have been described by various
commentators. My sense of them is informed especially by Mandel 1975,
McLuhan 1964, Horkheimer and Adorno 1972, and Baudrillard 1983.
Instrumental conceptions of language are of course not unique to the
post-World War II period; they date back to antiquity in the west and
have influenced translation theories at least since Augustine (Robinson
1991:50–54).
2 Holden 1991: Chap. 1 offers a similar assessment of contemporary
American poetry, although from a “centrist” position. For the historical
development of transparent discourse in English-language poetry, see
Easthope 1983.
3 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (c.48), sections 1 (1) (a), 16 (1)
(e), 21(3) (a) (i); 17 US Code, sections 101, 102, 106, 201 (a) (1976).
4 The ambiguous legal status of translation is discussed by Derrida 1985a:
196–200 and Simon 1989.
5 The UNESCO Recommendation on the Legal Protection of Translators
and Translations and the Practical Means to Improve the Status of
Translators (adopted by the General Conference at Nairobi, 22 November
1976), follows the wording of the Berne Convention:
 
Member states should accord to translators, in respect of their
translations, the protection accorded to authors under the provisions of
the international copyright conventions to which they are party and/
or under their national laws, but without prejudice to the rights of the
authors of the original works translated.
(article II.3)
6 This account of Blackburn’s Cortázar project draws on documents in the
Paul Blackburn Collection, Archive for New Poetry, Mandeville
Department of Special Collections, University of California, San Diego:
Letter to John Dimoff, National Translation Center, University of Texas,

Notes
315
Austin, 6 May 1965; Contract with Pantheon Books for the translation of
End of the Game and Other Stories, 4 June 1965; Amendment to Contract
with Pantheon Books, 12 May 1966; Letter to Claudio Campuzano, Inter-
American Foundation for the Arts, 9 June 1966. Information concerning
the “poverty level” is drawn from the Statistical Abstract of the United
States for the pertinent years.
7 The 1969 translation rate is taken from the “manifesto” that concludes the
proceedings from the landmark PEN conference held in 1970 (The World
of Translation 1971:377). The 1979 rate is taken from my own work-for-hire
contract with Farrar, Straus & Giroux for the translation of Barbara
Alberti’s novel Delirium, 29 May 1979.
8 British statistics are drawn from Whitaker’s Almanack, American statistics
from Publishers Weekly. I have also consulted the data in the United Nations
Statistical Yearbook, UNESCO Basic Facts and Figures, UNESCO Statistical
Yearbook, and An International Survey of Book Production during the Last
Decades 1982.
9 Schleiermacher’s theory, despite its stress on foreignizing translation, is
complicated by the nationalist cultural program he wants German
translation to serve: see chapter 3, pp. 101–116.
10 For the impact of poststructuralism on translation theory and practice,
see, for example, Graham 1985, Benjamin 1989, Niranjana 1992, and
Venuti 1992. Gentzler 1993: Chap. 6 surveys this movement.
11 The same contradiction appears in Freud’s own reflections on the
therapeutic/hermeneutic dilemma of psychoanalysis in Beyond the
Pleasure Principle (1920):
 
Twenty-five years of intense work have had as their result that the
immediate aims of psychoanalytic technique are other today than they
were at the outset. At first the analyzing physician could do no more
than discover the unconscious material that was concealed from the
patient, put it together, and, at the right moment, communicate it to
him. Psychoanalysis was then first and foremost an art of interpreting.
Since this did not solve the therapeutic problem, a further aim quickly
came in view: to oblige the patient to confirm the analyst’s construction
from his own memory. In that endeavor the chief emphasis lay upon
the patient’s resistances: the art consisted now in uncovering these as
quickly as possible, in pointing them out to the patient and in inducing
him by human influence—this was where suggestion operating as
“transference” played its part—to abandon his resistances.
(Freud 1961:12)
 
Although Freud intends to draw a sharp distinction in the development
of psychoanalysis between an early, hermeneutic phase and a later,
therapeutic phase, his exposition really blurs the distinction: both phases
require a primary emphasis on interpretation, whether of “unconscious
material” or of “the patient’s resistances,” which insofar as they require
“uncovering” are likewise “unconscious”; in both “the analyst’s
construction” can be said to be “first and foremost.” What has changed is

316
Notes
not so much “the immediate aims of psychoanalytic technique” as its
theoretical apparatus: the intervening years witnessed the development
of a new interpretive concept—the “transference.” Moreover, Freud’s
characterization of psychoanalysis as primarily therapeutic occurs in a
late text that is one of his most theoretical and speculative. Bettelheim’s
conception of psychoanalysis, the basis for his rejection of the Standard
Edition, smooths out the discontinuities in Freud’s texts and project by
resorting to a schema of development (like Freud himself):
 
The English translations cleave to an early stage of Freud’s thought, in
which he inclined toward science and medicine, and disregard the
more mature Freud, whose orientation was humanistic, and who was
concerned mostly with broadly conceived cultural and human
problems and with matters of the soul.
(Bettelheim 1983:32)
 
12
Although transparent discourse emerges in English-language translation
most decisively during the seventeenth century, it has been a prevalent
feature of western translation theory and practice since antiquity. This
topic is treated from various perspectives by Berman 1985, Rener 1989,
and Robinson 1991.
2 Canon
1
My conception of Denham and Wroth (discussed on pp. 44, 47) as
“courtly amateurs” assumes Helgerson 1983.
2
For the cultural activities of exiled royalist writers, see Hardacre 1953.
Steiner 1975:13–25 considers the French influence on their translations.
Zuber 1968 shows the importance of D’Ablancourt to the French
translation tradition.
3
The Brute legend in English historiography is treated by Parsons 1929,
Brinkley 1967, Jones 1944, and MacDougall 1982. Bush 1962 offers a useful
précis of the issues.
4
The historical allegory in Coopers Hill is elucidated by Wasserman
1959:chap. III, especially 72–76, and O’Hehir 1969:227–256. For the
ideological significance of Fanshawe’s and Wase’s translations, see Potter
1989:52–53, 89–90 and Patterson 1984:172–176. Hager 1982 notes the
domesticating impulse in Denham’s translation when discussing the
Laocoön passage.
5
Ogilby’s version of these lines, in referring to the king’s “sacred body”
and to the absence of “obsequies,” shares the royalism of Denham’s. For
the politics of Ogilby’s Virgil, see Patterson 1987:169–185.
6
This relies on Easthope’s account of transparent discourse in poetry and
its rise during the early modern period (Easthope 1983:chap. 7).
7
Samuel Johnson admiringly discusses Denham in The Lives of the English
Poets (1783), devoting an entire chapter to him but also commenting on
his work in the chapter on Dryden.

Notes
317
8
Historical explanations of the heroic couplet that stress its political
function are offered, for example, by Caudwell 1973:99, 135, Korshin
1973, and Easthope 1983:119. John Milton may have set forth the first
political reading of the heroic couplet when, in the prefatory statement to
Paradise Lost (1667), he opposed the “ancient liberty” of blank verse to
“the troublesome and modern bondage of Riming.”
9
The subscription lists for Pope’s Homer are discussed by Rogers 1978,
Hodgart 1978, and Speck 1982. Hodgart observes that the list for the Iliad
“reveals a decided Tory—Jacobite tendency” (Hodgart 1978:31).
10
For the emergence and function of the “public sphere” in the eighteenth
century, see Habermas 1989, Hohendahl 1982, and Eagleton 1984.
11
Alison describes the extremely favorable reception of Tytler’s treatise—
“The different reviewers of the day, contended with each other in the
earliness of their notice, and in the liberality of their praise”—concluding
that “after the experience of fifteen years [and five editions], it may now
be considered as one of the standard works of English criticism” (Alison
1818:28).
12
For the ideological standpoint of the Edinburgh Review, see Clive 1957:
Chap. 4, Hayden 1969:8–9, 19–22, and Sullivan 1983b:139–144.
13
Blackwood’s also ran a favorable review of the second volume of Rose’s
Ariosto (Blackwood’s 1824). For the ideological standpoint of this
magazine, see Hayden 1969:62–63, 73 and Sullivan 1983b:45–53.
14
These remarks assume the cultural histories of Abrams 1953 and Foucault
1970.
15
For the ideological standpoints of these magazines, see Roper 1978:174–
176, 180–181, Hayden 1969:44–45, 73, and Sullivan 1983a:231–237 and
1983b:57–62.
16
The parentage of Lamb and Caroline St. Jules is discussed by Posonby
1955:2–5, Stuart 1955:160–163, 184, and Cecil 1965:27.
17
Quinlan notes that “the taste for Evangelical literature had eventually
pervaded all ranks of society. Even among the upper classes there were
many, like Lord Melbourne, who read theology and biblical criticism for
pleasure” (Quinlan 1941:271).
18
Lamb’s politics is also discussed by Dunckley 1890:83–84, 106–107.
Quinlan notes that “as compared with the strict Evangelicals who
indiscriminately banned all novels and plays, the expurgators might
consider themselves liberals, taking a middle course at a time when the
most severe censors could not tolerate polite literature in any form”
(Quinlan 1941:229).
3 Nation
1
English renderings of Schleiermacher’s lecture are taken from Lefevere
1977:67–89, French renderings from “Des différentes méthodes du
traduire,” trans. Berman 1985:279–347. Quotations of the German follow
Schleiermacher 1838:207–245.

318
Notes
2
Sheehan 1989:157–158 describes the different German cultural
constituencies during this period.
3
For surveys of German nationalism in the eighteenth and early
nineteenth century, see Sheehan 1989:371–388 and Johnston 1989:103–113.
4
Lefevere’s choice of “the Germans translate every literary Tom, Dick, and
Harry” to render Schlegel’s “die Deutschen sind ja Allerwelts-übersetzer”
is typical of his strong reliance on fluent strategies that draw on
contemporary English idioms.
5
For critiques of Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics along these lines, see, for
example, Palmer 1969:91–94 and Gadamer 1970:68–84. Two expositions of
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics which make clear but do not critique its
individualism are Forstman 1968 and Szondi 1986.
6
Steiner 1974:234 et passim has so far been the only translation theorist
writing in English who recognizes the importance of Schleiermacher’s
lecture—but for rather different reasons from those set forth here and in
Berman 1984:248–249n.
7
In this passage Lefevere is quoting Nida 1964:159. Lefevere later
reaffirmed his view of Schleiermacher’s theory by asserting that “the
second part of his famous maxim, ‘move the author towards the reader,’
[is] the only viable one” (1990:19). Lefevere’s latest work shows a much
greater concern for the cultural and social determinants of translation
(Lefevere 1992a), although he feels that a foreignizing method like
Schleiermacher’s is obsolete
 
because the audience for it has almost ceased to exist[,] the educated
reader who was able to read original and translation side by side and,
in doing so, to appreciate the difference in linguistic expression as
expressing the difference between two language games.
(Lefevere 1992b:5)
 
My argument, however, is that foreignizing translation can appeal to
diverse cultural constituencies, monolingual as well as educated, but also
that foreignizing translation discourses can be perceived without
recourse to a comparison with the foreign text (even if such a comparison
is certainly illuminating),
8
The account of Newman’s career and opinions presented in the following
pararaphs draws on the DNB, Sieveking 1909, and Newman’s three-
volume selection of his many lectures, pamphlets, and articles (Newman
1869, 1887, and 1889).
9
For the diversity of the Victorian reading audience, see Altick 1957. For
the meanings and uses of English archaisms, I have relied on the OED.
10
Newman referred to the “modern Greek Epic metre” in his 1851 review
article, where he quoted from “a well-known patriotic address
stimulating the Greeks to free themselves from Turkey” (Newman
1851:390). His use of the “modern Greek Klephtic ballad” is noticed in the
North American Review 1862a:119. Hobsbawm discusses the role of the
“klephts” in the Greek nationalist movement (Hobsbawm 1962:173–174).

Notes
319
11
For liberal historiography, see Butterfield 1951, Burrow 1981, and Culler
1985. Newman’s other historical writings also reveal Whig assumptions.
A liberal teleology shaped the lessons he drew from historical “contrasts”
and frequently issued into a utopianism, both democratic and
nationalistic:
 
We […] can look back upon changes which cannot be traced in
antiquity: we see the serf and vassal emancipated from his lord, the
towns obtaining, first independence, next coordinate authority with
the lords of the land. When the element which was weaker gradually
works its way up, chiefly by moral influences and without any
exasperation that can last long, there is every ground to hope a final
union of feeling between Town and Country on the only stable basis,
that of mutual justice. Then all England will be blended into one
interest, that of the Nation, in which it will be morally impossible for
the humblest classes to be forgotten.
(Newman 1847a:23)
 
Newman treated capitalist economic practices with the same Whiggish
optimism, asserting that because “all-reaching Commerce touches distant
regions which are beyond the grasp of politics” geopolitical relations will
eventually be characterized by “peace” (ibid.:33),
12
The divided reception of the controversy becomes evident in a brief
survey of the reviews. Arnold’s recommendation of hexameters for
Homeric translation was accepted in the North American Review 1862a and
1862b. More typical were reviews that accepted Arnold’s academic
reading of Homer, but rejected his recommendation of hexameters as too
deviant from English literary tradition: see, for example Spedding 1861
and the North British Review 1862. Near the end of the decade, Arnold’s
“brilliant contribution” to the controversy was still being mentioned in
reviews of Homeric translations (Fraser’s Magazine 1868:518). Newman, in
contrast, had few supporters. John Stuart Blackie seems to have been
unique in agreeing with Newman’s reading of Homer and
recommending a rhymed ballad measure for Homeric translation
(Blackie 1861).
13
Lattimore insisted that “my line can hardly be called English hexameter”
because it lacks the regularity of nineteenth-century hexameters (he cited
Longfellow). But he made clear the domestication at work in his version:
he agreed with Arnold’s reading of Homer and aimed to adapt his six-
stress line to “the plain English of today” (Lattimore 1951:55). The first
paperback edition of Lattimore’s Iliad appeared in 1961; by 1971 the
translation had been reprinted twenty-one times.

320
Notes
4 Dissidence
1
My concept of foreignizing translation as a “dissident” cultural practice
is indebted to Alan Sinfield’s work on political forms of literary criticism,
notably 1992. Especially pertinent to the politics of foreignizing
translation is Sinfield’s remark that “political awareness does not arise
out of an essential, individual, self-consciousness of class, race, nation,
gender, or sexual orientation; but from involvement in a milieu, a
subculture” (Sinfield 1992:37).
2
Williams 1958: Chap. 2 has clarified this point. My argument concerning
Tarchetti’s cultural politics implicitly takes issue with Carsaniga:
 
In their loathing for everything bourgeois, the scapigliati found it
necessary to break with the Manzonian tradition and its ideological
mystifications; on the other hand their antisocial instincts prevented
them from achieving an authentic realist art. […] Tarchetti, who had
been an acute observer and critic of the distorting disciplines of
military life, took refuge in mysticism.
(Carsaniga 1974:338)
 
Such comments tend to make the naive equation between realism and
reality, failing to take into account the ideological determinations of
literary form.
3
Costa and Vigini 1991 indicates that few book-length translations of
foreign fantastic narratives were available in Italy before Tarchetti
began writing and publishing: there were three editions of
Hoffmann’s tales (1833, 1835, and 1855) and Storìe incredibili (1863),
which contained translations of Chamisso’s Peter Schlemihls
wundersame Geschichte and Poe’s “The Murders in the Rue Morgue”
and “The Oval Portrait.” The Italian versions of Poe’s texts were
made from Baudelaire’s French translations. Rossi 1959:121–125
sketches the Italian reception of Poe.
4
From its very first issue, The Keepsake published Oriental tales and
poems with titles like “Sadak the Wanderer. A Fragment,” “The
Persian Lovers,” and “The Deev Alfakir” (Reynolds 1828:117–119, 136–
137, 160–169).
5
These clauses are taken from my contracts with American publishers for
translations of several Italian-language books: Barbara Alberti, Delirium,
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 29 May 1979, p. 1; Restless Nights: Selected Stories
of Dino Buzzati, North Point Press, 15 September 1982, p. 2; and
I.U.Tarchetti, Fantastic Tales, Mercury House, 3 July 1991, p. 5.
5 Margin
1
Pound expresses this sort of elitism in his introduction to Sonnets and
Ballate of Guido Cavalcanti when he refers to “voi altri pochi [you other few]
who understand” (Anderson 1983:19). Other reviewers sympathetic to

Notes
321
Pound’s modernist translation projects include Murphy 1953, Ferlinghetti
1953, and The New Yorker 1954.
2
Davie’s commentary on Pound’s writing includes two books, 1964 and
1976. Homberger discusses Davie’s “sustained and occasionally bitter
attack upon the intention behind the Cantos” (Homberger 1972:28–29).
3
See also Stern 1953:
 
What is peculiar in Pound’s translating shows up mostly in the famous
versions of Cavalcanti and Arnaut Daniel. Away from the didactic
context, Pound has tended to burden some of the translations with an
antique weight (perhaps in order to carry what has since become staple
or cliché or what has since vanished altogether from the tradition). […]
The finest English verse in The Translations comes in The Seafarer and in
the Chinese poems of Cathay. There whatever is sporty or cagy or
antique or labyrinthine in other sections of the book drops away and
we have the pure, emotionally subtle, lovely verse which most English
readers have Pound alone to thank for knowing.
(Stern 1953:266, 267)
 
Edwin Muir similarly praises “all the translations in the book except
those from Guido Cavalcanti,” adding, somewhat eccentrically, that “the
poems from the Provençal and the Chinese bring off the miracle” (Muir
1953:40).
4
Fitts’s changing attitude toward Pound’s writing is documented by the
two reviews printed in Homberger 1972, the first a very enthusiastic
assessment of A Draft of XXX Cantos from 1931, the second a curt
dismissal of Guide to Kulchur from 1939 (Homberger 1972:246–255, 335–
336). Carpenter 1988:507, 543 also notes Fitts’s negative reviews of Pound.
Pound, in turn, felt that even Fitts’s positive reviews were misguided
(Carpenter 1988:478). Laughlin seems to have indulged Fitts’s criticisms,
since he invited Fitts “to check and correct the classical allusions” in The
Cantos (ibid.:687).
5
The translation is reprinted, without the Latin texts, in Zukofsky 1991,
where the dates of composition, 1958–1969, are given in square brackets.
Cid Corman, who was in correspondence with Louis Zukofsky and
published some of the Catullus translation in his magazine Origin, notes
that it involved “at least 8 or 9 years’ labor” (Corman 1970:4). Celia
Zukofsky later made clear the division of labor (Hatlen 1978:539n.2).
Pound’s influence on the Zukofskys’ Catullus can be inferred from
Ahearn 1987:200, 203, 208, 218.
6
I have learned much about the language of the Zukofskys’ Catullus from
Guy Davenport’s brief but incisive essays, 1970 and 1979. See also Gordon
1979 and Mann 1986, who presents an astute discussion of the cultural
and political issues raised by the translation.
7
Not surprisingly, Raffel reviewed Apter’s study very favorably (Raffel
1985), and his own study of Pound’s writing (Raffel 1984) includes a
chapter on the translations, but entirely omits any discussion of the

322
Notes
Cavalcanti and Daniel versions. See also Lefevere’s negative evaluation of
the Zukofskys’ Catullus (Lefevere 1975:19–26, 95–96). “The result,”
Lefevere concluded, “is a hybrid creation of little use to the reader,
testifying at best to the translator’s linguistic virtuosity and
inventiveness” (ibid.:26). Lefevere’s recent work aims to be “descriptive”
instead of “prescriptive,” so he refrains from judging the Zukofskys’
Catullus, although pointing out that it has “never achieved more than a
certain notoriety as a curiosum doomed not to be taken seriously”
(Lefevere 1992a:109).
8
I cite the Blackburn—Pound correspondence from Paul Blackburn,
Letters to Ezra Pound, Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare
Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University, and Ezra and Dorothy
Pound, Letters to Paul Blackburn, Paul Blackburn Collection, Archive for
New Poetry. Neither collection contains Blackburn’s first letters to Pound
in 1950. Some of the correspondence is dated, either by the
correspondents or by archivists; dates I have conjectured on the basis of
internal evidence are indicated with a question mark. My reading of
Blackburn’s relationship to Pound is indebted to Sedgwick 1985.
9
This publishing history is reconstructed from documents in the Paul
Blackburn Collection, Archive for New Poetry: M.L.Rosenthal, Letters to
Emile Capouya, 17 July and 2 August 1958; Capouya, Letter to John
Ciardi, 27 June 1958; Ciardi, Letter to Capouya, 2 July 1958; Capouya,
Letter to Ramon Guthrie, 18 July 1958; Guthrie, Letter to Capouya, 24 July
1958; Guthrie, Report on Blackburn’s Anthology of Troubadors, Capouya,
Letters to Blackburn, 12 September 1958, 8 October 1958, 31 October 1958,
8 December 1958, 26 March 1965; R. Repass, Memo (Contract Request for
Blackburn), 29 September 1958; Herbert Weinstock, Letter to Blackburn,
11 June 1963; Daniel R. Hayes, Letter to Blackburn, 7 June 1963; Arthur
Gregor, Letter to Blackburn, 1 September 1965; M.L.Rosenthal, Letters to
Blackburn, 8 February 1957, 16 March 1958, 14 June 1958, 22 July 1959, 1
November 1965.
10
“Agreement of Representation (Contract),” 11 August 1959, Paul
Blackburn Collection, Archive for New Poetry. Sales figures for the
Cortázar translations (cited on pp. 265–266) are taken from royalty
statements in the Blackburn Collection. Blackburn’s correspondence as
Cortázar’s agent documents the increasing American interest in the
Argentine writer’s fiction.
11
This catalogue of writers is drawn from various reviews of Blackburn’s
Cortázar: Coleman 1967, Kauffman 1967, Davenport 1967, Time 1967,
MacAdam 1967, Stern 1967, Times Literary Supplement 1968.
6 Simpatico
1
Montale’s seven Italian collections are Ossi di seppia (1925), Le occasioni
(1939), La bufera e altro (1956), Satura (1971), Diario del ’71 e del ’72 (1973),
Quaderno di quattro anni (1977), and Altri versi e poesie disperse (1981), now

Notes
323
gathered in Montale 1984a. William Arrowsmith was completing
translations of Cuttlefish Bones and Satura when he died in 1992; Jonathan
Galassi is currently completing a translation of Montale’s first three
books. Montale’s Italian texts have also been the object of free adaptations
in English: see, for example, Lowell 1961:107–129 and Reed 1990.
2
These reflections on romantic individualism and its degrading of
translation rely on Derrida 1976 and Deleuze 1990:253–266.
3
See also On the Genealogy of Morals:
 
A quantum of force is equivalent to a quantum of drive, will, effect—
more, it is nothing other than precisely this very driving, willing,
effecting, and only owing to the seduction of language (and of the
fundamental errors of reason that are petrified in it) which conceives
and misconceives all effects as conditioned by something that causes
effects, by a ‘subject,’ can it appear otherwise.
(Nietszche 1969:45)
 
Deleuze 1983:6–8 offers an incisive exposition of Nietzsche’s “philosophy
of the will.”
4
The magazines that have published my translations of De Angelis’s
poetry include American Poetry Review, Paris Review Poetry, and Sulfur. The
translations have been rejected by Antaeus, Conjunctions, Field, New
American Writing, The New Yorker, and Pequod, among others.
5
Letter from Peter Potter, Assistant Editor, Wesleyan University Press, 24
November 1987.
6
For a selection from the writing of this loosely associated group, see
Messerli 1987. For discussions of the theoretical differences between the
L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E group and the romanticism which dominates
contemporary American poetry, see Perloff 1985 and Bartlett 1986.
7
De Angelis’s poetry has been reviewed in little magazines like Produzione
e cultura, in the widely circulated literary tabloid Alfabeta (now defunct),
and in mass-audience magazines like L’Espresso and Panorama.
Newspapers that have printed reviews of his books include La Gazzetta di
Parma, La Stampa, and Corriere della Sera.
8
Derrida similarly notes that “there are, in one linguistic system, perhaps
several languages, or tongues, […] There is impurity in every language,”
and he concludes that “translation can do everything except mark this
linguistic difference inscribed in the language, this difference of language
systems inscribed in a single tongue” (1985b:100). I am arguing that it is
precisely this difference that the strategy of resistancy is designed to
mark, the differences among languages, but also within them.

Bibliography
Abrams, M.H. (1953) The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical
Tradition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Adams, R.M. (1979) “From Langue d’Oc and Langue d’Oïl,” New York Times
Book Review, 25 February, pp. 14, 36.
The Adventures of Catullus, and History of His Amours with Lesbia. Intermixt with
Translations of his Choicest Poems. By several Hands. Done from the French.
(1707), London:J.Chantry.
Ahearn, B. (ed.) (1987) Pound/Zukofsky: Selected Letters of Ezra Pound and Louis
Zukofsky , New York: New Directions.
Alison, A. (1818) Memoir of the Life and Writings of the Honourable Alexander
Fraser Tytler, Lord Woodhouselee, Edinburgh: Neill & Co.
Allen, D.M. (ed.) (1960) The New American Poetry, New York: Grove.
Altick, R. (1957) The English Common Reader: A Social History of the Mass Reading
Public, 1800–1900, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Amos, F.R. (1920) Early Theories of Translation, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Anderson, B. (1991) Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism, rev. edn, London and New York: Verso.
Anderson, D. (1982) “A Language to Translate Into: The Pre-Elizabethan Idiom
of Pound’s Later Cavalcanti Translations,” Studies in Medievalism 2:9–18.
—(ed.) (1983) Pound’s Cavalcanti: An Edition of the Translations, Notes, and Essays,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Annan, N. (1944) “Books in General,” New Statesman and Nation, 18 March, p.
191.
Anti-Jacobin Review; and Protestant Advocate (1821) Review of G.Lamb’s
Translation of Catullus, 61:13–19.
Apter, R. (1986) “Paul Blackburn’s Homage to Ezra Pound,” Translation Review
19:23–26.
—(1987) Digging for the Treasure: Translation after Pound (1984), New York:
Paragon House.
Arnold, M. (1914) Essays by Matthew Arnold, London: Oxford University Press.
—(1960) On the Classical Tradition, ed. R.H.Super, Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.

Bibliography
325
Athenaeum (1886) Review of The Iliad of Homer, trans. Arthur Way, 10 April, pp.
482–483.
Bakhtin, M. (1984) Rabelais and His World (1964), trans. H.Iswolsky,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Balderston, D. (1992) “Fantastic Voyages,” New York Times Book Review, 29
November, p. 15.
Baldick, C. (1983) The Social Mission of English Criticism: 1848–1932, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Ballantyne, A. (1888) “Wardour-Street English,” Longman’s Magazine 12
(October):585–594.
Ballerini, L. and Milazzo, R. (eds) (1979) The Waters of Casablanca,
Chelsea 37.
Barnard, M. (ed. and trans.) (1958) Sappho: A New Translation, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
—(1984) Assault on Mount Helicon: A Literary Memoir, Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Bartlett, L. (1986) “What Is ‘Language Poetry?” Critical Inquiry
12:741–752.
Bassnett, S. (1980) Translation Studies, London and New York: Methuen.
Baudrillard, J. (1983) Simulations, trans. P.Foss, P.Patton, and P.Beitchman, New
York: Semiotext(e).
Belsey, C. (1980) Critical Practice, London and New York: Methuen.
Beltrametti, F. (1976) Another Earthquake, trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and
Los Angeles: Red Hill.
Benjamin, A. (1989) Translation and the Nature of Philosophy: A New Theory of
Words, London and New York: Routledge.
Berengo, M. (1980) Intellettuali e librai nella Milano della Restaurazione, Turin:
Einaudi.
Berman, A. (1984) L’Epreuve de l’étranger: Culture et traduction dans l’Allemagne
romantique, Paris: Gallimard.
—(1985) “La traduction et la lettre, ou l’auberge du lointain,” in Les Tours de
Babel: Essais sur la traduction, Mauvezin: Trans-Europ-Repress.
Bernstein, C. (1986) Content’s Dream: Essays 1975–1984, Los Angeles: Sun &
Moon.
—(1992) A Poetics, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Bettelheim, B. (1983) Freud and Man’s Soul, New York: Alfred Knopf.
Bevington, M.M. (1941) The Saturday Review, 1855–1868: Representative Educated
Opinion in Victorian England , New York: Columbia University Press.
Biggs, M. (1990) A Gift That Cannot Be Refused: The Writing and Publishing of
Contemporary American Poetry, New York: Greenwood.
Blackburn, P. (1953) “Das Kennerbuch,” New Mexico Quarterly 23
(Summer):215–219.
—(ed. and trans.) (1958) Anthology of Troubadours—translated from the 12th and
13th C. Occitan by Paul Blackburn, Unpublished Manuscript, Paul Blackburn
Collection, Archive for New Poetry, Mandeville Department of Special
Collections, University of California, San Diego.

326
Bibliography
—(1962) “The International Word,” Nation, 21 April, pp. 357–360.
—(1963) “The Grinding Down,” Kulchur 10 (Summer):9–l8.
—(trans.) (1966) Poem of the Cid, New York: American R.D.M.
Corporation.
—(1985) The Collected Poems of Paul Blackburn, ed. E.Jarolim, New York: Persea.
—(ed. and trans.) (1986) Proensa: An Anthology of Troubadour Poetry (1978), ed.
G.Economou, New York: Paragon House.
Blackie, J.S. (1861) “Homer and his Translators,” Macmillan’s Magazine
4:268–280.
Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (1818) “Observations on Catullus, Suggested
by a Piece of French Criticism,” 2:486–490.
—(1823) “New Poetical Translations—Wiffen—Rose—Cower,” 14:26–39.
—(1824) “The Second Volume of Rose’s Ariosto,” 15:418–424.
Blanchot, M. (1990) “Translating” (1971), trans. R.Sieburth, Sulfur
26:82–86.
Bonifazi, N. (1971) Il racconto fantastico da Tarchetti a Buzzati, Urbino: STEU.
—(1982) Teoria del fantastico e il racconto fantastico in Italia: Tarchetti, Pirandello,
Buzzati, Ravenna: Longo.
Borges, J.L. (1962) Ficciones, ed. A.Kerrigan, New York: Grove.
Bowdler, T. (ed.) (1818) The Family Shakespeare. In Ten Volumes 12mo. In which
nothing is added to the Text; but those Words and Expressions are omitted which
cannot with Propriety be read aloud in a Family, London: Longman.
Brady, P.V. (1977) “Traps for Translators,” Times Literary Supplement, 25
February, p. 201.
Braun, R.E. (1970) “The Original Language: Some Postwar Translations of
Catullus,” The Grosseteste Review 3, 4:27–34.
Brinkley, R. (1967) Arthurian Legend in the Seventeenth Century (1932), New York:
Octagon.
British Critic (1798) Review of J.Nott’s Translation of Catullus, 10:671–673.
British Quarterly Review (1865) “Homer and his Translators,” 40 (April):290–324.
Brooke, S. (1898) English Literature from the Beginning to the Norman Conquest,
New York and London: Macmillan.
Brower, R. (ed.) (1959) On Translation, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Brownjohn, A. (1969) “Caesar ’Ad Some,” New Statesman, 1 August, p. 151.
Bunting, B. (1936) Review of E.Stuart Bates, Modern Translation, Criterion
15:714–716.
Burgess, A. (1990) “On Wednesday He Does His Ears,” New York Times Book
Review, 14 October, p. 11.
Burrow, J.W. (1981) A Liberal Descent: Victorian Historians and the English Past,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bush, D. (1962) English Literature in the Earlier Seventeenth Century 1600–1660,
2nd edn, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Butler, H.E. and Cary, M. (eds) (1927) C. Suetoni Tranquilli Divus Iulius, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Bibliography
327
Butterfield, H. (1951) The Whig Interpretation of History, New York: Scribner.
Caesar, A. (1987) “Construction of Character in Tarchetti’s Fosca,” Modern
Language Review 82:76–87.
Cagnone, N. (1975) What’s Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba? trans. David Verzoni,
New York, Norristown, and Milan: Out of London.
Campbell, G. (ed. and trans.) (1789) The Four Gospels, Translated from the Greek.
With Preliminary Dissertations, and Notes Critical and Explanatory., London:
A.Strahan & T.Cadell.
Carpenter, H. (1988) A Serious Character: The Life of Ezra Pound, Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Carsaniga, G.M. (1974) “Realism in Italy,” in F.W.J.Hemmings (ed.) The Age of
Realism, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Castronovo, V., Fossati, L.G., and Tranfaglia, N. (1979) La stampa italiana nell’età
liberale, Rome and Bari: Laterza.
Caudwell, C. (1973) Illusion and Reality: A Study of the Sources of Poetry (1937),
New York: International Publishers.
Cecil, D. (1965) Melbourne, London: Constable.
Celan, P. (1986) “The Meridian,” in Collected Prose, trans. R.Waldrop,
Manchester: Carcanet.
Chandler, A. (1970) A Dream of Order: The Medieval Ideal in Nineteenth-Century
English Literature, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Cherchi, P. and Parisi, J. (1989) “Some Notes on Post-War Italian Poetry,” Poetry
l55 (October–November):161–167.
Christ, R. (1984) “Translation Watch,” PEN American Center Newsletter 53
(Winter):8.
Cixous, H. (1974) “The Character of ‘Character’,” trans. K.Cohen, New Literary
History 5:383–402.
Clive, J. (1957) Scotch Reviewers: The Edinburgh Review, 1802–1815, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Cohen, J.M. (1962) English Translators and Translations, London: Long-mans,
Green & Co.
Coleman, A. (1967) “Everywhere Déjà Vu,” New York Times Book Review, 9
July, p. 5.
Commager, S. (1971) Review of Three Catullus Translations, New York Times
Book Review, 15 August, pp. 4, 35.
Conquest, R. (1970) “The Abomination of Moab,” Encounter 34 (May):56–63.
Coogan, D. (1970) “Catullu,” Chelsea 28:113–118.
Corke, H. (1967) “New Novels,” The Listener, 8 June, pp. 761–762.
Corman.C. (1970) “Poetry as Translation,” The Grosseteste Review 3,
4:3–20.
Cortázar, J. (1964) “Continuidad de los Parques,” in Final del juego, Buenos
Aires: Editorial Sudamericana.
—(1965) The Winners, trans. E.Kerrigan, New York: Pantheon.
—(1966) Hopscotch, trans. G.Rabassa, New York: Pantheon.
—(1967) End of the Game and Other Stories, trans. P.Blackburn, New York:
Pantheon.

328
Bibliography
—(1969) Cronopios and Famas, trans. P.Blackburn, New York: Pantheon.
—(1973) All Fires The Fire, trans. Suzanne Jill Levine, New York: Pantheon.
Costa, C. (1975) Our Positions, trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and Los
Angeles: Red Hill.
Costa, M. and Vigini, G. (eds) (1991) CLIO: catalogo dei libri italiani dell’ottocento
(1801–1900), Milan: Editrice Bibliografica.
Crusius, L. (1733) The Lives of the Roman Poets. Containing A Critical and
Historical Account of Them and their Writings, with large Quotations of their most
celebrated Passages, as far as was necessary to compare and illustrate their several
Excellencies, as well as to discover wherein they were deficient, London: W.Innys,
J.Clarke, B.Motte, J.Nourse.
Cucchi, M. (1983) Dizionario della poesia italiana: i poeti di ogni tempo, la metrica,
i gruppi e le tendenze, Milan: Mondadori.
Culler, A.D. (1985) The Victorian Mirror of History, New Haven, Connecticut:
Yale University Press.
D’Ablancourt, N.P. (trans.) (1640) Les Annales de Tacite. Première Partie.
Contenant la vie de Tibère, Paris: Jean Camusat.
Davenport, G. (1967) “And a Cool Drink by the Hammock,” National Review, 25
July, pp. 811–812.
—(1970) “Louis Zukofsky,” Agenda 8(3–4):130–137.
—(1979) “Zukofsky’s English Catullus” (1973), in C.F.Terrell (ed.) Louis
Zukofsky, Man and Poet, Orono, Maine: National Poetry Foundation.
Davie, D. (1953) “Translation Absolute,” New Statesman and Nation, 5
September, pp. 263–264.
—(1964) Ezra Pound: Poet as Sculptor, New York: Oxford University Press.
—(1976) Ezra Pound, New York: Viking.
Dawson, J. (1966) Friedrich Schleiermacher: The Evolution of a Nationalist, Austin
and London: University of Texas Press.
De Angelis, M. (1975) “L’idea centrale,” in M.Forti (ed.) L’almanacco dello
Specchio 4:371–391.
—(1976) Somiglianze, Milan: Guanda.
—(1985) Terra del viso, Milan: Mondadori.
—(1994) Finite Intuition: Selected Poetry and Prose, ed. and trans. L. Venuti, Los
Angeles: Sun & Moon.
Dejeanne, J.M.L. (ed.) (1971) Poésies Complètes du Troubadour Marcabru (1909),
New York: Johnson.
Deleuze, G. (1983) Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans. H.Tomlinson, New York:
Columbia University Press.
—(1990) The Logic of Sense, trans. M.Lester with C.Stivale, ed. C.V. Boundas,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1986) Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature, trans.
D.Polan, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Denham, J. (ed. and trans.) (1656) The Destruction of Troy, An Essay upon the
Second Book of Virgils Æneis. Written in the year, 1636, London: Humphrey
Moseley.
—(1969) The Poetical Works, ed. T.H.Banks, 2nd edn, Hamden, Connecticut:
Archon.

Bibliography
329
Derrida, J. (1976) Of Grammatology, trans. G.C.Spivak, Baltimore and London:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
—(1982) “Difference,” in Margins of Philosophy, trans. A.Bass, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
—(1985a) “Des Tours de Babel,” trans. J.F.Graham, in J.F.Graham (ed.)
Difference in Translation, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
(1985b) The Ear of the Other: Otobiography, Transference, Translation, ed.
C.McDonald, trans. A.Ronell and P.Kamuf, New York: Schocken.
Dickstein, M. (1992) Review of G.Celati, Appearances, trans. S.Hood, New York
Times Book Review, 29 November, p. 18.
Dryden, J. (1956) “Preface to Ovid’s Epistles” (1680), in E.N.Hooker and
H.T.Swedenberg, Jr (eds) The Works of John Dryden, vol. I, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
—(1958) “Dedication of the Æneis” (1697), in J.Kinsley (ed.) The Poems of John
Dryden, vol. III, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—(1962) “Preface to The Rival Ladies” (1664), in G.Watson (ed.) Of Dramatic
Poesy and Other Critical Essays, vol. I, London: Dent.
Dublin University Magazine (1862) “Homer and his Translators,” 59 (June):643–
654.
Dunckley, H. (1890) Lord Melbourne, London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle
and Rivington.
Eagleton, T. (1984) The Function of Criticism: From The Spectator to Post-
structuralism, London: Verso.
Easthope, A. (1983) Poetry as Discourse, London and New York: Methuen.
Edinburgh Review (1820) Review of T.Mitchell’s Translations of Aristophanes,
34:271–319.
Edwards, J. (1954) “Pound’s Translations,” Poetry 83:233–238.
Eliot, T.S. (1928) “Baudelaire in Our Time,” in For Lancelot Andrewes: Essays on
Style and Order, London: Faber & Gwyer.
—(1950) Selected Essays, New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Elton, C.A. (ed. and trans.) (1814) Specimens of the Classic Poets, In a Chronological
Series from Homer to Tryphiodorus, Translated into English Verse, And Illustrated
with Biographical and Critical Notices, 3 vols, London: Robert Baldwin.
Eshleman, C. (1989) “The Gull Wall,” in Antiphonal Swing: Selected Prose, 1962–
1987, Kingston, New York: McPherson.
European Magazine, and the London Review and Literary Journal (1793), Review of
A.F.Tytler, Essay on the Principles of Translation, 24:186–189, 278–282.
Fagles, R. (trans.) (1990) Homer, The Iliad, ed. B.Knox, New York: Viking.
Farina, S. (1913) La mia giornata: Care ombre, Turin: Società Tipografico-Editrice
Nazionale.
Faulkner, P. (ed.) (1973) William Morris: The Critical Heritage, London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Faxon, F.W. (1973) Literary Annuals and Giftbooks. A Bibliography, 1823–1903.
Reprinted with Supplementary Essays, Pinner, Middlesex: Private Libraries
Association.
Feldman, G. (1986) “Going Global,” Publishers Weekly, 19 December, pp.
20–24.

330
Bibliography
Feldman, R. and Swann, B. (eds) (1979) Italian Poetry Today, St. Paul, Minnesota:
New Rivers.
Fell, C. (1991) “Perceptions of Transience,” in M.Godden and M.Lapidge (eds)
The Cambridge Companion to Old English Literature, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Felstiner, J. (1983) “Paul Celan in Translation: ‘Du Sei Wie Du’,” Studies in
Twentieth-Century Literature 8:91–100.
—(1984) “Paul Celan’s Triple Exile,” Sulfur 11:47–52.
Ferlinghetti, L. (1953) “Among the New Books,” San Francisco Chronicle, 4
October, p. 26.
Fiedler, L. (1962) “Sufficient unto the Day” (1955), in W.Phillips and P. Rahv
(eds) Partisan Review Anthology, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Fischbach, H. (1992) “The Mutual Challenge of Technical and Literary
Translation: Some Highlights,” Sci-Tech Newsletter, January, pp. 3–5.
Fitts, D. (1954) “The Tea-Shop Aura,” New Republic, 4 January, pp. 18–19.
—(ed. and trans.) (1956) Poems from the Greek Anthology, New York: New
Directions.
—(1958) The Poetic Nuance, New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Flad, B. (1992) “A Speech for the Defense of the Visible and Audible
Translator,” Translation Review 38–39:40–41.
Forstman, H.J. (1968) “The Understanding of Language by Friedrich Schlegel
and Schleiermacher,” Soundings 51:146–165.
Fortini, F. (1975) “The Wind of Revival,” Times Literary Supplement, 31 October,
pp. 1308–1309.
Foucault, M. (1970) The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences,
New York: Random House.
—(1977) “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” in Language, Counter-Memory,
Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews, eds and trans D.F. Bouchard and
S.Simon, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Fowler, H.W. (1965) A Dictionary of Modern English Usage, ed. E.Gowers, New
York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frank, J. (1961) The Beginnings of the English Newspaper 1620–1660, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Fraser’s Magazine (1868) “Translations of the Iliad,” 78 (October): 518–531.
Frémy, D. and M. (eds) (1992) Quid 1992, Paris: Laffont.
Frere, J.H. (1820) Review of T.Mitchell’s Translations of Aristophanes, Quarterly
Review 23:474–505.
Freud, S. (1960) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901), trans. A.Tyson, ed.
J.Strachey, New York: Norton.
—(1961) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920), ed. and trans. J.Strachey, New
York: Norton.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1970) “The Problem of Language in Schleiermacher’s
Hermeneutic,” trans. D.E.Linge, in R.W.Funk (ed.) Schleiermacher as
Contemporary, New York: Herder and Herder.
Gall, S. (1980) “Ramon Guthrie,” in K.L.Rood (ed.) Dictionary of Literary
Biography 4: American Writers in Paris, 1920–1939, Detroit: Gale.

Bibliography
331
Gardam, J. (1990) “The Institute of Translation and Interpreting Survey of
Rates and Salaries,” Professional Translator and Interpeter 1:5–14.
Genest, J. (ed.) (1832) Some Account of the English Stage from the Restoration in
1660 to 1830, vol. VIII, Bath: H.E.Carrington.
Gentleman’s Magazine (1798) Review of J.Nott’s translation of Catullus, 68:408.
—(1825) “John Nott, M.D.,” 95:565–566.
—(1834) “Hon. George Lamb,” 104:437–438.
Gentzler, E. (1993) Contemporary Translation Theories, London and New York:
Routledge.
Giddens, A. (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure, and
Contradiction in Social Analysis, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Gioia, D. and Palma, M. (eds) (1991) New Italian Poets, Brownsville, Oregon:
Story Line Press.
Giuliani, A. (ed.) (1961) I novissimi: Poesia per gli anni ‘60, Milan: Rusconi and
Paolazzi.
Glenny, M. (1983) “Professional Prospects,” Times Literary Supplement, 14
October, p. 1118.
Goldin, F. (ed. and trans.) (1973) Lyrics of the Troubadours and Trouvères: An
Anthology and a History, Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
Gordon, D.M. (1979) “Three Notes on Zukofsky’s Catullus,” in C.F. Terrell (ed.)
Louis Zukofsky, Man and Poet, Orono, Maine: National Poetry Foundation.
Gozzano, G. (1981) The Man I Pretend to Be: The Colloquies and Selected Poems of
Guido Gozzano, ed. and trans. M.Palma, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
—(1987) The Colloquies and Selected Letters, ed. and trans. J.S.Nichols,
Manchester and New York: Carcanet.
Graham, J. (ed.) (1985) Difference in Translation, Ithaca, New York: Cornell
University Press.
Graham, S. (1953) “Pound Sterling,” Poetry Review 44:472–473.
Grannis, C.B. (1991) “Balancing the Books, 1990,” Publishers Weekly, 5 July, pp.
21–23.
Grant, M. (ed.) (1980) Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, The Twelve Caesars, trans.
R.Graves, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Graves, R. (trans.) (1957) Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, The Twelve Caesars,
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
—(1965) “Moral Principles in Translation,” Encounter 24:47–55.
Grove, R. (1984) “Nature Methodiz’d,” Critical Review 26:52–68.
Guthrie, R. (1923) Trobar Clus, Northampton, Massachusetts: S4N.
—(1927a) A World Too Old, New York: Doran.
—(1927b) Marcabrun, New York: Doran.
—(1929) The Legend of Ermengarde, Paris: Black Manikin.
—(1970) Maximum Security Ward 1964–1970, New York: Farrar, Straus &
Giroux.
Habermas, J. (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry
into a Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. T.Burger with F. Lawrence,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

332
Bibliography
Hager, A. “British Virgil: Four Renaissance Disguises of the Laocoon
Passage of Book 2 of the Aeneid,” Studies in English Literature 1500–1900,
22(1982):21–38.
A Handbook for Literary Translators (1991), 2nd edn, New York: PEN American
Center.
Hardacre, P.H. (1953) “The Royalists in Exile during the Puritan Revolution,
1642–1660,” Huntington Library Quarterly 16:353–370.
Harrison, T.J. (ed. and trans.) (1983) The Favorite Malice: Ontology and Reference
in Contemporary Italian Poetry, New York, Norristown, and Milan: Out of
London.
Hatlen, B. (1978) “Catullus Metamorphosed,” Paideuma 7:539–545.
Hawkins, T. (ed. and trans.) (1625) Odes of Horace, The best of Lyrick Poets,
Contayning much morality, and sweetness, Selected, and Translated by S:T:H:,
London: W.Lee.
Hayden, J.O. (1969) The Romantic Reviewers, 1802–1824, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and Time, trans. J.Macquarrie and E. Robinson, New
York: Harper and Row.
Helgerson, R. (1983) Self-Crowned Laureates: Spenser, Jonson, Milton, and the
Literary System, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Hermans, T. (1985) “Images of Translation: Metaphor and Imagery in the
Renaissance Discourse on Translation,” in T.Hermans (ed.) The Manipulation
of Literature: Studies in Literary Translation, London: Croom Helm .
Hill, H.C. (1970) “Transonance and Intransigence,” The Grosseteste Review
3(4):21–25.
Hingley, R. (ed. and trans.) (1964) The Oxford Chekhov, vol. III, London and New
York: Oxford University Press.
Hobsbawm, E.J. (1962) The Age of Revolution: 1789–1848, New York: New
American Library.
Hodgart, M. (1978) “The Subscription List for Pope’s Iliad, 1715,” in R.B.
White, Jr (ed.) The Dress of Words, Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas
Libraries.
Hohendahl, P.E. (1982) “Literary Criticism and the Public Sphere,” trans.
R.L.Smith and H.J.Schmidt, in The Institution of Criticism, Ithaca, New York:
Cornell University Press.
Holden, J. (1991) The Fate of American Poetry, Athens, Georgia: University of
Georgia Press.
Holyday, B. (trans.) (1635) Aulus Persius Flaccus His Satyres. Translated into
English, By Barten Holyday, Master of Arts, and student of Christ Church in
Oxford. And now newly by him reviewed and amended. The third Edition,
London: R.Higginbotham.
Homberger, E. (ed.) (1972) Ezra Pound: The Critical Heritage, London and
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Honig, E. (1985) The Poet’s Other Voice: Conversations on Literary Translation,
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Hooley, D.M. (1988) The Classics in Paraphrase: Ezra Pound and Modern

Bibliography
333
Translators of Latin Poetry, Selinsgrove, Pennsylvania: Susquehanna
University Press.
Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T. (1972) Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. J.
Gumming, New York: Continuum.
Houghton, W.E., Houghton, E.R. and Slingerland, J.H. (eds) (1987) The
Wellesley Index to Victorian Periodicals, 1824–1900, 5 vols, Toronto: University
of Toronto Press.
Howard, H. (trans.) (1557) Certain Bokes of Virgiles Aenaeis turned into English
meter by the right honorable lorde, Henry Earle of Surrey, London: R. Tottel.
An International Survey of Book Production during the Last Decades (1982), Paris:
UNESCO.
Jackson, R. (1981) Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion, London and New York
: Methuen.
Jameson, F. (1979) Fables of Aggression: Wyndham Lewis, the Modernist as Fascist,
Los Angeles and Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jiménez-Landi, A. (1974) The Treasure of the Muleteer and Other Spanish Tales,
trans. P.Blackburn, Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
Johnston, O.W. (1989) The Myth of a Nation: Literature and Politics in Prussia
under Napoleon, Columbia, South Carolina: Camden House.
Jones, E. (1944) Geoffrey of Monmouth 1640–1680, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Jonson, B. (1968) The Complete Poetry of Ben Jonson, ed. William B.Hunter, Jr,
New York: Norton.
Kaplan, B. (1967) An Unhurried View of Copyright, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Kauffmann, S. (1967) “Real and Otherwise,” New Republic, 15 July, pp. 22, 36.
Keeley, E. (1990) “The Commerce of Translation,” PEN American Center
Newsletter 73 (Fall):10–12.
Kemeny, T. (1976) The Hired Killer’s Glove, trans. T.Kemeny, New York,
Norristown, Milan: Out of London.
Korshin, P.J. (1973) From Concord to Dissent: Major Themes in English Poetic
Theory 1640–1700, Menston, England: The Scolar Press.
Krapp, G.P. and Dobbie, E.V.K. (eds) (1936) The Exeter Book, New York:
Columbia University Press.
Kratz, D. (1986) “An Interview with Norman Shapiro,” Translation Review
19:27–28.
Lacan, J. (1977) “The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire in the
Freudian Unconscious,” in Ecrits: A Selection, trans. A.Sheridan, New York:
Norton.
Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Toward a
Radical Democratic Politics, trans. W.Moore and P.Cammack, London: Verso.
Lamb, G. (ed.) (1816) Shakespeare’s Timon of Athens, As Revived at the Theatre
Royal, Drury-lane, On Monday, Oct. 28, 1816. Altered and Adapted for
Representation, By the Hon. George Lamb, London: C.Chapple.
—(ed. and trans.) (1821) The Poems of Caius Valerius Catuttus Translated. With a
Preface and Notes, By the Hon. George Lamb, 2 vols, London: John Murray.

334
Bibliography
Latham, W. (trans.) (1628) Virgils Eclogues Translated into English: By W.L.
Gent., London: W.Jones.
Lattimore, R. (ed. and trans.) (1951) The Iliad of Homer, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lecercle, J.-J. (1990) The Violence of Language, London and New York: Routledge.
Lefevere, A. (1975) Translating Poetry: Seven Strategies and a Blueprint, Assen:
Van Gorcum.
—(ed. and trans.) (1977) Translating Literature: The German Tradition from Luther
to Rosenzweig, Assen: Van Gorcum.
—(1981) “German Translation Theory: Legacy and Relevance,” Journal of
European Studies 11:9–l7.
—(1990) “Translation: Its Genealogy in the West,” in S.Bassnett and A.Lefevere
(eds) Translation, History and Culture, London and New York: Pinter.
—(1992a) Translation, Rewriting and the Manipulation of Literary Fame, London
and New York: Routledge.
—(ed. and trans.) (1992b) Translation/History/Culture: A Sourcebook, London and
New York: Routledge.
Levy, C. (1991) “The Growing Gelt in Others’ Words,” The New York Times, 20
October, p. F5.
Levy, E. (1966) Petit Dictionnaire Provençal—Français (1909), Heidelberg: Carl
Winter Universitatverlag.
Lewis, P.E. (1985) “The Measure of Translation Effects,” in J.Graham (ed.)
Difference in Translation, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Locher, F. (ed.) (1980) Contemporary Authors, vols 93–96, Detroit: Gale.
London Magazine (1824) “Rose’s Orlando Furioso,” 9:623–628.
London Quarterly Review (1858) “Horace and his Translators,” 104
(October):179–198.
—(1874) “The Odes of Horace and Recent Translators,” 42 (April and
July):1–27.
Lorca, F.G. (1979) Lorca/Blackburn: Poems of Federico Garcia Lorca, trans. P.
Blackburn, San Francisco: Memo’s.
Lottman, H.R. (1991) “Milan: A World of Change,” Publishers Weekly, 21 June,
pp. S5–S11.
Lowell, R. (1961) Imitations, New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
MacAdam, A. (1967) “A Life without Patterns,” New Leader, 11 September, pp.
19–20.
McDougal, S. Y (1972) Ezra Pound and the Troubadour Tradition, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
MacDougall, H.A. (1982) Racial Myth in English History: Trojans, Teutons, and
Anglo-Saxons, Hanover, New Hampshire: University Press of New England.
McKendrick, J. (1991) “Italians for Anglosassoni,” Poetry Review 81, 3
(Autumn):58–59.
McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Macmillan’s Magazine (1861) “Homer and His Translators,” 4:268–280.
McPeek, J.A.S. (1939) Catullus in Strange and Distant Britain, Cambridge,

Bibliography
335
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Makin, P. (1978) Provence and Pound, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Mandel, E. (1975) Late Capitalism, trans. J.De Bres, London: New Left Books.
Mann, P. (1986) “Translating Zukofsky’s Catullus,” Translation Review
21–22:3–9.
Marcus, J. (1990) “Foreign Exchange,” Village Voice Literary Supplement, 82
(February):13–17.
Mariani, G. (1967) Storia della Scapigliatura, Caltanisetta and Rome: Sciascia.
Marsh, P. (1991) “International Rights: The Philosophy and the Practice,”
Publishers Weekly, 12 July, pp. 26–27.
Martin, C. (ed. and trans.) (1990) The Poems of Catullus (1979), Baltimore and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mayor, A.H. (1932) “Cavalcanti and Pound,” Hound & Horn V(3) (April-
June):468–471.
Mellor, A.K. (1988) Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters, New York
and London: Methuen.
Mercurius Politicus, Comprising the Sum of Foreine Intelligence, with the Affairs now
on foot in the three Nations of England, Scotland, & Ireland. For Information of the
People. Numb. 306. From Thursday April 17: to Thursday April 24, 1656.
Messerli, D. (ed.) (1987) “Language” Poetries: An Anthology, New York: New
Directions.
Michener, C. (1980) “Laughter Goes Into Exile,” Newsweek, 24 November,
p. 108.
Montale, E. (1959a) Poems by Eugenio Montale, ed. and trans. E.Morgan,
Reading, England: University of Reading.
—(1959b) Selected Poems of Montale, ed. and trans. George Kay, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
—(1966) Selected Poems, ed. G.Cambon, New York: New Directions.
—(1970a) Provisional Conclusions, ed. and trans. E.Farnsworth, Chicago: Henry
Regenry.
—(1970b) Xenia, trans. G.Singh, Los Angeles: Black Sparrow, and New York:
New Directions.
—(1971) The Butterfly of Dinard, trans. G.Singh, Lexington: University Press of
Kentucky.
—(1973) Mottetti, trans. L.Kart, San Francisco: Grabhorn Hoyem.
—(1976a) New Poems: A Selection from Satura and Diario del ’71 e del ’72, ed. and
trans. G.Singh, New York: New Directions.
—(1976b) A Poet in Our Time, trans. A.Hamilton, London: Boyars.
—(1978) The Storm and Other Poems, trans. C.Wright, Oberlin: Oberlin College.
—(1980a) It Depends: A Poet’s Notebook, trans. G.Singh, New York: New
Directions.
—(1980b) Xenia and Motets, trans. K.Hughes, London: Agenda.
—(1982) The Second Life of Art: Selected Essays, ed. and trans. J.Galassi, New
York: Ecco.
—(1984a) Tutte le poesie, ed. G.Zampa, Milan: Mondadori.

336
Bibliography
—(1984b) Otherwise: Last and First Poems, trans. J.Galassi, New York:
Random House.
—(1985) Bones of Cuttlefish, trans. A.Mazza, Oakville, Ontario:
Mosaic.
—(1986) The Storm and Other Things, trans. W.Arrowsmith, New York:
Norton.
—(1987) The Occasions, trans. W.Arrowsmith, New York: Norton,
—(1990) The Motets of Eugenio Montale; Mottetti: Poems of Love, trans. D. Gioia,
St. Paul, Minnesota: Graywolf.
Monthly Magazine (1821) Review of G.Lamb’s Translation of Catullus,
52:33–36.
Monthly Review (1792), Review of A.F.Tytler, Essay on the Principles of Translation,
8:361–366.
—(1797) Review of J.Nott’s Translation of Catullus, 24:275–278.
—(1822) Review of G.Lamb’s Translation of Catullus, 97:1–13.
Moore, N. (1971) “Hot Cat on a Cold Tin Roof Blues (or, Get Your Boots
Laced, Fullus—Here Comes That Guy ‘Cat’Ullus,” Poetry Review
62:179–187.
Muir, E. (1953) “New Poems for Old,” Observer, 2 August, p. 40.
Murphy, R. (1953) “The Art of a Translator,” Spectator, 18 September,
p. 303.
Mynors, R.A.B (ed.) (1969) Virgil, Opera, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
National Review (1860) “The English Translators of Homer,” 11
(October):283–314.
Newman, F.W. (1841) Introductory Lecture to the Classical Course, London:
Simpkin, Marshall and Co., and J.Green.
—(1847a) Four Lectures on the Contrasts of Ancient and Modern History, London:
Taylor and Walton.
—(1847b) On the Relations of Free Knowledge to Moral Sentiment, London: Taylor
and Walton.
—(1851) “Recent Translations of Classical Poets,” Prospective Review, 7
(August):369–403.
—(ed. and trans.) (1853) The Odes of Horace, London: John Chapman.
—(ed. and trans.) (1856) The Iliad of Homer, London: Walton and Maberly.
—(1861) Homeric Translation in Theory and Practice. A Reply to Matthew Arnold,
Esq., London and Edinburgh: William and Norgate.
—(1869) Miscellanies, vol. I, London: Trübner and Co.
—(1887 and 1889) Miscellanies, vols II and III, London: Kegan Paul,
Trench.
New Republic (1955) “Selected Books,” 16 May, p. 46.
New Yorker (1954) “The Translations of Ezra Pound,” 1 May, p. 112.
Niccolai, G. (1975) Substitution, trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and Los
Angeles: Red Hill.
Nida, E.A. (1952) God’s Word in Man’s Language, New York: Harper &
Brothers.
—(1964) Toward a Science of Translating. With Special Reference to

Bibliography
337
Principles and Procedures Involved in Bible Translating, Leiden: Brill.
—(1975) Customs and Cultures: Anthropology for Christian Missions (1954), South
Pasadena, California: William Carey Library.
Nida, E.A. and de Waard, J. (1986) From One Language to Another: Functional
Equivalence in Bible Translating, Nashville: Thomas Nelson.
Nietzsche, F. (1967) The Will to Power, trans. W.Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale,
New York: Vintage.
—(1969) On the Genealogy of Morals, trans. W.Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale,
New York: Vintage.
Niranjana, T. (1992) Siting Translation: History, Poststructuralism, and the
Colonial Context, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.
North American Review (1862a) “On Translating Homer,” 94 (January):108–125.
—(1862b) “Newman’s Homeric Translation,” 94 (April):541–545.
North British Review (1862) “Recent Homeric Critics and Translators,” 72
(May):345–380.
Nott, J. (ed. and trans.) (1778) Kisses: A Poetical Translation of the Basia of Joannes
Secundus Nicolaius. With the Original Latin, and An Essay on his Life and
Writings. The Second Edition, With Additions, London: J.Bew.
—(ed. and trans.) (1782) Propertii Monobiblos; or, That Book of the Elegies of
Propertius, Entitled Cynthia; Translated into English Verse: With Classical Notes,
London: H.Payne.
(ed. and trans.) (1787) Select Odes, from the Persian Poet Hafez, Translated into
English Verse; with Notes Critical, and Explanatory London: T.Cadell.
—(ed. and trans.) (1795) The Poems of Caius Valerius Catullus, in English Verse,
with the Latin Text revised, and Classical Notes. Prefixed are Engravings of
Catullus and his Friend Cornelius Nepos: Two Volumes, London: Joseph
Johnson.
Ogilby, J. (ed. and trans.) (1654) The Works of Publius Virgilius Maro. Translated,
adorn’d with Sculpture, and illustrated with Annotations, By John Ogilby,
London: T.Warren.
O’Hehir, B. (1968) Harmony from Discords: A Life of Sir John Denham, Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
—(ed.) (1969) Expans’d Hieroglyphicks: A Critical Edition of Sir John Denham’s
Coopers Hill, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Osmond, T.S. (1912) “Arnold and Homer,” in W.P.Ker (ed.) Essays and
Studies By Members of the English Association, vol. III, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Ossman, D. (1963) The Sullen Art: Interviews with American Poets, New York:
Corinth Books.
Packard, W. (ed.) (1987) The Poet’s Craft: Interviews from the New York Quarterly
(1974), New York: Paragon House.
Palmer, R.E. (1969) Hermeneutics: Interpretation Theory in Schleiermacher,
Dilthey, Heidegger, and Gadamer, Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern
University Press.
Pannwitz, R. (1917) Die Krisis der europäischen Kultur, Nurenberg: H.Carl.

338
Bibliography
Parsons, A.E. (1929) “The Trojan Legend in England: Some Instances of its
Application to the Politics of the Times,” Modern Language Review 24:253–
264, 394–408.
Patterson, A. (1984) Censorship and Interpretation: The Conditions of Writing
and Reading in Early Modern England, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.
—(1987) Pastoral and Ideology: Virgil to Valéry, Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Penna, S. (1982) This Strange Joy: Selected Poems, ed. and trans. W.S.Di Piero,
Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press.
Perkin, J. (1989) Women and Marriage in Nineteenth-Century England, London:
Routledge.
Perkins, D. (1987) A History of Modern Poetry: Modernism and After, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Perloff, M. (1985) “The Word as Such: L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E Poetry in the
Eighties,” in The Dance of the Intellect: Studies in the Poetry of the Pound
Tradition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Phaer, T. (ed. and trans.) (1620) The Thirteene Bookes of Aeneidos. The first twelue
being the worke of the Diuine Poet Virgil Maro; and the thirteenth, the Supplement
of Maphaus Vegius. Translated into English Verse, to the first third part of the tenth
Booke, by Thomas Phaer, Esquire: and the residue finished, and now newly set forth,
for the delight of such as are studious in Poetry, by Thomas Twyne, Doctor in
Physike, London: B.Alsop.
Picasso, P. (1968) Hunk of Skin, trans. P.Blackburn, San Francisco: City
Lights.
Piccolo, L. (1972) Collected Poems of Lucio Piccolo, trans. R.Feldman and B.
Swann, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Piola-Caselli, E. (1927) Trattato del Diritto di Autore, 2nd edn, Naples:
Marghieri.
Pontiggia, G. and Di Mauro, E. (eds) (1978) La parola innamorata: i poeti nuovi
1976–1978, Milan: Feltrinelli.
Pope, A. (ed. and trans.) (1967) The Iliad of Homer (1715–20), in Maynard Mack
(ed.) The Twickenham Edition of the Poems of Alexander Pope, vol. VII, London:
Methuen, and New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.
Porta, A. (1978) As If It Were a Rhythm, trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and Los
Angeles: Red Hill.
—(ed.) (1979) Poesia degli anni settanta, Milan: Feltrinelli.
—(1986a) Invasions: Selected Poems, ed. P.Vangelisti, trans. A.Baldry,
P.Vangelisti, and P.Verdicchio, San Francisco and Los Angeles: Red Hill.
—(1986b) Passenger: Selected Poems, ed. and trans. P.Verdicchio, Montreal:
Guernica.
—(1987) Kisses from Another Dream, trans. A.Molino, San Francisco: City Lights.
—(1992) Melusine, trans. A.Molino, Montreal: Guernica.
Portinari, F. (1989) “Milano,” in A.Asor Rosa (ed.) Letteratura italiana. Storia e
geographia, III, Turin: Einaudi.
Posonby, V.B. (ed.) (1955) Georgianna; Extracts from the Correspondence of

Bibliography
339
Georgianna, Duchess of Devonshire, London: John Murray.
Potoker, E.M. (1965), Review of H.Böll, Absent Without Leave, trans. L.
Vennewitz, Saturday Review, 11 September, p. 42.
Potter, L. (1989) Secret Rites and Secret Writing: Royalist Literature, 1641–1660,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pound, E. (1950) The Letters of Ezra Pound, 1907–1941, ed. D.D.Paige, New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World.
—(1952) The Spirit of Romance (1910), New York: New Directions.
—(1953) Translations, New York: New Directions.
—(1954) Literary Essays, ed. T.S.Eliot, New York: New Directions.
—(1956) Selected Poems, New York: New Directions.
—(1960) The ABC of Reading (1934), New York: New Directions.
Publishers Weekly (1963) “Statistics for 1962: Subject Analysis of American Book
Production,” 21 January, pp. 40–44.
Quarterly Review (1823) Review of L.Ariosto, Orlando Furioso, trans. W.S. Rose,
30:40–61.
—(1888) “Matthew Arnold,” 167 (October):398–426.
Quasimodo, S. (1968) The Selected Writings of Salvatore Quasimodo (1960), ed. and
trans. A.Mandelbaum, New York: Minerva.
—(1980) The Tall Schooner, trans. M.Egan, New York: Red Ozier.
—(1983) Complete Poems, trans. J.Bevan, London: Anvil.
Quinlan, M. (1941) Victorian Prelude: A History of English Manners, 1780–1830,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Quinn, S.M.B. (1972) Ezra Pound: An Introduction to the Poetry, New York:
Columbia University Press.
Raffel, B. (1969) “No Tidbit Love You Outdoors Far as a Bier: Zukofsky’s
Catullus,” Arion 8:435–445.
—(1984) Ezra Pound, The Prime Minister of Poetry, Hamden, Connecticut:
Archon.
—(1985) “Pound and Translation,” Literary Review 28:634–635.
Reed, J. (1990) The Coastguard’s House, Newcastle upon Tyne: Bloodaxe.
Rener, F.M. (1989) Interpretatio: Language and Translation from Cicero to Tytler,
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Rexroth, K. (1985) “Why Is American Poetry Culturally Deprived?” (1967), in
TriQuarterly 20 63:53–59.
Reynolds, B. (1950) The Linguistic Writings of Alessandro Manzoni: A Textual and
Chronological Reconstruction, Cambridge: Heffer.
Reynolds, F.M. (ed.) (1828) The Keepsake for MDCCCXXVIII, London: Hurst,
Chance and Co.
Rider, H. (1638) All The Odes And Epodes of Horace. Translated into English Verse:
By Henry Rider, Master of Arts of Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge, London:
R.Rider.
Robinson, D. (1991) The Translator’s Turn, Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Rogers, P. (1978) “Pope and his Subscribers,” Publishing History 3:7–36.
Roper, D. (1978) Reviewing before the Edinburgh: 1788–1802, Newark, Delaware:
University of Delaware Press.

340
Bibliography
Ross, A. (1989) No Respect: Intellectuals and Popular Culture, New York and
London: Routledge.
Rossetti, D.G. (ed. and trans.) (1981) The Early Italian Poets (1861), ed. Sally
Purcell, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Rossi, S. (1959) “E.A.Poe e la Scapigliatura Lombarda,” Studi americani
5:119–139.
Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism, New York: Pantheon.—(1990) “Embargoed
Literature,” Nation, 17 September, pp. 278–280.
Sandri, G. (1976) From K to S: Ark of the Asymmetric, trans. F.Pauluzzi, New
York, Norristown, and Milan: Out of London.
Sanguined, E. (1963) “Da Gozzano a Montale,” in Tra Libertà e Crepuscolarismo,
Milan: Mursia.
Saturday Review (1861) “Homeric Translators and Critics,” 27 July, pp. 95–96.
Scarles, C. (1980) Copyright, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scarron, P. (1988) Le Virgile Travesti (1648–49), ed. J.Serroy, Paris: Bordas.
Schleiermacher, F. (1838) Sämmitliche Werke. Dritte abteilung: Zur Philosophie,
Zweiter Band, Berlin: Reimer.
—(1890) Selected Sermons, ed. and trans. M.F.Wilson, New York: Funk and
Wagnalls.
—(1977) Hermeneutics: The Handwritten Manuscripts, ed. H.Kimmerle, trans.
J.Duke and J.Forstman, Missoula, Montana: Scholars Press.
Sedgwick, E.K. (1985) Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial
Desire, New York: Columbia University Press.
Sereni, V. (1971) Sixteen Poems, ed. and trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and
Los Angeles: Red Hill.
Shakespeare, W. (1959) Timon of Athens, ed. H.J.Oliver, London: Methuen.
Sheehan, J.J. (1989) German History, 1770–1866, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Shelley, M.W. (1976) Collected Tales and Stories, ed. C.E.Robinson, Baltimore and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sieveking, I.S. (1909) Memoir and Letters of Francis W.Newman, London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trübner and Co., Ltd.
Simon, S. (1989) “Conflits de juridiction: La double signature du texte traduit,”
Meta 34:195–208.
Sinfield, A. (1989) Literature, Politics, and Culture in Postwar Britain, Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
—(1992) Faultlines: Cultural Materialism and the Politics of Dissident Reading,
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Sinisgalli, L. (1988) The Ellipse: Selected Poems, ed. and trans. W.S.Di Piero,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Skone James, E.P., Mummery, J.F., Rayner James, J.E., and Garnett, K.M. (1991)
Copinger and Skone James on Copyright, 13th edn, London: Sweet and
Maxwell.
Smith, D.M. (1969) Italy: A Modern History, 2nd edn, Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Smith, L.R. (ed. and trans.) (1981) The New Italian Poetry, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.

Bibliography
341
Smith, W.J. and Gioia, D. (eds) (1985) Poems from Italy, St. Paul,
Minnesota: New Rivers.
Spatola, A. (1975) Majakovskiiiiiiij, trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and Los
Angeles: Red Hill.
—(1977) Zeroglyphics, San Francisco and Los Angeles: Red Hill.
—(1978) Various Devices, ed. and trans. P.Vangelisti, San Francisco and Los
Angeles: Red Hill.
Spatola, A. and Vangelisti, P. (eds) (1982) Italian Poetry, 1960–1980: from Neo to
Post Avant-garde, San Francisco and Los Angeles: Red Hill.
Speck, W.A. (1982) “Politicians, Peers, and Publication by Subscription,
1700–50,” in I.Rivers (ed.) Books and their Readers in Eighteenth-Century
England, Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Spectator (1918) “The Gate of Remembrance,” 20 April, p. 422.
Spedding, J. (1861) “Arnold on Translating Homer,” Fraser’s Magazine 63
(June):703–714.
Stallybrass, P. and White, A. (1986) The Politics and Poetics of Transgression,
London: Methuen.
Stapylton, R, (trans.) (1634) Dido and Aeneas. The Fourth Booke of Virgils Aeneis
Now Englished by Robert Stapylton, London: W.Cooke.
Steiner, G. (1974) After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation, London,
Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Steiner, T.R. (ed.) (1975) English Translation Theory 1650–1800, Assen: Van
Gorcum.
Steiner, W. (1992) “The Bulldozer of Desire,” New York Times Book Review, 15
November, p. 9.
Sterling, J.A.L. and Carpenter, M.C.L. (1986) Copyright Law in the United
Kingdom, Sydney and London: Legal Books.
Stern, D. (1967) “Straight and Nouveau,” Nation, 18 September, pp. 248–249.
Stern, R.G. (1953) “Pound as Translator,” Accent 13(4) (Autumn):265–268.
Stewart, S. (1980) “The Pickpocket: A Study in Tradition and Allusion,” MLN
95:1127–1154.
Stock, N. (1982) The Life of Ezra Pound, rev. edn, San Francisco: North Point.
Stone, L. (1977) The Family, Sex and Marriage in England, 1500–1800, New York:
Harper and Row.
Storie incredibili (1863), Milano: Daelli.
Strabo (1930) The Geography of Strabo, ed. and trans. H.L.Jones, London: William
Heinemann Ltd, and New York: G.P.Putnam’s Sons.
Stracher, C.A. (1991) “An Introduction to Copyright Law for Translators,”
Translation Review 36–37:12–14.
Stuart, D.M. (1955) Dearest Bess: The Life and Times of Lady Elizabeth Foster,
afterwards Duchess of Devonshire, London: Methuen.
Stubbs, J. (1968) “Looking-glass Land,” Books and Bookmen May, p. 26.
Sturgeon, T. (1990) “Doing That Medieval Thing: Paul Blackburn’s Medieval
Premises,” Sagetrieb 9:147–168.
Sullivan, A. (ed.) (1983a) British Literary Magazines: The Augustan Age and
the Age of Johnson, 1698–1788, Westport, Connecticut and London:
Greenwood.

342
Bibliography
—(1983b) British Literary Magazines: The Romantic Age, 1789–1836, Westport,
Connecticut and London: Greenwood.
—(1984) British Literary Magazines: The Victorian and Edwardian Age, 1837–1913,
Westport, Connecticut and London: Greenwood.
Szondi, P. (1986) “Schleiermacher’s Hermeneutics Today,” in On Textual
Understanding and Other Essays, trans. H.Mendelsohn, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Tarchetti, I.U. (trans.) (1869a) Carlo Dickens, L’amico comune, Milano:
Sonzogno.
—(trans.) (1869b) J.F.Smith, Fasi della vita o Uno sguardo dietro le scene, Milano:
Sonzogno.
—(1967) Tutte le opere, ed. E.Ghidetti, 2 vols, Bologna: Cappelli.
Thomas, A. (ed.) (1971) Poésies completes de Bertran de Born (1888), New York:
Johnson.
Time (1967) “Unease in the Night,” 11 August, p. 80.
Times Literary Supplement (1961) “On Translating the Bible,” 17 February,
p. iv.
—(1967) “Anatomy of a Publication,” 11 May, p. 399.
—(1968) “Experiment with Rabbits,” 14 March, p. 245.
—(1969) “Recapitulations,” 20 February, p. 180.
Todd, J. (ed.) (1985) A Dictionary of British and American Women Writers,
1660–1800, Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Allanheld.
Todorov, T. (1975) The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre, trans.
R.Howard, Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Townshend, A. (1983) The Poems and Masques of Aurelian Townshend, ed. C.
Brown, Reading, England: Whiteknights Press.
Tytler, A.F. (1978) Essay on the Principles of Translation, ed. J.F.Huntsman,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Underdown, D. (1960) Royalist Conspiracy in England 1649–1660, New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University Press.
Ungaretti, G. (1958) Life of a Man, ed. and trans. A.Mandelbaum, London:
Hamish Hamilton, New York: New Directions, and Milan: Scheiwiller.
—(1969) Selected Poems, ed. and trans. P.Creagh, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
—(1975) Selected Poems of Giuseppe Ungaretti, ed. and trans. A. Mandelbaum,
Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Updike, J. (1981) “Books,” New Yorker, 3 August, pp. 92–93.
Venuti, L. (ed.) (1992) Rethinking Translation: Discourse, Subjectivity, Ideology,
London and New York: Routledge.
Vicars, J. (1632) The XII Aeneids of Virgil, the most renowned Laureat Prince of
Latine-Poets; Translated into English deca-syllables, By John Vicars, London:
N.Alsop.
Von Hallberg, R. (1985) American Poetry and Culture, 1945–1980, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Wagstaff, C. (1984) “The Neo-avantgarde,” in M.Caesar and P.Hainsworth
(eds) Writers and Society in Contemporary Italy, New York: St. Martin’s
Press,

Bibliography
343
Ward, A. (1974) Book Production, Fiction and the German Reading Public,
1740–1800, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wasserman, E. (1959) The Subtler Language: Critical Readings of Neoclassic and
Romantic Poems, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Watt, I. (1957) The Rise of the Novel, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Weber, H. (1812) Tales of the East: Comprising the Most Popular Romances of
Oriental Origin; and the Best Imitations by European Authors: With New
Translations, and Additional Tales, Never Before Published, vol. II, Edinburgh:
James Ballantyne and Company.
West, P. (1970), Review of G.G.Márquez, One Hundred Years of Solitude, trans.
G.Rabassa, Book World, 22 February, p. 4.
Westminster Review (1862) “On Translating Homer,” 77:150–163.
Whicher, G. (1953) “Reprints, New Editions,” New York Herald Tribune, 25
October, p. 25.
—(1954) Review of The Translations of Ezra Pound, American Literature
26:119–121.
Whiteside, T. (1981) The Blockbuster Complex: Conglomerates, Show Business,
and Book Publishing, Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University
Press.
Whitfleld, S.J. (1991) The Culture of the Cold War, Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Willey, B. (1956) More Nineteenth-Century Studies: A Group of Honest Doubters,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Williams, R. (1958) Culture and Society 1780–1950, New York: Harper and
Row.
Wilson, E. (1946) “Books,” New Yorker, 13 April, p. 100.
Wilson, P. (1982) “Classical Poetry and the Eighteenth-Century Reader,” in
I.Rivers (ed.) Books and their Readers in Eighteenth-Century England, Leicester:
Leicester University Press.
Wiseman, T.P. (1985) Catullus and His World: A Reappraisal, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wollstonecraft, M. (1975) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, ed. M. Brody,
London: Penguin.
Woodmansee, M. (1984) “The Genius and the Copyright: Economic and Legal
Conditions of the Emergence of the ‘Author’,” Eighteenth-Century Studies
14:425–448.
Wordsworth, W. (1974) The Prose Works of William Wordsworth, eds W.J.B. Owen
and J.W.Smyser, vol. I, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The World of Translation (1971), New York: PEN American Center.
Wroth, T. (1620) The Destrvction of Troy, or The Acts of Æneas. Translated ovt of the
Second Booke of the Æneads of Virgill That peerelesse Prince of Latine Poets. With
the Latine Verse on the one side, and the English Verse on the other, that the
congruence of the translation with the Originall may the better appeare. As also a
Centurie of EPIGRAMS, and a Motto vpon the Creede, thereunto annexed. By S
THOMAS WROTHE, Knight, London: T.Dawson.

344
Bibliography
Zanzotto, A. (1975) Selected Poetry of Andrea Zanzotto, ed. and trans. R. Feldman
and B.Swann, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Zuber, R. (1968) Les “Belles Infidèles” et la formation du goüt classique: Perrot
d’Ablancourt et Guez de Balzac, Paris: Colin.
Zukofsky, L. (1991) Complete Short Poetry, Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Zukofsky, L. and Zukofsky, C. (1969) Catullus (Gai Catulli Veronensis Liber),
London: Cape Goliard Press, and New York: Grossman.
Zwicker, S.N. (1984) Politics and Language in Dryden’s Poetry: The Arts of
Disguise, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Academy of American Poets 144
Adams, B. 228
Adams, R.M. 271
The Adventures of Catullus 82
Agenda 276
Allen, D.: The New American Poetry
250
L’almanacco dello Specchio 275
American Bible Society 21
American Booksellers Convention 14
American Literature 207
Anderson, B. 100
Anderson, D. 191, 198
Anti-Jacobin Review 92
Antonella, A. 15
Antonioni, M. 266
Anvil Press Poetry 277
Apter, R. 224–5, 237
Apuleius 31
The Arabian Nights 158–60
Arion 220
Ariosto, L.: Orlando Furioso 78, 79
Aristophanes 77, 78, 80–1, 208
Arnold, M. 35, 201; On Translating
Homer 100, 129–41, 143–6
Arrowsmith, W.: translation of E.
Montale 277, 285–6
Ashmore, J. 44
Athenaeum (English) 140–1
Athenaeum (German) 104
Atlantic Monthly 209
 
Bailey, J. 201
Bakhtin, M. 72
Balestrini, N. 277
Ballerini, L. 277
Banks, T. 58
Barnard, M. 211; translation of
Sappho 211–13
Barnes, D. 265
Barthelme, D. 266
Bassnett, S. 36, 38
Bates, E.S.: Modern Translation 188
Baudelaire, C. 189–90
Beckett, S. 265
Belsey, C. 150–1
Beltrametti, F. 277, 278
Benjamin, W. 309
Berman, A. 20, 101, 110, 112
Bernart de Ventadorn 258
Berne Convention 9
Bernstein, C. 5–6, 303
Bertamini, M. 283
Bertran de Born 234–8, 249, 253,
257
Bettelheim, B. 25–9
Bevan, J. 277
Bible 137, 158
Binswanger, L. 293
Bioy Casares, A. 2
Blackburn, P. 10–11, 40, 224,
225–6, 253–4, 264–5, 270–2,
309, 310; Anthology of
Troubadours 226, 233, 236–8,
240–5, 249, 253–63;
correspondence with
E.Pound
226–33, 248, 253; “Das
Index

346
Index
Kennerbuch” 228–30; “The
Grinding Down” 251; “The
International Word” 249–52, 264;
interviews 225–6, 233, 246, 247,
248, 261; The Journals 262–3;
“Meditation on the BMT” 263–4;
Proensa 226, 254, 260; “Sirventes”
248–9; translation of J.Cortázar
264–70, 272
Blackwood’s Magazine 78, 84
Blanchot, M. 293, 307; “Translating”
307–9
Bligh, F.B. 142
Blow-up (Antonioni) 266
Bly, R. 275
Boito, A. 185–6
Boito, C. 185–6
Böll, H. 2
Bollingen Prize for Poetry 205
Bonefonius 93
Bontempelli, M. 186
Books and Bookmen 266
Borges, J.L. 265
Bottke, K. 226
Bowdler, T. 80
Boyars, Marion 276
Brandeis, I. 279
Bray, B. 3
Brecht, B. 303
Brinsley, J. 46
British Critic 91–2, 93
British Quarterly Review 139
Brooke, S. 38
Brooke-Rose, C. 266
Brower, R.: On Translation 210
Brown, T. 71
Browning, R. 139, 144, 193
Brownjohn, A. 221–2
Bunting, B. 188–9, 191, 202, 204,
210
Burns, R. 124, 137, 221
Burroughs, W. 265
Butor, M. 265
Buzzati, D. 186
Byron, Lord 96, 124, 164, 189
 
Cagnone, N. 277, 278
California, University of, Press 254
Calvino, I. 2, 8, 186
Camden, W. 51
Campbell, G.: The Four Gospels 74–6
Campion, T. 81
Camus, A. 2
Capouya, E. 253–5
Carcanet 277
Cardenal, P. 226, 227
Carter, A. 266
Castalio, S. 75
Cato 219
Catullus 81–93, 95, 97, 98, 123,
214–24
Cavalcanti, G. 190–8, 200–1, 202, 206,
207, 208, 238, 244; “Chi è questa
che vien” 193; “Donna mi prega”
190
Cavendish, G., Duchess of
Devonshire 95
Cavendish, W., Duke of Devonshire
95, 96
Cecil, D. 97
Celan, P, 275, 283, 284, 304, 306;
“The Meridian” 304–5
Celati, G. 2, 3
Center for Inter-American Relations
265
Centro Internazionale Poesia della
Metamorfosi 302
Cercamon 244
Cervantes 143
Chamisso, A. von 161
Chapelle, J.de la: Les Amours de
Catulle 82
Chapman, G.: translation of Homer
130, 132, 141
Char, R. 283
Charles I 47, 51, 53, 54
Chaucer, G. 242
Chelse 221
Choate School 210
Christ, R. 8
Ciardi, J. 254–5
Cicero 67, 104
The Cid 270
City Lights 278
Cixous, H. 151–2
Claudian 283
Cohen, J.M. 6, 30, 143–4
Columbia University Press 10

Index
347
Commager, S. 216
Conquest, R. 222
Come, G. 277
Contemporary Authors 209
Coogan, D. 221, 222
Coover, R. 266
Copyright 8–10, 164–6, 184–5, 310,
311–12
Cornell University Press 277
Cortázar, J. 264–70, 271; All Fires
The Fires 264; “Continuidad de
los Parques” 268–70; Cronopios
and Famas 264; End of the Game
10–11, 264, 265–6, 268;
Hopscotch 264, 265; The Winners
264, 265
Costa, C. 277, 278
Coviello, M. 277
Cowley, A. 48, 64, 68
Cowper, W.: translation of Homer
118, 122, 131
Creagh, P. 277
Creeley, R. 226, 246, 254
The Criterion 188, 209, 276
Crusius, L. 82–3
Cucchi, M. 291
Cummings, E.E. 261
 
D’Ablancourt, N.P. 48–50
Daily Advertiser 71
Daniel, A. 191, 198–200, 206, 208,
213–14, 224, 232, 242, 243
Dante Alighieri 190, 254, 276, 279
Dartmouth College 255
Davenport, G. 266
Davie, D. 206–7, 214
Dawson, J. 106
De Angelis, M. 275–6, 277, 286, 292–3,
300, 303–4; “Antela” 301–2; “Il
corridoio del treno” 296–300;
“L’idea centrale” 287–96; “Lettera
da Vignole” 283–5; Somiglianze
275, 287, 291, 296, 304
Defoe, D. 119
DeKock, C.-P. 157
Deleuze, G., and F.Guattari 160–1,
273, 305–6
Del Re, A. 200–1
Denham, Sir J. 67–8, 85, 98, 130,
210, 221; Coopers Hill 45, 51–2,
53, 62; The Destruction of Troy
44–65; The Passion of Dido for
Aeneas 53; The Sophy 54; “To
Sir Richard Fanshawe upon
His Translation of Pastor Fido”
51, 62
Dickens, C. 35, 119, 124, 139, 162,
164
Dickinson, E. 208
Diodorus 31
Di Piero, W.S. 277
Divers Press 226
Donne, J. 224
Doubleday 254
Douglas, G.: translation of Virgil
198, 235, 242
Dowson, E. 189, 190
Dryden, J. 67–8, 72, 130, 144, 189,
210, 215, 220–1, 309;
“Dedication of the Æneis” 62,
64–5, 67; “Preface to Ovid’s
Epistles” 62, 68; “Preface to The
Rival Ladies” 62–3; translation of
Virgil 64–5
Dublin University Magazine 139
Dudek, L. 227
Dylan, B. 247
 
Eagleton, T. 134
Easthope, A. 275
East India Company 95
Ecco Press 276
Economou, G. 254, 271
Edinburgh Review 77–8, 80–1, 96
Edwards, J. 206
Eliot, T.S. 191, 202, 204, 224,
275, 276; “Baudelaire in Our
Time” 189–90; “Philip
Massinger” 196;
“Tradition and the Individual
Talent” 289
Elton, C.A. 83–4
Emporio pittoresco 162, 164
Encounter 222
Erckmann, E., and L.-A.Chatrian
149, 186
European Magazine 73, 74
Evening Post 71

348
Index
Everyman’s Library 140
Exeter Book 38
 
Fagles, R.: translation of Homer
144–5
Fanshawe, Sir R. 48, 54
Farina, S. 163–4 The Favorite Malice
(Harrison) 278
Feldman, R., and B.Swann 277, 278
Fell, C. 36
Feltrinelli Editore 282
Fiedler, L. 208, 252
Fitts, D. 208–14, 243; One Hundred
Poems from the Palatine Anthology
209–10; “The Poetic Nuance”
210–11
Fitzgerald, E. 144; The Rubáiyát of
Omar Khayyám 188–89
Ford, F.M. 213, 227
Fortini, F. 284, 293
Foster, Lady E. 95, 96
Foucault, M. 39–40
Fowler, H.W. 143
Frankfurt Book Fair 14
Frederick II 105
Frere, J.H. 77, 79–81, 130
Freud, S.: The Psychopathology of
Everyday Life 25; The Standard
Edition 25–8
Frost, F. 254
Fulbright Fellowship 226
 
Gaddis, W. 265
Galassi, J. 277
Gall, S. 255
García Márquez, G. 2
Gautier, T. 149, 186
Gentleman’s Magazine 67
Geoffrey of Monmouth 51
George III 95
George, S. 308
Gilbert, S. 2
Gioia, D. 277; translation of E.
Montale, 279–82, 285; and M.
Palma: New Italian Poets 302; and
W.J.Smith: Poems from Italy 278
Giuliani, A. 277; I novissimi 282
Goethe, J.W.von 99, 103, 104, 232
Golden, S. 254
Goldin, F. 240
González Martínez, E. 211
Gottsched, J.C. 105–6
Gourmont, R.de 205
Gozzano, G. 277
Grant, M. 31, 37
Grass, G. 8, 265
Graves, R. 310; Claudius, the God 30;
I, Claudius 30; “Moral Principles
in Translation” 30–1; translation
of Suetonius 29–34, 37–38
Graywolf Press 276
Grey, C. 95 The Grosseteste Review
220
Grotius, H. 104
Grove, R. 63
Grove Press 265
Guanda Editore 275–6
Guarini, G. 54
Guernica Press 278
Guillem IX 226, 237–8, 243, 256,
263
Guthrie, R. 254–60; Graffitti 255; The
Legend of Ermengarde 255
Guthrie, W. 67
 
Hafiz 93, 94
Hall, E. 123
Hamilton, A. 277
Hamish Hamilton 277
Harcourt Brace 208
Harrison, T.: The Favorite Malice 278
Harvard University Press 210
Hawkes, J. 265
Hawkins, Sir T. 46
Hawtrey, E.C. 133
Heidegger, M. 293–5, 300, 303
Heim, M.H. 3
Henrietta Maria 46
Herrick, R. 81, 93, 221
Heywood, T. 51
Hill, H.C. 220
Hoffmann, E.T.A. 149, 151, 161, 186
Hohendahl, P.U. 109
Hölderlin, F. 104, 308
Holyday, B. 47
Homer 65, 66, 71, 72, 104, 118,
122, 125, 127–41, 143–5, 146,
158

Index
349
Hood, S. 3
Horace 45, 46, 49, 82, 93, 122, 123–7
Hound & Horn 202, 209
Howard, H., Earl of Surrey 53, 57,
207
The Hudson Review 254
Hughes, K. 277
Hutchinson, J., Colonel 58
Hutchinson, L. 58
 
Italian Poetry, 1960–1980 (Spatola and
Vangelisti) 278
 
James I 46, 51
Jeanroy, A. 233
Jonson, B. 45, 46, 47–8, 51, 72, 81,
91, 93
Johnson, S. 62, 85, 220
Jowett, B. 131
Joyce, J. 217, 227
 
Kafka, F. 265, 306
Keats, J. 195
Kelly, R. 254
The Keepsake 162, 178, 179, 180, 181
Kemeny, T. 278
Kenner, H. 204, 206, 207, 228–9
Kentucky, University Press of 276
Kerrigan, E. 264
Koran 180
Kristeva, J. 2, 3
Kulchur 251
Kundera, M. 2
 
Lacan, J. 293, 298
Laclos, C.de 104
Lalli, G.B. 50
Lamb, Lady C. 96
Lamb, G. 81, 96; translation of
Catullus 84–93, 97–8
Lamb, P., Viscount Melbourne 96
Lamb, W., Lord Melbourne 96
Landolfi, T. 186
Landon Award for Poetry
Translation 144
Lane, H. 3
Lang, A. 202
Latham, W. 46–7
Lattimore, R. 139
Laughlin, J. 210
Lecercle, J.-J. 216
Lefevere, A. 102, 110, 117–18
Leibniz, G.W. 104
Levin, I. 265
Levy, E. 240, 258
Lewis, P. 23–4, 182, 183–4, 291, 296
Lockhart, J.G. 135
Loeb Classics 188
London Magazine 78, 79
London Quarterly Review 124–7
Longman’s Magazine 141–2
Longfellow, H.W. 119, 124, 133, 135
Lorca, F.G. 270
The Los Angeles Times 8
Lowell, R. 224, 275
Lucan 70
Lucian 71
Lucretius 93
Lumelli, A. 277
Luther, M. 308
 
MacBride, J. 278
MacLow, J. 227
Macmillan 233, 253–4, 259, 261, 266,
271
Maginn, W. 132
Magrelli, V. 285
Makin, P. 236
Malatesta, S.P. 236
Mandelbaum, A. 277
Manzoni, A. 158, 166; I promessi sposi
149, 156–7, 161
Marcabru 233, 238–40, 242, 255, 260,
261
Marlowe, C. 241
Marsh, P. 14–15
Martial 211
Martin, C.: translation of Catullus
215, 219, 220
Martin, T. 125
Maupassant, G.de 199
May, T. 70
Mayor, A.H. 202
Mazza, A. 277

350
Index
Meleagros 209
Mellor, A. 175
Mercurius Politicus 45
Merwin, W.S. 224
Michie, J. 221
Minerva Press 277
Mitchell, T.: translation of
Aristophanes 77–8, 80
Mondadori Editore 275
Montale, E. 275, 276–86; “Due
sciacalli al guinzaglio” 279;
Mottetti 279–85; Le occasioni 279;
“La speranza di pure rivederti”
280–2
Montanus, A. 75
Monthly Magazine 92
Monthly Review 73–4, 92, 93
Moore, N. 221, 222–3
Morris, W. 35, 40, 141–2, 143–4
Mosaic Press 276
Moseley, H. 44
Munday, A. 51
Murphy, A. 70
Mussolini, B. 205, 236
 
Napoleon Bonaparte 106–7
The Nation 249, 253, 254, 267
National Book Award 265
National Review 125
Nérval, G. 149
The New American Poetry (Allen) 250
New Directions 205, 206, 210, 265,
276, 277
New Italian Poets (Gioia and Palma)
302
Newman, F. 40, 118, 145–6, 309;
Four Lectures on the Contrasts of
Ancient and Modern History 120;
Hebrew Theism 119; Introductory
Lecture to the Classical Course
120–1; On the Relations of Free
Knowledge to Moral Sentiment
119–20; response to M.Arnold
134–7, 140; The Soul 143;
translation of Homer 100,
121–5, 127–41, 143–4;
translation of Horace 122,
123–7
New Statesman and Nation 206, 221
The New Yorker 266
The New York Herald Tribune 208
New York Quarterly 247, 248, 261
The New York Times 205, 265, 271
New York University 253
Niccolai, G. 277, 278
Nichols, J.G. 277
Nida, E. 21–3, 117–18; Customs and
Cultures 22; God’s Word in Man’s
Language 23
niebo 283
Nietzsche, F. 39, 293, 294, 295, 298
Nobel Prize for Literature 278
North American Review 201
North British Review 201
Norton, W.W. 276
Nott, J. 81, 309; translation of
Catullus 84–95, 98
I novissimi (Giuliani) 277, 282
 
Oberlin College Press 276
O’Brien, F. 265
Ogilby, J. 44
Ohio State University Press 277
Olson, C. 246, 261
On Translation (Brower) 210
Origin 254
Osmond, T.S. 143
Ossman, D. 233
Out of London Press 278
Ovid 70, 82, 123
Oxford Standard Authors 140
Oxford University Press 276
 
Palma, M. 277; and D.Gioia: New
Italian Poets 302
Pannwitz, R. 149
Pantheon Books 10, 265
Partisan Review 205
Pasolini, P.P. 275
Pedro de Aragon 226
PEN American Center 8, 11–12
Penguin Classics 30, 34, 37
Penna, S. 277
Pennsylvania, University of 200
Persius 47
Petrarch 93, 190
Phaer, T. 46
Picasso, P.: Hunk of Skin 270

Index
351
Piccolo, L. 277
Pindar 68
Pirandello, L. 186
Plato 104
Playboy 3
Poe, E.A. 149, 161, 186
Poems from Italy (Gioia and Smith)
278
Poetry 206, 209
Poetry Review 200, 206, 221, 302–3
Poetry Society of America 302
Pope, A. 72, 96, 221; translation of
Homer 65–6, 71, 118, 122, 131,
144
Porta, A. 277, 278, 283
Potter, L. 54
Pound, E. 34, 37, 40, 187, 190–215,
224–46, 248, 249–50, 252, 253,
254, 255, 257, 259, 261, 271,
309; The ABC of Reading 198;
“Arnaut Daniel” 198–200, 224,
242; “Ballad of the Goodly
Frere” 208; The Cantos 35, 225,
228; Cathay 191 205 214;
“Cavalcanti” 190, 192, 244;
correspondence with M.
Barnard 212–13, with P.
Blackburn 226–33, with F.
Schelling 200; Guido Cavalcanti
Rime 195–6, 202; “Guido’s
Relations” 191, 193, 197, 207;
“Homage to Sextus Propertius”
191; Noh plays 205, 214; The
Pisan Cantos 205; “Postscript”
192; “The River Merchant’s
Wife: A Letter” 191; “The
Seafarer” 34–6, 38, 191, 205, 214;
“Sestina: Altaforte” 235–6, 257;
Sonnets and Ballate of Guido
Cavalcanti 192, 195, 200–1, 206;
The Spirit of Romance 193, 226,
232, 234, 235, 238; Translations
205, 243; Umbra 191
Praga, E. 186
Preusker, K. 103
Princeton University 144
Princeton University Press
277, 278
Propertius 93, 94, 123
Prynne, W. 51
Pynchon, T. 265
 
Quarterly Review 77, 78, 141
Quasimodo, S. 277
Quinn, Sister B. 226
 
Rabassa, G. 3, 264, 265
Rabelais, F. 143
Raffel, B. 220–1, 222, 224–5, 274
Random House 276
Ravensworth, Lord 125
Red Hill Press 277, 278
Red Ozier Press 277
Rexroth, K. 224, 303
Richardson, S. 104
Richelieu, Cardinal 50
Rider, H. 49
Rivista minima 152, 162
Robbe-Grillet, A. 265
Robinson, C. 168
Roscommon, Earl of 43, 274
Rose, W.S. 78–9
Rosenthal, M.L. 253–5
Ross, A. 252
Rosselli, A. 277
Rossetti, D.G. 144, 208; translation of
G.Cavalcanti 192, 193–8, 201, 206,
238
Rousseau, J.-J. 159
 
Sagan, F. 2
Said, E. 159
St. Elizabeth’s Hospital for the
Criminally Insane 205, 212, 226,
252
St. Jules, C. 96
Sallust 70
Sandri, G. 278
Sandys, G. 70
Sanguined, E. 277, 282
Sappho 211–13
Sarraute, N. 265
Sartre, J.P. 303
Saturday Review (English) 138–9
Saturday Review of Literature
(American) 205, 254
Scalise, G. 277
Scarron, P. 50

352
Index
Scheler, M. 303
Schelling, F. 200
Schiller, F. 103, 104
Schlegel, A.W. 104, 108
Schlegel, F. 104, 105, 107
Schleiermacher, F.: Ueber die
verscheidenen Methoden des
Uebersetzens 19–20, 41, 99–118,
119, 145–6
Scott, Sir W. 35, 124, 128, 142, 143,
237
The Seafarer (Anglo-Saxon) 34–6, 38
Secundus Nicolaius, J. 93–4
Sereni, V. 277
Shakespeare, W. 80, 97, 104, 123, 132,
139, 164, 217, 231, 242
Shapiro, N. 1, 7–8
Shelley, M.W. 161; “The Mortal
Immortal” 162, 167–84
Shelley, P.B. 124
Sheridan, F.: The History of Nourjahad
177–81
Sidney, Sir P. 242
Sieburth, R. 307, 308
Sinclair, M. 201–2
Sinfield, A. 34
Singh, G. 277
Sinisgalli, L. 277
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 224
Skeat, W.W. 213
Smith, W.J., and D.Gioia: Poems from
Italy 278
Society of Authors 8
Il sole 163
Sophocles 54, 104, 137, 208
Sordello 227
Sotheby, W. 122
Spatola, A. 277; and P.Vangelisti:
Italian Poetry, 1960–1980 278
Southey, R. 135
Lo Specchio 275
The Spectator 142–3
Stallybrass, P., and A.White 71, 72
Stapylton, R. 44, 48, 49
Steurat, H. 70
Stevenson, R.L. 143
Stewart, S. 181
Stone, L. 95
Stowe, H.B. 164
Strabo 158–60
Strachey, J. 26–7
Suetonius 29–34
Sun & Moon Press 303
Super, R.H. 140
Svevo, I. 265
Swann, B., and R.Feldman 277,
278
Swift, J. 84
Swinburne, A.C. 189, 193, 213
Symonds, J.A. 213
Symons, A. 189
 
Tacitus 48, 49, 70, 71, 72, 104
Tarchetti, I.U. 148–50, 186;
“L’elixir dell’immortalità
(imitazione dall’inglese)” 162,
170–3, 176–7, 181–5; “La
fortuna di capitano Gubart”
160; Fosca 149; “Idee minime
sul romanzo” 152–61; “II
mortale immortale
(dall’inglese)” 162; Una nobile
follia 149, 163; Paolina 149, 167;
Racconti fantastici 149
Tel Quel 282
Tennyson, A.Lord 35, 124, 193
Thackeray, W.M. 119
Thompson, W.H. 131
Times Literary Supplement 201
Todorov, T. 151
Tottel, R. 57
Toulouse, University of 226, 255
Townshend, A. 54
Transition 209
Trask, W. 7
Tsvetayeva, M. 275
Tyson, A. 26
Tytler, A.F., Lord Woodhouselee
130, 134, 221; Essay on the
Principles of Translation 65,
68–76, 246, 274
 
Ungaretti, G. 277
Updike, J. 8
 
Vangelisti, P. 277; and A.Spatola:
Italian Poetry, 1960–1980 278
Vargas Llosa, M. 2, 3

Index
353
Vennewitz, L. 3
Venuti, L. 273, 275–6, 286;
translation of M.De Angelis
286–7, 290–6,
299–305
Vicars, J. 44, 57
Vidal, P. 227, 230, 248
Virgil 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52–60,
61, 63–5, 71, 82, 189, 198, 235
Viviani, C. 277
Vogue 266
Von Hallberg, R. 252–3
Voss, J.H. 104, 308
 
Wagstaff, C. 282
Waller, E. 64, 81
Ward, A. 103–4, 105
Wase, C. 54
Waterhouse, E. 51
Way, A. 140–1
Wesleyan University Press 301–2
Westminster Review 138
Whicher, G. 207–8
Whigham, P. 221
White, A., and P.Stallybrass 71, 72
Whitman, W. 208
Wilde, O. 189, 190
Willey, B. 143
William III 65
Williams, W.C. 233, 246, 250, 261
Wilson, P. 66
Wisconsin, University of 225–6
Wollstonecraft, M: A Vindication of
the Rights of Woman 167, 169–70,
174, 180, 181
Woodmansee, M. 165
Wordsworth, W. 72, 255, 275, 289
Wright, C. 277
Wroth, Sir T. 47–8, 53
Wyatt, Sir T. 93, 198, 207
 
Yankee Doodle 133
 
Zanzotto, A. 277, 278
Zukofsky, C. and L. 40, 309, 310;
translation of Catullus 214–24,
245, 274
Zwicker, S. 65

