

Tom Harpur, columnist for the Toronto Star, Rhodes scholar, and former
Anglican priest and professor of Greek and New Testament at the University of
Toronto, is an internationally renowned writer on religious and ethical issues. He
is the author of nine bestselling books, including For Christ’s Sake and Would
You Believe?. He has hosted numerous radio and television programs, including
Life After Death, a ten-part series based on his bestselling book of the same
name, and a twelve-part television series based on his bestseller The Uncommon
Touch: An Investigation of Spiritual Healing.
Books of Merit

The Pagan Christ

ALSO BY TOM HARPUR
Harpur’s Heaven and Hell 
For Christ’s Sake 
Always on Sunday 
Life After Death 
God Help Us 
The Uncommon Touch 
Would You Believe? 
Prayer: The Hidden Fire 
Finding the Still Point

TOM HARPUR
THE 
PAGAN 
CHRIST
Recovering the Lost Light
Thomas Allen Publishers 
Toronto

Copyright © 2004 by Tom Harpur 
Discussion Guide copyright © 2004 by Thomas Allen Publishers 
First paperback edition 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means—graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, 
or information storage and retrieval systems—without the prior written permission 
of the publisher, or in the case of photocopying or other reprographic copying, 
a license from the Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Harpur, Tom 
The pagan Christ : recovering the lost light / Tom Harpur.
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-88762-145-7 (bound)    ISBN 0-88762-195-3 (pbk.)
1. Christianity—Origin.   2. Christianity and other religions. 
3. Church history—Primitive and early church, ca. 30–600. 
I. Title.
BR129.H37   2004     270.1      C2003-906521-9
Editor: Jim Gifford 
Cover and text design: Gordon Robertson 
Cover image: Max Kandhola/Photonica 
Discussion Guide questions compiled by Rev. Larry Marshall
Published by Thomas Allen Publishers, 
a division of Thomas Allen & Son Limited, 
145 Front Street East, Suite 209, 
Toronto, Ontario M5A 1E3 Canada
www.thomas-allen.com

The publisher gratefully acknowledges the support of 
the Ontario Arts Council for its publishing program.
 
We acknowledge the support of the Canada Council for the Arts, which 
last year invested $21.7 million in writing and publishing throughout Canada.
We acknowledge the support of the Government of Ontario through the 
Ontario Media Development Corporation’s Ontario Book Initiative.
 
We acknowledge the financial support of the Government of Canada through the Book 
Publishing Industry Development Program (BPIDP) for our publishing activities.
13 12 11 10 09    2 3 4 5 6
Printed and bound in Canada

To the memory of 
Professor Alvin Boyd Kuhn, Ph.D. (1880–1963), 
a man of immense learning and even greater courage

The very thing which is now called the Christian religion 
existed among the ancients also, nor was it wanting from 
the inception of the human race until the coming of Christ 
in the flesh, at which point the true religion, which was 
already in existence, began to be called Christian.
– ST. AUGUSTINE, Retractiones
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels.
– ST. PAUL, 2 CORINTHIANS 4:7
Do you not know that you are the temple of God, 
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
– 1 CORINTHIANS 3:16
Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born, 
But not within thyself, thy soul will be forlorn; 
The cross on Golgotha thou lookest to in vain 
Unless within thyself it be set up again.
– ANGELUS SILESIUS (1624–1677)

Contents
Acknowledgments
Timeline
Introduction to the Paperback Edition
1 Discovery: A Bible Story I’d Never Heard Before
2 Setting the Stage: Myths Aren’t Fairy Tales
3 Christianity before Christianity: Where It All Began
4 The Greatest Cover-up of All Time: How a Spiritual Christianity Became
a Literalist Christianism
5 It Was All Written Before—in Egypt
6 Convincing the Sceptics
7 The Bible—History or Myth?: 
The End of Fundamentalism
8 Seeing the Gospels with New Eyes: 
Sublime Myth Is Not Biography

9 Was There a Jesus of History?: Where It All Began
10 The Only Way Ahead: Cosmic Christianity
Epilogue
Appendix A: Background on Three Experts on Mythology, Religion, and
Ancient Egypt
Appendix B: More Similarities between the Egyptian Christ, Horus, and
Jesus
Appendix C: Two Strange Passages
Appendix D: Response to The Pagan Christ for Discussion Purposes
Glossary
Notes
Bibliography
The Pagan Christ: A Discussion Guide

Acknowledgments
To the Canada Council: my sincere appreciation for the award and its support
in the research and writing of this work.
Authors are often asked how long it takes them to write their books. The
honest answer, in most cases, is what I would certainly say with regard to this
one: a lifetime. The Pagan Christ flows from all I have experienced and read
over that lengthy span. Consequently, I owe a huge debt to past teachers, friends,
my many book and column readers over the years, and a host of other writers
and thinkers far too numerous to name. In particular, though, I wish to thank the
Reverend Larry Marshall, who first introduced me to the writings of Dr. Alvin
Boyd Kuhn. When he originally sent me some samples of Kuhn’s writings, I did
with them what I usually do with the avalanche of religious and spiritual
material that would pour over the desk of anyone specializing in this field for a
major world-class newspaper—I put them to one side. Thankfully, however, he
remained persistent. He sent more manuscripts and kept asking how I liked what
had already come. At last, like the wearied judge in the Gospel parable of the
woman who wouldn’t take no for an answer in her quest for justice, I relented
and undertook to read some of it as a way out. It was a startling revelation
beyond anything I had imagined possible, a key turning point on my spiritual
path. Reading at first in sheer disbelief, and then more and more seeing the
radical truth of what was being so learnedly and powerfully set out before my
eyes, I began to devour Kuhn’s writings and then those of his two major sources,
especially the Egyptologist, poet, and social reformer Gerald Massey. Marshall
was a constant resource, encourager, and friend throughout the research and
writing of The Pagan Christ. He read the second rough draft and made many
helpful suggestions, and later prepared the Discussion Guide. I cannot thank him
enough. Thanks as well are owed to Bill Denyar for his reading and gentle
criticism of the initial draft.
Patrick Crean, the publisher at Thomas Allen, showed his warm enthusiasm
for this project from the outset. A vote of thanks go to him for his courage and
his overall wise counsel, especially in the final stages. To my editor, Jim Gifford,
special gratitude is due for his thoroughness, his “tough love” approach to the
text, and his quiet but steady pressure on me to make my own voice heard above

the essential chorus of the major ancient and modern sources. Thanks too belong
to Alyssa Stuart, the publicity manager at Thomas Allen, and to the rest of the
support staff there.
Finally, my wife, Susan. There is no adequate way to express what she has
meant to me in the creating and completing of The Pagan Christ. Her technical
and editorial skills, honed by twenty-eight years of work at the Toronto Star,
were an incredible and continuous asset to one who is quite honestly a techno-
moron, a word the novelist Robertson Davies once used to describe himself to
me in an interview. Susan played a crucial role at every stage, but her
contribution really goes far beyond that. I’ll say no more. She knows, and that’s
enough for me.
—TWH

Timeline
YEAR  
 
3000 B.C.E. — Stonehenge erected
c. 3000 B.C.E. — Birth of Persian sun-god, Mithras, celebrated on December 25.
Mithraism Reached Rome in 67 B.C.E.Rival of Christianity and
very similar
From
earliesttimes
all over world
— Sun Gods
2589–2566
B.C.E
— The Great Pyramid of Cheops at Giza built
Up to 2500
B.C.E.
— Stone Age in Britain
2500
B.C.E.and
forward
— Bronze Age in Britain
Many
centuriesB.C.E.
— Various forms of “baptism” arepracticed in Mithraism,
Judaism andother religions
c. 600 B.C.E.–
c.300 C.E.
— Mystery Religions in Greece and throughout later Greco–
Romeworld.Most follow a pattern similar to theJesus Story
469–399 B.C.E — Socrates lived
37 B.C.E — Julius Caesar crosses Rubicon
Sometime
between 4
B.C.E.and 6
C.E.
— Birth of Jesus Christ, according tothe New Testament
100 B.C.E.–
200 C.E.
— Gnosticism. Exact dating is not yet possible. Was
contemporary with birth of Christianity and seems to
haveoriginated in trends of thought withinboth Paganism and
Judaism
185–254 — Life of Origen, one of the brightest theologians of the early

church, and leader of the Alexandrian School
312 — “Conversion” of Constantine. Christianity becomes the
religion of the Roman Empire
325 — Council of Nicea creates Nicene Creed. Arius is condemned.
Jesus is ruled to be of “one substance” with the Father
345 — Date of Christmas moved to December 25 by Pope Julian
391 — Burning of Alexandrian library
400 — Council of Alexandria condemns Origen’s teachings as
heretical. This condemnation was repeated in 543 and 553 in
Constantinople
451 — Council of Chalcedon. Final agreement on two natures of
Jesus Christ: truly God, truly man
529 — Closing of Plato’s Academy in Athens by Emperor Justinian
553 — Doctrine of Reincarnation repudiated in Constantinople. It was
condemned again by councils in 1274 and 1439
c. 500–1000 — Dark Ages
1096–99 — First Christian Crusade
1270–72 — Eighth and last Crusade
1300–1500 — Renaissance: a rediscovery of Pagan philosophy and art
1500–1600 — Reformation: Luther’s “95 Theses” in 1517 at Wittenburg
1799 — Discovery of the Rosetta Stone
1815 — Rosetta Stone’s hieroglyphics translated
1945 — Discovery of the Gnostic “library” at Nag Hammadi, Egypt,
including The Gospel of Thomas
1947 — Discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran

Introduction to the Paperback Edition
“I don’t know how to find the words to express the incredible joy,
excitement, and peace that have descended upon me since reading The
Pagan Christ. I feel as if a door of incredible opportunity has been opened
for me (and for everyone) to find a more authentic, rational, and deeply
spiritual faith. After completing a Masters degree in Religious Studies, I
found it impossible to believe in Christianity any longer. This book has
reopened the history of truth that I caught only a glimpse of during my
graduate studies. It has explained so much, created many new questions,
and opened up a whole new world of rational theological wonder. Thank
you!”
– J.S., A READER
This letter is but one of thousands of very similar responses that I have
already received and that continue to flood in as word of The Pagan Christ and
its message continues to spread. Let me welcome you as you prepare to explore
more fully what she has rightly termed “a rational and deeply spiritual faith.” Let
me also share with you the profound conviction that in doing so you are part of
what will one day be looked back upon as nothing less than the beginning of a
rebirthing of the Christian religion for this new millennium. This enterprise is
prompted and directed by the Divine Spirit—all around us and so intimately
rooted in each of our beings. This is the same Spirit who makes all things new
again.
While the vast response to The Pagan Christ has been enthusiastically
positive, the book has nevertheless met furious opposition from certain
ultraconservative sources. Most of these people lead lives so heavily invested in
conservative Christianity that they are naturally deeply threatened by ideas that
do not support their traditional beliefs. I urge the reader to remember that growth
is only possible through challenging the mind to think new thoughts, and
welcoming the change that might occur as a result. For many people, old
religious moorings have slipped into the darkness and vanished. At the same

time, fundamentalists on all sides clamour that they alone possess the only true
way ahead. To avoid confusion, it is important to find and to work from a solid
theological base—one that nevertheless is sufficiently universal and flexible to
cope with fast-changing realities and a vastness of the cosmos that seems to
expand as we draw each breath. I can assure you that you have nothing to fear
from The Pagan Christ, and, I hope, much to gain. For a fuller discussion of
challenges to this book, please see Appendix D.
Reading The Pagan Christ is only a beginning for those of you who are
embarking on this spiritual journey. If you have the opportunity, please consider
using the Discussion Guide at the back to form or join a discussion group. A true
adventure awaits you— the Spirit of the Christ within every heart will guide you
into truth and you will be part of a new birthing of the faith in our times.
Why the “Pagan” Christ?
“Thousands of souls in the Pagan world were on fire with the pure flame of
divine passion of the Christly love centuries before Jesus ever lived.”
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN1
Before we begin, there is something you must know about the title of this
book. The word “Pagan” is almost totally misunderstood today. The deeply
pejorative use of the word—entirely due to Christian prejudice and bias for
centuries—is illustrated at once by the Concise Oxford Dictionary’s almost
brusque: “heathen, unenlightened or irreligious (person).” But, the citation goes
on to admit that in its origin the word was totally neutral. It comes from the
Latin, pagus, a country district. A Pagan, a “Paganus,” initially was a peasant.
The term was soon to be used by the emerging church authorities to denote all
who were not orthodox Christians. As we shall see, the “Pagans” who were
persecuted, decried, killed, and ultimately utterly vanquished by the Church,
held views of “the Christ within” which the Church was to plagiarize blatantly—
and then cover up with book-burnings, anathemas, and murder. Ironically,
centuries later it was to the “Pagan” Aristotle and his teacher Plato that the
church was finally forced to turn in order to save its theological “bacon.” The
monumental work of Thomas Aquinas, which is the foundation of Roman
Catholic theology and based upon Aristotle—including its whole theory of
natural law—testifies to that.

The Pagan Christ

1
DISCOVERY
A Bible Story I’d Never Heard Before
My point,once again,is not that those ancient people told literal stories
and we are now smart enough to take them symbolically,but that they told
them symbolically and we are now dumb enough to take them literally.
– JOHN DOMINIC CROSSAN, Who Is Jesus?
ONE DAY, in the late sixties, while I was teaching at the Toronto School of
Theology’s Wycliffe College, a very bright English student at Victoria College,
in the University of Toronto, came to my study with an urgent matter to discuss.
She was the daughter of a friend of mine and was enrolled in an undergraduate
course taught by Northrop Frye, a course for which he was justly renowned. Her
problem was that her rather conservative evangelical faith was being deeply
challenged. The towering scholar, later to become internationally known in
particular for his classic books on the Bible, was telling his classes with all his
usual wit and verve that the Bible was not a document concerned with history
but a vast collection of sublime myths and metaphors. Though I was far from
following any form of fundamentalism, I remember trying to reassure her—not
without difficulty—that there was indeed a profoundly historical core to it all.
That had been my background, and it suited the college’s ethos as well. At that
time, I knew very little of Frye’s actual thinking, apart from her report. Fifteen
years passed before I read the newly published Great Code and then its sequel,
Words with Power, and came to a much fuller understanding of what Frye truly
had to say and what Bible language really was all about. That experience and his

words were in the back of my mind all through the months of research that went
into the writing of this book. I found myself in particular recalling Johan L.
Aitken’s lines in his introduction to Frye’s last work, The Double Vision. “In a
legendary undergraduate course,” Aitken wrote, “Frye reminded his students that
when the Bible is historically accurate, it is only accidentally so: reporting was
not of the slightest interest to its writers. They had a story to tell which could
only be told by myth and metaphor: what they wrote became a source of vision
rather than doctrine.” In all my reading ever since, I have found that observation
to be wise beyond any view of Scripture I had ever read before. It’s an
understanding that is vital to this exploration.
Let me say that I write here, as in all my work, as a journalist with special
training in theology and religion. I have the great responsibility of sharing the
“story” that follows with as wide an audience as possible, because what I
describe and document in the following pages is one of the most far-reaching
tragedies in history. It is the premise of this entire account that very early on, in
the third and fourth centuries C.E., the Christian Church made a fatal and fateful
error. Either deliberately, in a competitive bid to win over the greatest numbers
of the largely unlettered masses, or through wilful ignorance of the true, inner
sense of the profound spiritual wisdom it had inherited from so many ancient
sources, the Church took a literalist, popularized, historical approach to sublime
truth. What was preserved in the amber of allegory, it misrepresented as
plodding fact. The transcendent meaning of glorious myths and symbols was
reduced to a farrago of miraculous or irrelevant, or quite unbelievable, “events.”
The great truth that the Christ was to come in man, that the Christ principle was
potentially in every one of us, was changed to the exclusivist teaching that the
Christ had come as a man. No other could match him, or even come close. The
Dark Ages—and so much more—were the eventual result.
While most of what is laid out in this book will possibly surprise and stir both
faithful and outsider alike, that is not my primary intention. This book is not
about seeking controversy or headlines; it is a sincere and earnest search for
spiritual truth. Certainly it is in no way meant as an attack upon Christianity—or
any other religion, for that matter. Quite the opposite, in fact. In the end, it is
about the realization of a richer, more spiritual faith than I ever knew before.
I want to affirm with the utmost emphasis and sincerity from the very outset
that the evidence investigated here, the discoveries I have made, and the inner
struggles and deep insights that have flowed from them have made a joyous and
life-changing imprint upon me. When I first began my investigation, I thought to
myself, Can any of this be true? Several months later, I found myself asking
instead, What if it is true? The implications were enormous. It meant, you see,

that much of the thinking of much of the civilized West has been based upon a
“history” that never occurred, and that the Christian Church has been founded on
a set of miracles that were never performed literally. Finally, though, I said to
myself, because of the sheer weight of the evidence before me, Yes, I believe it’s
true. And that has made all the difference, a huge and immensely positive
difference for my understanding of my faith and my own spiritual life.
Simultaneously, it has transformed my view of the future of Christianity into one
of hope.
Just to anticipate a little, here’s why I can say that with conviction. You will
find that the allegorical, spiritual, mythical approach to the Bible and to
Christian faith—that is, the true, spiritual Christianity, before official
Christianism took over—solves the enigmas of Scripture and the Christos story
as nothing else can do. Bible stories come alive with amazing new freshness,
believability, and power. Our own potential for Christhood, and for experiencing
the indwelling spirit of God here and now, sounds forth in a clear and relevant
message for everyone. Hope for a truly cosmic faith is kindled and fanned into
full flame. There is a theological grounding given for our own instinctual
yearning for a faith that resonates with our own “matter,” the natural world. Our
fresh (yet ancient, more universal) understanding of the Jesus theme opens up
doors to other faiths that orthodox Christianity as it is now can never hope to
pass through. And that’s not all. Seen in their new light, the rituals of Easter and
Christmas, along with Christian symbols such as the cross and the Eucharist,
glow with renewed significance and depth.
In all honesty, however, this has not been a simple or easy journey for me.
Having come from a Judeo-Christian background and commitment and
dedicated my life to making known spiritual truth, I had never before
encountered in depth the kind of challenges to my own faith I explore here.
Certainly very little of what follows was ever presented to me by the institutional
Church during my ten years of university training for the Anglican priesthood
long ago. Nor was it ever once seriously discussed by any of my colleagues
during the roughly ten years I spent as a professor of the New Testament and
Greek at a prominent Canadian theological college. It was assumed by all
throughout that traditional Christianity had always been more or less what it is
today. Its superiority over other religions was seldom, if ever, seriously
challenged.
Of course, I had read the great anthropologist Sir James George Frazer’s
Golden Bough, written between 1890 and 1915, with its comparative religions
findings; I had read Plato and Aristotle in Greek at the University of Toronto and
again at Oxford, and I had studied both Orphism and the Mystery Religions. Yet

few, if any, of the Egyptian parallels to the Gospel writings examined here ever
came into my view. The similarities that existed between Christian beliefs and
the earlier Pagan religions were always quickly passed over in seminary as
“foreshadowings” of the Good News proclaimed by the New Testament. Like
the various “prophecies” and prototypes in the Old Testament, similarities in
previous religions were represented as having been wholly “fulfilled” in Jesus.
Nobody even suggested that the opposite might be true, that the Bible in general
and the New Testament in particular actually copy or repeat motifs laid down
many centuries, and in some cases many millennia, before. I was aware of
Sigmund Freud’s harsh-sounding dictum that the Bible was a “total plagiarism”
of the Sumerian and Egyptian mythologies, but I had dismissed this as a gross
distortion typical of the founder of modern psychiatry’s well-known bias against
all religion. I had also once read Dr. Anna Bonus Kingsford’s opinion that the
“Hebrew sacred books” were all “Egyptian in origin,” but I had quite arbitrarily
dismissed it as nonsense.
When I started my ministry in a parish, and even when I was teaching at the
seminary, I had absolutely no idea of many of the startling truths you are about
to encounter. For example, I didn’t fully understand the nature and relevance of
what I now call “a true myth” for early religious thinkers—that myth is more
eternal in its meaning than history. It would have been news to me that Moses is
an Egyptian name—as in Ramose or Thutmose—and even that there was a Jesus
in Egyptian lore many thousands of years ago. His name was Iusu, or Iusa,
according to Gerald Massey, and that means “the coming divine Son who heals
or saves.”1 I knew nothing then of an Egyptian Christos, or Christ, named Horus.
He and his mother, Isis, were the forerunners of the Christian Madonna and
Child, and together they constituted a leading image in Egyptian religion for
millennia prior to the Gospels. Erik Hornung says there was “an obvious analogy
between the Horus child and the baby Jesus . . . long before Christianity, Isis had
borne the epithet ‘Mother of the God’.”2 What a different kind of preaching and
teaching I would have done had I realized that this mythical Horus anticipated
by thousands of years most of the sayings and the miracles of Jesus Christ—that
he too had a supernatural birth, and that in one of his roles, he was “a fisher of
men with twelve followers.” It would have made a profound difference to me to
know that piercing the literal sense of the Bible to reveal its hidden, allegorical,
and mystical inner core could free us up and offer new, transformative spiritual
vistas and insights. For example, imagine my surprise at discovering, during the
research for this book, that Martha and Mary figure in a story about the raising
from the dead of El-Asar, or Lazarus, at an Egyptian Bethany about four

thousand years ago. The “miracle” described in John’s Gospel was never a
historic event; instead, it was a recurring, deeply archetypal, and widely used
symbol of God’s power to resurrect the dead.
There is so much more to explore and share. Most potent of all has been the
increasing knowledge I have gained of how the key early Christian doctrine, the
incarnation of spirit in human flesh or matter in each of us, is in fact the oldest,
most universal mythos known to religion. It was current in the Osirian religion in
Egypt at least two thousand years B.C.E. But I anticipate.
In any event, I can promise the reader this: I have indeed found for myself, in
the course of all the emotional and intellectual wrestling involved in coming to
grips with this material, not just a deeper faith but a far more bracing, more
intellectually honest, more tuned-into-the-universe-itself kind of belief system
than I ever dreamed possible. I see my Christian faith with a transformed vision.
What I have written is not intended primarily for scholars, although I hope
they will be deeply challenged and learn from it too. While I have the greatest
respect for scholarship and will be drawing upon the work of experts in many
fields—as well as my own training and experience—I have dedicated my entire
professional career as a theologian and journalist to the attempt to make complex
issues as simple as possible for ordinary, intelligent laypeople. The scholars have
their libraries and their own hidden sources. Many of them, it seems, can
communicate only with one another. Indeed, some of them may like it that way.
But the result too often has been, and still is, that ordinary, traditional citizens,
the majority of any society, have been ignored or left to pick up whatever crumbs
drop from the academic table. This is never more true than related to matters of
theology—to religious beliefs and doctrines.
Much, perhaps even most, of what is contained in this book has been known
to some comparative religions scholars for years— ever since the 1799
discovery of the Rosetta Stone on the western bank of the mouth of the Nile
River by Colonel Broussard, an officer in Napoleon’s army, an event that made
possible the first deciphering of the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic writings. But
some combination of fear, vested Church interests, and the belief that some
things should not be left to the hoi polloi to discuss at all convinced many of
these experts over the years to keep virtual public silence. They know the
potential for controversy and hostility from the ecclesiastical and other powers
that be, as well as from those many rank-and-file Church members who fear
change more than anything else. Whenever any of this material has been mooted
seriously, others have rushed to crush it, dismissing it summarily or labelling it
as rank heresy. They quote—usually out of context—whatever Bible verses seem
to prop up their position. What the late comparative religions scholar and

linguist Alvin Boyd Kuhn has called “the shadow of the third century” still
makes its sinister presence felt.
The Church today stands at a crossroads. Many of its best thinkers are
warning that it may have only one more generation before extinction because of
its failure to communicate meaningfully with a postmodern age. Richard
Holloway, former primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church, rightly notes that the
religio-spiritual longing of modern men and women has never been stronger, but,
he says, “The end of Christianity is coming because there is a system
undergirding the traditional ‘economy of salvation’ which is more concerned
with preserving its own power than exploring the truth.”3 My own thinking and
experience confirm this. The answer to this crisis lies in a proper understanding
of where and how everything began. However, engaging in this endeavour
reveals some extremely disturbing facts.
The blunt truth is that seismic research by a few specifically neutral scholars,
most notably Orientalists and Egyptologists, has been deliberately ignored by
churchly authorities for many decades. Scholars such as Godfrey Higgins (1771–
1834), author of the monumental tome Anacalypsis, the British Egyptologist
Gerald Massey (1828–1908), and more recently, and most important, the already
cited American specialist in ancient sacred literature Alvin Boyd Kuhn (1881–
1963) have made it clear in voluminous, eminently learned works that the Jewish
and Christian religions do indeed owe most of their origins to Egyptian roots.
Certainly a full appreciation of the huge contribution such experts as Higgins,
Massey, and especially Kuhn have made to finding a fresh understanding of
religion in general and Christianity in particular is long overdue. These men and
their scholarship challenge present Christianity to the core and yet, without
question, offer a radically fresh and hope-filled way ahead. They were men far in
advance of their time. Through it all, though, they believed firmly in the
presence of a divine power or cosmic mind behind and throughout the universe,
and in the survival of the soul after death. I personally owe them a lot more than
I can ever say.
Godfrey Higgins will always have a firm place in comparative religions
studies because of his massive, two-volume Anacalypsis: An Enquiry into the
Origins of Languages, Nations, and Religions. It was to have a profoundly
formative influence upon Alvin Boyd Kuhn many years later. It stands as one of
the most learned and far-ranging studies of the origins of religion I have ever
encountered. First published (in only two hundred copies) in 1833, it was the
final product of many long years of study.
Gerald Massey was a man of vivid genius and poetic fire who distinguished
himself as a social reformer, a poet, and especially an Egyptologist. His poetry

won the admiration of both Tennyson and Ruskin. His fame, however, rests
mainly on six monumental volumes that dealt at length with the mythology and
religion of ancient Egypt. He studied the extensive Egyptian records housed in
the British Museum and taught himself to decipher the hieroglyphics. Although
he was a capable lecturer, his speeches and books were not widely circulated.
The record shows that his controversial work was considered taboo in what were
regarded in his day as respectable literary and religious circles. He was
nevertheless light-years ahead of his time.
I have found the writings and research of Dr. Alvin Boyd Kuhn to be the most
erudite, most eloquent, and most convincing— both intellectually and intuitively
—of any modern writer on religion I have encountered in a lifetime dedicated to
such matters. To meet him through his books and monographs is to be
confronted by a towering polymath whom history has yet to recognize fully in
all his brilliance.
Kuhn’s second book, The Lost Light, published in 1940,was a stunning,
exhaustive exposition of the allegories, parables, and personages of biblical
Christianity and of the basic foundations of all religion. It is unquestionably his
single greatest contribution to a rational, convincing, highly illuminating
understanding of what the ancient wisdom was really all about and where
religion, especially Christianity, should be going today. I have a signed first
edition of this book on my desk as I write this. Printed on the title page are the
words “This book will be to religion what Darwin’s work has been to science,” a
quotation from the president of the National Library Board of America. Kuhn’s
books have never been given the wide recognition they so deeply deserve. He
simply stepped too often and much too hard on too many powerful toes,
particularly those of the vested religious institutions and their hierarchical
keepers.4
Far from being an original contribution to the world of religious thought, as
these scholars have convincingly shown, Christianity was turned in the early
centuries into a literalist copy of a resplendent spiritual forerunner. I will clearly
document that there is nothing the Jesus of the Gospels either said or did—from
the Sermon on the Mount to the miracles, from his flight as an infant from Herod
to the Resurrection itself—that cannot be shown to have originated thousands of
years before, in Egyptian Mystery rites and other sacred liturgies such as the
Egyptian Book of the Dead.
Everything—from the star in the east to Jesus’ walking on water, from the
angel’s pronouncement to the slaughter of the innocents by Herod, from the
temptation in the wilderness to the changing of water into wine—already existed
in the Egyptian sources. Egypt and its peoples had knelt at the shrine of the

Madonna and Child, Isis and Horus, for many long centuries before any
allegedly historical Mary lifted a supposedly historical Jesus in her arms. But for
all those centuries before the translation of the Rosetta Stone by Champollion in
1822, the ancient key to all this Egyptian material had been lost. Centuries of
blissful ignorance went by. Now, since the translation of the books of old Egypt
— the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the Pyramid Texts, the Amduat, and the
“Book of Thoth,” for example—there is irrefutable proof that not one single
doctrine, rite, tenet, or usage in Christianity was in reality a fresh contribution to
the world of religion. Kuhn puts it tersely when he says that the entire body of
Christian doctrine is simply a revamped and mutilated Egyptianism. These may
seem extremely blunt words, but a full reading of his works reveals the mountain
of undeniable evidence he has to back them up.
The cross, as we shall see, was a feature of ancient religion for a vast span of
time prior to the Christian era. But imagine my surprise when I discovered that
something universally believed to have been a purely Christian innovation—the
Greek monogram comprising the first two letters of the word for Christ (chi and
rho), letters often superimposed on each other in church ornamentation— was
also pre-existent to Christianity. It appears on the coins of the Ptolemies and
even those of King Herod the Great almost forty years B.C.E. Herod was made
king of the Jews by the Romans in 40 B.C.E., and he reigned until 4 B.C.E. The
Emperor Constantine the Great put this monogram on the labarum, or standard,
of his legions after his famous victory at the Milvian Bridge three hundred years
later. Thus he linked the Church to his political and military power, and all who
rebelled against the new Catholic or universal orthodoxy were labelled heretics.
In his introduction to Who Is This King of Glory?, one of his deliberately
neglected and yet most learned exposés, Kuhn says that the entire Christian
Bible, Creation legend, the descent into and exodus from Egypt, ark and flood
allegory, Israelite “history,” Hebrew prophecy and poetry, and the imagery of the
Gospels, the Epistles, and Revelation are now proven to have been transmitted
from ancient Egypt’s scrolls and papyri into the hands of later generations who
didn’t know their true origin or their fathomless meanings. He asserts that: “long
after Egypt’s voice, expressed through the inscribed hieroglyphics, was hushed
in silence, the perpetuated relics of Hamitic (Egyptian) wisdom, with their
cryptic message utterly lost, were brought forth to the world by parties of
ignorant zealots as a new body of truth.” Only by fully acknowledging and
regaining its parenthood in that sublime Pagan source will Christianity rise at
last to its intended true nobility and splendour, he argues.
As we shall shortly see, the Church of the third and fourth centuries, when
challenged by its Pagan critics as to the real sources of its gospels, dogmas, and

rites, reacted with fierce hostility, systematically hunting down and eliminating
all traces of its Pagan past. It hounded anyone, whether Christian or not, who
bore witness to the old truths. It closed down the traditional, “Pagan”
philosophical schools, persecuted those involved in the various popular Greco-
Roman Mystery Religions, burned hundreds of thousands of books, and hurled
the charge of heresy—with its penalty of excommunication—at any who
threatened to question the orthodox party line. Many were put to death. The
Pagan inheritance was everywhere hotly denied. This was the beginning of a
violent process that was to recur over the centuries and eventuate in a
Christianity that Frye once bluntly described as “a ghost with the chains of a foul
historical record of cruelty clanking behind it.”5 Studying this attempt to squelch
the truth in detail for the first time was a profound shock for me.
Today there is no longer any excuse for any hierarchy to ignore the truth of
what has actually transpired. The record is now plain for all to see. Not only did
the early Christians take over almost completely the myths and teachings of their
Egyptian masters, mediated in many cases by the Mystery Religions and by
Judaism in its many forms, but they did everything in their power, through
forgery and other fraud, book burning, character assassination, and murder itself,
to destroy the crucial evidence of what had happened. In the process, the
Christian story itself, which most likely began as a kind of spiritual drama,
together with a “sayings” source based upon the Egyptian material, was turned
into a form of history in which the Christ of the myth became a flesh-and-blood
person identified with Jesus (Yeshua or Joshua) of Nazareth.6 The power of the
millennia-old Christ mythos to transform the whole of humanity was all but
destroyed in the literalist adulation of “a presumptive Galilean paragon.”
Centuries of darkness were to follow.
I have laboured to present this work as clearly as possible, yet in places some
hard work will be required, and readers must be prepared to think on their own
and to be open to fresh ideas. It might well be a good idea to keep a Bible at
hand, in case you want to check a reference for yourself, but this isn’t essential.
Keep in mind throughout that however negative—even shocking—the evidence
may seem at times, a vast hope shines through it all. The overwhelmingly
positive conclusions finally reached point toward an exhilarating new approach
to faith and to a sorely needed, truly spiritual Christianity in this still very new
millennium. My goal throughout is not to summarily dismiss the deep beliefs
held by many millions in North America, Europe, and increasingly now in the
Southern Hemisphere, where the vast majority of today’s Christians live. But I
do want these people to think deeply about their faith anew. Once the “surgery”

is over, you will see, with me, how the Bible is wonderfully illumined afresh,
how a rational, cosmic faith not only is possible but indeed is the only thing that
makes sense in our fast-changing, pluralistic world. You will learn how any
future faith must and can be fully grounded in nature and its cycles. The Jesus
story will come alive and strike your heart and intellect as never before.
Traditional rituals such as Holy Communion, baptism, and the Church’s key
festivals of Christmas and Easter will have new power once we understand their
true meaning in the light of the ancient wisdom. The nearuniversal belief in a
glorious destiny beyond the grave will be grounded once and for all in
something more solid than a merely pious or emotion-based faith. Belief in the
Christ within will be established as the key to personal and communal
transformation. Our journey begins.

2
SETTING THE STAGE
Myths Aren’t Fairy Tales
On the intellectual side of religion and spirituality we are still dwelling
in the lingering shadows of medieval night, hypnotized and victimized by
superstition of the weirdest types flaunted from pulpit and seminary. This
beclouded day of gloom will continue as long as we have not the acumen to
dissociate sublime myth,allegory,drama and symbol from the dregs of
history.
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
Those who lack discrimination may quote the letter of the Scripture,but
they are really denying its inner truth.
– THE BHAGAVAD-GITA 
THE DISCOVERIES AND REVELATIONS in this book have had a profound effect
upon my own personal spiritual journey. It is hard for me even now to believe
that throughout all my previous training in and inquiry into the spiritual and
religious dimensions of life, I could have missed something so important.
Indeed, the uncovering of these truths has been unquestionably the most
transformative experience of my life. My hope is that my excitement and
inspiration will be passed on to you. We begin by taking a closer look at myth.

The Power of Myth
One would easily suppose that with the enormous popularity of the widely
broadcast six-part television series The Power of Myth, featuring the late Joseph
Campbell in conversation with Bill Moyers, and with the extensive writings on
this topic by Campbell, there would be a general public awareness of the
centrality and importance of mythology for human culture and progress. The
series, which has often been repeated and reposes on the video shelves of many
thousands of people the world over, made plain, in the simplest of terms, the
essential ability of myths to change states of consciousness and to impart
sublime truths accessible in no other way. It showed, among other things, how
each one of us is affected by the myths not only of the past but of the culture
around us today.
Nevertheless, it is safe to say that there are, at this moment, few words in our
language less comprehended, or for that matter valued, than the word “myth.”
Mention “myth” or “mythology” to the average person, and he or she will
assume that you are speaking of remote, insubstantial, irrelevant matters. In our
culture, the word is synonymous with, at best, fairy tales and, at worst, outright
lies and deception. If you pay attention, you’ll be amazed at how often you’ll
read or hear someone say, “It’s only a myth.”
Since this book will frequently deal with myth, it is of paramount importance
that this disastrous distortion and misunderstanding be met head on. Inasmuch as
the arguments advanced will lead inexorably to the conclusion that the entire
Gospel story of Jesus—not to mention about 95 percent of the rest of the Bible—
is a myth or a collection of the same, it is imperative that the true meaning of
myth receive detailed attention.
Here are three brief quotes from Kuhn to underline this salient point in my
argument:
• “What was known of old . . . is that the myth as employed by ancient
illuminati in Biblical scripture is not fiction, but the truest of all history!”
• “The myth is the only true narrative of the reality of human experience. It
is the only ultimately true history ever written . . . as it is the actual
experience of life in its evolution. Real as history is, it is finally less true
than the myth. The myth is always and forever true; actual history is
never more than an approximation of the truth of life.”

• “Myth was the favourite and universal method of teaching in archaic
times.”
Missing What’s Really Going On
A too often forgotten truth is that you can live through actual events of
history and completely miss the underlying reality of what’s going on. What
history misses, the myth clearly expresses. The myth in the hands of a genius
gives us a clear picture of the inner import of life itself. As Campbell repeatedly
made clear in his many books and in the interviews with Moyers, the deepest
truths about life, the soul, personal meaning, our place in the universe, our
struggle to evolve to higher levels of insight and understanding, and particularly
the mystery we call God can be described only by means of a story (mythos) or a
ritual drama. The myth itself is fictional, but the timeless truth it expresses is not.
As Campbell puts it, “Myth is what never was, yet always is.” It’s a means of
expressing the inner structure or meaning of all history. It has the incredible
power to fire the imagination and the spirit in such a way as to lift our
consciousness ever upward to higher states of evolution. If you examine the
best-known Greek myths, for example, you will see that each one has within it a
deep truth about the human condition that remains timeless even though the
event never happened. There are the simple examples of Narcissus, who fell in
love with his own reflection, and Icarus, who through hubris and carelessness
flew on his artificial waxen wings too close to the sun. We all know what
insights Freud garnered from the Oedipus saga. Whether it’s the prodigal son or
the good Samaritan in the New Testament, the truth and relevance of these tales
have nothing whatever to do with their having been actual happenings in history.
This is why, in Kuhn’s view, “Mythology is the repository of man’s most ancient
science.”
This will be extremely difficult for some to grasp just at first. It was for me as
well. But anyone who wants to understand religion, religious ideas, and religious
documents—that is, scriptures of any kind—must realize that the divine, the
mysterious, the ineffable, the workings of the spirit in the human heart or in the
cosmos at large cannot be adequately expressed other than by myth, allegory,
imagery, parable, and metaphor. Literal, descriptive narrative inevitably leads to
either idolatry or utter nonsense. Thus myths are not some fictional embroidery
or dispensable addition to the major faiths; they are their very essence. Strip
them away and there is little that is precious left. Christianity does not need to
“demythologize” its story; it needs to “remythologize” it, as we shall see.

Concealing Sacred Truth from Those 
Who Would Abuse It
There was another reason for the use of myths by ancient sages and scribes:
they were a device for concealing sacred, precious wisdom from profanation by
the vulgar or the malicious. There was a determination in the earliest circles of
the very wise to prevent the special spiritual knowledge, or gnosis, from falling
into unworthy hands, those who would misuse, desecrate, or pervert it in any
way. By not being what they seemed on the surface— historical narratives or
descriptions—and by ample use of symbolism and other devices, the myths kept
the traditions alive for those who were truly seeking spiritual enlightenment,
those who meant business. Sallustius, a fourth-century philosopher, in his
treatise On the Myths, says that “to conceal the truth by myths prevents contempt
of the foolish, and compels the good to practice philosophy.” It was not in any
way a class issue or a case of discrimination, except that it did demand a
minimum level of intellectual acumen and education from a sincere seeker. The
principal determinant of those admitted to the meaning of the myths or initiated
into the widely popular Mystery Religions, where they were dramatized and
experienced, was genuine zeal for the divine. Commenting on this esoteric
approach, the great second-century theologian Origen said that ordinary people
see only the exterior symbol: “It’s allowed by all who have any knowledge of the
scriptures that everything there is conveyed enigmatically, i.e., esoterically.”
Once the early Church turned to literalism and an exoteric, bottom-line rendering
of the faith, Origen was condemned as a heretic and his books were banned.1 To
read them was to risk instant excommunication. The Church forgot or ignored
the fact that St. Paul himself used the esoteric, allegorical approach.2
Ancient peoples did not believe their myths. They believed in them, in the
sense that they believed in the truth beneath the stories. As Professor Kuhn
notes, “Never did intelligent people believe them; they believed what they
represented, symbolized, adumbrated.” This distinction is tremendously
important because, as we shall soon see, It was the total misreading of the myth,
of the allegories and the drama, that resulted in Jesus’ being made into a
historical God-Man—an event that distorted Christianity from earliest times and
effectively aborted the real power of the myth to transform the life of every
individual. Once one man became the total embodiment of God-made-flesh, the
rest of humanity were left looking beyond themselves to a matchless paragon of
virtue instead of realizing their own Christ-power within. The impetus for moral
and spiritual transformation thus was virtually nullified. This eventually led to

the colossal blunder, perpetuated from the third century onward, of mistaking
myth, drama, ritual, allegory, and other forms of symbolic representation for
objective history, and following this by turning the body of myths into alleged,
literal occurrences.
In Shadow of the Third Century, we read: “The sacred scriptures are written in
a language of myth and symbol and the Christian religion threw away and lost
the very soul of their meaning when it mistranslated this language into alleged
history instead of reading it as spiritual allegory.” The result was a pathetic, blind
faith in a kind of emotional and superstitious supernaturalism. The evidence of
this is all around us today in extreme, literalist, ultraconservative forms of
Christianity. Jesus becomes a magician or Superman figure, quite removed from
the real universe in which we live. In his book Miracles, C. S. Lewis struggled
manfully to justify the Gospel miracles in rational terms, but he ended in a sad
failure on philosophical and other grounds. His basic error was in treating as
history what never was history—and indeed was prefigured at least five
millennia earlier in the Egyptian mythology. As Gerald Massey impatiently
exclaims in his book Luniolatry (Moon worship), “The insanity lies in mistaking
myth for human history or Divine Revelation. . . . The Gospels do not contain
the history of an actual man, but the myth of the God-Man, Jesus, clothed in an
historical dress.” Sublime myth literalized makes for quite grotesque history. We
shall see the evidence for this shortly. It’s one of the chief reasons why the
traditional interpretation of the Bible often makes so little sense to modern men
and women— and especially to the young.
The Central Christ Myth
All of this brings us to the central Christos myth, which in its many different
forms lies at the heart of every ancient religion. The work of Massey and Kuhn,
reinforced by modern mythologists, firmly establishes that the single vast theme
(in fact, the central teaching) of all religion is indeed the incarnation of the
divine in the human. Moreover, while the sun is the source of all that is in our
solar system, it is also by its light alone that we are able to see and know
everything that exists, and for that reason, it was a natural symbol in antiquity
for the ultimate being, for God. Thus the radiant figure of the sun god, who
really represented at the same time both the divine and also humanity divinized,
was at the core of the Christ mythos in ancient times. In the various sun gods,
from Hercules of Greece to Horus, or Iusa, of Egypt, humans could see pictured
their own history, their destiny, and their eventual conversion into angels of light.
The same is true of the Gospel Jesus figure.

Significantly, modern science is confirming that every cell in our body is
literally shot through with particles of the sun. At the Sudbury Neutrino
Observatory in Ontario, the deepest, cleanest research site in the world, scientists
have ascertained that untold billions of solar neutrinos pervade the entire
universe. They are able to pass through the earth itself and all substances,
including lead. More than a hundred billion neutrinos will pass through your
hand as you read this sentence!3
The following is the best summary I know of what Kuhn’s reasoning and
years of research on the Christ concept come down to in the end: “The vitalizing
item of ancient knowledge was the prime datum that man is himself, in his real
being, a spark of divine fire struck off like the flint flash from the Eternal Rock
of Being, and buried in the flesh of body to support its existence with an
unquenchable radiant energy. On this indestructible fire the organism and its
functions were ‘suspended,’ as the Greek Orphic theology phrased it, and all
their modes and activities were the expression of this ultimate divine principle of
spiritual intelligence, energizing in matter.”
I had studied some of these insights while reading Greats (Classics) at Oxford
years ago, but nobody ever brought it all together in a meaningful synthesis like
this.
The ancients placed at the myth’s centre an ideal person who would symbolize
humanity itself in its dual nature of human and divine. This ideal person—the
names were Tammuz, Adonis, Mithras, Dionysus, Krishna, Christ, and many
others—symbolized the divine spark incarnate in every human being, the
element “destined ultimately to deify humankind.” Rooting their religion firmly
in the bedrock of nature itself, the ancient sages saw the successive phases of our
divinization being enacted daily, monthly, and yearly in the solar allegories of
rising and setting, waxing and waning (of themoon,whichmirrors the
sun’smovements), and on the larger scale, in the precession of solar equinoxes
and solstices. Ancient religion was solar and lunar based. It is called sun
worship, but it was much more spiritual than this suggests or sounds. The
ancient sages of Egypt, Chaldea, and Sumeria were wise and spiritual enough
not to wholly identify their deity with even so glorious a manifestation as the
sun. God, they understood, was far beyond the sun in glorious reality; but since
one can speak of God only by means of metaphor in the end, the solar disk was
the most powerful, most fitting symbol they could conceive of. What’s crucial to
remember is that when they extolled the sun’s splendour, they saw it as symbolic
not only of God but ultimately of our own divinity as well. The sun god was the
embodiment, or model, of what each of us, through spiritual evolution, was
finally meant to become.

Since myth and ritual always go hand in hand, the entire evolutionary history
of humankind was accordingly programmed by these same theologians and
depicted in a great drama that was repeated in mystery plays aimed at raising
people’s consciousness and allowing them to experience the emotional catharsis
involved in living through a symbolic dying and rising again “to newness of
life.” All the subsidiary myths, allegories, parables, rites, and fables were
formulated to support and supplement this central play, or acting out of the one
truth—that we are embodied souls or spirits destined, through the love of God,
for eternity. Like the sun setting in the west, we too have descended into mortal
forms through incarnation. As it rises daily in the east with renewed power and
vigour, so we will rise again. In other words, what the central Christ (or sun god)
represents, we too one day shall be, and not just in theory or according to some
mythical ideal, but in a final, resurrected reality. This is a spirituality full of hope
and power.
What is amazing is the universality and similarity of these ancient myths,
though they are found in widely disparate cultures and date from the very mists
of antiquity. Whether Chaldean, Sumerian, Persian, or Egyptian—or indeed, as
we shall see, from Central Africa or the Americas—they seem to have come
from a single highly advanced source of intellectual understanding. It’s almost as
though long ago, there was one virtually cosmic religion that eventually and
gradually deteriorated over eons. Some eminent scholars take this view, but no
one really knows for certain. One thing is rock solid, however—our modern
assumption that ancient equals primitive couldn’t be more mistaken. Far distant
civilizations still stun us with their engineering and architectural feats—the
pyramids and palaces of old Egypt or the “cathedral” of Stonehenge—and the
same is true in the realm of the spirit.
We have seen how the ancients used allegory and myth to express their
thinking about God and other religious themes. But apart from their profound
study of the only Bible originally available to humans—the whole “book” of
Creation around them and in the cycles of nature—where did these brilliant
insights and convictions come from? The answer seems to be that they came
from deep within. Through prolonged meditation and inner searching, the
ancients discovered archetypal images and symbols that corresponded to what
they saw and experienced in the natural world. They came to know, for example,
the reality of the Christ (or atman, or soul) within by inward exploration. They
discovered what God had already in compassion planted there: the divine, God’s
own “image.” Since the language of our unconscious is based on symbols—as
Jung and many others have discovered—it was natural to express such
profundities in ageless imagery, metaphor, and allegory.

What is of the utmost importance, though, is that through the myths and the
esoteric (or inner) symbolism, the reality of the faith of these ancient peoples
still shines brilliantly today. The evidence shows that their belief in God, in the
eternal Christ “seed” or principle in every human being, and in the certainty of a
radiant life to come was as strong as or stronger than that of any literalist or
fundamentalist believer today. The Egyptian texts, as we shall see, glow with a
life-transforming power and a lofty morality to match. The Ten Commandments,
for example, are all anticipated in the teachings from the Hall of Judgment,
where the soul was weighed in the balance at life’s end.
Here is a summary of what the spiritual Christ of both the pre-Christian and
the earliest Christian gnosis, or experience, was and how such a reality operates
in us today:
1 The Christos is the name give to the incarnate presence of God within.
2 The Christos, though known by many names, is present within all
humanity; it is common spiritual property, but not all Christians and non-
Christians recognize or acknowledge it in their lives.
3 To release the potential power of the Christos within, everyone must
realize his or her innate spiritual nature and power.
4 Doctrines, creeds, dogmas, rites, and rituals have tended to replace this
awareness of an innate spiritual essence, although they could still be used
to help us celebrate the presence of the Christ within.
5 The Gospels are really dramas about the Christos, with Jesus in the
starring role as a dramatic personality. Jesus is the symbolic
personification of the Christos.
6 Jesus’ birth, death, and resurrection are subjective events of the Christ
within that each of us is meant to experience. The Christ is born within
the manger of our hearts; the Christ within gives “his” life for us in the
same way that a seed must die in order to germinate. The Resurrection is
our being raised to new life out of the tomb of our carnality and

worldliness, and in the end, as the creed says, we are reborn to “the life
of the world to come.”
7 It is through our permission that the Christos is unleashed to spiritualize
our nature. We don’t become God, but each of us is a fragment of God
with divine potential.
8 Religions should provide opportunity for people to commit their lives not
to a personal, historic Jesus (in the case of Christianity) but to the eternal
Christ, however this divine presence is described.4
All of these themes will recur as we move along.

3
CHRISTIANITY BEFORE CHRISTIANITY
Where It All Began
The very thing which is now called the Christian religion existed among
the ancients also,nor was it wanting from the inception of the human race
until the coming of Christ in the flesh,at which point the true religion which
was already in existence began to be called Christian.
– ST. AUGUSTINE, Retractiones 
THIS ASTOUNDING STATEMENT by St. Augustine, one of the most brilliant
thinkers in the earliest centuries of the Church, utterly refutes the traditional
view that Christianity, though of obvious Jewish roots, virtually fell from the
skies as a radically new, unique, all-surpassing religion destined to fulfill or
eclipse all other faiths. St. Augustine here unequivocally states that “from the
inception of the human race,” the Christian religion has been around, and that It
was held “among the ancients also.” Elsewhere, speaking of Socrates (who
antedated Christianity by about five hundred years), he said that he was as grand
a Christian as any churchly saint or martyr. Indeed, he said that Socrates’ Pagan
brand of Christianity was as lofty and pure as the kind he himself knew. Few
Christians are aware that Augustine himself received the Christian doctrine of
the Trinity from the Pagan philosopher Plotinus (c. 205–270 C.E.), who “fed his
mind on the attributes of the Pagan divinities and was steeped in Hellenistic
rational religion and esotericism.”
Significantly, St. Augustine’s words are echoed at considerable length by the
Church historian Eusebius (c. 260–340), the most important—though highly

biased—early historian of Christianity. “The religion published by Jesus Christ
to all nations is neither new nor strange,” Eusebius writes. “For though, without
controversy we are of late, and the name of Christians is indeed new; yet our
manner of life and the principles of our religion have not been lately devised by
us, but were instituted and observed . . . from the beginning of the world, by
good men, accepted by God; from those natural notions which are implanted in
men’s minds.” This latter concept is crucial. It explains the archetypal nature of
the Christos symbolism as it occurs throughout this investigation.
Indeed, in his famous book Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius, the bishop of
Caesarea and one of the major shapers of the emerging Christian orthodoxy he
championed, says that the Gospels of the New Testament were really the old
dramatic books of the Essenes, from pre-Christian days.1 Of a group of Essenes
called Therapeutae (healers), in Egypt, he writes: “These ancient Therapeutae
were Christians and their writings are our Gospels and Epistles.”
Even the second-century theologian and historian Justin Martyr conceded as
much when he wrote that whatever things were rightly said among the ancients
“are now the property of Christians!” He had important and numerous reasons
for making such a claim, and he is frequently at great pains to show that
Christianity in no way differed from Paganism. In a further statement, addressed
directly to Pagan critics of his faith, Justin Martyr argues that in “declaring the
Logos, the first begotten Lord, our master Jesus Christ, to be born of a virgin
mother, without any human mixture, and to be crucified, and dead, and to have
risen again and ascended into heaven, we say no more than what you say of those
whom you style the sons of Jove.”
Celsus, a famous Pagan philosopher with whom Origen waged a well-known,
detailed debate, said: “The Christian religion contains nothing but what
Christians hold in common with the heathen; nothing new.” For this, Origen had
no rebuttal. As well, Ammonius Saccas (c. 175–240), the great founder of
Neoplatonism (born of Christian parents himself) and the teacher of Origen,
stoutly maintained that Christianity and Paganism differed on no essential points.
The Evidence
The words from these early witnesses pack a huge wallop for orthodox
theology. But they truly sink in only when one takes the time to examine
meticulously the evidence on which they stand. The evidence of close
similarities between Christianity and other ancient world faiths is massive,
detailed, extremely specific, and quite incredibly far-flung, stretching from the
Vedic wisdom of India to the Norse myths of Scandinavia, the legends of the

Incas, and the original spirituality of the indigenous peoples of North America.
The Spanish conquistador Hernando Cortez (1485–1547), after his conquest of
Mexico in 1519–21, complained in his diaries that the devil had positively taught
to the Mexicans “the same things which God had taught to Christendom.” Early
explorers in contact with North American Natives had similar experiences.
Without exception, every element of the allegedly “new,” uniquely revealed
religion was extant before the first Christian century in the traditions, practices,
and literature of many other lands and people. When the Abbé Huc became the
first Christian to enter the region of Turkestan, he was filled with consternation
when he found the Tartary natives celebrating the Eucharist with bread and wine.
Francisco Pizarro was amazed when he found Aztec and Mayan rites and beliefs
similar to those of the Roman Catholic system. The truth is that nobody of any
acumen can observe the hundreds upon hundreds of resemblances between
material in the Bible and very specific passages in many pre-Christian books and
scrolls and believe that this is all purely accidental. Kuhn states bluntly that “no
one can make the search and discover these numberless resemblances without
forming the conviction that the Bible writings are rescripts, often . . . corrupted,
of antecedent wisdom literature.” As I read the evidence, checked and rechecked
the sources, I gradually realized the truth of this assertion.
In his highly detailed 830-page Anacalypsis, Godfrey Higgins, a giant of
ancient learning, says, “One thing is clear—the mythos of the Hindus, the
mythos of the Jews and the mythos of the Greeks are all at bottom the same; and
what are called their early histories are not histories of humankind, but are
contrivances under the appearance of histories to perpetuate doctrines . . . in a
manner only understood by those who had a key to the enigma.”2
Gerald Massey, to whose lifelong study of ancient myths and symbolism both
Kuhn and I owe an enormous debt, stated, “The human mind has long suffered
an eclipse and been darkened and dwarfed in the shadow of ideas the real
meaning of which has been lost to moderns. Myths and allegories whose
significance was once unfolded in the Mysteries have been adopted in ignorance
and reissued as real truths directly and divinely vouchsafed to humanity for the
first and only time! The early religions had their myths interpreted. We have ours
misinterpreted. And a great deal of what has been imposed on us as God’s own
true and sole revelation to us is a mass of invertedmyths.”3
Parallels between Jesus and the Buddha
A number of authors have commented on the parallels between the Buddha
and Jesus.

Here is a paragraph from Oliver Wendell Holmes’s introduction to Sir Edwin
Arnold’s famous account of the life of the Lord Buddha, The Light of Asia:
If one were told that many centuries ago a celestial ray shone into the
body of a sleeping woman, as it seemed to her in her dream, that thereupon
the advent of a wondrous child was predicted by the soothsayers; that
angels appeared at this child’s birth; that merchants came from afar bearing
gifts to him; that an ancient saint recognized the babe as divine and fell at
his feet to worship him; that in his eighth year the child confounded his
teachers with the amount of his knowledge, still showing them due
reverence; that he grew up full of compassionate tenderness to all that lived
and suffered; that to help his fellow creatures he sacrificed every worldly
prospect and enjoyment; that he went through the ordeal of a terrible
temptation in which all the power and evil were let loose upon him, and
came out conqueror of them all; that he preached holiness and practiced
charity; that he gathered disciples and sent out apostles to spread his
doctrine over many lands and peoples; that this “helper of the worlds” could
claim a more than earthly lineage and a life that dated long before Abraham
was—of whom would he/she think the wonderful tale was told? Would
he/she not say that this must be another version of the story of the One who
came upon our earth in a Syrian village during the reign of Augustus Caesar
and died by violence during the reign of Tiberius? What would this person
say if told that the narrative was between five and six centuries older than
that of the Founder of Christianity? Such is the story of this person [the
Buddha]. Such is the date assigned. The religion he taught is reckoned by
many to be among the most widely prevalent of all beliefs.
Since Holmes was living in staid New England about the 1830s, and since
none of the newly translated Egyptian hieroglyphic material had yet been
published—indeed, the whole of comparative religious study still was in its
infancy—it was quite daring of him to draw this close parallel. What is worth
noting, however, since it shows the frequent inertia of humanity in the face of
unorthodox truths, was that his words appear to have had little or no effect upon
the prevailing climate of thought among Christians in general at that time.
The Buddha, when he prepares to depart, promises (like Jesus) to send the
Paraclete, “even the spirit of truth which shall lead his followers into all truth.”4
The Buddha had his transfiguration when he went up a Sri Lankan mountain
called Pandava, or Yellow-white. “There the heavens opened and a great light

came in full flood around him and the glory of his person shone forth with
‘double power.’ He shone as the brightness of the Sun and Moon.” This exactly
parallels—but predates by six centuries—the Gospel story of Jesus’
transfiguration on Mt. Tabor.
What is true of actual events in the Buddha’s life—and I could provide many
more instances—is also true of his sayings. Jesus said that whoever looked upon
a woman with lust has already committed adultery in his heart. The third
commandment, according to the Buddha, is “Commit no adultery; the law is
broken by even looking at the wife of another man with lust in the mind.”
Among other sayings assigned to the Buddha is one dealing with the wheat
and the tares, as in the Gospels. You may remember that on one occasion
(Matthew 13:24ff), Jesus told a parable about a farmer who sowed “good seed”
in his field. While he was asleep, an enemy came and sowed poisonous seeds
(tares) in the same spot. When the crop grew, the man’s servants wanted to pull
the weeds out. The owner, however, warned them not to do so because of the
risk of tearing out the “wheat” as well. He told them to wait until the harvest
(final judgment), when the tares could be uprooted and burned while the grain
went safely into the barn.
Another saying involves the parable of the sower, the only parable found in all
three synoptic Gospels. In this story, Jesus describes how a sower cast his seed
broadside and it landed on a variety of soils—some good, some stony, some
thick with thorns —with a range of predictable results. So it was, he said, with
those who received the word of God. The Buddha told it earlier.
The Buddha similarly related the parable of the hidden treasure that was to be
stored safely where a thief could not break in, and the story of a rich young man
who was told to sell all he had and give it to the poor. It’s also reported that
Buddha said, “You may remove from their base the snowy mountains, you may
exhaust the waters of the ocean, the firmament may fall to earth, but my words
in the end will be accomplished.” Jesus said, “Heaven and earth shall pass away
but my words shall not pass away.” The great scholar Joseph Warschauer pointed
out not only that every one of Jesus’ answers to Satan in the temptation in the
wilderness comes from Deuteronomy in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament), but
also that an encounter between the Saviour figure and the principle of evil is
fully paralleled in Zoroastrian (Persian) and Buddhist literature and the Egyptian
scriptures. The well-known Sermon on the Mount was by no means first told in
Matthew’s Gospel. It belonged, in one form or another, to a whole body of
ancient, arcane, or secret religions. There is, for example, not a single word or
saying in it that cannot be paralleled or found explicitly in the Jewish Mishnah,
Midrash, or Talmud. Having once been a professor of the New Testament, I was

aware of that, but not of all the other parallels. The Hermetic Books of Egypt
contain some of the most ancient wisdom of any books in the world.5 The
Seventh Book of Hermes is entitled “His Secret Sermon on the Mount of
Regeneration.” The blunt truth is that the bulk of the sayings attributed to all the
masters or gods in all the early religions were once oral teachings in the ancient
myths and in the various Mystery Religions “ages before they were ever written
down.”6
Other Parallels
The sayings of Jesus are not the only item from a common ancient source.
Studies show that there are close “parallel cycles” of allegorical “events” in the
mythic and dramatic representations of thirty to fifty earlier gods (or Christs) in
the ancient sacred bibles of the world. The parallels in the birth and life of Lord
Krishna, the Hindu Christ, are now well known. The Persian prophet Zoroaster
was born in innocence and of a virgin birth, from a ray of divine reason (Logos).
Eventually, he was suspended from wood or “from the tree”—the cross or tree of
the later Calvary. There is also the story of Salivahana, a divine child born of a
virgin in Ceylon (Sri Lanka). He was the son of Tarshaca, a carpenter. His life
was threatened in infancy by a tyrant who afterwards was killed by him. His
story shows such close affinity to that of Jesus that it would be hard to deny a
common source for both. Many of the other circumstances, with slight
variations, are also the same as those told of Lord Krishna.
The central teaching of Christianity was and is the doctrine of the Incarnation
(i.e., that God left the glories of heaven and became a human being like any of
us). As John’s Gospel puts it, “The Logos or Word became flesh.” One could go
on to illustrate this affirmation by citing endless New Testament quotations,
references, and illustrations, but surely it needs no further elaboration. That’s
what the whole faith is about, pure and simple. As the Nicene Creed says, “For
us men and for our salvation he came down from heaven and was incarnate by
the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man.” But, and this is of
tremendous significance, the thoroughgoing studies of ancient religions done
over many years by the scholars I refer to here have established with certainty
that incarnation—the indwelling of God or divine essence in the human, every
human—is the central teaching of all ancient belief systems everywhere. It
became clear to me as I investigated further that ancient cults focused all their
efforts upon the cultivation of the god within man. This, in the final analysis, is
the nucleus of the only true Christianity. It was true of the Sumerians and the
Chaldeans; it was true of the Egyptian dynasties for untold millennia; it was true

for the authors of the Old Testament (the Psalmist prayed, “Take not thy holy
Spirit from me”), for Pythagoras and Plato, and for all the varied Mystery
Religions of the Greco-Roman world in the four centuries B.C.E. and beyond. It
was at the core of nearly all Paganism. As I saw the evidence for this continuing
to grow and delved more deeply into it, a whole new world of understanding
began to open before me. I remembered once reading in Plutarch (c.45–125 C.E.)
that all the ancient Greek wise men—Solon, Thales, Pythagoras, and Plato— had
in their day gone to Egypt and been instructed by the priests in the ancient
wisdom. But the full impact of that escaped me at that time.
It was in Egypt that the Greeks, and the peoples of the entire Middle East,
learned of the doctrine of God in man—the Incarnation. By about the year 1425
B.C.E., there had been painted in the tomb of Pharaoh Tuthmosis III, deep inside a
stone mountain where the sun never penetrates and the darkness is perpetual, a
complex mural that tells a story that was already then at least a thousand years
old. This mysterious painting, all done in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics or
sacred picture writing, is called The Book of What Is in the Duat (or the
Amduat). The mural is divided into twelve panels that represent the hours of the
sun’s passage through the heavens each day. But as the complex figures show,
the story being told is really that of each person’s spiritual journey from natural
man or woman to heir of God. What’s important for our discourse here is that the
one supreme being, Ra (pronounced rah)—often depicted as a sun disk or a
human being—is shown enclosed inside a tabernacle, or canopy. The canopy for
the ancient Egyptians symbolized the flesh. In other words, the painting clearly
shows God incarnate in the flesh—as a person, as representing “every man.”
This is the very concept that Paul echoes when he says, fifteen hundred years
later, that we are God’s temple, or tabernacle, “and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you.” A spectacular copy of the Amduat was on display in the United States in
2002 as part of a touring exhibit called The Quest for Immortality: Treasures of
Ancient Egypt.7
From all his years of study of Egyptian myths and symbols, Kuhn says that
the essence of this ancient religious outlook was that where mind and body meet
“is our holy mount.” Our life, according to the old wisdom, stretches from the
western gate of physical birth (the setting of the sun symbolizes entry into
matter), across the dark nocturnal sea of earthly experience, to the eastern
horizon of bursting light. In this life, we are on the “mount of the horizon,” the
Hill of the Lord, our Mt. Sinai, and with veiled face, we may come close enough
to deity to hear his voice, his uttered, manifested Word of Truth (though, like
Moses, we can not face his full glory).
The sole and crucial difference between the ancient myths and Christianity is

that Christianity eventually concentrated this universal concept into a single
historical person. (The debate over whether Jesus of Nazareth, called Christ, was
a historical person is not as cut and dried as many suppose, but I will discuss that
contentious issue later.) What was being symbolized, allegorized, imaged, and
clothed—even at times deliberately hidden, to avoid “casting pearls before
swine”—in all kinds of sacred myths and stories, like that of Jonah in the belly
of the great fish or Daniel in the lion’s den, was the truth of the God-presence in
every human life. By the middle to the end of the second century C.E., however,
the Jesus story had been turned into a literal “history” of the godhood of one
individual alone. Only through him and his alleged “perfect offering”of himself
in sacrifice to the Father could humanity achieve salvation. Any book, any
academy or school, any thinker who ran counter to this official rendition of the
ancient religion clearly testified to by Augustine was ruthlessly opposed— and
where possible, destroyed. Fraud, forgery, deceit, and violence, as we shall see
shortly, became the tools the orthodox used to crush the “heretics.” The heretics
were simply the losing side. The victors got to tell the story—their way.
The Saviour Theme
Consider this: comparative religions studies reveal that almost every
traditional faith the world over rests on a central story of the son of a heavenly
king who goes down into a dark lower world, suffering, dying, and rising again,
before returning to his native upper world. Acted out in a moving, multi-faceted
dramatic ritual, the story tells how this king/god wins a victory over his enemies,
has a triumphant procession, and is enthroned on high. Comparative religions
scholars have made lists of thirty to fifty such avatars or saviours, including
Osiris, Horus, Krishna, Bacchus, Orpheus, Hermes, Balder, Adonis, Hercules,
Attis, Mithras, Tammuz of Syria, Thor (son of Odin), Beddru of Japan, Deva Tat
of Siam, and many more. Kersey Graves, in his book The World’s Sixteen
Crucified Saviours, quotes a prophecy of the Persian Zoroaster: “A virgin should
conceive and bear a son, and a star would appear blazing at midday to signalize
the occurrence.” Zoroaster told his followers, “When you behold the star, follow
it wherever it leads you. Adore the mysterious child, offering him gifts with
profound humility. He is indeed the Almighty Word which created the heavens.
He is indeed your Lord and everlasting King.”8
In their 1999 work The Jesus Mysteries: Was the “Original Jesus” a Pagan
God?, two British scholars, Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy, examine the close
parallels between the Greco-Roman Mystery Religions and early Christianity.
Their data prove to anybody but the most closed-minded that the old “similarity

or contiguity in time is not the same as a causal or imitative link” line of rebuttal
will no longer wash.
Freke and Gandy show that Christianity and the Mystery Religions of the
preceding and contemporary periods share virtually all the same beliefs,
doctrines, rituals, and rites. To give just one example, in the case of those based
upon the Osiris/Dionysus myth, the “hero” is the saviour of mankind, God
incarnate, born of a virgin in a cave on December 25; he has a star appear at his
birth, is visited by magi from the East, and turns water into wine at a wedding;
he heals the sick, casts out demons, and performs miracles; he is transfigured
before his disciples, rides a donkey into a special city, is betrayed for thirty
pieces of silver, and celebrates a communal meal with bread and wine; he is put
to death on a cross, descends into hell, and is resurrected on the third day; he
dies to redeem the world’s sins; he ascends into heaven and is seated beside God
as the divine judge. He represents the Christos, or the divine soul, of every
human being.9
Literal or Mythical?
 
The only difference—and It was quite radical—between the Jesus story of
the New Testament and the many ancient myths depicting what seems the
identical combination of concepts and characteristics is that nobody among the
ancients, prior to the full-fledged Christian movement, believed for one moment
that any of the events in their dramas were in any way historical. What counted
were the deep, timeless spiritual truths behind or beyond the fictional packaging.
There was one primal, central myth—originating undoubtedly in Egypt—and all
the rest flowed from that. In Christianity, however, the myth was eventually
literalized. Jesus was historicized. The consequences of this were to prove very
damaging over the centuries to come. A believer had to put his or her trust in
Jesus alone to know both divinity and ultimate resurrection. That’s the kind of
religion on which I, like many of you, was raised. The pre-Christian Christianity
spoken of by Augustine had become “Christianism” instead.
Christianity, as its millions of followers have been traditionally taught, is
about the arrival in history of the Messiah, the Son of God, as an actual person.
But in Egyptian religion—and all the other socalled primitive faiths already
mentioned—the “messianic son,” symbolled by the sun itself, came ever
mythically “as the manifestor and witness for the Father,” who had sunk his own
life in matter to reproduce himself in his next generation. According to the
historian Herodotus, the “father of history,” the Egyptian Jesus, known as Iu-em-

hetep, was one of the eight great gods who were described in the papyri as
having existed almost twenty thousand years ago.10 He bore different names as
specific cults changed. But to the sages of old time, the coming was a constantly
recurring and purely symbolic event. The ancient messiah was an
anthropomorphic, representative figure that came from age to age, cycle to cycle.
In the Egyptian Ritual, he came symbolically each day, but he also came
periodically; he came “regularly and continuously.” His solar and lunar symbols
came cyclically and in eternal renewal with the seasons. The solstices and the
equinoxes marked his waxing and waning presence. This Egyptian “messiah”
was not expected at any historic date, at any epoch. Rather, symbols of his
spiritual coming manifested themselves in natural phenomena by the day
(sunrise and sunset, for example), the year, or the lunar cycle. The constant
repetition of the symbols was the assurance of their unfailing fulfillment. They
meant that an elevation of distinctly divine consciousness was gradually coming
into rulership in humanity, a kingdom of goodness, truth, and beauty, a kingdom
of love.
It is now clear to me that for the ancients, the final fulfillment of this coming,
or advent, would have meant stopping dead the march of the universe. And for
one person to be saved here and now, in some static fashion for all eternity, he
would have had to drop out of step with the rhythmic pulse of life. To them,
salvation meant to consummate the present evolutionary cycle and keep
marching on with nature until full divinization was realized. There was no manic
expectation of some supernatural, apocalyptic “second coming.” It was
happening to those who opened themselves to it here and now, step by step.
Significantly, here the King James translation of the “end of the world” has done
a lot of harm. The Greek text always uses words that explicitly signify the end of
the age, cycle, or eon, not the end of the cosmos itself.
Christliness
In the pre-Christianism Christianity, It was believed that the coming of the
Messiah, or Christ, was taking place in the life of every person at all times. Each
person had his or her evolutionary solstice, his or her Christmas, and, eventually,
his or her Easter too. The symbols for all of this, taken from the book of nature,
were annuals; the actual events they typed (symbolized) in mankind’s history
were perennials. In nature, every process was seen as typical and repetitive. But
also it was, and is, typical of all other processes, and of life in its entirety. The
Christ portrayed in nature and then personified in dramatic form in the Egyptian
rituals stood for the “sun” of divinity in human beings. The Gospels’ “life” of

Jesus turns out in the end analysis, then, to be a somewhat garbled and
fragmentary copy of an Egyptian prototype who was a purely dramatic figure
portraying the divinity in man. We will look more thoroughly into this dimension
of the story in chapter 9. Significantly, Meister Eckhart (1260–1327), the
German Dominican mystic who died before he could be fully tried for heresy by
the archbishop of Cologne (he died while appealing to the pope), once wrote that
the Christ was not a historical person, per se, but rather “the collective soul of
humanity.”
We can sum it up this way: the primary truth of human culture presented by all
sage religions of antiquity is that there resides deeply embedded in the core of
our basic constitution a nucleus of what, for want of a better designation, must
be called a divine spark, or “sun.” The glow of Christliness—a thing Kuhn
describes as at once both chemically radioactive and intellectual—in us is,
indeed, as Paul himself says, our “hope of glory.” All the sun symbolism of
religion, ancient and modern, is an attempt to express this one salient truth. All
the Christs of antiquity were denominated as sun gods. We all share in this one
primordial “fire.”
Sun Worship and Christianity
Most Church members have no idea of the period of overlap between ancient
“Pagan” sun worship and what was gradually developing as “orthodox”
Christianity. Constantine, for example, generally recognized as the first Christian
emperor, gave toleration to Christianity in or about 313 in the Edict of Milan,
after his victory at the Milvian Bridge, where he had his legendary vision of in
hoc signo vince (conquer in this sign, the sign of the cross). But his coins
continued to bear the inscription sol deus invictus (unconquerable sun) for many
years. He refused baptism until he was on his deathbed in 337 so that he could
die having committed no fresh crimes. He had good reasons to worry. Even
though he had summoned some 318 bishops to Nicaea in 325 to solve the Arian
controversy* and thus achieve political and religious unity for the empire—the
result was the still-repeated Nicene Creed—he remained a violent man. Having,
he thought, settled the doctrine of the Trinity once and for all, he returned home
from Nicaea and murdered or caused to have murdered his son, Crispus; his
wife, Fausta (boiled alive and suffocated in her bath); his brother-in-law,
Licinius, and his son (flogged to death); and several others.
Constantine never quite gave up the hope of further uniting the empire in the
adoration of the one sun god who combined in himself the Father-God of the
Christians and the much-worshipped (solar god) Mithras. Significantly,

according to the Catholic Encyclopedia, Pope Leo the Great (pontiff from 440 to
461) witnessed that in his day, it was the custom of many Christians to stand on
the front steps of St. Peter’s in Rome “and pay homage to the sun by obeisance
and prayers.”
The February 2003 issue of the well-known and respected magazine Bible
Review carried an illustrated article, “Faces of Jesus,” which described a famous
ceiling mosaic of Tomb M, underneath St. Peter’s in the Vatican. It dates to the
third or fourth century C.E. The mosaic shows the vine of the Greek sun god,
Dionysus, reinterpreted as the vine of Jesus Christ and surrounding a large image
of Christ, as the sun god, riding in a sun chariot being pulled across the heavens
by four white horses.11 Thus Jesus was quite literally the “sun of righteousness”
for many members of the Church for several centuries. The well-known
Christmas carol “Hark, the Herald Angels Sing” has this line from Scripture:
“Risen with healing in his wings.” A common depiction of the sun in ancient
times shows it as winged on two sides. The Christian Sabbath, Sunday, is a
direct relic of this solar phenomenon. The Pagan name for it was dies solis (the
day of the sun). The phrase “Our Lord, the Sun” was used in prayer by
Christians up to the sixth century, and was even embedded in the Church’s
liturgy until it was changed to “Our Lord, the God.”
The Ultimate Christian Symbol
The symbol of the cross—“the old, rugged cross,” as the familiar hymn puts
it—will forever in traditional Christianity be associated with the shame,
suffering, sacrifice, and ultimate victory of Jesus Christ on the first God’s Friday
(Good Friday). But it has to be noted that inasmuch as it was by far the earliest
and most universal of all religious icons, the cross had quite a range of wholly
different meanings for untold millennia before the dawn of official, literalist
Christianity (Christianism).
Egyptologists, for example, report that the sign of the cross was commonly
found on the breasts of mummies, and that the cross was frequently placed in the
hands of the dead as “an emblem both of incarnation and of new life to come.” It
was even carved on the back of the scarab (a gem or brooch representing the
dung beetle), another symbol that meant eternal life.
The ankh, a cross with a circle or loop at the top, was widely used in ancient
Egyptian culture as a sign of eternal life, but crosses of all types, from swastikas
to the cross of Plato’s mythical divine man “stamped upon the universe,” are
evident whenever socalled primitive religion is studied. (Incidentally, the
swastika symbol, tainted forever by its appropriation by the Nazis, was found in

ancient Hindu, Mexican, and Buddhist traditions, and many others. The name
comes from the Sanskrit world svastika, meaning a mystical cross denoting good
fortune. Some authorities say it was meant to represent the sun with its rays.)
Conservative scholars, eager to debunk any dependency of Christianity upon
Paganism, usually attempt to explain away the extraordinary dissemination of
the cross through the world prior to Christianity by calling it a primordial
symbol related much more to other symbols such as the centre, the circle, and
the square. It’s most obvious use in this respect would be to divide a circle into
four even parts, for example. Yet other scholars have produced a mass of
evidence for a radically different point of view.
Spirit into Matter
Kuhn contended that the single most important religious event in all human
history was the awakening of selfreflective consciousness. At that precise
moment, we stopped being purely animals and became “quickened” as true
human beings with intellects and souls. A solely religious version of this same
evolutionary phenomenon can, of course, be found in the classic creation myths
of the first two chapters of Genesis.
The birth of all religious impulses ultimately is traceable to this momentous
creation event—the awareness that the “horizontal” line of our animality had
been intersected by the “verticality” of selfreflective reason and a profound
sense of the divine, the Christos within. The cross, Kuhn convincingly argues,
symbolized spirit plunged into matter. As we have seen, the technical term for
this is incarnation. It is the interaction between spirit and matter that is the key to
how the entire universe works, but nowhere is this more vitally true than in our
own humanity.
The cross, then, in all its shapes and forms, depicted allegorically this primal
experience and reality. Hence its universality. It was a constant symbol of our
rootedness in the earth on the one hand and our destiny with God on the other.
Later mystic philosophers found it to be the ideal “plus sign” because, as a
symbol of addition, a process of expanding by adding on, it signified the whole
way to human development. Placed on an angle, as the multiplication sign, the
cross again mystically represents the motion and impulse given to all life by the
intersection of spirit (the vertical) with matter (the horizontal). It’s what pulses
through the universe as the initial simplicity of the one becomes the infinite
multiplicity of the many.
The evidence is overwhelming that in Paganism and early Christianity, the
cross was always a symbol of life, never of death (except as “death,” in its

symbolic sense, means incarnation). To be in the body was to be put—even
impaled or crucified—on this cross of fleshly existence. This is the powerful
meaning behind Jesus’ command “Take up your cross . . .”—that is, accept the
discipline and ambiguity and suffering involved in being a fully aware human
being. (The Greeks said that the body is the tomb of the soul, and they had a
word play on it: soma [body] = sema [tomb].) It also symbolized the cross of life
on earth, because its four arms represent the fourfold foundation of the world,
the four elements (earth, water, air, and fire), and the underpinning of the human
temple, or being.
It needs to be better known that the true sign of Christianity for the earliest
centuries of Church history was not a crucifix—a cross bearing the figure of
Jesus—but either a bare cross or one with a lamb fastened to it. In the entire
iconography of the catacombs, no figure of a man on a cross appears for the first
six or seven centuries of the era. It will come as a surprise to many that the first
known figure of a god on a cross is a likeness of the sun god Orpheus from some
three centuries B.C.E. The crucifix on the amulet on the cover of The Jesus
Mysteries, by Freke and Gandy, clearly depicts this image.
Not until 692, in the reign of Emperor Justinian II, was it decreed by the
Church (through the Trullan Council) that the figure of the historical Jesus on the
cross should supersede that of “the lamb, as in former times.” Hence the
erroneous—and to be quite honest, overly prominent—display of the crucifix
throughout the Roman Catholic world today. The bare cross is a more accurate
symbol of the original faith.
The Irony
There is a somewhat grotesque irony at play here. For just over one billion
Roman Catholics—and for the secular world looking on—the central icon of the
living God today is a human figure impaled and in agony on an instrument of
torture, suffering, and pain. Small wonder that such a belief system makes so
much of suffering while remaining sadly indifferent to the suffering that several
of its teachings cause. Vatican edicts on birth control and other “hormone issues”
are cases in point. Religion and spirituality are supposedly about life—abundant,
evolving, transforming, ultimately triumphant life. An empty cross can convey
all that. But a crucifix symbolizes the opposite. Gerald Massey, who, like Kuhn,
began his researches with no animus whatever toward religion in general or the
Christian Church in particular, waxes highly indignant about this issue. As a
victim of cruel child labour and grinding poverty, he knew first-hand the
frequent, hardhearted indifference of the superficially pious and devoutly

orthodox “upper and middle classes.” Massey knew full well that the history of
Christianity shows plenty of evidence of great individual acts of charity, and of
powerful movements based upon compassion and a love of social justice, but he
was adamant that the centrality of the crucifix—of a personal, historic Jesus on a
cross—had unconsciously fostered a belief that “suffering is good for you,” that
you must resign yourself and, above all, comply and conform.
The Hope
Learning about the depth and background of all these symbols in the pre-
Christian era, and about how the literal, surface meaning is only a veneer over
their essential truth, has been a truly liberating experience for me. It has made
clear to me that the concepts at the heart of Christianity really flow from the
deep well of the unconscious, having been planted there by God. For example,
the idea of the Christ within—the fully realized spiritual human being—is now
to me an unmistakable, Jungian-style archetype in our human psyche. The same
is true of the other religious symbols described here. Implanted deeply by the
Creator, they belong to us uniquely as human beings, however they are named,
and they are full of promise and hope for a meaningful, twenty-first-century
faith.
Remember, above all, that the fact that most of the material in the Jesus story
was previously extant in other sacred literature of the ancient world in no way
detracts from its power and relevance for our lives today. If something is true or
portrays a deep reality, it remains true forever. Things are not true simply
because someone somewhere first said them, or because they are collected in
books such as the Bible. They are true because they ring with full authenticity on
the anvil of our souls.
* Arius was the author of the key “heresy” debated at the Council of Nicaea.
His position was that Jesus Christ was created by God the father and so was inferior to him.

4
THE GREATEST 
COVER-UP OF ALL TIME
How a Spiritual Christianity 
Became a Literalist Christianism 
There are many things that are true which it is not useful for the vulgar
crowd to know;and certain things which although they are false it is
expedient for the people to believe otherwise.
– ST. AUGUSTINE, City of God 
The following two strong statements truly compelled me to pay close
attention—to sit up and think more deeply:
• “Christianity evolved and took historical form as the result of a corruption
of high wisdom already extant, and not as the promulgation of new light
and wisdom previously unknown.”
• “Christianity only gained favour and held the allegiance of the masses of
the populations of the West for centuries because it succeeded in
accommodating its message to the prevalent levels of general
unintelligence. In doing so it inevitably distorted its truths into ludicrous
caricature and baneful forms of error and falsehood.”
THE ALVIN BOYD KUHN BOOK that has made by far the greatest impression

upon me, given my past training and overall general commitment to the idea of
the high nobility of Christianity as a religious movement, has been The Shadow
of the Third Century. Its 522 studiously researched pages on the lies, fraud,
deceit, and violence that conspired to turn Christianity into what Kuhn calls
Christianism came as a profound surprise and shock. I can only hope that all
sincere seekers after truth will go beyond this present, necessarily brief,
summary to read it fully for themselves. There’s no question whatever in my
mind that those who do so will be as deeply affected as I was. Kuhn shows
clearly that the truth about early Christian history has been sadly suppressed.
Indeed, he claims—and then proves—that the trail of unbelievable and quite
deliberate skulduggery runs throughout almost the entire history of ecclesiastical
Christianity. Reading his arguments and checking his sources for myself, I
realized that other investigators had missed the truth before because they were
not cognizant of (or were unwilling to face) the fact that a conspiracy had
operated over a span of centuries. They ignored what were piously seen as
unfortunate excesses or momentary lapses and kept following the official party
line.
His case rests upon the undeniable fact that the religion that started under the
name of Christianity in the first century did not long retain its original deeply
spiritual nature and substance. I was quickly forced to realize that it was not by
any means the same religion in the fourth century that it had been in the first.
Despite beginning as a more or less sincere effort of genuine religiousness and
mysticism fed by many sources and expressed in many forms, it had plunged
rapidly down the grade of deterioration “until in the fourth century it had
completed its dire transformation (transmogrification) into Christianism.”
I have carefully examined the major evidence so thoroughly documented by
Kuhn, and I have found these facts:
• Christianity began as a cult with almost wholly Pagan origins and
motivations in the first century, “and by the fourth it had utterly turned its
back on Paganism and repudiated every hint of . . . connection with it,
loading it with contempt from that day to this.”
• Books that were highly regarded in the movement at the start and for some
time thereafter were condemned and violently repudiated within less than
two centuries.

• Several doctrines that were held in great esteem in the initial period, such
as the doctrines of reincarnation and a universal salvation, were later
refuted.
• Nearly all the original thinkers who had shared in the building of the new
movement—its very pioneers and leaders—had, even before the fourth
century, been pronounced heretics and were reviled by those who had
swept in and grabbed control of the policies.
• The mystical/allegorical method of interpreting the sacred Scripture, used
at the beginning by Paul and such eminent scholars as Clement of
Alexandria and Origen, was replaced by a wholly literal/historical
approach.
Let me expand a little on this last point. This whole process of drastic change
hinged on the crucial decision to take the ancient esoteric wisdom of socalled
Paganism—the pre-Christianism Christianity of which both St. Augustine and
Eusebius wrote— and make it exoteric (i.e., plain, open, and simple for the
ignorant and unlearned masses). This decision had no doubt a worthy aim, and
on one level, fuelled by the Roman gift for organization and crowd control (not
to mention the ready use of force whenever deemed necessary), It was a great
success. But the price, both intellectually and practically, was terrible.
In a powerful passage, Kuhn says that by the time the Pagan doctrine of the
birth of Christhood in man had been put forth exoterically, for lowly mental
grasp, as the literal birth of a baby on December 25, it was no longer true. By the
time the crucifixion of divine mind power on the “cross” of existence in the
fleshly body of every member of our species had been concretized and
historicized as the literal agony of a quivering body of one man on a wooden
cross, it was no longer true. By the time the dismemberment of the unit power of
Christhood (with each human given a portion for his divine transfiguration from
within) had been made “comprehensible” as the actual breaking of a literal loaf
of bread into fragments, it was a false belief. Indeed, “by the time the descent of
the Monad [the One God and Source of All Being] from the Logos of divine
intellection into the water (matter) of the human body had been ‘clarified’ and
‘simplified’ to poor mental capacity as the baptism of a man in the Jordan River,
it was a delusion and a snare to uncritical thought. Instead of enlightening him it

would hallucinate him, because his ability to lift it from the concrete to the
spiritual sense was non-existent. And by the time the incarnation doctrine had
been ‘made plain’ as the descent of God’s radiant being into the physical corpus
of one man, so that simple minds could see it, it was an outright mockery of
truth. . . . Crude conception ends by taking the concrete images for the factual
substance of truth.”
The earliest Church Fathers themselves admit that they took the high,
symbolic, esoteric (or secret) wisdom that the Christian movement had inherited
from Paganism—from Platonic philosophy and the Mystery Religions—and
explained it, or rather downgraded it, by means of vulgar fables for the illiterate
mob. One fifth-century pope even exulted, “What profit hath not this fable
brought us.” In his Anacalypsis, Godfrey Higgins comments, “Their
explanations to the vulgar are suitable to the vulgar, and were meant merely to
stop their enquiries.” Indeed, Higgins, who also began his prodigious studies
with no bias whatever against Christianity, says concisely that while the Fathers
confessed—and, for close to two hundred years, upheld—the existence of an
inner profundity of meaning and high range of mystical experience that could be
shared only with initiates and “genuinely tested and accredited competents,”
they were soon spreading these inner teachings abroad to the general public,
“and in the process reducing the rich and sumptuous feast of wisdom to such a
hash and porridge as the ignorant masses could find in some way digestible.
Thus came Christianism which was the wreckage of Christianity.”
I found it particularly convincing that the great historian of that period,
Edward Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, observed: “The
most extravagant legends, as they conduced to the honour of the Church, were
apprehended by the credulous multitude, countenanced by the power of the
clergy, and attested by the suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical history.”1
In short, in the view of these scholars, the Church converted a whole mass of
romantic legends or myths into socalled history, a multiplication of “fictitious
stories.” What emerged was in many ways a cult of ignorance. Not surprisingly,
today’s ultraconservative Christians are not very pleased with Gibbon. Most
have yet to hear of Higgins, Massey, and Kuhn. But they need to hear them if
Christianity today is to be more a part of the solution to the world’s problems
and less a part of the problems themselves. The still-potent aura of Christian
triumphalism needs to be shattered by the hard facts of history for a new order of
global religious harmony to emerge. Here is a humbling assessment by Kuhn of
the real state of affairs: “The universal tradition in all Christendom has had it
that the new faith sprang into existence out of conflict as the bearer of the
victory of light over darkness. Alas and again alas, it was not so. It came out

waving the banner of darkness as victor over the light. But it all but put out the
light of the world.”
This statement about putting out the “light” may seem like an exaggeration of
the worst kind—until you read the full story and comprehend it. I discovered in
my research that like Massey and Kuhn, a host of other scholars have
documented such a horror story of book burning, forgery, and deliberate fraud
over the late second, third, and fourth centuries that anyone unfamiliar with it
can scarcely take it all in. “Picture the anomaly of the Christian host emerging
from the struggle allegedly carrying the victorious banner of light, while with
hot feet it stamped out the blackened ashes of the books of the Alexandrian
library,” wrote Kuhn. “Picture this bearer of the standard of new light . . .
burning in 553 C.E. the books of its most truly exalted theologian, Origen, and
invoking anathema [curses of excommunication] on anyone found reading
them.”
Charles B. Waite, in his History of the Christian Religion to the Year 200, tells
how Eusebius, whose Ecclesiastical History is the principal source for the
history of Christianity from the apostolic age until his own day, was a most
conspicuous liar. What’s almost equally bad is that Eusebius frequently made
many sloppy mistakes. “No one has contributed more to Christian history, and
no one is guilty of more errors,” Waite charges. “The statements of this historian
are made, not only carelessly and blunderingly, but in many instances in
falsification of the facts of history. Not only the most unblushing falsehoods, but
literary forgeries of the vilest character darken the pages of his . . . writing.” I
had heard not a word about any of this during my years of training for the
Anglican priesthood.
Waite cites authorities who confirm this scandal by asserting that Eusebius
indeed had “a peculiar faculty for diverging from the truth.” He was always
ready to supply by fabrication what was wanting in the historical record. In other
words, this great world religion actually rests on a foundation of falsehood and
forgery.2
Few mainline Church members today are aware of just how extremely critical
Edward Gibbon is in Decline and Fall of all these early Christian frauds,
deceptions, and forgeries. Gibbon candidly asserts that Eusebius, whom he calls
the “gravest” of the ecclesiastical historians, “indirectly confesses that he has
related whatever might redound to the glory, and that he has suppressed all that
could tend to the disgrace, of religion.” This is not history— it is the kind of
chronic revisionism more often associated today with repressive political
systems. Anyone truly familiar with Gibbon’s scrupulously careful account
knows that he found everything about Christian “history” until 250 totally

untrustworthy and “suspicious.” He wrote, “The scanty and suspicious materials
of ecclesiastical history seldom enable us to dispel the dark cloud that hangs
over the first age of the church.”
Gibbon testifies, for example, to the “vulgar forgery” of the deliberate
insertion of two admittedly spurious passages regarding Jesus Christ into the text
of the Jewish historian Josephus. He also produces reliable authorities to show
that even in such an important matter of historical record as the number of
Christian sectaries martyred under several Roman emperors, the Christians
“outrageously falsified the figures.” The gross overstatements were to increase
the sympathy that martyrdom naturally arouses, he explains.
In an article on evolution, the historian Alexander Wilder says that men like
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Eusebius (all early Christian apologists) “have
transmitted to posterity a reputation for such untruth and dishonest practices that
the heart sickens at the story of the crimes of that period.” The duplicity, he
notes, is all the worse since the whole Christian outline rests upon it. Gerald
Massey bluntly charges that the “Christian scheme or schema, as it is aptly
called in the New Testament, is a fraud.”
Here is specific, shocking confirmation of an otherwise seemingly grotesque
evaluation from one of the most respected Fathers of the Church, St. Gregory of
Nazianzen (329–389), in a letter to the esteemed St. Jerome. Nicknamed “The
Theologian,” Gregory wrote to his friend and confidant, “Nothing can impose
better on the people than verbiage; the less they understand, the more they
admire. Our [Christian] Fathers and Doctors have often said, not what they
thought, but what circumstance and necessity forced them to.”
The whole aim of these third-and fourth-century Machiavellian machinations
was to obscure and conceal all traces of the deep connection between the “new
light” of Christian revelation and its Pagan past. “And when Eusebius recorded
his memorable boast that he had virtually made ‘all square’ for the Christians, it
was an ominous announcement of what he had done to keep out of sight the
mythical and mystical rootage of historical Christianity,”
charges Massey. “The Gnostics had been muzzled and their extant evidence as
far as possible masked. He and his co-conspirators had done their worst in
destroying documents and effacing the telltale records of the past, to prevent the
future from learning what the bygone ages could have said directly for
themselves.”3 They made mute all the Pagan voices that would have “cried aloud
their testimony” against the unparalleled imposture then being shaped and
perfected in Rome. They in fact succeeded in reducing the first four centuries to
total silence on all matters of the most vital importance for any proper
understanding of the Christian religion. Massey’s last sentence in this passage,

however, is the most significant of all. He writes, “The mythos having been at
last published as a human history, everything else was suppressed to support the
fraud.”
Whether such dishonest practices were always motivated by malice,
ignorance, misplaced zeal, or deliberate conspiracy can be keenly debated by
scholars. What cannot be gainsayed by anyone is that the history of the early
centuries of the Christian religion witnessed the perpetuation of an “extensive
series” of what all later historians refer to as “pious frauds.” Many, if not all, of
the Christian apologists of the period admit this unashamedly themselves.
This very admission of widespread basic dishonesty greatly strengthens the
case that the entire transformation of earlier myth into a seemingly historical
“reality” was itself a lie. This lie is perhaps mitigated somewhat if we remember
what G. R. S. Mead wrote in his Fragments of a Faith Forgotten: “It must not be
supposed that the re-writers and editors of the old traditions were forgers and
falsifiers in any ordinary sense of the word. Antiquity in general had no
conception of literary morality in its modern meaning, and all writing of a
religious character was the outcome of an inner impulse.” Mead goes on to add
that the mythologizing of history and the historicizing of mythology were
“common to the times” and, at one point or another, to all ancient peoples. If the
literal truth of objective events is not really your main theme or interest, but the
experience of the inner spiritual life is, it can partly explain to a modern reader
what was often actually going on. (In my experience, no modern theologically
trained literary critic has done more to clarify these issues than Northrop Frye.)
In his Anacalypsis, Higgins says that It was common for priests in ancient
religions to attribute to their opponents absurd opinions they never held—
simply to disgrace them. He adds, “This has always been considered by priests a
mere allowable ruse in religious controversy.”
The German scholar John Laurence von Mosheim, in his celebrated History of
the Christian Religion, says of the Gospel of Hermas, “At the time he wrote,
(most likely) between 140 and 155 C.E., It was an established maxim with many
of the Christians that it was pardonable in an advocate for religion to avail
himself of fraud and deception if it were likely they might lead to attainment of
any considerable good. Of the list of silly books and stories to which this
erroneous notion gave rise from the second to the 15th century no one who is
familiar with Christian history can be ignorant.”
Gibbon’s harsh judgment was that as long as they contributed to the glory of
the Church, the legends and forgeries were lauded by the mob, welcomed by the
hierarchy, and supported by the dubious “evidence” of alleged ecclesiastical
history. As a specific example, Gibbon notes in his work Vindication that the

thirty-second chapter of the Twelfth Book of Anselm, Evangelical Preparation,
bears for its title this scandalous proposition: “How It May Be Lawful and
Fitting to Use Falsehood as a Medicine and for the Benefit of Those Who Want
to Be Deceived.”4
The greatest preacher of the early Church, John Chrysostom (the golden
mouth), who lived from about 347 to 407 and was both bishop of Constantinople
and a famous doctor of the Church, observed in his commentary on 1
Corinthians 9:19, “Great is the force of deceit, provided it is not excited by a
treacherous intention.” Few today can read this without some recoil and surprise.
Centuries later, even such a distinguished churchman as Cardinal John Henry
Newman, in the Apology for His Life, appeared to put his stamp of approval on
this kind of dishonesty for the glory of the faith. He writes, “The Greek Fathers
thought that when the cause was just ( justa causa) an untruth need not be a lie.”
With such logic, one can justify almost anything.
This is just a small sampling of a mass of evidence set out by Kuhn and others
that the early Fathers held it as a “distinct proposition” that pious frauds were not
only justifiable but even laudable. To enforce their claims to exclusive salvation,
they filled all ecclesiastical literature “with the taint of the most unblushing
mendacity.” Since “heathenism” had to be combated, prophecies about Christ by
Orpheus and the Sybils were forged, and “lying wonders” were multiplied.
Heretics had to be convinced, so false interpolations and complete forgeries were
made. The whole process continued until eventually the very sense and love of
truth “seemed blotted out from the minds of men.” As we shall see, even the
texts of the evolving New Testament were tampered with.
Higgins bluntly declares that every ancient author, without exception, has
come to us through the medium of Christian editors who have “either from
roguery or folly, corrupted them all.” He writes, “We know that later in one
batch all the Fathers of the Church and all the Gospels were ‘corrected,’ that is,
corrupted by the united exertions of the Roman See, Lanfranc, who became the
Archbishop of Canterbury in 1070, and the Benedictine monks of St. Maur.”
A similar revision had occurred centuries earlier. Victor Tununensis, an
African bishop of the sixth century, wrote a chronicle ending at the year 566. It
records that in the year 506 at Constantinople, by order of Emperor Anastasius,
“the holy Gospels, being written by illiterate Evangelists, were censured and
corrected.” One of the Church Fathers, a Bishop Dionysius, complained that
even his own writings “had been falsified by apostles of the devil.” No wonder,
he added, “that the Scriptures too were falsified by such persons.”5 Even Origen
had noted that already the differences between copies of the Gospels in his day

were “considerable,” partly because of the carelessness of individual scribes but
also partly because of the impious audacity of “those who added or removed
what seemed good to them in the work of ‘correction.’”6
Obviously, you have to regard with deep suspicion any group or movement,
however noble its declarations, that proceeds to win its “case” by silencing,
excommunicating, or murdering its assumed opponents. Yet most Christians
today are totally unaware that Church history conceals a horrendous, lengthy
record of precisely these kinds of tactics by the proponents of what eventually
became “orthodox,” credal belief. What’s more, the kind of bigoted fury
unleashed in the third and fourth centuries against Pagans, “heretics,” and
nonconformists of all types set a ruthless precedent for centuries to come. The
comparatively modern Church historian G.R.S. Mead cites, for example, the
burning of the manuscripts of French rabbis during the notorious Inquisition and
the vandalism of fanatical crusaders, “who left smouldering piles of Hebrew
scrolls behind them in their path of blood and fire.” Kuhn argues that the official
burnings of Hebrew books began at Montpellier, France, in 1233, with the
commitment to the flames of all the works of Maimonides (1135–1204), the
renowned Jewish philosopher and theologian. In the same year at Paris, some
twelve thousand volumes of the Talmud were burned, and in 1244, eighteen
thousand other various works were thrown into fire, he records.
Epiphanius (315–403), the rigidly conservative bishop of Salamiz, in an attack
upon the “Sabellian heretics” (who found they couldn’t follow the majority view
of the Trinity), wrote that “the whole of their errors . . . they derive from. . . that
which is called the Gospel of the Egyptians.”7 Kuhn remarks, “Priceless in value
would be that same Gospel of the Egyptians if Christian fury had not destroyed
it.” Another priceless book, The True Logos by Celsus, one of the most noted
Pagan philosophers of the second century, was likewise burned. The brilliant
Gnostic philosopher Basilides (c. 135–150) taught at Alexandria in the second
quarter of the second century and claimed to know of a secret tradition
transmitted by St. Peter himself. He was highly regarded even by so eminent a
Christian theologian and Church Father as Clement of Alexandria (c. 150–215).
Yet according to Eusebius, his irreplaceable, widely renowned Interpretations
upon the Gospels— in twenty-four splendid volumes—were all burned “by order
of the Church.” Thirty-six priceless volumes written by Porphyry (c. 232–303),
one of the most learned and brilliant minds of his era, were destroyed by the
Church Fathers. Porphyry, a Neoplatonist philosopher who could not accept the
divinity of Christ and who exposed numerous inconsistencies in the Gospels, had
tried official Christianity for a brief time but found it sadly wanting. Fifteen of

his burned books formed a special series called Against the Christians. Scholars
would give a lot to have them now.
In his book Pagan and Christian Creeds, Edward Carpenter, an English
philosopher, writes bluntly, “The Christian writers . . . not only introduced new
doctrines, legends, miracles and so forth— most of which we can trace to
antecedent Pagan sources—but they took pains to destroy the Pagan records and
so obliterate the evidence of their own dishonesty.” J.M. Robertson, in Pagan
Christs, agrees with Carpenter and gives as an example the treatise of Firmicus
(c. 350), which was deliberately mutilated at a passage accusing Christians of
following the practices of the widely popular cult of Mithras.8
Kuhn, in his inspiring but at times difficult tome The Lost Light, explains that
the story of the destruction of not only books but also cities, monasteries, and
temples—indeed, of the early pre-Christian Gaelic civilization in Britain,
Ireland, Brittany, and Gaul—is also a sorry narrative of Christian fury. A
Christian mob destroyed the Gaulish city of Bibracte in 389, and Alesia was
destroyed before that. Bibracte had a sacred Druid college with forty thousand
students, and it offered courses in philosophy, literature, grammar, law,
medicine, astrology, architecture, and esoteric religion. Arles, with a seat of
learning founded two thousand years B.C.E., was sacked by Christians in 270.
These acts of outrage in all probability included the tragic destruction of scrolls
and books that might well have completely illumined our understanding of the
mysterious rock monuments at Stonehenge. Instead, it today still lies wrapped in
a miasma of questions and ignorance.
The utter destruction of the untold thousands of irreplaceable books and
scrolls of the incredible library at Alexandria by a Christian mob stands as
perhaps the greatest single testimony to the overwhelming hatred of learning and
education held by the rank-and-file majority who flocked to the new religion.9
They were looking, as I have already described, for an exoteric (or literal)
religion suited to the lowest common denominator.
This vast store of ancient knowledge, with its museum and the temple of
Serapis (the Serapeum), was first established by Ptolemy I, a former boyhood
friend of Alexander the Great and later one of his leading generals, between 300
and 290 B.C.E. It housed priceless classics in every field of human endeavour,
from medicine to theology, including works by the great Greek playwrights
Euripides, Aeschylus, and Sophocles. It had been partly burned by accident
during a punitive attack on the harbour by Julius Caesar in 47 B.C.E., and it was
then targeted for destruction by Emperor Aurelian in the third century. He
reigned 270–275 C.E. In 400 the Serapeum, to which most of the books had by

then been moved, was burned to the ground on the orders of Theophilus, the
bishop of Alexandria. Then there were riots led by a mob of Christian monks in
415, in the reign of Emperor Theodosius, and with the knowledge or connivance
of Bishop Cyril, who had succeeded Theophilus as the patriarch. All that
remained of the library, museum, and temple was finally left in smoking ruins.
Tragically, this same mob, led by a monk named Peter the Clerk, then attacked
and murdered the most brilliant woman philosopher, astronomer, and
mathematician of antiquity, the widely renowned Hypatia.10 The daughter of the
distinguished Platonic philosopher Theon and the leading lecturer at the library
and museum, Hypatia represented the highest standard of Pagan erudition and
grace—and was a prime example of the equality of women in the supposedly
inferior religion. She was taken by the mob to a church called the Caesareum,
where she was stripped, stoned with roofing tiles, and torn apart; her flesh was
scraped from the bones with oyster shells, and she was then burned at a spot
called Cinaron. Socrates Scholasticus (380–450) records, in his Ecclesiastical
History, that this happened during Lent, in the fourth year of Cyril’s episcopate.
Some authorities question whether Cyril was directly involved in Hypatia’s
death, but he was known to be jealous of her popularity and was a hot foe of
anything other than the new, orthodox Christianity, or Christianism. Cyril
ruthlessly hunted down heretics, Pagans, and Jews, looting their homes and
possessions. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church says that if Cyril
didn’t order Hypatia’s murder, it “was certainly the work of his supporters.” This
same source says that whatever one thinks of the “methods adopted” by Cyril in
fighting the perceived enemies of the Church, “his distinction and ability as a
[Christian] theologian are beyond dispute.” (Apparently, you can be a good
theologian while acting out the worst kind of violence.) Incidentally, the great
library of Alexandria has recently been reopened, with great pomp and
pageantry, nearly sixteen hundred years after its destruction.11
All of this mayhem was a further deliberate attempt to “blot out all links”
between the Christian body of doctrine and any Pagan material. The top Church
authorities were not content with the original, specious allegation that Satan had
been behind all the amazing resemblances—they even talked of “anticipated
plagiarism,” charging that the devil stole the rites, doctrines, and dogmas
centuries before they became accepted by the Church— so they destroyed as far
as possible the entire Pagan record to obliterate the evidence of their own
dishonesty. Whole treatises on Mithraism—a vigorous rival to early Christianity
—were obliterated. The library of Apollo at Rome was torched and burned to the
ground. Commenting on this whole shameful phenomenon, Sir Gilbert Murray

(1866–1957), the great classical scholar, said, “The polemic literature of
Christianity is loud and triumphant; the books of the Pagans have been
destroyed!” Rome’s Emperor Theodosius I, who reigned from 379 to 395, had
made a number of heresies illegal, and Paganism was virtually outlawed. His
successor, Theodosius II, promulgated the Theodosian Code, which specifically
placed thirty-six heresies under a total ban and completely anathematized
Paganism, Pagan temples, and astrologers as well. In 529, Emperor Justinian, in
the name of Christianity, finally closed the doors of Plato’s famous Academy in
Athens, put the philosophers to flight, and forced any who failed to escape to be
baptized.
The Church’s initial attempts to blame obvious similarities between Christian
doctrines and the Pagan originals on the work of the devil struck me at first as
too outlandish to be believed. Then I read what the otherwise esteemed Christian
apologist Justin Martyr had to say about it. He described the Lord’s Supper as
told in the Gospels and then declared that “the wicked devils have imitated [it] in
the Mysteries of Mithras, commanding the same things to be done. For, that
bread and a cup of water are placed with certain incantations in the mystic rites
of one who is being initiated you can either know or learn [emphasis in
original].” Tertullian (160–220), originally from North Africa and eventually the
first Roman theologian to write in Latin, also said that the devil “by the
mysteries of his idols” imitates even the main part of the divine [Christian]
“mysteries.” He writes, “He baptizes his worshippers in water and makes them
believe that purifies them from their crimes! . . . Mithras sets his mark on the
forehead of his soldiers; he celebrates the offering of bread; he offers an image
of the resurrection . . . he limits his chief priests to a single marriage; he even has
his virgins and ascetics.”
The concluding proof that the later medieval and our modern views of
Christianity are not identical to those held at the very outset lies in the sad truth
that one of the most influential and most learned of the Fathers, a man whose
scholarship was central to the early Church’s self-understanding, was
excommunicated as a heretic. It was done within three hundred years of his
death by a Church that had so very quickly lost the light of its original
inspiration. Origen, a pupil of St. Clement of Alexandria, believed in and taught
reincarnation, karma, and universal salvation as Christian doctrines. He was
opposed to a literalist approach to Scripture and to the reduction of the
profundities of spiritual truth to the vulgarities of simplistic exotericism (i.e.,
literalist, common, bottom-line thinking). He paid the price. One of his most
significant observations—an observation that the Church needs to hear and
ponder anew today—was that a literal understanding of a “Christ crucified” was

a doctrine “only fit for children” in the faith.
What I have just documented, as concisely as possible, is the calculated
destruction, corruption, and accompanying cover-up of an ancient, honourable,
and highly spiritual religion. It was a crime of major magnitude that the Church
still refuses to acknowledge, let alone ask divine forgiveness for. The most
important thing to remember at this point is that there can be no genuine hope of
recovery and renewal for either an individual or an institution without an honest
facing up to the past. Sweeping any of this under the carpet of ignorance,
excuses, or platitudes can never lead to the healing and the future we all seek. To
use again the metaphor I employed at the start, no surgery is ever pleasant, but at
times surgery alone holds out the hope of a healthier future for the patient.
The hope that still gleamed brightly through for me as I first read about this
ominous, dark, and shameful record was the same light that the prologue to
John’s Gospel says shines on forever in the darkness, “and [that] the darkness
has never succeeded in putting out.” This same light, according to St. Paul, has
shone into each of our hearts through the indwelling spirit of the Christ. That
crucial, optimistic part of our story is yet to come.

5
IT WAS ALL WRITTEN 
BEFORE—IN EGYPT
Part I:
Ancient Egyptian Religion 
All that went into the making of the Christian historical set-up was long
pre-extant as something quite other than history,was in fact expressly
nonhistorical,in the Egyptian mythology and eschatology. For when the sun
at the Easter equinox entered the sign of the fishes (Pisces) about 255
B.C.E.,the Jesus who stands as the founder of Christianity was at least
10,000 years of age and had been travelling hither as the Ever Coming One
through all preceding time.... During those 10,000 years,that same
incarnation of the divine ideal in the character of Iusa [or Horus],the
Coming Son,had saturated the mind of Egypt with its exalting influence.
Little did men of that epoch dream that their ideal figure of man’s divinity
would in time be rendered historical as a man of flesh.
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
Many of you, if you’re like me, have always been intrigued by the mystery
surrounding ancient Egypt. But the average person won’t have a working
understanding of Egyptian religion, mostly because the symbolism has often
been so poorly explained. Even modern Egyptologists in their scientific
approach have tended to miss or dismiss its inner meanings.

This short account will help the reader see the background for all that
follows.1 Like the Christians many millennia later, the ancient Egyptians
believed in a God who was self-created, self-existent, immortal, invisible,
eternal, omniscient, almighty, and inscrutable; he was the maker of the heavens
and the earth, sky and sea, men and women, animals, birds, fish and creeping
things, trees and plants, and the incorporeal beings who were the messengers
(angels) that fulfilled his wish and word.
The whole of Egyptian religion and theology was based on this belief. (One
hymn from the pyramids says, “Oh, thou divine Child, who didst create thyself, I
am not able to describe thee.”) In an amazing fashion this belief persisted from
the very beginning. True, a seemingly polytheistic set of ideas and beliefs also
was cultivated from time to time, but more as personifications of natural forces
and powers—much as in Hinduism. The idea of monotheism, as I read it, was
never lost sight of; on the contrary, it has been reproduced in the religious
literature of all periods. This is particularly true of the various re-editings of that
corpus known as the Egyptian Book of the Dead. The word used of other deities
was not actually our word “God” but Neter, a spiritual aspect of the one God.
In his work Egyptian Religion, Sir Wallis Budge, the controversial keeper of
Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities in the British Museum a century ago,
describes the ancient Egyptian as standing easily “first among the nations in his
capacity for development, and in his ability for evolving conceptions about God
and the future life, which are claimed as the peculiar product of the most
cultured nations of our time.”
Siegfried Morenz, in his well known book, Egyptian Religion, says that in
spite of differences “we can speak of an Egyptian religion which . . . has one
fundamental point in common with Christianity: the reality of a God who is in
man and above men.
In the light of this present book, what was particularly important was the
Egyptian belief in an anthropomorphic divinity, or Christ ideal, whose life in this
world and the world beyond was typical of the ideal life of man. The chief
embodiments of this divinity were, of course, Osiris and his son, Horus. Neither,
however, was ever regarded as historical.
A list of the names of all the gods of Egypt would fill pages. But all these gods
were only forms, attributes, or phases of Ra, the solar god, who himself was the
supreme symbol or metaphor for God. “The educated classes in Egypt never
placed ‘the gods’ on the same high level as the one God, and they never
imagined that their views on this point could be mistaken,” Budge states.
Ra was undoubtedly the oldest of the gods worshipped, “and his name belongs
to such a remote period that its full meaning is unknown. He was in all periods

the visible emblem of God,” says Budge. A hymn inscribed in the tomb of Seti I
(c. 1370 B.C.E.) reads, “Praise be unto thee, O Ra, thou exalted power . . . thou
One who bringest into being that which has been begotten, behold (thy) body is
Horus.” In other words, Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis, is himself an aspect of
Ra. Indeed, Budge says, “We find everywhere the attempt being made to
emphasize . . . that every god [Neter], whether foreign or native, was an aspect
or form of Ra.”
Here are some typical descriptions from the ancient text:
• God is One and alone and none other is existent with him.
• God is the One creator who has made all things.
• God is a spirit, a hidden spirit, the spirit of spirits, the divine spirit.
• God is from the beginning. . . . He was when nothing else had being. . . .
He shall endure to all eternity.
• God is truth. . . . God is life. . . . He liveth life to humanity and he breathed
the breath of life into his nostrils.2 • God is father and mother, the father
of fathers. . . . He is creator of the heavens and the earth.
• He is the primeval Potter who turned men and gods into being out of his
hands.
There are also passages (which remind me of those in Isaiah 40) where the
Egyptian text says, “The heavens rest upon his head and the earth supports his
feet.” I am also reminded of the Psalms in the following: “God is merciful unto
those who reverence him and he heareth him that calleth upon him. He protects
the weak against the strong and hears the cry of him that is bound in fetters.”
And in a passage reminiscent of Genesis, chapter 1, we learn that the Egyptian
believed in a time when nothing existed—neither heaven nor earth—except for
the boundless primeval water, Nu, which was shrouded in thick darkness. “At
length the spirit spoke the word and creation was the result.”

It is clear that at one time “the Egyptian’s greatest hope seems to have been
that he might not only become divine, the son of God by adoption, but that Ra
would actually become his father.” He or she would become the actual child of
God.
From the earliest period on, the Egyptian believed that Osiris was of divine
origin; that he suffered betrayal, death, and mutilation at the hands of the powers
of evil; and that after a great struggle with these powers, he rose again. Because
he had conquered death, the righteous too might conquer death. He was so
exalted that he became the equal and even, at times, the superior of Ra, the sun
god. At his birth into the world, a voice was heard saying, “The lord of all the
earth is born.” Budge notes, “The worship of Osiris was so widespread and the
belief in him as the god of resurrection so deeply ingrained . . . that he
represented the ideal of a person who was both god and human and he typified to
the Egyptians in all ages the being who by reason of his sufferings and death as a
human could sympathize with them in their own sickness and death.” I think
immediately of this passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews: “For in that he
himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to help them that are tempted.”
Osiris was divine, yet in the myth he became a human who lived on the earth,
ate, drank, and suffered a cruel death, then triumphed over death through help of
the gods (Horus) and attained everlasting life. Budge adds, “But what Osiris did,
they could do, and what the gods did for Osiris they must also do for them. . . .
They like him would rise again and inherit life everlasting.” Horus was so
closely associated with Osiris that at times they are virtually interchangeable. We
are reminded at this point of the Jesus of John’s Gospel. He said, “I and the
Father are one.”
Thus to Osiris this hymn was sung: “Let thy heart be content, for thy son
Horus is established upon thy throne.” In another line from the same hymn, we
catch what seems like a forecast of Handel’s Messiah: “Homage to thee, O thou
king of kings, lord of lords, and prince of princes.”
What is most significant is that no matter how far back researchers go, there is
no time “that there did not exist a belief in the resurrection, for everywhere it is
assumed that Osiris rose from the dead. ” Eventually, Osiris “became the cause
of the resurrection of the dead; and the power to bestow eternal life upon mortals
was transferred from the gods to him. . . . He who was the son of Ra became the
equal of his father and he took his place side by side with him in heaven.” One is
reminded of the statement in the Apostles’ Creed “and he ascended into heaven
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father.” He thus became not just the equal of
Ra but, in many respects, “a greater god than he.”
In another phase of the same complex of stories, Horus is all that Osiris was.

In one litany from the Egyptian Book of the Dead, it says, “Thy son Horus is
triumphant. . . . The sovereignty over the world has been given to him, and his
dominion extends to the uttermost parts of the earth.” Both were “the god-
human, the being who was both divine and human.”
Budge writes, “In Osiris later on, the Christian Egyptians found the prototype
of Christ, and in the pictures and statues of Isis suckling her son, Horus, they
perceived the prototypes of the Virgin Mary and her Child.” Somewhat naively,
he adds that nowhere in the world did Christianity find people whose minds
were so thoroughly prepared to receive its doctrines as the Egyptians!
Regarding the great goddess Isis, he argues that what appealed most to the
Egyptians was her role as “divine mother.” In this character, “thousands of
statues represent her seated and suckling her child, Horus, whom she holds upon
her knees.”
In The Secret Lore of Egypt, Erik Hornung says “there was a smooth transition
from the image of the nursing Isis, Isis lactans, to that of Maria lactans. The
miraculous birth of Jesus could be viewed as analogous to that of Horus, whom
Isis conceived posthumously from Osiris, and Mary was closely connected with
Isis by many other shared characteristics.”3
The Eye of Horus
For those who may be feeling that Horus, the Egyptian Christ, is some
remote and obscure figure from the mists of mythical antiquity, I’d like to show
that his story still touches the life of virtually every dweller on our planet,
regardless of nationality, colour, or clime. The Horus myth tells that he was
determined to avenge his father’s murder at the hands of his wicked uncle, Seth.
In the battle, Horus’ eye was torn out and shredded into fragments, but Thoth,
who personified divine intellect and was the inspirer of laws for the ancient
Egyptians, healed and restored it fully. The complete, renewed eye thus came
symbolically to denote wholeness, healing, and health. It was used eventually in
the hieroglyphic script to represent unharmed wellness and unity. The symbol
then became a mystical sign used by Galen, the famous Greek physician of the
second century, to impress his patients, and its pictograph gradually evolved into
the shape of Rx, which is today the symbol for a prescription in every country
the world over, whatever the language.
Have you ever closely examined an American one-dollar bill? There, too, you
will see the eternal eye of Horus/Osiris—and a pyramid as well. Several of the
American Founding Fathers, most notably George Washington, belonged to the
Masonic Order. The Masons base most of their inner rituals on symbols and

ceremonies that originated with the building of the great pyramids of Egypt and
other Egyptian esoteric lore.
The Afterlife
In Egyptian religion, the belief that the deeds done in the body would be
analyzed and scrutinized by the divine powers after death belongs to the earliest
period of that civilization. This belief remained essentially the same in all
generations and throughout all periods. Each soul was dealt with individually,
most often by being “weighed in the balance”—a concept many carvings depict.
We see scales with the individual’s heart in one pan and a feather (symbolic of
righteousness or moral law) in the other. The goal was to gain admission to the
realm of Osiris.
The place of judgment was called the Hall of Maat (or Mate, the plural). This
word originally referred to a reed or stick used for measuring. The name was
then transferred to two goddesses, Isis and Nephthys, who were also called the
Mate because they stood by at the judgment representing straightness, integrity,
what is true and right. Significantly, both Massey and Kuhn trace the New
Testament name Matthew to this root concept; whether this be so or not, it is
undeniable that of the four Gospels, Matthew’s is supremely the Gospel of
judgment (see especially the great parable of the sheep and goats in Matthew
25). It is also the Gospel where the new Torah, or Law of Righteousness—the
Sermon on the Mount—is found.
In the Hall of Maat, the deceased person recited a negative confession in a
series of addresses to a “jury” of forty-two gods. He or she named each god and
said, “I have not committed such-and-such a sin.” Sins included robbery, false
witness, cheating on weights and measures, fits of anger, lying, fornication,
blasphemy, and other similar offences.
As Budge observes, the religious and moral concepts underlying this
confession are “exceedingly old,” and they give us a clear picture of the high
values marking what the ancient Egyptian believed to be his or her duty to both
God and neighbour. After the judgment, Horus, who has all the attributes of
Osiris, leads the deceased to his father’s throne and asks that he or she be
accepted into the divine presence “and be like unto the followers of Horus
forever.”
The deceased then says, “I have given bread to the hungry man and water to
the thirsty man and clothing to the naked person, and a boat to the shipwrecked
mariner.” These words are hauntingly echoed many centuries later in the chapter
from Matthew just cited above: “For I was hungry and you gave me meat; I was

thirsty and you gave me drink; I was a stranger and you took me in; naked and
you clothed me.”
It cannot be said too often that what is most striking at all stages and in all
forms in the study of Egyptian history, literature, and art is the frequency of the
allusions to future life. Belief in one god is ancient there, but as Budge often
points out, belief in a life to come is older yet—“at least as old as the oldest
human remains found in Egypt.” The Egyptians believed that thosewho once
have lived in this world have “renewed” their life beyond the grave, “and that
they still live and will live until time shall be no more.” The souls of the blessed,
complete with spiritual bodies, “dwelled in heaven with the gods and they
partook of all the celestial enjoyments forever.”
The ancient Egyptians believed that a person consists of body, soul, and spirit.
In spite of what some have taught about the meaning of mummification, the
Egyptian texts are quite specific: the soul and spirit of the righteous pass fro
mthe body and live with all the beatified and the gods in heaven. But the
physical body did not rise again, and it was believed never to leave the tomb. In
the fifth-dynasty inscription, about 2350 B.C.E., it says, “The soul to heaven, the
body to earth.”
Budge, however, stumbles over why the Egyptians continued to mummify
their dead when they didn’t expect the body to rise again. He is at a loss to
explain it. He notes that in all the Egyptian texts, there is never once an
explanation given for the mummification process. Kuhn, however, believes the
mummy’s meaning is quite clear. Its secret lies in the ancient Egyptian belief in
incarnation, the God-become-flesh in every person, as already explained in
chapter 3.The mummy was to be a constant reminder of incarnation and its
eternal significance. The body was the vehicle for the divine spirit. Just as it was
soaked in various medications and spices to preserve it, so too each individual is
“steeped” in, or anointed with, soul energies that will endure to everlasting life.
The Egyptians believed in a bodily resurrection, but it was of a purely spiritual
kind. The body of the deceased changed into a Sahu, or “incorruptible spiritual
body” (shades of what Paul says quite explicitly in 1 Corinthians 15), which
passed immediately out of the tomb and went to heaven to dwell with God.
According to Budge, this belief in a spiritual body dates even to the prehistoric
period. The ultimate destiny of the soul is to become wholly divinized. In the
Papyrus of Ani, the deceased says, “My soul is God, my soul is eternity.”
Eventually, he or she becomes part of Ra himself. The Amduat, already
mentioned, was part of this body of ancient sacred writings dealing with the
same theme.
As early as the fifth dynasty, the dead were believed (as in the New Testament

Book of Revelation) to suffer neither hunger nor thirst; they were robed in white
linen and ate of the fruit of the Tree of Life. In chapter 52 of the Egyptian Book
of the Dead, it is made plain that in heaven, relationships were recognized and
rejoiced in. In one passage (c. 1000 B.C.E.), the deceased prays that his father and
mother “be given unto me as guardians of my door, and for the ordering of my
homestead.” Budge points out, “He would not ask this thing if he thought there
would be no prospects of knowing his parents in the next world. . . . Thus we are
sure that the Egyptians believed they would meet their relatives in the next world
and know and be known by them.”
In spite of the highly spiritual tone of all this teaching, chapter 110 of the
Book of the Dead shows that the Egyptians believed they would live a semi-
material life in the age to come. Though spirits, they would sow and reap, eat
and drink celestial foods, make love, and “do everything even as a person does
upon earth.”
Budge concludes his book with the following: “Thus we see by what means
the Egyptians believed that mortal man could be raised from the dead, and attain
unto life everlasting. The resurrection was the object with which every prayer
was said and every ceremony performed, and every text, and every amulet, and
every formula, of each and every period, was intended to enable the mortal to
put on immortality and to live eternally in a transformed glorified body.”

Part II:
Horus and Jesus Are the Same
So Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.
– Acts 7:22 
Out of Egypt have I called my son.
– Hosea 11:1 
Egypt labored at the portrait of the Christ for thousands of years before
the Greeks added their finishing touches to the type (symbol) of the ever-
youthful solar god. It was Egypt that first made the statue live with her own
life and humanized her ideal of the divine. The Christian myths were first
related of Horus or Osiris,who was the embodiment of divine
goodness,wisdom,truth and purity.... This was the greatest hero that ever
lived in the mind of man— not in the flesh—to influence with transforming
force;the only hero to whom the miracles were natural because he was not
human.
– GERALD MASSEY, The Natural Genesis 
We come now to the most critical section of our exploration— the specific
evidence that the Jesus story is not original as it comes to us in the New
Testament Gospels. Gerald Massey has traced 180 instances of close similarity

or actual identity between Horus, the Christ of old Egypt, and the Gospel Jesus.
Reading first his research and then Kuhn’s elaboration of it, together with the
complementary work of scholars like Freke and Gandy on the period intervening
between Egypt and later Greek/Jewish developments, I was led inexorably to the
conviction that Egypt was truly the cradle of the Jesus figure of the Gospels.
Here already was the story of how the divine son “left the courts of heaven,” as
Massey puts it, and descended to earth as the baby Horus. Born of a virgin
(through whom he “became flesh,” or entered into matter), he then became a
substitute for humanity, went down into Hades as the quickener of the dead, their
justifier and redeemer, “the first fruits” and leader of the resurrection into the life
to come.
This mythical prototype has ledme, and many others who have studied the
discoveries that follow, to a deeper, more spiritual comprehension of what it
means to say that Jesus is the Christ. It has been a deeply positive,
consciousnessraising experience, one filled with fresh hope of a truly
“reasonable” faith with eternal, universal roots. Rather than destroying deeply
held convictions about God, the relevance of the Gospels, and immortality, this
exploration has confirmed them for me and enriched them beyond measure.
In his sharp reply to the many angry critics who claimed that he was
destroying belief in the deity of Jesus by pointing out all the similarities, Massey
exclaims: “It is not I that deny the divinity of Jesus the Christ; I assert it! He was
and never could be any other than a divinity; that is, a character non-human and
entirely mythical, who had been the divinity of various Pagan myths that had
been Pagan during thousands of years before our Era.”
The truth is that the miracles ascribed to Jesus on earth were already described
in the pre-Christian religion. Of this, there is ample proof. Horus is, as we shall
see, behind the very same miracles that are repeated in the Gospels and were
first performed as mysteries in the divine netherworld, according to the myths.
Once the historicization and literalization of the central character in the Jesus
myth had taken place, and what had begun as a series of dramas based on a
symbolic or mythical redeemer was firmly locked into the four Gospels as actual
histories of a god in disguise, the charge of the Pagan enemies and critics of
Christianity was sounded. You have stolen all our beliefs and rites, they claimed,
and by making them out to be concrete, historical events, you have claimed them
as your own. What you have written in your Gospels has all been written before
by the sages and demigods whom we revere.
In my view, this verdict of the socalled Pagans is now unassailable. When you
read, for example, about the saviour figure Horus explicitly making the kind of
“I am” claims that conservative Christians loudly teach are wholly unique to

Jesus—especially in John’s Gospel—you see what these Pagan critics were
saying.
Consider this: Horus (The Ritual: The Egyptian Book of the Dead c.78) said,
“I am Horus in glory”; “I am the Lord of Light”; “I am the victorious one . . . I
am the heir of endless time”; “I, even I, am he that knoweth the paths of
heaven.” These together are strongly reminiscent (or rather, one should say
prophetic) of Jesus’ words, “I am the light of the world,” and again, “I am the
way, the truth and the life.”
You, the reader, must eventually decide whether this “Pagan” charge of
religious plagiarism on a monumental scale was warranted. It is still too early in
our exploration for a final assessment. But judging by the utter ferocity of the
reaction of the Church of the third and fourth centuries, we can conclude that
this accusation was regarded by the Church authorities as a highly embarrassing,
even lethal, rebuke. As we have seen, they first tried to ridicule the whole
suggestion of their having “borrowed” from Paganism. When that failed, they
took the bizarre tack that the devil had planted these similarities in the Pagan
religions centuries before, in order to deceive potential converts. When that
didn’t cut it either, they became extremely provoked and violent indeed. All the
signs point to a guilty, fearful conscience at work.
Angry “Christian” Mob Burns Precious Books
As already mentioned, at the end of the fourth century an angry “Christian”
mob, stirred up by their fanatical leaders, stormed the famous, centuries-old
library at Alexandria and burned it to the ground. Many thousands of absolutely
priceless scrolls or “books” containing classical works and a irreplaceable store
of ancient wisdom on all subjects, from mathematics, astronomy, theology,
philosophy to medicine, were utterly destroyed. The last school of “Pagan”
philosophy at Athens was closed by Church decree in 529, but the process of
eliminating all competitors had been begun over two centuries earlier.
Unfortunately, the Church has only rarely since that time been a sympathetic
friend of dissident or even challengingly new ideas. The famous case of
Galileo’s forced recanting of his view that the earth moves around the sun
illustrates the point.
The truth is that the Gospels are indeed the old manuscripts of the dramatized
rituals of the incarnation and resurrection of the sun god Osiris/Horus, rituals
that were first Egyptian, later Gnostic and Hellenic, then Hebrew, and finally
adopted ignorantly by the Christian movement and transferred to the arena of
history. They were not considered history until, in Christian hands, their esoteric

meaning had been obscured and the wisdom needed to interpret them
nonhistorically was wanting. Kuhn says quite starkly that we can now state, with
little chance of refutation, that the Gospel “life” of Jesus had already been
described, in substance, at least three thousand years before he came. An
Egyptian Jesus had raised an Egyptian Lazarus from the dead at an Egyptian
Bethany, with an Egyptian Mary and Martha present, in the scripts of that
ancient land about two thousand years B.C.E. We will look at this Lazarus
incident in much more detail shortly.
In an extraordinary revelation, Massey writes that carvings depicting scenes of
angels announcing a deific advent to shepherds in the fields, of the angel Gabriel
telling a virgin that she would be the mother of the Christos, of the Nativity in
the cave, and of three sages kneeling in adoration before the infant deity were on
the innermost walls of the holy of holies in the temple of Luxor at least
seventeen hundred years B.C.E. The Virgin Mother had held the divine child in
her arms in zodiacs on temple ceilings for millennia before the Galilean baby
saw the light.
The temple of Luxor was built by Amenhotep III, a pharaoh of the eighteenth
dynasty. There is a reproduction of the scenes I have just described and their
accompanying hieroglyphics in Massey’s book The Historical Jesus and the
Mythical Christ (page 34 of the Kessinger edition). The temple of Luxor is
indeed where they are still to be found today. Gerald Massey describes each
illustration of the Nativity in great detail. His central thesis in this and his five
other learned volumes on Egyptian religion and its parallels with Christianity is
that all ancient religion began as astronomical and astrological in nature. All the
great truths of the divine incarnation in matter, and of the eternal, ever-coming
Christ into every individual, were engraved in the starry heavens above and
symbolized by the cyclic movements of the heavenly bodies, particularly the sun
(which, as we have seen, was the ultimate symbol of the full effulgence, power,
and majesty of God). Massey shows that traditional Christianity is in fact, in its
origins, what he calls “equinoctial Christolatry” (i.e., Christ-worship based on
the symbolism of the solar cycle). The canonical Gospels, he contends,
“inherited the leavings of primitive or archaic man, ignorantly mistaking these
for divine revelations.” Unaware that the original mythos of messianic mystery,
the virgin motherhood, the incarnation and birth, the life and character, the
crucifixion and resurrection of the saviour Son who was the word of all ages, the
alpha and omega, was already part of Egyptian religion since earliest times, the
compilers of the New Testament missed the point entirely— that the whole thing
was meant allegorically.
What all of this means is that the manger of the Christian story existed in

Egyptian mythology as the birthplace of the messiah, or anointed one. Though
sited in the zodiac at a spot known as Aptu or Abydus, it was also referred to as
a cave. Indeed, Justin Martyr uses the “type,” or symbol, of both a cave and a
stable as the birthplace of Jesus. At the winter solstice, the ancient Egyptians
would parade a manger and a child through the streets of major cities and towns.
The birth of the Persian sun god, Mithras, also was held to have occurred in a
cave at the winter solstice, sometime between 3000 and 2400 B.C.E. His birthday
was celebrated on December 25. Mithraism, a contemporary and keen rival of
early Christianity, had a Eucharist-type meal, observed Sunday as its sacred day,
had its major festival at Easter (when Mithras’ resurrection was celebrated), and
featured miracles, twelve disciples, and a virgin birth.
The various names for the Christ in Egyptian literature—Iusa or Iusu (Jesus),
Horus, Iu-em-hept, and Atum (HebrewAdam)— are always associated with
phrases meaning “the coming one” or he who is “the comer,” because he
represented the cyclic rebirth of the solar deity. He is the “ever-coming child” of
the Virgin Mother, the great Isis, or a host of others. In his role as messiah,
Horus announces himself with the words “I am Horus who steppeth onward
through eternity. . . . Eternity and everlastingness is my name.” He says he is
yesterday, today, and tomorrow, and the name of his boat is Millions of Years.
Spiritually, he was the symbol for the soul in every human being. In the Gospel,
we remember, Jesus says, “Before Abraham was, I am.” The Epistle to the
Hebrews reads, “Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today and forever.”
The evidence that Christianity was in its beginnings firmly rooted in an
Egyptian-style, equinoctial mode of thinking still abounds today. The birthday of
Jesus Christ was first celebrated by the earliest Church in the spring of the year.
But in 345, Pope Julius decreed that the birthday (nobody knew any precise date
for it, suggesting again that the entire thing was pure myth) should thenceforth
be held on December 25, three days after the “death” of the winter solstice and
the same day on which the births of Mithras, Dionysus, the Sol Invictus
(unconquerable sun), and several other gods were traditionally celebrated. Few
Christians today realize that in the fifth century, Pope Leo the Great had to tell
Church members to stop worshipping the sun. The first ostensibly Christian
emperor, Constantine, who converted to the new faith at the beginning of the
fourth century, was still worshipping the sun god Helios many years later, as
coins and other evidence reveal.
But the birth of the Christian Saviour is not the only event tied to socalled
Pagan astronomical/astrological roots; the greatest Church festival of all, Easter
Day, the moment of Christly Resurrection, is also similarly linked. Easter occurs
on different dates each year because, like the Jewish Passover, it is based upon

the vernal equinox, that dramatic moment when the hours of daylight and the
hours of darkness at last draw parallel and then the light finally and triumphantly
wins out. Thus Easter is always fixed as the first Sunday after the first full moon
following the spring equinox. It’s a cosmic, solar, and lunar event as deeply
rooted in religious traditions originating from sun-god worship as one could
conceivably imagine. Traditional Christianity, I have come to realize, has
forfeited a great deal of its vital historical connection with the natural world and
the cosmos as a whole by a deliberate downplaying of the significance of this
solarlunar connection.
Massey found numerous parallels between the stories of the Egyptian sun
deities, Osiris, Horus, and Ra (all interchangeable), and that of the biblical Jesus.
The “three kings,” or magi, of the biblical account, for example, echo a triad of
solar deities who symbolized the ancients’ thinking about the three regions,
earth, heaven, and a netherworld (and were later symbolized by the three stars of
the “belt” in the constellation Orion). Among the other similarities he uncovered
were the following:
• Like the “star in the east” of the Gospels, Sirius, the morning star in
Egypt, heralded the birth of Horus.
• Horus was baptized in the River Eridanus (Jordan) by a god figure named
Anup the Baptizer (John the Baptist), who was later decapitated.
• Like Jesus, Horus had no history between the ages of twelve and thirty.
• Horus walked on water, cast out demons, and healed the sick.
• Horus was transfigured on a mountain; Jesus took Peter, James, and John
into “a high mountain” and was transfigured before them.4 • Horus
delivered a “Sermon on theMount,” and his followers faithfully
recounted the “Sayings of Iusa” (or Jesus).
• Horus was crucified between two thieves, buried in a tomb, and
resurrected. His personal epithet was Iusa (or Iusu), the “ever-becoming
son” of Ptah, or the Father.

• Horus was the good shepherd, the lamb of God, the bread of life, the son
of man, the Word, and the fisher; so was Jesus.
• Horus was not just the path to heaven but the way by which the dead
travel out of the sepulchre. He was the god whose name was written as
the “road to salvation”; he was thus “the Way, the Truth and the Life.”
Therefore,the key verse of conservative orthodoxy today was sourced in
Pagan roots.
• The Creed says that Jesus descended into hell, or (better) Hades, but so
too did Horus before him. Both went to preach to the souls in prison.
Both were “dead and buried,” but only figuratively. Again, this is simply
a metaphorical description of the descent of the divine into matter—into
human beings, in fact. As Kuhn sharply observes, “It has absolutely
nothing whatever to do with a literal hillside grave.” The death of the god
is his self-giving to mortals. That’s why every ancient religion had at its
heart a dying or dismembered/disfigured deity. One of humanity’s first
mythical saviour figures, Prometheus, was pinned by the wrists and
ankles to a rock in the Caucasus Mountains where his liver was torn out
by a vulture.
• Jesus came in the name of the Lord. He was called Kyrios, or Lord. Horus
too was “the Lord” by name.
• Like Jesus, Horus was supposed to reign for one thousand years (i.e., to
usher in a millennium).
• Horus came to seek and to save what was lost. We are reminded of the
Gospel parables of the lost sheep, the lost coin, and the “lost” son.
• In the Gospels, it is the women who announce the Resurrection. “The
goddesses and the women proclaim me when they see me,” shouts Horus

as he rises from the tomb, “on the horizon of the resurrection.”
Altogether, Massey discovered nearly two hundred instances of immediate
correspondence between the mythical Egyptian material and the allegedly
historical Christian writings about Jesus.5 Horus indeed was the archetypal
Pagan Christ.
Our close examination of the astonishing parallels between the Egyptian
Christ figure Horus and the Jesus of the canonical Gospels declares in a dramatic
and, tome, irrefutable manner our major premise—that Christianity in its final
orthodoxy was simply a reissuing of an ancient wisdom in a literalized and
highly exclusivist form. The result was a kind of plagiarism, but in a badly
warped and weakened edition. What was timeless and universally applicable in
the Horus myth eventually became tragically locked into a single person, time,
and place; what had been esoteric and symbolic was made exoteric and
historical. Instead of an ideal and divine principle—the Christ—working in
every heart, all of God’s evolutionary thrust for humanity was locked up
exclusively in one personality—the “personal Jesus.” Myth had been misread as
biography. Countless millions ever since have had to look beyond, to an
external, morally unreachable Saviour, instead of being empowered by the
saving grace of the ever-coming Christ spirit within. This is what we need so
badly to rediscover and apply. We can find that light as we move beyond the
literal text of the New Testament and see the metaphorical and allegorical truth
beneath it all.
The Spiritual Importance of the Number Twelve
In Luke’s Gospel, we read how Jesus’ parents took him to the temple for
what today is called his bar mitzvah—his entry into adult responsibility to the
Torah. But Horus and all the other Christ figures also came of age in a special
rite at twelve. (Today, bar mitzvahs occur at the age of 13 for boys, and the
equivalent for girls, the bat mitzvah, at age 13.)
Significantly, both Horus and Jesus were accompanied by twelve disciples, as
were Mithras and Dionysus. After reading Massey and Kuhn, I discovered that
this has a deeper spiritual meaning than appears at first sight. A vast flood of
light is let in upon Gospel interpretation if it is understood that the twelve
disciples of Jesus symbolized the twelve powers of spiritual light energy to be
unfolded by man in twelve labours (or stages) of growth, all imaged by the
twelve signs of the zodiac. Kuhn says that from the first it should have been

seen, “without cavil,” that the twelve apostles were so much more than agents
used by a historical personage to found an earthly ecclesiasticism. For when the
Gospel Jesus told them they would sit with him on the twelve celestial thrones
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, they moved at once from the realm of
personal history into that of “cosmic hierarchism.”
Egypt gave the twelve followers a more definitive name and function. The
twelve were astronomical powers, rulers or “saviours of the treasure of light.”
Because light was the crowning product of all cosmic operation, the saviours of
it were the culminating depositories of dynamic agency. They became the twelve
great spirit-children of Ra’s unimaginable might. With Horus, they became the
twelve who accompanied the god to earth as sowers of the seed and later reapers
of the divine harvest. In John, Jesus uses the same sowing and reaping
metaphors to describe the mission of his twelve disciples. He says, “I tell you,
look around you and see how the fields are ripe for harvesting.” Without
exposing you to a further mass of detail, let me say simply that the evidence
seems incontestable that the twelve disciples represent twelve deific powers, and
not men.
In the ancient gnosis, as the soul advances through the scale of evolution, he
or she passes through twelve grades of being, adding to his or her estate the
quality gained at each level, until his or her absorption of the essence of all
nature is complete. These twelve qualities of perfected spiritual understanding
are what are represented by the twelve astrological signs of the zodiac. In the
ancient wisdom, the sun’s journey through each sign, acquiring the special
powers of each, symbolized the soul’s round of the elements and the acquisition
of the twelve intelligences. It all had as its basis the passage through the heavens
of the solar god, who symbolized the unseen divinity behind and through all
things. We are made up of body, mind, and spirit. For each of these there are four
elements: fire, air, earth, and water. Combined in the one grand synthesis that
constitutes a human being, these twelve aspects create the potential for Christ
consciousness.
In the old religions of Egypt, Chaldea, and Greece, the twelve rays of genius
in humans were variously represented by the Twelve Saviours of the Treasure of
Light, the Twelve Reapers of the Golden Grain, the Twelve Harvesters in the
Fields of Amenta, the Twelve Builders, the Twelve Carpenters, the Twelve
Potters, the Twelve Weavers of the Pattern, the Twelve Fishermen, the Twelve
Rowers of the Boat of Ra (with Horus at the prow), the Twelve Sailors in the
Ship of Ra, the Sun. The Twelve Labours of Hercules, the Twelve Sons of Jacob,
the Twelve Tribes of Israel, the Twelve Apostles, and the twelve knights of King
Arthur’s table all have the same zodiacal, evolutionary, and theological

derivation. And then there are the twelve months of the year. It was no accident
that there were twelve gods with Odin in Norse mythology. The whole of the
Bible, as anyone familiar with it knows, is permeated by the number twelve and
multiples thereof.6 Twelve times twelve times one thousand gives the figure of
144,000, the symbol for all the “elect” of God in the Book of Revelation.
Fish/Scarab/Beetle
The Egyptian Christ, manifested in the sign of Pisces, was foreordained to be
Ichthys (the Greek word for “fish”), the fisherman, and to be accompanied by
fishermen followers. Doctrinally, he was the “fisher of men.” Horus, the best-
known Egyptian Christ figure, was associated from time immemorial with the
fish, and Massey’s Natural Genesis features a reproduction of an Egyptian
engraving showing Horus holding a fish above his head. Several of the early
Christian Fathers refer to Christ also as Ichthys, or “that great fish,” and the
mitre worn by succeeding popes “in the shoes of the fisherman” is shaped
exactly like a fish’s mouth. It’s well known that the Greek word ichthys forms an
acrostic meaning “Jesus Christ the Son of God (Our) Saviour.” Having been in
Rome numerous times during my dozen years covering religion around the
world for the Toronto Star, I have seen first-hand how frequently the outline of a
fish occurs in catacombs as a Christian symbol. It also doubled as a sign of the
Eucharist. Prosper Africanus, an early Christian theologian, calls Christ “that
great fish who fed from himself the disciples on the shore and offered himself as
a fish to the whole world.” Commenting on this same passage from the end of
John’s Gospel, St. Augustine says that the broiled fish in the story “is Christ.”
The art found in ancient Egyptian tombs commonly shows fish, fishermen, nets,
and fish traps of varying kinds. All have the same spiritual meaning.
Much more important, however, is the fact that the Egyptian texts bear witness
to an “only begotten god” (meaning begotten of one parent only), whose symbol
was the beetle because in ancient science this creature was thought to be “self-
produced, being unconceived by a female.” Massey says, “The only begotten
god is a well-known type [symbol], then, of divinity worshipped in Egypt. In
each cult the Messiah-son and manifestor was the only-begotten god. This,
according to the Egyptian text, is the Christ, the Word, the manifestor in John’s
Gospel.” In fact, in one early version of the Greek text of the New Testament’s
Gospel of John, the phrase “the only begotten son of God” actually reads “the
only begotten god”! Its very unorthodoxy makes it likely that it is the preferred,
original reading.
The truth thus came forcefully home to me that this Egyptian Christ is indeed

the express image of the Christ of John’s Gospel, who begins in the first chapter
without father or mother and is the Word of the beginning, the opener and
architect, the light of the world, the self-originated and only begotten God. I
found that the very phraseology of John often echoed the Egyptian texts, which
tell of he who was “the Beginning of becoming, from the first, who made all
things but was not made.” Some of the Fathers of theChurch knewthat the beetle
was a symbol of Christ. Augustine, indeed, writes, “My own good beetle, not so
much because he is only begotten (God), not because he, the author of himself,
has taken on the form of mortals, but because he has rolled himself in our filth
and chooses to be born from this filth itself ”—like the dung beetle.
When the god Osiris came to earth as a saviour, he came as his own son, the
child Horus. He was born “like or as a Word.” The Egyptian texts say that he
came to earth as a substitute. Indeed, an ancient Egyptian festival celebrating the
birth of Horus was called “The Day of the Child in His Cradle.”
When Horus comes to earth in the Egyptian story, he is supported or given
bread by Seb, who is the god of earth, “the father on earth.” He is thus the divine
father on earth of the messiah-son, who manifests in time. Just as Joseph, the
adoptive father of Jesus, provides shelter and food for his son, so Seb (Jo-Seph)
cares for Horus. The consort of Seb is the mother of heaven, named Nu; Meri
(Mary) is another Egyptian name for heaven, as well as the name for the mother
of the messiah. Massey concludes, “Thus Seb and Meri for earth and heaven
would afford the two mythic originals for Joseph and Mary as parents of the
divine child.” There are seven different Marys in the four Gospels. They
correspond with uncanny fidelity to seven Marys, or Hathors, in the Egyptian
stories.
Faced with such a body of facts, I had absolutely no question left. The
evidence from Egypt seemed clearly beyond rebuttal. I believe we can say with
total assurance that the Jesus who was administered to by seven women;
betrayed by Judas; conqueror of the grave; the resurrection and the life; before
Herod; in Hades and in his reappearance to the women and the seven fishermen;
crucified on either the fourteenth or the fifteenth of the spring month, Nissan,
and also “spiritually” crucified in “Egypt,” as it is written in Revelation (11:8);
as judge of the dead, with sheep on his right hand and goats on his left—is, as
Kuhn has argued, “Egyptian from first to last, in every phase, from the beginning
to the end.” There is an undeniable irony and a profound, deep, undeniable truth
in Hosea’s prophetic saying “Out of Egypt have I called my Son.” A deep irony
indeed.
Once again it is absolutely critical to stress that my argument that the Christ of
the Gospels had an antecedent in Egypt (and in many other places and cultures

as well) is not part of any attempt to debunk orthodox Christianity. Nothing is
further from my mind. My aim, instead, is to reveal the truly spiritual nature of
the Christos archetype in all of human history and, ultimately, to explain what
this will mean to us.

6
CONVINCING 
THE SCEPTICS
Considered as those of a human being,the character and teachings of
the Christ in the Gospels are composed of contradictions and opposites
impossible to harmonize. In fact,the many hundreds of sects and
denominations of Christians who are today engaged in formulating the
theology of their assumed founder and in denying each other’s
interpretation, do but inevitably represent the organic disunity from the
beginning,and reflect the fragmentary nature of the origins.
The general assumption concerning the gospels is that the historic
element was the kernel of the whole,and that fables accreted around
it;whereas the myths,being pre-extant,prove that the core of the material
was mythical,and it then follows that the “history”is incremental....The
worst foes of the truth have ever been the rationalizers of the mythos. They
have assumed the existence of a personal founder of Christianity as the
fundamental fact. They have done their best to humanize ...the mythos by
discharging the supernatural and miraculous ...in order that it might be
accepted. Thus, they have lost the battle by fighting it on the wrong ground.
– GERALD MASSEY, The Historical Jesus and the Mythical Christ
SINCE MOST, IF NOT ALL, of this material will be new and even unimaginable
to many readers, and since it is so critical to the major arguments I present
throughout, I want to expose any remaining sceptics to more relevant evidence.
Remember, our ultimate goal is a renewed spirituality focused upon and fuelled
by the “Christ in you, the hope of glory,” to quote St. Paul. As he says, we can

do all things through this Christ consciousness, which “strengthens us within.”
Our bodies are indeed the temples of God, whose Holy Spirit dwells in us
always, no matter how we feel on any given day.1
As we continue to examine the similarities between the words and miracles of
Horus and those of the Gospel Jesus, we will discover fresh, unsuspected
insights and meanings in Bible texts that once seemed worn, beyond belief,
nonsensical, or simply inexplicable. Comparing the two representative Christs
helps us move out of old, and now irrelevant, paradigms toward the universality
of the much deeper message behind it all.
The Nativity and Early Years
Jesus’ Nativity will always be associated with the ox and the ass because of
the stable and the manger. But these two animals were also with the Egyptian
Iusa, ages upon ages before. What this earthy feature of the birth story is really
about, in the true, esoteric sense, is the coming of the divine into the basic
animal nature to create that wholly new reality—the human being (part animal,
part divine). Significantly, both these animals are in a way asexual, or
“crossovers,” which suggests that ultimately the Christ in us is a melding of the
male and female principles. Indeed, the Christ of Revelation has the breasts of a
woman! Spirit (male) and matter (female), when brought together, ultimately
become androgynous. This is the real meaning behind these words in Luke
20:34: “Those who belong to this age marry and are given in marriage; but those
who are considered worthy of a place in that age and in the resurrection from the
dead neither marry nor are given in marriage. Indeed they cannot die anymore,
because they are like angels . . . being children of the resurrection.”2
Notice that Horus, who says, as he presents himself to earth, “I am the baby
born as the connecting link between earth and heaven,” is paralleled completely
by the infant Jesus, who came to bring “glory to God in the highest and on earth
peace to all those of good will.”
Immediately after the story of the birth of Jesus in Matthew, there is the threat
from Herod that I alluded to in an earlier chapter. In the story of Horus, the life
of the infant god is immediately threatened by an evil being called, significantly,
Herut. Herut is “the serpent of many myths,” Kuhn contends. The best other
example is a serpent that tries to kill the infant Hercules, another saviour figure
who died and went to heaven.
In the New Testament the angel of the Lord says to Joseph, “Arise and take
the young child and his mother and flee into Egypt.” At the birth of Horus, the
god That says to the mother, “Come, thou goddess Isis, hide thyself with thy

child.” She is told to take him to a secluded spot in the marshes of Lower Egypt,
called Kheb (or Khebt). Interestingly, the heroic Sumerian king, Sargon, had to
be hidden, like Moses, in a reed basket by a river also to avoid being killed.
Jesus, all four Gospels declare, was baptized in the River Jordan by his cousin
John, who was dubbed “the baptizer.” John was later beheaded by the tetrarch
Herod Antipas (4 B.C.E.–39 C.E. )— after Salome’s famous dance—at the whim of
his wife, Herodias, and his death signalled the beginning of Jesus’ public
ministry. Horus, as we have seen, was baptized in the River Eridanus (or
Arutana) by the Egyptian John the Baptist, Anup, who was also later beheaded.
Kuhn says that Horus in his baptism was “transformed from the word made flesh
to the word made truth”—a change from the natural to the wholly spiritual.
Something I had never realized before was that each Christ figure of antiquity
had his own special forerunner. In the case of Horus, Anup makes the path ready
for his advent (although Horus preceded Anup in stature and authority). Anup,
we are told, lived in the dark and empty reaches of Amenta—the Egyptian term
for “earth”—until the day of his manifestation. In the Gospels, John the Baptist
is said to have dwelt in the wilderness until the time of his “showing forth,” or
public appearance, in Israel.3 Anup (also known as Anubis) is “the preparer of
the way of the other world”; he is the power making straight the paths to the
upper realms of heaven. This instantly calls to mind Matthew’s description of
John the Baptist (Matthew 3:3): “For this was he that was spoken of by Esaias
[Isaiah], saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, ‘Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his paths straight.’”
The minor deity Anup, though distinguished, was only a star god—that is, a
precursor to the much greater solar light, the sun itself. Similarly, John, though
enormously important in the New Testament, was far surpassed by those
enlightened by Jesus, according to the Gospels. The “least” in the kingdom of
heaven, it says, is greater than he. In other words, to be in the spiritual realm, to
be an incarnated soul, is to be greater than the one who symbolizes the natural
animal-man. The baptism of Jesus is in reality a symbol, or glyph, of the
incarnating process that all of us take part in. The water he descends into denotes
matter (our bodies are about two-thirds water, and water is the symbol for matter
in the ancient theology). The bird “like a dove” (traced in Egyptian lore to Tef,
the breathing force) stands in general for the divine energy of the soul. In the
ancient Egyptian planisphere, or chart of the heavens, the star called Phact,
which was the dove, was in the position to announce the coming of each new
solar year, and hence of the sun god Horus. Horus, according to the myth, was
given the hawk as his distinctive symbol, and he is often depicted as a hawk-
headed figure. But Kuhn points out that he also rose from his baptism as the

dove, for he exclaims, “I am the Dove; I am the Dove!” Seven doves,
representing the sevenfold nature of all deific emanations, are frequently found
described in words or pictures in arcane or esoteric religions. In Didron’s Book
of Iconography, for example, the child Jesus is depicted in the Virgin’s arms,
surrounded by seven doves that symbolized the seven powers he was to
spiritualize.4
Jesus and Horus received their baptisms at the age of thirty. My research
revealed that there is a gap in the life history of all the ancient sun gods between
twelve and thirty. Both numbers are symbolic; they stand for the completion and
perfection of cycles, the end of an age, or stages of transition and transformation.
“At 30, each emerges as the Adult God, or Homme Fait,” Kuhnwrites.
According to Luke’s unique account, Jesus is twelve when he stays behind at
the temple in Jerusalem and engages the scribes in questions and discussion.
This was universally acknowledged by the ancients to be the age at which each
individual becomes aware of his or her soul within. It is the dawning of maturity,
when the falsetto voice of innocent youth dramatically changes to the authentic
voice of adult responsibility, and children are endowed with responsible
knowledge of good and evil. Horus was twelve when he had his eye—which had
been stolen by Sut (who corresponds to Satan)—restored to him, a symbol of
this basic rite of passage and of the dawning of the full intellectual faculty. These
are the kinds of insights that excited and stimulated me most in this whole
exploration.
Ministry, Teachings, and Miracles
In the Egyptian myth and symbolism, “the kingly force of life”— that is, the
sun and the spiritual reality it stood for in each human being—was thought to be
caught up in an ongoing struggle against elements seeking to limit or destroy its
potency. (This is why the December solstice was so crucial in all ancient
religions.) Thus the Christos, Horus, who represented the spiritual light, is
depicted as constantly engaged in a “great spiritual warfare” with various
mythical creatures, including the seven-headed dragon of darkness called Sut
(and a variety of other names). The Gospels similarly depict Jesus, the agent of
light against darkness, involved in a running battle with his adversary, Satan.
The story of the Temptation of Jesus, as told in the Synoptic Gospels, vividly
symbolizes this and again can be found in the Egyptian Ritual in an earlier form.
Horus is seized in the desert of Amenta (earth) and taken up a high mountain,
called Hetep, by his evil twin and arch-rival, Sut, for spiritual testing. Sut
represents dark opposition to Horus, the “good light” at every step. But like

Satan, he eventually is defeated. Jesus’ cry about seeing Satan “fall like
lightning” was preceded millennia before by Horus when, in ultimate victory
over Sut, he says to Osiris, his father, “I have brought thee the associates of Sut
in chains.”
Of the three Gospel accounts of the Temptation, Luke’s is particularly
interesting, in that he alone concludes, “When the devil had finished every test,
he departed from him until an opportune time.” The contest, in other words, was
meant to be understood as continuous. Once understood in its symbolic sense, it
speaks at a much deeper, cosmic level of the yin and yang of existence, the
struggle to balance the polarities of life—light and dark, up and down,
centrifugal and centripetal forces, hot and cold—and so on. Ancient religion was
deeply connected to the realities of the universe at all levels. But the struggle of
Jesus and Satan (or Sut and Horus, allegorically understood) is really about our
own daily struggle here and now. The Christ within us gives us the victory. As
Paul says, “I can do all things through the Christ who strengthens me within.”
Kuhn draws on his deep understanding of esoteric meanings and ancient
languages to create a fascinating take on the whole concept of Armageddon, the
supposed final conflict between the forces of Christ and Satan, or the Antichrist,
at the end of all things. He argues that the term “Armageddon” has nothing to do
with some final armed battle in the Middle East (or anywhere else) at some
supposed “end of theworld.” He contends that it really stands for the ongoing
struggle between essential evolutionary forces, symbolized by Christ and Satan,
and that at its most basic level, it is “nothing but the whole battle of life” each of
us is now waging day by day. Hell, for example, is right here, right now. The
socalled Day of Judgment is an ongoing, present process in every life.
In the Egyptian Ritual, when the associates of Sut came and seized Horus,
they suddenly saw a double crown on his forehead and fell on their faces. Gospel
readers know that when Judas and his associates came to the Garden of
Gethsemane to apprehend Jesus, he asked them (in John’s version) whom they
were looking for. When they said Jesus of Nazareth, he said, “I am he” (or, in the
plain Greek, “I am”). Once he said that, they “stepped back and fell to the
ground.” Scene for scene, these two stories are the same.
According to all four Gospels, Jesus was a healer and an exorcist. Even the
scholars of the controversial California-based Jesus Seminar (about which I will
say more in another chapter) admit that much. As Matthew, chapter 15, describes
it, “Great crowds came to him, bringing with them the lame, the maimed, the
blind, the mute, and many others. They put them at his feet and he cured them.”
But I was surprised to discover that Horus had, much earlier, opened dumb
mouths and performed other Jesuslike healings. The act of giving a voice to

those unable to speak was of particular significance in the Egyptian record. The
inner meaning was that Horus’ spiritual influence caused their lives to express
the words of power and truth. This is the allegorical essence behind Jesus’
healings too. The Christ within gives each of us the power to find and express
“our own true voice.”
Horus restores sight to the blind, casts out demons, and makes the deaf hear.
He is designated as “he who dissipates the darkness.” He is hailed as a prince in
the City of the Blind, as one who “comes to shine into their sepulchers and to
restore spiritual sight to the blind on earth.” He is also described as “open[ing]
the eyes of the prisoners in their cells.” This was echoed by Jesus in his first
sermon in the synagogue at Nazareth, when he says, “He has sent me to proclaim
release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind.”
Confronted by these similarities, I was forced to face the question that
necessarily faces the reader now: What becomes of the Gospel healings in the
light of all this antecedent material in the Egyptian scripts? There can be but one
reply that is sincere: the New Testament miracles are virtually identical
reproductions of ancient religious dramatizations, and not actual or historical
occurrences. All of the Gospel miracles of Jesus are historically impossible,
Massey says, because “they were already pre-existent as mythical
representations . . . and depicted in the drama of the Mysteries.” His point is that
the miracles ascribed to Jesus in the Gospels had all previously been assigned to
the pre-Christian Iusa/Horus, the divine healer who was quite obviously
nonhistorical. Horus/Iusa—or Jesus—is the performer of all themiracles later
repeated in the New Testament. “The miraculous of the gospels was the mythical
of the Egyptian religion and subsequent Mysteries—all provably pre-extant,”
Massey concludes. But it’s important to stress that they were all pointing to a
living, healing God behind, beneath, and within all things. The incarnate God
heals those who call upon his inner power. This is as true today as it was in
ancient Egypt or in Palestine two thousand years ago.
That is the really significant aspect to keep in mind as we consider the
relevance of all this to our life and faith today. The healings remain
tremendously important. Spiritually, the message is that the Christ (or divinity)
within each of us can be called upon to aid us in all our infirmities. In the
Gospels, the disciples were fearful of an approaching storm, but Jesus was asleep
in the stern of their boat; like them, we need to awaken the Christ within and
draw upon that resource. The healings of the Gospels are not cancelled out. Far
from it. They are seen in their true light, as illustrations of God’s healing power
yesterday, today, and always.

The God of Wine
Few stories in the Gospels are more familiar than what John calls the first
“sign,” or miracle, of Jesus: the changing of water into wine at a wedding in
Cana of Galilee. “You have kept the good wine until now,” says the surprised
steward to the bridegroom as he tastes the results.
Traditional commentators have made much of the fact that the water used,
according to John’s account, had been set aside for “Jewish rites of purification”
of the old era and had been transformed into an utterly new, much more potent
entity. Not only is the evangelist saying here that what Jesus, as the Christ, offers
is better than the traditional way, but he’s also saying that Christ actually rivals
and surpasses Bacchus (the Greek counterpart is Dionysus), the reigning god of
wine in the surrounding Pagan culture. The Christ comes to intoxicate humanity
with the divine wine or “more abundant life.”5
Here again, the Egyptian Horus, we find, was the much earlier prototype of
Bacchus. Like both Bacchus and Jesus, Horus was the vine, and his “season”
was celebrated at the Egyptian Uaka festival “with prodigious rejoicing and a
deluge of drink.” The divine “mania,” said by Plato to be even better than
laborious reason, was the heady transport that resulted from imbibing the
spiritual liquor of life. The Bacchic feast of intoxication was a symbol of the
legitimate and blessed ecstasy of the soul on partaking of the heavenly wine, the
gift of the divine presence within. It was a sign of the gift of reason and spirit
and the symbol of “life abundant.”
As always, though rooted in natural symbols, what is being really dealt with,
then, is profoundly spiritual in essence, often on several levels at once. The
fermented potency of wine was, at its deepest spiritual level, a symbol of the
presence of the incarnated God within the spiritually aware person—a direct
contrast to the natural animal-human. “The juice of the grape was the ‘blood’ or
essential energy of Horus or Osiris in the Egyptian Eucharist just as in the case
of Jesus at the Last Supper,” notes Kuhn. What is so important here, especially
since these elements are so often lacking in today’s Christianity, are the themes
of transformation and inner power.
In other words, the wine offered by the “gods” for humanity’s uplift is their
own celestial nature and energy. The transformation of water into wine
represented the power of the divine to mature the inert elements of sense and
feeling in every one of us into spiritual character. Horus was given the title “the
Jocund” when he “rose up full of Wine,” and he was symbolized by the
constellation Orion, with the goblet stars for his cup. Orion, as we have seen,
constellated the figure of the heavenly Christ.

Writing on this same series of motifs, Godfrey Higgins observes that in places
in the Egyptian scripts, Osiris himself was characterized as the vine and Horus as
the Unbu, or branch. He comments, “The typical tree of life in the Greek
[dependent on the Egyptian] planisphere is the grapevine.” The grapes originated
in or near the sign of Virgo, the mythical mother of the child who was to “rise up
out of death to bring salvation to humans under the sign of the vine.” In John,
chapter 15, in a lengthy and detailed dissertation, Jesus says that he is “the true
vine,” and that his followers are the “branches,” destined to bear much fruit.
Horus played this symbolic role in Egypt long before. The imagery changes—
the walls of old Egyptian tombs show vintners pressing new wine, and wine-
making is everywhere a constant metaphor of spiritual processes— and yet the
same reality, the Christ principle, is central.
The soul, or the portion of god within, causes the divine ferment in the body
of life. It’s developed there, as on the vine, by the sun of man’s spiritual self.
Astronomically, the vine and the mixing bowl were constellated as celestial
symbols, the latter as the star cluster called the Crater (Latin for “bowl”), the
sacramental cup, or grail. Anyone who has both studied John’s Gospel for years
and taught it to seminary students, as I have, has to be deeply impressed by the
Egyptian wisdom and symbolism. Clearly, it shows that John is a reworking or
copy of what came ages before.
Significantly, both Massey and Kuhn— and other authorities— testify that the
surface of the coffin lid of the mummified Osiris (every deceased person was
referred to as the Osiris) constituted the table for the Egyptian cult’s Last Supper
or Eucharist. It was the board on which the mortuary meals were served. The
coffin bore the hieroglyphic equivalent for KRST. Massey connects KRST with
the Greek word Christos, messiah, or Christ.6 He says, “Say what you will or
believe what you may, there is no other origin for Christ the anointed than
‘Horus the Karast’or ‘anointed son of God the Father.’ . . . Finally, then, the
mystery of the mummy is the mystery of Christ.” The mystery of Christ is the
mystery of you and me. The Egyptians, and all those who closely followed them
later, believed that each of us is intended ultimately to be a Christ, anointed for
an eternal destiny with God. Significantly, the authors of The Jesus Mysteries
have dedicated their book to “the Christ in each of us.” St. Paul quite boldly
speaks of “putting on Christ,” and of each of us having “the mind of the Christ.”
That was a kind of hopeful Christian understanding that was beginning to make
more and more sense to me. I recalled how, in writing to the Galatians, Paul
spoke of suffering the pangs of childbirth “until the Christ is formed within
you.”

Of Fishing, Fishermen, and Nets
In The Lost Light, and frequently in his other lectures and writings, Kuhn
examines the numerous references in the ancient Egyptian material to fish,
fishing, water, and all the images pertaining to them. We have already seen
something of the power of the fish as a Christos symbol throughout ancient
religion. But the symbolism changes and varies in a hundred different settings,
always following the principle that “nature is meaningless nowhere,” and that
“every cosmic process had its reflection in nature, again in the spiritual life of
man, and lastly (often) in the physiology of the body.” Jesus, Horus, and many
other “gods” came as fish. In India there is the fish-avatar Vishnu, and it was
also a title for Bacchus and Marduk. Astrologically speaking, and this was
crucial for ancient Christology, the Christos was represented as Pisces from
roughly 255 B.C.E. to 1900. Aries, the ram or lamb, was the dominant Christ
symbol in ancient religion for about twenty-four hundred years before that, and
Taurus, the bull, preceded Aries. A complete “age,” or cycle—where the sun
moved through all twelve signs of the Zodiac—occurred approximately every
twenty-six thousand years. That means the Christos type today, and for the rest
of this millennium, would be Aquarius. In a Christly pattern, this is indeed the
very beginning of the Age of Aquarius, the water-bearer. Notice that in the
Aquarius’ astrological pictographs, there are streams of water flowing from the
jar—the stream of matter and of spirit.
The fish represented the immortal soul as “a breather in the water of worldly
existence.” Just as a fish almost miraculously can live and breathe wholly
surrounded by water, the ancients taught, so too the soul can be entombed by
flesh or matter and still survive. Escape from a purely natural life to a spiritual
one was described in the Egyptian Ritual as “coming forth from the net” or
coming forth from the Catcher of Fish. In fact, the ancients always portrayed
true being as an escape from the waters of life (i.e., from matter)—hence the
widespread use of the fisherman’s net as an emblem of salvation.
A passage called “The Secret of Horus in An” is the mythic tale of how his
mother, Isis, caught him in the water. The goddess Neith, on her behalf, fished
him out with a net. This was a cosmic symbol of life first coming out of the
water as part of the evolutionary process. Like the infant Moses (a sun god, in
Kuhn’s view), Sargon, and even ancient New Zealand gods such as Maui, Horus
was drawn out of the water at birth. The meaning is profound.7 Matter,
symbolled by water, gives birth to spirit, or the Christ.
In Mark’s Gospel, Jesus called four fishermen to follow him. In the Egyptian
Ritual, the four fishers pulled the dragnet through the waters to capture Horus.

They are described more fully as “fishers for the great prince who sits at the east
of the sky,” More proof that Horus was thought of as the rising sun and the
Christos.
Walking on the Water
In the Egyptian material, Horus emerges from the rage of a nocturnal storm
on the waters into the calm of a bright daybreak. Like Tammuz and many other
mythical sun gods, he was said to “still the sea by his power.” In one place,
Osiris is said to keep souls from being drowned in the symbolic waters of
incarnation. As already cited, Jesus, in one Gospel, sleeps in the stern of a boat
as a great storm overtakes him and his disciples and threatens to sink the ship.
He rebukes the waves with a “Peace, be still” command. On another occasion,
the disciples are in a boat being buffeted by contrary winds, and Jesus comes
toward them “walking on the sea.”8 Again the sea (ever the symbol of the unruly
powers of matter) was calmed. Rationalists have attempted to explain this
incident away by saying that Jesus must have been walking on a sandbar or
along the shore itself, and in the uncertain mists of morning—it was about the
“fourth watch” (i.e., just at dawn)— the disciples made an innocent and
forgivable mistake. But this line of approach rests on just as literalist an
understanding of the passage as the fundamentalist’s assumption that Jesus was
indeed contradicting the basic laws of nature.
The reference to the “fourth watch” is deeply significant in the ancient
wisdom as well. From an evolutionary point of view, we humans move from the
mineral stage to the vegetative stage to the animal stage; accordingly, it is in the
middle of the fourth phase, of animal-human development—the “fourth
watch”—that incarnation, or the advent of divine, selfreflective consciousness,
takes place. Three and a half was a terribly important number in the ancient lore
for this very reason, and those with a deeper interest can examine for themselves
the Book of Revelation (especially chapter 11) to find several instances of its
use. Of course, twice three and a half, the number seven, is the single most
important figure in the whole of ancient religion. It stands for perfection, for the
very principles (or archai) upon which the cosmos itself has been built. Hence,
the seven “days” of Creation, the seven notes of the scale, the seven colours of
the prism, and so on, throughout not just the texts of ancient Bibles but the
whole of the universe.
In the Egyptian Ritual, the Manes, or deceased person, prays, “Grant that I too
may be able to walk on the water as thou walkest on the Nun [the primordial,
quantum ‘soup’ out of which the universe was born] without making any halt.”

Elsewhere he cries out, “I fail; I sink into the abyss of the flowingwaters.” The
corresponding story in Matthew14:25–30 tells how Peter asked to join Jesus
walking on the water but, having got out of the boat and felt the great power of
the wind and the waves, began to sink, crying out in fear, “Lord, save me!” This
story is an almost exact copy when it’s understood in its true, esoteric (or
symbolic) meaning. Through insights such as this, I was finding the New
Testament come alive to me as never before.
Once again, Horus anticipated all of this. It was written of him, “He hath
destroyed the water-flood of his mother. . . . He hath dispersed the raging rain
storm!” And again, “He hath dispersed for thee the rain storm, he hath broken
for thee the tempests.” What such passages are actually about is the power of the
Christ within each of us to still the strong, restless power of the elements in our
lower animal nature, symbolized by the wild and roiling sea. Instead of a literal
story about a kind of magician, we have a relevant and potentially transformative
wisdom to apply to our daily life.
The Egyptian Ritual assigns various names to the ship of Horus as it crosses
the sea of this lower life. Horus himself says in one place, “Collector of souls is
the name of my barque.” He was described as collecting souls for Ra, and in so
doing, he was thought to be reunifying the dismembered Osiris through his
“Horus spirit.” The deeper meaning—because there are always several layers—
is that all humanity is to be gathered together in a new bonding of love and
goodwill. As the ship sails along, “it will collect again the divine fragments
scattered abroad in the descent [of the god] to earth.” The symbolism of Noah’s
ark and the later likening of the church to a ship (the word “nave,” the main
body of a church, comes from the Latin word for “ship”) all echo these earlier
ideas.
Rising in Three Days
The Gospels, indeed the entire Bible, follow the Egyptian emphasis upon the
number three as well. Even a cursory examination of the Jewish and Christian
scriptures reveals how often the number three occurs. For example, when Jesus
stayed behind at the temple after his bar mitzvah, Mary and Joseph searched for
him “for three days.” In Matthew 15:29–32, Jesus is said to have had
compassion for the hungry crowd because “they continue with me three days.”
His message to that “fox” Herod was that “on the third day I shall be perfected.”
Three-day symbolism is found all through the Old and New Testaments.
So we find that Horus, like Jesus at his Resurrection, rose in a new body of
light on the third day. Osiris also is said to “die” at the winter solstice and be

“reborn” at the spring equinox, again as Horus, on the third day at Easter. Like
Jesus, the Egyptian saviour shared the experience of human suffering and death.
However, as we have seen, later Christianity took this story literally instead of
spiritually or mythically.
The chief significance of the number three here is that it “represents the period
of incubating life”—a special time when something new is about to break forth.
But It was based solidly on Egyptian lore, founded as always upon keen
observation of the natural world. The ancient sages had observed that the moon,
the monthly manifestor of the reflected light of the sun, went through a cycle of
twenty-eight days, which always included a three-day period when the sun lit up
no part of the orb’s surface visible to us from earth. This critical period of
waiting to see the “birth” of the new moon (and also, by proxy, of its lord, the
sun) was a symbol of both heavenly and human gestation and dramatic renewal.
The full moon was a monthly symbol of the maturation of the divinity, or
Christos, in everyone.
That’s what was also behind the symbolism of Jonah’s being held three days
in the belly of the great fish and, however distantly, of Jesus’ saying about the
temple being destroyed and in three days “I will raise it up” (a prophecy that,
again, was really about dying, resurrection, and new life).
Other Familiar Roles
• Jesus was the Good Shepherd whose voice the sheep know and who goes
out into the wilderness to bring back the one that is lost. In John, chapter
10, this whole theme is worked and reworked in a spiralling fashion
typical of the Gospel’s style. Not only is he shepherd and gatekeeper for
the flock, but he is the gate itself. Horus was the Good Shepherd
centuries, even millennia, before, however. He says to the flocks of Ra in
the desert of Lower Egypt, “Protection for you, all you flocks of Ra.”
Part of Osiris’ regalia was a shepherd’s staff, or crook, precisely like the
one carried today by the pope and bishops of the Catholic, Orthodox, and
Anglican Churches.
• Both Horus and Jesus are described as coming forth as the Winnower.
Matthew’s Gospel tells how John the Baptist predicts that Jesus will hold
a fan (the New Revised Standard Version, or NRSV, calls it a winnowing
fork) in his hand, “and he will clear his threshing floor and will gather his

wheat into the granary; but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable
fire.” Esoterically, this unusual symbol is a clear pictograph for the
principle of the mind. Intellect is to sweep out the chaff of sensuality and
free the golden grain. Those who were initiated into the greater mysteries
in the Greco-Roman world were washed with water and then breathed
upon and symbolically “fanned and winnowed” by the purifying wind or
spirit. This was really the same as the dual baptism of water and fire in
the Gospels. In Egypt, the fan, called the Khi, was the sign of air, breath,
and spirit. In Egyptian and Greek religion, the divine brings us intellect,
which is what keeps us from being smothered by sensation. This
understanding is in stark contrast to millions of ultraconservative
Christians, who seem so often to view reason as “a tool of the devil” and
pride themselves on acting on “faith alone.”
• Passages in the Gospels dealing with judgment of sinners (and also the
drama of Jesus’ Passion narrative, specifically the trials before Caiaphas,
Herod, and Pilate) reflect, with uncanny accuracy, scenes from the
Egyptian Great Hall of Justice, where those who have sided with Sut
against Horus are separated from the sheep and transformed into goats. I
am again reminded of Matthew, chapter 25, and the parable of the sheep
and the goats at the end of the age. In the King James Version, or KJV, it
begins, “When the Son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And
before hims hall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he
shall set the sheep on his right hand but the goats on the left.” Notice that
it is Matthew alone who has Jesus saying that the very hairs on a person’s
head are numbered in God’s sight. In the Egyptian Ritual, every hair is
weighed on the scales of justice. Many chapter headings are sayings of
deceased persons that repeat sayings originally ascribed to Horus. Horus
indeed is the divine speaker of yore, just as Jesus in the Gospels is
presented as the one whose words are life.
• Massey places those people in the Egyptian myth “that sat in darkness”
and saw a great light in what is called Amenta (i.e., the earth itself).
When Horus brings the divine light, he is declared to “descend from
heaven to the darkness of Amenta as the Light of the World.” In John’s

Gospel, chapter 9, Jesus says, “As long as I am in the world, I am the
light of the world.” The evangelist then uses the story of the healing of
the man who was blind from birth to illustrate this truth. In a deeper,
more spiritual sense, we are all blind from hewas our birth in a material
body (i.e., “in matter”), until our eyes are opened and we realize what
and who we really are: bearers of the Christ within.
• Jesus said he was the bread of life, a theme underlined heavily in chapter 6
of John’s Gospel. There, Jesus says, “I am the living bread that came
down from heaven. Whoever eats of this bread will live forever; and the
bread that I will give for the world is my flesh. . . . Unless you eat the
flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you.”
And again, “For my flesh is true food and my blood is true drink. Those
who eat my flesh and drink my blood have eternal life.”
Clearly the “bread” is, then, the divine principle of light and life. The
“blood” is the pledge of the same life and energy poured out for human
benefit. But Jesus was not the only divine person who offered his body and
blood symbolically for the nourishment of mortals. Massey says Horus
“also gave his flesh for food and his blood for drink.” Needless to say, the
language is pure allegory. As I first read this, I could not help thinking that
if this had been fully understood by the Church of the late second, third, and
fourth centuries, a lot of bloodshed over the true nature of the Mass or
Eucharist could later have been avoided. A lot of misunderstandings and
hardships remain today because Churches such as the Roman Catholic
Church still insist on taking the Eucharist passages in the Bible so literally.
That’s one of the chief reasons that Rome refuses to engage in
intercommunion with Anglicans, Lutherans, and other Churches that take a
more symbolic approach.
Horus declared, in the Egyptian Ritual, “I am the possessor of bread in
Anu. I have bread in heaven with Ra.” He is both the bread of life and the
divine corn. Like Jesus, who was of the same consubstantial essence as the
divine Father, according to John’s account, Horus is symbolically “the flesh
and blood of his father Osiris.” In his Christological character, Horus said,
“I am a soul and my soul is divine. I am he who produceth food. I am the

food that perished not.” Jesus said, “I am that bread of life. . . . Whoever
eats of the bread that I shall give him will never hunger.” Both are speaking
about the same deep spiritual realities.
• The concept of being born twice, once naturally and then again spiritually,
is a feature not just of John’s Gospel—with its oft-quoted “You must be
born again,” or, better, “You must be born from above”—but of almost
all early religions, including Hinduism. In the Egyptian cults, those twice
born are born first of the “water” of human nature and then again of the
spirit. The Ritual text calls out to the glorified soul: “Hail, Osiris, thou art
born twice!”9
• Both Horus and Jesus make a series of lengthy addresses to their fathers.
Horus, indeed, gives roughly forty of them in all. The most famous of
Jesus’ Gospel monologues of this type constitutes the whole of John,
chapter 17. It is certainly not historical but part of the myth. It, like most
of the discourses John attributed to Jesus, reads quite differently from
anything Jesus says in the three Synoptic Gospels. It ends, significantly,
“Now, I come to thee. . . . Glorify thy son.” In fact, he asks the Father to
restore to him the glory he had with him “before the world was.” Horus
pleads in a similar manner for Osiris to “let the state of the shining ones
be given to me. The elect arrives at the Aged One on the confines of the
Mount of Glory where the crown awaits.”10 This is a clear statement of
the return of the solar ray of the Logos. He was, from all time, in the
bosom of the universal father, Ra, and he suffered death in order to
glorify humankind, whom Ra gave him to uplift in nature. Like Horus,
Jesus asks to be restored to his pristine effulgence, or glory. The
similarities are so striking that when I first examined them, I could hardly
believe what I was reading.
• When Horus rises up in his glory, he lifts all other people with him. I was
powerfully reminded here of Jesus’ words about being “lifted up” and
drawing “all people” unto him. Paul, of course, says, “Now is Christ
risen from the dead and become the first-fruits of them that slept.”
Likewise Horus, “the Lord of Resurrection,” is the first of those who
slept in darkness to wake as “a soul most mighty.”

• Horus, as a symbolic sun deity, was often portrayed in the iconography as
a little, old, ugly man (representing the dying or setting sun, and also the
waning sun of autumn). As the rising sun in the east, however, he was
pictured as ruddy, strong, and youthful. Jesus, in Gnostic monuments in
the Roman catacombs, is portrayed either as vigorous, young, and of a
beautiful countenance or, to use Isaiah’s words, as an afflicted, elderly
“man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.”
As the Horus of the incarnation—symbolized by the sun on the western
horizon, “dipping down into matter”— the god made flesh in human form,
a voluntary sacrifice, the image of suffering—the Egyptian deity is also
sometimes pictured as a little child, maimed in his lower members and
marred by the loss of his stolen eye, and the discerning reader is forced to
recall some of the most moving words ever penned. Either Horus fulfills
this Isaiah passage or, muchmore likely, the passage borrows from the
earlier Horus myth. I like the James Moffat translation, which reads as
follows:
He was despised and shunned by men,
a man of pain who knew what sickness was;
like one from whom men turn with shuddering,
he was despised,we took no heed of him.
And yet ours was the pain he bore,
the sorrow he endured!
We thought him suffering from a stroke
at God’s own hand;
Yet he was wounded because we had sinned;
’twas our misdeeds that crushed him;
’twas for our welfare that he was chastised;
the blows that fell to him
have brought us healing.
And the Eternal laid on him
the guilt of all of us.
He was ill-treated,yet he bore it humbly,
he would never complain;

Dumb as a sheep led to the slaughter,
dumb as a ewe before the shearers.
They did away with him unjustly;
and who heeded how he fell,
torn from the land of the living,
struck down for sins of ours?
They laid him in a felon’s grave,
and buried him with criminals,
though he was guilty of no violence
nor had he uttered a false word.
He shall succeed triumphantly,
since he has shed his life-blood,
and let himself be numbered among rebels,
bearing the great world’s sins
and interposing for rebellious men.
Certainly this graphic description of the Christos who suffers for humanity
was written long before the appearance of any historical Jesus. The Gospel “life”
of Jesus, Isaiah’s account of the suffering servant, the story of Job’s afflictions,
the pre-Christianism story of the suffering Christ, and the description of the
pierced, wounded, crucified Horus of the ancient Egyptian records—all match
each other with unmistakable fidelity, Kuhn says. It’s the same story—as the
familiar evangelical hymn puts it, “the old, old story”—indeed.
Sadly, as we have seen, the Christian third-century falsifiers, to cover up the
fraud they committed in turning what was originally so allegorical and spiritual
into history and literal fact, burned— along with the hundreds of thousands of
other books already mentioned—the twenty-four volumes of the Gnostic
theologian Basilides. The books, called The Exegetica, were his biblical studies,
the very first commentaries on the Gospels by any Christian thinker. Since
Basilides was steeped in all the ancient wisdom, his interpretation of the Gospels
would have been of priceless value to the world and to would-be Christians
today. Clement of Alexandria described Basilides as “the philosopher devoted to
the contemplation of divine things.” Like all the other Christian Gnostics,
Basilides (who lived c. 140) expounded a fully spiritual, allegorical, and
symbolic interpretation of the Christos based upon his knowledge of Greek,
Hebraic, and Egyptian lore. We have an urgent need to recover his vision. One of
the most hopeful outcomes for me as I read and reread the Gospel texts from the
perspectives gained from the research discussed here is the continuous series of

surprises I now get as I am able to accept the allegories, the metaphors, and the
myths of the Bible and look behind or beyond them to the esoteric meaning
buried deeply within.
For further strong parallels between Horus and Jesus, I would encourage
readers to consult appendix B in this book. We have had only a partial peek at
the scores of similarities I have seen.
By truly understanding the role of Horus as revealing the coming of ever-
fuller divinity in every single human being, we are freed up to see the full
meaning of the Jesus “player” in the Gospel dramas. Today’s Christianity needs
a cosmic yet inner Christ, not some personalized idol in a narrow cult that bids
all the world to come to it—on its terms alone. People need and want a
connection to God that has already been planted in the soil of their own minds
and hearts. Knowing the Horus story is a sublime myth, we can penetrate once
more—like Origen and the other earliest Christians—to the heart of the same
eternal myth carried by the Gospels. That’s where my hope for the future of the
Church really lives—in the Christ within.
We are now ready, however, to tackle head-on the question of whether the
Bible can in any sense be regarded as history.

7
THE BIBLE— 
HISTORY OR MYTH?
The End of Fundamentalism
In the cosmic economy,the divine must always sacrifice its life for the
lower ranks of existence. In every religion a god is pictured as dying for
man.
There is not one iota of history as we know it in the entire Bible!
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Our Birth Is but a Sleep 
False History?
 
THE LEAD ARTICLE in the March 2002 issue of the prestigious Harper’s
magazine, titled “False Testament,” bluntly stated that archaeology now refutes
the Bible’s claim to history. Over the past several years, dispute over biblical
historicity has marked scholarly conferences and been the focus of articles in
The New York Times and U.S.News and World Report, a cover story in the
December 2002 issue of Maclean’s magazine, and a hard-hitting piece by the
archaeologist Ze’ev Herzog in the Israeli newspaper Ha’aretz. But the Harper’s
exposé, by the journalist Daniel Lazare, was the most trenchant, current account

I have seen yet.
Citing the most recent evidence (or rather, for the most part, the lack of it),
Lazare pulled the foundation out from under almost every major historical beam
in the edifice of accepted wisdom about everything from the existence of
Abraham and the other biblical patriarchs to the Exodus from Egypt, the
supposed glories of Kings David and Solomon, and even the reputed conquest of
the Promised Land (Canaan).
For millions of Jews, Christians, and Muslims, the revelations came as an
enormous shock. In the United States, clergy reported that many church
members have had their faith severely shaken by the account. According to “Is
the Bible Historical Hooey?,” a leading article about the affair in the May/June
2002 issue of the widely circulated Biblical Archaeological Review (BAR), the
ministers quoted said that people were demanding to know why, if the Bible is
wholly unreliable as history, they should believe any of it. The absolutist,
literalist approach has been so successful that the concept of Scripture as entirely
allegorical and mythical is still virtually beyond comprehension for most
traditional believers. Yet that is proving to be Christianity’s Achilles’ heel in the
present crisis. The old literalism simply cannot withstand the probing of modern
thought, research, and scholarship. What was never history to begin with can’t
masquerade as history any longer. This marks a major, decisive turning point in
Christianity’s overall story. It brings with it the hope of the recovery of a much
more spiritual belief system and experience of God.
The old Bible view, Lazare noted, was that the Israelites started out in the
middle of the second millennium B.C.E. as a nomadic band originating in
Mesopotamia (Iraq); they migrated first to Palestine and then to Egypt; after
years of enslavement, they escaped into the desert under Moses, eventually
crossed the Jordan and, in a vicious conquest, took over what today constitutes
modern Israel, the occupied territories, and (back in David’s time) muchmore.1
Lazare stated baldly that on the basis of his research and a survey of current
scholarship, he’d concluded that all of this is “bosh.” In the past quarter century,
he said, archaeologists have seen “one settled assumption over who the ancient
Israelites were and where they came from proved false.” Instead of a band of
invaders who conquered Canaan, “the Israelites are now thought to have been an
indigenous culture that developed west of the Jordan River around 1200 B.C.E. ”
The epic stories of Abraham, Isaac, and the other patriarchs “appear to have
been spliced . . . out of various pieces of local lore.” The whole account of
David’s empire is now viewed as “an invention of Jerusalem-based priests in the
seventh and eighth centuries B.C.E. who were keen to burnish their national
history,” he wrote. (By the way, a study of comparative religions shows that all

ancient peoples did the same.)
According to Lazare’s findings, Jewish monotheism—that is, the exclusive
worship of a Semitic deity called YHWA, or Yahweh (Jehovah)—didn’t fully
“coalesce” until sometime between an Assyrian conquest of the northern
kingdom of Israel in 722 B.C.E. and the Babylonian conquest of the southern
kingdom of Judah in 586. The Bible indicates this happened much earlier. As we
shall discover, the true origins appeared in Egyptian religious thought.
The situation gets even more problematic for the traditionalists in every camp.
Abraham, as Kuhn had long insisted, was utterly mythological. “Not only is
there no evidence that any such figure as Abraham ever lived but archaeologists
believe that there is no way such a figure could have lived given what we now
know about Israelite origins,” Lazare wrote. In other words, as Kuhn said much
earlier, he was a leading figure in the larger myth.
And Lazare didn’t stop there. The Exodus never occurred, he asserted, a
conclusion he based upon a growing body of evidence about ancient Egyptian
border defences, desert sites where the fleeing Israelites allegedly camped, and
so on. The Old Testament description of the conquest of Canaan thus “turns out
to be fictional as well.”
King David, said by the Bible to have been a mighty potentate and empire
builder, “was rather a freebooter who carved out what was at most a small duchy
in the southern highlands around Jerusalem and Hebron.” In fact, there are some
archaeologists today who maintain, because of the absence of concrete evidence,
that he too never existed. The name David appears on one lone inscription on a
stone block, or stele, from the ninth century B.C.E., and that’s all there is. As
Lazare points out, “If David and Solomon had been important regional power
brokers, one might reasonably expect their names to crop up on monuments and
in the diplomatic correspondence of the day. Yet, once again, the record is
silent.”
Fundamentalists once took delight in evidence from the 1930s that the walls
of Jericho had on one occasion fallen down, much as the Book of Joshua
describes. However, Lazare reminds readers that the British archaeologist
Kathleen Kenyon, in more recent times, has demonstrated from pottery shards in
the ruins that the destruction occurred no later than 1300 B.C.E., almost a hundred
years before the conquest (if there was one) could have happened. Joshua may
well not have “fit the battle of Jericho” after all.
There was much more, and Lazare had plenty of hard data to support his
devastating attack, including corroborative evidence from the recent bestselling
book The Bible Unearthed by Israel Finkelstein, an archaeologist at Tel Aviv
University, and the journalist Neil Silberman. Massey and Kuhn were strikingly

far ahead of all of this present scholarship in their research and conclusions. In
Who Is This King of Glory?, Kuhn mentions Massey’s dismissal of the
Pentateuch, or first five books of the Old Testament, as historical, quoting him in
words that seem straight out of the Finkelstein-Silberman book. Massey derides
the Pentateuch as an indistinguishable “mush” of myth and mystery. He said it
had “neither head, tail, nor vertebrae.” Had it been real history, particularly the
detailed accounts of battles in the Book of Joshua, Palestine and Judea ought to
be overrun with ancient implements of war and work, of Hebrew manufacture
and of the conquered races. But outside of the Bible story, there’s absolutely no
evidence to be found of the numberless combats and the devastation of
Jehovah’s enemies in great battles. Also, the country of a people so rich that
King David, in his poverty, could collect millions of pounds to build a temple is
found to have been without art, sculptures, mosaics, bronzes, pottery, or precious
stones. Similarly, Lazare writes, King Solomon was supposed to have been a
master builder and “an insatiable accumulator” of luxurious items. “He drank out
of golden goblets, outfitted his soldierswith golden shields,maintained a fleet of
sailing ships to seek out exotic treasures, kept a harem of 1,000 wives and
concubines, and spent 13 years building a palace and a richly decorated temple
to house the Ark of the Covenant.” Yet not one single goblet or one brick has
ever been found to indicate that such a reign existed! Proofs of Bible history will
not be found, says Massey, even if all of Palestine is dug up in the search.
Indeed, how fatuous it is to think of digging in the earth to find proof of myths
and allegories. No amount of archaeology can ever prove a myth.
The BAR response to Lazare’s explosive tour de force was disappointing to
anyone looking for a strong refutation. Indeed, I was struck more by the
concessions it had to make to Lazare’s case than by assurances of there being
“another side.” The piece, by one of the magazine’s editors, charged that the
Harper’s feature presented “only one side of a very hot debate in the field.” In
denying that Abraham ever existed, or that the Exodus from Egypt, the conquest
of the Holy Land, and the grandeur of the empires of David and Solomon were
solid facts of history, it didn’t give any indication that there might be “another
side.”
It’s true that Daniel Lazare didn’t acknowledge that there are some
conservative scholars who don’t dismiss the biblical accounts as summarily as he
does. Nevertheless, the case he presented was backed, as noted, by
overwhelming evidence, and what was a real eye-opener for many traditional
Bible readers was the extent to which the BAR editor had to agree with most of
Lazare’s most damning conclusions. He conceded, for example, that when it
comes to the Exodus from Egypt—where Moses leads the Israelites across the

Red (Reed) Sea into the somewhat absurd and obviously symbolic forty-year
wilderness trek—“I doubt you’d find many scholars who’d accept the Biblical
account at face value. We have no archaeological evidence of a man named
Moses, of Israelites wandering in the desert or of the events at Mount Sinai.”
(Kuhn wrote a brilliant monograph, The Red Sea Is Your Blood, to show the true
symbolic or allegorical meaning of the episode of the crossing of the Red—or,
correctly translated, Reed—Sea.)
The BAR editor admitted as well that Lazare’s argument that archaeology
doesn’t support the Biblical story of the conquest of Canaan is based not on
malice, as some fundamentalists have claimed, but on some very hard facts. He
said, “The Biblical account of the conquest does have its problems—the picture
formed by archaeology does not match the description in the Book of Joshua of a
swift military victory by the Israelites.” But the issue, he argued, is much more
“complex” than Lazare describes.
The article was equally weak in its response to Lazare’s debunking of the
stories of the great kingdom of David. The editor wrote, “The paucity of
archaeological remains from tenth-century Jerusalem is a problem. The capital
of a significant empire should leave behind some artifacts for us to recover.” But
that’s Lazare’s point precisely. The evidence for a large Davidic empire simply
isn’t there. The BAR commentator is forced to concede that, “we are far from
being able to offer a definitive history of David, one way or another.”
Even on such an important topic as Abraham, there is little that can be said to
dispute Lazare’s claim that he never lived. The BAR editor rather lamely points
out that there are “some historical details” in the Bible stories that mesh with
“details of treaties he made with local rulers and the price of slaves” and the
“historical record.” That proves nothing, however. He remains an extremely
shadowy, mythical character. In The Lost Light, Kuhn makes some startling
comments on Abraham, who he says categorically was never a historical figure.
Kuhn even unlocks the meaning of the patriarch’s name, A-Brahm, arguing it is
a combination of the alpha privative (as in the words “amoral” and “anoxia” and
Brahm (as in Vedic or Hindu), and means, therefore, “not Brahm.” He writes that
“Abraham the patriarch, or oldest of the emanations, was not Brahm, the Hindu
supreme deity, Brahma, the Absolute, but the first emanation from Brahm. He
was the first life that was not Absolute, but from the Absolute, a kind of
demigod, or sun God.”
In the end, Lazare concludes, “Rather than a chronicle of genuine events, the
history that Genesis (and other Old Testament books) set forth was an artificial
construct, a narrative framework created long after the facts in order to link
together a series of unconnected folktales like pearls on a string.” All of this

fully accords with the findings of the scholars we have met here. Myth certainly
uses historical details at times, and there are many to be found in the Old
Testament and the New. But ultimately a myth, as said earlier, has to do with
eternal truths.
It’s important to understand the kind of arguments used in reaching such
conclusions. For example, Lazare’s piece notes how the biblical stories of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob make frequent mention of camel caravans. An
instance is that of Genesis 24, where we read that Abraham’s emissary, sent to
find a wife for his son Isaac, “took ten of his master’s camels and left taking with
him all kinds of good things.” But analysis of ancient animal bones “confirms
that camels were not widely used for transport in the region until well after 1000
B.C.E.,” that is, over five hundred years later than the Bible dating for the
patriarchs. Nor is there any hint of mention of a person called Abraham in any of
the non-Biblically related inscriptions and other evidence available.
How Should We Interpret the Old Testament?
 
My own view, expressed in newspaper columns at the time, was that both
sides in this ongoing debate should be aware of the salient truth about all ancient
bibles and sacred texts insisted upon by Higgins, Massey, Kuhn, Northrop Frye,
Joseph Campbell, and numerous others. These texts were never intended as
history in the first place. They are almost purely allegorical, and their true
meaning is to be sought beneath the surface. For example, the constant
references to the various captivities of the Jews throughout the artificially
constructed “history” of the Old Testament should be understood as the real
“captivity” of the human soul in matter. The theme is really that of incarnation
once again.
The following familiar Old Testament stories show that we need to look
beneath the surface to know why they were told in the first place:
1. The crossing of the Red Sea is, according to the allegorical or symbolic
meaning, really the entrance into matter. Water always stands for matter
in the esoteric wisdom. The well-known story of the forty years the Jews
spent wandering in the wilderness was a mythical construct that was
symbolic of the soul’s life in the body during its earthly sojourn. This
insight is true of the Gospels also, as our exploration will show shortly.
2. The story of Daniel in the lion’s den and the three faithful Israelites who

survived the fiery furnace illustrate the central theme that life for the soul
of each of us in matter is like being exposed to wild beasts (our senses
and passions) or being tried by fire (temptations and all forms of
suffering). In each case, the trusting spirit within is given the courage and
protection to survive. The divine soul is ultimately imperishable.
3. The strange, epic story of Samson makes little sense as a literal tale, but
it simply glows once the allegorical and astronomical background is
known. Samson in Hebrew means “solar,” and he is plainly a sun-god
figure (as the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church suggests and
Kuhn affirms). Delilah, whose wiles eventually stripped him of his
prodigious strength, is linked by Massey with the feeble, waning aspect
of lunar light—the dark of the moon—a sign of the sun’s weakening each
month. In the saga, she shears off Samson’s hair, symbolizing the sun’s
loss of its halo of powerful rays. As a result, Samson—like Horus—has
his eyes put out. His “light” is extinguished temporarily. But in the
conclusion, as he brings down the great theatre holding his enemies and
kills three thousand Philistines, he wins victory over his foes.
4. The story of Gideon is another variation on the theme. He has his greatly
outnumbered troops surround the enemy by night. Each soldier holds a
candle hidden in an earthen pot or vase and then suddenly breaks it open
to flash an encircling ring of light. His foes, hearing the cry “The sword
of the Lord and of Gideon” from the hilltops surrounding their camp—
and seeing the many lights—run for their lives. The hidden meaning is
that the light within each of us (the Christ) can, as St. Paul says,
overcome all things.
5. There are several perplexing passages in the Old Testament, and at least
one in the New, where women far beyond the age of child-bearing,
women who have been barren their whole lives, suddenly and
miraculously become pregnant and give birth. Sarah, the wife of
Abraham, is one. Hannah, Samuel’s mother, and Elizabeth, the mother of
John the Baptist, are two others. What do these strange “miracles” really
mean? Kuhn explains that each is a type, or symbol, of the evolutionary
process. The mineral stage is followed by the vegetative, and that in turn

is followed by the animal. Halfway through the age of the animal
kingdom—in geology and biology, this would be billions of years after
the big bang—the stage of incarnation (that is, the dawning of
selfreflective consciousness) raises the animal to the human. “Late in
time behold him come, offspring of the virgin’s womb [matter],” as the
carol says. The late birth of singular heroes such as Isaac, Samuel, and
John the Baptist symbolizes the fact that our evolution as rational, soul-
bearing animals has come well on in God’s overall “plan” for this cycle
or eon (age).
The Old Testament is not a historically accurate record of events but the story
of a people’s evolving understanding of God and of God’s relationship with our
humanity.
The New Testament
What about the New Testament, then? Surely here, if anywhere in holy writ,
we are on historical terra firma. But once you realize, as I have been arguing,
that ancient authors writing about God and God’s ways with individuals and
nations always use metaphor, myth, poetry, allegory, parable, and a host of other
devices to describe eternal truths, you have to ask why they would suddenly stop
at the beginning of the Christian era. The truth is that they didn’t. The Gospels,
in particular, may sound a little like history in places, but most biblical scholars
today agree that they very are far from what we moderns understand by that
concept.
The Gospels, however they originated, were religious dramas used for
worship and as a form of evangelism. They were meant not to impart history but
to buttress and convey belief. The editor of John’s Gospel (the least historical of
them all) boldly and honestly states his aims in the text itself when he says, “But
these things are written so that you may come to believe that Jesus is the
Messiah.” The goal is to establish the faithful and to create new converts, not to
create an authentic biography.2
Luke Tries to Make Myth into History
Luke’s Gospel opens with the statement that he is adding his account to those
already written by “many” others in order to set forth the “truth” about the Jesus
story. This carries an appealing impression of concern for history. He names

names and gives the illusion of firm dating. But the early chapters of this work
are filled with nonhistorical, highly symbolic, mythical narratives.
For example, when Mary bursts into the soaring verses of the Magnificat upon
hearing that her aged relative Elizabeth is also “with child,” it is given as a
spontaneous moment. But anyone of good sense can tell that this psalm is a well-
crafted, well-studied piece of Midrashic writing (imaginative commentary) that
nobody, let alone an untutored girl, could improvise. Scholars are quite aware
that this psalm expands on and repeats Hannah’s song in 1 Samuel, chapter 2. It
has nothing historical about it.
Next, Luke tells how a decree went out from Augustus that “all the world
should be registered.” The trouble is that there is absolutely no trace—in a well-
documented period—of such a decree. It’s simply a means of getting Joseph and
Mary to Bethlehem for theological reasons. The messiah had to be of Davidic
descent, and thus from Bethlehem. Luke says the birth occurred while Quirinius
was governor of Syria. That means it could not have happened before 6 C.E., the
year we know he took office. At the same time, Matthew says Jesus was
conceived while Herod the Great was in power in Judea. But Herod died in 4
B.C.E.! The authors of The Jesus Mysteries point out that Mary’s real miracle, if
both references are taken as genuinely historical, was “a 10-year pregnancy.” For
Matthew, Jesus’ hometown was Bethlehem. For Luke, it was Nazareth.
As we have already seen, the stories of the angels and the shepherds, in Luke,
and of the wise men, in Matthew, are rewrites of Egyptian mythical themes from
at least two thousand years earlier. They are portrayed in the art at Luxor. There
is no historical record of Herod’s alleged edict regarding the “slaughter of the
innocents” either. Common sense tells us that such an order was an impossibility
in any case. Did Herod intend to kill the children of his friends, his soldiers, his
civil servants, tourists passing through, and so on? You know for certain the
whole matter is symbolic once you realize that an attempt to slaughter a holy
child appears in all the ancient hero myths, from Moses to Horus to Sargon to
Hercules. As noted earlier, the threat to the newly born Horus, the Egyptian
Christ, came from Herut, the serpent.
Then there’s the matter of the two genealogies of Jesus in Matthew and Luke.
Clearly, they have nothing to do with history and everything to do with myth.
Luke traces the family “history” to Adam because his story is universal.
Matthew traces it to Abraham because he’s interested in establishing the Jewish
line of descent. But both accounts give the show away when they come to their
conclusion. Both show clearly that on the father’s side, Jesus was (as was
compulsory for the Jewish story) a descendant of David. But they fail to point
out how utterly irrelevant this really is, since, in their view, Joseph wasn’t the

real father at all—it was a virgin birth. The myth required this.
There is more. Historically, virgins don’t have babies, but stories of virgin
births abound in myths. Stars don’t “stand” over houses or stables, and they
don’t lead people west (especially when they appear in the east!). But they do
occur in every ancient myth. Every early messiah figure was heralded by a star.
That’s the point.
The Prodigal Son
This is one of the best-known stories told in the Gospels (found only in
Luke). It has been preached about, dissected, and written about quite literally
millions of times. In Finding the Still Point, I discussed it and tried to show that
the point where the “lost” son “came to himself ” was the central one that
everything depended on. He realized his unique, inner self, and it turned him
completely around. From the esoteric, allegorical viewpoint, however, the
meaning lies even deeper yet. The story is actually a classic exposition of the
incarnational theology I have been describing throughout. The Prodigal Son
represents the hidden drama of the soul. When we enter into matter—taking
upon us a body and embarking upon a lifetime of experience—we are truly
going off into “a far country,” to be tested, fed on scraps (compared with our true
spiritual heritage), degraded, and alienated in many ways. One day, however,
true enlightenment dawns. The divinity within is recognized, the “sleeping”
Christ is awakened, and we return home to the waiting “Father.” The welcome
accorded the Prodigal Son is an allegorical reference to the ultimate rejoicing of
the soul’s glorious resurrection on the other side. Other details in the story, such
as the carping of the elder son, were likely added later, either because of a failure
to see its true esoteric sense or to score points in the early Christians’ squabble
with the synagogue.
The Sower
Another familiar parable is the one involving the sower who sows the Word
—the Greek term is logos—on various soils. The true esoteric or allegorical
meaning once again has to do with the theme of incarnation. The ancient Stoics
believed there was a “seed” of the divine mind, or Logos, in every human being
—they even called this the spermatikos logos, the “seed Logos”—and the
Gospel story reflects a similar belief. God, the true “sower,” casts the divine seed
into every heart. But success is determined by the “soils”—that is, the kind of
response and lives lived as a result. The message is: Be the best soil. In other

words, wake up to who and what you really are. Become it.
A Case Study: The Raising of Lazarus
Since I want you to know as intimately as possible what was going on in my
own mind as I wrestled with all of this material, I think it’s useful to examine the
most striking of all the New Testament miracles attributed to Jesus. The story of
the raising of Lazarus is well known in some circles. But you need to be truly
familiar with it for the discussion that follows. Here it is, then (John, chapter 11),
taken from the King James Version.
Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of
Mary and her sister Martha. . . . Therefore, his sisters sent unto him, saying,
Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick. When Jesus heard that, he said,
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God, might be glorified thereby.
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. When he had heard
therefore that he [Lazarus] was sick, he abode two days still in the same
place where he was. Then after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into
Judaea again. . . . These things said he: and after that he saith unto them,
Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.
Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. Howbeit Jesus
spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in
sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for
your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let
us go unto him. Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his
fellow disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him. Then when Jesus
came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days already. Now
Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off. And many of
the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their
brother. Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and
met him: but Mary sat still in the house. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord,
if thou hadst been here my brother had not died. But I know, that even now,
whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. Jesus saith unto her,
Thy brother shall rise again. Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise
again in the resurrection at the last day. Jesus said unto her, I am the
resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.
Believest thou this? She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art

the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world. And when
she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister secretly
saying, The Master is come, and calleth for thee. As soon as she heard that,
she arose quickly and came unto him.
Now Jesus was not come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met him. The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out,
followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there. Then when
Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet,
saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which
came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled. And said, Where
have ye laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see. Jesus wept.
Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him! And some of them said,
Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that
even this man should not have died?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha,
the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he
stinketh: for he had been dead four days. Jesus saith unto her, Said I not
unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of
God?
Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.
And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou has
heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the
people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou has sent me.
And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come
forth. And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with
graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto
them, Loose him, and let himgo.
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things
which Jesus did, believed on him.
Let me say from the outset that this entire chapter, with its detailed account
of the raising of Lazarus, was always problematic to me, both as a student and
later as a professor of the New Testament. It is set out in John as the last and
crowning “Sign” of the series of seven signs, beginning with the changing of
water into wine at the very outset of the Gospel, intended to convince the reader
that Jesus is indeed the Messiah and the Son of God. In particular, it sets up the

key saying about Jesus being the resurrection and the life. He is the one who can
make the dead live again. Yet several things about the story had disturbed me
long before I was made aware of its Egyptian antecedents.
First, the raising of Lazarus is presented in the Gospel as being the straw that
broke the proverbial camel’s back. Jewish authorities in the story are so shocked
by it, and so afraid that the whole world will be convinced by it (to the point that
the Roman authorities will be provoked and take violent, repressive action), that
they immediately plot to get rid of Jesus once and for all. The raising of Lazarus,
then, is purported to be the immediate cause of the crucifixion. Yet this flatly
contradicts the picture given in the three Synoptic Gospels. There, Jesus’ arrest,
trials, and execution are quite plainly said to be the result of the angst and anger
of the authorities over his cleansing of the temple. Mark puts it thus: “And the
scribes and the chief priests heard it [about the temple cleansing and his remark
about their having made God’s house ‘a den of thieves’], and sought how they
might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people were astonished at
his doctrine.” Both versions cannot be sustained together. The gap is too great.
Interestingly, the temple cleansing comes right at the beginning of Jesus’ public
ministry according to John’s Gospel but is placed right at the end of it by
Matthew, Mark, and Luke.
Second, it has always seemed to me inexplicable that this spectacular story of
Lazarus, had it been historical, would have been so thoroughly overlooked by
the other three evangelists and their “schools.” Yet the story appears solely in the
Fourth Gospel. Such a momentous “proof ” of superhuman, divine power could
never have been kept hidden from others—indeed, as we have seen, it was its
very celebrity, even among Jesus’ enemies, that led to the cross, according to
John. It seemed certain to me, then, that the miracle is not in Matthew, Mark, or
Luke because those authors knew nothing whatever about it. It was not part of
the common tradition. It bears the feel and character of allegory and myth.
Third, the secular witnesses were noticeably silent. If we recall the alleged
opening of the tombs on that first Good Friday (recorded only by Matthew),
when “the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,
and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city and
appeared unto many,” we must conclude that this kind of public wonder-working
would certainly not have escaped the numerous secular chroniclers, historians,
and other witnesses of the day. But there is not a word of secular or Jewish
comment on it anywhere to be found.
It was thus all a serious puzzle for me when I took the widely accepted
historical-critical approach to it as a New Testament scholar. However, once I
came across the researches of Massey, Kuhn, and other scholars, with their deep

knowledge of ancient linguistics and their insights into Egyptian mythology, the
puzzle wholly disappeared. It became crystal clear to me that John’s narrative at
this point is lifted straight from ancient themes and then reworked to fit his own
overall schema and purposes. Read allegorically, the way it is told in the
Egyptian sources, this story is no problem. Read as history, it’s a plagiaristic
(though well-meaning) forgery. It creates insurmountable difficulties for
reasonable, educated people today.
Consider this a form of detective work for a few moments and see how
scholarly analysis reveals the true meaning of what is going on. In the Egyptian
Book of the Dead, Anu, called Heliopolis in Greek (meaning “city of the sun”),
was the theological name of an actual Egyptian city where the rites of the death,
burial, and resurrection of Osiris or Horus were enacted each year. The name is a
combination of nu, the name for “mother heaven” or primal, empty space, the
“abyss of nothingness,” and the alpha privative— hence, A-Nu, or “not
nothingness,” a world of concrete actuality, the world of substantial
manifestation. In other words, Anu was precisely a place where units of divine
consciousness (or souls) go to their symbolic “death” in every human
(incarnation) and later rise again to glory. Anu was called, among other things,
the place of “multiplying bread.” (Significantly, Bethlehem, the birthplace of
Jesus, means “the house of bread.” We will not stop here, tempted though we
may be, to show the intimate connections between this concept and the Gospel
Christ who multiplies loaves and fishes for the crowds.) The Hebrews added
their prefix for “house,” beth, to Anu and produced Beth-Anu, or the House of
Anu. But because the u and the y were interchangeable in antiquity, we ended up
with the New Testament counterpart Bethany. The point here is that when we
read the Egyptian text, we find that the Egyptian Christ, Horus, performed a
great miracle at Anu, or Bethany. He raised his father, Osiris, from the dead,
calling unto him in the cave to “rise and come forth.”
These clues help us solve the question of who Lazarus was originally.
According to Egyptologist Sir Wallis Budge, as well as my major sources and
other eminent authorities on the texts, the ancient name for Osiris was Asar. The
Egyptians regularly expressed their reverence by placing the definite article
“the” before the names of their gods. Just as Christians say, or should say, “the
Christ,” the Egyptians said “the Osiris.” But that was the equivalent of saying
“Lord Osiris.” When the Hebrews took up the name of the Osiris, or Lord Osiris,
they used the Hebrew word for “lord,” el—hence El-Asar.3 Later on, the
Romans, speaking Latin, of course, took El-Asar and added the us ending used
for most male names. The result was El-Asar-us. In time, the initial e “wore off,”
as linguists describe it, and the s in Asar changed to z, its constant companion in

language. Thus, we have Lazarus, the Osiris of the Beth-Anu story. So it is that,
beginning with Massey, these scholars convincingly conclude that Jesus’ raising
of Lazarus at Bethany is “but a rescript of the old Egyptian dramatic mystery in
which Horus, the Christ, raised his ‘dead’ father Osiris from the grave.” It is
written in the hieroglyphics that Horus followed the divine Meri to the place
where Asar (Osiris) lay buried in his tomb, just as Jesus followed Mary, who had
come forth to meet him on the way to Bethany. The most important point is that
this Egyptian recital was in the papyri perhaps as long ago as five thousand years
B.C.E.
Further evidence of similarities between the ancient myth and the Gospel
account is found in the plentiful references in the Gospel story to mourning and
weeping at the home and the grave of Lazarus. The “Jews” who were there to
comfort the sisters were weeping, we are told, as was Mary. And then we have
the ringing, famous words “Jesus wept.” But the Bethany, or Beth-Anu, of the
Egyptian story was known long before as “the place of weeping”! As Kuhn
notes, “Isis and her divine sister, Nephthys, Jesus and Horus, Mary and Martha,
all wept over the inert lord, El-Asar-us.”
Those two divine sisters, Isis and Nephthys, are also significant. An old
source-name for Isis was Meri, like the Latin word mare, “the sea” (the primitive
source of all life). The Egyptian plural of Meri, however, was Merti. In the Latin
feminine form, this became Mertae. In Hebrew, it resolved into what was
rendered in English as Martha. So even in the ancient Egyptian transaction, there
were also present the two Marys, or Mary and Martha, the sisters of Lazarus.
One final detail: in the Johannine account, Jesus makes the surprising
assertion that Lazarus is not dead but only sleeping. The same thing was said
many centuries earlier, in the ancient scripts of Osiris in Egypt: “That is Osiris
who is not dead but sleeping in Anu, the place of his repose, awaiting the call
that bids him come forth today.” In the text of the Har-Hetep, the speaker, who
personates Horus in the drama, is he who comes to awaken Asar (Osiris) out of
his sleep.
What are we to make of this recondite but almost exact parallel between the
two texts, the Egyptian and the Johannine? The conclusion seems inevitable to
me. The Egyptian Ritual was certainly mythical in character—that is, it was
intended to celebrate the eventual resurrection to radiant glory of the individual’s
true self, the inner Christ. Similarly, the author/editor of John had no intent to
deceive the reader with “false history.” The purpose, rather, was exactly the
same—to convey, in the vivid context of a fictional story, the esoteric, spiritual
truth of our own final victory over the grave itself, our resurrection. It was a vital
part of the drama in this particularly Jewish version of the eternal myth. The

thing that moves me most about such an approach, and that fills me with fresh
optimism for a more profound understanding of the whole Jesus story, is that
what is simply incredible as “history” suddenly becomes dazzlingly alive with
spiritual meanings, as relevant as one’s next breath. It was becoming
increasingly obvious to me, as I read on, that what we need today is not a further
rationalizing and demythologizing of the Bible accounts, but rather a
remythologizing of them in order to see their eternal significance as we have
never seen it before. The need is not to peel away the myth, as I used to think,
but to use it to penetrate to the spiritual heart of what it has always been trying to
tell us.
The Egyptians believed in the immortality of the soul and of its final glorious,
spiritual resurrection from the very dawn of time. The story of Osiris/Lazarus
dominated not just their religious thinking but that of the entire Greco-Roman
world prior to what we now call the Christian era. To see it reflected in the
Gospel, as we have done, is not to “debunk” the New Testament. Rather, it is to
ground it, and the hope of the resurrection message, ever more firmly in the
wider, more ancient wisdom of humanity’s most gifted and learned sages. The
mythical, symbolic meaning of the raising of Lazarus goes to the core truth that
simple history can never touch. We shall all one day likewise rise again.
This, of course, is just a bare peek at the issues involved. But the evidence is
mounting. The old literalist approach is dead in the water. Yet through this very
necessary process, as we have already begun to see, something quite new and
bracing and liberating is about to emerge.

8
SEEING THE GOSPELS 
WITH NEW EYES
Sublime Myth Is Not Biography
The evidence suggests that the New Testament is not a history of actual
events,but a history of the evolution of Christian mythology.
– TIMOTHY FREKE AND PETER GANDY, The Jesus Mysteries
From a hoary civilization [Egypt] comes the literature that ends all
debate by offering the incontrovertible evidence that the Gospels are not
and never were histories. They are now proven to have been cryptic dramas
of the spiritual evolution of humanity and of the history of the human soul
in its earthly tabernacle of flesh.
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
BY NOW, it is more than obvious that no part of this investigation is intended
to take away from the enormous importance of the Gospels to my own spiritual
journey or to any renewal of Christianity in our day. It is my deep conviction and
experience that the metaphorical/allegorical interpretation given to them by the
work of Massey and Kuhn, in particular, greatly enhances their relevance to our
lives—their power to enlarge and uplift one’s spiritual vision. At present, given
the prevalence of an overly literalist approach, I have come to realize that they

are largely—indeed, one could say completely—misunderstood. To read them as
history is to be forced to leave all sense of normal reality outside on the church
steps. Taken literally, they present a world of abnormal events totally unrelated
to people’s authentic living today. When, in the liturgy, the Sunday Gospel is
read, the reader says, “The word of the Lord,” and the people respond with
“Thanks be to God.” But they usually have little sense of what it means.
As the scholars of the controversial California-based Jesus Seminar have
pointed out, some twenty gospels of various kinds have come down to us either
in whole or in pieces from the first three centuries of the common era, but only
four ended up included in the New Testament. The seminar, founded in 1985 by
Robert Funk, now consists of a group of over seventy-five internationally
recognized biblical scholars who are experts in a wide variety of fields, from
ancient history to archaeology. Sifting through the Gospels and the Book of
Acts, grading the various sayings and deeds of Jesus according to their
probability of authenticity, they have produced a very different “man” from the
figure that is the icon of orthodox Christianity. In their findings, Jesus had a
human father whose name may not have been Joseph; he was born not in
Bethlehem but in Nazareth; he was an itinerant sage who liked the company of
social outcasts; he healed many psychosomatic illnesses; he did not walk on
water, feed the crowd with miraculous meals, change water into wine, or raise
the dead. In their view, there was no empty tomb; belief in the Resurrection is
based on the visionary experiences of Peter, Mary, and later, Paul. Jesus did not,
in their view, preach that he would come again. The chief flaw in the entire Jesus
Seminar approach, however, is that like the fundamentalists, the scholars of the
Jesus Seminar seem stuck with the mistaken view that they are ultimately
dealing with history. If they could only strip away all accretions and get back to
the kernel or core! But myth treated as history invariably falls apart. Instead of a
powerful spiritual message, they have ended up with scraps of “stones for
bread.”1
The truth is that the earliest documents available to the seminar scholars are
some tiny fragments of a papyrus copy of John’s Gospel, dating to about 130 C.E.
The first substantial physical evidence for the four Gospels comes from near the
end of the second century C.E., about 170 years after Jesus’ demise. But even
then, as the seminar’s leaders point out, “hard information” is lacking as to how,
when, and by whom they were actually composed or edited.2
The kind of exploration we have taken so far has shown that there is no
question that the four Gospels contain material derived originally from ancient
Egyptian sources. We have already seen plenty of evidence for this in the

chapters on Horus and the Lazarus “miracle.” But we must not think the
borrowing was direct. Much of the material had undoubtedly been used and
reused in the dramas and plays of the Greco-Roman Mystery Religions, and a
great deal comes by way of what Christians call the Old Testament. Some of it,
for example, much of the Sermon on the Mount, comes from a common store of
ancient wisdom literature that was widely circulated in the Middle East and
eventually found its way into Jewish Talmudic and Midrashic (imaginative)
commentaries. With the possible exception of the saying about forgiving one’s
enemies (and even this is disputed), there is absolutely nothing in the sermon in
Matthew, chapters 5 to 7—paralleled by Luke’s Sermon on the Plain—that
cannot be found in the Jewish sources. I already knew that according to the
tradition of the Christian Fathers, the primary nucleus of the canonical Gospels
was not the life of Jesus at all but a collection of Logia, or sayings, which were
written down inHebrewor Aramaic by Matthew, the scribe of the Lord. An early
writer to bear testimony to Christian history is Papias, the bishop of Hieropolis
in Asia Minor. Writing sometime around 120 C.E., he emphatically declares that
the Christian Gospels were founded upon and originated in the Logia. (Papias
also said that according to the tradition he received, Jesus died at home in bed of
old age.) Notice that the Gospel of Thomas, discovered with other Gnostic
writings at Nag Hammadi in Egypt in 1945, was purely made up of sayings
attributed to Jesus. It had no Passion or Resurrection story. The same is true of
the hypothetical document “Q,” a “sayings” source believed to have been used
by both Matthew and Luke.3
Papias is the earliest witness to name a written Gospel: Mark. He said that
Mark, having become the interpreter for Peter, wrote down accurately what he
remembered, but not in the correct order: “For he neither heard the Lord nor
accompanied him.” Matthew, he says, put the Oracles of the Lord in the Hebrew
language, “and each one interpreted them as best he could.” Kuhn notes that
Papias knew of no other Gospels than those of Mark and Matthew at that time,
and actually he had heard of such writings only from the elders at second hand.
He had not seen any himself. Gerald Massey derives the word “myth” from the
old Egyptian mutu, meaning utterance or sayings, and relates it to the Egyptian
mattiu, whichmeans “the word of truth” or “true sayings.” The resemblance to
Matthew here cannot be accidental.
Most significantly, key early Church Fathers—notably Clement of Alexandria,
Origen, and Irenaeus—agree, following the witness of Papias (against Eusebius,
the ever-dubious historian), that Matthew, and not Mark, was the primary
Gospel. But there is plenty of evidence to show that these sayings, the admitted
foundations of the Gospels, were not first uttered by Jesus or invented afterwards

by his followers. Many of them were pre-existent, prehistoric, and therefore
certainly pre-Christian. They were collections of Egyptian, Hebrew, and Gnostic
sayings, and therefore cannot stand on their own as evidence that the Jesus of the
Gospels ever lived as a man or teacher. These sayings were all oral teachings in
the ancient Mysteries ages before they were written down. Most of the data
included in the original Gospel of Matthew, in particular, were put in with the
obvious motive of appearing to fulfill Old Testament prophecy. In other words,
Jesus is made to fulfill what had already been written for a different context.
Hence the frequent, almost tedious, refrain in that Gospel that events happened
“according as it was prophesied by Isaiah” or some other prophet. You can check
this aspect out for yourself by reading Matthew carefully and noticing how
formulaic this process becomes. It’s abundantly clear that the compiler was too
uninstructed to know that these prophecies belonged previously to the
astronomical allegory of ancient Egypt, and that they did not refer to human
history and were not supposed to be fulfilled on the plain of objective event.
There is a huge amount of evidence that the core of the spiritual tradition
handed down from earliest times was incorporated into collections of the most
outstanding and vital utterances spoken by the Christos figure in the cryptic
dramas and rituals of the past. These collations of “sacred utterances of the
divine Son to humans” were circulated, in secret, all over the ancient world
under the name the Logia, or “sayings of the Lord.” Having thoroughly weighed
the research, I now believe they were the root documents from which the
canonical Gospels were extracted. Then, to cover deterioration and suit the
various emerging communities of Christians, they were amended, interpolated,
and edited by many scribes. I am convinced that this explanation is as near to
being the truth of the source, origin, and nature of the Christian Gospels as can
be determined.
It is worth remembering that most editors of such narratives felt fully at ease
using that freedom which all antiquity was wont to allow itself in dealing with
literary monuments. There were no copyright laws. Indeed, as difficult as this is
for us to conceive of today, the concept of copyright was utterly foreign to the
ancient mind. There was little hesitation in reshaping materials to exclude
whatever did not suit the particular editor’s point of view, or in substituting other
formulae of his own composition and expanding or abridging after his own
pleasure. The proof of this, for contemporary New Testament scholars and even
the attentive lay student, can be seen in the somewhat cavalier way in which
both Matthew and Luke treat the Gospel of Mark (which both, quite obviously,
had before them as they compiled their own); they leave material out, make
changes, and add to it at will. Elaine Pagels, author of Beyond Belief: The Secret

Gospel of Thomas, reminds us that “what survived as orthodox Christianity did
so by suppressing and forcibly eliminating a lot of other material.”
What is more, we learn from Origen himself that as late as the early third
century, there were different versions of Matthew’s Gospel in circulation.
Jerome, at the end of the fourth century, says the very same thing—he even says
that there were as many different texts as there were manuscripts of the Latin
version! It was an extreme fundamentalist’s worst possible nightmare.
The Nativity Myth
When you recall that the birth narratives of Matthew and Luke are
nonhistorical,made up as they are of pious legends andMidrashic-type invention
(whose highly symbolic and spiritually meaningful character must nevertheless
be stressed), and that the parables come from ancient “sayings sources,” it
becomes even more apparent that what we are dealing with in the Gospels are
literary editions of allegorical and mythical themes that have a history of their
own but contain little history themselves. All the legends about a virgin birth, a
star in the east, three wise men bearing gifts, the evil power that tries to take a
special child’s life, and angelic messengers have, as we have seen, been enacted
many times before in the myths of Egypt and other places too numerous to
mention.
Bishop John Spong, members of the Jesus Seminar, and many other
contemporary scholars have worked and reworked the birth narratives, sifting
them like finely powdered flour, but none has, in my view, shown their full depth
and significance as Massey and Kuhn have done.4 Today’s critical exegetes, I am
persuaded, are still caught in the literalist, historical trap, even as they try to
extricate the Jesus story from its mythical package. They are the rationalizers of
the mythos against whom Massey in particular forewarned. Lose the myth and
you lose everything.
The sad truth, as one reconsiders the conflicting nativity stories of Matthew
and Luke, is that the resolution of the allegorical birth of the Christ into the
delivery of a literal baby in a localized, historical Bethlehem has kept the rest of
humanity from realizing the true meaning of the messianic fulfillment. With the
third-century conversion of an age-old spiritual drama meant to depict the truth
about each of us into the biography of a unique man-saviour, the great truth that
a ray of the solar Logos was incorporated distributively into animal humanity
faded out and was obliterated. Among other things, this has meant that the true,
inner meaning of the annual celebration of Christmas for each individual person
has been lost. I am reminded of the response made by Sir Wallis Budge, in his

book Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection, to a careless assertion by some of his
contemporaries that the people of West Africa were “primitive savages.” Budge
wrote, “This is a great mistake, for they possess the remnants of a noble and
sublime religion, the precepts of which they have forgotten and the ceremonies
of which they have debased.” Nowhere is this phenomenon of decline more
visible than in what has happened to the religious treatment of Christmas. The
story is not the literal account it seems to be on the surface; it is about the birth,
in the heart of every human being, of the Christ. It is a supreme telling of the
central myth of all religion—the incarnation of the divine into human flesh. As
the quotation at the very beginning of our study says, “Though Christ a thousand
times in Bethlehem be born, but not within thyself, thy soul will be forlorn; the
cross on Golgotha thou lookest to in vain unless within thyself it be set up
again.”
The point is that while on the surface the Gospels appear to be a form of
biography combined with proclamation, closer examination reveals that they are
not biographies at all. They are extraordinarily imprecise or vague just at the
places where we would most expect explicit details. We know nothing about
Jesus’ appearance from these texts—the colour of his skin or his eyes, his
approximate height or size, whether he was bearded or clean-shaven, whether he
had long hair or was balding, and so on. We’re left wholly guessing about his
date of birth and the year he died, even about whether he was married or single.
Because of the vast silence about the years between his birth and the beginning
of the ministry (apart from Luke’s legend-like story about Jesus’ visiting the
temple at the age of twelve for his bar mitzvah, volumes have been filled with
speculations that grow wilder with passing time. There are legends about
supposed visits to England; mystical sojourns in Egypt, Tibet, India; and much
more. Credulous souls who have great difficulty discerning evidence from
fanciful conjecture flock to buy each latest embroidery on this theme.
Mark, the earliest Gospel, omits everything before Jesus’ appearance as an
adult man at the Jordan River to be baptized by John. It contains no birth
narratives, no genealogies, no traces of childhood or youth whatever. This is a
strange way to begin any attempt at a “life” of a person clearly regarded as
spectacular. Mark’s Gospel is so lean and spare, so lacking in details about Jesus’
life that Jesus’ ministry could only have lasted a little over one year, as we have
seen. It is only from John that the case can be built for a three-year timespan.
Long ago, I was struck by how Mark liked to link each anecdote to the next with
the word “immediately” (euthus in Greek), which gives a breathless sense of
pace but is actually a cover-up for the author’s lack of knowledge of any specific
time sequences. As Papias said, Mark did not have his account in any particular

order. Scholars, myself included, have often described the Gospel as little more
than a Passion narrative with an introduction.
However, the real centre of interest, and the place where the details start to
flow, is not the birth but the events leading up to and culminating in the arrest,
trials, and Crucifixion of Jesus, when the story nears its climax. It takes very
little imagination indeed to see this entire Gospel as a ritual drama or mystery
play. The divine teacher is called, is tested by the “adversary,” gathers disciples,
heals the sick, preaches the Good News about God’s kingdom, finally runs afoul
of his bitter enemies, suffers, dies, and is resurrected after three days. This is the
total pattern of the sun god in all the ancient dramas, as we have already seen.
What is different about Mark and the other, more complex Gospels is that it is all
presented as if it was genuine history! Kuhn’s marshalling of the evidence at this
point seems to be beyond rebuttal. He shows that the stories of the arrest, trial,
and Crucifixion are quite understandable as scenes in a mystery play but
inexplicable as facts of history. He writes, “The trial is presented as lasting
through one night when, as the great scholar Renan notes, an Eastern city is
wrapped in silence and darkness—quite natural as scenes in a mystery play, but
not as actual history.”
The Passion Narratives
I have examined in detail how, in the Egyptian Ritual, a multitude of
symbolic events are thrown into the night preceding the Passover of the spring
equinox, March 21, the most important date in the Egyptian calendar and in all
the various sun-based myths.5 The spring equinox was, next to the summer
solstice, the single most important cosmic event for all ancient cultures and
religions, from the Druids at Stonehenge to the Native North Americans, from
the heart of the African jungle to the fertile plains of Mesopotamia. It’s the
supremely symbolic moment when the sun’s returning vigour actually draws
equal to and then surpasses the forces of darkness. For the Egyptians, this
particular night was symbolic of “the dark night of the soul” in incarnation,
which ended with the soul passing over the boundary at Easter, just three days
later. Kuhn writes, “All processes of transformation, purifying, perfecting,
glorifying, reach their consummation on the last marge of the night period as it
breaks into the dawn of Easter’s spiritual Sun. In the Egyptian calendar this
would be the night of the Passover of spring.” It was for this reason that the
Egyptian drama placed the crowning of every spiritual process on this eventful
equinoctial night.
Remember, it was all purely symbolic, and so it was no problem to allocate to

that night any number of representations of the soul’s experience as it ends its
earthly history. This is why in the Gospel accounts of the Passion, the various
trials (before the high priest, Herod, and then Pilate) the Last Supper, Jesus’
bloody sweat in the garden, his betrayal, his bearing the cross, his procession
through the old city, his mockery and suffering, his crucifixion, his death and
burial—and much else—could all be “staged” on this night. But it was not, and
could not be, actual history.
Sadly, the final shapers of the Gospel materials in the second and third
centuries were so blinded by their fanatical desire to crush Paganism and change
spiritual allegory into history that they didn’t pause to reckon with the difficulty
of crowding this long series of varied events into the course of a single evening.
Jesus, accordingly, as Kuhn wryly observes, was given an impossibly busy night
to close his sad career. The literalizers of the drama didn’t scruple to ask a
credulous laity to believe that in one single night occurred the Last Supper with
the disciples; the washing of the disciples’ feet; the lengthy walk to the Mount of
Olives; the long watch in the Garden of Gethsemane; the disciples falling asleep
when Jesus castigated them for not being able to watch with him one hour; the
arrest, and the severing (and subsequent healing) of the ear cut off by Peter; then
three distinct judicial trials involving the summoning of judges, juries,
attendants, and officers, the populace always available in the dead of night; then
the mockery of the soldiers, the parting of Jesus’ garments, and the forcing on
him of the crown of thorns; then the march along the Via Dolorosa and up the
hill of Golgotha, “the place of the skull”; and the harrowing Crucifixion (which
ran into the next morning). As I re-examined the details of the Passion texts
(something that through overfamiliarity with the story, I had never really thought
much about), I realized that there is an obvious, meagre limit to what can
actually occur in the temporal span of one evening. The Gospels here stand
helplessly vulnerable to the attack of plain reason. They are indeed exposed as
the old manuscripts of the dramatized ritual of the incarnation and resurrection
of the sun god, a ritual that was first Egyptian, later Gnostic and Hellenic, then
Hebrew, and finally adopted ignorantly by the Christian movement and distorted
into “history.” The manuscripts were not history “until in Christian hands the
esoteric meaning had been obscured and the wisdom needed to interpret them
nonhistorically was wanting,” says Kuhn.
It’s important to be quite clear. Two levels of meaning are at stake in all of
this. If my major sources and others of their school are correct, as I now am
convinced they are, then in the ancient Egyptian (and other mystery) dramas and
in the four Gospels, the central figure represents both the Christos (Divine
Principle as he/it incarnates and dies only to rise again in self-offering on behalf

of all humankind), and also the soul of every individual in its journey to eternal
life. It came to me with unparalleled illumination that the story of Jesus is the
story of each of us in allegorical form. As spirit-gifted animals, we are crucified
on the cross of matter; we are bearers of the Christ within and will one day be
resurrected to a glorious destiny with God. Any soul is being crucified on the
cross when it is alive in the physical body, according to the ancient esoteric
wisdom.
It is highly significant that crucifixion was an integral component of many of
the Mystery Religions, and it undoubtedly found its dramatic prototype there. In
the Mystery ritual the candidate for initiation was symbolically bound or
“nailed” to a cross and even, in some rites, put into a hypnotic coma, to be
wakened from “death” after three days, on Easter morning. Indeed, some
authorities see in this type of ritual the basis for Jesus’ claim that Lazarus “is not
dead, but sleepeth.” The story originated in Egypt, then came to be a framework
for a ritualistic dramatization of death and resurrection. One of the secrets of the
transformative dynamic of the Mystery Religions was the regular use of very
specific rituals, dramatizations, sounds, lights, and other effects to recreate
symbolically the inner changes of consciousness being portrayed. This was the
essence of their power.
Resurrection
It would take many books to deal fully with the Gospel narratives of the
Resurrection. John Spong and dozens of other contemporary scholars have dealt
in great detail with the intricacies of the texts, the stark inconsistencies between
the different accounts, and the overall background. There’s no need to repeat
their work here. But I feel I must highlight certain key aspects. For example, in
Matthew’s story about the chief priests and the Pharisees coming to Pilate after
the Crucifixion and demanding that the tomb be sealed and a “watch” of soldiers
be set, they said, “We remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again.” As my old friend Professor Frank W. Beare
noted in his commentary on Matthew, we are here asked to believe that while the
disciples had apparently forgotten all about any prediction by their master—they
are shown as totally unprepared and disbelieving when presented with the fact of
the Resurrection— his enemies, the harshest non-believers, remembered it all.
But in any case, the whole Resurrection account by Matthew is rendered suspect
as history because of his gratuitous embroidering of the moments following
Jesus’ death. The King James Version of Matthew 27:50ff reads, “Jesus, when he
had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And, behold, the veil of

the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake,
and the rocks, rent; and the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints
which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went
into the holy city, and appeared unto many.”
I wish all fundamentalists would take special note that while these quite
public, literally stupendous events are alleged to have taken place, not a single
other contemporary source can be found to corroborate or confirm them—even
though this was at a time and in a place where capable observers, recorders of
remarkable happenings, historians, and others were in no way lacking. There is
not a smidgeon of a trace of historicity to be found. Yet they are stated in
Matthew with every appearance of fact.
It’s enough for our purposes to say that obviously the Gospels’ treatment of
the Resurrection is similar to that already described for Jesus’ last night. In the
ancient Egyptian lore, Osiris rose on the third day, following lunar or cosmical
symbolism. The inner meaning was that the germinal seed of divine
consciousness, buried for three ages (or “kingdoms”) in lower matter—mineral,
vegetable, animal—then rose to incarnation in humans “in the fourth watch.”6
There can be no question that the literal misconstruction of the Resurrection
by Christian theology has been “most lamentably serious and fatal,” as Kuhn
asserts. The imagery of the rent veil, the discarded swathings, the rolled stone,
and the opened tomb was converted into actual occurrence and mistakenly
attached to a personal life. The figure of the Christos was nailed on a wooden
cross (just as the mythical Prometheus was fastened to a rock in the Caucasus
Mountains), and his body was consigned to a rocky tomb. And what may have
been gained “in gruesome realism” by these manoeuvres has been erased by the
loss of the universality of the experience and its ineffable beauty as a spiritual
mystery. In Kuhn’s view, one I soon came to share, there was no reason,
justification, or need for the literalization of the Crucifixion and the
Resurrection. People who were “children in intellect” took the grand parables
and allegories of the esoteric wisdom and “fed them to infantile minds as
veritable history.” The Logos was declared to have come as the man Jesus, born
as a baby in Judea and walking the lanes, lake strands, and hills like any peasant.
Kuhn’s own crusade was to “rekindle the lamp that once burned so luminously”
of a truly spiritual faith. Taken literally, the stone said to have been rolled away
by angels from the mouth of the tomb has all but suffocated the real spirit of
what the myth is about— our own rising to immortality. The early Gnostics took
a wholly spiritual view of Jesus’ Resurrection, as indeed did St. Paul in 1
Corinthians 15 and scholars such as Origen. They regarded a belief in Jesus’
physical resurrection as unlearned foolishness.

Nature
This is a good place to reassure the reader of a very important truth. Ancient
religion was indeed deeply rooted in nature and nature symbolism, as we have
seen, but these ancients were infinitely more sophisticated than our frequent, too
readily assumed superiority allows most of us moderns to realize, especially
Christian critics of Pagan thought. For example, the solar myth was not created
to celebrate the sprouting of the corn; on the contrary, the sprouting of the grain
was called upon to help the mind frame a more realistic conception of the divine
seed that, like the grain, was buried in the earth of flesh and sensation. The
ancient sages used nature to vivify spiritual processes. When Jesus says, “Except
a seed fall into the ground and die, it abides alone and doesn’t bear fruit,” it is an
eloquent example of this. As most poets have done, they worshipped spirit
through its reflection in nature. Nature was the materialization of the thoughts of
God—his panoply or garment. The ancients believed that a lively apprehension
of the deeper aspects of truth would be facilitated by the contemplation of their
universal counterpart in the physical world. The evidence is mountainous that
Pagan eyes pierced through the phenomena of nature to the truth of higher
levels. Everything in the environment of the early Egyptians, from the annual
flooding of the Nile to the humblest creature, the dung beetle, held deep spiritual
messages.
In other words, Pagan spiritual discernment was all the keener for its close
beholding of the natural world. The assumption that in primitive infantilism the
Pagan stopped at nature while the Christian went on to God is in reality a rank
form of heresy. It’s defied, I discovered, by all the facts of antiquity. This
gratuitous, we might even say arrogant, depreciation of past civilization is belied
by scriptures of the most exalted wisdom. The authors of such high revelations
knew the realm of sublime truth that lay beyond nature, and they also knew the
powerful reality that nature was the visible analogue of this other world of truth.
Then, as now, esoteric genius grasped the distinction between outer and inner,
but ancient wisdom recognized infinitely better than modern the essential
kinship of the two. The lack of a deep connection between spiritual values and
the natural world today contrasts sharply with what we have foolishly called
“primitive” religions around the world, and accounts in no small measure for the
dryness and overly cerebral nature of much of traditional Christian worship. It
has contributed, in large measure, to our present environmental crisis.
Immediately, one thing is crucial to the message of this book. Things are not true
because they are in the Bible. They were put in the Bible because they were
spiritually true.

A Contemporary Comment: Insight from Earl Doherty
Earl Doherty, the author of The Jesus Puzzle, has played a prominent part in
the recent debate over Christian origins. While I don’t agree with him on every
point, I want to give a brief synopsis of some of what he has to say on his very
active website on the issues we’re looking at here.7
Doherty explains that Jesus (Yeshua/Joshua) is a Hebrew name meaning
“saviour” (strictly speaking, “God saves”). At the beginning of Christianity, he
notes, it referred not to the name of a specific human individual but, like the
term Logos, to a concept— to a divine, spiritual figure who is the mediator of
God’s salvation. As we have seen, the Christos, a Greek translation of the
Hebrew word messiah, is also a concept, meaning “the anointed one of God.”
“In certain sectarian circles across the Roman Empire, which included both Jews
and Gentiles, these names would have enjoyed a broad range of usage. Belief in
some form of spiritual Anointed Saviour . . . Christ Jesus . . . was in the air,”
Doherty writes. Paul and the Jerusalem brotherhood, he argues, were simply one
faction of this widespread phenomenon, albeit an important and eventually very
influential one. But later, in a “mythmaking process of its own,” this group of
missionaries came to be regarded as the whole movement’s point of origin. Did
the Evangelists see themselves as writing history? he asks, answering that it is
now a maxim that the Gospels are “faith documents.” The Evangelists had no
concern for historical research as we know it; rather, they were engaged in a type
of Midrash, an inspired commentary. He confirms that in the minds of the
Evangelists, the Gospels expounded new spiritual truths through a retelling of
Scripture. “New Testament elements are simply a reworking of stories recorded
in the Old Testament. Jesus was cast in tales like those of Moses, for example,
presenting him as a new Moses for contemporary times.” Mark, he says, might
have thought there was some Joshua/Jesus figure who actually existed, but “in
any event, before long, such Gospels came to be looked upon as purely factual
records by gentiles who did not understand their Jewish roots, and scripture
came to be seen as the prophecy of such real events rather than their source.”
Mark, he argues, brought to a head an already fledgling process and added those
biographical elements he found in the “sayings” traditions. With the Old
Testament open before him, he fleshed out his story of Jesus’ ministry and
passion.
Doherty reminds us too that the story of Jesus “resides in scripture more than
in an assortment of isolated passages.” The overall concept of the Passion, death,
and Resurrection has emerged out of a theme repeated in tales throughout the
Hebrew Bible and related writings. This is the story modern scholars have

characterized as the Suffering and Vindication of the Innocent Righteous One.
As we have already seen, we find it in the story of the suffering servant in Isaiah,
in Tobit, in Esther, in Daniel, and in other places. All tell a story of a righteous
man or woman who suffers, is convicted and condemned to death, gets
resurrected at the last moment, and rises to a high position. “It is the tale of how
the Jews saw themselves; the pious persecuted by the powerful, the people of
God subjugated by the godless,” he says. It was an image readily absorbed by
the Christian sect, so the tale of Jesus also follows this pattern. Jesus’ redemptive
role was a paradigm for Jewish motifs of suffering and atonement and destined
exaltation, brought into a potent mix with the Hellenistic son (Logos) and
saviour-god philosophies. Thus, he concludes, “Christianity emerged as a
genuine synthesis of the leading religious ideas of the ancient world particularly,
and it set the course of Western faith for the next two millennia.”
Most of what Doherty says here agrees with the major themes I have already
raised. What he and many other more radical scholars today lack, however, is the
deeper, earlier insight drawn by Kuhn and Massey from the fertile store of
ancient Egyptian religion. That’s what has been most surprising and enlightening
for me. All of the Old Testament materials Doherty refers to themselves derive
from Egyptian antecedents.
The question, then, is, If the Gospels are mainly allegorical and symbolic,
have they any solid value for us at all as sources for religious and spiritual truth?
Obviously, the two major authorities I have examined believe they do—and so
do I. Ask yourself, Is a poem true? Can it contain truth of infinite value even
though its content is symbolic or fictional? Are the plays of William Shakespeare
true? Sublimely so, when it comes to matters of the human heart and human
spirit. Yes, though fiction, they are supremely true. But they are not exact
history, nor can they ever be. That precisely is the case with Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John. I find, in such an in-depth approach, excitingly fresh grounds
for both faith and hope.
A Personal Note
I want to add a personal note to this look at the Gospels and the issue of their
true value. The question of who wrote the Gospels (and when, how, and why) is
extraordinarily complex. Indeed, a plethora of books on these and related themes
exist all around us. But anyone who reads Massey and Kuhn will, I’m sure,
reach the kinds of conclusions I have reached here. Yet it wasn’t the research I
did in preparation for this book that first convinced me that the basic texts of the
Christian faith, the four Gospels, had to be read in a manner quite different from

that I had been raised on, and that I eventually taught to a subsequent generation
of budding ministers in seminary. In fact, my understanding changed radically in
the years after I left teaching in 1971. Anyone who wishes can check this by
looking up the 1991 version of my book, Life After Death. Chapter 12 of the
book is titled “The Christ Myth as the Ultimate Myth of the Self.” It drew sharp
criticism from conservative-minded Christians at the time. I blame there a crude
literalism for the way Christian thinking and teaching about an afterlife has
become so distorted, irrelevant, and unreal. I wrote, “A story and a whole range
of symbols meant to relate us to our own, inner selves have been taken as purely
historical facts about a distant, inhuman person who was God-in-disguise. As
Carl Jung argued, it makes Jesus Christ a monster figure to say that one can only
become fully human in the presence of and through the death of one who is
uniquely God-man. In that view, we can never be what he was. . . . He was so far
unlike us and removed from us as to be of little real help. Pretending to live a
normal, human life, he really always had ‘four aces up his sleeve.’” (This is why,
incidentally, Jung was so critical of the imitation of Christ as a way of moral
development. He argued that only a “God within” had the much-needed
psychological power to transform human personality.)
I, in that book, quoted Joseph Campbell, who wisely said, “A symbol, a
mythic symbol, does not refer to something which is known or knowable in a
rational way. It refers to a spiritual power that is operative in life and is known
only through its effects.” And I added that the purpose of religious myths is not
to entertain but “to bring about a change of consciousness in each of us.” With
this as an introduction, I invited the reader to look at the Gospel story, or myth,
of Jesus in a deeply personal way, as a story about the inner meaning of his or
her own life—from Virgin Birth to Crucifixion and Resurrection. I repeat that
invitation with renewed vigour today.
In the light of what I have learned since that time, both academically and
spiritually, I am even more certain that this can be a vital exercise for enhancing
inner growth. We know how the Church has for centuries insisted that Christ is
every person and represents us all. But as we have seen, in the myth there is
encapsulated the profound reality that the opposite is true as well. As each of us
becomes aware of his or her true essence as a body-spirit entity and awakens the
Christ within, he or she too is Christ. No longer is it a case of looking outside
ourselves to emulate a remote historical figure. Rather, it’s a matter of knowing
ourselves to be wholly one with the very same energies and principles that in the
drama are shown driving him. Thus, as Carl Jung describes it, each individual
can discover that he or she is “imbued with a latent divinity.” What the ancient
orthodoxy was trying to say in the creeds about a literalized saviour figure, Jesus

Christ, having “two natures in one person” becomes an accurate description of
you and of me. It’s the true definition of any human life. Full psychic maturity
and the only true hope of the greater evolution of genuine human community
depends on it. I believe that all of this makes the inner meaning of the Jesus
story as relevant and life-giving as our next heartbeat.
The Gospels, I have found, make sense today only when read and understood
from this spiritual point of view. That’s why I’m so certain that what is contained
here is vital for the future of the Christian faith and all humanity.

9
WAS THERE A JESUS OF HISTORY?
Where It All Began
Jesus of Nazareth and the Gospel story cannot be found in Christian
writings earlier than the Gospels, the first of which [Mark] was composed
only in the late first century....There is no non-Christian record of Jesus
before the second century.
– EARL DOHERTY, The Jesus Puzzle
When the conception of a purely spiritual Christ could no longer
successfully be imported to the turbulent masses,who clamoured for a
political saviour,it was found necessary or expedient to substitute the idea
of a personal Messiah....The swell of this tide carried the Church Fathers to
the limit of recasting the entire four Gospels in terms of a human biography.
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, The Lost Light 
DURING THE OPENING SEQUENCE of the Woody Allen film Husbands and
Wives, Woody and his wife, played by Mia Farrow, are making final preparations
to welcome lifetime friends over for dinner. Woody is neurotically fussing about
and mumbles Einstein’s saying that God doesn’t “play dice” with the universe.
“No,” Woody then intones, “he just plays hide-and-seek.” There is a hide-and-
seek quality to the profound question raised by all of our explorations thus far: in
the light of everything we have examined, can we say with any authority that

Jesus of Nazareth actually existed as a historical person? I have very grave
doubts that we can.1 It is abundantly clear to me that while there are indeed
certain historical elements in the Gospel accounts—specific place names, actual
persons (such as Herod, Pilate, and Caiaphas the High Priest, and alleged dates
—these alone don’t constitute a genuine history or biography in any modern
sense. When we review the exact parallels between early saviour stories and the
sayings and actions of Jesus, it’s more than obvious that what we’re dealing with
is another variant of the overarching archetypal theme of the same mythos in all
ancient religion—only this time in Jewish dress.
I hasten to assure the reader that I am fully aware that the discussion that
follows will be at first quite intimidating for some, perhaps many. To claim that a
historical figure who has inspired so much love and devotion over centuries is in
fact a mythical copy of many preceding saviours is somewhat of a shock, I
know. This was not something that I found easy to accept myself. But in matters
of faith, as in all else, truth demands my allegiance over everything—truth acted
upon in love. The reality is that God calls us to use his divine gift of reason, and
we ignore this not just at our peril but to our ultimate loss. What we are
considering now is the logical consequence of all we have been through so far.
Be patient and hear the argument to its end. You will find, as I have promised
from the start, that we are being called not to an impoverished vision but to one
that radiates with fresh understanding and hope. Jesus lives on for us, but in a
new way.
Reviewing the relevant literature I discovered that the mythical or spiritual as
opposed to the historical interpretation of the Gospels has been set out repeatedly
by such scholars as Dupuis, Drews, Robertson, Smith, Renan, Strauss, Massey,
Higgins, Mead, Kuhn and a score of others. In spite of a mass of scholarship on
the topic, however, in spite of the evidence from the study of comparative
religion in particular, the historical view of Jesus’ life is still stubbornly
maintained. Kuhn is correct when he says that all this scholarship “points with
steady directness” to the truth that the events of the Gospel narratives are
matched with amazing fidelity “by the antecedent careers of such world saviours
as Dionysus, Osiris, Horus, Tammuz, Adonis, Atys, Orpheus, Mithras, Krishna,
Bala-Rama, Vyasa, Buddha, Hercules, Sargon, Serapis, Marduk, Izdubar,
Witoba, Apollonius of Tyana, Yehoshua ben Pandera, and even Plato and
Pythagoras.” We have seen for ourselves the clear reality of this view in our
earlier detailed comparison of the lives of Horus and Jesus.
Matthew’s technique of scouring the Old Testament for appropriate
“prophecies” to act as a framework for his narrative gives that Gospel a surface
feeling of authentic Jewish history. But this whole edifice collapses when you

realize that these socalled prophecies were all fulfilled in the Old Testament and
can be wholly explained without any future reference at all. Often, in the New
Testament, they have been taken out of context and twisted beyond recognition.
Hebrew prophecy, it must be remembered, was not about fore-telling but about
forth-telling (i.e., about speaking out on issues immediately at hand). Their total
artificiality is fully revealed when one realizes how they are used to make Jesus
do exactly what his predecessors in the sun-god myths had already done
centuries before. This is confirmed by the fact that the body of material regularly
used in the ceremonial dramas of the widespread early Mystery Religions around
1200 years B.C.E. makes up in general the series of events narrated in the New
Testament as if they were Jesus’ personal life story.
Massey, near the end of his most important work, Ancient Egypt: The Light of
the World, offers detailed proof that the literalizers of the legend and the
“carnalizers” (historicizers) of the Egyptian– Gnostic Christ have but gathered
up the “empty husks” of Pagan tradition, minus the kernel of the Gnosis (inner
knowledge of the meaning of the higher spiritual truths). So when we have taken
away from their collection all that pertains to Horus, there is nothing more than
“the accretion of blindly ignorant belief ” on which to base a Judean history.
Then, Massey concludes, “Of all the Gospels and collections of sayings derived
from the ritual of the resurrection in the names of Mattiu, or Matthew, Aan or
John, Thomas or Tammuz or Tum, Hermes, Iu-em-hetep, Iusa or Jesus, those
that were canonized at last as Christian are the most exoteric, and therefore the
furthest away from the underlying, hidden and buried, but imperishable truth.”
Massey testifies that neither Philo, the brilliant Alexandrian Jew who laboured
so hard to effect a syncretism of Greek Platonism, Egyptian mysticism, and
Mosaic Hebraism, and who was an exact contemporary of Jesus (c. 20 B.C.E.–50
C.E.), nor Irenaeus (c.130–c.200 C.E.), bishop of Lyons and one of the earliest
Church Fathers, believed that the divine Word (Logos) could ever become
incarnate in one man. Kuhn says that Philo no more knew of a Christ that could
be made flesh than he knew of a Jesus in human form—and he lived at the time
of the alleged historical Jesus! The same is true of Tatian, the Christian apologist
and Gnostic (c. 160 C.E.) who wrote the first-ever attempted harmony of the four
Gospels, the Diatessaron. He completely disclaimed the notion of the Christ
having assumed an actual body, as did all the Gnostic Christians. They declared
it impossible that he (the divine Logos) should suffer, since he was by nature
both incomprehensible and invisible, a divine emanation of the one God.
The stark truth is that apart from the four Gospels (and their full witness is
really established only from about 140 to 170 C.E.) and the Epistles, there is no
hard, historical evidence for Jesus’ existence coming out of the first century at

all.2 It must also be remembered that no autograph (original) manuscript of any
one of the four Gospels has ever come to light, nor has any credible witness ever
claimed to have seen such a manuscript.3 Origen says the four Gospels were
chosen out of a very large number (we know of at least twenty), and Irenaeus
somewhat oddly says that the four were selected out of many because there were
four winds and four quarters to the globe. Kuhn quotes Mead, in Did Jesus Live
100 B.C.E.?, when he writes: “It has always been an unfailing source of
astonishment to the historical investigator of Christian beginnings that there is
not one single word from the pen of any Pagan writer of the first century of our
era which can in any fashion be referred to the marvelous story recounted by the
Gospel writers. The very existence of Jesus seems unknown.”
What is even more curious is that the closer one gets to Jesus’ alleged time,
the greater and more general is the denial or ignorance of his existence. But the
further one draws away from it, the greater and more insistent are the “proofs” of
it. This again entirely reverses the universal phenomenon of a historical
recording. Most living characters are familiar entities during and immediately
after their lives, and they wax romantic and are haloed only after centuries have
elapsed. But Jesus was airy and ethereal in the first century and crystallized into
quite a concrete personality only after several centuries. Something quite strange
was going on.
Very sadly, a work of Celsus, a second-century Pagan philosopher, called The
True Logos, which would have certainly thrown much light on all early Gnostic
and esoteric interpretations of sacred writings of the time, was totally destroyed
by literalist Christians. One intriguing fact, however, emerges from the mystery
of the historicity of Jesus. Of the Church Fathers, Irenaeus seems never to have
subscribed to the story of Jesus’ death on the cross, or his death at all at the early
age of about thirty-three. It is most curious—given the repeated claim by
conservatives that Jesus’ life was accepted as historical by the early Church—
that Irenaeus refers to a remarkable legend that flatly refutes the Gospel
“history.” The good bishop claims that Jesus was not crucified at the age of
thirty-three but passed through every age and lived on to be an “oldish man,” a
claim he says is testified to by Church “elders” and was bequeathed to them
directly from John. Papias, you remember, also said Jesus died in bed at an
advanced age. Kuhn comments, “We are permitted to wonder how such a
tradition, attributed to so accredited a source as John, could have lived on for so
many years, if the general field was occupied by the factual acceptance of the
Gospel narrative, or how it could have been purveyed by a bishop of such
eminence in the Church as Irenaeus.”

The truth is that both Massey and Kuhn have considered the question of the
historicity of Jesus in the minutest detail, each spending hundreds of pages
examining the evidence. What’s more, they do not rest solely upon their own
long years of labour in the field, drawing heavily on the work of scores of other
eminent scholars in reaching their conclusion. In finally negating the historical
Jesus, Kuhn cites not only such well-known philosophers as Kant and Hegel but
the leading Jewish and Christian biblical experts of his era.
He quotes, for instance, Robert Keable, who in his book The Great Galilean
says, “Nobody knows enough of the early life of Jesus to write a biography of
him. For that matter, no one knows enough for the normal Times obituary notice
of a great man. If regard were had to what we should call in correct speech
definitely historical facts, scarcely three lines could be filled.” In his challenging
work The Twilight of Christianity, the Bible scholar Harry Elmer Barnes reviews
the meagre number of non-Gospel mentions of Jesus—a sum total of twenty-
four lines from Pliny, Tacitus, Suetonius, and Josephus—and states that, given
that these passages are virtually all forgeries and interpolations, they constitute
poor evidence of what the orthodox insist on calling one of the best-attested
events in history. Barnes points out that even if this secular testimony was
indisputably reliable and authentic, it would be “faltering support” for so great
an edifice to rest upon. Add to all this the undeniable fact that there is, in the
extant Jewish literature of the first century, not a single authentic reference to the
founder of Christianity. For a detailed, critical look at the specific references in
the four non-Christian authors just cited, I recommend Doherty’s discussion in
his book The Jesus Puzzle.
Commenting in his 1999 book The Fabrication of the Christ Myth on the
well-known Gospel story of the Gadarene swine, which rushed down a steep
cliff and were drowned in the Sea of Galilee, the Jewish scholar Joseph Leidner
points out that because Gadera is actually several kilometres away from the sea,
the whole incident is evidence of either ignorance or total lack of concern with
veridical history.4 Citing other similar examples, he writes, “From the evidence .
. . the blunt conclusion emerges that the Gospel writers did not know the
geography and customs of the Holy Land, and did not know Judaism itself. They
were working with source materials having nothing to do with historical data of
any kind.”5
We must remember that very few periods in the history of the ancient world
were so well documented as the period when Emperors Caesar Augustus and
Tiberius reigned supreme. Yet one amazing fact must be faced: no contemporary
non-Christian writer even knew of Jesus’existence. It’s for this reason that

Barnes was able to declare Jesus a mythical person, the product of the
mythmaking tendencies common to religious people of all ages, particularly the
period of the early Roman Empire. He lists Bruno Bauer, Albert Kaltoff, Arthur
Drews, J. C. Stendel, Emil Felden, Jensen, Lublinski, Bolland, Van der berg,
Charles Virolleaud, Ryner Couchoud, Gerald Massey, Emilio Bossi, Georg
Brandes, John M. Robertson, G. R.S. Mead, Whittaker, Edward Carpenter, and
W.B. Smith among the eminent scholars and critics who have contended that
Jesus was not historical.
Of the spate of new books on this theme, I would single out Leidner’s
Fabrication of the Christ Myth. After a thorough investigation of the relevant
Jewish sources for first-century Judaism and history, he concludes: “There is not
a particle of evidence that ‘Jesus of Nazareth’ ever existed. No detail of the story
has been confirmed beyond reasonable doubt.” Leidner argues, in particular, that
the Passion narratives are “a contrived and synthetic work” derived from older,
non-Christian sources. Significantly, he notes that the Jewish historian Josephus,
in his contemporary writings, lists the name of Jesus/Yeshua “no less than 21
times referring to different persons.”6 Jesus (or Joshua), he notes, is one of the
commonest names in the index. Leidner sums up his “take” on the whole issue in
this way: “Jesus is a radically Christianized version of the supernatural [hero]
Joshua. We thus have an alternative for Christian origins.”
Certainly, a Jesus or Joshua/Yeshua character was already the archetypal hero
in Judaism in the Old Testament book that bears his name many hundreds of
years B.C.E. He was also the central figure in the mystery dramas taken over by
the Hellenized Jews. The sages connected the Jewish Kabbalistic Yeshua-Jesus
directly with the biblical personification. They possessed the secrets of the
Mystery language, and it appears that this was the language in which the Gospels
were written. The Gospel editors thus did not have to invent Jesus, or Yeshua.
His name was already in the air. He was already in the documents they had re-
edited or transcribed. But later ignorance changed him from a symbol (type) to a
personal entity or reality. Thus it happened that what had been a combined
astrological and mythical dramatization of every individual’s total experience
was turned into the story of one character and set forth as a biography, or “life,”
Kuhn says. Nearly everybody tends to think that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John
were citizens of the first century C.E. who one day took pen in hand and wrote the
Gospels out of their heads. Not so. Kuhn enters a genuine note of sanity here
when he writes that the final staggering truth about the Bible books is that no
“authors” ever sat down and wrote them the way Walter Scott wrote the
Waverley novels. The longer I researched this issue, the clearer his judgment
became. The books of the Bible were in existence long before ink ever met paper

to record and preserve them. They were the spoken lines, or sayings, of the great
spiritual drama; they were the esoteric oral tradition, extant many thousands of
years before they were ever written down. But at some epoch, as Kuhn says,
“The sages . . . did at last commit them to writing, lest in some degenerate age
they be lost.” The Evangelists then, I am convinced, simply brought out to more
popular knowledge hidden Gospels that already had a Joshua/Jesus central figure
and had previously been concealed inside the depths of Essene and Mystery cult
secrecy. They were an exoteric popularization, not a fresh literary or religious
creation.
Significantly, the controversial founder of Theosophy, Madame H. P.
Blavatsky, who has been maligned by her detractors, had unquestionably a deep
insight into the nature and meaning of ancient, esoteric wisdoms. She writes, in
Isis Unveiled,
It is a poor compliment paid the Supreme, this forcing upon him four
Gospels, in which, contradictory as they often are, there is not a single
narrative, sentence or peculiar expression whose parallel may not be found
in some older doctrine of philosophy. Surely the Almighty—were it but to
spare future generations their current perplexity—might have brought down
with Him, at His first and only incarnation upon earth, something original,
something that would trace a distinct line of demarcation between Himself
and the score or so of incarnate Pagan gods, who had been born of virgins,
had all been saviours, and were either killed or were otherwise sacrificed
for humanity.
She says, with respect, that neither she nor anyone else honestly looking at the
question has put the divine son of God in the position of a poor religious
plagiarist. The blame falls squarely on the Christian Fathers and their successors
in the Church.
Theosophists aside, the renowned genius and humanitarian Dr. Albert
Schweitzer, in The Quest for the Historical Jesus, says that after years of careful
study, he concluded there was no traditional Jesus of Nazareth as a historical
person. Prophetically, he saw that the Jesus figure of the theologians was the
dramatized, ritualized, symbolic figure of our divine nature—grossly mistaken
after centuries of ignorance for a man of flesh. Schweitzer writes, “There is
nothing more negative than the result of the critical study of the life of Jesus.
The Jesus of Nazareth who came forward publicly as the Messiah, who preached
the ethic of the Kingdom of God, who founded the Kingdom of heaven upon
earth, and died to give his work its final consecration, never had any existence.

This image has not been destroyed from without, it has fallen to pieces, cleft and
disintegrated by the concrete historical problems which come to the surface one
after another.”7 In our day, the labours of the California-based Jesus Seminar
have afforded ample proof of Schweitzer’s convictions. They have stripped away
almost everything mythical and reduced Jesus to a wandering Cynic philosopher
who came finally to a criminal’s end. Marcus Borg appears to be the most
positive to me, but his demythologized Jesus of history nevertheless still seems
to be in a radical “disconnect” from his Christ of faith.
St.Paul
The earliest writings in the New Testament, whichmake up more than one-
quarter of its total content, are the letters of the Apostle Paul. What is absolutely
striking about them is their virtual silence on the whole subject of a historical
Jesus of Nazareth. There is no question that this is the datum that ultimately
stares down the proponents of historicity. Before it, all glib sophistry fails and
even the most subtle argument goes dumb. There is no adequate answer to this
testimony, in my view. If Jesus lived as claimed, and Paul—who definitely was
historical—lived and wrote as claimed, I believe it is unthinkable that the
Apostle would have left a total blank on the subject. Traditionalists can offer a
wide variety of specious reasons to “explain” Paul’s silence about his master.
But when they have exhausted all their arguments, they have not laid to rest the
ghost of this utterly insistent question or reduced by one iota the pressure of its
threat to the prevailing orthodox position. “It haunts the claim of Jesus’ existence
like a stalking specter and no trickery can exorcise it,” Kuhn asserts. Paul never
once mentions the man Jesus, in the full historical sense. Yet, as stated, he is the
earliest witness among all the Bible writers, the one nearest Jesus in actual time.
His earliest letters antedate the appearance of Mark by at least a generation.
Of course, a critic will argue that Paul does occasionally speak of Jesus by
name. This is quite true. But today, most Bible theologians agree that even when
he does so, he is not talking about a man of flesh and blood, a historical person,
any more than the Egyptians were when they spoke of Iusa millennia earlier.
Paul’s Christ is nowhere called Jesus of Nazareth, nor is he born in Bethlehem.
The Jesus Paul dilates upon repeatedly is in reality the spiritual entity in the core
of each human’s inner being. He is the spiritual Christ principle (the eternal
Christos), not the man. As Benjamin Bacon, of the Yale Divinity School, says in
his book Jesus and Paul, “Paul is the first Bible writer in the first century and he
definitely knows no Christ except one he describes as ‘not after the flesh.’” Yes,
Paul does talk about “this Jesus whom we have seen,” and at times he gives the

impression he has an interest in an actual person, but closer examination shows
that he really is speaking always of mystical visions of an exalted, spiritual being
whom he calls Christ. When, in 1 Corinthians 15, he describes his experience of
the risen Christ, he says that “last of all he was seen by me also.” But the Greek
word he uses for this, and all the other apostolic encounters he describes there, is
ophthe. It was the word regularly used by the Mystery religionists to describe a
visionary “seeing.”
As a matter of fact, as Bacon says, Paul expressly disavows even having any
interest in a “Jesus after the flesh,” i.e., a historical Jesus, and his letters bear this
out because—and this is highly significant— they contain not a single reference
to any of the great miracles, teachings, and other events related in the Gospel
narratives as integral to Jesus’ life and ministry. I have looked myself in detail at
what scholar after scholar has discovered—that all the miracles, parables, and
other teachings of Jesus’ ministry are either unknown to Paul or a matter of
complete indifference to him. Stunning though it may be, Paul apparently knew
nothing about or cared nothing for the Gospel story that had allegedly founded
the very faith he had so enthusiastically embraced. The conservatives cry out
that he simply took all that for granted. But their argument here is, to my mind,
unbelievably weak. It is indeed commonly assumed in Christian circles that Paul
knew everything the Gospels describe, and that this body of history was the basis
of his espousal of the faith. But my own study, in addition to that of my other
sources, makes it clear to me that, as George Bernard Shaw makes clear in his
preface to Androcles and the Lion, the Epistles are in no way an outgrowth of
Gospel “history.” They are clearly prior, independent, and would undoubtedly
still be in the biblical literature if no personal Jesus had ever lived. They are
about a spiritual Christ presence within.
Some have argued that Paul didn’t have to mention Jesus because everybody
already knew of his existence. Such knowledge was so commonplace that there
was no reason even to mention it, this line of reasoning says. Because he was so
obviously a definite, historical character, his life and personal doings never
needed to be spoken of. I can readily see why Kuhn has so little time for such a
devious tack. He says, with justified impatience, that it is impossible that Paul
could discourse at length upon the fundamentals of the religion that Jesus
assumedly founded and feel no need to speak of the founder himself. Jesus was
the source and inspiration of the greatest religion on earth—a man whose life
was so epochal that history was redated from his birth, a man whose bold
preaching of the divine wisdom granted to men was to free the human race from
the bondage of sin and evil, a man whose mission was so mighty that stars led
the way and angels choired and heavenly hallelujahs mingled with earthly songs

to celebrate the descent of deity to the planet—and yet when Paul “descants with
holy enthusiasm upon the marvels of this world-changing message,” he found no
occasion to speak directly of the man who was the genius of it all. He concludes,
“For Paul to write fifteen Epistles, basic treatises on the religion that this man
founded, and find no reason to refer even once to anything he said or did would
be on the order of one’s writing a thorough treatise on the American Revolution
and never once mentioning George Washington!”
Since Paul was, above all things, a communicator par excellence, he spoke to
the people of his time in the mystical language they understood—the vernacular
of the Mystery Religions. He uses their phraseology, their symbols, their whole
philosophy of personal redemption and immortality through identification with
and absorption into the dead and resurrected Christhood of God’s Logos, or son.
All his language about being “in Christ” or having “Christ in you” reflects the
current Hellenic theosophy and philosophy. It is really Orphic-Platonic-Mystery
cultism, almost pure Hindu or Vedic yoga mysticism, with no immediate
reference to the Gospel life of Jesus at all.8 It is the universal Good News of the
incarnation of the divine in every human being.
The clincher to all of this for me comes in Colossians, where the Apostle, or
someone relying heavily upon his thought, comes right out and declares bluntly
that the secret of the whole Christian “mystery” is this: “Christ in you, the hope
of glory.” This is indeed a mystical, spiritual reality akin to that of ancient Egypt,
and it has nothing whatever to do with a presumed historical Jesus. The same is
true of his famous saying “You have the mind of Christ.”
Several noted scholars have remarked upon the obvious fact that even when
Paul does mention Jesus by name, he lacks the features given him in the Gospels
that render him so human and so real. Noting this phenomenon, Kuhn wonders
when it will dawn upon the orthodox mind that Paul’s Jesus lacks any human
quality for the very reason that in Paul’s understanding, he was not a human
person at all. Only by use of an elaborate metaphor could Paul’s description of a
principle of mystic exaltation be clothed in terms of touching human appeal.
“This is the one substratum which explains and resolves all the puzzles and
conundrums of the argumentative problem, yet it is the last one the apologists
will look at,” Kuhn says.
Paul’s Conversion
What are we to make, then, of Paul’s conversion on the road to Damascus? I
have become fully convinced that strange as this may sound to orthodox ears,
there is more than enough solid reason to suspect that the whole episode of

Paul’s great vision was the rescript of a portion of Mystery dramatism. For Paul
says that the sudden, blinding radiance of Christly glory threw him with his face
to the ground, after which a voice out of the light spoke to him and said, “Stand
on your feet, Paul.” This hardly seems like personal history; in the Mystery
philosophy, the descent of the divine soul into incarnation in the early human
beginning stage sent it first into the bodies of animals, who walked on all fours
with face to the ground. As the Christ consciousness gradually asserted its
rulership, the humanized animals slowly rose to their feet. For the god-soul to
incarnate at the beginning of the cycle was for it to fall to earth with its face to
the ground; then the divine voice within spoke and bade it stand up on its feet as
the upright human-divine! It is not hard to presume that an age saturated with
mythical typology would have readily introduced in the Mystery ceremonial
such a dramatized representation of the soul’s descent into lowly animal body
and its resurrection to eventual upright human status. The initiate acted out the
entire consciousnessraising rite.
Let’s take a closer look at the description of Paul’s conversion in the New
Testament. Most are unaware that the Book of Acts, the major source for this
life-changing Pauline experience, has two distinct versions of it. What’s more,
the two descriptions do not entirely agree. In Acts 9:1ff, we have the first telling
of the story—in the third person. Here is the core of it from the KJV:
And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven:
And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?
And he said, Who are thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to
do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be
told thee what thou must do.
And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a
voice, but seeing no man.
Those with him, it says, “stood speechless”; in this telling, they heard a voice
but saw nothing. Then, almost at the end of Acts (26:1–20), Paul retells the
experience in the first person—his own words. There are some minor variations,
but themost blatant is the statement that they “were all fallen to the earth”—in
other words, his companions also saw the blinding light, otherwise their falling
to the ground is without explanation. But the voice, in this version, is heard only

by Paul himself. It was a purely inner experience. In any case, Paul’s words of
conclusion are what is truly important here. He says, “Whereupon, O King
Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.” Paul describes his
encounter with the Christ as a mystical, visionary experience. It was by no
means some kind of objective encounter with the resurrected Jesus of Nazareth
of the Gospels. Paul was a mystic, and he knew only the mystical Christos,
Christ not “after the flesh” but after the spirit. As he says, “The Lord is that
Spirit.”
F.W. Conybeare, in Myth, Magic and Morals, corroborates my own (as well as
Kuhn’s and Doherty’s) position on Paul when he says that Paul’s Christ is an a
priori construction owing little or nothing to the historical man of Nazareth, and
to those who allegedly knew that man and cherished his memory. The most that
Paul owed to him was the ancient name Jesus/Joshua. Paul’s Jesus, he says, is an
ideal supernatural, superhuman saviour, destined from the beginning of the
world to play a cosmic role. Paul, surprisingly, shows no acquaintance with the
Sermon on the Mount or with the parables (or with the Virgin Birth and the
empty tomb, for that matter). Elsewhere, Paul also describes what happened to
him as God revealing his son “in me” instead of “to me,” thus indicating an inner
mystical vision rather than an external event. Twice in 1 Corinthians (12ff), he
says he can’t really describe or remember whether certain visions occurred to
him “in the body or out of it, I know not; God knoweth.” There is no doubt that
this can serve as the legitimate foundation for the suggestion that Paul’s ecstatic
vision may well have been one of those super-conscious experiences that many
people have had, an experience so detached from objective reality that it cannot
be related to actual events in the world at all.
When Paul designates the “figure” appearing to him with his phrase “the Lord
Jesus Christ,” it can be seen to stand for a generic name of such a type of radiant
manifestation, with no connection to any former or present living personality.
Ancient Egyptian necrological science, as I have learned, predicated that the
gods and the elect of perfected humanity could appear to men in whatever
garments of solid or etheric matter they chose. They could appear in many
different forms, clothed in flesh or clothed in light. Paul, with his Mystery
Religions associations, must have been familiar with these possibilities. There’s
a perfect example of this phenomenon in the Book of Acts itself (14:11–12). In
Lystra, a mob cried out that “the gods have come down to us in human form.”
They called Barnabas, Paul’s associate, Zeus and Paul himself Hermes because
“he was the chief speaker.”
What has genuinely amazed me, in reading Massey and Kuhn, is how fully
they anticipated—by over fifty years, at least—the results of current scholarship

on Paul’s commitment to the mystical, Gnostic view of the Christ and his
avoidance of the literalist, “personal saviour” point of view. The authors of The
Jesus Mysteries, who never once mention Kuhn’s name (not even in their
bibliography), come to exactly the same conclusion he reached in Who Is This
King of Glory? long ago. As he wrote then, “Paul had striven to describe and
colour in the most graphic language available, which evidently he judged to be
the phraseology of the Mystery Religions, the only Christ he knew, the power
and the grace of the Christ of the inner chamber of human consciousness.”9
I am compelled, therefore, by my own independent research to agree that
Paul’s Christ was not Jesus of Nazareth. Paul himself tells us in Galatians, “I
made known to you brethren, as touching the Gospel which was preached by me,
that it was not after man [i.e., of human origin]. For neither did I receive it from
a man, nor was I taught it, save through the revelation of the Christ revealed
withinme.” His was the mystical Christ known down through the ages, the
socalled Pagan Christ, the ray of the cosmic Logos, who was and remains
nonhistorical, having neither beginning of days nor end of life.
In the end, then, it became extremely difficult—in fact, impossible— for me
to withstand the cumulative force of reasoning on either the Gospels or Paul and
the “historical Jesus.” Kuhn sums it up most succinctly when he says that Paul’s
silence about the parables and miracles and other details of the Gospel Jesus is
quite incredible. “No amount of sophistry or mental chicanery can set aside the
verdict of common sense,” he concludes.
Paul, it seems clear, was a Gnostic “in his essential leanings,” and the reason
he makes no mention of and shows no interest in a historical Jesus—he uses the
mystical term “Christos” roughly 270 times—is that he had never heard of him.
Obviously, he knew the Greek name Jesus as the equivalent of Joshua, and knew
that the Hebrew or Jewish version of the Christos myth had Yeshua-Christos, or
Jesus Christ, as its “Lord,” but that is a far cry from believing in or knowing of a
flesh-and-blood saviour. Paul could no more have believed in a personal Logos
than could Philo, who as we have observed was just about contemporary with
him. The ultraconservatives keep insisting on a “physical” resurrection of Jesus.
Paul, whose work predates the first Gospel, insists on the exact opposite. His
fifteenth chapter of 1 Corinthians could not possibly be clearer. I invite you to
read or reread that passage for yourself. The passage is almost pure Platonism.
Paul knows only a spiritual resurrection. He says, “It is sown a natural body; it is
raised a spiritual body.” Corruption cannot inherit in corruption. As in the
Egyptian theology, only the Sahu, the spiritual body, enters into bliss. He
certainly believed—as I do—in a future resurrection, but he did not believe in
the resuscitation of corpses.

What’s really important is that Paul’s spiritual view of Christ (his Christology)
and Gnostic Christianity held the early Christian movement up to a truly high
standard of intellectual and philosophical excellence. Later literalizing and
popularizing trends turned the Church away from “the higher and fuller concept
of the Christ as the ever-coming world Messiah of a divine spirit transfiguring
humanity,” to what Kuhn calls the “winsome-but-gruesome personal Jesus.”
Before anyone becomes too upset by the use of the adjective “gruesome” here, it
should be said that no offence is intended to the traditionalist mind. In referring
to it, I am thinking expressly of certain extreme forms of both Protestantism and
Catholicism, where in hymns, art, and a myriad other forms so much is made of
“the blood,” the bleeding wounds, and the supposedly pierced heart of the
personal saviour on a cross. To a total outsider, unfamiliar with all of this, the
sudden introduction to so much religious gore can, as I myself have witnessed,
be a traumatizing experience. It is both unnecessary and wrong, a mistaking of
myth for historicity.10
No doubt it will come as a great surprise—and may well bring, at first, a sense
of loss—to those who, over their years of traditional-style learning and worship,
have become attached to a “personal Jesus” to discover that his historicity is in
question. It was the same for me some years ago, when I first began to look hard
at the Jesus-of-history/Christ-of-faith dichotomy. But I have come to realize just
how totally luminescent and freeing the position argued by Massey, Kuhn, and
many others really is. The personal Jesus concept is truly a limiting, and deeply
divisive, dead end. The historical evidence simply isn’t there. It’s a classic
example of the emperor’s having no clothes. What is more, it commits idolatry
by making a flesh-and-blood man into God—thus forever alienating Jews,
Muslims, and believers of a host of other religions, and making full religious
harmony on the planet a perpetual impossibility. It has, most notably in the
United States, created a kind of passive-dependent Jesus cult totally prone to
extreme magical thinking. It restricts Christhood to one person in all of history,
instead of acknowledging the deep, archetypal power of a universal—yes,
cosmic—principle and ideal. There is no doubt that by exalting Jesus in a unique
magnificence, the Church has too often let the divinity in every human heart—
yours and mine—lie fallow. Kuhn is right. The deity that needs exaltation is that
struggling “within the breasts of the sons and daughters of Earth. Jesus’
enthronement is the disinheritance of the common human being. . . . The
historical Jesus blocks the way to the spiritual Christ in the chamber of the
heart.”
The truth, I have discovered, is that this inner experience of the presence and
power of God as the Christ within our own consciousness is the best proof of the

authenticity of true Christianity. As a scholar friend of mine puts it, “I don’t need
an external, allegedly historical figure to experience God. But I do need the story
of Jesus, the mythos, to bring home to me in power the meaning of the struggle
and destiny of my own soul. I don’t need the crumbs of assumed but largely
incomprehensible ‘events’ in the past, but rather the feast of a living parable that
illuminates my spiritual journey today. It’s the allegorical or metaphorical
interpretation of the Gospel story that makes God relevant and real to me.”
I am today wholly convinced that a Christianity that embodies and proclaims a
spiritual Christos, or Jesus Christ, available in every heart will hold once more
the intellectual and moral dynamism first experienced by St. Paul and the other
earliest Christians. Once again, I am filled with a firm hope for the future.

10
THE ONLY WAY AHEAD
Cosmic Christianity
The historical Jesus as a civilizing influence has now been tried for
nearly twenty centuries. With a weird irony,not only has it not in large
measure elevated humanity in the West above an earlier barbarism,but it
has in fact been used as a cloak for the worst atrocities and inhumanities
that history records. The foulest cruelties were perpetrated in the very name
of the gentle Nazarene! It well behooves humanity in the West now to try the
concept of the indwelling Christ,the hope of our glory.
– ALVIN BOYD KUHN, The Root of All Religion 
IT WOULD BE MISLEADING to leave you with the overall impression that the
conclusions we are about to examine came at me like some bolt from the blue.
Faithful readers of my previous books, and of my columns over the years, will
know that I have been steadily and inexorably pushed by the Spirit toward an
independent realization of many of the truths expressed much more boldly and
fully in this volume. This is especially the case with my previous book, Finding
the Still Point, where I made my strongest case yet for the indwelling presence
of the divine (Incarnation) in the life and soul of every human being. That book
was already at the printer before I had read even a line of my major source
authors in this present book. Those who remember my much earlier Life After
Death may recall that in the chapter titled “The Christ Myth as the Ultimate
Myth of the Self,” I reasoned that the story of Jesus was indeed the story of
every person, and it gains its true meaning and relevance for us only if it is seen

in that light. Whether there ever was a socalled historical Jesus really makes no
difference to the meaning of his story, or mythos, for our lives. Significantly, I
began that passage, written over a decade ago, with the following words of
Joseph Campbell: “The biography of a spiritual teacher is not an account of
historical facts. . . . It is a symbol of the spiritual biography of that man, and all
the elements of the biography are symbolic. Just through reading them properly,
you learn the message.” These are words every seminary student should be
required to memorize.
I only wish I had known at the beginning of my working life and ministry,
nearly fifty years ago, what I know now. What’s much more important, though,
is the inescapable conclusion that the entire course of Western history over the
past eighteen hundred years would have been far different if a more spiritual
understanding of the Christ and Christianity had prevailed at the outset, instead
of what Paul called “the letter that kills” (i.e., flat literalism). The Church’s
deplorable record of persecutions, wars, and other atrocities would never have
taken place. Uncounted millions would have been encouraged to nurture and
bring to fruition their own moral and spiritual Christhood, instead of always
passively waiting for a perfect saviour from outside to do the job for them. That,
of course, would not have suited ecclesiastical authorities bent on maintaining
control of both bodies and souls.
From the outset, in writing The Pagan Christ, I had a number of crucial goals
in mind. In particular, I wanted to address the future of the Church and of
Christianity, long a major passion and concern. It is only in the past few years,
and then particularly during the researching and writing of this book, however,
that I have come to understand the full nature of the problem—and to see clearly
a transforming path ahead. There is no doubt whatever that the Church of the
late second, third, and fourth centuries scored a great triumph in winning over
the uneducated masses. But by literalizing and making a pseudo-history out of
the Jesus story—by making all the ancient wisdom exoteric and commonplace—
the Church turned that triumph into a pyrrhic victory of staggering proportions.
Ignorance and an unquestioning faith were championed, frauds were passed for
sacred truths, dissent of any kind was labelled heresy, and within a short time, all
of Europe was plunged into the Dark Ages. Only a much later return to the
socalled Pagans, Plato and Aristotle, injected sufficient rationality and
philosophy into Christian theology to keep it alive at all.
Today, we have a situation where the ultraconservative wing of the Church
has, as a prime specimen of its devotion to credulity, U.S.President George W.
Bush, the leader of the most powerful nation on earth. Bush, who has said that
Jesus Christ is his “favourite philosopher,” was once asked at a press conference

what he thought about the ongoing debate in some American educational circles
over creationism and the theory of evolution. The leader of the world’s only
superpower replied that in his considered view, “The jury is still out on that
one.” Ignorance is bliss, indeed, it seems. He is surrounded by like-minded born-
again Christians— and the Pentagon is filled with them—who believe that an
apocalyptic armageddon, or final battle between good and evil, is currently in
God’s plans, and that it will be fought in and around Jerusalem. I wonder
whether he has ever even heard of the concept of a self-fulfilling prophecy.1
However scary that product of a literalist reading of the Bible, and of
Revelation especially, may be, there is little reason for joy even when we look to
the liberal wing of Christianity. Take, for example, the Jesus Seminar, the
California-based scholars who for years now have been subjecting the New
Testament to the most rigorous of scrutinies to determine what is bedrock and
what is not. Though obviously they are the opposite of fundamentalists, they
share the same basic assumption that behind the whole Jesus story, there is a
historic kernel—if they can only find it. What they have found is so meagre that
it frankly will not serve as sustaining, energizing spiritual food for today’s men
and women. Once you assume historicity and train the full glare of historical
research on the Bible, the entire edifice begins to crumble. As I have argued, it is
not about history, unless by that you mean the inner story of the human mind and
heart in its dealings with the divine.
To realize that Jesus was, and still remains, the supreme dramatic symbol of
the divinity within us all; to understand that the Christ is the divine essence of
our nature; that his story is a dramatic representation of a deep element of human
consciousness; to see the symbolic quality of all Scripture—all of this has made
me deeply aware of the tremendously significant message I had to try to clarify
and make as widely known as possible. Religion does not have to continue to be
the sadly divisive part of the world’s problems. As we shall see in a moment, the
doctrine of Incarnation I have described here at some length gives us a basis for
universal recognition of one another as brothers and sisters in God.
I trust that in arguing this case and presenting the evidence, I have succeeded
in bringing to a much wider audience the work of a man I have come to regard
as one of the single greatest geniuses of the twentieth century, Alvin Boyd Kuhn.
From my own lengthy experience and background, I can safely say that he
towers above all others of recent memory in intellect and his understanding of
the world’s religions. Kuhn has, I believe, more to offer the Church just now
than all the scholars of the Jesus Seminar together. More than John Spong, much
more than his contemporary C. S. Lewis, more than Joseph Campbell or
Matthew Fox. I remain stunned at the silence with which his writings have been

greeted by scholars. Ordinary laypeople can be forgiven. He is anything but an
easy read. By everyone else, his work has been deliberately, though subtly,
ignored or suppressed. I hope The Pagan Christ will play a strong role in
changing all that.
Here, then, are the nine areas where my thinking has been challenged and
transformed—the areas I believe are most pregnant with hope for the future.

1. Makes the Bible Come Alive
The enigma of the Bible has been largely solved. Dark passages, cryptic
narratives or events—all have been shot through with a new, though long-lost,
light because of this awareness that the key to all Scripture is to be found in the
doctrine of Incarnation. Once you really understand that all the myths, legends,
stories, “histories,” allegories, parables, and symbols are a kaleidoscope of
variations on this one central theme, the Bible comes alive in a wholly new way,
I have found. This is a theme I plan to explore in much greater detail someday.
In the meantime, it is particularly important to remember that the Bible books
were never “written” in any normal, modern sense. From the beginning, they
were preserved in memory only. They made up the body of what is known as the
great oral tradition, a set of ritual formulas, ceremonial rites, allegorical
depictions of truth, myths, number graphs, and pictorial symbols of the realities
and the phenomena of human spiritual history that had been handed down from
generation to generation in unwritten form. Only here and there, chiefly to avoid
their being lost, forgotten, or too badly corrupted by change, they were set down
in writing and so, at last, came to later ages as books, presumably “written” or
edited and revised by somebody. Kuhn says—and he documents this thoroughly
—that once written, they became subject to the usual human proclivities of
tampering, altering, and religious skulduggery of many kinds. The fact that they
met with this treatment not only is admitted by historians of Christianity in its
early stages, as we have seen, but is boasted of by the scribes and some of the
Church Fathers, who thus resorted to unholy means to achieve holy ends. I quote
again for emphasis a letter from St. Gregory Nazianzen, one of the most
respected theologians of the early centuries, to his close friend St. Jerome, in
which he said, “Nothing can impose better on a people than verbiage: the less
they understand the more they admire. . . . Our Fathers and Doctors have often
said, not what they thought, but that to which circumstances and necessity forced
them.” It really changes our understanding profoundly to realize that the books
of the Bible were never written in the modern understanding of literary
authorship. They were largely the final deposit on vellum or papyrus of formulas
acted out and retold down through the ages. They were often direct
transcriptions of the lines recited by actors in the great Mystery plays of the
ancient religion.
Not only are former Bible riddles solved when we reach this new

understanding, but the texts make sense as never before. Take, for example, that
well-known Gospel incident of Jesus’ walking on water and stilling a storm. If
you see this not as some supernatural trick but as a powerful symbolic
representation of the Christ within calming the “troubled ocean” of our inner
fears and instilling a sense of peace, you are released from the intellectual
impossibility of believing in a god-man who defies gravity and is wholly beyond
our emulation today. If we see the various “miraculous” healings as a dramatic,
mythical reference to the healing power of the Christ within each one of us, and
if we see such otherwise incomprehensible and magical events (such as the
feeding of thousands by multiplying bread or turning water into wine) as
symbolizing God’s gift to each of us of the divine energies by which we live and
grow, the passages hit home in an entirely new way. As Kuhn says, the Gospels
are the story of our souls. “The birth, the awakening of intellectual power at age
twelve, the temptation or stress of conflict between the body and the soul, the
development of the soul’s divine potency to heal the ills and weaknesses of the
flesh, the overcoming and casting out of the demonic forces of the natural man
by the Christ’s influence, the symbolic raising of the dead inert spiritual power to
a new birth of life . . . the whole experience of the soul under the long
domination of the animal instinct being itself the essence of crucifixion on the
cross of matter, the final victory in the soul’s radiant transfiguration of the mortal
man by the spirit’s light, the ultimate resurrection of the soul out of its death
under the suffocating heaviness of the life of sense.” There is no doubt that this
utterly transforms our entire understanding of the ancient text.
There is indeed, then, a potent wisdom in the Bible, hidden though it is in
necessary imagery, that bites on our personal and communal lives today as
nothing else can do.

2. Inspires Fresh Hope for a Cosmic Faith
All of the research done for this book has helped me bring to my faith a fully
spiritual comprehension of what was once bogged down in utterly outmoded
credal and other accumulations. I really believe that applying the truths so
clearly revealed by our study means that the original, more truly spiritual
Christianity of the first two centuries can be recovered. For the first time,
something I have been searching for all my adult life—namely, a basis for a
universal, cosmic Christianity—has been rendered a possibility. The view of
faith outlined here is one that knows no boundaries of sect or creed because it is
based on the universal truth of the “light that lighteth every person coming into
the world”; it belongs to all, regardless of ethnicity, colour, or clime.
Significantly, it applies to the millions of humans who were born and died long
before Christianity as a religion was ever thought of; it belongs to the now, and
to the future as well. Whatever the defenders of orthodoxy have to say, and I am
well aware it will be plenty, they cannot deny that the literalist, exclusivist
Christianism held by the majority of Churches—“Our Church and our view of
Jesus remain the only way”—is extremely divisive and will never lead to the
solidarity of all humanity. It remains a serious source of global disharmony and,
at times, vicious open conflict. The theologian Hans Kung has said repeatedly
that there will never be global peace until there is harmony between the world’s
great religions, especially Islam and Christianity. But this will never happen
while Christians claim to hold a monopoly on divine truth. I am not pleading
here for one totally homogeneous faith to replace the current religious pluralism.
Not at all. Rather, I’m urging the adoption of a profoundly unifying basis to
transcend the divisive outlook that so often accompanies our traditional
differences. As the poet W.H. Auden has warned us, we must either learn to love
or die. Using the words “the Christ” is important for would-be Christians. But if
other religions use other terms—atman, spirit, soul, the higher self—we must
realize they’re still speaking of the same inner reality.
As Kuhn says in his most recent book, A Rebirth for Christianity, “If
Christianity will now recognize that the time has come to join with the other
great living religious traditions, and direct its vision to the reawakening of the
divine spirit, the Christos in man, it may yet vindicate its right to call its message
the true religion of humanity.” If you recognize the divine presence in another
person, you cannot harm him or suffer your brother to endure injustice.

The words of Northrop Frye, whom I quoted near the beginning of our
exploration, resonate with fresh power for me now. Just before his death, he
wrote, “I think immense changes could be brought about by a Christianity . . .
that was no longer crippled by notions of heresy, infallibility, or exclusiveness of
a kind that should be totally renounced and not rationalized to the slightest
degree. Such a Christianity might represent the age of the Spirit.”2 That’s the
new vision.

3. Clarifies the Ancient Symbols
For the first time for me, a spiritual and mystical understanding of the Christ
myth has made powerfully relevant the whole doctrine of the Cross, the
Crucifixion, and the Resurrection of the Christ. All the old business about blood
and sacrifice and suffering gods finally comes into focus and grasps hold of both
mind and heart. The love of God is seen more clearly than ever in the
“sacrifice,” or constant outpouring of his divine nature, to secure our share in it
forever. The mythical, allegorical meaning of the Passion of Jesus Christ as an
enactment of God’s role in our creation and our incarnation as embodied
“fragments of deity” is far more profound than some imagined transaction where
God’s wrath is nullified by the literal death of an only son.
The above point leads to my renewed awareness of the power and the
symbolism of the Eucharist itself. It is no longer a crude, barbarous echo of some
kind of cannibalistic rite, nor is it a purely polite symbolic recalling of a two-
thousand-year-old event. It graphically and powerfully offers an immediate
experience of inwardly “feeding” upon the facts that the divine has poured out
its energies and life as our spiritual bread and drink. And it is a dramatic
experience of “remembering,” in the sense of bringing back together all the
various fragments of the “body” of God. It is a potent symbol of the restoration
of the whole family of humanity as the child of God.

4. Underlines the Dangers of Literalism
Once the literalist approach to the Gospels and the rest of the Bible has been
seen for the great blunder it has been—and in some places remains today—the
pernicious habit of targeting specific groups and lacerating them by quoting
“proof texts” loses all its presumed authority. Most of the atrocities committed
by the Church and its more rabid followers down through the ages have been
directly inspired by literalist thinking. The lies, for example, behind all the anti-
Jewish bigotry and hatred that has so tragically marked the history of
Christianity almost from its inception, and that culminated in the Holocaust. The
Church did not kill six million Jews, obviously. But centuries of a literal reading
of the Passion narratives—especially the words, in Matthew, “His blood be upon
us and our children”—and the anti-Jewish teachings of a continuous train of
Christian theologians down to and including Martin Luther himself, made it
possible for the Holocaust to occur. Even at present, hatred toward Jews,
homosexuals, Muslims, and others is still being encouraged in some quarters by
extreme Biblical literalists. The Biblical exposition given here, I repeat, utterly
destroys this dangerous fundamentalist exegesis once and for all. We will never
have peace on earth as long as literalism controls religions.
As Origen, the vigorous foe of literalism, rightly said so long ago, “Very many
mistakes have been made [interpreting Scripture], because the right method of
examining the holy texts has not been discovered by the greater number of
readers.”3

5.Emphasizes Our Responsibility for Our Own
Evolution
The kind of spirituality of which I have written here offers a full response to
what I believe to be the cardinal quest of contemporary human beings in their
hunger for God. It offers living experience in the place of dry dogma. It offers an
emphasis on experiencing the God within in the “now,” instead of a wistful
looking back over two thousand years to an unreachable ideal, a hero who, as
Carl Jung warned, appeared unique and therefore forever unrepeatable.
Rather than encouraging the belief that all we have to do is to depend on the
works and moral perfection of a peerless wonder-worker from long ago, such a
spirituality calls for the individual to take fullest responsibility for his or her own
moral struggle. He or she is aided, to be sure, by the constant presence of the
Christ spirit within, but the call is—as St. Paul often reminds us—to work out
our own salvation “in fear and trembling.” In other words, it stimulates vigorous
moral effort rather than dampening it. The point is that no literal, historical son
of God was ever sent to earth to transfigure and transform each of us by some
remote magic and thus save us from the evolutionary task of transfiguring
ourselves. Human beings will never really be successfully oriented toward this
task until they realize that within their own minds and bodies dwells the divine
power that is to be raised up and glorified in us. Paul reminded his followers at
Corinth, “Don’t you know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of
God dwells within you?” God has called us to full responsibility for our own
evolution, our own actions. It is only when this knowledge becomes a certainty
that the individual can truly begin to focus his or her psychic energies upon
stirring into full awakening the latent nature of the God within. It’s the only
effective way forward, morally and spiritually.
I am reminded here of what Carl Jung said about the weakness of the old
Imitatio Christi approach. Jung obviously had nothing against people trying to be
loving and kind. But, he said, “The Imitatio Christi will forever have this
disadvantage: we worship a man as a divine model, embodying the deepest
meaning of life, and then out of sheer imitation we forget to make real the
profound meaning present in ourselves. If I accept the fact that a god is absolute
and beyond all human experience, he leaves me cold. I do not affect him, nor
does he affect me. But if I know, on the other hand, that God is a mighty activity
within my own soul, at once I must concern myself with him.” If we follow a

Christ “out there,” in other words, while ignoring the kingdom of God or the
Christ within, authentic transformation never occurs.
6. Highlights Nature’s Guiding Role
Nature and the material world are far more integral to the spirituality
outlined here. While literalist Christianism tends to rely on a supernatural,
magical, or otherworldly view of life and the universe, the ancient wisdom
presented here as the matrix out of which true, spiritual Christianity emerged is
entirely holistic and rooted in a natural reality that comprehends the entire
cosmos. The solstitial-equinoctial basis of Christmas and Easter alone provides a
natural symbolism for the deepest truths of each individual’s spiritual life. The
heavens do indeed “declare the Glory of God,” as the Psalmist says. The first
thing that strikes a novice studying ancient Egyptian religion is the huge part
played in it by a daily awareness of nature and its role everywhere around us as
teacher and guide. There are deep implications here for our urgent environmental
concerns and a host of other current issues. I now never look at the clear night
sky without recalling that Orion is the timeless figure of the heavenly Christ. The
three stars of the belt have been known for millennia as the three kings, or wise
men. I never see the moon now without being reminded of its reflecting the solar
glory and its monthly telling of the story of our incarnation and ultimate
resurrection.
The ideas of the ancients regarding the evolution of the universe in general
and of humanity (especially individual humans) in particular resonate so closely
with contemporary scientific thought. What ignorance once called primitive
religion taught that at a certain point in evolution—when the mineral had given
rise to the vegetable, then to the animal—the process could go no further.
What was needed was a metaphorical “stooping down,” the “descent” or the
“sacrifice” of spirit to inject a fresh and higher impulse to the process.
Symbolically, the God “died” in order to be fragmented and then incarnated into
the highest (humanoid) animal souls. That is the evolutionary “moment”
described in the first two chapters of Genesis, when the human was made in
God’s likeness (mythically speaking) and Adam became “a living soul.” Soon
after, in the myth, Adam and Eve’s “eyes were opened” and moral awareness
was born. With this kind of an understanding, all the years of conflict between
religion and science are seen for what they were—sheer nonsense and a sad
waste of both time and lives.
7. Explains What the Jesus Story Really Means to Us

While showing the deep relevance of the Jesus story, and the persona of
Jesus for the life and spiritual growth of every Christian, this fresh view of the
faith leads to an escape from the false religion involved in the current idolatrous
cult of a “personal” Jesus. By showing him to have been deeply true in the
mythical sense rather than literally as God, the vast theological offence currently
given to the majority of other faiths, particularly Islam and Judaism, is not
simply mitigated—it is entirely removed. Thus lies open a way to interfaith
understanding that otherwise can never exist. This has enormous potential for
world peace, since there is currently an underlying religious dimension to almost
every conflict on the face of the globe. on the face of the globe.
I have found that seeing the Jesus story for what it is—a profoundly spiritual
allegory of the soul—in no way detracts from the moral and social teaching that
for so many centuries has been so deeply connected with his assumed deeds.
Unquestionably, this story has produced an infinite outpouring of compassionate
activity through down the ages. I would never for a moment question the
positive contributions to human welfare of traditional Christianity. But whatever
the source of the teachings in the Gospels (see, for example, Luke 4:17–
19,which is clearly direct from the Old Testament, however much it in turn owed
to Egypt), their relevance and urgency for the human conscience remain
precisely the same. They are wholly unchallenged or weakened in any way.
Justice is always justice, whether expressed in hieroglyphics, Hebrew, Greek, or
English. The inspiration of Jesus Christ as portrayed in the Gospels is in no way
lessened by the knowledge that each of us has the potential for birthing the
Christ within, and for living that out to ever fuller maturity. Quite the contrary.
As Paul told the Galatians, the aim of all his efforts and teachings was that the
Christ might be fully “formed in you.”

8.Gives Our Rituals More Potency
Let me try to allay one possible source of alarm. Once it is realized that what
formerly passed as historical—and thus to so many made little sense—is to be
taken in a symbolical or allegorical manner, the fear may be that all the old
pageantry, ritual, and celebration will have to go. Nothing could be further from
the truth. In reality, those who celebrate Christmas knowing that the Bethlehem
baby is an image of something remote from the physical and not an event in the
usual sense at all will still find the stable, the manger, the ox, and the star
radiantly alight with a transferred meaning poured down upon them from above.
“The whole pageantry and accoutrement of meaning can be heartily entertained
and in no sense (save the historical) rejected, when a reference to a reality
beyond it is accepted and one that it cannot carry is rejected. It becomes
translucent with beauty through simply being the agency of the mind’s grasp of
the supernal beauty beyond it,” Kuhn asserts.
Since this is a seismic shift in thought for most people, it’s essential to let the
scholar himself be heard. “It may be a paradox,” he explains, yet it is thoroughly
true that religious imagery and pageantry exercise a far stronger dynamism when
they are known to be allegorical than if they are believed to be memorials of
fact. The symbol helps the mind to grasp greater reality over in the subjective
world; from that clearer vision the mind can swing back and embrace the symbol
as an integral part of the great treasure of light caught by its aid.” This is to
refute the charge that if the events of religious festivity are thrown out as
nonhistorical, Christmas and Easter and ceremonies like them will lose all their
gripping impressiveness. On the contrary, Kuhn affirms, the symbols will exert a
far weightier significance when they are envisioned truly as symbols and not
falsely as events. I can only add that this has been my personal experience too.
The celebrations of Christmas and Easter have become infinitely more potent for
me as I have learned to penetrate beyond the externals to the realities within. As
Origen says, taken in its literal, allegedly historical sense, “Christ crucified is
teaching for babes.” Or, to quote St.Paul, “ But,when I became a mature man, I
put away childish things.”

9. Enhances Belief in Life After Death
My belief in a glorious dimension of life yet to be revealed—a life beyond
death—is even stronger now than it was when my book on the subject appeared
over a decade ago. What the scholarship explored has done is to deepen and
enrich that belief in more ways than I can fully describe.
If you believe in the truths of the most ancient of human wisdom—the
wisdom expounded by the Egyptians, the Orphics, the Pythagoreans and Plato,
as well as by St. Paul, the Gnostics, Clement of Alexandria, Origen, and a host
of others—we are all “sparks of divine fire struck off from the flint of the
Eternal,” immortal souls clad in mortal bodies. You can begin to understand how
allegorically, in the minds of these illuminati, death changes its meaning entirely.
Death meant simply the end of our life in the body now. That’s why St. Paul
could say, “Who will deliver me from the body of this death?” Or, again, “We
have this treasure— the Christ within—in vessels of clay.” The Greeks, with a
play on words, said soma sema, “the body is a tomb.” So Kuhn can argue that
you and I, in a profound sense, are never going to be more “dead” than we are
right at this moment. He says, “Right now our deific souls are at the very bottom
of the arc of death and can never be as dead again as they are now and have
been.” As we live our lives here, immersed in matter, we are gaining experience
and expanding consciousness. But we are, in a deep sense, alienated from, or
“dead” to, the spiritual realm whence we originally came and to which we shall
one day return. That’s a belief that changes how you look at everything and
everyone.
This view of life and death also transforms the way ancient sacred texts
should be read, including the various Books of the Dead. What we call physical
death is really the moment of our rebirthing and return to glory. At that point,
depending on how spiritually mature we have become through our “death in
matter,” we either move on to “heaven” (to take on new responsibilities) or come
back in the “cycle of necessity” (to reincarnate and grow further).
I have thought a lot about reincarnation since I argued the case against it in
Life After Death, but I have been challenged to examine that theory much more
closely through this latest research. I still have not made up my mind. Certainly
some of the brightest lights of the early Church believed in it, and that belief
persisted for several centuries in the face of growing opposition. Indeed, the fact
that there was so much resistance to it from the third century on leads me to

suspect it was a serious threat to the paternalism and authoritarianism that Rome
had come to espouse so heartily. Not surprisingly, Rome didn’t want the masses
doing what Paul had so strongly urged: working out their own salvation with fear
and trembling. The Church wanted passive obedience, not karmic self-
responsibility.
I was thrilled when I first read how the ancient Chaldean Oracles said, “All
things are the progeny of fire.” This ultimate symbol for the divine is where we
all originate. But we walk about in neartotal forgetfulness of who we really are.
As Plato said, “Humans are on Earth like beings stricken with amnesia.” This led
to his theory of reminiscence—that all learning ultimately is a form of
remembering. The relevance of this for religion, and spiritually in general, is
tremendous. Kuhn says evocatively, “Salvation, the whole aim of religion, is by
way of rekindled memory of slumbering divinity.” I love that. Sacred literary
composition for the ancient sages had one supreme aim: to reveal the heroic
struggle of the soul-fire of humanity to overcome its prison in matter and free
itself to transform mortality into immortality.
In short, my faith that the Christ within us is indeed “the hope of glory” still to
come has been fortified by the sweep of Kuhn’s vast knowledge and the razor
edge of his logic and reason. As he has said so well, “Beneath the superficial
consciousness, wrapped up with the concerns of ordinary existence in each
mortal, there slumbers the unawakened energy of a divine nature.”
Such a faith, so very far from being escapist or life-avoiding, arms us with the
moral and intellectual courage to live our lives to the fullest for the advancement
of all, sub specie aeternitatis—in the light of the eternal.

EPILOGUE
The historian Edward Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
writes, “The practice of superstition is so congenial to the multitudes that, if they
are forcibly awakened, they still regret the loss of their pleasing vision.” Gibbon
was echoing one of the most well-known passages from Plato’s writings, the
great Myth of the Cave, from the Republic. There, Plato tells the story of
captives in a cave, forced to look at mere shadows reflected on the wall for their
only glimpse of life and ignorant of the sunlit world beyond their confines. He
says that if somebody were to come to free them and lead them up to the light,
they might well prefer to stay in darkness. The point is that I am fully aware that
there will be great resistance in some quarters to the ideas set forth in this book.
Nobody likes to change, and religious views are held to more tenaciously than
any others. All a person can do is try to set forth the truth as clearly as he sees it
and let the Spirit take it from there.
Having spent twenty years preparing and writing his Anacalypsis, Godfrey
Higgins writes in the preface that he had some strong trepidation over how it
would be received. “I will not deny that I feel cowardly,”he wrote. He
foresawthe loss of some of his friends. I can identify with those feelings. But I
also identify with his commitment to honour “and establish truth.”
Like Higgins, I quote in conclusion, therefore, some sage words of the freed
slave and Stoic philosopher Epictetus (first century C.E.) on this issue:
If you resolve to make wisdom and virtue the study and business of
your life, you must be sure to arm yourself beforehand against all the
inconveniences and discouragements that are likely to attend this resolution.
I imagine that you will meet with many scoffs and much derision; and that
people will upbraid you with turning philosopher all on the sudden. But be
not you affected or supercilious; only stick close to whatever you are in
your judgment convinced is right and becoming; and consider this as your
proper station, assigned you by God, which you must not quit on any terms.
And remember, that if you persevere in goodness, those very men who
derided you at first will afterward turn your admirers. But if you give way
to their reproaches, and are vanquished by them, you will then render

yourself doubly and most deservedly ridiculous.
It is my firm conclusion, at the end of this study, that Christianity did indeed
take a tragically wrong turn at the end of the third century and the beginning of
the fourth. It is high time to reverse that. A better story has taken its place!
May the Christ in each of us give us the courage to see and live the truth.
Easter 2004

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
The Soul that rises with us,our life’s Star,
Hath had elsewhere its setting,
And cometh from afar:
Not in entire forgetfulness, 
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God,who is our home.
– WILLIAM WORDSWORTH,
“Ode: Intimations of Immortality”

APPENDIX A
Background on Three Experts 
on Mythology, Religion, 
and Ancient Egypt
Godfrey Higgins (1771–1834)
Higgins, whose father was a “gentleman of small, though independent,
fortune,” went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He had a grounding in Greek and
Latin and early on wrestled with the works of Euclid, John Locke’s On the
Understanding, and the writings of Varro, Macrobius, and Cicero. He preferred
the philosopher Epictetus to the Greek poets, and he gained familiarity with a
impressive range of other classical authors. As soon as possible he turned his
attention to the “evidence upon which our religion was founded,” and was both
shocked and intrigued by what he discovered. He then widened the inquiry to
include the origin of all religions, nations, and languages. He taught himself
languages ancient and modern; visited libraries in France, Rome, and Naples;
and wrote a book on the Druids in the process. One of his earliest discoveries, he
says, was that it was “impossible” to look on the supposed histories of ancient
empires or peoples, or on the old mythologies, as having anything whatever to
do with actual events. This led eventually to his conviction that a high
civilization had existed prior to all recorded history. He became convinced that
there was a most ancient and universal religion from which all later creeds and
doctrines everywhere sprang. He believed that this primordial religion possessed
accurate knowledge of universal and cosmic phenomena, and that it positioned
no person or institution as intermediary in man’s communion with the divine.
Higgins soon realized that nothing he had been taught as a youth about faith and
religion could be relied upon at all. Once he had taught himself Hebrew, he says
he “very soon discovered that no translation of the Book of Genesis, either by
Jew or Christian, could be depended upon.” In fact, he remarks that “almost all

the latter part of my life has been spent in unlearning the nonsense I learned in
my youth.”This has been largely my experience too.
Higgins set out on what he regarded as the most valuable contribution to
progress one man could make. He says he shortly saw that in his arduous
labours, he “was striking the hardest blow that ever was struck at the tyranny of
the sacerdotal [priestly] order— that I was doing more than any man had ever
done before to disabuse and enlighten mankind, and to liberate them from the
shackles of prejudice in which they were bound.” Not surprisingly, his work was
constantly attacked and suppressed by outraged religious opponents.
Higgins was convinced he had proved, among many other things, that the
Celtic Druids were originally priests who emigrated from India, and that they
were both the introducers of the Cadmean system of letters (from Cadmus, the
legendary founder of Thebes) and the builders of Stonehenge, Carnac, and other
cyclopean works found in Asia and Europe. Here is my favourite Higgins
quotation: “Had Jesus considered any symbol or confession of faith necessary,
he would have given one. As he has not given one, and as he did not take it upon
himself to legislate in the case, on every principle of sound reasoning it must be
held that he did not think a belief in this or that faith, as it is called, was
necessary to salvation.”1
Gerald Massey (1828–1907)
Relatively little is known of Massey’s career. His humble birth at Gamble
Wharf, Hertfordshire, England, in May 1828, held scant promise for the future.
His parents were illiterate and his education was meagre. From the age of eight,
he laboured twelve hours a day, first at a silk mill, breathing a rank atmosphere
amid the deafening roar of incessant machines, then as a straw-plaiter in the
marshes, an even unhealthier environment. For three years, he suffered from
tertian ague, a disease acquired from this.
In later life, Massey said, “Having to earn my own bread by the eternal
cheapening of flesh and blood so early, I never knew what childhood meant.

Ever since I can remember I have had the aching fear of want, throbbing in heart
and brow. The child comes into the world like a new coin with the stamp of God
upon it, and in the manner in which rich people sweat down sovereigns by
hustling them in a bag to get gold dust off them, so is the poor man’s child
hustled and sweated down in this society to get wealth from him. . . . So
blighting are the influences which so surround thousands in early life, to which I
can bear bitter testimony.”
But Massey improved his life at every opportunity, and in his spare time, he
read voraciously. Books were scarce, however, and he memorized several
chapters of the Bible, read Robinson Crusoe and John Bunyan. He discovered
English, Roman, and Greek history, and a ravishing awakening ensued—the
wonders of a new world. “Till then,” he says, “I had wondered why I lived at all.
Now I began to think that the crown of all desire and the sum of all existence
was to read and get knowledge. Read! Read! Read! I used to read at all possible
places—and in bed till three in the morning.”
Massey became increasingly interested in Egyptology. Finally, after years of
study, he wrote a series of brilliant scholarly works on the religion and
mythology of ancient Egypt. In 1881 he published, in two volumes, A Book of
the Beginnings. The Natural Genesis followed in 1883, and finally, in 1907, he
published the two-volume Ancient Egypt: The Light of the World.
Dr. Alvin Boyd Kuhn acknowledged that Gerald Massey had been a great
inspiration to him. In A Rebirth for Christianity, Kuhn called specific attention to
the enormous value to him of Massey’s research on Christian origins. He writes,
“With brilliant scholarship and insight he pierced Egypt’s enigmatic scriptology,
and documented the provenance of both Old and New Testament literature from
remote Egyptian sources. He forced us to ask how the four Gospels of the
Christian canon could be the biography of any Messianic personality living in
the first Christian century, when he traced their texts back to Egyptian
documents that must have been venerable even in 3500 B.C.E. ”
To Gerald Massey, It was an unforgivable pretense for the clergy to continue
to preach that man was a fallen creature doomed to plead for God’s salvation.
Every advance made by science for humanity was the result of research and
perseverance, not praying to “a jealous God.” Massey proclaimed, “It is a sad
farce for you to pray for God to work a miracle . . . when you are doing all you
can to prevent it.”
The death of Jesus could not save man from himself, he argued. Massey was
adamant in his belief that man, as the old Egyptians taught, was what he was as a
result of what he had done. There was no dodging the law of cause and effect.
One of Massey’s greatest contributions was his lecture “The Coming

Religion.” It is poignant with sincerity. He asserted that each person must do his
own thinking and have absolute freedom of expression. He stressed that the new
religion about to be born must have “sincerity of life, in place of pretended
belief; a religion of science, in place of superstition.” This religion, he predicted,
will proclaim man’s ascent rather than his fall. It will be a religion of fact in the
present, not of faith for the future. The temple will be what it was intended to be
—the human form—rather than an edifice of brick and stone. It will be a religion
of accomplishment rather than of worship, and in place of the many narrow
creeds, it will be a religion of life. Above all, it will be a joyous religion, Massey
affirmed, a cosmic path for all.2
Alvin Boyd Kuhn (1880–1963)
His brief obituary in The New York Times on September 15,1963, is most
notable for what it misses and leaves out.3 But its brevity and opacity are
symbolic of the severely muted response that greeted the man and his
monumental achievement. Kuhn was born on September 22, 1880, on a farm in
Franklin County, Pennsylvania. While in high school, the future scholar of
comparative religions was able to take two years of classical Greek—an
experience he later realized was hugely important for his “true life’s work.” He
gave a graduation valedictory address called “The Lyre of Orpheus,” which dealt
with Jason and the Argonauts in their search for the storied Golden Fleece. It
was this speech that Kuhn felt presaged his later fascination with the Orphics
and with Platonism. He became convinced early on that his role would be to
reawaken the “supernal wisdom,” and to be the one who recovered the Golden
Fleece of ancient truth for the good of the modern world.
Kuhn resembles his mentor, Gerald Massey, in that he did a prodigious
amount of reading and research on his own. After a couple of years of teaching
elementary school, he obtained a B.A. degree at the age of twenty-three. He
taught for twenty-five years, but at the same time, he pursued his more serious

academic search into the origins of religious symbols and meanings. At the age
of forty-six, he was able to study philosophy at Columbia University and obtain
a Ph.D. Finally, the cherished dream of writing and lecturing opened up. He was
offered several posts at universities but he preferred to remain free to lecture and
continue his research. He continued his career up to the week he died.
Kuhn founded his own publishing firm and produced a number of his own
books and monographs himself. This might have been a mixed blessing, in my
view. I know from my own experience how much a book’s success depends
upon marketing and promotion, and this self-publishing aspect (in addition to the
religious hostilities already mentioned) might well have a lot to do with the lack
of attention his work was to receive.
Apart from his almost unbelievable erudition, Kuhn had the energy and
capacity for the work of three men. His nearly two thousand public lectures—
always lengthy, detailed, and delivered to packed houses, according to
eyewitnesses with whom I have spoken—represent by themselves a huge
outpouring of vitality and strength. He was a frequent visitor, for example, to
Toronto, where his annual week-long lecture series drew capacity crowds for
years.

APPENDIX B
More Similarities between 
the Egyptian Christ, Horus, 
and Jesus
• Horus in ancient Egyptian wisdom comes as “the Lord of life and
freedom”; Jesus in the Gospels comes that we might have life and “have
it more abundantly.” Horus comes with the title of “the Deliverer,” for
those who are “in their prison cells” (i.e., entombed in matter). Jesus
comes to set the captives free and to liberate the oppressed. Horus is the
Egyptian prototype of the chosen one (called the Servant by Isaiah), who
came for “a light to lighten the gentiles, to open blind eyes, to bring out
the prisoners from their dungeons, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prison-house.” His earthly father was Seb, or Joseph. Seb was also of
royal descent.
• Jesus came as the Messiah, the Christos, the anointed one. Horus,
according to a passage in the Egyptian Ritual where he addresses his
father, Osiris, also likened this blessing to “the gift of grace and of
spiritual unction.”He tells Osiris, “I have strengthened thy existence. . . .
I have given thee thy soul, thy strength, thy victory. I have anointed thee
with offerings of holy oil.” It is no coincidence that the word messiah
comes from the Hebrew word for “anointed one.” The Greek equivalent
is christos, from a root also meaning “to anoint.” (The hidden esoteric
meaning of all this talk about anointing is that in each human being, the
guardian angel, the spirit—the divine element or fragment or spark—and
the “animal human” anoint each other according to the ancient wisdom.
The union of spirit with flesh gives spirit the opportunity for experience
and flesh the opportunity for glory to come. Neither is inferior to the

other in the grand evolutionary plan.)
• The Christ of the Gospels is the coming one, “he that should come,” while
“he that cometh”—bringing peace—was the Egyptian Jesus, Iu-em-
hetep. According to the earliest Greek historian, Herodotus, the father of
secular history, this Jesus was to be found eighteen thousand years earlier
in Egyptian religion. In the New Testament, it is said of the future
manifestor, “Then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory. But when these things begin to come to pass, look
up, and lift up your heads; because your redemption draweth nigh.” And
of Osiris coming in the clouds of heaven, we read, “The Osiris passes
through the clouds, turns back the opposers, gives life to the ministers of
the sun. The face of the Osiris [or Horus] is rendered great by his crown.
Lift up your heads! Pay ye attention! Make way for your Lord.”
• In the famous kenosis, or “emptying,” passage in Paul’s Letter to the
Philippians, the Apostle says that the Christ “emptied himself.” In the
Egyptian Ritual, we learn that Horus (Iusu, Iusa, or Jesus) “disrobes” to
reveal himself while he presents himself to earth. In ancient esoteric
thought, the entire process of the god or the soul coming down to
incarnation often involved his taking off layers of glorious apparel on the
one hand while assuming ever more dense garments at the same time—
signifying immersion in the opacity of matter. Obviously, a humiliation,
the taking-on of the role of a less glorious being, was being depicted; it
was an emptyingout of glory. At one stage or another of the myth, all
three persons of the Egyptian Trinity, Isis, Osiris, and Horus, are
represented “descending” to this earth in humble, human form.
• Ra (or Osiris/Horus) manifests as “the burning one,” “he who sends his
fire into the place of destruction,” “he who sends fire upon the rebels.”
Christ also comes in the person of the burning one and the sender of
destruction by fire. He is proclaimed by Matthew to be the baptizer with
fire. He says, in another pronouncement, “I am come to send fire upon
the earth.”
• Osiris/Horus is the god who opens pathways in the highest heaven, and as

the risen god, “his form is of the eternal essence . . . he shines and he sees
his mysteries.”He is also referred to as the splendid one who lights up the
sarcophagus (tomb) and raises the soul of the deceased. Jesus is the
resurrection and the life, the door, the tomb-breaker, and the establisher
of a foothold in the heavens. In the vanishing vision of the risen Christ in
the Gospels, “he was taken up, and a cloud received him” as the
inhabitant of the empyrean above.
• Horus says in the Egyptian Ritual, “I am Horus, the Prince of Eternity.”
John’s Jesus tells the disciples that he was with the Father before all
worlds. In the Ritual, Horus says, “Verily before Isis was, I grew up and
waxed old, and was honoured before those who were with me in glory.”1
• According to the Synoptic Gospels, Jesus’ ministry lasted only one year;
you have to examine John’s version to get a ministry of almost three
years. Horus, because of the nature of the solar cycle, typically reigned
for one year. (By the way, both Clement of Alexandria and Origen held
the view that Jesus’ ministry lasted only one full year.)
• Regarding the Transfiguration, the Egyptian Ritual says: “Horus gives
thee the gods, he makes them come to thee, they illumine thy face.” On
the Mount of Transfiguration (Mt. Tabor), Jesus’ face “did shine as the
sun and his garments became as white as the light.” Both these stories
teach the illuminative power of solar deity, and thus of God behind and
through it all.
• Like Jesus in the Gospels, Horus was the raiser of the dead. Kuhn,
following Massey, contends that the story of the paralytic who was let
down through the roof and was told by Jesus to take up his bed and walk
is an actualization of a passage in the Ritual where the deceased is told,
“Horus causes thee to stand up at the risings. Thou art raised up; thou art
not dead.” The Lazarus story is another example of this.
• Jesus dies between two thieves. But in Egyptian lunar lore, “two thieves
of the light,” who happened to be the minor deities Anup and Aan, are at

one point drawn up on either side of the sun god. The inner message was
that incarnation steals away the divine light—only to add to its
brightness. Here, indeed, would appear to be the authentic pre-Christian
prototype of the Gospel Crucifixion between two thieves.
• The first Palm Sunday, Jesus’ triumphal but strangely inconclusive ride
through Jerusalem in the Gospels, is really a literalized but mishandled
part of the ancient myth where Horus, too, rides on the back of a donkey.
The real meaning in both cases—though obscured in the New Testament
rendition— is that the divine element, or the god, in every person rides
into glory on the back of the animal self. It’s to mark the final triumph of
the soul in man over his lower world. Massey, with typical erudition,
points out that palm leaves were thrown in front of Jesus because the
palm tree is an arcane symbol of the lunar month. It was widely believed
to be the only tree to produce an additional branch every twenty-eight
days!
• The familiar story of the man who asked Jesus to permit him to enter into
a nearby herd of pigs and then rushed them headlong to their destruction
over a cliff and into the sea seems at first sight to be original to the
Gospels. But in the ancient Egyptian judgment scene, when the person
whose life marked him as evil was condemned and rejected, he was
delivered to a being called the Typhonian beast—a combined
crocodile/hippopotamus/pig. The esoteric meaning here is quite plain. He
was not released but sent down again into incarnation in the body of a
beast, thrust back into the animal body for more learning experience. In
the Gospel account, the entry of the rejected “evil spirits” into the pigs,
plus the rush down into the water (symbolizing matter), is thus this same
reality—the return to indwelling of an animal organism by souls in need
of further moral evolution.
• Horus says he has come with empowerment and certitude to offer the
comfort that he “lives on amidst all overthrow.” This is a sort of a “Rock
of Ages” certitude that abides amidst all flux. In his turn, many centuries
later, Jesus says, “In this world, you face persecution. But, take courage;
I have conquered the world!”


APPENDIX C
Two Strange Passages
There are two oddities from the text of the New Testament itself. They fully
support the thesis that the true background of the Jesus story is the eternal,
spiritual Christ myth. Both come from the Book of Revelation—the book that
Gerald Massey contended holds some of the earliest material in the entire corpus
of New Testament writings.
a) Revelation 1:13, in the King James Version, says, “And I saw in the midst
of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a garment
down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.” “Paps” is the
archaic word for a woman’s breasts. In the Greek, the word used is the plural
mastos, which the lexicon defines as “the breast, esp., of the swelling breast of a
woman.” Rarely, the plural was used to refer to a man’s breasts, but the
prevailing sense is female. The fact that the figure in this passage from
Revelation wore a “girdle,” or cincture, about the breasts—the modern
equivalent would be a brassiere—confirms that the breasts in question are
female. Indeed, the New English Bible translates the plural as though it were a
singular —“with a golden girdle round his breast.” The New Revised Standard
Version tries to avoid any embarrassment by wrongly translating it as “chest.”
True, the word in Greek here for “girdle” is the same one used to describe John
the Baptist’s girdle. But there it plainly says that it was wound about his loins,
not his chest.
What makes me come down on the side of the KJV’s take— though preferring
the translation of breasts to paps—is that something more than the surface
meaning is at play here. Among the ancients, for centuries before the Christian
era and contemporaneously with it, it was common to picture divinities with
features of the opposite sex, denoting wholeness. For example, Horus was at
times depicted with “the locks of girlhood.”The male gods Bacchus and Serapis
often appear with breasts, and Venus, goddess of love for the Romans, is
sometimes depicted with a beard!
A deep esoteric point was being made. In ancient philosophy and religion,

before Creation, God—all life—was seen as Father and Mother in one. Only by
slow development did God become Mother and Father separately. The belief was
that human beings too were androgynous before a bifurcation took place and
they split into separate sexes. Since there are many other references in
Revelation that betray the author’s deep knowledge of socalled Pagan
symbolism, it’s quite possible that the Son of Man figure with breasts echoes this
primal oneness theme. In any case, this figure of the Christos is by no means any
historical man. It’s an archetype of the spiritual, timeless Christ of the myth.
b) In Revelation 11:8, there is a most puzzling passage in which two
“witnesses” are to be killed. “And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the
great city, which spiritually pneumatikõs is called Sodom and Egypt, where also
our Lord was crucified,” reads the text [my emphasis]. Once again, it must be
stressed that the author is clearly concerned not with any historical events, or a
“Jesus of history,” but with symbolism and allegory. Jerusalem, and not Sodom
or Egypt, clearly is the location for the death of Jesus in all four Gospel
accounts. Sodom and Egypt here are an esoteric, “spiritual,” or symbolic way of
speaking of this earth and of time (as opposed to the heavenly realms and
eternity). “Our Lord” here is once more not a “personal” Jesus but the eternal
Christos.

APPENDIX D
Response to The Pagan Christ 
for Discussion Purposes
Ever since The Pagan Christ arrived in bookstores across Canada in March,
2004, there has been a remarkable flood of e-mails from readers from every
possible background and from all adult age groups. While a few letters have
been those of outrage, the overwhelming majority, a ratio of well over 20 to one,
have been enthusiastically positive. The most frequently used phrase in
describing readers’ experience has been “a sense of liberation.” Here’s an
abbreviated letter from a 79-year old woman who got the book after hearing the
Tapestry interview on CBC Radio Easter day: “I was excited by your words. I
was eating lunch at the kitchen table—and I stood up and danced around.” She
closed with: “Thank you for your book, that made me dance with joy . . .”
Here’s another from a 60-year old man who “felt like a spiritual fraud”
because his many doubts had left him“ with no church, no creed, no safe haven. I
have found such a haven in the pages of TPC. Thank you for restoring wings and
wonder to my faith.”
Finally, from a mature man who has worried for years about the exclusivity of
traditional Christianity and the fate of all those both who came before it and
those who exist outside it today: “Finally it all makes sense. Finally, it all
becomes one. Finally, I have peace…I truly appreciate the effort that went into
this book and also the limb that you’ve had to climb out on to publish it.” There
have been thousands of such communications. Study groups have been formed
spontaneously across the country in churches and outside of them completely.
The book is now being published around the world.
It would be wrong, however, to suppose that all the response has been
glowing. There have been some harsh reviews and criticisms of many kinds,
particularly from ultraconservative sources. None of this was unexpected. One
would have been concerned had it been otherwise. It’s above all a sign of the
powerful message the book contains.

Let me share with you a reasonable approach to these criticisms:
1. The first thing to do in examining critical comment is to determine the
nature of the source itself—is it (he or she) part of the ecclesiastical
apparatus and thus possessed of an agenda of its own? If the reviewer is a
priest, a church official, or a professor at seminary, for example, is he or
she at all likely to be neutral over a book that challenges the very
underpinnings of official Christianity? The ultraconservative and/or
fundamentalist Christians sadly will always be deeply threatened by any
ideas that do not support and agree with their traditional beliefs. If one
stone of the edifice is obliterated, the whole edifice begins to totter.
2. Then one should ask the key question: Does this critic give any sign or
evidence whatever that he or she has read the key sources upon which the
chief arguments of the book have been based? None of the critical
reviews I have read so far pass this acid test of intellectual integrity.
Higgins, Massey, and Kuhn remain hidden territory for them. It appears
that some scholars with credentials in Egyptology resist any intrusion
into their field.
3. You will notice the general professional academic, who despite the
explanation at the beginning of the book that It was not written for
scholars (hence the minimum of footnotes), illogically insists that the
lack of lengthy references, suitable for a Ph.D. thesis, undermines the
book’s integrity. Critics will often try to repudiate sources even if the
material presented is factual.
4. Lastly, and most important of all, there is the crucial question to be
asked: “Is this review/criticism/charge concerned about the main theses
of The Pagan Christ—its leading arguments and message—or is it rather
a matter essentially of a nitpicking, scatter-gun attack aimed at
discrediting the book at any cost?
The critical response to The Pagan Christ has been most interesting and
stimulating. Any author tries to learn from his critics; and some have proven
valuable. But, overall, the negative responders have only served to strengthen

my convictions that led to the writing of the book in the first place. I wish you
much courage to follow the Christ within.
Here are some additional points to be made for discussion purposes:
1. Contrary to what most people believe, there is no general unity among
Egyptologists on every issue. “Egyptology” simply means the study of
Egypt, and what I have found is that every “Egyptologist” I have read or
heard from has his or her own individual interpretation of the same data.
In The Pagan Christ, I have worked extensively with several
Egyptologists. It comes down to a question of whose interpretations
stand up to scrutiny and common sense. The fact that certain
“Egyptologists” may not agree with this work does not surprise me. To
begin with, unless they have read the fundamental works I am using, they
are not in a position to give a scholarly critique. What’s more, that’s the
whole point of the book! It’s high time this material was widely known
and studied. The Pagan Christ has a timely message for Christianity,
other religions, and the world. All the nitpicking and distorting of its
message can’t change that.
2. Alvin Boyd Kuhn was a highly educated man with a Ph.D. from
Columbia University. His thesis was published by Henry Holt of New
York as part of a Columbia University series on world religions. His
book, The Lost Light, by Academy Press, New Jersey, bears on its title
page the following quote: “This book will be to religion what Darwin’s
work has been to science” with attribution to President of the National
Library Board, U.S.A. Most of Kuhn’s later work was self-published, a
very common occurrence in his day by those whose work was too
scholarly or controversial for a popular press. Many brilliant people have
published their own works, for example, Rudolf Steiner and Walt
Whitman, America’s best-known poet.
3. Some may be critical of my statement that “Paul’s Jesus lacks any human
quality for the very reason that, in Paul’s understanding, he was not a
human person at all.” But, of this claim there can be no doubt—
numerous other writers and authorities over the centuries have noticed
the same thing. Paul’s Jesus is a nonhistorical, Gnostic, or mystical
reality.

4. The name Yeshua or Yehoshua is the title of the earliest Hebrew hero,
Joshua, many centuries earlier; the Septuagint, (the Greek version of the
Old Testament) has the word Jesus about 200 times and it was written
c.300–250 B.C.E.) Yahweh, which is also related to Yehoshua, according
to Diodorus Siculus (a primary source) in the first century B.C.E. comes
from the Egyptian IAO. The origins of Jesus as a name thus go far back
into earliest times and in fact lie behind the much later Jewish terms.
Herodotus in Book II c. 43 confirms this. So does the ancient Phoenician
symbol later rendered as IHS.
5. There are various versions of how Horus was conceived, but, all of them
involve a miraculous birth. In one tradition, Isis was impregnated by “a
flash of lightening or by the rays of the moon.” In The Golden Bough,
Frazer tells how Isis conceived “while she fluttered in the form of a hawk
over the corpse of her dead husband.” In the ancient Syrian and Egyptian
rituals of the nativity, the celebrants retired into inner shrines from which
at midnight they issued with a loud cry “the Virgin has brought forth!”
The Egyptians even represented the newborn sun by the image of an
infant, who on his birthday, the winter solstice, was brought out and
exhibited to the worshippers. Isis retained her virginity perpetually and
was given the epithets “Immaculate Virgin” and “uncontaminated
goddess,” as well as “Mother of God.” By the way, I nowhere suggest
that the N.T. Mary was a goddess like Isis, as one critic says. But, there
were so many images and statuettes of Isis holding the baby saviour,
Horus, throughout the ancient Mediterranean world that when
Christianity finally triumphed these same figures became those of the
Madonna and child without any break in continuity. No archaeologist can
now tell whether some of these artifacts represent the one or the other.
Contemporary Egyptologists such as Eric Hornung and before him
Siegfried Morenz (Egyptian Religion) confirm this strong linkage.
6. Regarding the age of Osirian religion, primary sources such as the
historian Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus make clear that the oral
tradition indicates he “walked the earth” as God’s Incarnation thousands
of years previously. Osiris was both God and man exactly the same as

Jesus. So were a host of other ancient deities. What’s more, the
Incarnation was also believed in for millennia B.C.E. in early Vedic
religion. Krishna and Buddha both reflect this widespread belief.
7. Some deny that Horus had twelve disciples. However, the twelve disciple
gods is a prominent theme in the ancient Egyptian religion (as also in the
cult of Mithras). Horus, the sun god, is surrounded by the twelve signs of
the zodiac, his “helpers” and “disciples.” Some of them were fisherman.
8. To date there has been no incontrovertible evidence of a historical Jesus’
existence. I recommend reading the seven books of British scholar
Professor G.A.Wells on this, and also the latest two by Professor Robert
Price, whose books deal specifically and authoritatively with this theme.
9. Gerald Massey, described as an Egyptologist in the edition of The
Encyclopedia Britannica of 1911 (he died in 1908), worked not only with
leading Egyptologists at the British Museum. He also used the primary
sources supplied by such outstanding archaeologists and Egyptologists as
H. Edouard Naville, who authored many books based upon his own
expeditions and research, especially at the Horus shrine, the temple of
Edfu at Abydos. He drew particularly upon his work Textes relatifs au
mythe d’Horus recueillis dans le temple d’Edfu. (Geneva: H.George,
1870). He also had before him the ground-breaking, on-site research and
writings of Egyptologist Sir Peter le Page Rénouf, who authored the
Hibbert lectures of 1879 on Ancient Egyptian Religion.

GLOSSARY
Allegory and Allegorical
Allegory is an extended figure of speech, a continuous metaphor. St.
Augustine defined allegory as a mode of speech whereby one thing is understood
by means of another. It’s very important to notice that the term itself is used in
one of the earliest New Testament writings by Paul. In Galatians 4:24, he says:
“Which things [the story of Abraham and Sarah] contain an allegory.” In other
words, what seems like a historical narrative is not one at all. The Cambridge
Encyclopedia calls allegory “a literary device by which another level of meaning
is concealed within what is usually a story of some kind.” We are so used to the
literal approach to Scripture that we fail to remember that the greatest scholars of
the first two Christian centuries employed the allegorical method almost entirely.
For Origen, for example, the allegorical method was for spiritually mature
Christians. He called the literalists “somatic” (i.e., physically oriented) believers.
Allegory, he said, takes one from the level of simplistic “belief ” to actual heart-
and-mind knowledge, or “gnosis.” On the other hand, sheer literalism, he said,
leads only to a popular, irrational faith. It is the allegorical method of
interpretation that marks the approach the first compilers of the New Testament
habitually took toward the Old Testament. My thesis here is that all Scripture is
by nature allegorical, and that to treat it otherwise is to conclude in serious error.
Esoteric and Exoteric
Esoteric means “inner” or “hidden.” It’s a kind of spiritual wisdom kept from
crass outsiders with no spiritual ambitions. In the Gospels, Jesus applies the
esoteric principle sharply when he warns the disciples not to throw “pearls
before swine.” Exoteric is, of course, the opposite, meaning “external” and
“open.” Christianity began as an esoteric religion but was changed within three
centuries into one almost wholly exoteric.
Incarnation

Quite literally, the word means “in the flesh.” It comes from two Latin
words, in and carne. The central, orthodox Christian doctrine of Incarnation is
limited to the presumed historical person of Jesus, or Yeshua/Joshua, the “Word
made flesh.” But as the scholars referenced here have proved beyond a shadow
of doubt, this doctrine has from earliest times been applied not to one individual
but to every member of our species. The Egyptians taught this; the Greeks,
especially the Orphics, Pythagoras, and Plato, taught this; and so did the Mystery
Religions of the Greco-Roman world. Dr. Alvin Boyd Kuhn’s major thesis is
this: “There is but one central theme to the drama of human life, i.e., the
interrelated history of the two components of man’s life—soul and body, god
and animal.” The term “incarnation” is used throughout this book to refer to the
God within each of us—the “Light which lighteth every person coming into the
world.” To quote the great American transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson,
“Man is a god in ruins.”
Metaphor
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines a metaphor as the “application of a
name or descriptive term or phrase to an object or action to which it is
imaginatively but not literally applicable.” Examples of metaphors include “the
fog was a grey cat prowling across the harbour” and “the moon was a lighthouse
to the wanderers lost in the forest’s gloom.” In short, a metaphor is the
imaginative use of one term to describe another to which it does not normally
apply. Scripture is filled with such figures of speech. Jesus, for example, says, “I
am the door,” “I am the vine,” and “I am the bread of life.” All language about
God must of necessity be a metaphor, since he/she is beyond any literal
description. Religion forgets this at its peril.
Mystery Religions
This refers to a range of religious rites and cults spread throughout the
ancient Greco-Roman world. Full admission was limited to those with genuine
spiritual aspirations; they went through elaborate secret initiation rituals, or
“mysteries.” The most famous of these religions were the mysteries of Demeter
at Eleusis, in Greece, but those of Dionysus, Isis, and Mithras (which was
remarkably like Christianity) were all similar. They involved deeply moving
experiences aimed at awakening to full consciousness the reality of the god
within, and they held forth the promise of eternal life. All of them are traceable

in one form or another to Egyptian—or, in the case of Mithras, Persian—
sources. Plutarch tells us they arrived in Rome about 70 B.C.E. Mithraism, with its
baptism, eucharist, and other rituals, gave Christianity a close “run” as a rival for
about two hundred years. Christianity, in its earliest days, also had its
“mysteries”—the doctrine of the Trinity, the Eucharist, and so on. Paul often
uses terms taken from the Mystery Religions, showing much more kinship with
them than orthodoxy has acknowledged.
Symbol, Symbolic, and Symbolism
The American philosopher and educator John Dewey (1859–1952) says in
his book The Quest for Certainty, “The invention or discovery of symbols is
doubtless by far the greatest single event in the history of man. Without them no
intellectual advance is possible; with them, there is no limit set to intellectual
development except inherent stupidity.” Dewey is right. It is a truth, however,
often forgotten by critics of religion, and by religious people themselves. There
are, as the scholar Thomas Masson noted in his book Ascensions, many things,
those utterly beyond the power of words to convey, “which can be only indicated
by symbols understood by the few and reinterpreted for wider circles.” Kuhn,
commenting on this phenomenon, quotes Emerson: “A good symbol is a
missionary to convince thousands.” In our present culture, with its tendency to
be overawed by science and technology, and thus prone to the error that only the
“scientific method” results in true knowledge, we need to be reminded that it is
not just religion that relies upon symbolism in its thinking. The physicist James
Jeans, in his book The World around Us, says, “When we try to discuss the
ultimate structure of the atom, we are driven to speak in terms of similes,
metaphors, and parables.” Today we cannot be reminded too often of the power
of imagery and symbolism of every kind to change our awareness and our lives.
Almost the whole of contemporary advertising is based upon the use of symbols.
All language about God is, in the end, symbolic.

Notes

INTRODUCTION
1. A Rebirth for Christianity. (All subsequent citations of Alvin Boyd Kuhn unless otherwise
indicated are taken from one of the following: The Lost Light, Who Is This King of Glory?, The
Shadow of the Third Century, or A Rebirth of Christianity.)

1: DISCOVERY
1. Christians and others assume that the Greek name Jesus was the original name of the saviour. This
was impossible. The name Jesus did not exist, and would not have been spelled with the letter J,
until about six hundred years ago. There was no J in any language prior to the fourteenth century
in England. The letter did not become widely used until the seventeenth century.The Encyclopedia
Americana contains the following on the letter J: “ The formof J was unknown in any alphabet
until the 14th century. Either symbol J or I used initially generally had to be the sound of Y as in
year. Gradually the two symbols J and I were differentiated, the J usually acquiring consonantal
force and thus becoming regarded as a consonant, and the I becoming a vowel. It was not until
1630 that the differentiation became accepted in England.” In the 1611 King James Version of the
Bible, there was no J letter. James was spelled Iames and Jesus was spelled Iesous. In the ancient
Latin and Greek languages, Jesus was spelled with the letter I. In Hebrew we know there was no J
either, so Jesus was originally spelled Yeshua. But the ua ending in Yeshua’s name, when
transliterated into Greek, is feminine singular, which presents a problem. The Church simply
changed ua to u; thus Jesus became a male saviour. What most people do not understand is that
the us ending to Jesus’ name was set up to denote male gender. The ous and the us ending in the
Greek name Iesous and the Latin name Iesus also denote them asculine singular. Where did the
name Jesus originate? Simply put, it was derived from the Latin Iesus, which was derived from
the Greek Iesous, which in turn was derived from the Egyptian Iusa. “Jesus” has Egyptian roots.
See also Kuhn’s Who Is This King of Glory?, page 264.
2. The Secret Lore of Egypt, p. 60.
3. Richard Holloway, Doubts and Loves (Edinburgh: Canongate Books, 2001).
4. Kuhn’s first book, Theosophy: A Modern Revival of the Ancient Wisdom, published by Henry Holt
and Co. in New York, in 1930, was his Ph.D. thesis at Columbia. It was the first and only time
that any university in Europe or America had ever permitted anyone to win the degree with a
thesis on Theos [or God], a thesis for which the Society later criticized him. Here again we can
discern possible problems for him in terms of reception by the wider public. Theosophy is an
honourable and learned branch of philosophy dealing with hidden or mystical teachings of the
past, but there were some messy controversies involving Madame H.P. Blavatsky, one of the
founders of the movement, which no doubt cast some clouds over the entire subject in some
circles. At any rate, as a debut title it was bound to give Kuhn’s critics and enemies a tool with
which to oppose his challenging ideas. Kuhn’s Lost Light was followed by scores of books and
printed lectures, all of which focused on the background and meaning of religious symbolism in
general and that of the Christian religion in particular. Who Is This King of Glory?:A Critical
Study of the Christos-Messiah Tradition, one of his most important works, was published in 1944;
Sex as Symbol came out in 1945; and the real shocker, Shadow of the Third Century: A
Revaluation of Christianity, a book that exposed the Church’s use and abuse of Pagan sources
(and that every seminarian and cleric should read at the earliest opportunity), appeared in 1949.

India’s True Voice was published in 1955, and in 1970 there appeared, posthumously, his smaller
but prophetic volume A Rebirth for Christianity, which is still in print and selling today. Because
of greatly renewed interest in Kuhn’s findings today, Kessinger Publishing, in Montana, a
specialist in rare esoteric books, has been reprinting all his major works. In addition, Health
Research of Makulumne Hills, California, has brought out Hark! Messiah Speaks and Kuhn’s last-
completed book on nature, The Ultimate Canon of Knowledge. It has also published two of his
insightful monographs: Christ’s Three Days in Hell and Case of the Missing Messiah. Kuhn also
left behind his unfinished autobiography, Great Pan Returns, and a book titled Krishnamurti and
Theosophy. Other unpublished Kuhn manuscripts include “Rudolph Steiner’s ‘Mystery of
Golgotha’” and several untitled pieces. See the bibliography for further details.
5. Northrop Frye, The Double Vision: Language and Meaning in Religion (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1991), p. 58.
6. See the explosive 1999 book The Jesus Mysteries, by Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy.

2: SETTING THE STAGE
1. See glossary.
2. See Galatians. 4:24–25.
3. “Mystery of Solar Neutrinos Solved at Underground Site,” Toronto Star, November 25, 2003.
4. I am indebted here in part to the Reverend Larry Marshall, a learned colleague who has immersed
himself in ancient spiritualities and philosophies, especially the writings of Massey and Kuhn, for
many years.

3: CHRISTIANITY BEFORE CHRISTIANITY
1. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, chapter 17 of Book 2.
2. Godfrey Higgins, Anacalypsis, p. 441.
3. Gerald Massey, The Natural Genesis, vol. 1, p. 313.
4. Incidentally, Horus says the same thing in the same role, and Lord Krishna, in Hinduism, cries, “I
am the letter A, I am the beginning and the end,” while the Christ of Revelation says, “I am the
Alpha and Omega.” Like Jesus, Krishna tells his disciples he will dwell in them and they in him.
He says he is the light and the life and the sacrifice.
5. Egyptologist Erik Hornung says on page 34 of The Secret Lore of Egypt, “The roots of
Hermeticism might reach back to the beginning of the second millennium B.C.E.
6. I am indebted to Kuhn for most of the research here, but for a more recent examination of the same
subject, see Marcus Borg, Jesus and Buddha: The Parallel Sayings.
7. See William Stewart, “The Egyptian Secret,” in Quest magazine, May–June 2003.
8. In the Book of Enoch, written before or about 170 B.C.E., the Christ is spoken of as already
existing in heaven and is referred to at times as the Son of Man. There are echoes of Enoch in
Revelation and in Paul’s letters, as well as in the Gospels.
9. In Montfaucon’s Antiquities, a statue of a hierophant of the Mysteries depicts a woman
dramatizing the role of the Syrian goddess Cybele. She is shown wearing an Episcopal-type mitre
on her head, a tunic or cassock like a Catholic priest down to her ankles, and a surplice, with
overall an Episcopal cope with the twelve signs of the zodiac along the borders. The similarities
to later Christian robes are startling.
10. See the dozens of citations in the index of Massey’s Ancient Egypt, The Light of the World,
Volume II, page 927 under Iu, Iu-em-hetep. Egyptologists today call him Imhotep.

11. See John 15:1–8.

4: THE GREATEST COVER-UP OF ALL TIME
1. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (New York: Modern Library, 1995),
p. 502.
2. For a detailed account, see Joseph Wheless’s Forgery in Christianity.
3. Eusebius, who died c. 340, together with the other shapers of the emerging orthodoxy, was aided
enormously by Emperor Constantine’s claim that Christianity was the glue with which to hold the
empire together. The surge toward centralism and conformity was nowbacked by the might of
Caesar.
4. Anselm was the archbishop of Canterbury at the time. He lived from c. 1033 to 1109.
5. Catholic Encyclopedia, vol. 5, p. 10.
6. Origen, Commentary on Matthew, XV, p. 14.
7. Ad. Haeres (Against Heresy), 26:2
8. For further reading on this, see not only Kuhn but Mead, Fragments of a Faith Forgotten.
9. See Erik Hornung’s The Secret Lore of Egypt, p. 186: “Christian zealots had . . . made it a tabula
rasa.”
10. Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, edited by F. L. Cross, former Professor of Divinity in
the University of Oxford.
11. On October 16, 2002.

5: IT WAS ALL WRITTEN BEFORE—IN EGYPT
1. There are many excellent sources for this subject, including Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt
by Eric Hornung and others mentioned in the bibliography. Hornung defines “Egyptosophy” as
the belief that the land of the Nile was the fount of all wisdom. Once the discipline of
“Egyptology” made its appearance in 1822, the relationship between the two has been
problematic and there had been a reluctance to treat the topic. He says that though Egyptosophy
often imagines itself to be far superior to any discipline that is blind to its true wisdom,
Egyptology is often all too hastily inclined to ignore anything having to do with Egyptosophy,
forgetting that it represents a hunger for hidden truths that is not satisfied by the scientific
discipline and is in this respect entirely legitimate. He says “And while we in Egyptology take the
picture of Egypt in classical antiquity quite seriously, we have trouble taking its continuation
down into modern esoteric movements and its unbelievable wide spread equally seriously. . . .
Scholarly concern with the esoteric tradition is still in its infancy and stands in inverse proportion
to the immense importance of the esoteric among the general public. Even today there is only one
professorship of esoteric lore in all the world, at the Sorbonne in Paris.”
2. Compare this to Genesis 2:7: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust . . . and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life.”
3. Hornung, The Secret Lore of Egypt, p. 75.
4. Mark 9:2–8.
5. In the catacombs of Rome are many pictures of the baby Horus being held in the arms of his
mother, Isis—the original Madonna and Child. Other images, supposed by some of the pious to be
likenesses of baby Jesus, are actually of the infant Horus and include a solar disk.
6. See the excellent article on the number twelve in The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible, vol. 4.

6: convincing the sceptics
1. 1 Corinthians 3:16.
2. New Revised Standard Version.
3. Luke 1:80.
4. Didron, The Book of Iconography, Figure 124.
5. The book The Jesus Mysteries has a very full description of the nature and influence of what Freke
and Gandy call the Osiris/Dionysus Mystery Religions and, in particular, the role of
Dionysus/Bacchus as the god of the vine and wine.
6. Modern Egyptologists dispute this, but according to Gerald Massey, Karast, “the deceased,” was
anointed, hence the transition to the concept of Christos, which of course, means “anointed” in
Greek.
7. The June 2003 issue of Bible Review carried a lead article on the Egyptian roots of Moses’ name,
and on Egyptian–Hebrew overlappings in general.
8. Mark 6:47–51.
9. The Ritual (Egyptian Book of the Dead), Chapter 170.
10. The Ritual, Chapter 131.
7: THE BIBLE—HISTORY OR MYTH?

1. See the Book of Joshua for the story of the mayhem allegedly committed in the name of Yahweh.
2. For a very scholarly treatment of the inconsistencies and flat contradictions of the New Testament
documents when taken from a historical perspective, see Can We Trust the New Testament by
G.A.Wells.
3. Rénan in his Life of Jesus says that in the late middle ages the name Lazarus was rendered,
Eleazar. Bethany in the same period was Elazarie.

8: SEEING THE GOSPELS WITH NEW EYES
1. See Robert Funk and the Jesus Seminar The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do? (Harper
San Francisco, 1998).
2. Ibid., pp. 1–2.
3. See Elaine Pagels Beyond Belief: The Secret Gospel of Thomas (New York: Random House, 2003)
and B. L. Mack The Lost Gospel: The Book of Q and Christian Origins.
4. In their thick 1998 report, The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?, the scholars of the Jesus
Seminar conclude that of all the sayings attributed to Jesus in the Gospels, only 18 percent are
“actual or probable.” Regarding the 176 “events” described as happening to or with him, they
conclude that only 16 percent fall in these same categories. They, of course, take a
historical/critical approach, one that leaves them in the end with very little indeed. Jesus is simply
an itinerant sage who comes to a grisly end. See The Acts of Jesus, pp. 1–8.
5. The Ritual, Chapter 19.
6. In the Gospel story of Jesus walking on the sea, it is highly symbolic that he is said to come during
the fourth watch of the night! That’s when the Christ appears.
7. See www.jesuspuzzle.org.
9: WAS THERE A JESUS OF HISTORY?
1. I refer the reader again to jesuspuzzle.org and to the wide-ranging, heated debate that has been
going on there for several years now. Earl Doherty, the author of the website and a recent book by
the same name, has compiled all scholarship on this contentious and deeply controversial issue for
all to see. As was to be expected, the work has been greeted with derision and catcalls from the
conservative wing of the Church. But when taken along with the exhaustive studies of the
antecedent Egyptian materials, it makes what seems to me to be an incontrovertible case. One
champion of the conservative position is the American journalist Lee Strobel; he has published a

book of interviews with conservative scholars, The Case for Christ. Doherty, at the time of
writing, had just published a compelling rebuttal of Strobel’s chief arguments called Challenging
the Verdict.
2. There was a great furor in the world’s media and among scholars in the fall of 2002 when an
ossuary alleged to have once held the bones of James, the brother of Jesus, came to light in
Jerusalem and eventually was displayed in museums around the world, including the Royal
Ontario Museum in Toronto. It was hailed as the first archaeological evidence for a historical
Jesus. However, as I predicted in a column in the Sunday Star at that time, after a few months, a
group of fourteen experts pronounced the ossuary a complete fake. It dated to the first century
C.E., but the inscription in Aramaic was obviously forged. It had been scratched on only a couple
of years ago and then covered by a doctored varnish to give the appearance of age.
3. Fundamentalists often make the claim that the Bible is inerrant and hence infallible in the “original
autographs.” They neglect to add that we don’t have a single autograph of any book in the entire
Bible.
4. Joseph Leidner, The Fabrication of the Christ Myth.
5. The one possible exception to Leidner’s argument is found in the Fourth Gospel. One of the
sources relied on by the author/editor does show some detailed knowledge of Jerusalem.
6. In the Loeb edition of Josephus’ words.
7. Schweitzer concluded that Jesus was an apocalyptic preacher whose message turned out to be
wrong.
8. I refer the reader here to my book Finding the Still Point, and the discussion in the section titled
“The God Within.” It expresses the very same spiritual philosophy.
9. For those wishing to explore this further, I would recommend the work of Elaine Pagels on the
Gnostics and the Gospels, and especially her book on Pauline Gnosticism. See the bibliography
for details.
10. See Donald Akenson, St. Saul (Montreal: McGill University Press, 2000), p. 171.

10: THE ONLY WAY AHEAD
1. The kind of wisdom Kuhn and Massey are talking about is a form of Hermetism. The
Egyptologist, Erik Hornung, ends his book The Secret Lore of Egypt with these words: “All
Hermetism is by its very nature tolerant. Hermes Trismegistus (the Greek version of the Egyptian
Thoth) is a god of harmony, of reconciliation and transformation, and he preaches no rigid dogma.
He is thus an antidote to the fundamentalism that must be overcome if we desire to live in peace.”
2. Frye, The Double Vision, p. 58.
3. Origen, Philocalis 1.8.
APPENDIX A
1. Higgins, Anacalypsis, p. xviii.
2. Through those long years of devoted study at the British Museum, Massey enjoyed the friendship
and wise counsel of Dr. Samuel Birch, an outstanding Egyptologist. He attracted a following of
dedicated students, who later assisted in his research. Two of his most prominent coworkers were
George St. Clair, who authored Creation Records Discovered in Egypt, and Dr. Albert
Churchward, who wrote The Origin and Evolution of the Human Race. Gerald Massey so
impressed the novelist George Eliot that she made him the hero of one of her famous romances.
Thus Massey became immortalized in literature as “Felix Holt the Radical.” Among Massey’s
American friends and admirers was a prominent New York journalist and publisher, D.M. Bernett.
On page 967 of the second edition of his World’s Sages, Thinkers and Reformers, Bernett says,
“Gerald Massey is a warm-hearted, genial man, and as a companion and friend he has few
superiors. His interests and incentives are decidedly in the direction of science and rationalism.
He has for many years been freed from the old binding and blinding theological creeds and
obligations. He regards priestcraft as one of the great evils which mankind for thousands of years
has been compelled to endure and support; and holds it as one of the most important works that
men of the present time can engage in to demolish the idols of the past dark ages.” Though a poet,
Shakespeare scholar, and renowned Egyptologist, Gerald Massey is best remembered for his
courageous convictions. His research led him to the conclusion that in Africa alone could be
found the origins of myths, mysteries, symbols, languages, and religions. Egypt was the
mouthpiece. In his lectures, Massey often repeated his contention that the gnosis, or central
mystery, of Christianity was primarily derived from Egypt through various lines of descent—
Hebrew, Persian, Greek, Alexandrian, Essenian, and Nazarene. These converged in Rome, where

the history was manufactured from identifiable matter recorded in the ancient Book of Wisdom. It
was during this period that he delivered his famous lectures on Gnostic and historic Christianity.
He clearly depicted the origin of Christianity and said unequivocally that it was not derived from
Buddhism, as some then held. Long before man uttered a verbal prayer, he expressed himself by
actions or gesture-language, Massey said. He discussed this at length in “Man in Search of His
Soul during 50,000 Years and How He Found It.” Present-day psychologists recognize gesture-
language as an indication of man’s true unexpressed attitudes; unconsciously, he assumes gestures
revealing his thinking. In “The Seven Souls of Man,” Massey said, “The modern manufacture of
ancient mysteries is a great imposition and sure to be found out. The mysteries called Christian . .
. I look upon them as the greatest imposition of all.” His own meditation on facts of abnormal or
extraordinary nature proved to him that mind existed and operated invisibly. He did not trouble
about “the other world” at all, for it was in this world that people needed assistance. Life to him
was not worth living if something was not done to further its work. “It is only in helping others
that we can truly help ourselves,” said Massey in the lecture “The Devil of Darkness in the Light
of Evolution.”
3. Here is Alvin Boyd Kuhn’s obituary notice, as it appeared in The New York Times on September
15, 1963: “Elizabeth, N.J., Sept. 14.Dr. Alvin Boyd Kuhn, author, lecturer and former teacher of
languages, died today at Morristown Memorial Hospital. Hewas 82 years old. Dr. Kuhn wrote ten
books and twenty booklets [monographs] on religion, philosophy, semantics and Bible
interpretation. He gave 1,945 lectures in the United States and Canada, discussing, among many
subjects, the Dead Sea Scrolls. Dr. Kuhn, who received his Doctor of Philosophy degree from
Columbia University, taught Latin, Greek, French, German, Spanish and English in high schools
in Chambersburg, Harrisburg and elsewhere in Pennsylvania. He studied Hebrew and
hieroglyphics for his work in Bible interpretation. His works include: The Lost Light; Shadow of
the Third Century; Who Is This King of Glory?; India’s True Voice; The Lost Key to the
Scriptures; Man’s Two Births; and The Red Sea. Dr. Kuhn received a B.A. degree from Franklin
and Marshall College, where he was for a time secretary to the president. He is survived by a son,
Dr. Alvin Kuhn, a professor at the University of Cincinnati; a daughter, Mrs. William Caulwell,
wife of a faculty member at Millersville State College (Pa.), and four grandchildren.”
APPENDIX B
1. In the Hindu Bible, the Bhagavad-Gita, Lord Krishna, the Hindu Christ, says to the warrior
Arjuna, “I am the beginning, the life-span, and the end of all. . . . I am the beginning, the middle
and the end in creation. . . . In the alphabet, I am the A [alpha].”

Bibliography
Assman, Jan. Moses the Egyptian: The Memory of Egypt in Western
Monotheism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.
———. The Search for God in Ancient Egypt. Ithaca, New York, and
London: Cornell University Press, 2001.
———. The Mind of Egypt. New York: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt &
Company, 1996.
Barnes, Harry Elmer. The Twilight of Christianity. New York: Richard R.
Smith, Inc., 1931.
Beard, Mary, and John North. Pagan Priest: Religion and Power in the
Ancient World. London: Duckworth Press, 1990.
Boardman, Griffin, and Oswyn Murray. The Oxford History of the Classical
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Borg, Marcus. Jesus and Buddha: The Parallel Sayings. Berkeley, CA:
Ulysses Press, 1999.
———. The Heart of Christianity: Rediscovering a Life of Faith. San
Francisco: HarperCollins, 2003.
Bornstone, Willis and Marvin Meyer, eds. The Gnostic Bible: Gnostic Texts

of Mystical Wisdom. Boston: Shambala Publications, 2003.
Brandon, S. G. F. Religion in Ancient History: Studies in Ideas, Men and
Events. London: Allen and Unwin, 1969.
———. The Judgement of the Dead. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1969.
Budge, E.A. Wallis. Egyptian Religion. New York: Citadel Press, 1997.
———. Gods of the Egyptians. New York: Dover Publications, 1969.
———, trans. The Egyptian Book of the Dead. New York: Dover
Publications, 1967.
Burckhardt, Jacob. The Life of Constantine. Munich: Deutsche Verlags-
Anstalt, 1929.
———. The Age of Constantine the Great. New York: Dorset Press, 1949.
Burkert, Walter. Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers, 1985.
———. Ancient Mystery Cults. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1987.
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. London: Paladin,
1949.
———. The Power of Myth. Charlotte, NC: Anchor Publishing, 1991.

Carpenter, Edward. Pagan and Christian Creed: Their Origin and
Meaning. Kila, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
Carpenter, Thomas, and Christopher Faraone. Masks of Dionysus. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1993.
Churton, Tobias. Gnostics. London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1987.
Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church.Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1958.
Crossan, John Dominic. The Historical Jesus: The Life of a Mediterranean
Jewish Peasant. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1991.
———. Who Killed Jesus?: Exposing the Roots of Anti-Semitism in the
Gospel Story of the Death of Jesus. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1995.
———. The Birth of Christianity: Discovering What Happened in the Years
Immediately After the Execution of Jesus. San Francisco: HarperCollins,
1998.
David, Rosalie. The Cult of the Sun: Myth and Magic in Ancient Egypt.
New York: Barnes and Noble, 1998.
Doane, Thomas William. Bible Myths and Their Parallels in Other
Religions. Kila, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
Doherty, Earl. The Jesus Puzzle: Did Christianity Begin with a Mythical
Christ?. Ottawa: Canadian Humanist Publications, 1999.
Dunand, Francois, and Zivie-Coche, Christiane. Gods and Men in Egypt:

3000 BCE to 395 CE. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 2004.
Dunlap, Samuel F. Sod: The Mysteries of Adoni. London: Williams and
Norgate, 1866.
Eliade, Mircea. The Myth of the Eternal Return: Or, Cosmos and History.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974.
Ellerbe, Helen. The Dark Side of Christian History. Bellingham, WA:
Morningstar Books, 1995.
Eusebius. The History of the Church from Christ to Constantine. New York:
Penguin, 1965.
Faulkner, Raymond O., trans. The Book of the Dead. London: British
Museum Press, 1972.
Feldman, Louis H. Josephus, the Bible and History. Detroit: Wayne State
University Press, 1989.
Fideler, David. Jesus Christ, Sun of God: Ancient Cosmology and Early
Christian Symbolism. Wheaton, IL:Quest Books, 1993.
Finkelstein, Israel, and Neil Asher Silberman. The Bible Unearthed:
Archeology’s New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its Sacred
Texts. New York: Touchstone Books, 2002.
Frazer, James George. The Golden Bough. London: Wordsworth Reference
Books, 1922.
Freke, Timothy, and Peter Gandy. The Complete Guide to World Mysticism.

London: Piatkus Books, 1997.
———.The Wisdom of the Pagan Philosophers. Boston: Journey Editions,
1998.
———. The Jesus Mysteries: Was the “Original Jesus” a Pagan God?.
New York: Random House, 1999.
———. Jesus and the Lost Goddess: The Secret Teachings of the Original
Christians. New York: Harmony Books, 2001.
Freud, Sigmund. Moses and Monotheism. New York: Vintage Books, 1939.
Frye, Northrop: The Double Vision: Language and Meaning in Religion.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991.
Funk, Robert, and the Jesus Seminar. The Five Gospels: The Search for the
Authentic Words of Jesus. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1997.
———. The Acts of Jesus: What Did Jesus Really Do?.NewYork:
HarperCollins, 1998.
Gabriel, Richard A. Jesus the Egyptian. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, Inc., 2005.
Gadalla, Moustafa.Historical Deception: The Untold Story of Ancient
Egypt. Erie, PA: Bastet Publishing, 1996.
Gibbon, Edward. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 5 vols.,
1776–88. Reprint. New York: Modern Library, 1995.
Graves, Kersey.TheWorld’s Sixteen Crucified Saviors: Christianity before

Christ.Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 1999.
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. London: Penguin Books, 1992.
Gregory, John. The Neoplatonists: A Reader. London: Kylie Cathie, 1987.
Hall, Manly P.Mystics and Mysteries in Alexandria. Los Angeles:
Philosophical Research Society, 1981.
Harnack, Adolf von. Mission and Expansion of Christianity. 2 vols., 1908.
Reprint. New York: HarperCollins, 1962.
Harpur, Tom. For Christ’s Sake. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1986.
———. Life after Death. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1991.
———. Finding the Still Point: A Spiritual Response to Stress. Kelowna,
BC: Northstone Publishing, 2002.
Hengel, Martin. The Hellenization of Judea in the First Century After
Christ. Philadelphia: Trinity Press International, 1989.
Higgins, Godfrey. Anacalypsis: An Inquiry into the Origin of Languages,
Nations and Religions. 1833.Reprint. Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing,
1997.
Hoeller, Stephan.Gnosticism: New Light on the Ancient Tradition of Inner
Knowing. Wheaton, IL:Quest Books, 2002.
Hoffmann, R. Joseph, trans. Celsus on the True Doctrine: A Discourse
Against the Christians.Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.

Hollroyd, S. Gnosticism. Boston: Element Books, 1994.
Hornung, Erik. Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the
Many. Ithaca, NY:Cornell University Press, 1982.
———. The Secret Lore of Egypt. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University
Press, 2001.
Johnson, Sarah Iles, editor. Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Josephus, Flavius. The Jewish War.New York: Penguin, 1959.
———.The Antiquities of the Jews (LoebClassical Library).9 vols.
Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press, 1965.
Kallen, Horace M. The Book of Job as a Greek Tragedy. Kila, MT:
Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
Kennedy, H. A. A. St. Paul and the Mystery Religions. London: Hodder and
Stoughton, 1969.
Kingsford, Anna Bonus, and Edward Maitland. The Perfect Way: Or the
Finding of Christ.KilaMT:Kessinger Publishing, 1996.
Klausner, Joseph. From Jesus to Paul. 1934. Reprint. Boston: Beacon
Press, 1961.
———. Jesus of Nazareth: His Life, Times and Teaching. 1922.Reprint.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1964.

King, C.W. Early Christian Numismatics. London: Bell and Dalby, 1873.
Knight, Christopher. The Hiram Key: Pharaohs, Freemasons and the
Discovery of the Secret Scrolls of Jesus. London: Arrow Books, 1997.
Koester, Helmut. Ancient Christian Gospels: Their History and
Development. Philadelphia: Trinity Press, 1990.
Kuhn, Alvin Boyd. A Rebirth for Christianity. Theosophical Publishing
House, 1970.
———. The Root of All Religion. 1944. Reprint. Kila, MT: Kessinger
Publishing, 1993.
———. The Lost Light: An Interpretation of Ancient Scriptures.1940.
Reprint. Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
———. Prayer and Healing.Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
———. The Red Sea Is Your Blood.Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
———. Shadow of the Third Century: A Revaluation of Christianity. Kila,
MT: Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
———.Who Is This King of Glory? Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
———. Mary Magdalene and Her Seven Devils. nd. Available at
http://www.members.tripod.com/~pc93/mmag7dev.htm.

———. 
Let 
There 
Be 
Light 
on 
Genesis. 
nd. 
Available 
at
http://www.members.tripod.com/~pc93/ltblongn.htm.
———. The 
Great Myth of the 
Sun-Gods. 
nd. Available at
http://www.members.tripod.com/~pc93/kuhn.htm.
———. Christ’s Three Days in Hell: The Revelation of an Astounding
Christian 
Fallacy. 
nd. 
Available 
at
http://members.tripod.com/~pc93.kuhn/htm.
———. Easter: The Birthday of the Gods. Courtice, ON: Canadian
Theosophical 
Society, 
nd. 
Available 
at
http://members.tripod.com/~pc93/kuhn.htm.
———. The Tree of Knowledge. Vancouver: Canadian Theosophical
Society, nd. Available at http://members.tripod.com/~pc93.kuhn/htm.
———. Creation in Six Days? Vancouver: Canadian Theosophical Society,
nd. Available at http://members.tripod.com/~pc93.kuhn/htm.
———. Our Birth Is But a Sleep.Olcott Foundation Lecture, 1959.
Lane Fox, Robin. Pagans and Christians.New York: Penguin, 1986.
Leedom, Tim C. The Book Your Church Doesn’t Want You to Read. San
Diego: Truth Seeker, 2001.
Leidner, Harold. The Fabrication of the Christ Myth. Tampa, FL: Survey
Books, 1999.
Loisy, Alfred F. The Birth of the Christian Religion: The Origins of the New

Testament. New Hyde Park, NY:University Books, 1962.
Ludemann, Gerd.Heretics.Norwich, UK: SCMPress, 1995.
Lund, Nils Wilhelm. Chiasmus in the New Testament: A Study in the Form
and Function of Chiastic Structures. London: Hendrickson Publishers,
1992.
Lundy, John P.Monumental Christianity: Or the Art and Symbolism of the
Primitive Church.Kila, MT:Kessinger Publishing, 2003.
Mack, Burton L. The Lost Gospel:the Book of Q and Christian
Origins.New York: HarperCollins, 1993.
Martin, Luther H. Hellenistic Religions: An Introduction.Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1987.
Martin, Raymond. The Elusive Messiah: A Philosophical Overview of the
Quest for the Historical Jesus. Boulder, CO:Westview Press, 1999.
Massey, Gerald. Ancient Egypt, the Light of the World: A Work of
Reclamation and Restitution in Twelve Volumes. Vols. 1 and 2. Kila, MT:
Kessinger Publications, 2001.
———. The Historical Jesus and the Mythical Christ.Kila, MT:Kessinger
Publications, 2002 ———. The Natural Genesis.Kila, MT:Kessinger
Publications, 1999.
Mead, G.R. S. Fragments of a Faith Forgotten.Kila, MT:Kessinger
Publications, 1997.

———. Pistis Sophia: A Gnostic Gospel. Kila, MT: Kessinger Publications,
1998.
———. Thrice Greatest Hermes: Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy and
Gnosis. 1906. Reprint. Kila, MT:Kessinger Publications, 1997.
Meyer, Marvin. The Ancient Mysteries: Sacred Texts of the Mystery
Religions of the Ancient Mediterranean World. San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 1987.
Morenz, Siegfried: Egyptian Religion. Ithaca, New York: Cornell
University Press, 1996.
Mosheim, Johann Lorenz von. History of the Christian Religion. 2 vols.
New York: South Converse, 1854.
Pagels, Elaine. The Gnostic Gospels.New York: Vintage Books, 1981.
———. The Gnostic Paul: Gnostic Exegesis of the Pauline Letters.
Philadelphia: Trinity Press, 1992.
PowellDavies, A. The First Christian: A Study of St.Paul. New York: New
American Library, 1959.
Price, Robert M.: Deconstructing Jesus. New York: Prometheus Books,
2000.
Riley, Frank L. Biblical Allegorism: A Key to the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God. Kila, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
Robinson, James M., ed.The Nag Hammadi Library. New York:

HarperCollins, 1978.
Rushkoff, Douglas.Nothing Sacred: The Truth about Judaism. New York:
Crown Publishing, 2003.
S, Acharya. The Christ Conspiracy: The Greatest Story Ever Sold.
Kempton, IL: Adventures Unlimited, 1999.
Schuon, Frithjof. In the Face of the Absolute. Bloomington, IN: World
Wisdom Books, 1994.
Schweitzer, Albert. The Quest of the Historical Jesus. 1910. Reprint. New
York: Macmillan, 1964.
Segal, Robert A., ed. The Gnostic Jung. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Smith, Jonathan Z. Drudgery Divine: On the Comparison of Early
Christianities and the Religions of Late Antiquity. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994.
Spong, John Shelby. Why Christianity Must Change or Die: A Bishop
Speaks to Believers in Exile. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1998.
———. A New Christianity for a New World: Why Traditional Faith Is
Dying and How a New Faith Is Being Born. San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 2003.
Taylor, Thomas, trans. Iamblichus on the Mysteries of the Egyptians,
Chaldeans and Assyrians. San Diego: Wizards Bookshelf, 1997.
———. Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries. San Diego: Wizards Bookshelf,

1997.
Thorburn, T. J. The Mythical Interpretations of the Gospels. Kila, MT:
Kessinger Publishing, .
Turcan, Robert. Cults of the Roman Empire. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers,
1992.
Ulansey, David. The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries: Cosmology and
Salvation in the Ancient World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Waite, Charles B. The History of the Christian Religion to the Year Two
Hundred. Chicago: C.V. Waite, 1900.
Weiss, Johannes. Earliest Christianity: A History of the Period A.D.30–150.
1914. Reprint. New York: Harper’s, 1959.
Wells, G. A. Can We Trust the New Testament: Thoughts on the Reliability
of Early Christian Testimony. Chicago: Open Court, 2004.
———.Did Jesus Exist? Pemberton Publishing, 1975.
West, John Anthony. The Traveler’s Key to Ancient Egypt: A Guide to the
Sacred Places of Ancient Egypt. Wheaton, IL:Quest Books, 1995.
Wheless, Joseph. Forgery in Christianity: A Documented Record of the
Foundations of the Christian Religion. 1930. Reprint. Kila, MT:
Kessinger Publishing, 1997.
Suggested Websites

www.crosscurrents.org/. An online magazine for those dedicated to current
discussions of wisdom/faith.
www.innerspirituality.org. A Toronto fellowship based upon The Pagan
Christ.
www.jesuspuzzle.com/. Asource for following the ongoing discussions
raised by the book of the same name.
www.newadvent.org/. Resources such as the Catholic Encyclopedia,
Church Fathers, etc.
www.tcpc.org/. The site for Progressive Christianity, a growing, inclusive,
non-dogmatic form of the Christian faith.
www.theosophical.ca. The home page leads to a wide range of esoteric
authors, including Massey and Kuhn.
www.tomharpur.com/. An emerging site dedicated to cosmic spirituality.
www.truthbeknown.com/. The highly provocative, often shocking insights
of a feminine scholar and free thinker, Acharya S.
www.webcom.com/~gnosis/search_form.html/. The Gnosis Archive. All
Nag Hammadi and many other Gnostic texts are available here.
www.wisdomworld.org/. The world of theosophy explained and explored.
A guide to ancient wisdom.
www.medmalexperts.com/. The pagan origins of the Christ myth.

DISCUSSION
GUIDE

CHAPTER ONE
Discovery: A Bible Story I’d 
Never Heard Before 
My point, once again, is not that those ancient people told literal stories
and we are now smart enough to take them symbolically, but that they told
them symbolically and we are now dumb enough to take them literally.
— JOHN DOMINIC CROSSAN, Who Is Jesus?
Begin by introducing yourselves and answering this question: Where
are you in your spiritual journey right now?
1. What was your first impression on reading the title The Pagan Christ?
2. What is the meaning of the word “pagan”?
3. What “fatal and fateful error” did the church make in the third and fourth
centuries?
4. What effect does the allegorical approach to the Bible have on you?
5. What do you think of Pagan religion as being “foreshadowings” of
Jesus? What does Harpur think?
6. How do you respond to the “startling new truth” that Harpur says we are
about to encounter?

7. Discuss the following quote by Richard Holloway: “The end of
Christianity is coming because there is a system undergirding the
traditional economy of salvation which is more concerned with
preserving its own power than exploring the truth.”
8. How did the church of the fourth and fifth centuries handle the Pagan
sources of Christianity’s doctrines, dogmas, and rites? How do you think
they should have handled it?
9. What does Harpur believe will be the consequences of the “surgery”
performed on Christianity?
10. What do you think the consequences will be? Why?

CHAPTER TWO
Setting the Stage:
Myths Aren’t Fairy Tales 
“On the intellectual side of religion and spirituality we are still dwelling
in the lingering shadows of medieval night, hypnotized and victimized by
superstition of the weirdest types flaunted from pulpit and seminary. This
beclouded day of gloom will continue as long as we have not the acumen to
dissociate sublime myth, allegory, drama and symbol from the dregs of
history.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
Begin by answering this question: What are the obstacles blocking your
spiritual life and journey?
1. What has been your understanding of myth?
2. What, according to Harpur, is the true meaning of myth?
3. Harpur believes that myth is better than history at expressing truth. Do
you agree or disagree?
4. Discuss Harpur’s assertion that Christianity does not need to
demythologize its story, but that it needs to remythologize it.
5. How did the ancients use myth?

6. Does belief in a flesh and blood redeemer distort Christianity for you?
7. What does Harpur believe is the central theme of all religion?
8. Why was nature so important to the ancients?
9. What is a mystery play and how were they used?
10. Do you believe, as some scholars do, that in the long past ages there
was one religion, a primal religion, that was the source of all religions?
11. Where did the brilliant insights and convictions of the ancients come
from?
12. Discuss Harpur’s summary of the spiritual Christ. How does this appeal
to you?

CHAPTER THREE
Christianity before 
Christianity:
Where It All Began 
“The very thing which is now called the Christian religion existed
among the ancients also, nor was it wanting from the inception of the
human race until the coming of Christ in the flesh, at which point the true
religion which was already in existence began to be called Christian.”
— ST. AUGUSTINE, Retractiones
Begin by answering this question: What concerns you most about
Christianity?
1. Share your reactions to the statements of Augustine, Eusebius, Justin
Martyr, Celsus, and Ammonius Saccas.
2. What are the parallels between Christianity and Buddhism?
3. According to Harpur, what is the core belief of all religions?
4. What is the crucial difference between the ancient myths and orthodox
Christianity?
5. What is heresy and how was it used? Do you consider yourself a heretic?
6. What is the central story of every traditional faith?

7. Compare the Osiris/Dionysius myth with the story of Jesus.
8. What do you think is the difference between the traditional Jesus story
and other ancient myths?
9. What do you believe about the “second coming”? What does Harpur
believe?
10. Harpur writes that each person has his or her own personal Christmas
and Easter. Share your Christmas and Easter experiences.
11. What was the meaning of the cross millennia before Christianity?
12. What does the cross mean to you personally?

CHAPTER FOUR
The Greatest Cover-Up 
of All Time: How a Spiritual 
Christianity Became 
a Literalist Christianism 
“There are many things that are true which is not useful for the vulgar
crowd to know; and certain things which although they are false it is
expedient for the people to believe otherwise.”
— ST. AUGUSTINE, City of God 
Begin by answering this question: What concerns you most about the
church?
1. What is “Christianism”?
2. What caused Christianism?
3. What shocking charges can be made against the church fathers?
4. How did the church fathers justify these “pious frauds”? How do you
react to the charge of pious fraud?
5. Who “corrected” the Gospels and the writings of the church fathers?
6. How were the Gospels corrected?

7. What priceless books were destroyed by the orders of the church?
8. What other destruction was caused by Christian fury?
9. Who was Hypatia and what happened to her?
10. What do you think of the church’s charge to the pagans of “anticipated
plagiarism”?
11. What is the Theodosian Code?
12. When did Plato’s Academy in Athens finally close, and why?
13. What learned father of the church was excommunicated? Why?
14. What does Harpur believe the church should do now?
15. What do you believe the church should do now?

CHAPTER FIVE
It Was All Written 
Before—in Egypt 
Part I: Ancient Egyptian Religion 
Part II: Horus and Jesus Are the Same 
“All that went into the making of the Christian historical setup was long pre-
extant as something quite other than history, was in fact expressly nonhistorical,
in the Egyptian mythology and eschatology. For when the sun at the Easter
equinox entered the sign of the fishes (Pisces) about 255 B.C.E., the Jesus who
stands as the founder of Christianity was at least [thousands] of years of age and
had been travelling hither as the Ever Coming One through all preceding time . .
. During those [millennia], that same incarnation of the divine ideal in the
character of Iusa (or Horus), the Coming Son, had saturated the mind of Egypt
with its exalting influence. Little did men of that epoch dream that their ideal
figure of man’s divinity would in time be rendered historical as a man of flesh.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
Begin by answering this question: What changes would you like to see
in Christianity?
1. How is Osiris the prototype of Christ?
2. Why were Egyptian Christians so open to Christianity?
3. Does the story of Horus “touch” your life in any way?
4. What, according to Massey and Kuhn, is the origin of Matthew’s name?
5. What is the Egyptian understanding of judgment and resurrection?

6. What was the hope of every Egyptian? What is your hope? Why?
7. What parallels exist between the stories of Horus and Jesus?
8. What does Harpur believe we need to discover and apply?
9. Who or what are the twelve disciples according to Kuhn and Massey?
10. What significance does the fish have for Christianity?
11. What is the true meaning of “only begotten”?
12. What details in the life of Jesus can be traced back to Egyptian religion?

CHAPTER SIX
Convincing the Sceptics 
“The general assumption concerning the gospels is that the historic element
was the kernel of the whole, and that fables accreted around it; whereas the
myths, being pre-existent, prove that the core of the material was mythical, and it
then follows that the “history” is incremental . . . The worst foes of the truth
have ever been the rationalizers of the mythos. They have assumed the existence
of a personal founder of Christianity as the fundamental fact. They have done
their best to humanize . . . the mythos by discharging the supernatural and
miraculous . . . in order that it might be accepted. Thus, they have lost the battle
by fighting it on the wrong ground.”
— GERALD MASSEY, The Historical Jesus and the Mythical Christ
Begin by answering this question: What frustrates you most when you
go to church?
1. Do you think the church lost the battle? What does Massey say?
2. How does Harpur compare the births and baptisms of Horus and Jesus?
3. What is the allegorical interpretation of the temptation? Armageddon?
Hell? Judgment?
4. What is the relevance of healing to our lives today?
5. What evidence is there that John was reworking Egyptian texts?
6. How was the Zodiac used by the ancients?
7. How was the fish used as a symbol for Christ?

8. What is the deeper meaning of Jesus’ walking on the water?
9. What scriptures have Egyptian roots?
10. What kind of Christianity does Harpur believe is needed today? What
kind of Christianity do you believe is needed today?

CHAPTER SEVEN
The Bible—History 
or Myth?: The End of 
Fundamentalism 
“In the cosmic economy, the divine must always sacrifice its life for the
lower ranks of existence. In every religion a god is pictured as dying for man.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Our Birth Is But a Sleep
Begin by answering this question: If the Bible has little history in it
what are the possible implications for the territory dispute between Israel
and Palestine?
1. How does the journalist Daniel Lazare pull “the foundations out from
under almost every major historical beam in the edifice of accepted
wisdom” with respect to the Biblical patriarchs, the exodus, David and
Solomon, and conquest of the promised land?
2. What evidence is there that the Bible has little history in it?
3. How should we interpret the Old Testament stories of the exodus, Daniel,
Samson, and Gideon?
4. What does Harpur say about the historical basis of the New Testament?
5. What deeper meaning does Harpur find in the parable of the prodigal
son?
6. What puzzling aspects does Harpur raise about the Lazarus story?

7. How does he solve the puzzle?
8. What conclusions does Harpur come to with regard to the Lazarus event?
9. What meaning does the Lazarus story have for you?
10. Try your skills at interpreting allegorically the birth of Jesus, the
miracles of Jesus, and the death and resurrection of Jesus.

CHAPTER EIGHT
Seeing the Gospels with 
New Eyes: Sublime Myth 
Is Not Biography
“The evidence suggests that the NewTestament is not a history of actual
events, but a history of the evolution of Christian mythology.”
— TIMOTHY FREKE AND PETER GANDY, The Jesus Mysteries 
“From a hoary civilization (Egypt) comes the literature that ends all debate
by offering the incontrovertible evidence that the Gospels are not and never were
histories. They are now proven to have been cryptic dramas of the spiritual
evolution of humanity and of the history of the human soul in its earthly
tabernacle of flesh.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, Who Is This King of Glory?
Begin by taking a Bible story which puzzles you and seek to interpret it
allegorically: What does it mean to you now?
1. How does Harpur believe the Gospels came about?
2. What is the chief flaw of the Jesus Seminar according to Harpur?
3. What is the truth of the nativity for Harpur? What is truth of the nativity
for you?
4. How does Harpur explain the passion of Jesus?
5. Why is the resurrection story suspect as a historical event?

6. What is the inner meaning of the resurrection?
7. Why was nature so important to ancient religions?
8. How does Harpur answer the question as to whether the Gospels are
true?
9. How were you taught to understand the Gospels? How has your
understanding changed?
10. Harpur believes that the Christ myth is the ultimate myth of the self.
Does this understanding help you at all in gaining new meaning from the
New Testament? Discuss.

CHAPTER NINE
Was There a Jesus 
of History?:
Where It All Began
“Jesus of Nazareth and the Gospel story cannot be found in Christian
writings earlier than the Gospels, the first of which (Mark) was composed only
in the late first century . . .There is no non-Christian record of Jesus before the
second century.”
— EARL DOHERTY, The Jesus Puzzle 
“When the conception of a purely spiritual Christ could no longer
successfully be imported to the turbulent masses, who clamored for a political
savior, it was found necessary or expedient to substitute the idea of a personal
Messiah . . .The swell of this tide carried the Church Fathers to the limit of
recasting the entire four Gospels in terms of a human biography.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, The Lost Light 
Begin by answering this question: How would the nonhistoricity of
Jesus affect you?
1. Do you agree or disagree with Woody Allen’s statement that God doesn’t
play dice with the universe but instead plays hide-and-seek?
2. What historical elements does Harpur believe are in the Gospels?
3. What facts does Harpur assemble to prove the nonhistoricity of Jesus?
4. What are we to make of the references to Jesus in the works of Pliny,
Tacitus, Suetonius, and Josephus?

5. What archetypal hero in the Old Testament was possibly the model for
Jesus? Can you think of others? What about Psalm 22 or Isaiah 53?
6. What was Paul’s understanding of Jesus?
7. What does Harpur make of Paul’s conversion on the road to Damascus?
8. What words of Paul to King Agrippa prove that Paul’s conversion was an
inner experience?
9. What does a “personal Jesus” mean to you? Why is a personal Jesus not
acceptable to Harpur? Is a personal Jesus acceptable to you?
10. What is the best proof of the “truth” of Christianity for you? What is the
best proof according to Harpur?

CHAPTER TEN
The Only Way Ahead:
Cosmic Christianity 
“The historical Jesus as a civilizing influence has now been tried for nearly
twenty centuries. With a weird irony, not only has it not in large measure
elevated humanity in the West above an earlier barbarism, but it has in fact been
used as a cloak for the worst atrocities and inhumanities that history records. The
foulest cruelties were perpetrated in the very name of the gentle Nazarene! It
well behooves humanity in theWest to try the concept of the indwelling Christ,
the hope of our glory.”
— ALVIN BOYD KUHN, The Root of All Religion 
Begin by answering the question: What do you feel is the way ahead for
each of you?
1. How does the Bible come alive for Harpur? Has it come alive for you?
2. Are you inspired with fresh hope? Is Harpur?
3. What symbols are clarified for Harpur?
4. What are the dangers of literalism?
5. What does the Jesus story mean to you?
6. If Christmas and Easter (or any other story in the Bible) are interpreted
allegorically will they lose their power? Explain your answer.

7. Has your understanding of Christianity changed?
8. How has The Pagan Christ affected your faith?
9. What is your overall impression of The Pagan Christ?
10. How do you think this book will affect your faith? Your life?

BOOKS BY DR. ALFRED BOYD KUHN
A Rebirth for Christianity 
The Root of All Religion 
The Lost Light 
Prayer and Healing 
The Red Sea Is in Your Blood 
Shadow of the Third Century 
Who Is This King of Glory?
Mary Magdalene and Her Seven Devils 
Let There Be Light on Genesis 
The Great Myth of the Sun Gods 
Christ’s Three Days in Hell 
Easter 
The Tree of Knowledge 
Creation in Six Days?
Our Birth Is But a Sleep

BOOKS BY GERALD MASSEY
Ancient Egypt: The Light of the World 
The Historical Jesus and the Mythical Christ 
The Natural Genesis
RECOMMENDED READING
The Jesus Mysteries, 
Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy 
Jesus and the Lost Goddess, 
Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy 
The Gnostic Gospels, Elaine Pagels 
The Gnostic Paul, Elaine Pagels 
Beyond Belief, Elaine Pagels 
The Bible Unearthed, 
Israel Finkelstein and Neil Asher Silberman 
Man and His Symbols, Carl G. Jung 
The Masks of God, Joseph Campbell 
Breakthrough, Matthew Fox 
The Spiral Staircase, Karen Armstrong

