The Adler School 
of 
Professional Psychology 
 
Catalog 2006 – 2007 

Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Chicago campus: 
 
65 East Wacker Place, Suite 2100 
Chicago, IL  60601 
312.201.5900 – telephone 
312.201.5917 – fax 
 
Vancouver campus: 
 
Suite 753 – Three Bentall Centre 
595 Burrard Street 
PO Box 49104 
Vancouver, B.C 
Canada 
V7X 1G4 
604.482.5510– telephone 
604.874.4634 – fax 
 
Website: 
www.adler.edu
 
Information: 
admissions@adler.edu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table of Contents 
 
The School: An Overview 
1-10 
 
The School’s Mission 
1-2 
 
Social Responsibility 
2 
 
Organization & Governance 
2-3 
 
Accreditation & Approvals 
3-4 
 
Master’s Level Licensure/Registration 
4 
 
Doctoral Level Licensure/Registration 
4 
 
Degree, Certificate Programs, and Concentrations 
4-5 
Respecialization in Clinical Psychology 
5 
Continuing/Professional Education 
5 
 
Facilities & Campus Locations 
5-6 
Faculty 
6-7 
Library 
7-8 
Psychological Services Center 
8 
Nondiscrimination Policy 
9 
Diversity 
9 
Rights Reserved 
9-10 
 
 
 
 
General Academic Policies & Procedures 
11-18 
 
Schedule 
11 
 
Registration 
11 
 
Class Attendance 
11 
 
Course Withdrawal 
11-12 
 
Full-Time and Part-Time Status 
12 
 
Administrative Withdrawal 
12 
 
Satisfactory Progress 
12-13 
 
Student Conduct and Comprehensive Evaluation 
13-14 
Qualifying Examinations 
15 
Grading System 
15-17 
Academic Standards 
17 
Leave of Absence 
17-18 
Professional Writing Skills 
18 
 
Admissions Policies & Procedures 
19-25 
 
Admission Requirements 
19 
 
Application Deadlines 
19-20 
 
Application Process 
20 
 
Evaluation of Applicants 
20 
 
Provisional Admission 
20-21 
 
Acceptance of Admission 
21 
 
Deferring Admission 
21 
 
International Applicants 
21-22 
 
Students at Large 
22-24 
 
Changing or Adding Programs 
24 

 
Readmission 
24 
 
Transfer Credit 
24-25 
 
 
Tuition & Financial Aid 
26-32 
 
2006-2007 Tuition and Fees Schedule 
26-27 
 
Chicago Students 
26 
 
Vancouver Students 
27 
 
Payment Schedule 
27 
 
Tuition Refunds 
27-29 
 
Veteran’s Benefits 
30 
 
Financial Aid 
30 
 
 
Eligibility 
30-31 
 
Types of Aid Available 
31-32 
 
Federal Stafford Loan 
31 
 
         Federal Work-Study (Part-Time Work)  
31 
 
         Scholarships 
31 
 
         Alternative Loans  
31 
 
         Academic Standards of Progress 
31-32 
 
International Students 
32 
 
Canadian Student Loans Program 
32 
 
 
M.A. in Counseling Psychology 
33-36 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
33 
 
Degree Requirements 
33-34 
 
Practicum 
34-35 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
35-36 
 
Graduation Requirements 
36 
 
M.A. in Counseling Psychology: Art Therapy 
37-40 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
37 
 
Degree Requirements 
38 
 
Practicum 
38-39 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
39-40 
 
Graduation Requirements 
40 
 
Concentration/Post-Master’s Certificate in Art Therapy Counseling (CAT) 41-42 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
41 
Concentration/Certificate Requirements 
42 
 
CAT Graduation Requirements 
42 
 
M.A. in Marriage & Family Counseling 
43-46 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
43 
 
Degree Requirements 
43-44 
 
Practicum 
44-45 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
45-46 
 
Graduation Requirements 
46 

 
Certificate in Marriage & Family Therapy 
47-48 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
47 
 
Certificate Requirements 
47-48 
 
Graduation Requirements 
48 
 
Doctoral Concentration in Marriage & Family Therapy 
49-50 
 
Course Requirements 
49 
 
Specialized Practicum for MFT Concentration  
49 
 
Graduation Requirements 
49-50 
 
M.A. in Counseling & Organizational Psychology 
51-54 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
51 
 
Degree Requirements 
51-52 
 
Practicum 
52-53 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
53-54 
 
Graduation Requirements 
54 
 
M.A. in Police Psychology 
55-56 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
55 
 
Degree Requirements 
55-56 
 
Graduation Requirements 
56 
 
 
Specialization or Certificate in Substance Abuse Counseling 
57-58 
 
Course Requirements 
57 
 
Specialized Practicum for Substance Abuse Concentration/Certificate57-58 
 
Completion Requirements 
58 
 
 
Certificate in Adlerian Psychotherapy 
59 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
59 
 
Certificate Requirements 
59 
 
Graduation Requirements 
59 
 
Concentration & Certificate in Clinical Hypnosis 
60-61 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
60 
 
Certificate Requirements 
60-61 
 
Graduation Requirements 
61 
 
Concentration & Certificate in Clinical Neuropsychology 
62-64 
 
Program Overview & History 
62-63 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements—Matriculating Adler Students 
62 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements—Outside Professionals 
62 
 
Concentration/Certificate Requirements 
63-64 
 
Graduation Requirements 
64 
 
 

Concentration/Certificate in Group Psychotherapy 
65-66 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
65 
 
Certificate Requirements 
65 
 
Graduation Requirements 
65-66 
 
Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology (Psy.D.) 
67-80 
 
Admission Requirements 
 
67 
 
Review of Applications 
68 
 
Length of Program 
68 
 
Time to Completion 
68 
 
Concentration & M.A. Degree Options 
69-70 
 
Doctoral Scholars Program 
71 
 
Residency Requirement 
71 
 
Qualifying Examinations 
71-74 
 
Practicum 
74 
 
Internship 
74-75 
 
Doctoral Dissertation 
75-76 
 
Degree Requirements 
76-77 
 
Schedule 
78 
 
Suggested Course Sequences  
78-80 
 
Graduation Requirements 
80 
 
Course Descriptions 
81-108 
 
Faculty 
109-119 
Chicago Campus 
109-117 
Vancouver Campus 
117-119 
 
Board of Trustees 
120 
 
Administration & Staff 
121 
 
Academic Calendar 2006-2007 
122-123 
 
Chicago Campus 
122 
 
Vancouver Campus 
122-123 
 
 
 
 

The School: An Overview 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology (Adler School) was established in 
1952 and is a private, not-for-profit institution of higher education.  With a commitment 
to continuing the work of the first community Psychologist, Alfred Adler, the Adler 
School holds the following values as core to our educational programs; social interest, 
compassion, justice, respect for the individual, honor diversity and difference, intellectual 
rigor, optimism, collaboration, and pragmatism.  The School is an independent school of 
professional psychology, drawing students from North America and internationally. 
 
While enjoying international recognition for the expertise of its faculty and 
excellence of its educational programs, the School has established an outstanding 
reputation for innovation within its educational programs and community and clinical 
services.  The Adler School learning community is comprised of persons of diverse 
cultures, ages, educational backgrounds, personal interests, and professional experiences.  
For further information about the Adler School, visit our web site at www.adler.edu. 
 
The School’s Mission 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology is an institution of higher education 
committed to advancing the values and theories of Alfred Adler within the context of 
professional psychology.  To this end, the School’s mission is to provide quality 
professional education, psychological services, community services, and research, 
anticipating and responding to the constant and changing needs of students, the 
profession of psychology, the community, and society.  The values that the Adler School 
holds as relevant to its mission include the following: 
 
• 
The broad application of the philosophy, principles, and techniques of Alfred Adler 
in particular and psychology in general to mental health, medicine, education, 
business and industry, and other related areas of social need; 
 
• 
The preparation of students who have the academic ability, capacity for independent 
judgment and creative thought, educational preparation, emotional stability, 
maturity, ethical standards, motivation, personal integrity, and human values for a 
life of professional competency and service to their families, communities, 
profession, and society; 
 
• 
The inclusion of nontraditional learners, returning students, change-of-career 
students, women, and persons of minority heritage in its programs; 
 
• 
The promotion of excellence in faculty, administration, staff, learning resources and 
facilities, and support services to foster the academic, research, social, cultural, and 
clinical interests of students and clients; 
 
• 
The importance of quality in graduate-level education, clinical training, research, 
educational publications, and learning materials;  

 
 
• 
The expansion of knowledge and enhancement of growth, skill development, and 
values through instruction, role-modeling, demonstration, publication, and 
community service for both lay and professional persons; 
 
• 
The commitment to lifelong learning, personal and professional development, 
scholarship, and commitment to social interest, human equality, the worth and 
dignity of the individual, cooperation, and optimism as embodied in the philosophy 
of Alfred Adler; 
 
• 
The commitment to public service as an expression of social interest through 
educational programs, psychological services, consulting, and other activities which 
contribute to the mental, emotional, and social well-being of individuals, groups, and 
communities; 
 
• 
The encouragement of professional and civic service by faculty, staff, board 
members, students, and graduates; 
 
• 
The development and distribution of educational materials unique to the field of 
Adlerian psychology and related areas for psychologists, counselors, parents, clergy, 
teachers, business, educational institutions, and other individuals and organizations. 
 
Social Responsibility 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology mission and vision emphasizes the critical 
need to educate and train socially responsible graduates.  This commitment builds upon the work 
of the first community psychologist, Alfred Adler.  In addition to providing students with 
knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enable them to provide traditional psychological services 
to a wide range of client populations, all degree programs at the School prepare students to be 
socially responsible practitioners.  This preparation includes a grounding in theories and research 
on the impact on broader structural and systemic factors on human well-being and training in 
methods designed to impact social policies, address community issues and solve social problems.  
The faculty of the School has adopted the following definition of a socially responsible graduate: 
 
Socially responsible graduates are those who 
 
1. embrace a diversity of perspectives, 
2. work to build and maintain bridges across social, economic, cultural, racial and 
political systems, 
3. empower others to identify and address shared problems, and 
4. foster the development of social equality, justice and respect through 
compassionate action throughout the global community. 
  
Organization & Governance 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology is a private, independent, not-for-
profit institution of higher education.  The School is incorporated in and operates under 
 
2

 
the provisions of the State of Illinois General Not-For-Profit Corporation Act and is 
declared a 501(c)(3) tax exempt organization by the U.S. Department of the Treasury.  
Contributions are tax deductible to the full extent allowable by law. 
 
Accreditation & Approvals 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology holds various accreditations, 
approvals, recognitions, and memberships, including the following. 
 
• 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology is one of the oldest accredited, 
freestanding professional psychology schools in the nation.  The School has been 
continuously accredited since 1978 by the North Central Association of Colleges 
and Schools’ Higher Learning Commission.  The Commission can be contacted at 
NCA-HLC, 30 North LaSalle Street, Suite 2400, Chicago, IL 60602-2504, (800) 
621-7440, web site: www.ncacihe.org. 
 
• 
The Adler School has authority to offer courses and programs in the State of 
Indiana.  Its programs in Indiana are regulated by the Indiana Commission on 
Proprietary Education which can be contacted at, ICPE, 302 West Washington 
Street, Room 201, Indianapolis, IN 46204, (800) 227-5695 (toll-free) or (317)232-
1320. 
 
• 
The Adler School Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology is accredited by the 
American Psychological Association.  The APA’s Committee on Accreditation can 
be contacted at The Office of Program Consultation and Accreditation, 750 First 
Street NE, Washington, D.C. 20002, web site: www.apa.org.  1-800-374-2721, 202-
336-5500 
 
• 
The Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology is listed as a Designated Doctoral 
Program in Psychology by the National Register of Health Service Providers in 
Psychology. 
 
• 
The Adler School Substance Abuse Counseling Program is approved by the Illinois 
Alcohol 
and 
Other 
Drug 
Abuse 
Professional 
Certification 
Association 
(IAODAPCA) as an advanced counselor training program 
 
• 
The Adler School’s Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology: Art Therapy is 
approved by the American Art Therapy Association, Inc. (AATA). 
 
• 
The Adler School’s educational offerings are approved for veterans’ education by 
the State Approving Agency for Veterans’ Education. 
 
• 
This school is authorized under Federal law to enroll nonimmigrant alien students.   
 
• 
The Adler School is a member of the following organizations: 
º National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities  
 
3

 
º National Council of Schools and Programs of Professional Psychology  
º North American Society of Adlerian Psychology  
º Federation of Independent Illinois Colleges and Universities 
 
Master’s Level Licensure/Registration 
Graduates of the Master of Arts programs in Counseling, Organizational Psychology, 
Marriage and Family Therapy, and Art Therapy are qualified to sit for the licensing 
examination for Licensed Professional Counselors (LPC) in the State of Illinois.  With 
additional post-graduate, supervised clinical experience, graduates of the M.A. programs 
are eligible to sit for the licensing examination for Licensed Clinical Professional 
Counselors (LCPC) in the State of Illinois. Graduates of the Vancouver Campus are 
eligible for membership with the British Columbia Association of Clinical Counsellors 
(www.bc counsellors.org) and/or the Canadian Counselling Association (www.ccacc.ca). 
Doctoral Level Licensure/Registration 
 
All psychologists who offer direct services to the public must be licensed or certified 
by the state or province in which they practice.  Because licensure requirements vary 
from state to state and province to province, students should plan ahead to ensure they 
will be able to meet all requirements of a particular state or province.  Licensure typically 
requires completion of a period of post-doctoral supervised experience and successful 
completion of the Psychology Licensure Examination as well as satisfaction of other 
requirements of individual states or provinces.   
 
Degree, Certificate Programs, and Concentrations 
 
The Adler School is committed to serving both traditional and nontraditional 
students.  A number of degree programs, certificates and concentrations can be completed 
on either a full-time or part-time basis. Note that the Doctoral Program has a one year 
full-time residency requirement.  Programs are offered in the following areas: 
 
Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D.)  in Clinical Psychology   
 
Masters of Arts in: 
Counseling Psychology 
Counseling: Art Therapy 
Counseling & Organizational Psychology  
Police Psychology 
Marriage and Family Therapy 
 
Certificates and Concentrations in: 
Adlerian Psychotherapy 
Art Therapy 
Clinical Hypnosis 
Clinical Neuropsychology 
 
4

 
Marriage & Family Counseling 
Group Psychotherapy 
Substance Abuse Counseling 
 
Concentrations offered (Psy.D. program): 
Primary Health Care 
Child and Adolescent 
 
Respecialization in Clinical Psychology 
 
Individuals possessing a doctorate in psychology or in an area primarily 
psychological in nature may apply for respecialization in clinical psychology. This 
retraining program requires students to complete the necessary coursework and clinical 
practica to be eligible for internship and licensure.  The curriculum for students admitted 
in to the respecialization program is individualized and takes into account the background 
and needs of applicants.  For further information, please contact the Psy.D. Program 
Director. 
 
Continuing/Professional Education 
 
The Adler School is committed to providing lifelong learning and service to the 
public.  The school thus offers continuing professional education courses, seminars, and 
workshops.  Courses may also be taken on an audit basis for purposes of continuing 
professional education.  Qualified psychology graduate students, social workers, nurses, 
psychologists, physicians, and other health care professionals may register for continuing 
education offerings in order to earn continuing education credits. They may also register 
for individual courses or coursework required for a certificate in order to earn academic 
credit as a student-at-large.  More information on student-at-large status is available in 
the section on Admissions policies.  Information on certificate programs is also available 
in separate sections of this catalog. 
The School is approved by the following organizations to sponsor continuing 
education programs (CEU): 
 
• 
The American Psychological Association,  
• 
The National Board for Certified Counselors,  
• 
The State of Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulations  
 
(for Registered Social Workers), and  
• 
The Illinois Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Professional Certification Association.   
 
Facilities & Campus Locations 
 
The Chicago campus at 65 East Wacker Place in housed throughout four floors of an 
historic office building overlooking the Chicago River.  Facilities include classrooms, 
administrative and faculty offices, assessment and observation laboratories, computer lab, 
the Sol and Elaine Mosak Library, and the Rudolf and Sadie “Tee” Dreikurs 
Psychological Services Center. 
 
5

 
The School’s near north Loop location is in the heart of Chicago’s best cultural, 
dining, and shopping attractions.  Easy accessibility by car or public transportation 
creates an ideal setting for students commuting not only from the greater Chicago area 
but from throughout the United States and Canada as well. 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology – Chicago Campus 
65 East Wacker Place 
Suite 2100 
Chicago, IL  60601 
 
Located near the campus are many prestigious colleges and universities, public 
libraries, lake front parks, museums, and public parking facilities.  Major tourist 
attractions include the Art Institute of Chicago, Water Tower Place, Auditorium Theater, 
Chicago Theater, Oriental Theater, Sears Tower, Shedd Aquarium, Adler Planetarium, 
and the Field Museum of Natural History. 
 
The Vancouver campus is located within the Bentall Centre, Western Canada’s largest 
integrated office complex in the heart of Vancouver’s dynamic business core.   With a 
waterfront view, the campus boasts state of the art classroom and administrative 
technology, and newly renovated classroom and office space for our Vancouver students, 
faculty and staff.   
 
Adler School of Professional Psychology - Vancouver Campus 
Suite - 753 
Three Bentall Centre 595 Burrard St. 
P.O. Box 49104 
Vancouver, BC 
Canada  V7X 1G4 
 
The Vancouver Campus is readily accessible. Transit connections are easily made 
given Skytrain is accessed through the retail concourse and connects directly to the 
Seabus and West Coast Express.  A major bus hub is also located at Burrard and 
Dunsmuir Streets, which is 20 minutes from the Vancouver International Airport.  
Located in an area that is well-known for its shops and restaurants, downtown 
Vancouver, theatres, restaurants, Stanley Park, and English Bay Beach are all just 
moments away-either on foot or a brief bus ride. 
 
Faculty 
 
The School’s educational philosophy is embodied in its diverse, dedicated, and 
highly qualified faculty.  Faculty members are chosen for their educational qualifications, 
professional experience, clinical training and practice, professional and community 
involvement, area of expertise, scholarship, ability to teach, and personal/professional 
commitment to the School’s mission to educate socially responsible graduates.  Faculty 
members are professionals who combine community involvement and clinical practice 
with their instructional duties.  Many hold leadership positions and are active in 
 
6

 
professional organizations throughout the United States, Europe, and Canada.  The 
faculty’s high level of professional activity enriches the curriculum and models for 
students the integration of community involvement, clinical practice, research, and 
professional contribution.   
The faculty consists of core, part-time program, and adjunct members.  Core faculty 
members are full-time.  Core faculty are actively involved in academic governance, 
faculty committees, clinical supervision, curriculum development, community 
involvement, and research.  Core faculty members maintain office hours and campus 
activities four days per week.  The faculty have created a learning community committed 
to the discovery and development of knowledge, values, and skills where students can 
engage in a rich learning experience. 
The core faculty is supplemented by part-time program and adjunct faculty, visiting 
professors, and other professionals who are hired to teach specific courses or render other 
academic or clinical services.  Adjunct faculty are chosen for their expertise in specific 
areas that supplement varied curricula. 
 
Library 
 
 
The Sol and Elaine Mosak Library supports the research and teaching needs of the 
Adler community.  Faculty and students have access to collections including more than 
12,000 books in psychology and related areas, 140 current journal subscriptions, and 
1,000 audio-visual resources.  Interlibrary loan is available to help students locate 
materials not owned by the library. 
 
The professional librarians of the Sol and Elaine Mosak Library offer in-depth assistance 
with both traditional and electronic information resources.  Public workstations available 
in the Library and in the Computer Center provide access to the online library catalog and 
to scholarly databases.  To facilitate research, the library subscribes to a variety of 
academic online resources, including:  ABI-INFORM, Academic Search Premier, 
ArticleFirst, Business Source Elite, Criminal Justice Periodicals Index, Dissertations and 
Theses Full-Text, Electronic Collections Online, ERIC, Government Publications Online, 
Health and Psychosocial Instruments, Health Source, LexisNexis Academic, Medline, 
Mental Measurements Yearbook, Newspaper Source, Periodicals Abstracts, Professional 
Development Collection, ProQuest Psychology Journals, PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, 
PsycBOOKS, WilsonSelectPlus, and WorldCat.  The librarians have created and 
maintain indices to the journals of Individual Psychology, as well as to Adler School 
dissertations and theses.   
 
Major subject areas of the collections include: Adlerian Psychology, Alcohol and 
Substance Abuse, Art Therapy, Assessment, Clinical Psychology, Psychotherapy, Family 
Therapy, Forensic Psychology, Gender and Culture, Gerontology, Group Therapy, Health 
Psychology, Hypnosis, Marital Therapy, Mental Health, Neuropsychology, 
Organizational Psychology, Police Psychology, Research, Social Exclusion, and 
Spirituality. 
 
The Library also contains one of the most extensive collections of Adlerian-oriented 
 
7

 
books, journals, manuscripts, reprints, thesis and audio-visual resources in the world. 
 Within the library, the collections of the Adler Athenaeum hold primary and secondary 
resources on Alfred Adler and Rudolf Dreikurs.  This archival center houses manuscripts, 
correspondence, and theses related to Individual Psychology.   
 
The library can be contacted by telephone:  (312)-201-5900, extension 234;  by fax: (312) 
201-8756  or by e-mail:  library@adler.edu.   
 
Psychological Services Center 
 
The Rudolf and Sadie “Tee” Dreikurs Psychological Services Center (PSC) is a full-
service, community mental-health counseling center licensed by the State of Illinois 
Department of Professional Regulation offering a Pre-Doctoral Internship Program in 
Clinical Psychology that is approved by the American Psychological Association (APA) 
and is a member of the Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers 
(APPIC).  The PSC has a dual mission: to provide psychological services to the public 
and to serve as a clinical training site for the School’s master’s, doctoral, and certificate 
program students.   
The internship is a partially affiliated program, reserving four of its five positions for 
Adler School students.  For more information on clinical training opportunities, e-mail 
the PSC at psc@adler.edu, or call (312) 201-5900 x248, or (312) 327-0959. 
Services provided to the public include psychotherapy, neuropsychological 
assessment, support groups, parenting classes, consultation, vocational assessment, 
psychological testing and psychoeducational programs.  In addition to its central location 
on campus, the PSC has a number of satellite locations throughout the Chicago area 
serving clients in diverse settings such as elementary and secondary schools, correctional 
facilities, churches, transitional homes, gerontological facilities, and businesses.   
The PSC’s programs and services are designed to assist children, adolescents, adults, 
couples, families, and groups in dealing with personal issues, marital and family 
problems, depression and anxiety, stress, school adjustments, family conflict, couple 
distress, grief and loss, substance abuse, and other related personal or psychological 
issues.  Clients come from a wide range of educational, ethnic, economic, and cultural 
backgrounds. 
The PSC’s psychological services are provided by master’s, doctoral, and post-
doctoral trainees under the supervision of the School’s core faculty, all of whom are 
licensed clinical psychologists.  Additional supervision may be provided by adjunct 
faculty or individuals holding supervisory responsibility at satellite locations.   
Master’s and doctoral practicum fieldwork, doctoral internships, and post-doctoral 
training all can be completed through PSC sites.  Trainees are matched with sites based 
on their interests, training and education needs, and abilities.  All trainees spend at least 
some of their clinical time at the central location.  PSC training experiences include: 
providing direct clinical service under supervision; individual, group, and peer 
supervision; case management and triage meetings; didactic workshops and seminars; 
and other learning experiences. 
 
 
 
8

 
Nondiscrimination Policy 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology is an Affirmative Action Equal 
Opportunity Institution committed to nondiscrimination and equal opportunity in 
employment and education regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, national or ethnic origin, political beliefs, disability, or veteran status.  
The educational programs, activities, and services offered to students are administered on 
a nondiscriminatory basis subject to the provisions of all state and federal statutes.  In 
these endeavors, the Adler School promotes nondiscrimination and equal opportunity in 
the student body, faculty, and staff.  The Adler School provides reasonable 
accommodation to students on the basis of documented disability in accordance with the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
The School maintains policies and procedures to support students in their academic 
endeavors. Policy statements regarding expectations of student behavior and procedural 
guidelines for resolution of problems are available to all students and to all members of 
the School community.  Questions, concerns, or complaints regarding School policy and 
practice or protection against discrimination should be directed to the Vice President of 
Administration and will be handled according to Adler School procedures.   
All individuals have the right to contact the Illinois Department of Human Rights 
(IDHR) at (312) 814-6200 or TDD (312) 263-1579 and/or the United States Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) at (312) 353-2713 or TDD (800) 669-
3362.  A charge with the IDHR normally must be filed within 180 days after the date that 
a civil rights violation allegedly has been committed.  A charge with EEOC must be filed 
within 300 days of the alleged incident. 
 
Diversity 
 
The Adler School is strongly committed to honoring individual and cultural diversity 
among students, staff, and faculty.  Its goal is to provide opportunities for everyone to 
learn and interact in an environment in which racial, cultural, and national heritage, 
disability status, gender, sexual orientation and age are respected by the Adler School 
learning community.  The curricula of all programs provide the opportunity for students 
to acquire knowledge, skills, and values related to individual and group diversity.  Field 
placements for clinical training are available in areas where the clientele is partly or 
primarily from traditionally underserved groups. 
Recruitment and retention of a diverse student body is important to prepare students 
to enter a world in which the understanding of individual and cultural diversity is 
essential for peace and progress.  Student organizations provide support and fellowship 
for members of diverse and marginalized groups. 
 
Rights Reserved 
 
This Catalog and the contents herein are not to be construed as a binding contract 
between the Adler School and the student.  The Catalog merely presents the offerings and 
requirements in effect at the time of publication and in no way guarantees that the 
offerings and requirements will remain the same. 
 
9

 
The Adler School reserves the right to refuse to admit or readmit any applicant.  
Furthermore, the Adler School reserves the right to dismiss any student at any time who 
fails to give satisfactory evidence of academic or clinical ability, earnestness of purpose,  
or active cooperation in all requirements for acceptable program completion. 
The Adler School reserves the right to change, as necessary and without advance 
notice, its admission or academic requirements, rules, policies, tuition, fees, curricula, 
courses, course content, and graduation requirements and to apply such changes to 
current and new students alike.  Course offerings and requirements are continually under 
examination, and revisions are expected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10

 
General Academic Policies & Procedures 
 
Schedule  
 
  The year-round instructional format consists of three semesters.  Each credit hour is 
equal to 14 contact hours of instruction, which is supplemented by appropriate reading, 
research, study, and other educational activities students are expected to undertake 
between class sessions.  Courses are held during daytime, evening, and weekend hours.   
 
Registration 
 
Term schedules are published online prior to the start of the term.  Students may 
register for courses in person, by mail, or by fax.  Registration deadlines are published 
each term.  Continuing students who register after the deadline will be charged a late 
registration fee.  Registrations will not be accepted for students with delinquent accounts. 
Registrations are processed according to a priority system based on the student’s 
year of entry.  Students wishing to register for more than 15 credit hours in any term must 
have written approval from the Vice President for Academic Affairs.   
 
Class Attendance 
 
Students are responsible for maintaining regular and punctual attendance at each 
class session.  Students who expect to miss or arrive late for class must notify the 
instructor in advance.  Students who miss more than two classes in a semester will 
receive a grade of “F” (Fail) and must repeat the course.  Students whose absence or 
tardiness in less two classes per semester affects the quality of their work or the work of 
the class may be given a lower grade.  In those instances in which a class is offered on an 
intensive format (that is, three or fewer class meetings in a semester), missing one class 
will result in a grade of Fail.  Due to the unique structure of the practicum seminar 
courses, students who miss more than one class session in a semester will receive a grade 
of No Credit “NC” and be referred to the Training Committee for review. 
Students may not register for overlapping classes as this would result in absences 
from one or both classes.  
 
Course Withdrawal 
  
Requests to drop or withdraw from courses after the first class session must be 
submitted via an Add/Drop form to the Office of the Registrar.  Notifying the instructor 
or ceasing class attendance does not constitute an official withdrawal.  The official date 
of withdrawal is the date the drop form is received by the Office of the Registrar.  
Students may not withdraw after the eighth week of a semester course, after the first class 
session of a 3-day course, or after 50% of the class sessions of a sequential weekend 
course.  Withdrawal from a course requires the approval of the students’ academic 
advisor.  If a student withdraws from a course after the withdrawal period, a grade of 
 
11

 
“W” (Withdrawal) will appear on their transcript.  Students who stop attending class 
without an official withdrawal will receive a grade of “F” for the course.  
A drop fee is charged for withdrawal from each course after the Add/Drop period.  
Students who withdraw after the beginning of the term may receive refunds in 
accordance with the established refund policy.  Students who are withdrawn due to 
disciplinary or academic reasons may receive a prorated refund.   No refunds will be 
made when students stop attending class without officially withdrawing from the course. 
 
Full-Time and Part-Time Status 
 
To be considered full-time, Doctoral students must enroll in ten (10) or more credit 
hours each term.  Doctoral students enrolled in between six and nine (6-9) credit hours 
each term are considered half-time.  Doctoral students registered for less than six credit 
hours are considered less than half-time and are not eligible for federally funded financial 
aid. 
 
  M.A. students must enroll in eight (8) or more credits to be considered full-time.  
Masters students enrolled in four to seven (4-7) credits are considered half-time, and 
those enrolled in fewer than four credits are considered less than half-time and are not 
eligible for federally funded financial aid. 
 
 
Students registered for practicum, dissertation, or internship satisfy the requirement 
for full-time study, and are eligible to receive Title IV funding and deferments.  Students 
registered for half-time internship or doctoral dissertation continuation satisfy the 
requirement for half-time study, and are eligible to receive Title IV funding and 
deferments.  Students carrying a full-time load are encouraged to limit any employment 
to part-time in order to allow adequate time for classes, practicum work, study, and other 
student activities. 
 
Administrative Withdrawal 
 
Once enrolled, students are expected to maintain satisfactory progress and register 
each term until completing the program in which they have been admitted.   Students who 
fail to maintain active student status will be administratively withdrawn from the School 
unless they have previously obtained an approved leave of absence.  Administrative 
Withdrawal will be noted on the student’s transcripts who have been administratively 
withdrawn.  Students who wish to return to their studies must submit a new application 
for admission no sooner than one year after their dismissal and, if admitted, must follow 
the regulations and program requirements in effect at the time of the new admission.  
 
Satisfactory Progress 
 
Students must maintain satisfactory academic progress to maintain good academic 
standing.  Students are considered to be making satisfactory academic progress if they are 
taking a course load that ensures steady movement toward degree completion within the 
 
12

 
maximum time limits for degree completion, and if they are meeting academic and 
clinical standards. All students must maintain a cumulative grade point average of 3.0 on 
a 4.0 scale in order to be in good academic standing, to participate in practica, to receive 
financial aid, and to graduate. In addition, students must successfully complete (“B” 
grade or better) 70% of attempted coursework in each term they are enrolled in order to 
be eligible for federal student financial aid. 
Masters students must complete a minimum of twelve (12) credit hours every twelve 
months and must satisfactorily complete all of the requirements for graduation within five 
years of the date of first registration following admission to the School.     
Doctoral students must complete at least eighteen (18) credit hours every twelve 
months and must satisfactorily complete all requirements for graduation within seven 
years of the date of first registration following admission to the School.  Students 
enrolled in dissertation or internship, are considered to be maintaining minimum credit 
requirements for satisfactory academic progress.   These requirements constitute the 
minimum enrollment necessary to be considered in good standing.   
 
Student Conduct and Comprehensive Evaluation  
 
The School requires that students demonstrate the highest standards of academic, 
personal, and professional conduct. The determination of students’ performance is not 
limited to grades or grade point average, but includes all factors involved in students’ 
academic and clinical progress and professional development.  Upon entry into the 
program, all Adler School students are provided with a statement regarding the  
responsibility and interest the Adler School places upon the multiple aspects of student 
development and functioning (e.g. cognitive, emotional, psychological, interpersonal, 
technical and ethical) in the evaluation of student-trainees.  This statement is derived 
from the recommended policy language for the comprehensive evaluation of student-
trainee competence in professional psychology programs developed by the Student 
Competence Task Force of the Council of Chairs of Training Councils.  Such 
comprehensive evaluation of student-trainees is necessary to protect the public and the 
profession.   
All students are required to sign a document indicating that they have received and 
reviewed this statement. This signed document is retained in the student file to indicate 
his/her acceptance of the comprehensive evaluation policies employed by the School. In 
light of this policy, in addition to assigning a grade, instructors also may submit a written 
evaluation of students’ performance in any or all of the above areas of development and 
functioning, including strengths, weaknesses, and recommendations for any additional 
work that may be needed. 
Performance in courses, practica, internship, and qualifying examinations assess a 
broad range of areas of competency, endorsed by professional organizations such as the 
American Psychological Association and the National Council of Schools and Programs 
in Professional Psychology, expected of students as they progress toward their degrees.  
To insure that consistent and structured evaluation of students’ performance in these 
areas of competency occurs throughout their education and training, the Adler School has 
developed the Student Learning Outcomes Assessment Program.  This program is 
designed to provide multiple measures of students’ performance in the areas of cognitive, 
 
13

 
emotional, psychological, interpersonal, technical and ethical functioning.  The conduct 
and performance of students in all aspects of their education and training may be used to 
assess their academic and clinical suitability.  Performance in individual classes may not 
be predictive of performance in clinical training situations or on qualifying examinations.  
Professional and ethical conduct is required in interactions with faculty, administrators, 
other students, clinical supervisors and staff members. 
Students are expected to fulfill academic and clinical requirements in an ethical and 
honest manner.  This expectation includes proper acknowledgment and appropriate use of 
the ideas and written works of others, submission of one’s own work to fulfill course 
requirements, and honesty during the completion of in-class and take-home examinations.  
Failure to comply with the highest standards of academic integrity and conduct, including 
plagiarism or receiving improper assistance, will result in disciplinary action, and may 
lead to dismissal from the School. 
A student may be subject to disciplinary action, including dismissal from the School, 
when excessive course withdrawals or class absences interfere with fulfillment of course 
requirements, when the student’s behavior has been disruptive or is detrimental to the 
learning environment, when the student’s physical health or emotional stability interferes 
with course work or clinical training, or when the student’s conduct has been judged to be 
in violation of professional or ethical standards. 
Students are expected to refrain from engaging in clinical activities which are 
unethical or unlawful, those for which they are not qualified, or those for which they lack 
the required credentials.  Students shall not maintain a private practice nor engage in 
rendering psychological services on either a fee or not-for-fee basis unless they are 
legally and professionally qualified to do so.  The phrase “psychological services” is 
broadly defined to include psychometrics, psychotherapy, counseling, guidance, 
hypnosis, research, or other related activities. 
Students engaged in activities which are unlawful or unethical or for which they are 
not qualified or lack appropriate clinical supervision are subject to dismissal from the 
School. 
Professional psychologists and counselors have a duty of care to the public and to 
society.  This duty makes the assessment of students’ clinical competency and suitability 
of particular importance.  The School reserves the right to take disciplinary action 
including, but not limited to, suspension, placement on probation, or dismissal of a 
student at any time when a student’s academic or clinical performance, ethical standards, 
attendance, financial delinquency, emotional stability, or personal conduct is significantly 
detrimental to the educational goals and purposes of the institution.  Students who fail to 
meet academic or clinical requirements or who violate standards of professional, 
academic, or personal conduct will be referred for review by the Clinical Training and/or 
Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committees. 
Students with questions as to whether a particular course of action meets the 
School’s expectations for student conduct may receive guidance from the Director of  
Training and Community Service or the Director of Student and Alumni Affairs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
14

 
Qualifying Examinations 
 
All M.A. degree programs require the successful completion of the M.A. Clinical 
Qualifying Examination.  The Psy.D. degree program requires successful completion of 
the Doctoral Written Qualifying Examination (for those students who were admitted prior 
to Fall 2006) or the Community Service Capstone Paper (for those students who were 
admitted Fall 2006 and after) and the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination.  Two 
attempts at qualifying examinations are permitted.  Students who do not pass the Doctoral 
Written Qualifying Examination (WQE) or Community Service Capstone Paper (CSCP) 
after the first attempt are referred to their academic advisor to review feedback from the 
faculty evaluators of the examination and develop a plan for re-taking the examination. 
Students who fail the WQE or CSCP a second time are subject to dismissal from the 
doctoral program.  Students who fail the M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination or the 
Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination the first time are referred for review by the 
Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee.  Students who fail on the second attempt 
for either examination are subject to dismissal. 
 
Grading System 
 
Traditional letter grades are given for most of the courses offered.  A limited number 
of courses are evaluated on a pass/no pass basis.  The grading system is as follows: 
 
   Grade       Description        Grade Point 
 
A   
Excellent          
4.0 
 
A- 
 
3.75 
 
B+                     
3.5 
 
B   
Satisfactory       
3.0 
 
B-                     
2.75 
 
C   
Marginal           
2.0 
 
D   
Unsatisfactory     
1.0 
 
F   
Failure            
0.0 
 
CR   
Credit            
0.0 
 
NC  
No Credit          
0.0 
 
I   
Incomplete                         n/a 
 
IP  
In Progress        
n/a 
 
NP 
No Progress 
n/a 
 
M   
Missing Grade      
n/a 
 
AU 
Audit/No Credit    
n/a 
 
W   
Withdrawal         
n/a 
 
TR 
Transfer 
n/a 
 
 
 
In Progress 
 
A temporary grade of “IP” (In Progress) is given to students who are engaged in 
practicum, field experiences, independent study, dissertation, or courses in which 
 
15

 
completion of work may typically be expected to exceed the end of the term.  The “IP” 
will be removed from the transcript when the final grade has been posted. 
 
No Progress 
 
 A grade of “NP” (No Progress) is given to students enrolled in Dissertation Proposal or 
Dissertation whose work does not indicate that they are making required progress on 
completion of their dissertation proposal or dissertation. Any student receiving three 
consecutive grades of NP will be referred to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation 
Committee for review.  The “NP” will be removed from the transcript when the final 
grade for either Doctoral Dissertation Proposal or Doctoral Dissertation has been posted. 
 
Incomplete 
 
An “I” (Incomplete) grade will be granted only in exceptional situations when 
requirements for a course cannot be completed in the normal time allowed.  An 
Incomplete grade is allowed only with the written consent of the instructor and indicates 
that the student has presented a satisfactory reason for receiving an incomplete grade.  
Students must request an incomplete prior to the due date of the final requirement of the 
class in question.   
For an incomplete to be granted, students must file with the Registrar a completed 
Incomplete Agreement form, approved and signed by the instructor, which states what 
the student must do to satisfy the course requirements, including the instructor’s grading 
criteria and the agreed-upon completion date.  The maximum time limit for finishing 
incomplete work is the end of the following term.   
Notation of an “I” grade remains on the transcript alongside the final grade 
following completion of the requirement.  Receipt of more than one “I” grade may 
preclude students from enrolling in subsequent terms and the student may be referred to 
the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee. 
If the course work is not successfully completed within the time limit established by 
the instructor (less than one term, or within one term following the course), the grade 
“Incomplete” will be changed automatically to an “F” (Fail).  Students who receive an 
“F” will not be allowed to register for the subsequent term and will be referred to the 
Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee for evaluation. 
 
Credit/No Credit 
 
A grade of “CR” (Credit) is assigned upon satisfactory completion of professional 
development seminars, practicum seminars, practicum/internship requirements, a limited 
number of regular courses, the qualifying examinations, and the doctoral dissertation.  A 
grade of “NC” (No Credit) is assigned upon unsatisfactory performance in practicum or a 
course offered on a pass/no pass basis.  Grades of “CR” are not used in calculating the 
grade point average; however, grades of “NC” are used in calculating the grade point 
average and are considered failing grades for the purposes of student assessment. 
 
 
 
16

 
Audit 
 
Students registered to audit a course will receive, upon successful completion of the 
course, a designation of “AU” on their transcripts which signifies neither credit nor a 
grade.  After an audited course is completed, it cannot be changed to credit at a later time. 
 
Grade Corrections 
 
Once a grade has been recorded on the student transcript, additional work cannot be 
submitted to change the grade.  To change an incorrectly recorded grade, students must 
file a written petition with the Registrar.  The Registrar will conduct a review of the 
circumstances and make a determination as to whether the original grade should be 
changed.   
Students who may have disputes over the assignment of grades are encouraged to 
speak with the faculty member directly.  If the student feels that a satisfactory solution 
has not been provided, the student should discuss the grievance with their faculty advisor.  
If the grievance is still unresolved, the student should proceed to the formal institutional 
grievance procedures. Guidelines and information about the grievance policies may be 
obtained from the Director of Student and Alumni Affairs. 
Grade changes or alterations to student records are not permitted after a degree has 
been officially posted to the academic record. 
 
Academic Standards 
 
Students whose grade point average falls below a “B” (3.0) or who have received 
two grades of “C” or “I”, or a single grade of “NC”, “D”, or “F” will be referred to the 
Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee.  The Committee will conduct a review of 
the student’s records, which may include a meeting with the student, and make 
recommendations regarding the student’s standing.  Such recommendations may include, 
but are not limited to, academic probation with a remediation plan or dismissal from the 
School. 
Only two grades of “C” and no grades of “D”, “F”, or “NC” may be counted toward 
completion of degree requirements.  A maximum of six (6) credit hours may be repeated 
to remediate deficient grades and, thus, qualify for graduation.  Both the original course 
grade and the repeated course grade will be calculated in the overall GPA, and both will 
appear on the transcript. 
Students who receive more than any combination of six (6) credit hours of “C” or 
who receive a single grade of “NC”, “D”, “F” in any course or program requirement are 
subject to immediate dismissal. 
 
Leave of Absence 
 
Students may request a Leave of Absence due to illness or other extenuating 
circumstances by completing a Leave of Absence form and submitting it to their faculty 
advisor.  Leave of Absence forms must be signed by the student’s faculty advisor as well 
as the Director of Student and Alumni Affairs.  Signed forms must be submitted to the 
 
17

 
Registrar’s Office.  A Leave of Absence may be granted for up to three terms (one 
calendar year).  If a student has accepted a practicum or internship prior to requesting a 
leave, or is completing a practicum/internship at the time of the request, the student must 
contact the Director of Training and Community Service prior to submission of the form 
to their faculty advisor.  The Leave of Absence will be noted on the student’s transcript 
for each approved term until the student returns to school.  Time approved for a Leave of 
Absence does not impact the maximum time allowed for degree completion. 
Students who do not return from a Leave of Absence by the agreed upon term will 
be administratively withdrawn from the School.  In order to be readmitted, 
administratively withdrawn students must submit a new application for admission no 
sooner than one year after the date upon which they were dismissed and, if admitted, 
must follow the program requirements in effect at the time of the new admission. 
 
Professional Writing Skills 
 
   Students entering the field of professional psychology or counseling must 
demonstrate excellent communication skills in order to effectively perform their 
responsibilities.  The ability of students’ to convey ideas and information effectively in 
writing is evaluated throughout their education and training.  Students identified by an 
instructor or a practicum site supervisor as demonstrating deficiencies in their writing 
skills may be required to enroll in and successfully complete a non-credit course in 
professional writing.  Notification of such requirement to a student will be made by the 
Director of Student and Alumni Affairs.  A student notified of such a requirement must 
enroll for the required writing course in the following term.  A student who demonstrates 
continued writing deficiencies after one term of the course may be required to enroll a 
second time.  Students who fail to complete the required course will be referred for 
review to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18

 
 
Admissions Policies & Procedures 
 
Admission Requirements 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology seeks to admit individuals who will 
contribute to a diverse student body representing a wide range of professional interests, 
ethnic and cultural backgrounds, varied academic and work histories, and broad 
geographic exposure. 
All applicants for admission to graduate-level degree programs and specializations 
must have at least a baccalaureate degree from a college or university which is regionally 
accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or an equivalent academic 
degree from a foreign college or university.  In addition, all applicants must fulfill the 
minimum admission requirements for the program they choose, as detailed in the 
program descriptions presented in this Catalog, and must demonstrate acceptable 
proficiency in spoken and written English.  Applicants nearing completion of a 
baccalaureate degree may apply for early admission contingent upon successful 
completion of the undergraduate degree.   
Possession of the minimum requirements does not ensure admission.  The School 
reserves the right to admit or deny admission based on the professional judgment of the 
faculty and administration involved in the admissions process. 
 
Application Deadlines 
 
 
Priority Deadlines 
The Adler School employs a rolling admissions process.  While applications are 
accepted throughout the year, priority deadlines are in place for the doctoral program (see 
Psy.D. program grid).   Programs fill early so applicants are strongly encouraged to begin 
the application process at least six to twelve months before their desired term of entry. 
Applicants seeking admission to the Psy.D. program for the Fall term should submit 
a complete application by the priority deadline of February 15th in order for interviews to 
be scheduled and notification of acceptance to be completed by April 1.  Those who are 
admitted must notify the Admissions Department no later than April 15 of their intent to 
matriculate in the subsequent Fall term.  Space permitting, applications submitted after 
the deadline will be accepted subject to the Council of Graduate Departments of 
Psychology (COGDOP) criteria.  These criteria state that acceptance of an offer of 
admission that is given or left in force after April 15 commits students to not solicit or 
accept an offer from the Adler School without first obtaining a written release from the 
institution to which a commitment has already been made.  The February 15th deadline 
does not apply to certificate and master’s level programs.  
 
Program 
Priority deadline 
Term of entry 
Psy D 
February 15th 
November 1st 
Fall  
Spring (January) 
MA in Counseling 
Rolling 
Fall and Spring 
MA in Organizational Psychology 
Rolling 
Fall Entry Only 
 
19

 
MA in Counseling Art Therapy 
Rolling 
Fall and Winter 
MA in Marriage and Family Counseling 
Rolling 
Fall and Winter 
MA in Police Psychology 
Rolling 
All 
Specializations 
Rolling 
All 
 
 
Application Process 
 
Applicants begin the admission process by submitting the following: 
• A completed Adler School Admissions Application Form;  
• A typed 500-word autobiographical essay/personal statement; 
• A non-refundable $50.00 application fee; 
• Three (3) letters of recommendation, using Adler recommendation form 
(found in application packet) 
• Official Transcript from each undergraduate and graduate school attended 
 
Application forms can be obtained from the Office of Admissions or from the Adler 
School web site at www.adler.edu.  Official transcripts must be sent directly to the Office 
of Admissions.  Non-English transcripts must be translated into English by a professional 
translation service.   
When all materials required for application have been received, applicants’ 
completed files will be reviewed and evaluated by the Admissions Committee.  
Applicants whose materials are acceptable as determined by this review will be invited to  
interview with a member of the Adler School core faculty.  Students transferring from 
other graduate degree programs to seek admission to the Adler School must submit a 
letter from the Dean of their previous program stating that they are in good standing and 
free from academic or disciplinary inquiry or action. 
 
Evaluation of Applicants 
 
Applicants are evaluated on many factors including but not limited to; past academic 
performance, content and clarity of written communication, letters of recommendation, 
personal and professional presentation in the interview process; prior work and/or 
volunteer 
experience, 
integrity, 
motivation, 
and 
ethical 
standards. 
Following completion of the admissions process, applicants will be notified in writing of 
the admission decision.  The submission of false or incomplete information on the 
application form or on other credentials may result in denial of admission and/or 
termination of enrollment.  The Adler School’s admission decision is final and is not 
subject to appeal.  Additionally, it is the policy of the Adler School that the rationale for 
admissions decisions is confidential and not discussed with the applicant.  
 
Provisional Admission 
 
Successful applicants may be admitted with full standing or provisionally at the sole 
discretion of the Admissions Committee.  Provisional admission may be granted when 
applicants do not meet the requirements for full admission but demonstrate exceptional 
 
20

 
motivation or other qualifications as well as a willingness to comply with additional 
conditions specified by the Admissions Committee.  
Provisional status will be noted in the students’ academic file until criteria for full 
standing have been met.  Students will be notified in writing when full admission has 
been granted.  It is the responsibility of students to actively pursue completion of 
admission conditions and to submit documentation that conditions have been met.  
Students who do not satisfy the conditions set forth to achieve full admission will not be 
allowed to continue in the program.  
 
Acceptance of Admission 
 
Applicants who are offered admission to an Adler School program have thirty days 
or until the priority deadline notification for PsyD to accept the offer.  Those who accept 
must return a signed statement of acceptance along with a $500 (PsyD students) or $250 
(MA and Specialization students) nonrefundable tuition deposit which will be credited 
toward payment of the first term’s tuition and fees.  Applicants for admission may 
receive a refund of the tuition deposit if a letter requesting cancellation is received within 
five working days after their statement of acceptance is received by the School; 
otherwise, admitted applicants who choose not to enroll shall forfeit their deposit. 
If a statement of acceptance is not received from applicants within the stated 
deadline the offer of admission will no longer be valid, and the applicants’ files will be 
inactivated.   
 
Deferring Admission 
 
 
Students who have been fully admitted into a degree program may defer their 
admission for one year after their original term of admission.  To defer admission, the 
student must have their statement of acceptance along with the appropriate tuition deposit 
on file with the Office of Admissions.  Students may not defer for more than one year.  
Students that defer admission but do not matriculate must reapply for admission by 
sending a new Admission Application, $50 application fee, 3 letters of recommendation 
and all official transcripts as outlined in Admissions Process section of the current 
catalog. The Office of Admissions does not maintain student files for students who do not 
enroll by their intended start date.   
Applicants who do not matriculate into a degree or certificate program do not have 
the right of access to their admission files.   
 
International Applicants 
 
International applicants must submit a completed application as outlined above.  In 
addition, any applicant where English is not their first language, must submit scores from 
the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL).  Scores should be sent directly to 
the School by the testing service.  The Adler School’s code number for receiving test 
scores is 1147.  Applicants who have taken the paper-based TOEFL must receive a 
minimum score of 550.  Those who have taken the computer-based TOEFL must have a 
minimum score of 213.  Students taking the Internet-based TOEFL must have a minimum 
 
21

 
score of 79.  Students that have earned a Bachelors or Masters degree in an accredited 
program in the United States will not be required to take the TOEFL. 
 
Applicants educated outside of the United States should contact the Office of 
Admissions as early as possible to obtain additional forms that may be required for 
document translation.  International applicants must also submit documentation of 
sufficient financial resources to complete the program and provide for living expenses 
while attending the Adler School.  Once enrolled in the program, students must pay 
tuition and fees at the time of registering for classes.  International students will not be 
allowed to register for classes if they have an outstanding balance which jeopardizes the 
student’s ability to remain in the US under their F-1 student visa. 
Students that have been accepted into a degree program at the School, will be 
issued an I-20 upon receipt of their Statement of Acceptance and the appropriate tuition 
deposit.  Students should allow enough time for securing an F-1 student visa in their 
country for travel to the US.  It is the student’s responsibility to provide the Office of 
Admissions with a current foreign address and mailing address if different, along with 
the intended US address.  I-20s cannot be mailed to Post Office Box numbers.   
Once the student arrives on campus, they must notify the Office of Admissions of 
their arrival and update their US address.  I-20s cannot be updated with Homeland 
Security until we receive this information. 
International Students must have their I-20s updated each year they are in 
attendance at the School.  Students must maintain full-time status each term as outlined 
by the school for their program.   If the student has extenuating circumstances that require 
that they are enrolled less than full-time, the student must request an exception from the 
Director of Student and Alumni Affairs.  If an exception is given, then the Director will 
issue a letter to be used to update the student’s SEVIS record and to accompany the 
student’s I-20. 
Students should not attempt to enter the United States without their current and 
updated I-20.  
Although the School does not provide financial assistance for International Students 
in the form of financial aid or tuition reduction, students are eligible for Adler 
Scholarships unless otherwise noted. 
 
Students-at-Large  
 
Students matriculating under the status “student-at-large” (SAL) fill one of three 
categories.  In each case, these students are not degree seeking students, but will receive 
credit for each course taken up to the maximum credits permitted.  Students who are 
considering application to a degree or certificate program at Adler may take a maximum 
of nine (9) credit hours of courses as students-at-large as long as they meet the minimum 
eligibility for admission.  Persons interested in registering as students-at-large must 
complete the SAL Application process as outlined below, and be approved by the 
Admissions Committee prior to registering for courses.  Those who later seek admission 
to a degree or certificate program will not be required to pay an additional application fee 
for the admissions application, but will be required to submit additional information as is 
required to make that degree program application complete.  Students-at-large are not 
eligible for Financial Aid. 
 
22

 
Students-at-large must comply with course prerequisites as given in the School 
Catalog and other requirements for courses taken and may not enroll in courses which are 
reserved for students fully admitted to particular degree programs.  Appropriate courses 
taken for credit usually will apply toward completion of program requirements for SAL 
who are admitted at a later date; however, successful completion of course work as an 
SAL does not guarantee admission to a degree or certificate program.  An SAL whose 
application to a degree or certificate program has been denied may not enroll in further 
courses or continue as a student-at-large. 
Because students-at-large are limited to a total of nine (9) credit hours of course 
work, persons who plan to pursue a degree or certificate program should apply for 
admission at the earliest opportunity.  Students-at-large who have completed nine credit 
hours of courses may not register for additional courses until such time as they have been 
formally admitted to a degree or certificate program.  Credits earned as students-at-large 
cannot be used to improve grade point averages as an entry into a program. 
 
Student-at-Large - Currently enrolled in graduate program other than Adler 
 
Students that are currently enrolled in a graduate degree program in an accredited 
program and wish to take a class offered at Adler must submit a completed application 
for admission, non-refundable $50 application fee, along with official transcripts from 
their current graduate program.  Applications will be reviewed by the Admissions 
Committee, and will not be allowed to register until they have been approved for 
admission as an SAL.  Graduate students in psychology-related degree programs at other 
regionally accredited institutions bear the responsibility of verifying with their home 
institutions whether Adler courses will be transferred back and accepted for credit. 
 
Student-at-Large / Non-Degree Seeking Student  
 
Students who wish to take classes for personal pursuit not related to a degree 
program or qualified graduate students and mental health professionals may be admitted 
as student-at-large and must follow the general guidelines for SAL.  Qualified mental 
health professionals may take courses as non-degree-seeking students for continuing 
education credit or for professional enrichment as long as they meet the minimum 
eligibility for admission. 
A maximum of 9 credits or the equivalent in continuing education hours may be 
earned by non-degree-seeking students. Courses taken by non-degree-seeking students 
will not apply toward completion of program requirements if the individuals are later 
admitted to a degree or certificate program.   
Non-degree-seeking students must meet all course prerequisites and all other 
requirements for courses taken. Individuals who have been denied admission to a 
graduate program at the Adler School will not be permitted to enroll as non-degree-
seeking students.  
Persons interested in registering as non-degree-seeking students must submit an 
application for non-degree-seeking student status along with an official copy of a 
transcript showing conferral of a baccalaureate or graduate degree.   
 
23

 
Graduate students of other institutions pursuing non-degree-seeking status at Adler 
may be asked to provide approval of their department chairperson to register for specific 
courses.  Non-degree-seeking students are not eligible for Financial Aid.  Applicants 
must submit a completed application form, non-refundable $50 application fee, and 
official transcripts from all undergraduate and graduate schools attended. Applications 
will be reviewed by the Admissions Committee, and prospective students will not be 
allowed to register until they have been approved for admission as a non-degree seeking 
SAL. 
 
Changing or Adding Programs 
 
Psy.D. students who wish to complete a Master’s degree program and M.A. students 
who wish to change from one Adler Master’s degree program to another or must request 
permission to do so.  Application forms can be obtained from and are submitted to the 
Admissions Office when completed.  No additional application fees are required. 
Students must satisfy admission requirements for the degree or certificate program at 
the time of application to the new program.  Students whose applications are accepted, as 
determined by review of the Admissions Committee, will be notified in writing of the 
decision of the Admissions Committee regarding the application to the new program.   
Acceptance into and/or successful completion of one degree or certificate program 
neither constitutes nor guarantees admission to another program.   
Master’s degree students who wish to apply to the Psy.D. program must have 
completed at least thirty (30) credit hours of graded course work and be actively engaged 
in a practicum before applying.  Letters of recommendation from Adler faculty and 
practicum supervisors and an interview with doctoral core faculty will be required.  
Students from MA programs who have been accepted to the doctoral program must 
complete all requirements for their MA degree no later than one year after acceptance.   
 
Readmission 
 
Applicants who have been accepted for admission but fail to matriculate within one 
year or previously enrolled students who do not register for courses for a period of one 
year must submit a new application for admission and will be evaluated according to 
current admission requirements.  If readmitted, applicants/students will be subject to 
program requirements in effect at the time of the new application.  This applies to 
students who seek to return to the School following an approved leave of absence, 
withdrawal in good standing, or other absence. 
 
Transfer Credit  
 
Students accepted for admission may be granted transfer credit for graduate level 
courses previously taken at another accredited institution.  No credit hours may be 
transferred into a certificate program.  A maximum of twelve (12) credit hours may be 
transferred into a M.A. program.  A maximum of twenty-four (24) credit hours may be 
transferred into the Psy.D. program.   
A request for transfer credit is considered only after students have been accepted 
 
24

 
into a program and have submitted the appropriate paperwork. Please refer to the Office 
of Admissions for information regarding transfer credit applications and deadlines.  
Graduate courses from regionally accredited institutions that are equivalent to 
courses required in the students’ degree program at Adler and in which students have 
earned grades of “B” or better may be considered for transfer credit.  Electives and 
clinical training credits are not eligible for transfer credit.  Coursework taken more than 
five years prior to enrollment will not be accepted for transfer credit.  Credit hours 
granted for transferred courses are based on credit hours granted for the equivalent course 
at Adler.   
Transfer of Credit forms are available from the Registrar’s Office.  A fee is assessed 
for each course evaluated for transfer credit eligibility. 
 
25

 
Tuition & Financial Aid 
 
2006-2007 Tuition and Fees Schedule  
 
Financing your graduate education is an important part of your graduate school planning. 
Therefore, it is important to us that we are available to work with you throughout the 
financial aid process.   The following Schedule of Tuition and Fees is effective as of 
September 1, 2006. The school reserves the right to add or change any of the fees or 
charges listed below at any time without prior written notice. 
 
Tuition and Fees  - Chicago Students  
Admissions Fees & Deposits 
 
Admissions Application Fee  
 
 
 
 
 $50 
 
Deposit (non-refundable) – MA programs 
 
 
 
$250 
 
Deposit (non-refundable) – PsyD program 
 
 
 
$500 
 
Tuition  
Tuition (per credit Hour) 
 
 
 
 
 
              $690 
Tuition – Audit (per credit hour) 
 
 
 
 
              $345 
Tuition – Dissertation (per credit hour) 
 
 
                          $690 
Tuition – Internship (per credit Hour) 
 
 
                          $690 
Tuition – Qualifying Exam Fee 
 
 
 
                          $690 
Tuition & Fees – MAPP Program Credit Hour 
 
                         $840 
 
Doctoral Dissertation Continuation  
 
 
 
            $1380 
 
Registration-based fees 
 
Fee - Dissertation Defense  
 
 
 
 
 
$350 
 
Fee - Professional Liability Insurance (per term practicum/internship)$50 
 
Fee – Student Activity (per term) 
 
 
 
 
$160 
 
Fee – Qualifying Exam 
 
 
 
 
 
$690 
 
Degree Completion Fees 
 
Graduation Fee (non-refundable) 
 
 
 
 
$100 
 
Commencement Fee (non-refundable) 
 
 
 
$200 
 
Continuing Education Certificate Processing  
 
 
$25 
 
Other Fees 
 
Course Drop (per form) 
 
 
 
 
 
 $30 
 
Late Payment (per occurrence) 
 
 
 
             $100 
 
Late Registration (per occurrence) 
 
 
 
 
 $75 
 
Returned Check (per occurrence) 
 
 
 
       
 $50 
 
Testing Kit (per occurrence)  
 
 
 
 
 $75 
 
Official Transcript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 $10 
 
Transfer/Waiver Credit Evaluation 
 (per course)  
 
$150 
 
 
26

 
 
Tuition and Fees – Vancouver Students 
Admissions Fees & Deposits in Canadian Dollars 
 
 
Admissions Application Fee  
 
 
 
 
$50 
 
Deposit (non-refundable) – MA programs 
 
 
 
$250 
 
Tuition 
 
Fee – Per credit hour -  
 
 
 
 
 
$506 
 
Fee - Audit – per credit hour -  
 
 
 
 
$253 
 
Fee - Qualifying Exam Fee -   
 
 
 
 
$700 
 
Registration Based Fees 
 
Fee – Student Activity/Library Fee  (per term) 
 
 
$125  
 
Fee – Late Registration Fee (per occurrence)  
 
 
$50 
 
Fee – Course Add/Drop Fee (per occurrence) 
 
 
$30 
 
Fee – Returned Cheque (per occurrence) 
 
 
 
$50 
 
Vancouver Campus accepts cheques, Mastercard, Visa, and American Express. 
 
Changes in tuition and fees apply to current and new students. Students may pay tuition 
and fees by check or money order made payable to the Adler School of Professional 
Psychology.  The School accepts Visa, MasterCard, Discover, and American Express 
credit cards.  Unless otherwise indicated, tuition and fees are listed in U.S. dollars, and 
remittance must be made in U.S. dollars. 
 
Payment Schedule 
 
Tuition and fees are due and payable in full at the time of registration.  Payments 
made to the School are first applied against any previously existing balance, then to 
current charges. 
Students are responsible for all tuition, cost of texts, and fees at the time due 
regardless of pending employer or third-party reimbursement, unless other financial 
arrangements have been made.  Students approved for financial aid funds are exempt for 
the amount of aid anticipated, until those funds are disbursed. 
Students whose financial accounts are delinquent are not in good standing and are 
not eligible to register for subsequent terms, begin a practicum or internship, obtain 
transcripts, or graduate until all outstanding balances are paid in full.  The School retains 
the right to administratively withdraw students whose accounts are past due, and to 
charge all associated fees.  
 
Tuition Refunds 
 
Students who have officially withdrawn from the School or specific courses may 
receive a tuition refund within 14 days of receipt of the official withdrawal form.  
Refunds will be based upon the total charge incurred rather than the amount paid by the 
 
27

 
students.   
The percentage of tuition refunded, excluding the nonrefundable tuition deposit and 
all other fees, is determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
 
Fifteen-Week Term -  Refund Schedule 
 
By the last day (Sunday) of the first full week of class    
 
 
 
100% 
After the first full week of class, but before the last day of the second week  
50% 
 
Intensive / Weekend Course -  Refund Schedule 
 
Before the first session of the course 
100% 
Before the second session of the course 
50% 
No further refunds provided for intensive or weekend courses. 
 
Vancouver Refund Policy 
 
To initiate a refund, written notice must be provided: 
(a) By a student to the institution when the student withdraws, or 
(b) By the institution to the student where the institution dismisses a student. 
Refund entitlement is calculated on the total fees due under the contract, less the 
applicable non-refundable application or registration fee. Where total fees have not yet 
been collected, the institution is not responsible for refunding more than has been 
collected to date and a student may be required to make up for monies due under the 
contract. 
 
(a) Refunds before the program of study begins: 
(i) If written notice of withdrawal is received by the institution less than seven (7) 
calendar days after the contract is made, and before the start of a program of study, the 
institution may retain the lesser of 10% of the total fees due under the contract or 
$100. 
(ii) Subject to subsection (a) (i), if written notice of withdrawal is received by the 
institution thirty (30) calendar days or more before the start of a program of study, the 
institution may retain 10% of the total fees due under the contract. 
(iii) Subject to subsection (a) (i), if written notice of withdrawal is received by the 
institution less than thirty (30) calendar days before the start of a program of study, the 
institution may retain 20% of the total fees due under the contract. 
(b) Refunds after the program of study starts: 
(i) If written notice of withdrawal is received by the institution, or a student is 
dismissed, within 10% of the program of study’s duration, the institution may retain 
30% of the total fees due under the contract. 
(ii) If written notice of withdrawal is received by the institution, or a student is 
dismissed, within 30% of the program of study’s duration, the institution may retain 
50% of the total fees due under the contract. 
(iii) If a student withdraws or is dismissed after 30% of the program of study’s 
duration, no refund is required. 
 
28

 
 
            Fort Wayne – Refund Schedule 
 
The Indiana Proprietary Education Commission (IPEC) requires that all educational 
programs operating in the state of Indiana utilize and publish the following Refund 
Policy.  Adler School students taking classes in Fort Wayne, IN are subject to this refund 
policy.  The exact language from the IPEC follows.  In this instance, the “institution” 
refers to the Adler School. 
 
Adler School will make the proper refund no later than thirty-one (31) days of the 
student's request for cancellation or withdrawal. 
 
A student is entitled to a full refund if one (1) or more of the following criteria are met: 
 
• The student cancels the enrollment agreement or enrollment application within six 
(6) business days after signing. 
• (B) The student does not meet the institution's minimum admission requirements. 
• (C) The student's enrollment was procured as a result of a misrepresentation in the 
written materials utilized by the institution. 
• (D) If the student has not visited the institution prior to enrollment, and, upon 
touring the institution or attending the regularly scheduled orientation/classes, the 
student withdrew from the program within three (3) days. 
• (2) A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after starting the 
instructional program at the institution and attending one (1) week or less, is 
entitled to a refund of ninety percent (90%) of the cost of the financial obligation, 
less an application/enrollment fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to 
exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
• (3) A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more 
than one (1) week but equal to or less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the 
duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of seventy-five 
percent (75%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an 
application/enrollment fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed 
one hundred dollars ($100). 
• (4) A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more 
than twenty-five percent (25%) but equal to or less than fifty percent (50%) of the 
duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of fifty percent (50%) 
of the cost of the financial obligation, less an application/enrollment fee of ten 
percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
• (5) A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more 
than fifty percent (50%) but equal to or less than sixty percent (60%) of the 
duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of forty percent (40%) 
of the cost of the financial obligation, less an application/enrollment fee of ten 
percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
• (6) A student withdrawing from an institutional program, after attending more 
than sixty percent (60%) of the duration of the instructional program, is not 
entitled to a refund. 
 
29

 
 
Veteran’s Benefits 
 
Students who receive U.S. veteran’s benefits will follow the regulation under Title 38, 
Sections 1651 and 1701, of the State Approval Agency for Veteran’s Education. 
 
Financial Aid 
 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology is approved by the Department of 
Education to award federal student aid to eligible students.  In addition to our 
participation in Title IV Federal Assistance program, we have many options available to 
students to help offset expenses while attending school.  Eligible students have the 
following options to choose from: 
 
• Federal Stafford Loans 
• Federal Work Study 
• Scholarships 
• Alternative Loans (Available to U.S. and International Students) 
 
 
In order to be awarded financial assistance through the Office of Financial Aid, a student 
must have a completed financial aid file and must meet all eligibility requirements.  
Students can begin the process of completing their financial aid file by submitting a Free 
Application of Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) to the Department of Education and by 
submitting an Institutional Application to the Office of Financial Aid.  For priority 
consideration students should have application materials submitted by the following 
dates: 
 
 
Fall Term: 
July 15th 
 
Spring Term: November 15th 
 
Eligibility  
 
To apply for federal loan and work-study funds a student must meet the following 
criteria: 
 
• Citizen, national, permanent resident, or other eligible non-citizen of the United 
States. 
• Demonstrate financial need as defined by the U.S. Department of Education for 
Title IV funding. 
• Enrolled at least half-time in a program leading to a degree or certificate. 
• Maintain Satisfactory Academic Progress. 
• Comply with Selective Service registration. 
• Not be in default on any educational loan and not owe a refund on a grant or loan 
at any institution.  
 
30

 
• Have not been convicted of a drug offense (see question 35 of the FAFSA for 
more details).  
 
Types of Aid Available 
 
Federal Stafford Loan  
 
The Federal Stafford Loan provides the most attractive choice among loan options for 
most student borrowers. Two types of loans are offered through the Federal Stafford 
Loan program: 
• Subsidized 
The subsidized loan is based on need, and the government pays the interest while 
the student is enrolled on at least a half-time basis.  
• Unsubsidized 
The unsubsidized loan is a non-need-based loan for educational expenses. The 
student is responsible for the interest upon disbursement. 
 Federal Work-Study (Part-Time Work)  
 
The Federal Work-Study program provides an excellent opportunity for you to earn 
money from part-time work. Under this program, the federal government pays a portion 
of your wages and the Adler School contributes the remainder. This makes Federal 
Work-Study eligible students particularly attractive to campus departments that have job 
openings for students.  
 
Under the Federal Work-Study program, you may work up to 20 hours per week during 
the Fall,  Spring, and Summer semesters. During school breaks you may work up to 40 
hours per week.  All hiring is done on a term-by-term bases.   
Scholarships 
The Adler School of Professional Psychology offers scholarships based on academic 
achievement, financial need, and community involvement.  Scholarships are available to 
both new and returning, U.S. and international students.  Students should contact the 
Office of Financial Aid for applications and further information.  
Alternative Loans 
Alternative loans are available to U.S. and International students.  When applying for an 
alternative loan, students should note that approval is based upon the student’s credit 
rating and interest rates vary.  For more information, contact the Office of Financial Aid. 
Academic Standards of Progress 
 
In order to participate in Title IV federal assistance while in school, the government 
requires that students maintain minimum requirements in order to remain eligible to 
receive aid.  At the Adler School of Professional Psychology, students are required to 
maintain the following: 
 
31

 
 
• 3.0 cumulative GPA for all course work attempted 
• Complete at least 70% of course work attempted.  A credit is successfully 
completed when the student earns a grade of A, B, C, D or .  Incomplete (“I”) 
grades do not count until changed to A, B,C, D, or P.  It is the student’s 
responsibility to notify the Office of Financial Aid once an “I” has been changed 
to an A, B, C, or P.  
 
If a student falls below either of these standards, the student will be placed on Academic 
Probation for one semester.  If a student does not meet both of these standards by the end 
of the probation term, the student will lose his or her eligibility to receive financial 
assistance until the standards are met.   
 
If there are extenuating circumstances involved with a student not meeting the Academic 
Standards of Progress, a student may appeal their status and request to be re-instated.  
The appeal form is available in The Office of Financial Aid.   
International Students 
International students are eligible to receive alternative loans while attending the Adler 
School of Professional Psychology.  Alternative loans are approved based on credit 
ratings.  Students should also contact their appropriate government and provincial 
agencies to find out about additional sources of aid to help offset expenses while 
completing their course work.  International student are encouraged to contact the Office 
of Financial Aid to obtain further information. 
Canadian Student Loans Program 
The mission of the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP) is to promote accessibility to 
post-secondary education for students with a demonstrated financial need by lowering 
financial barriers through the provision of loans and grants, and to ensure Canadians have 
an opportunity to develop the knowledge and skills to participate in the economy and 
society. Information can be obtained at: 
www.hrsdc.gc.ca/en/gateways/nav/top_nav/program/cslp.shtml 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32

 
M.A. in Counseling Psychology 
 
The Master of Arts (M.A.) in Counseling Psychology program is designed to 
provide students with a foundation in theories and methods of counseling psychology 
with hands-on, practical, supervised training in counseling psychology techniques.  The 
program offers the best features of traditional (M.A.) training programs coupled with 
Adler School’s emphasis on the education and training in socially responsible practice. 
This broad-based program usually takes full-time students at least two years to complete.  
Graduates of the program are prepared for entry-level professional work in a variety of 
human service agencies and organizations in the public or private sector.  This degree 
program also is designed to provide a foundation for those who plan to pursue the Doctor 
of Psychology (Psy.D.) degree at the Adler School.  This degree program satisfies the 
academic and pre-degree training and education requirements for the Licensed Clinical 
Professional Counselor (LCPC) credential in the State of Illinois, and all requirements for the 
Licensed Professional Counselor (LCP) in the State of Illinois.  Applicants should check 
credentialing requirements in the jurisdiction in which they intend to practice following 
graduation.  Links to state and provincial credentialing boards can be found on the website of the 
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards at http://www.asppb.org./
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent from an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• 
The equivalent of twelve semester credit hours in psychology with grades of no less 
than “C” or better in each course.  These courses should include general or 
introductory psychology, abnormal psychology, theories of personality, and 
psychometrics or tests and measures.  
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as the final step in the 
application process. 
 
Degree Requirements 
 
Successful completion of the following courses is required for this degree:  
 
*200 Professional Development Seminar I 1 cr. 
*201 Professional Development Seminar II 1 cr. 
*202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
*203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
  350 Community Psychology & Mental Health 3 cr. 
  402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 3 cr. 
  431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
  432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision 1 cr. 
 
33

 
  438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
*472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
  497 Research Methods 3 cr. 
*505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
  502 MA Practicum Seminar I 1 cr. 
  503 MA Practicum Seminar II 1 cr. 
  506 MA Practicum I 1 cr. 
  507 MA Practicum II 1 cr. 
*520 Theories of Psychotherapy 3 cr. 
  569 Lifestyle & Career Development 3 cr. 
  623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
*641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
*648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. or 
  649 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 3 cr. 
  671 Structural & Sociocultural Bases of Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
Basic Intervention Elective – 3 Hours chosen from 335 Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,          
663 Effective Marriage & Family Counseling, or 337 Group Psychotherapy 
Intervention Elective - 3 Hours chosen from a menu of intervention classes. 
 
995 M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination 0 cr. 
 
* = Required before beginning practicum 
 
 
Total Credit Hours: 52 
 
Practicum  
 
An integral part of all Master’s Programs offered at Adler is the acquisition of 
practical clinical skills gained in field placements.  Ongoing involvement in clinical 
activities at professional training sites, including the School’s Psychological Services 
Center, gives students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the 
knowledge, skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work.  Practicum training 
requirements begin with a first year Community Service Practicum that focuses on 
developing skills related to community-based interventions, advocacy, social justice, and 
systemic interventions that benefit human welfare and well-being. .Clinical training 
provided in students’ second practicum focuses on developing the competencies needed 
to prepare students for entry level practice at graduation. Because the focus is on 
integrating Master’s level education at Adler with Master’s-level supervised clinical 
training, no transfer credit is granted for practica credits earned elsewhere.  Students must 
successfully complete course pre-requisites prior to being approved to begin their second 
practicum.   
First year students will spend 6-10 hours per week over the course of six months at 
an approved Community Service Practicum site and must concurrently enroll in required 
coursework.  A minimum of 150 clock hours of Community Service Practicum is 
required.  Students should expect to spend at least two days per week over the course of 
at least nine months at an approved clinical practicum site and must concurrently enroll in 
 
34

 
Practicum Seminars throughout their field training.  Minimum total clock hours of 
practica are required, which is further outlined in program descriptions within this 
catalog.   
The Director of Training and Community Service works in collaboration with 
students in identifying clinical experiences which meet the standards and requirements of 
the program.  Students should refer to the Practicum Handbook, available from the Adler 
Website (www.adler.edu), for detailed information. 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
 
YEAR ONE 
Fall Term 
200 Professional Development Seminar 1 cr.  
641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
 
402 Introduction  to Adlerian Psychology & Psychopathology  3 cr. 
Credits = 10  
 
Spring Term 
201 Professional Devel. Sem.  1 cr.  
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. or 649 Biopsychosocial             
Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 3 cr. 
520 Theories of Psychotherapy 3 cr. 
202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
Credits = 9 
 
 
Summer Term 
203 Community Service Pract. II 1 cr. 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
350 Community Psychology & Mental Health 3 cr. 
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
Credits = 10 
 
YEAR TWO 
Fall Term 
502 MA Practicum Seminar I 1 cr. 
506 MA Practicum I 1 cr. 
 
Basic Intervention Elective 3 cr. 
671 Structural & Sociocultural Bases of Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Supervision  1 cr. 
Credits = 9 
 
 
Spring Term 
503 MA Practicum Seminar II 1 cr.  
507 MA Practicum II 1 cr. 
 
 
35

 
Intervention Elective 3 cr. 
 
569 Lifestyle & Career Development 3 cr. 
Credits = 8 
 
Summer Term 
497 Research Methods  3 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
995 MA Clinical Qualifying Examination 0 cr. 
Credits = 6 
 
Total Credit Hours: 52 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 52 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 700 minimum clock hours of practicum. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades or 
 
six credit hours of “C” or “C+”.  
4.  Successful completion of the M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination. 
5.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
6.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
the conferral of the Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36

 
M.A. in Counseling Psychology: Art Therapy (MAT)  
 
The Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology: Art Therapy program combines 
core counseling education and training, the theories and techniques of Alfred Adler, and  
education and clinical training in the field of art therapy.  The American Art Therapy 
Association (AATA) and the State of Illinois approved this program in 1999.  The 
program requires 61 credit hours of courses, which includes 700 hours of practicum 
under at least partial supervision of a registered art therapist (ATR).  The program can be 
completed in two years. 
 
 
This program provides students with the academic and pre-degree clinical 
experiences required to apply for registration as an art therapist and also to be licensed 
(LPC and LCPC) by the state of IL.  Art therapists work in a wide variety of clinical and 
educational settings, including hospitals, schools, wellness centers, children’s agencies, 
correctional facilities, and geriatric settings.   
 
Following the degree, a graduate may apply to become a Registered Art Therapist 
(ATR).  The ATR requires an additional 1,000 hours of supervised, direct client contact 
using art therapy beyond those earned during the degree program.  One hour of 
supervision is required for every 10 hours of direct client contact.  A minimum of five 
hundred (500) hours of this work experience must be supervised by an ATR.  Up to five 
hundred (500) hours may be supervised by another licensed professional.  Once you 
become ATR, you may apply to sit for the Board Certification exam (BC). 
 
The graduates of this program can also sit for the Licensed Professional 
Counselor (LPC) exam.  To apply to take the Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor 
(LCPC) exam the graduate of this program must first pass the LPC and also do 3,360 
hours of paid, supervised, direct client contact using counseling/art therapy. 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements  
 
Applicants to this program must have:  
 
• A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent from an accredited institution. 
• A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• The equivalent of twelve (12) semester credit hours in psychology with grades of 
“C” or better.  These courses should include general or introductory psychology, 
abnormal psychology, theories of personality, and psychometrics or tests and 
measures. 
• Eighteen (18) semester credit hours – or  twenty-seven (27) quarter hour credits – 
in-studio art which demonstrates proficiency and disciplined commitment in art 
creation.  
• Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview and will be asked to 
bring a portfolio of original artwork, demonstrating competence with art 
materials, as a final step in the application process. 
 
37

 
Degree Requirements   
 
Successful completion of the following courses is required for this degree: 
 
*200 Professional Development Seminar I  1 cr. 
*201 Professional Development Seminar II  1 cr. 
*202 Community Service Practicum  1 cr. 
*203 Community Service Practicum  1 cr.  
*344 Historical & Theoretical Perspectives of Art Therapy  3 cr. 
*345 The Use of Art in Assessment, Diagnosis & Treatment Planning  3 cr. 
346 The Use of Art in Group & Addiction Counseling  3 cr. 
350 Community Psychology/Mental Health  3 cr. 
402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology  3 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting  1 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision  1 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders  3 cr. 
*450 Child & Adolescent Development & Art Therapy  3 cr. 
451 Socio-Cultural & Systemic Perspectives in Art Therapy  3 cr. 
452 Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy I  3 cr. 
*453 Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy II  3 cr. 
466 Art Therapy Studio: Professional Development  3 cr. 
467 MAT Practicum Seminar I  1 cr. 
468 MAT Practicum Seminar II  1 cr. 
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills  3 cr. 
480 MAT Practicum I  1 cr. 
481 MAT Practicum II  1 cr. 
497 Research Methods  3 cr. 
*505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics  3 cr. 
514 Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis  3 cr. 
520 Theories of Psychotherapy  3 cr. 
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I or II  Biopsychosocial Bases of        
Health & Dysfunction II  3 cr. 
995 MA Clinical Qualifying Examination  0 cr.                                            
 
* = Required before beginning practicum 
 
Total Credit Hours: 61 
 
Practicum 
 
            An integral part of all Master’s programs offered at Adler is the acquisition of 
practical clinical skills gained in field placements.  Ongoing involvement in clinical 
activities at professional training sites, including the School’s Psychological Services 
Center, gives students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the 
knowledge, skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work.  Practicum training 
requirements begin with a first year Community Service Practicum that focuses on 
 
38

 
developing skills related to community-based interventions, advocacy, social justice, and 
systemic interventions that benefit human welfare and well-being.  Clinical training 
provided in students’ second practicum focuses on developing the competencies needed 
to prepare students for entry level practice at graduation.   Because the focus is on 
integrating Master’s level education at Adler with Master’s-level supervised clinical 
training, no transfer credit is granted for practica credits earned elsewhere.  Students must 
successfully complete course pre-requisites prior to being approved to begin their second 
practicum.   
 
           First year students will spend 6-10 hours per week over the course of six months at 
an approved Community Service Practicum site and must concurrently enroll in required 
coursework.  A minimum of 150 clock hours of Community Service Practicum is 
required.  Students should expect to spend at least two days per week over the course of 
at least nine months at an approved clinical practicum site and must concurrently enroll in 
Practicum Seminars throughout their field training.  Minimum total clock hours of 
practica are required, which is further outlined in program descriptions within this 
catalog. 
 
            The Director of Clinical Training and Community Service works in collaboration 
with students to identify and approve clinical experiences which meet the standards and 
requirements of the program.   
 
Curriculum Sequence 
  
YEAR ONE 
Fall Term 
346 The Use of Art in Group & Addiction Counseling  3 cr. 
402 Introduction & Psychodynamics of Adlerian Psychology  3 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders  3 cr. 
200 Professional Development Seminar  1 cr. 
Credits =13 
 
Spring Term 
201 Professional Development Seminar  1 cr. 
450 Child & Adolescent Development & Art Therapy  3 cr. 
466 Art Therapy Studio: Professional Development  3 cr. 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics  3 cr. 
350 Community Psychology/Mental Health  3 cr. 
202 Community Service Practicum  1 cr. 
Credits = 14 
 
Summer Term 
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills  3 cr. 
345 The Use of Art in Assessment, Diagnosis & Treatment Planning  3 cr. 
453 Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy II  3 cr. 
203 Community Service Practicum  1 cr. 
 
39

 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting  1 cr. 
Credits = 11 
 
YEAR TWO 
Fall Term 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision  1 cr. 
452 Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy I  3 cr.  
452 Socio-Cultural & Systemic Perspectives in Art Therapy  3 cr. 
520 Theories of Psychotherapy  3 cr. 
480 MAT Practicum I  1 cr. 
467 MAT Practicum Seminar I  1 cr. 
Credits = 12  
 
Spring Term 
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I or  Biopsychosocial Bases of 
Health & Dysfunction II  3 cr. 
514 Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis  3 cr. 
497 Research Methods  3 cr. 
481 MAT Practicum II  1 cr. 
468 MAT Practicum Seminar II  1 cr. 
Credits = 11 
 
Summer Term 
995 MA Clinical Qualifying Examination  0 cr. 
 
Total credit hours: 61  
 
Graduation Requirements 
  
1.      Satisfactory completion of 61 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.      Satisfactory completion of 700 minimum clock hours of practicum. 
3.      A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades (or 6 
credit hours) of “C”. 
4.      Successful completion of the Master’s Clinical Qualifying Exam (MCQE). 
5.      Successful portfolio review. 
6.      Completion of application for Graduation and full payment of all outstanding tuition 
and fees. 
7.      Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for the 
conferral of the Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology: Art Therapy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40

 
Concentration/Post-Master’s Certificate in Art Therapy 
Counseling (CAT) 
 
The Concentration or Post-Master’s Certificate in Art Therapy Counseling (CAT) 
combines presentation of the theories and techniques of art therapy with supervised 
practicum experience to provide students with training in the use of art in counseling.  
Students enrolled in a degree program at the Adler School may graduate with a 
concentration in Art Therapy.  Post-Master’s students are awarded a certificate.  In 
accordance with the Education Standards of the American Art Therapy Association 
(AATA), this Concentration/Certificate program requires a minimum of 15 hours of full-
time study, or the equivalent on a part-time basis, from entry to completion.  A 700-hour 
practicum in art therapy under partial supervision of a registered Art Therapist (ATR) is 
required. 
 
Graduates of this program must complete 1,500 hours of supervised work as an 
art therapist in order to apply for registration as an art therapist (ATR).  
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• A master’s degree in psychology or a related field from an accredited institution, 
or have the equivalent academic preparation form an institution outside the United 
States. 
• A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• The CAT requires each student to submit a portfolio of original artwork, before 
admission to the program, that demonstrates competence with art materials. 
• The CAT shall require that each student admitted to this program successfully 
complete requirements not later than twelve (12) months after entering the 
program (and including credits taken before admission). 
• A minimum of eighteen (18) semester credit hours – or 27 quarter-hour credits – 
of study in studio art which demonstrates proficiency and disciplined commitment 
in art-making. 
• Equivalency of some non-academic studio art experience or art therapy based 
coursework (270 hours) may be substituted for the required hours of study in 
studio art at the discretion of the MAT Program Director.  However, it is 
imperative that the applicant evidences a range of experience using a variety of art 
materials and processes. 
 
 Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview and will be asked to bring a 
portfolio of their artwork as the final step in the application process. 
 
 
 
 
41

 
 Concentration/Certificate Requirements 
 
       The following courses are required for the Concentration/Certificate program.  In 
addition, students in this program will be required to submit a portfolio of their art 
therapy course experiences for review.  
 
344  Historical & Theoretical Perspective in Art Therapy  3 cr.  
345  The Use of Art in Assessment, Diagnosis & Treatment Planning  3 cr. 
346  The Use of Art in Group & Addiction Counseling  3 cr. 
450  Child & Adolescent Development and Art Therapy  3 cr. 
451  Socio-Cultural & Systemic Perspectives in Art Therapy  3  cr. 
452  Theories and Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy I  3 cr. 
453  Theories and Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy II  3 cr. 
466  Art Therapy Studio: Professional Development  3 cr. 
467  MAT Practicum Seminar I  1 cr. 
468  MAT Practicum Seminar II  1 cr. 
480  MAT Practicum I  1 cr. 
481  MAT Practicum II  1 cr. 
  
Total Credit Hours:  28  
 
CAT Graduation Requirements 
 
1.   Satisfactory completion of 28 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.   Satisfactory completion of 700 hours of supervised practicum. 
3.   A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade (or 3 
credit hours) of “C”.  
4.   Successful Portfolio Review. 
5.   Completion of Application for Graduation and full payment of all outstanding tuition 
and fees. 
6.   Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for the 
conferral of the Concentration/Certificate in Art Therapy Counseling.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42

 
M.A. in Marriage & Family Counseling 
  
The Master of Arts in Marriage & Family Counseling program is designed to 
prepare entry-level counselors to specialize in working with couples and families.  The 
sequence of courses and supervised clinical training will assist professionals in qualifying 
for licensure as a Marriage and Family Therapist and a Licensed Clinical Professional 
Counselor (LCPC) in many states, and in qualifying for membership in professional 
organizations such as the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy 
(AAMFT).  For current requirements, students should contact directly the licensing 
agency of the state in which they plan to work and professional organizations with which 
they desire to affiliate.  
Students in this program complete course work and practicum experiences focused 
on the understanding and integration of individual life style dynamics with couple and 
family systems.  Graduates of the program have a theoretical understanding of individual, 
couple, and family systems, including developmental issues and major variations; 
assessment skills in life style and systemic diagnosis; and intervention skills based upon 
major models of marital and family therapy, with the theory and values, techniques, and 
theories of Alfred Adler as a foundation. 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent from an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• 
The equivalent of twelve semester credit hours in psychology with grades of “C” or 
better.  These courses should include general or introductory psychology and 
abnormal psychology. 
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as the final step in the 
application process. 
 
Degree Requirements 
 
Successful completion of the following courses is required for this degree: 
  
*200 Professional Development Seminar I  1 cr. 
*201 Professional Development Seminar II  1 cr. 
*202 Community Service Practicum  1 cr. 
*203 Community Service Practicum  1 cr. 
350   Community Psychology & Mental Health  3 cr. 
402   Intro to Adlerian Psychology  & Psychopathology  3 cr. 
431   Child Guidance & Parenting  1 cr. 
432   Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision  1 cr. 
438  Introduction to Addictive Disorders  3 cr. 
 
43

 
*472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills  3 cr. 
497   Research Methods  3 cr. 
*505 Professional Issues & Ethics  3 cr. 
523   Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy  3 cr. 
*623 Life Span Development  3 cr. 
*641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences  3 cr. 
*648 Biopsychosocial Basis of Health & Dysfunction I  3 cr. 
         or 649  Biopsychosocial Basis of Health & Dysfunction II 
*651 Assessment & Treatment from a Systemic Perspective   3 cr. 
652   Life Cycle & Cultural Issues in MFT  3 cr. 
655   Advanced Couples Therapy  3 cr. 
662   Overview of Models of Marriage & Family Therapy  3 cr. 
663   Effective Marriage & Family Therapy 3 cr. 
664   Practicum in Marriage & Family I  1 cr. 
665   Practicum in Marriage & Family II  1 cr. 
667   MA Practicum Seminar in Marriage & Family  I  1 cr. 
668   MA Practicum Seminar in Marriage & Family II  1 cr. 
995   M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination  0 cr. 
* = Required before beginning practicum 
 
Total Credit Hours: 55  
 
Practicum   
 
An integral part of all Master’s Programs offered at Adler is the acquisition of 
practical clinical skills gained in field placements.  Ongoing involvement in clinical 
activities at professional training sites, including the School’s Psychological Services 
Center, gives students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the 
knowledge, skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work.  Practicum training 
requirements begin with a first year Community Service Practicum that focuses on 
developing skills related to community-based interventions, advocacy, social justice, and 
systemic interventions that benefit human welfare and well-being.  Clinical training 
provided in students’ second practicum focuses on developing the competencies needed 
to prepare students for entry level practice at graduation. Because the focus is on 
integrating Master’s level education at Adler with Master’s-level supervised clinical 
training, no transfer credit is granted for practica credits earned elsewhere.  Students must 
successfully complete course pre-requisites prior to being approved to begin their second 
practicum.   
First year students will spend 6-10 hours per week over the course of six months at 
an approved Community Service Practicum site and must concurrently enroll in required 
coursework.  A minimum of 150 clock hours of Community Service Practicum is 
required.  Students should expect to spend at least two days per week over the course of 
at least nine months at an approved clinical practicum site and must concurrently enroll in 
two semesters of Practicum Seminars during their field training.  A minimum of 700 total 
clock hours of practica are required, which should include at least 200 hours of direct 
clinical service, of which one-third or more should be in conjoint therapy with couples or 
families.  
 
44

 
The Director of Training and Community Service works in collaboration with 
students in identifying clinical experiences which meet the standards and requirements of 
the program.  Students should refer to the Practicum Handbook, available from the Adler 
Website (www.adler.edu), for detailed information. 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
 
YEAR ONE 
Fall Term 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 Professional Development Seminar 1 cr    . 
641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
                          
623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
              
 
   
402 Introduction  to Adlerian Psychology & Psychopathology  3 cr. 
 
           
Credits = 10 
 
Spring Term 
201 Professional Development Seminar  1 cr.                      
202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr.           
350 Community Psychology & Mental Health 3 cr.              
             
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
       
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
  
Credits = 9   
 
                 
 
 
Summer Term 
203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
651 Assessment & Treatment from a Systemic Perspective 3 cr. 
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. or 649 
Credits = 10  
 
YEAR TWO   
Fall Term 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
667 MAF Practicum Seminar I 1 cr.        
664 MAF Practicum I 1 cr. 
 
        
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Supervision  1 cr.  
       
652 Lifestyle & Cultural Issues in Marriage & Family Therapy 3 cr.       
  
662 Overview of Marriage & Family Therapy  Models 3 cr. 
Credits = 9  
 
 
 
 
 
Spring Term  
 
 
 
 
 
 
668 MAF Practicum Seminar II 1 cr. 
665 MAF Practicum II 1 cr.   
663 Effective Marriage & Family Therapy 3 cr.           
523 Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy 3 cr. 
Credits = 8  
 
 
 
45

 
Summer Term 
497 Research Methods  3 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
655 Advanced Couples Counseling 3 cr. 
995 MA Clinical Qualifying Exam 0 cr. 
 Credits = 9 
 
Total Credit Hours: 55 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 55 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 700 minimum clock hours of practicum and appropriate 
hours of clinical service. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades or 
six credit hours of “C” or “C+”. 
4.  Successful completion of the M.A. Clinical  Qualifying Examination. 
5.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
6.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
the conferral of the Master of Arts in Marriage & Family Counseling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46

 
Certificate in Marriage & Family Therapy 
 
The Certificate in Marriage & Family Therapy program enables qualified 
professionals in psychology, social work, and related mental health fields to enhance their 
knowledge and skills in couple and family therapy and to help them achieve licensure or 
other professional recognition.  The course work and clinical practica in this certificate 
program focus on helping the student to understand and integrate individual life style 
dynamics with couple and family systems.   
The program is designed to provide students with opportunities to develop 
intervention skills through role-playing and supervised clinical experience.  Graduates of 
the program will have a theoretical understanding of individual, couple, and family 
systems, including developmental issues and major variations; assessment skills in life 
style and systemic diagnosis; and intervention skills based upon major models of marital 
and family therapy, with the theories and methods of Individual Psychology as a 
foundation.   
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A master’s degree in psychology, social work, or a related mental health field from 
an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• 
Prerequisite graduate-level courses including the following: a minimum of nine 
semester hours in human development, personality theory, human sexuality, 
psychopathology, or behavioral pathology; three semester hours of professional 
issues and ethics; and three semester hours of research design, methods, and 
statistics.   
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process.  Graduate-level course work previously completed at another college 
or university may be recognized for transfer of credit and will be evaluated on an 
individual basis by the Program Director.  Students lacking any of the graduate-level 
prerequisite courses listed above can take Adler School courses from the MAF program 
or the equivalent courses at another college or university: 
 
Certificate Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for this certificate.  In addition, students in this 
program should consult with the Program Director to review previous graduate 
coursework and develop an individualized course of study. 
 
402  Intro to Adlerian Psychology & Psychopathology 
 
3 cr 
523  Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy   
3 cr 
651  Assessment & Treatment from a Systemic Perspective   
3 cr 
 
47

 
652  Life Cycle & Cultural Issues in Marriage & Family Therapy 3 cr 
655  Advanced Couples Therapy  
 
3 cr 
662  Overview of Models of Marriage & Family Therapy   
 
3 cr 
663  Effective Marriage & Family Therapy   
 
3 cr 
664  Practicum in Marriage & Family I 
 
1 cr 
665  Practicum in Marriage & Family II 
 
1 cr 
667  MA Practicum Seminar in Marriage & Family  I  
 
1 cr 
668  MA Practicum Seminar in Marriage & Family II  
 
1 cr 
995  M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination  
 
0 cr 
 
Total Credit Hours:  25  
                                                                                                                                                                      
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.   Satisfactory completion of 25 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 400 minimum clock hours of specialized practicum in 
MFT. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade of 
“C” or “C+”. 
4.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
5.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
the conferral of the Certificate in Marriage & Family Therapy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48

 
Doctoral Concentration in Marriage & Family Therapy 
 
Adler School doctoral students working toward the Psy.D. in psychology may 
pursue specialized training in Marriage and Family Therapy concurrently with their 
doctoral work by fulfilling the requirements for the concentration in marriage and family 
therapy. Previous graduates of the Adler Psy.D. program may also return to pursue a 
formal specialized concentration such as MFT.  
 
Course Requirements 
 
The concentration in Marriage & Family Therapy requires the following 15 credits 
of coursework. Some substitution may be possible with the approval of the program 
director. 
 
523  Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy   
3 cr 
651  Assessment & Treatment from a Systemic Perspective   
3 cr 
652  Life Cycle & Cultural Issues in MFT 
 
3 cr 
655  Advanced Couples Therapy  
 
3 cr 
663  Effective Marriage & Family Therapy   
 
3 cr 
 
Specialized Practicum for MFT Concentration  
 
In addition to specialized coursework in MFT, students in the MFT concentration 
will acquire and develop practical clinical skills in MFT through specialized field 
placements. Ongoing involvement in clinical activities at professional training sites gives 
students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the knowledge, 
skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work. Since the MFT practicum is 
considered an advanced specialty practicum, students must satisfactorily complete a 
doctoral therapy practicum prior to beginning the MFT practicum.    
Students should expect to spend from ten to twenty hours per week at an approved 
MFT practicum site and must concurrently enroll in two semesters of Practicum Seminars 
during their field training.  A minimum of 400 total clock hours of practica are required, 
which should include at least 200 hours of direct clinical service, of which one-third or 
more should be in conjoint therapy with couples or families.  
The Director of Training and Community Service and the Director of the Marriage 
& Family Counseling Program work in collaboration with concentration students to 
identify clinical experiences which will meet the specialized needs of the MFT 
concentration and the goals of the student.  Additional resources are available in the 
Practicum Handbook, available on the Adler Website (www.adler.edu), and the database 
of practicum sites available from the Training Department. 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 15 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 400 minimum clock hours of MFT practicum, including 
 
49

 
appropriate hours of conjoint therapy. 
3. 
Successful submission of case analysis following outline in the M.A. Clinical  
Qualifying Examination. 
4.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
5.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
awarding a certificate of completion of the Concentration in Marriage & Family 
Therapy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50

 
M.A. in Counseling & Organizational Psychology 
 
The Master of Arts in Counseling & Organizational Psychology program combines 
the theories and skills of counseling psychology with organizational theory, design and 
development in order to prepare graduates for positions in business and industry, 
especially in organizational psychology and the related areas of personnel management, 
team 
building, 
performance 
enhancement, 
executive 
coaching, 
organizational 
development, training, and employee assistance programs. 
This program is a one of a kind in the area because it prepares graduates to sit for 
state level licensure as a master’s level counselor.  Graduates will be trained and qualified 
to be entry level counselors with skills in assessing and providing counseling services to 
individuals, couples, and families.  Beyond these important and marketable skills, 
graduates will have received training and skills in assessing and providing intervention in 
organizational settings on the level of the individual (personnel selection, leadership 
development, executive coaching, career assessment, and counseling), the work group 
(team assessment, team issue resolution, and team building), as well as the organizational 
level (talent audits, needs analysis, strategic planning, and organizational design and 
development). 
Courses in this program are offered on an every other weekend schedule, all day on 
Saturdays and Sundays.  The program’s design and schedule accommodate working 
professionals with the expectation that students will take two courses each term.   
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent from an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• 
The equivalent of twelve semester credit hours in psychology with grades of “C” or 
better.  These courses should include general or introductory psychology, abnormal 
psychology, theories of personality, and psychometrics or tests and measures. 
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process. 
 
Degree Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for this degree.  It is mandatory that students take 
courses following the sequence described below to insure timely progress in meeting 
program requirements. 
 
*200 Professional Development Seminar I 1 cr. 
*201 Professional Development Seminar II 1 cr. 
*202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
*203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
 
51

 
402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 3 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision 1 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
*472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
*505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
*520 Theories of Psychotherapy 3 cr. 
569 Lifestyle & Career Development 3 cr. 
*623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
*641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
*648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. or 
649 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 3 cr. 
571 Foundations in Counseling & Organizational Consulting 3 cr. 
574 Principles of Industrial/Organizational Psychology 3 cr. 
575 Executive Coaching/Consulting & Leadership Development 3 cr. 
580 Organizational Theory & Change Management 3 cr. 
584 Organizational Consultation & Group Development 3 cr. 
585 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology I: Counseling 1 cr. 
589 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology II: Counseling 1 cr. 
586 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology: Business 1 cr. 
587 Organizational Psychology Practicum I: Counseling 1 cr. 
590 Organizational Psychology Practicum II: Counseling 1 cr. 
588 Organizational Psychology Practicum: Business 1 cr. 
596 Practice Development & Issues 3 cr. 
995 M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination 0 cr. 
 
* = Required before beginning practicum 
 
Total Credit Hours: 57 
 
Practicum 
 
An integral part of all Master’s Programs offered at Adler is the acquisition of 
practical clinical skills gained in field placements.  Ongoing involvement in clinical 
activities at professional training sites, including the School’s Psychological Services 
Center, gives students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the 
knowledge, skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work.  Practicum training 
requirements begin with a first year Community Service Practicum that focuses on 
developing skills related to community-based interventions, advocacy, social justice, and 
systemic interventions that benefit human welfare and well-being.  Clinical training 
provided in students’ second practicum focuses on developing the competencies needed 
to prepare students for entry level practice at graduation.  Because the focus is on 
integrating Master’s level education at Adler with Master’s-level supervised clinical 
training, no transfer credit is granted for practica credits earned elsewhere.  Students must 
successfully complete course pre-requisites prior to being approved to begin their second 
practicum.   
 
52

 
First year students will spend 6-10 hours per week over the course of six months at 
an approved Community Service Practicum site and must concurrently enroll in required 
coursework.  A minimum of 150 clock hours of Community Service Practicum is 
required.  Students should expect to spend at least two days per week over the course of 
at least nine months at an approved clinical practicum site and must concurrently enroll in 
Practicum Seminars throughout their field training.  Minimum total clock hours of 
practica are required, which is further outlined in program descriptions within this 
catalog.   
The Director of Training and Community Service works in collaboration with 
students in identifying clinical experiences which meet the standards and requirements of 
the program.  Students should refer to the Practicum Handbook, available from the Adler 
Website (www.adler.edu), for detailed information. 
 
Curriculum Sequence 
 
YEAR ONE 
Fall Term 
200 Professional Development Seminar I 1 cr.  
571 Foundations in Counseling & Organizational Consulting  3 cr. 
623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
Credits = 7 
 
 
Spring Term 
201 Professional Development  Seminar II  1 cr. 
202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
574 Principles of Industrial/Organizational Psychology 3 cr. 
402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 3 cr. 
Credits = 8  
 
Summer Term 
203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
Credits = 7. 
 
YEAR TWO 
Fall Term 
575 Executive Coaching/Consulting & Leadership Development 3 cr. 
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. or 
649 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 3 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
Credits = 7 
 
 
 
 
 
53

 
Spring Term 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
580 Organizational Theory & Change Management 3 cr. 
Credits = 6 
 
Summer Term 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
520 Theories of Psychotherapy 3 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision 1 cr. 
Credits = 7  
 
YEAR THREE 
Fall Term 
585 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology I: Counseling 1 cr. 
587 Organizational Psychology Practicum I: Counseling 1 cr. 
584 Organizational Consultation & Group Development 3 cr. 
569 Lifestyle & Career Development 3 cr. 
Credits = 8 
 
Spring Term 
589 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology II: Counseling 1 cr. 
590 Organizational Psychology Practicum II: Counseling 1 cr. 
596 Practice Development & Issues 3 cr. 
Credits = 5 
 
Summer Term 
588 Organizational Psychology Practicum: Business 1 cr. 
586 MA Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology: Business 1 cr. 
995 M.A. Clinical Qualifying Exam   0 cr. 
Credits = 2  
 
Total Credit Hours:  57 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 57 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 400 clock hours of a counseling practicum and 300 hours 
of a business practicum. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades or 
six credit hours of “C” or “C+”. 
4.  Successful completion of the M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination. 
5.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
6.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
the conferral of the Master of Arts in Counseling & Organizational Psychology. 
 
 
54

 
M.A. in Police Psychology  
 
 
The Master of Arts degree in Police Psychology is designed for individuals 
currently in the field of law enforcement. The Program is designed to provide a 
theoretical background into psychology while training the student to apply clinical and 
social psychology to operational and administrative needs. Students will learn to apply 
the basic principles of Adlerian and Cognitive/Behavioral psychology to managerial, 
field and organizational cultural concerns which arise within the police environment. 
 
This Master of Arts degree is not designed to teach the student to conduct therapy 
or engage in psychological testing. There are no clinical hours required nor a practicum 
to complete. This degree does not lead to any type of licensure or certification. Rather, 
this Program is designed to teach students the practical applications of psychology to the 
field of law enforcement. Core professors and adjunct faculty all have extensive 
experience either in clinical psychology and/or law enforcement. A number of courses 
are team taught, combining experts from both fields of study. 
 
The Program consists of 33 credit hours divided into 10 core courses plus a thesis 
course. All core textbook are provided for each course, and courses are generally taught 
in the evenings or weekends. Students who choose to take two courses per semester can 
complete the degree program in two years. Individuals who have successfully completed 
the ten week School of Police Staff and Command, Northwestern University or the 
Chicago Police Executive Development Program will be granted 3 credit hours toward 
this degree by having the thesis requirement of MPP 753 waived.  
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent from an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as the final step in the 
application process. 
 
Degree Requirements 
 
The following core and advanced courses are required for this degree.  All required 
courses are three credits. 
 
MPP 751   Social and Community Psychology 
MPP 748   Psychology of Critical Incidents and Trauma  
MPP 746   Psychology of Police Organizations 
MPP 752   Psychology of  Leadership 
MPP 749   Psychology of Evil and Criminal Behavior 
MPP 745   Police Psychology 
 
55

 
MPP 750  Psychology of Terrorism 
MPP 350 Community Psychology and Mental Health   
MPP 402  Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 
MPP 747  Assessment Issues in Police Psychology  
MPP 753  Thesis & Portfolio Development  
 
Total Credit Hours: 33 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 33 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades or 
six credit hours of “C” or “C+”.  
3.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
4.   Completion of Thesis with a grade of “A” or “B”. 
5.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for the 
conferral of the Master of Arts in Police Psychology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56

 
Specialization or Certificate in Substance Abuse Counseling  
 
The Substance Abuse Counseling Program is designed to provide education and 
training in the prevention, intervention, and treatment of Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse 
(AODA) disorders.  Specifically the course work provides education in the theories, 
techniques, and the core functions of substance abuse counseling focusing on evidence 
based research and best practice standards.  This combined with the specialized 
practicum supervision and experience for entry level practice in AODA or mentally ill 
substance abuser (MISA) clinical programs provides advanced alcohol and other drug 
abuse counselor training. 
This program is accredited as an Advanced Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse 
Counselor Training Program by the Illinois Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Professional 
Certification Association, Inc. (IAODAPCA).  This certification process is based on the 
“Illinois Model for Certification of Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Counselors.” 
This program can be taken as part of the students’ graduate studies at either the 
masters or doctoral level as a concentration.   Students already with a bachelors, masters, 
or doctoral degree can enroll in the program for a certificate in substance abuse 
counseling.  In either case, admission is through the schools admissions process and a 
personal interview with the Program Director. 
 
Course Requirements 
 
The concentration/certificate in Substance Abuse Counseling requires the following 
twelve (12) credits of coursework: 
 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders                                             3 cr. 
436 Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual Aspects of Addictions                     3 cr. 
437 Treatment of Addictive Disorders                                                3 cr. 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics                                 3 cr. 
 
Specialized Practicum for Substance Abuse Concentration/Certificate 
 
In addition to the specialized coursework in AODA counseling, students in the 
AODA concentration/certificate will acquire and develop practical skills in the AODA 
core functions through specialized field placements. 
Students should expect to spend from ten to twenty hours per week at an AODA 
approved practicum site and must concurrently enroll in two semesters of Practicum 
Seminars during their field training.  A minimum of five hundred (500) total clock hours 
of practica are required. 
The Director of Training and Community Service and the Director of the 
Substance 
Abuse 
Counseling 
Program 
work 
in 
collaboration 
with 
concentration/certificate students to identify clinical experiences which will meet the 
required training hours and experiences. 
The concentration/certificate in Substance Abuse Counseling requires the 
following four (4) semester credit hours of practicum (500 hours) coursework: 
 
 
57

 
447 M.A. Practicum in Substance Abuse Counseling I                       1 cr. 
446 M.A. Practicum in Substance Abuse Counseling II                      1 cr. 
445 Practicum in Substance Abuse Counseling I (250 clock hours)    1 cr. 
448 Practicum in Substance Abuse Counseling II (250 clock hours)   1 cr. 
 
Completion Requirements 
 
1. Satisfactory completion of nine (9) semester credit hours of AODA coursework. 
2. Satisfactory completion of the three (3) semester hour course on Professional 
Development, Issues & Ethics.                                
3. Satisfactory completion of four (4) semester hours of practicum coursework 
including five hundred (500) clock hours of AODA clinical practicum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58

 
Certificate in Adlerian Psychotherapy 
 
The Certificate in Adlerian Psychotherapy program is designed to provide 
specialized training in the principles, techniques and methodologies of Alfred Adler. 
This program was developed to allow qualified professionals an opportunity to 
obtain specialized knowledge and clinical skills, participate in supervised clinical 
experiences, and acquire a specialty in Individual Psychology.  
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A master’s or doctoral degree in clinical or counseling psychology, social work, or a 
related field from an accredited institution. 
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process. 
 
Certificate Requirements 
 
Successful completion of the following courses is required for this certificate:   
 
402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 3 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision 1 cr. 
514 Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis 3 cr. 
523 Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy 3 cr. 
502 MA Practicum Seminar I 1 cr. 
503 MA Practicum Seminar II 1 cr. 
506 MA Practicum I 1 cr. 
507 MA Practicum II 1 cr. 
 
Total Credit Hours: 15 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 15 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 700 minimum clock hours of practicum. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade of 
“C” or “C+”. 
4.  Successful completion of a written, comprehensive case study of a client followed 
by an oral examination. 
5.  Submission of a completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
6.  Faculty approval for graduation. 
 
59

 
Concentration & Certificate in Clinical Hypnosis 
 
The clinical practice of hypnosis has changed greatly in the past 40 years.  Perhaps 
the greatest single advancement in the field of hypnosis is the realization that the ability 
to experience hypnosis resides largely in the person having the experience rather than in 
the therapist.  Modern clinical hypnosis is an interpersonal process in which the therapist 
and the client work cooperatively to enhance the well being of the client. 
The Concentration & Certificate in Clinical Hypnosis program is designed to 
provide graduate students in psychology and practicing professionals with an opportunity 
to obtain structured, sequential, professional education and training in clinical hypnosis.  
Adler School’s certificate program has been approved by the American Society of 
Clinical Hypnosis (ASCH).  Students currently enrolled in a degree program at the 
School are eligible to graduate with a Concentration in Clinical Hypnosis.  A Certificate 
is awarded to those possessing licensure as a clinical psychologist or other licensed health 
professionals. Graduates of this program meet or exceed the training requirements for 
membership in and certain certification requirements of ASCH.  Applicants who have 
completed programs or courses offered or approved by either ASCH or the Society for 
Clinical & Experimental Hypnosis (SCEH) may be able to waive some of the required 
courses in this program.   
This program presents the theoretical foundations of clinical hypnosis and develops 
students’ skills in the application of hypnosis techniques.  Students learn how to 
understand and employ hypnotic phenomena to aid clients with psychotherapy and 
medical related issues.      
The certificate indicates that the student has successfully completed a course of 
study in the area of clinical hypnosis.  The certificate is not intended to serve as a 
recognition of proficiency.  Further, it is not a license or certificate of registration as a 
professional hypnotist or hypnotherapist.  
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
A baccalaureate degree or the equivalent earned at an accredited institution. 
• 
A grade point average of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all undergraduate and 
graduate course work. 
• 
Graduate standing in a master’s degree or doctorate program in an area of mental 
health, or licensure as a clinical psychologist, or a related health care license.  
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process. 
 
Certificate Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for this certificate.  In addition, students in this 
program should consult with the Program Coordinator to develop an individualized 
course of study. 
 
60

 
 
710  Theories & Techniques of Clinical Hypnosis I  
3 cr 
711  Theories & Techniques of Clinical Hypnosis II  
3 cr 
 
         Advanced Hypnosis Elective 
Either  
712  Advanced Theories and Techniques of Hypnosis      3 cr 
Or 
714  Research Seminar in Clinical Hypnosis  
3 cr 
 
Total Credit Hours: 9 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 9 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade of 
“C” or “C+”. 
3.  Submission of a completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
4.  Faculty approval for graduation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61

 
Concentration & Certificate in Clinical Neuropsychology 
 
Program Overview & History 
 
Clinical Neuropsychology is one of the fastest growing subspecialties within 
psychology.  Its growth and credibility are manifested in the continued implementation of 
new doctoral and post-doctoral training programs; its widely-read professional journals 
such as Neuropsychology and The Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology; its growing  
professional organizations such as the International Neuropsychological Society (INS), 
the National Academy of Neuropsychology (NAN) and Division 40 of the American 
Psychological Association; its recognition by the National Register of Health Care 
Providers; and establishment of credentialing boards such as the American Board of 
Clinical Neuropsychology and the American Board of Professional Neuropsychology.   
Division 40 of the American Psychological Association defines a clinical 
neuropsychologist as follows: 
 
A Clinical Neuropsychologist is a professional psychologist who applies 
principles of assessment and intervention based upon the scientific study of 
human behavior as it relates to normal and abnormal functioning of the central 
nervous system.  The Clinical Neuropsychologist is a doctoral-level psychology 
provider of diagnostic and intervention services who has demonstrated 
competence in the application of such principles for human welfare following: 
 
• 
Successful completion of systematic didactic and experiential training in 
neuropsychology and neuroscience at a regionally accredited university; 
• 
Two or more years of appropriate supervised training applying 
neuropsychological service in a clinical setting; 
• 
Licensing and concentration to provide psychological services to the 
public by the laws of the state or province in which he or she lives; and 
• 
Review by one’s peers as a test of these competencies. 
 
The Concentration/Certificate in Clinical Neuropsychology was developed 
following the guidelines set forth by Division 40 of the American Psychological 
Association.  Its requirements are continually under examination and revisions are 
expected.  
The Concentration/Certificate is designed to provide doctoral students with the 
opportunity to develop a solid competence and proficiency in clinical neuropsychology.  
For Adler School’s doctoral students, completion of the Concentration in Clinical 
Neuropsychology, in conjunction with the Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology, prepares 
graduates to complete advanced work (i.e., postdoctoral fellowship), leading to careers in 
clinical neuropsychology and to board certification.  Note that a year of post-doctoral 
training is required for licensure as a psychologist in most states and provinces.  In 
addition, graduates are expected to continue training on a post-doctoral level and to 
acquire additional supervised clinical experience to increase both general and 
subspecialty neuropsychology competencies.  Current national guidelines recommend 
that students complete a two-year post-doctoral residency in neuropsychology following 
 
62

 
the completion of this program.  Licensed clinical psychologists admitted to the program 
will receive a Concentration in Clinical Neuropsychology. 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements—Matriculating Adler Students 
 
Students who have completed the requisite assessment sequence (627, 628 and 624), 
biological bases of behavior (636) and a course of biopsychosocial bases of health and 
dysfunction (648 or 649) are eligible to take Beginning Neuropsychological Assessment 
(720) as an advanced assessment elective.  Following successful completion of this 
course (i.e., grade of B or higher) and both the therapy (614-616) and clinical assessment 
(611-613) practica, students interested in obtaining the Concentration in Clinical 
Neuropsychology may then pursue its remaining course requirements and completion of 
an advanced practicum and practicum seminar in clinical neuropsychological assessment.   
 
Minimum Admission Requirements—Outside Professionals 
 
Applicants to this program must have: 
 
• 
Licensure as a clinical psychologist, or a related health care license.  
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process. 
 
Concentration/Certificate Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for the Concentration in Clinical Neuropsychology.  
In addition, students in this program should consult with the Program Coordinator to 
develop an individualized course of study.  The program may be modified based on 
individual circumstances.   
 
720  Beginning Neuropsychological Assessment  
3 cr. 
721  Intermediate Neuropsychological Assessment  
3 cr. 
722 Practicum Seminar in Neuropsychology I   
1 cr. 
723  Advanced Neuropsychological Assessment  
3 cr. 
724  Practicum Seminar in Neuropsychology II 
1 cr. 
725  Neuropsychological Intervention Techniques  
3 cr. 
726  Neuropsychology Practicum I: Assessment 
1 cr. 
 
(00 clock hours minimum) 
727  Neuropsychology Practicum II: Assessment 
1 cr. 
 
(400 clock hours minimum) 
728  Pediatric Neuropsychological Assessment   
3 cr. 
700  Doctoral Internship* (2,000 clock hours)  
0 cr. 
 
Total Credit Hours: 19 
 
* 
Doctoral Internship with a focus of at least 50% on neuropsychology. 
 
63

 
 
Although not required, Adler School doctoral students who are completing this 
concentration program are highly encouraged to carry out a dissertation that is primarily 
neuropsychological in nature. 
In addition to the neuropsychology courses listed above, other related elective 
courses are offered intermittently, on such topics as psychological and medical aspects of 
head trauma, assessing memory and amnesic disorders, ADHD seminar, and the 
Halstead-Reitan Battery.   
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 19 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 800 clock hours of clinical neuropsychological 
assessment practicum with ancillary seminars. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade of 
“C”. 
4.  Satisfactory completion of a 2,000 hour doctoral internship with a focus of at least 
50% on neuropsychology.  
5.  Submission of a completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
6.    Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for the 
conferral of the Concentration in Clinical Neuropsychology. 
 
 
64

 
Concentration/Certificate in Group Psychotherapy 
 
The innovative Certificate in Group Psychotherapy program is designed to provide 
students with an opportunity to explore and expand professional and personal 
capabilities.  The program incorporates theory and technique, development of the 
therapist’s style, and supervised practice.  The central goal is to increase students’ 
effectiveness and creativity in therapeutic interactions by helping them experience and 
understand the use of self in the psychotherapeutic process.  This program provides an 
intensive opportunity to develop, maintain, and enhance competence and self-confidence 
in group psychotherapy, including the application of group therapy theory and methods to 
group conflict.  Integration of personal and professional development is a primary 
objective, encouraging more effective and creative relationships within the group setting.  
Fundamental to the philosophical basis of this program is the belief that individuals 
and groups have the capacity to be healthy and adaptive.  If left to develop its own 
structure, a group eventually will reflect a collection of each member’s typical and 
historical interpersonal relationships.  Once emerged, that structure allows members to 
explore and learn from their own history.   
A Concentration in Group Psychotherapy is awarded to students enrolled in a degree 
program at the School.  A Certificate is awarded to outside professionals. 
 
Minimum Admission Requirements 
 
• 
Graduate standing in a master’s or doctoral program in psychology or a related field 
or licensure as a social worker, psychologist, physician, nurse (RN), or clinical 
professional counselor. 
 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process. 
 
Certificate Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for this certificate.  In addition, students in this 
program should consult with the Program Coordinator to develop an individualized 
course of study. 
 
337  Group Therapy 
707 Advanced Group Therapy 
770 Advanced Group Interventions: Conflict Resolution 
 
Total Credit Hours: 12 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 12 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than one grade of 
“C” or “C+”. 
 
65

 
3.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
4.  Faculty approval for graduation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees for 
the conferral of the Certificate in Group Psychotherapy. 
 
66

 
 
Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology (Psy.D.)  
 
The Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology (Psy.D.) program is designed to 
prepare students for the general practice of professional clinical psychology with a 
particular focus on socially responsible practice that includes education and training 
regarding the broader social and systemic factors that contribute to human dysfunction 
(e.g., poverty, oppression, marginalization) and methods for ameliorating these broader 
factors (e.g. primary prevention and policy change).  The program follows the 
practitioner model of training and education developed by the National Council of 
Schools and Programs of Professional Psychology.  This model identifies as objectives 
the development of knowledge, skills, and values in seven core competency areas: 
relationship, assessment, intervention, research and evaluation, consultation and 
education, management and supervision, and individual and cultural diversity.  These 
competencies are based upon a strong education in the foundations, knowledge base, and 
science of psychology.  
An additional competency area that completes the education and training model in 
the doctoral program is unique to the Adler School.  This is focused training in the 
theories and methods of Alfred Adler.  This focused training provides students with a 
strong and thorough grounding in a particular theory and method of psychology that 
forms of foundation for other theoretical perspectives offered in the doctoral program. 
The program is fully accredited by the American Psychological Association and 
meets the requirements of the National Register of Health Care Providers in Psychology 
and state licensure guidelines.   
 
Admission Requirements 
 
Applicants to the Psy.D. program must have a baccalaureate degree earned from a 
college or university regionally accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency 
or an equivalent academic degree from a foreign college or  university.  Applicants are 
typically required to have a grade point average of 3.25 or higher on a 4.0 scale for all 
undergraduate and graduate course work.  The Graduate Record Examination or Miller 
Analogies Test scores are not required; however, applicants who have taken either of 
these exams should submit their scores along with other application materials.  
Applicants must have at least 18 semester credit hours in psychology with grades of “C” 
or better.  Minimum required courses include introductory or general psychology, 
personality theory, abnormal psychology, and tests and measurement or psychometrics. 
Practicum or work experience in psychology or a related field is highly desirable and 
is considered in the evaluation of applicants.  Applicants who have a record of 
commitment to and experiences in community service nationally and/or abroad are 
particularly invited to apply for the doctoral program. 
Approved applicants will be invited to a personal interview as a final step in the 
application process.  
 
 
 
67

 
Review of Applications 
 
  The priority application deadline for the Fall Term is February 15th.  However, 
applications for admission to the Psy.D. program may be accepted throughout the year. 
Successful applicants who submit all required materials by the priority deadline for the 
Fall Term, and have completed the interview portion of their application, will be notified 
in writing of acceptance their by April 1st. 
Accepted students must notify the Office of Admissions in writing by April 15 of 
their intent to matriculate.  Space permitting, late applications are accepted subject to the 
Council of Graduate Departments of Psychology (COGDOP) criteria which state that any 
acceptance given or left in force after April 15 commits students not to solicit or accept 
an offer from the Adler School without first obtaining a written release from the 
institution to which a commitment has already been made.  Priority deadline for the 
Spring term is November 1st.   
Applications that are received after the priority deadline, may be reviewed 
continuously on a rolling basis.  Notification of admission decisions will be mailed to 
students within 2 weeks of the final review by the Admissions Committee. 
 
Length of Program 
 
The doctoral program may be completed in five years.  Full-time students (ten credit 
hours or more per term) should plan to spend three to four years in course work and 
practicum experience followed by a one-year full-time or two-year half-time internship. 
Students are required to enroll full time in order to complete the program in a timely 
fashion.  However, half-time study is permitted based upon approval of the student’s 
faculty advisor.  Due to the demands of study and clinical training, students should limit 
employment while completing the program.  Adherence to the satisfactory progress 
policy described in the section on general academic policies is required of all students 
and essential to timely completion of all program requirements.  
The doctoral curriculum is based upon attendance of school throughout the calendar 
year.  Course requirements must be completed through attendance of all three academic 
terms.  The suggested course sequence for the doctoral program curriculum provides 
guidelines for students to complete requirements in a manner that is timely and complies 
with academic requirements.  Students are strongly encouraged to complete their 
dissertation prior to their internship.  
 
Time to Completion 
 
The maximum time permitted for a student to complete all requirements for the 
Psy.D. degree is 7 years from the date of first registration following admission to the 
program.  Students are expected to complete the program within two years of completing 
the internship.  Failure to do so may result in administrative withdrawal from the 
program. 
 
 
 
 
68

 
Concentration & M.A. Degree Options 
 
Doctoral students may elect to choose a concentration as part of their doctoral 
studies that provides education and training in a focal area of study.  They may also earn 
the Master of Arts in Counseling Psychology degree while pursuing the Psy.D. degree.  
Students can earn these additional credentials by satisfying the admission and graduation 
requirements for predoctoral concentration areas or the Master of Arts degree as specified 
in those program sections of this Catalog.  Many graduates report that these additional 
credentials enhanced their value to internship directors and employers.  The attainment of 
the Master of Arts degree has assumed increased importance in recent years for students 
seeking internships in certain settings that require a graduate degree for reimbursement of 
services. Course and practicum requirements for successful completion of a Masters 
degree or concentration area vary depending on the training necessary for this additional 
qualification.  As a result, pursuing the M.A. in Counseling Psychology degree or a 
concentration area in addition to the doctorate typically will result in longer completion 
times for the doctoral degree.  Doctoral graduates may continue in certain concentration 
areas following graduation. 
The concentration areas available to doctoral students include the following:  
 
• Art Therapy 
• Marriage & Family Counseling 
• Substance Abuse Counseling 
• Clinical Hypnosis 
• Clinical Neuropsychology 
• Group Psychotherapy 
• Adlerian Psychotherapy 
 
For requirements for these concentrations, please see the appropriate sections of this 
catalog. 
 
• Child and Adolescent Psychology 
• Primary Care Psychology 
 
Students interested in the above two concentrations are required to take a total of 15 
credit hours devoted to the area of study.  In order to complete this requirement, doctoral 
student must use the required courses to satisfy the requirements in the doctoral 
curriculum for an advanced assessment/therapy elective (3 credits) and general electives 
(9 credits).  Thus, these two concentrations require completion of three credits beyond the 
114 required for the doctoral degree.  Students who opt for either of these concentrations 
are required to complete one of their two required practica in a related training setting.  
They are also required to choose a topic related to the concentration area for their 
doctoral dissertation. 
 
The Child and Adolescent Psychology concentration is designed for students with an 
interest in working with these populations.  Required courses provide students with 
knowledge and skills pertinent to issues of health and dysfunction with children and 
 
69

 
adolescents; assessment and intervention methods appropriate to these types of clients; 
and the broader structural and sociocultural factors that impact on their well-being.  The 
courses necessary for completion of this concentration are the following: 
 
    
338 Child & Adolescent Psychotherapy 
 
644 Child & Adolescent Health & Dysfunction 
 
683 Advanced Child & Adolescent Assessment 
 
684 Systemic Interventions with Children & Adolescents 
 
 
 
 
Elective menu (Choose one of the following): 
 
450 Child & Adolescent Development and Art Therapy 
652 Life Cycle & Cultural Issues in Marriage & Family Therapy 
704 Advanced Child & Adolescent Psychotherapy 
 
        The Primary Care Psychology concentration is designed for students interested in 
the integration of psychology and behavioral medicine with a particular focus in working 
in primary care health settings such as hospitals, group practices, HMOs and family 
practice centers.  Required courses provide students with knowledge and skills pertinent 
to mind/body interaction; the role of behavioral factors in physical well-being; the 
application of psychological assessment and intervention techniques to acute and chronic 
illness; and an understanding of the impact of broader structural and systemic factors on 
physical well-being and health care delivery.  The courses necessary for completion of 
the concentration are the following: 
 
 
735 Mind-Body Health I  
736 Mind-Body Health II 
737 Primary Care Psychology 
 
Elective menu (choose two of the following): 
 
705 Eye Movement Desensitization & Reintegration 
339 Biofeedback 
710 Theories & Techniques of Clinical Hypnosis I 
739 Mindfulness Meditation 
 
Students interested in choosing a concentration or in adding a Masters degree should 
contact the Concentration Coordinator or Program Director for further information.  
Students must complete a form that requires the signature of the Coordinator or Program 
Director available from the Office of Admissions in order to add a concentration or 
degree.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
70

 
Doctoral Scholars Program 
 
The Doctoral Scholars program presents an unusual opportunity for qualified, 
serious students of superior promise in the field of clinical psychology to receive 
instruction, consultation, and supervision from a senior member of the faculty in both 
individual and small group formats. 
Candidates for the program must have completed at least the first year of the 
doctoral program.  Requirements for participation include a high grade point average in 
graduate course work, self-motivation, and a commitment to scholarly activities under the 
mentorship of a senior member of the faculty.  Interested students should contact Dr. 
Torrey Wilson, Doctoral Program Director. 
 
Residency Requirement 
 
A residency requirement must be satisfied following admission to the Psy.D. 
program. The program requires each student a minimum of 3 full-time academic years of 
graduate study (or the equivalent thereof) and completion of an internship prior to 
awarding the doctoral degree.  At least 2 of the 3 academic training years (or the 
equivalent thereof) must be at the institution form which the doctoral degree is granted, 
and at least 1 year of which must be in full-time residence (or the equivalent thereof) at 
that same institution. 
 
Qualifying Examinations 
 
In addition to satisfying course work, practica, and other program requirements, 
students must also pass three qualifying examinations.  Qualifying examinations are 
important capstone tasks integrated throughout the doctoral curriculum that provide 
students with the opportunity to integrate course material and practical training, reflect 
upon the educational and training experiences, and apply their learning to clinical and 
social issues.  In addition, they enable faculty to evaluate students’ progress toward 
expected learning outcomes for the doctoral program. 
The Community Service Capstone Paper requires students to integrate experiences 
acquired during their Community Service practicum (a requirement of the doctoral 
program) with theories and research that includes material covered in first year classes 
including Social Psychology & Individual Differences, Community Psychology & 
Mental Health, Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology, and 
Professional Development, Issues & Ethics.  This integrative paper involves students 
providing a critical review of relevant empirical and theoretical literature on a 
psychological issue related to a community problem encountered at their practicum site 
as approved by their faculty advisor.  The goal of this capstone paper is to assess the 
ability of students to integrate course material and material derived from their literature 
review to the analysis of a community problem and methods of intervening to alleviate 
that problem.  Students are expected to register for this requirement upon completion of 
one year full time matriculation or the completion of 51 credit hours whichever comes 
first.  The Community Service Practicum must also be completed prior to engaging in the 
capstone task.  Students will have 30 days from the time their topic is approved to 
 
71

 
completed and submit this capstone paper. 
Students who fail the Community Service Qualifying Examination may be referred 
to their advisor or the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee for review, 
depending on the nature of the failure.  A determination will be made of whether and 
what type of remedial measures are needed to assist the student in addressing areas of 
deficiency and successfully passing the examination a second time.  Students who fail 
this examination a second time are subject to administrative withdrawal from the doctoral 
program.  
The next two qualifying examinations are clinical-competency based and patterned 
after the type of examination used post-doctoral degree to earn board certification.  In 
both examinations, students are required to synthesize and integrate clinical data from a 
range of sources to develop a clinical formulation and treatment plan, using theories and 
methods acquired in the classroom and at practica.  The first of these examinations, the 
Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination-Assessment Competency, consists of a 
comprehensive psychological report on an individual case integrating assessment 
material, social history, diagnosis, treatment plan; a paper integrating research with a 
pertinent clinical issue posed by the case; a formulation of the case based on Adlerian 
theory and methods; and a discussion of the impact of social issues on a pertinent clinical 
issue.  Students must register and submit their material for this examination no later than 
the last day of the spring term during which they are completing their doctoral assessment 
practicum.  Students submit the required written material for the examination to the 
Examination Coordinator who then assigns it to a Core Faculty member for review.  
Following faculty review of the submitted materials, students present the case orally to 
the faculty member who examines students on relevant issues to assess the student on the   
competency areas pertinent to the examination.  The prerequisite for the Doctoral Clinical 
Qualifying Examination-Assessment Competency is successful completion of the first 
two terms of the doctoral assessment practicum and approval of the Exam Coordinator.  
Students must successfully pass this examination in order proceed to their next 
practicum.  
The second clinical competency examination is the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying 
Examination—Intervention Competency.  Its format and intent is similar to the previous 
examination with the focus being on a sample of a therapeutic intervention conducted 
with a client.  The student is required to submit a written case formulation and treatment 
plan along with an audio taped/videotaped therapy session; a paper integrating research 
with a pertinent clinical issue posed by the case; a formulation of the case based on 
Adlerian theory and methods; and a discussion of the impact of social issues on a 
pertinent clinical issue.  Students must register and submit their material for the 
examination no later than the last day of the spring term during which they are 
completing their doctoral intervention practicum.  Students must again submit required 
material to the Examination Coordinator who then assigns it to a Core Faculty member 
for review. Following faculty review of the submitted materials, students present the case 
orally to the faculty member who examines students on relevant issues to assess the 
student on the   competency areas pertinent to the examination.  The prerequisite to take 
this examination is the successfully completion of the assessment practicum and Doctoral 
Clinical Qualifying Examination-Assessment Competency, and successful completion of 
the first two terms of the student’s intervention practicum. Students must successfully 
 
72

 
pass this examination in order to receive approval to submit application materials to 
internship sites from the Director of Training and Community Service. 
In the unusual instance that a student plans to complete the PsyD degree within four 
years and plans to apply for internship during their therapy practicum year, students will 
need to submit material for the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination—Intervention 
Competency by October 1st in the academic year in which they intend to apply for 
internship. If the student passes the examination, he/she will obtain approval from the 
Director of Training and Community Service to submit their application materials to 
Internship sites.   
Students may use the same client for both of the Clinical Qualifying Examinations.  
They may not, however, use the same client submitted for the Masters Clinical 
Qualifying Examination.  If they chose to use the same client when permitted, they need 
to submit material for the Adlerian theory and methods and socially responsible practice 
requirements in the Assessment examination taken first.  Students who chose to complete 
their two Clinical Qualifying Examinations using two different clients will need to 
complete the Adlerian theory and methods, socially responsible practice, and integration 
of science and practice in both parts.  The Integration of science and practice requirement 
needs to be completed for both Clinical Qualifying Examinations, regardless of whether 
the student uses the same client or not.   
The Doctoral level Clinical Qualifying Exam (CQE) is a capstone experience that 
allows faculty to evaluate students’ readiness for internship and ability to proceed in the 
program.  Students are permitted and encouraged to take a preparatory class for the CQE 
and to seek supervision and guidance on their work prior to submitting it to faculty for 
formal review.    In order to receive a “Fail” grade on the CQE, students must 
demonstrate significant problems in several areas of knowledge, skills, and/or values as 
measured by this exam.  Students who receive a “Fail” grade on this capstone task will 
need comprehensive guidance and direction in preparing to re-take the exam in the future.  
Failure of the CQE requires a review of a student’s academic and clinical readiness for 
internship and preparedness to proceed in the program.  As a part of this process, students 
who fail the CQE will be referred to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee 
(SCEC).   The SCEC will review the student’s academic and training file, consult with 
the student’s advisor, meet with the student, and determine a comprehensive remediation 
plan to assist the student in retaking the CQE.  The remediation plan will also outline the 
timeframe and tasks to complete prior to being approved to take the CQE again.  The 
remediation plan and timeline will be forwarded to the PsyD Program Director for review 
and final approval.  A copy of the remediation plan and subsequent documentation 
indicating completion of the remediation plan will be placed in the student’s academic 
file. A handbook on the two Clinical Qualifying Examinations is available to students 
online at the school’s web site.  
Students must register for a qualifying examination during the term in which they 
wish to take it.  In order to do so, they must complete a petition form to register for the 
examination and submit this with their registration material.  The Registrar’s office will 
conduct an audit on students applying for the examination to insure that they have the 
necessary requirements.  Students who do not have the requirements will have their 
petition denied.  Students are expected to take the examination during the term for which 
they have registered.  If they fail to do so, they must re-submit the petition form with 
 
73

 
their registration in a different term and again pay the fee for the examination.  Fees paid 
for examinations that are not taken by a student or failed by a student are not refunded. 
 
Practicum 
 
An integral part of the doctoral program is the acquisition of practical skills gained 
in field placements.  Ongoing involvement in community service and clinical activities at 
professional training sites, including the School’s Psychological Services Center, gives 
students the closely supervised opportunity to apply and further develop the knowledge, 
skills, values, and competencies they gain in course work.  Practicum training 
requirements begin with a first year Community Service Practicum that focuses on 
developing skills related to community-based interventions, advocacy, social justice, and 
systemic interventions that benefit human welfare and well-being.  Students then 
complete clinical training that focuses first on developing skills and providing experience 
in 
psychological 
assessment 
and 
second 
on 
developing 
skills 
related 
to 
intervention/treatment.  Because the focus is on integrating doctoral level education with 
licensed doctoral-level supervised clinical training, no transfer credit is granted for 
practica credits earned elsewhere or in a previously completed Adler M.A. program.  
Students must successfully complete course pre-requisites prior to being approved to 
begin their first practicum.   
First year doctoral students will spend 6-10 hours per week over the course of six 
months at an approved Community Service Practicum site and must concurrently enroll 
in required coursework.  A minimum of 150 clock hours of Community Service 
Practicum is required.  Second and third year doctoral students should expect to spend at 
least two days per week over the course of at least nine months at an approved practicum 
site and must concurrently enroll in Practicum Seminars throughout their field training.  
A minimum total of 1,200 clock hours of practica is required.  Most doctoral students 
complete more than the minimum number of hours prior to beginning their internship.  
Students may elect to complete an advanced practicum during their fourth year of study 
to obtain additional specialized or in-depth training to strengthen their learning 
experience.  Advanced practicum students must complete a minimum of 600 clock hours 
of practicum over the course of at least nine months at an approved practicum site, and 
must concurrently enroll in Practicum Seminars throughout the training year.   
The Director and Assistant Director of Training and Community Service works in 
collaboration with students in identifying clinical experiences which meet the standards 
and requirements of the program.  Students should refer to the Practicum Handbook, 
available on the Adler website (www.adler.edu), for detailed information. 
 
Internship 
 
An important portion of the Psy.D. program is devoted to a 2,000 clock hour 
internship at an approved site over a 12 month (full-time) or 24 month (half-time) period.  
The internship is designed to provide intensive advanced clinical training building upon 
course work, practicum experiences, and clinical supervision.  Because the internship is 
an essential component of the Psy.D. program, it can never be waived.  Students who do 
not successfully complete the internship are subject to dismissal from the School.  
 
74

 
Students must successfully complete all doctoral program requirements prior to 
beginning an internship.  Students are required to have their dissertation proposal 
completed and approved by their committee prior to beginning their internship.  The 
Director Training and Community Service works closely with students to assess 
readiness to apply for, accept, and begin internship, and to identify appropriate internship 
sites.  All students are required to participate in the APPIC Match process for internship 
placement.  Students are encouraged to apply to the school’s clinic, Dreikurs 
Psychological Services Center, which participates in the APPIC Match program.   
The Internship Handbook, available on the Adler website (www.adler.edu), provides 
specific information regarding internship requirements.  
 
Doctoral Dissertation 
 
The Doctoral Dissertation is the culmination of the students’ academic experience 
and clinical training.  Students may identify an interest, conduct preliminary work - such 
as reading - in the area of interest, and consult with faculty regarding a possible topic at 
any time during the program and are encouraged to do so as early as possible.  Course 
696 Doctoral Dissertation Preparation Seminar is a required non-credit course in the 
curriculum that provides assistance to students in understanding the dissertation process 
and developing a dissertation topic.  Students must successfully complete the Community 
Service Capstone Paper, the Research Methods course, the Statistics course, and course 
696 before registering for the Dissertation Proposal and formally beginning work on the 
dissertation.  Students may select a dissertation topic of historical, theoretical, clinical, 
social, or philosophical interest that will make a contribution to the field of clinical 
psychology.  While students typically choose to undertake an empirically-based 
dissertation, they are permitted to do a clinical case study or theoretically based 
dissertation that satisfies the requirements of scholarship and rigor with the approval of 
their faculty chairperson. 
One of the most important phases in preparation of the dissertation is writing the 
dissertation proposal.  Registration for Course 697, Doctoral Dissertation Proposal (1 
credit hour), is the first formal step.  Students are expected to complete a proposal to the 
satisfaction of their dissertation committee and to pass an oral defense of the proposal.  If 
the proposal is not completed and defended during the term of registration in Course 697, 
students must register for Course 695 Doctoral Dissertation Proposal—Continued in 
subsequent term(s) for zero credit hours and pay the required fee.  Students have three 
terms (one year) from initial registration for Course 697 to complete the dissertation 
proposal.  Failure to produce an approved proposal within one year will result in referral 
to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee.  The completion of the Doctoral 
Dissertation Proposal is a requirement for students prior to initiating the process of 
applying for internship.  Students applying for internship are expected to make adequate 
progress on their dissertation (See Internship Handbook available on-line at 
www.adler.edu for further detail).   
Completion of the Doctoral Dissertation and Oral Defense requires students to 
demonstrate the ability to evaluate, synthesize, integrate, and apply relevant 
psychological research and practice culminating in a scholarly paper of publishable 
quality.  Although the Oral Defense is focused on the Doctoral Dissertation, it may 
 
75

 
include areas such as research theory and design, professional psychology, clinical 
knowledge, and other psychology-related topics and issues.  
Dissertation students must meet requirements specified in the edition of the 
Dissertation Handbook that is current at the time they are registered for Course 697.  The 
School reserves the right to require students to meet any new dissertation requirements 
when students take longer than two years from the time of registration in Course 697 to 
complete the dissertation.   
Students must register for Doctoral Dissertation (Course 901) within three 
consecutive terms after approval of their dissertation proposal or in any term in which 
they are actively working on their dissertation with their committee members.  Once 
students register for dissertation, they must continue registering for three consecutive 
terms (901, 902, 903). Students completing their internship may be waived of this 
requirement with the permission of their dissertation chairperson and the Director of 
Training and Community Service.  Such permission will only be granted if the student is 
not actively engaged in working on their dissertation with the chair and/or any member of 
their dissertation committee.  In those instances where permission is granted, students 
must register for a total of three terms of dissertation.  Students who have failed to 
complete their dissertation after registering for three terms are required to register for 065 
Doctoral Dissertation Continuation until they are approved for the Oral Defense.  
Students receive a grade of In Progress for any term in which they are making 
satisfactory progress on their dissertation and a grade of No Progress when they are 
failing to complete the project in a timely manner. Any student who has received three 
consecutive grades of NP for either Dissertation Proposal or Dissertation will be 
automatically referred to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee for review.  
When a student satisfactorily completes the dissertation proposal or dissertation, a grade 
of CR (Credit) will be issued and all prior grades of NP and IP will be changed to Credit.   
Failure to complete the dissertation within two years of completing the internship may 
result in administrative dismissal from the Psy.D. program. 
 
Degree Requirements 
 
The following courses are required for this degree.  Students should take courses 
following the curriculum sequence described below in order to satisfy prerequisites for 
advanced courses, be approved to take qualifying examinations, and prepare for 
practicum placements.  Not following the recommended course sequence may result in 
longer time to completion of the degree.  Students admitted in the Winter term are 
required to follow a modification of the course sequence and, as a consequence, will take 
longer to complete their degree requirements. 
 
*200 Professional Development Seminar I 1 cr. 
*201 Professional Development Seminar II 1 cr. 
*202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
*203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
350 Community Psychology & Mental Health 3 cr. 
402 Introduction to Adlerian Psychology and Psychopathology 3 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
 
76

 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision 1 cr. 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
*472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
497 Research Methods 3 cr. 
*505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
514 Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis 3 cr. 
523 Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy 3 cr. 
*623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
601-606 Psy.D. Practicum Seminars I-VI 1 credit each 
611-616 Psy.D. Practica I-VI 1 credit each 
*624 Integrative Assessment 3 cr. 
*627 Assessment I: Cognitive & Intellectual Assessment 3 cr. 
*628 Assessment II: Personality Assessment 3 cr. 
632 Cognitive-Affective Bases of Behavior 3 cr.  
634 History & Systems 3 cr. 
636 Biological Bases of Behavior 3 cr. 
637 Statistics 3 cr. 
*641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
*648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr. 
*649 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 3 cr. 
671 Structural & Sociocultural Bases of Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
672 Global & Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
690 Supervision & Consultation 3 cr. 
691 Public Policy, Advocacy & Social Change 3 cr. 
692 Psychologists in Management & Administration 3 cr. 
696 Doctoral Dissertation Preparation Seminar 0 cr. 
697 Doctoral Dissertation Proposal 0 cr. (Note previously was 1 cr.) 
699 Doctoral Dissertation 0 cr. (Note previously required to take 8 cr.) 
740-742 Doctoral Internship-Full Time 0 cr. or 
743-748 Doctoral Internship-Half Time 0 cr. 
901-903 Doctoral Dissertation I – III 0 cr. 
905 Community Service Capstone Paper 0 cr. 
990 Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination-Assessment Competency 0 cr. 
991 Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination-Intervention Competency 0 cr. 
998 Doctoral Oral Defense 0 cr. 
Intervention Methods 9 cr.  Three 3 credit courses to be chosen from two menus  
Advanced Assessment or Advanced Intervention Elective 3 cr. 
Advanced Diversity Elective 3 cr. 
General Electives 9 cr. 
 
* = Required before beginning practicum 
 
Total Credit Hours: 114 
 
 
 
 
77

 
Schedule 
 
Doctoral courses are scheduled during all three terms in an academic year.  Classes 
are offered on weekdays as well as weekends during morning, afternoon and evening 
hours. 
 
Suggested Course Sequences  
 
YEAR ONE 
Fall Term 
200 Professional Development Seminar I 1 cr. 
402 Introduction  to Adlerian Psychology & Psychopathology  3 cr. 
472 Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills 3 cr. 
623 Life Span Development 3 cr. 
627 Assessment I: Cognitive & Intellectual Assessment  3 cr. 
Credits = 13 
 
Spring Term 
201 Professional Development Seminar II  1 cr. 
202 Community Service Practicum I 1 cr. 
431 Child Guidance & Parenting 1 cr. 
514 Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis 3 cr. 
628 Assessment II: Personality Assessment 3 cr. 
641 Social Psychology & Individual Differences 3 cr. 
648 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 3 cr.  
Credits = 15 
 
Summer Term 
203 Community Service Practicum II 1 cr. 
350 Community Psychology & Mental Health 3 cr. 
505 Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 3 cr. 
624 Integrative Assessment  3 cr. 
649 Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
Credits = 13 
 
YEAR TWO 
Fall Term 
497 Research Methods  3 cr. 
523 Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy 3 cr. 
601 Doctoral Practicum Seminar I  1 cr. 
611 Doctoral Practicum I 1 cr. 
671 Structural & Sociocultural Bases of Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
696 Doctoral Dissertation Preparation Seminar 0 cr. 
Advanced Diversity Elective  3 cr. 
905 Community Service Capstone Paper 0 cr. 
Credits = 14 
 
78

 
 
Spring Term 
051 Preparation for the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Exam 0 cr. 
432 Child Guidance & Parenting Supervision  1 cr. 
602 Doctoral Practicum Seminar II  1 cr. 
612 Doctoral Practicum II 1 cr. 
636 Biological Bases of Behavior  3 cr. 
637 Statistics   3 cr. 
Intervention Elective Choice 3 cr. 
Credits = 12 
 
Summer Term 
438 Introduction to Addictive Disorders 3 cr. 
603 Doctoral Practicum Seminar III 1 cr. 
613 Doctoral Practicum III 1 cr. 
Intervention Elective Choice  3 cr. 
Intervention Elective Choice 3 cr. 
Advanced Assessment or Intervention Elective 3 cr. 
697 Doctoral Dissertation Proposal 0 cr. 
990 Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination-Assessment 0 cr. 
Credits = 14  
 
YEAR THREE 
Fall Term 
604 Doctoral Practicum Seminar IV  1 cr. 
614 Doctoral Practicum IV 1 cr. 
634 History & Systems  3 cr. 
690 Supervision & Consultation  3 cr. 
901 Doctoral Dissertation 
0 cr. 
General Electives  3 cr. 
991  Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination-Intervention 0 cr. 
Credits = 11 
 
Spring Term 
605 Practicum Seminar V 1 cr. 
615 Doctoral Practicum V 
1 cr. 
632 Cognitive & Affective Bases  of Behavior 3 cr. 
672 Global & Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Health & Dysfunction 3 cr. 
691 Public Policy, Advocacy & Social Change 3 cr.  
902 Doctoral Dissertation 0 cr. 
 Credits = 11 
 
Summer Term 
606 Doctoral Practicum Seminar VI 1 cr. 
616 Doctoral Practicum VI 1 cr. 
692 Psychologists in Management & Administration 3 cr. 
 
79

 
903 Doctoral Dissertation 0 cr. 
General Electives 6 cr. 
Credits = 11 
 
YEAR FOUR 
Fall Term 
740 Doctoral Internship 0 cr. 
 
Spring Term 
741 Doctoral Internship 0 cr. 
 
Summer Term 
742 Doctoral Internship 0 cr. 
998 Doctoral Oral Defense 0 cr. 
 
Total Credit Hours: 114 
 
Graduation Requirements 
 
1.  Satisfactory completion of 114 credit hours, including all required courses. 
2.  Satisfactory completion of 1,200 minimum hours of practicum. 
3.  A cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher and no more than two grades or 
six credit hours of “C.” 
4.  Fulfillment of the Residency Requirement. 
5.  Successful completion of  all qualifying examinations. 
6.  Successful completion of a Doctoral Dissertation and Oral Defense. 
7.  Satisfactory completion of an approved Internship. 
8.  Submission of completed Graduation Application and full payment of all 
outstanding tuition and fees. 
9.  Recommendation by the Faculty to the Board of Trustees for the conferral of the 
Doctor of Psychology in Clinical Psychology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80

 
Course Descriptions 
 
Overview 
A description of regularly offered courses appears on the following pages.  The Adler 
School reserves the right to withdraw, modify, or add to the courses it offers at any time.  
Course offerings are continually under examination, and revisions are to be expected 
from time to time. 
 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
001  
Student Orientation  
This mandatory orientation for new students provides an overview of Adler School 
policies and procedures, facilities, personnel, resources, and organizations.  The training 
model and core competency areas of degree programs are explained. Newly admitted 
students are expected to attend this orientation prior to enrollment.  M.A. students who go 
on to the doctorate must participate in the orientation.   (0 credits) 
 
030 
Advanced General Psychology  
This graduate course reviews major psychological theories and research.  Subject matter 
presented in this course is prerequisite for admission into all degree and certificate 
programs.  Students may use this course to fulfill the undergraduate requirement. (0 
credits) 
 
040  
Advanced Abnormal Psychology  
This graduate course covers the development, symptoms, and patterns of maladaptive 
behavior.  Topics covered include the onset and progression of developmental and 
psychological disorders. Students are introduced to current DSM categorization and 
classification of psychological phenomena.  Subject matter presented in this course is 
prerequisite for admission into all degree and certificate programs.  Students may use this 
course to fulfill the undergraduate requirement. (0 credits) 
 
041  
Advanced Theories of Personality 
This graduate course provides a comparative study of the major theories of personality. 
The nature of personality is examined from various points of view including 
psychodynamic, humanistic, existential, behavioral, and cognitive.  Students may use this 
course to fulfill the undergraduate requirement. (0 credits) 
 
042  
Advanced Tests & Measures 
This graduate course provides a basic psychometric background for understanding 
assessment methods, basic statistics, and standardized tests.  Topics include construction 
and standardization of tests, reliability and validity, and the application of tests and 
measurements.  Students may use this course to fulfill the undergraduate requirement. (0 
credits) 
 
 
 
 
81

 
050  
Preparation for the Doctoral Written Qualifying Examination  
This study course is provided to assist doctoral students in preparing for the Written 
Qualifying Examination.  Students should take this course at least two terms before they 
plan to take the examination.  The course is offered only for doctoral students admitted 
prior to Fall 2006 who are required to complete this examination.  (0 credits) 
 
 
051  
Preparation for the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination  
This course is provided to assist doctoral students in preparing their submission of the 
materials required for the Clinical Qualifying Examination, and in preparing for the oral 
examination process.  Students should take this course at least two terms before they plan 
to take the examination.  (0 credits) 
 
065  
Doctoral Dissertation Continuation  
Doctoral students who are working on the dissertation following completion of the 
internship, and who have registered for the required three terms must register each term 
for this course and pay the required fee to remain in good standing.  Failure to enroll in 
courses or degree candidate continuation may result in dismissal from the Psy.D. 
program. (0 credits) 
 
200-201 Professional Development Seminar I & II 
This two-term course will provide students opportunities to meet in a small group with 
peers and one faculty member who will also serve as the students’ advisor.  The course 
covers advisement and mentoring around Adler degree requirements and mission, 
orientation to the field of professional psychology, issues of diversity as it relates to the 
field and students’ personal and professional growth, and overview of the ethical codes 
and professional standards of psychology.  This course will also assist students in 
orienting and preparing students for the Community Service Practicum.  (1 credit per 
term) 
 
202-203 Community Service Practicum I & II 
Co-requisites: Concurrent with one of the following courses: 350, 402, 505, 641. During 
the first year of the masters or doctoral program students are involved in supervised 
community service. The Training and Community Service Department will assist 
students in identifying a site for this practicum. Students will spend a minimum of five 
hours a week at this placement, accruing approximately 150 hours over the course of 30 
weeks (i.e. two semesters). Students will engage in activities such as psychoeducation, 
youth tutoring, research & program development, neighborhood development, and 
advocacy work. Students may not complete this requirement at their place of 
employment. May not be transferred or waived. (1 credit each term) 
 
334 
Psychodynamic Approaches to Interventions 
Prerequisites: 472, 520 (MA students only). This course is designed to provide critical 
examination of theory and techniques in psychodynamic models of psychotherapy (i.e., 
late Ego Psychology, traditional Object Relations, Self Psychology, Interpersonal 
psychotherapy) that focus on intrapsychic dynamics in the conceptualization of 
 
82

 
psychopathology and the treatment process. Contemporary versions that offer an 
understanding of diversity, including the role of culture, race, gender, and sexual 
orientation will be covered. (3 credits) 
 
335  
Cognitive-Behavioral Approaches to Intervention 
Prerequisites: 472, 520 (MA students only). This course will focus on the analysis of the 
relationship between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and how to intervene to help 
clients. Experiential exercises, such as role-play and self-treatment projects, will facilitate 
student learning.  The course will focus on outpatient populations with depression, 
anxiety, and other common psychological disorders. By the end of the class, students will 
have tangible skills to help clients to think more positively, feel better, and 
change their behaviors. (3 credits) 
 
336 
Humanistic/Existential Approaches to Intervention 
Prerequisites: 472, 520 (MA students only).  Major theories in the humanistic and 
transpersonal schools of psychology are reviewed including existential theory, Carl 
Rogers, Abraham Maslow, Stanislaf Grof, and Ken Wilber.  The integration of 
psychology and spirituality will be a particular focus of the class.  In addition to 
examining how these perspectives inform individual psychotherapy, their applications to 
resolving social problems and promoting socially engaged practice will also be discussed. 
(3 credits) 
 
337 
Group Psychotherapy 
Prerequisites: 472, 520 (MA students only). The history, theory, methods, and 
applications of group psychotherapy are examined, discussed, and demonstrated. The 
development of competency in group methods is enhanced through didactic presentation, 
role-playing, and participation in an ongoing group.  The class meets as a group in an 
unstructured format.  Students process their experiences in the here and now.  The aim is 
to help students become more comfortable with themselves and, therefore, learn to relate 
more effectively and creatively in the group setting. (3 credits) 
 
338 
Child & Adolescent Psychotherapy 
Prerequisites: 472, 623, 520 (MA students only). The purpose of this course is to provide 
a conceptual framework for interventions with adolescents and children. The course will 
focus on interventions and research targeting the major psychological disorders of 
childhood and adolescence, including ADHD, conduct disorders, anxiety disorders, 
depression, trauma based disorders, adjustment disorders, eating disorders, and 
developmental disorders. Interventions which impact the biological, familial, 
environmental, and socio-cultural factors which maintain the child’ problematic 
functioning will be emphasized. The importance of addressing individual differences and 
diversity in treatment, intervention and prevention efforts as well as the increased 
responsibility of clinicians working with children and adolescents is stressed. (3 credits) 
 
339 
Biofeedback 
Prerequisites: 472, 520 (MA students only). This class presents the theory and application 
of applied psychophysiology (biofeedback) as it is practiced today within mind/body 
 
83

 
medicine.  A review of the components of the autonomic and central nervous system 
underlying common used psychophysiological measures (EEG, EMG, HR, etc.)  will be 
presented.  The class will examine common applications of biofeedback and the evidence 
of its efficacy to specific disorders.  The class will examine common psychophysiological 
assessment procedures, personality testing,  and interview techniques employed in 
deciding upon the proper treatment methods for each client.  The historical, cultural, 
philosophical, and spiritual contexts of biofeedback practice will also be examined to 
discuss important diversity related considerations in treatment planning. (3 credits)   
 
344 
Historical & Theoretical Perspectives of Art Therapy 
This course introduces the history, philosophy, theory, and practice of the use of art in 
counseling.  The fundamental elements of three modes of art therapy are presented 
through demonstration, discussion, and required reading.  (3 credits) 
 
 
345 
The Use of Art in Assessment, Diagnosis & Treatment Planning 
Prerequisites: 346, 402 & 472. This course introduces purposes, issues, and the process of 
clinical art assessment.  Techniques for understanding the diagnostic and therapeutic 
aspects of projective drawings, nonverbal behavior, speech, and interpersonal 
transactions are presented.  A study of expressive components of artwork, psychological 
inferences, and report writing is introduced. (3 credits) 
 
346 
The Use of Art in Group & Addiction Counseling  
This course provides an Adlerian approach to group art therapy.  Students are involved in 
experiences in art making and processing which are applicable to group therapy and 
addiction counseling with clients.  Group therapy as it relates to art therapy is discussed, 
highlighting those aspects of the group experience that can encourage change in attitude 
and behavior. (3 credits) 
 
350 
Community Psychology/Mental Health    
Students learn theory and research on the role of community psychology in treating 
problems related to a range of pervasive social justice issues such as violence, 
homelessness, poverty, intolerance, and substance abuse, which impact on the mental 
health of individuals and communities.  Community Psychology is also concerned with 
preventive mental health.  Intervention strategies that involve work with individuals, 
families, groups, communities, and social and faith-based institutions are reviewed. (3 
credits) 
 
402 
Introduction to Adlerian Psychology & Psychopathology 
Students learn the theoretical principles of Individual Psychology as a basis for 
understanding the development of the individual’s creation of a unique style of living in 
the context of his/her original family constellation and socio-economic setting. It further 
emphasizes the contextual setting of pathological development of the style of life within 
families and society.  The course addresses cognitive, affective, socio-cultural 
dimensions of learning in the individual’s training and self-training; the selectivity of 
perception in the formation of the world view; the purposive nature of behavior; 
creativity, self-determination, and the indivisibility of the person as well as the 
 
84

 
maladaptive manifestation of these as the psychodynamics of psychopathology.  
Attention is paid to the recursive influence, both adaptive and maladaptive, of society on 
the individual and the individual on society. (3 credits)  
 
431  
Child Guidance & Parenting  
This course provides an opportunity to develop knowledge and skills in child guidance 
and parenting based upon Adlerian principles.  Through lecture, class discussion, 
observation, and participative demonstrations, students are prepared to facilitate a 
parenting group.  Upon completion of the class, students are required to lead or co-lead a 
supervised discussion parenting group for a minimum of eight sessions.  This 
requirement must be completed within one year of taking this course.  (1 credit) 
 
432  
Child Guidance & Parenting Group Supervision  
Prerequisites: 431; must be engaged in parenting group leadership.  Students engaged in 
leading parenting groups are required to register for supervision. (1 credit) 
 
436 
Bio-Psycho-Social-Spiritual Aspects of Addictions 
Prerequisite: 438. Major theories of etiology, social dynamics, and psychology of alcohol 
and other drug disorders are presented within the context of human development.  
Clinical research is reviewed which enhances a further understanding of the basic 
physiological, psychological, social and spiritual aspects.  Impact on the individual, 
family, community, and organizations/systems is presented.  Considerations for how 
these disorders apply to special populations such as people of color, GLBT persons, 
ethnic-multicultural populations, the economically disadvantaged, the oppressed, 
veterans, children & adolescents, women, and HIV-positive clients are discussed.  (3 
credits) 
 
437  
Treatment of Addictive Disorders 
Prerequisite: 438. This course will focus on the core functions of the alcohol and other 
drug counselor.  Clinical concepts, terminology, and treatment modalities including 
group, individual, couple, and family counseling techniques are reviewed. The 
importance of the clinical continuum of care is discussed with additional emphasis on 
prevention, intervention, treatment and aftercare.  Other topics relevant to the ATOD 
counselor from the treatment perspective, ethical practices, and legal aspects are 
presented.  (3 credits) 
 
438  
Introduction to Addictive Disorders 
This course is designed to provide an introduction to alcoholism, substance abuse, and 
other addictive disorders.  Included is an overview of the information needed to assess 
along with the treatment models of addictive disorders, and provide the tool to be able to 
recognize the signs and symptoms of substance use, misuse, abuse, dependence, dual 
disorders, and the mentally ill substance abusers (MISA).  The understanding of the basic 
pharmacological, physiological, and medical aspects of chemical dependence will be 
included along with the historic development of alcohol and other drug usage, self help 
groups, and treatment delivery systems.  (3 credits) 
 
 
85

 
445-446 Practicum in Substance Abuse Counseling I-II  
Prerequisites: Approval of Program Coordinator and Direct of Training and Community 
Service.  Students are involved in an approved field placement experience to integrate 
knowledge and skills in a clinical setting.  Students are required to spend 300 clock hours 
per practicum (a minimum of 700 total clock hours) in a supervised field experience. (1 
credit each) 
 
447-448   M.A. Practicum Seminar in Substance Abuse Counseling I-II 
Prerequisite: Concurrent with Practica (445 & 446).  This course is designed to develop 
alcohol and other drug counseling skills concurrent with practicum field experiences.  A 
group supervision model provides the student with the opportunity to apply previously 
learned concepts while working in an outside field experience.  Emphasis is on written 
and oral case presentations in the areas of counseling skills, intake assessment, treatment 
planning and case management.  Students are expected to recognize professional and 
legal considerations relevant to ethics, confidentiality, working with referral sources, 
special populations, treatment options, and models of alcohol and drug counseling. (1 
credit each) 
 
450 
Child & Adolescent Development & Art Therapy 
Prerequisites: 346 & 402.  This course presents an inquiry into child development, 
behavior, and major psychological disorders of childhood and adolescence.  Art therapy 
interventions/techniques for working with normal and exceptional children as well as 
those with trauma-based disorders, adjustment disorders, conduct disorders, ADHD, 
PTSD, depression, eating disorders, and developmental disorders are explored.  The art 
therapist’s task is to understand the source of dysfunctional behavior whether it is 
biological, familial, environmental and/or socio-cultural so that cooperative behavior can 
be encouraged.  (3 credits) 
 
451 
Sociocultural & Systemic Perspectives in Art Therapy 
Required course readings in art, poetry, and narrative story provide a background for 
discussing current multicultural issues so that students can become more competent in 
addressing the needs of ethnic minority populations in counseling.  Each student’s 
cultural perspective is an essential part of the learning so that one can maintain clarity 
when working with clients from cultures other than one’s own.  (3 credits) 
 
452 
Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy I 
Prerequisites: 346, 402.  This course focuses on understanding family dynamics and 
treatment strategies involving approaches in art therapy through selected readings, 
discussions and video presentations.  This course also explores ways to create community 
with the elderly through the process of art making. Students experience application of art 
therapy through designing and presenting an in-class role play and art experiential as well 
as participating in class by creating their own art. (3 credits) 
 
453 
Theories & Methods of Intervention in Art Therapy II 
This course provides experiences in art making and processing which are applicable to 
therapy and counseling with clients who have survived single or multiple traumatic 
 
86

 
experiences.  It includes education on various types of traumas, loss and grief, and the 
potential effect of traumatic experience on the whole person.  The frequent co-morbidity 
observed in trauma clients will be looked at in detail. The course will include an 
emphasis on assisting clients with skills of pacing and containment as they learn to re-
integrate feelings.  It also includes techniques to aid in the safe expression of intense 
affect through expressive art techniques. A brief overview of eating disorders will also be 
included in this course. (3 credits) 
 
466 
Art Therapy Studio: Professional Development 
This course is a studio exploration of personal creativity, self -expression, an Adlerian 
approach to dreams, and direct experience of the creative process with a focus on the 
relationship of creativity and the meaning one gives to life.  Experiential involvement 
with diverse media is included. Symbol and metaphor will be considered as guidelines for 
therapeutic change. The student will do an in-depth study of an artist and present in class 
a self-designed art experiential based on the life and work of that artist.  Psychopathology 
and its relationship to creativity will be explored.  (3 credits) 
 
467-468 M.A. Practicum Seminar in Art Therapy I-II 
Prerequisite: Concurrent with 480-481. Using a peer consultation model, practicum 
Seminar provides students engage in practicum training with an opportunity to discuss 
professional development and the supervision experience.  The seminars will cover a 
broad range of topics that include the student’s relationship with the on-site supervisor 
and other mental health workers, assessment, intervention, goal setting regarding 
treatment planning of clients, verbal responses to art work of both clients and the 
practicum student, and possible ways to ameliorate human suffering caused by injustice.  
The focus is on the development of knowledge, skills, and self-awareness of personal 
values to provide competent, ethical and socially responsible counseling. (1 credit each) 
 
472 
Basic Intervention & Assessment Skills  
Upholding the complementary relationship between assessment and intervention, t his 
course is designed to provide students with the foundational knowledge and skills 
necessary for entry-level clinical practice.  In the area of intervention, the course 
familiarizes students with the essential elements of the psychotherapeutic relationship, 
common factors in counseling and psychotherapy, meta-theoretical views on human 
change processes and basic multicultural competency in helping relationships.  In the 
area of assessment, the course covers intake interviewing, the mental status exam, risk 
assessment and the DSM-IV-TR multi-axial approach to diagnosis.  Students also learn 
about informed consent, confidentiality and the importance of clinical documentation, 
while solidifying their ability to compose cogent assessment reports and treatment plans. 
(3 credits) 
 
480-481 Practicum in Art Therapy I-II 
Prerequisites: Concurrent with M.A. Practicum Seminar (467-468); permission of 
Program Director; completion of a minimum of 24 credits hours including 200, 201, 202, 
203, 345, 346, 451, 472, and 505; permission of the Director of Clinical Training. This 
 
87

 
practicum requires 700 clock hours of clinical art therapy under at least partial 
supervision of a registered art therapist. (1 credit each)  
 
497 
Research Methods 
This course integrates the students’ academic program of study and clinical interests with 
an introduction to research design, methodology and statistics. Students are expected to 
conduct an extensive review of psychological literature and research from the field and 
prepare a major research paper in an area of special interest. Students in the doctoral 
program find this course helpful in preparing for the dissertation. Emphasis is placed on 
the use of the American Psychological Association standards for the preparation of 
manuscripts. (3 credits) 
 
499  
Independent Study  
Prerequisite: Permission of the Vice President of Academic Affairs.  Students in degree 
programs are provided an opportunity to pursue advanced study in special areas which 
Adler School does not normally provide.  This is a self-directed study under faculty 
supervision in any theoretical or clinical aspect related to the curriculum.  (1-3 credits) 
 
500  
M.A. Thesis  
Prerequisite: Permission of the Program Director of the M.A. program.  The M.A. Thesis 
is a student-directed study conducted in consultation with an approved faculty member in 
any theoretical, methodological, or applied psychological area relevant to the curriculum.  
The research culminates in the completion of a scholarly paper of publishable quality in 
accordance with Adler School guidelines and American Psychological Association 
standards.  A thesis may be required for credentialing in some jurisdictions.  Students 
should check credentialing requirements where they intend to practice to determine 
whether they need this course. (3 credits) 
 
502-503   M.A. Practicum Seminar I-II  
Prerequisite: Concurrent with Practica (506-507).   Using a peer consultation model, 
Practicum Seminar provides students engaged in practicum training with an opportunity 
to discuss professional development and the supervision experience.  Specific cases 
students are working on in practica are discussed to illustrate general principles of 
counseling and intervention.  The focus is on the development of knowledge, skills, 
values needed to provide competent and ethical counseling.   (1 credit hour each) 
 
505 
Professional Development, Issues & Ethics 
This course is designed to provide students with a solid foundation for the ethical practice 
of psychology and counseling. Students will learn codes of ethics of the American 
Counseling Association and the American Psychological Association, as well as the 
history of professional counseling and therapy. A review of theories of social justice and 
their relationship to ethical decision making will be provided.  This course will also 
reinforce the basics of professional writing and provide an introduction to supervision, 
consulting and leadership. Students will learn to apply ethical and professional decision-
making skills to current issues facing the fields of counseling and psychology.  (3 credits)  
 
 
88

 
506-507   M.A. Practicum I-II  
Prerequisites: Concurrent with M.A. Practicum Seminar (502-503); completion of a 
minimum of  24 credit hours of course work, including 200, 201, 202, 203, 472, 505, 520, 
641, and either 649 or 649; & permission of the Director of Clinical Training. (1 credit 
each term) 
 
514 
Life Style Assessment & Diagnosis 
Prerequisite: 402. This course focuses on the principles of the fundamental Adlerian 
appraisal process.  The range of assessment styles is discussed with an emphasis on 
making the process a reliable and replicable tool in the cache of the IP practitioner. This 
course introduces the family constellation and early recollections and their meaning, 
significance, and usefulness in helping to gain an understanding of the individual’s life 
style and outlook on life. The early social milieu in which the individual develops 
fundamental attitudes is discussed with an emphasis on understanding the importance of 
other family members in relation to the individual’s subjective view of him/herself and 
the world. (3 credits) 
 
520 
Theories of Psychotherapy 
Prerequisite: 472. This course presents an examination and analysis of the major theories, 
principles, and techniques of psychotherapy.  Approaches presented include Freudian, 
Rogerian, Jungian, Adlerian, existential, humanistic, rational-emotive, and cognitive-
behavioral therapies.  The influence of sociocultural and historical factors on the 
development of theories is examined. (3 credits) 
 
523 
Adlerian Approaches to Individual & Family Therapy 
Prerequisite: 402. The practical application of Adlerian approaches to psychotherapy are 
presented with specific emphasis on interventions for individuals and families. Particular 
emphasis is placed on the respective roles of the therapist and the client throughout the 
process of the four stages of therapy. Basic Adlerian therapeutic techniques are offered in 
both individual and family therapy. Interventions that are empirically based best practices 
are analyzed from an Adlerian perspective. Emphasis is placed on solution-focused 
interventions, the cultivation of self-storying and dynamics of responsibility.  Current 
research and recommendations for contemporary individual and family problems are 
discussed as is the use of self-help literature and groups. (3 credits) 
 
569 
Life Style & Career Development 
This course will examine a person’s career trajectory and dynamics within the context of 
the life style.  Students will learn to assess career interests, aptitudes, and options.   These 
will be explored as individual and collective sources of work information.  Understanding 
how these are embedded within the life style will allow students to help clients with 
career decisions and transitions in the broader perspective of total personal development. 
(3 credits) 
 
571 
Foundations in Counseling & Organizational Consulting 
This course introduces students to the field of consulting psychology.  Attention is paid to 
clinical applications and corporate practices as well as the integration of the two.  
 
89

 
Societies, organizations, and professional groups are explored as sources for professional 
exposure and development. (3 credits) 
 
574 
Principles of Industrial/Organizational Psychology 
This course covers organizational management with respect to human behavior in the 
workplace. Current developments in the behavior sciences as they apply to the business 
organization are stressed. Concepts emphasized in the course include individual and 
group dynamics, motivation, leadership, ethics, power, conflict resolution, decision-
making, and stress management. (3 credits) 
 
575 
Executive Coaching/Consulting & Leadership Development 
Prerequisites: 574 & 580.  This course addresses the principles of identifying and 
developing leadership potential.  Both the professional and technical aspects of 
personality assessment and career development are examined as well as organizational 
issues of competency modeling succession planning. (3 credits) 
 
580 
Organizational Theory & Change Management  
This course presents an analytical, in-depth study of key macro- and mid-level 
organizational theories of structure and design, technology, environmental adaptation, 
and managerial functions and controls. (3 credits) 
 
584 
Organizational Consultation & Group Development 
This course examines strategies and methods for developing and increasing the creativity, 
flexibility, and effectiveness of organizations and managers. Theories, applied analysis, 
and skill development emphasize the successful introduction of organizational change 
affecting work units, task groups, and individuals. (3 credits) 
 
585-586 M.A. Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology I: Counseling 
Prerequisite: Concurrent with 587& 588. Using a peer consultation model, Practicum 
Seminar provides students engaged in practicum training with an opportunity to discuss 
professional development and the supervision experience.  Specific cases students are 
working on in practica are discussed to illustrate general principles of counseling and 
intervention.  The focus is on the development of knowledge, skills, values needed to 
provide competent and ethical counseling.   (1 credit each term) 
 
587-588 Organizational Psychology Practicum I &II: Counseling 
Prerequisites: Completion of a minimum of 20 credit hours of coursework including 200, 
201, 202, 203, 472, 505, 520 641; and either 648 or 649; permission of the Director of 
Clinical Training; & concurrent with 585 & 586. Students must complete a minimum of 
700 clock hours of supervised experience in an approved clinical setting.  (1 credit each 
term) 
 
589 
M.A. Practicum Seminar in Organizational Psychology II: Business 
Prerequisite: Concurrent with 590.  Using a peer consultation model, Practicum Seminar 
provides students engaged in practicum training with an opportunity to discuss 
professional development and the supervision experience.  Specific cases students are 
 
90

 
working on in practica are discussed to illustrate general principles of organizational 
psychology and related business concepts.  The focus is on the development of 
knowledge, skills, values needed to provide competent and ethical counseling, 
consultation and business practices.   (1 credit) 
 
590  
Organizational Psychology Practicum: Business 
Prerequisites: Completion of a minimum of 20 credit hours of coursework including 200, 
201, 202, 203, 472, 505, 520 641; and either 648 or 649; permission of the Director of 
Clinical Training; & concurrent with 589. Students must complete a minimum of 300 
clock hours of experience in an approved work setting. (1 credit)  
 
596 
Practice Development & Issues 
Prerequisites: 571, 575, & 592.  This course is the capsule course to integrate the 
Counseling & Organizational Psychology program.  The focus is on building a practice 
“business plan”.  The practice areas of private clinical practice, EAP, HMO, fee for 
service, and management consulting will be explored.  The goal is to investigate 
particular practice areas and develop strategy to practice. This course will build on 571. 
(3 credits) 
 
601-603 PsyD Assessment Practicum Seminar 
Prerequisite: Concurrent with 611-613.  Taken concurrently with the diagnostic 
practicum, this seminar provides a setting for the student to discuss  and apply the 
fundamentals of clinical and diagnostic interviewing, to formulate  DSM-IV-TR 
diagnostic impressions, to write an accurate assessment report based  on data from the 
interview and mental status exam, and to appreciate how  diversity issues affect the 
content and processes of clinical interviewing and  more broadly of psychological 
assessment.  The course principally affords the student with an opportunity to review and 
discuss assessment cases from the diagnostic practicum, as well as to examine data 
generated from psychological tests.  Finally, the course serves as a peer consultation 
group in which students learn to present case material in a standard format, to question 
and analyze their own clinical work and to function  as peer consultants to their 
colleagues.   (1 credit each term) 
 
604-606 PsyD Therapy Practicum Seminar 
Prerequisites:  611-613; 601-603. Concurrent with 614-616. Using a peer consultation 
model, Practicum Seminar provides students engaged in practicum training with an 
opportunity to discuss professional development and the supervision experience.  
Specific cases students are working on in their therapy practicum are discussed to 
illustrate general principles of therapy and intervention.  The focus is on the development 
of knowledge, skills and attitudes, and values needed to provide competent and ethical 
clinical services.  A variety of topics and clinical experiences are offered through class 
discussion, case presentation, role playing, and structured exercises.  (1 credit each term). 
 
607-609 Advanced Practicum Seminar 
Prerequisites:  611-616, Concurrent with Advanced Practicum (619-621).  This seminar 
is structured as an opportunity to work one-on-one with a faculty member (assigned after 
 
91

 
a student registers for this course) on advanced clinical skills and professional 
development.  Student meets three times per term with a faculty member.  May not be 
transferred or waived.  (1 credit each term). 
 
619-621 Advanced Practicum I – III 
Prerequisites:  611-616, Concurrent with Advanced Practicum Seminar (607-609).  
Students are required to complete a minimum of 700 practicum hours in order to receive 
credit for this training experience.  May not be transferred or waived. (1 credit each term) 
 
623 
Life Span Development 
Social, cultural, biological and psychological issues of prenatal life, childhood, 
adolescence, adulthood and aging are presented. Psychosocial development, cognitive 
functioning, life transitions, coping and adaptation, work and retirement, bereavement 
and related issues are explored.  The course focuses primarily on the theories and 
application of normal development using a systems approach. (3 credits) 
 
624 
Assessment III:  Integrative Assessment  
Prerequisites: 627, 628. In this course students will become proficient in writing 
professional psychological reports integrating multiple facets of assessment data.  The 
course will teach students to effectively organize data, understand the impact of personal 
bias and sociocultural factors in interpretation of assessment findings, and focus on the 
individuality of the client’s strengths and weaknesses while communicating results in 
response to a specific question.  The development of effective treatment 
recommendations based on assessment findings will be another focus of the course.  May 
not be transferred or waived.  (3 credits) 
 
627 
Assessment I:  Cognitive & Intellectual Assessment  
Prerequisite:  Undergraduate Tests and Measures Course. This course introduces students 
to the theoretical basis, current issues, ethics and clinical use of cognitive and intelligence 
assessment.  An appreciation of the cultural influences and diversity involving 
assessment procedures is emphasized.  Classical and current theories of intelligence are 
explored.  Students are trained in proficient administration, scoring, interpretation and 
multi-source integrative interpretation of commonly used tests of intelligence and 
cognition. (3 credits)  
 
628 
Assessment II:  Personality Assessment 
Prerequisite: 627. This course will provide students with an overview of the conceptual, 
theoretical and empirical issues in the measurement of personality and psychopathology 
through examination of the reliability and validity of objective (actuarial) and projective 
methods of personality assessment.  Students will learn to administer, score and interpret 
broad-band measures (e.g., MMPI-2, PAI, etc.), narrow-band measures (e.g., BDI-II, 
State/Trait Anxiety Inventory, etc), and the Rorschach Inkblot Test, as well as other 
projective measures (e.g., TAT, Sentence Completion, etc.)  The course will also focus 
on the assessment of personality assets and strengths, criticisms of traditional approaches 
to personality assessment, and behavior assessment as an alternative to traditional 
approaches. (3 credits) 
 
92

 
 
632 
Cognitive-Affective Bases of Behavior 
This course emphasizes the most recent theoretical developments in cognitive-affective 
bases of behavior. Areas of emphasis will include attention, memory, knowledge, 
language, reasoning, problem solving, the cognitive bases of affect and consciousness, 
human learning and theories of motivation. The relevance of these topics to 
psychotherapy and change, as well as the possible impact of social issues on course 
topics, will also be examined. (3 credits) 
 
634  
History & Systems 
A survey of the historical development of major theories, research and practice in 
psychology is presented. Major systems of psychology are examined.  In addition, the 
course is structured around a number of major philosophical issues and how major 
theories of psychology have understood and addressed these issues.  The influence of 
sociocultural and historical factors on the development of theories is also examined, with 
particular focus to the role of psychology in promoting social justice.  (3 credits) 
 
636 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
The course objectives are to make the student aware of pertinent gross and microscopic 
human neuroanatomy, to build a foundational understanding of neurophysiology and the 
biology of the nerve, and to become familiar with a variety of clinical issues as they 
relate  to neurophysiology. The emphasis throughout the class will be on developing a 
working familiarity with the functional neuroanatomy of the human brain. The biological 
consequences of trauma will also be reviewed.  The role of environmental and ecological 
factors on biological functioning will be discussed to promote socially responsible 
professional practice. (3 credits) 
 
637 
Statistics 
Prerequisite: 497.  This course concerns concepts and applications of descriptive and 
inferential statistics and focuses on the statistical methods of data analysis, t-test, F-test, 
nonparametric statistics (Chi-square), the analysis of variance, multivariate analysis and 
other techniques. Particular attention is given to the application of research methodology 
to psychological problems and issues and to policy analysis and formulation. (3 credits) 
 
641 
Social Psychology & Individual Differences 
This course examines, from a diversity perspective, the theories and concepts of social 
psychology.   Factors related to individual and group identity such as age, gender, sexual 
orientation, race, ethnicity, socio-economic status and health status are examined to 
facilitate an understanding of the nature of human behavior in groups, institutions and 
organizations. The course also considers society’s role, and the role of the dominant 
culture, in the construction and evolution of the self.  Multiple determinants of behavior 
are addressed. (3 credits) 
 
644 
Child & Adolescent Health & Dysfunction 
The purpose of this course is to provide an understanding of the major psychological 
disorders of childhood and adolescence. The focus is on the interaction of biogenic, 
 
93

 
familial, environmental and socio-cultural factors. The importance of individual 
differences and responsibility in utilizing diagnostic labels is stressed. (3 credits) 
 
648 
Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction I 
Clinical manifestations of anxiety and personality disorders across the life cycle are 
examined using a systems approach. Topics covered include phobias, trauma, personality 
disorders, psychosexual disorders, etiology, treatment as well as personality traits in 
healthy development. Advocacy and policy issues regarding mental health and illness are 
also presented. (3 credits) 
 
649 
Biopsychosocial Bases of Health & Dysfunction II 
Clinical manifestations of the seriously mentally ill are presented including psychotic 
disorders such as schizophrenia and mood disorders such as major depression and bi-
polar disorders. Topics include etiology, epidemiology, expressed emotion, behavioral 
genetics, course and outcome, treatment, psychopharmacology, policy and advocacy 
issues. (3 credits) 
 
650 
Psyschopharmacology 
This course is an introduction to the scientific principles and clinical information needed 
for a basic understanding of the uses and limitations of the major classes of 
psychopharmacologic agents. The course builds on the material introduced in the 
prerequisite course #636. Although this course may be taken concurrently with course 
#636, students choosing to do so are advised that additional self-study will most likely be 
required. (3 credits) 
 
651 
Assessment & Treatment from a Systemic Perspective 
This course teaches basic systems theory and “Metaframeworks,” a comprehensive 
method for analyzing family and marital systems.  These concepts can be applied to a 
range of dysfunction of marital and family systems as well as healthy family functioning, 
including the impact of larger systems. Both conventional diagnostic categories and 
systemic diagnoses will be explored.  The primary emphasis is on theoretical analysis and 
systems thinking rather than intervention, although an integrative treatment model will be 
presented. (3 credits) 
 
652 
Life Cycle & Cultural Issues in Marriage & Family Therapy  
Prerequisites: 651 or 66 
3.  This course takes an in-depth look at the family life cycle, an important conceptual 
framework for family assessment and therapy. Beginning with intact, middle-class white 
American families, the course will explore differences related to class, family structure, 
trauma, and particularly ethnicity. While the course does not focus on therapy, 
implications for treatment will be explored.  (3 credits) 
 
655 
Advanced Couples Counseling 
Prerequisites: 651 or 663.  This is an advanced course on marital and family systems with 
a particular focus on marital and other committed couple systems. Emphasis is on 
research-based understanding of couple systems and the implications for relationship 
 
94

 
stability and for prevention and clinical intervention. New techniques for handling client 
resistance and for minimizing relapse will also be presented.  (3 credits) 
 
662 
Overview of Marriage & Family Therapy Models 
This course presents an overview of major models of marriage and family therapy, 
putting them in historical perspective and discussing how the MFT field has evolved. 
Important models will be introduced, including major figures in the model’s 
development, important concepts, and typical techniques. Students will be encouraged to 
critique these models with consideration of power and hierarchy, gender bias, and 
cultural fit. (3 credits) 
 
663 
Effective Marriage & Family Therapy  
This course offers an in-depth understanding of several evidence-based models for 
intervening with families and couples. This course covers a range of dysfunction of 
marital and family systems and appropriate interventions.  Emphasis is on the systematic 
application of techniques through theoretical analysis, intervention selection and role-
playing of interventions.  Students will be encouraged to examine how these models fit 
for themselves theoretically and personally, and how well they fit with a variety of 
clinical populations. (3 credits) 
 
667-668 M.A. Practicum Seminar in Marriage & Family I-III  
Prerequisite: Concurrent with Marriage & Family Practica (664-665).  In order to 
register, students are required to be actively counseling couples and families.  Students 
must either present audio or video tapes or simulate actual sessions for supervision.  
Rotating case presentations allow focus on intervention skills and theoretical analysis, as 
well as experiencing the role of case consultant.  (1 credit each term) 
 
671 
Structural & Sociocultural Bases of Health & Dysfunction   
Prerequisites: 350, 641.   Traditionally, psychologists work within in circumscribed 
clinical contexts in which mental health issues are deemed functions of individual 
pathology. In fact,   many mental health issues are symptomatic of structural 
phenomenon that characterize in the context in which individuals exist and over which 
they have limited influence, e.g., public policy, institutional behaviors, culturally-
embedded biases. The objective of this course is to shed light on these structural variables 
and how they undermine human well-being.  In particular, the course will be designed to 
(1) provide students with some of the basic analytic and critical thinking skills needed to 
identify and understand the role of structure in shaping human welfare;  (2) help students 
think about how to integrate structural analysis and understandings into their clinical 
work; and (3) help students think about how to fulfill their responsibility to their clients 
as well as society as a whole by encouraging public debate around this issue, and by 
actively advocating for welfare-enhancing structural change. (3 credits) 
 
672 
Race, Ethnicity, & Social Class 
Prerequisite: 641.  This course is designed to give students an understanding of various 
minority groups including African Americans, Asians, Latinos, and Native Americans.  
Students are exposed to the limitations and potential dangers of Western definitions of 
 
95

 
cultural groups.  Specifically, emphasis is placed on facilitating awareness of biased 
attitudes, influences of world view, and the consideration of the unique experiences of 
specific groups that have been marginalized and have experienced discrimination. (3 
credits) 
 
673 
Gender & Sexual Orientation Issues across the Lifespan 
Prerequisite: 641. This course examines the role of gender and sexual orientation as 
related to lifespan development, personality, lifestyle, behavior, decision-making and 
attitudes.  The course covers the impact of power differentials, social structures, 
stereotyping and role definitions on gender and sexual identity.  Additionally, the course 
investigates the implicit relationship between gender and sexual orientation and also 
explores gender and sexual orientation within the therapeutic process. (3 credits) 
 
674 
Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, & Transgender Issues across the Lifespan 
Prerequisites: 641 and either 431 or 623. This course focuses on GLBT persons across 
the lifespan and examines the evolution of the GLBT movement from multiple 
dimensions.  This course includes practical application of strategies useful in working 
with GLBT individuals of different ages and ethnicities.  Sources, forms, and the history 
of heterosexism and homophobia are covered as are the stages of healthy and positive 
GLBT identity formation and the potential consequences of “coming out.”  Discussions 
and research surrounding controversial issues affecting the GLBT community serve as 
the focal point. (3 credits) 
 
676 
Global & Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Health & Dysfunction 
Prerequisites 641, 671. This course focuses on how culture affects the definition, 
prevalence, recognition and societal response to health and illness.  The course examines 
the major environmental and systemic threats to psychological well-being and explores 
contextual views of mental illness that transcend Western views of psychopathology.  
Research on how a range of physical and psychological conditions are viewed cross-
culturally, and on how culture impacts utilization of services, is introduced.  Idioms of 
distress, ritual, and symbolic healing practices are also addressed. Additionally, the 
unique mental health needs of immigrants and refugees are covered.  Finally, the impact 
of globalization and other cross-cultural, social, economic and political trends on human 
welfare are also covered, as are novel applications for psychology across the globe. (3 
credits) 
 
677 
Advanced Issues in Religion & Spirituality - Theory & Therapy 
Prerequisites: 641. This course explores the diverse religions and spiritual paths in today's 
society.  Special attention is paid to spirituality and religion as mediators of risk and 
resiliency. Additionally, the role of religion and spirituality within psychology to date is 
examined, while also providing an overview of the field's reformed approach to assessing 
and incorporating religion and spirituality in therapeutic work. (3 credits) 
 
683 
Advanced Child & Adolescent Assessment 
Prerequisites: 623, 627, 628.  This course covers assessment of cognitive functioning, 
learning and achievement and social/emotional functioning in children and adolescents.  
 
96

 
Standard intelligence measures and achievement tests will be included as well as typical 
personality instruments and procedures for assessment of emotional and adaptive 
functioning with this special population.  Integration of areas of functioning and holistic 
assessment of overall adaptation and strengths and weaknesses will be emphasized.  
Attention will also be given to the use and social implications of these tools data and the 
role of assessment with children and adolescents in diverse contexts. (3 credits) 
 
684 
Systemic Interventions with Children & Adolescents 
Prerequisites: 338, 644. This course will focus on systemic interventions in addressing 
the needs of traumatized & disadvantaged children. Areas of emphasis will include 
trauma and children, behavioral and learning problems associated with conditions of 
disadvantage and traumatizing environments, diversity issues, advocacy, negotiating 
social service and educational systems that deal with children. (3 credits) 
 
690 
Supervision & Consultation 
This course intended to occur late in the doctoral curriculum, during or just before the 
internship, focuses primarily on clinical supervision, with secondary focus on clinical and 
programmatic consultation. It provides an overview of all dimensions of supervision, 
including the supervisory contract, theoretical models of supervision, the supervisory 
relationship, issues of diversity, gender and power, supervisory modalities, 
developmental issues, and ethical and legal issues. The course includes an optional 
laboratory in which students who do not have current supervisory responsibilities can 
arrange to have quasi-supervisory responsibility for students in lower-level intervention 
courses.  (3 credits) 
 
691 
Public Policy, Advocacy, & Social Change 
This course is designed to focus on the analysis, formulation, and advocacy of public 
policy within the context of public administration, community organizing and the policy 
making process.  It identifies methods for understanding the political process as a system 
and looks at evaluation techniques to address complex policy issues.  It examines ways 
psychologists, behavioral healthcare delivery systems, advocacy groups, and community 
organizations can work with local, state, tribal, and federal government to address issues 
of social change.  It provides an overview of governmental structure, process, and 
policies at all levels.  The course presents effective methods of communication, 
advocacy, and lobbying to challenge policy, promote concerns and address needs. (3 
credits) 
 
692 
The Role of Psychologists in Management, Administration, & Leadership 
This course focuses on the development of roles for psychologists in a variety of 
administrative and leadership roles including behavioral health care management, public 
administration, and educational leadership.  It provides a foundation of motivation and 
understanding for leadership development by offering theoretical background, practical 
information, and an opportunity for role modeling to encourage students to develop their 
organizational leadership skills.  It includes those skills necessary for psychologists’ own 
professional growth, development, and success.  Theories and practices of good 
organizational leadership will be reviewed. (3 credits) 
 
97

 
695 
Doctoral Dissertation Proposal-Continued  
Students who do not complete their dissertation proposal in the first term for which they 
have registered must continue to register for 695 and pay the necessary fee until their 
proposal has been approved by their committee members.  Failure to complete 
dissertation proposal within three consecutive terms may result in referral to the Student 
Comprehensive Evaluation Committee.  (0 credits) 
 
696 
Doctoral Dissertation Preparation Seminar 
Prerequisites: 498, 638.   The non-credit course is designed to assist students in the early 
stages of developing a dissertation topic.  The focus is on selection and development of a 
topic, selection of a committee and different stages of the dissertation process. (0 credits) 
 
697 
Doctoral Dissertation Proposal  
Prerequisites: 498, 638, 639, 640, 696.  One of the most important phases in preparation 
of the dissertation is writing the proposal in the selected area of research. Registration for 
this course is the first formal step in completing the dissertation.  Students are required to 
complete and successfully orally defend a proposal to the satisfaction of their dissertation 
committee.  Approval of the dissertation proposal is also a requirement for all students 
prior to applying for internship. Students who do not complete this requirement during 
the first term of registration are required to register for 695 each term thereafter until 
completed.  Failure to successfully complete the dissertation proposal after three terms 
will result in referral to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee for review.  (0 
credits) 
 
701 
Advanced Psychodynamic Approaches to Intervention 
This advanced interactive course aims to consider in depth select schools of 
psychoanalytic/dynamic thought and their respective theories of development and 
pathology, and, most notably, their perspective on clinical practice.  Object relations, 
self-psychology, and contemporary structural-relational perspectives will receive special 
emphasis.  Theoretical perspectives that incorporate racial-ethnic, sexual, gender, and 
other aspects of diversity will be incorporated into the discourse. (3 credits) 
 
702 
Advanced Cognitive-Behavioral Approaches to Intervention 
Prerequisite: 335.  Focuses on advanced theories such as schema therapy and dialectical 
behavior therapy.  The course will cover difficult populations such as individuals with 
personality disorders, psychotic disorders, and autism. (3 credits) 
 
703 
Advanced Humanistic/Existential Approaches to Intervention 
Prerequisite: 336.  This course builds upon the knowledge and skills developed in the 
introductory course in humanistic and existential approaches by developing a more in 
depth appreciation of particular theories and perspectives in this area of practice.  The 
integration of humanistic/existential/transpersonal theories with each other and with other 
theoretical perspectives will be the focus of the class.  In addition, the application of this 
perspective to a broad range of clinical and social issues will be emphasized.  Students 
will be encouraged to develop their own personal integration of this perspective into their 
personal and professional lives. (3 credits) 
 
98

 
 
704 
Systemic Interventions with Children & Adolescents 
Prerequisites: 338, 644. This course will focus on systemic interventions in addressing 
the needs of traumatized & disadvantaged children. Areas of emphasis will include 
trauma and children, behavioral and learning problems associated with conditions of 
disadvantage and traumatizing environments, diversity issues, advocacy, negotiating 
social service and educational systems that deal with children. (3 credits) 
 
705 
Eye Movement Desensitization & Reintegration 
Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) is a method of therapy used in 
the treatment of trauma.  EMDR is a physiologically based therapy that helps clients 
process and integrate disturbing material in new and less distressing ways.  This course 
provides an introduction to the model, provides empirical research associated with the 
model, teaches the basic process and offers space for students to focus on the relationship 
between EMDR and specific types of trauma. (3 credits) 
 
706 
Trauma Focused Approaches to Intervention 
This course covers the history, psychopathology and treatment of trauma-related 
dysfunction, particularly Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and its comorbidities.  
In the course, students learn about the prevalence and incidence of PTSD in civilian and 
military populations as well as the major risk and protective factors for trauma-related 
dysfunction, specialized assessments for identifying trauma-related pathology in adults 
and children, and the major approaches to counseling and psychotherapy for clients 
struggling with trauma.  Major treatment approaches covered in the course include 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR), somatic experiencing (SE), stress management techniques, group treatment 
approaches and psychopharmacological interventions. 
 
707 
Advanced Group Psychotherapy 
(Prerequisite: 337)  Building on the introductory course to Group Psychotherapy, this 
course examines the use of self and promotes development of group facilitation skills 
through the use of dynamic interaction and modeling.  Central to the course is the belief 
that personal issues can impede the formation of an effective therapeutic relationship and 
thus impair the client’s progress.  The class combines the  
presentation of conceptual material with experiential learning in an unstructured format.  
(3 credits) 
 
710 
Theories & Techniques of Clinical Hypnosis I 
This course will serve as an introduction to the theory and practice of clinical hypnosis in 
psychotherapy and medicine.  Students will examine the basic question of “What is 
Hypnosis” including its fact, fictions, history, and theory.  Theories of hypnosis will be 
explored utilizing the body of historical knowledge, clinical research, and experimental 
evidence into hypnotic phenomena which has amassed for over two centuries.  Students 
will be able to both learn about and experience the hypnotic phenomena which are 
discussed in class.  Students will also learn and practice basic methods of hypnotic 
induction, deepening, assessment, and clinical application.  Particular emphasis will be 
 
99

 
maintained throughout the class regarding the ethical and safety related guidelines 
students should follow when integrating hypnosis into their clinical practice. (3 credits) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
711 
Theories & Techniques of Clinical Hypnosis II 
Prerequisite: Permission of Program Coordinator.  Students continue their exploration of 
theories, techniques , and phenomena in clinical hypnosis work.  The main topics include: 
Advanced Hypnotic Inductions and Testing methods, Ego-Strengthening Protocols, Pain  
Management, PTSD, Anxiety and Phobic Disorders, Habit Disorders, Constructing 
Therapeutic Metaphors and Indirect Suggestions, Insight-Oriented and Exploratory 
Hypnotic Techniques, Ethics and Professional Conduct, and Integrating Hypnosis into 
Clinical Practice.   Students will be able to both learn about and experience the hypnotic 
phenomena which are discussed in class.  Particular emphasis will be maintained 
throughout the class regarding the ethical and safety related guidelines students should 
follow when integrating hypnosis into their clinical practice.. (3 credits) 
 
712 
Advanced Theory & Skills in Hypnosis Seminar 
Prerequisite: Permission of Program Coordinator.  Students learn advanced methods of 
hypnotic assessment and treatment and discuss their relevance to current theoretical 
models of hypnotic phenomena.  Students will be able to both learn about and experience 
the hypnotic phenomena which are discussed in class.  Particular emphasis will be 
maintained throughout the class regarding the ethical and safety related guidelines 
students should follow when integrating hypnosis into their clinical practice. (3 credits) 
 
714 
Research Seminar in Clinical Hypnosis 
Prerequisite: Permission of Program Coordinator.  Students learn methods of conducting 
research in hypnosis towards developing a topic of their choosing.  The class will focus 
on an evaluation of the major research paradigms now being employed in contemporary 
hypnosis research.  The student will be guided towards producing a paper which will 
generate hypotheses for hypnosis research that can be investigated as a research project 
or dissertation while at Adler.  (3 credits)     
 
720 
Beginning Neuropsychological Assessment  
Prerequisites: 627, 628, 624, 636, and 648. This course is a detailed overview of 
neuropsychological assessment techniques in common usage.  It provides an introduction 
to functional neuroanatomy and classic neuropsychological syndromes (e.g., the aphasias, 
agnosias and apraxias) within a sociocultural context.  Familiarity with administration, 
scoring and contextual interpretation of qualitative and objective methods of 
neuropsychological assessment is emphasized. (3 credits) 
 
721 
Intermediate Neuropsychological Assessment 
Prerequisite: 720.  The course covers selected topics of clinical neuropsychology in 
depth.  It includes a thorough examination of specific neurocognitive functions, such as 
memory and attention.  The neuropathology, assessment and treatment of amnesic 
disorders, head trauma, the dementias and psychiatric illness are studied in detail. (3 
credits) 
 
 
100

 
723 
Advanced Neuropsychological Assessment 
Prerequisite: 721.  This course draws upon the theories and concepts of cognitive and 
behavioral neurology.  There is further grounding in functional neuroanatomy, and the 
neuropathological bases, assessment and treatment of tumors, seizures disorders, 
cerebrovascular disease and toxic-metabolic derangements are covered.  (3 credits) 
 
722 &724 Practicum Seminar in Neuropsychology I and II 
Prerequisites: Concurrent with 726, 727. Taken concurrently with the neuropsychological 
assessment practicum, this seminar provides a setting for the student to discuss and apply 
the fundamentals of clinical neuropsychological assessment, to synthesize results and 
formulate diagnostic impressions, to write accurate and meaningful assessment reports, 
and to appreciate the role of culture and diversity in clinical neuropsychological work.  
Students review and discuss practicum cases and examine data from neuropsychological 
tests.  The courses serve as peer consultation groups in which students learn to present 
case material in a standard format, to question and analyze their own clinical work, and to 
function as peer consultants to their colleagues. (1 credit each term) 
 
725 
Neuropsychological Intervention Techniques 
The course introduces students to neuropsychological intervention strategies, such as 
neurocognitive rehabilitation, based on a thorough assessment of the client’s 
neuropsychological strengths and weaknesses.  Invention strategies for various 
neuropsychological disorders, including deficits in memory, attention, language, visual-
spatial and executive functions are considered.   
 
726-727 Neuropsychology Practicum  
An 800 clock hour advanced clinical practicum which provides experience in the 
administration, scoring and interpretation of neuropsychological assessment techniques 
under the supervision of a licensed neuropsychologist.  Students learn to develop a test 
battery based on a given referral question, and to integrate their findings to answer this 
question and to provide useful and clinically relevant recommendations. (1 credit each 
term) 
 
728 
Pediatric Neuropsychological Assessment      
This course provides training in the neuropsychological assessment of children, with an 
emphasis on trauma and developmental disorders.  An array of neuropsychological 
instruments are used.  Students develop skills in the administration, scoring, contextual 
interpretation and write-up of pediatric neuropsychological assessment methods. (3 
credits) 
 
732 
Advanced Assessment: Projective Methods 
Prerequisites:  627, 628, 624.  This course covers advanced interpretation of projective 
data using Exner’s comprehensive System for the Rorschach Inkblot Test, but also goes 
beyond Exner’s approach to consider the content of the client’s responses as well as 
thematic and sequential analysis.  The course also explores the utility of the Rorschach in 
forensic evaluations, the assessment of thought disorder, and the appraisal of object 
relations.  Additionally, the course covers new and innovative, but empirically based, 
 
101

 
approaches to the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) and other narrative-based 
instruments.  The course also emphasizes the historical roots of projective assessment 
within the broader realm of personality testing and highlights its pertinent place in 
clinical assessment today.  Adlerian, psychodynamic, phenomenological, and 
constructivist theories provide the theoretical underpinnings for discussions of data 
integration, report writing, and providing feedback to clients.  (3 credits) 
 
735 
Mind-Body Health I  
Behavioral medicine is a multi-disciplinary field on which psychology, public health, 
epidemiology, medicine, public policy and other health related professions intersect to 
promote emotional and physical well-being.  This course provides an overview of 
assessment, intervention and current research on the psychological mediators of health 
and illness from a behavior health perspective.  Although specific diseases and other 
medical conditions will be discussed, a broader, cross-disease perspective on behavioral 
medicine will be emphasized. (3 credits) 
 
736 
Mind-Body Health II 
This course focuses on the interventions and current research associated with specific  
life threatening, chronic and acute medical conditions across the life span.  The course 
addresses the psychosocial context of each medical condition and the ways in which 
psychological support can facilitate coping for both client and family.  (3 credits) 
 
737 
Primary Care Psychology 
Primary Care has provided psychologists a new role within the health care system to 
deliver behavioral health services. The focus in this course will be on functioning as a 
primary care consultant within a hospital or outpatient clinic setting. This course will 
introduce a model of collaborative care to provide continuous and comprehensive care to 
families in sickness and health, while also highlighting the ethical and relationship 
dilemmas in this role. Students will receive an overview of behavioral risk factors and 
sociocultural influences on problems seen in primary care. Common primary care 
problems, clinical assessment of these common conditions, and clinical interventions 
suitable for a primary care setting will be covered. Additionally, the effects of health 
policy, health care financing and design of health care system on individuals’ health will 
be discussed.  (3 credits) 
 
739 
Mindfulness Meditation 
This experiential course will teach students to manage their own stress, and to teach 
mindfulness-based meditation to others to help them to manage their stress.  Scientific 
studies have shown that meditation practice, as taught in this course, improves various 
medical and psychological outcomes.  Thus, this meditation course provides a potentially 
valuable skill to clinicians.  The Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) course can 
be useful in clinical, medical, and corporate settings. (3 credits) 
 
740-742 Doctoral Internship-Full Time 
Prerequisites: Successful completion of required qualifying examinations, doctoral 
dissertation proposal & permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Following 
 
102

 
completion of academic and practicum requirements, doctoral students must complete an 
internship of a minimum of 2,000 clock hours of training over a 12-24 month period. 
Most internships require a one-year, full-time commitment. In special cases, a two-year, 
one-half time internship may be obtained.  The internship is designed to provide an 
intensive clinical experience building upon the course work, practicum experiences, and 
skills supervision completed during the first three years of the doctoral program.  The 
Office of Training and Community Service assists students in identifying appropriate 
sites for internships.  (0 credits -Students must enroll three consecutive times) 
 
743-748 
Doctoral Internship-Half Time 
Prerequisites: Successful completion of required qualifying examinations, doctoral 
dissertation proposal & permission of the Director of Clinical Training.  Following 
completion of academic and practicum requirements, doctoral students must complete an 
internship of a minimum of 2,000 clock hours of training over a 12-24 month period. 
Most internships require a one-year, full-time commitment. In special cases, a two-year, 
one-half time internship may be obtained.  The internship is designed to provide an 
intensive clinical experience building upon the course work, practicum experiences, and 
skills supervision completed during the first three years of the doctoral program.  The 
Office of Training and Community Service assists students in identifying appropriate 
sites for internships.  (0 credits-Students must enroll six consecutive times) 
 
750 
Police Psychology 
This course is designed to cover the five core areas of the field of police psychology. 
Students will learn the basic principles of psychological diagnosis based on the categories 
outlined in the DSM Multiaxial Model. Disorders more common to police personnel will 
be presented along with research-based interventions and their application within a police 
culture. Students will also learn the basics of research following APA guidelines for the 
presentation of findings. Students will also learn the requisite skills for the development 
of reflection papers. In addition, the course will cover the foundation of ethics and ethical 
codes of conduct including an exploration of theories of social justice as they apply to 
21st century urban law enforcement. (3 credits) 
 
751 
Psychology of Police Organizations 
This course explores the critical thinking, skills and processes required to operate an 
effective law enforcement agency within a multicultural environment. Issues of assuming 
command, organizational structure, decision making, maintaining ethical behavior, 
institutional interventions, hiring practices, community relations, promotional strategies, 
and psychological well-being will be discussed. Students will be exposed to the essentials 
necessary to create an effective vision and mission statement along with the steps 
necessary to operationalize elements of this statement. (3 credits) 
 
752 
Assessment Issues in Police Psychology 
Students will learn the basic statistical principles used in the development of 
psychological and promotional testing. Measures of central tendencies, validity, 
reliability and the fundamental issues of test construction will be presented. In addition, 
students will learn the more prevalent psychological instruments used in the hiring, 
 
103

 
assessment and promotion of police personnel. Concepts underlying personality 
assessment, projective tests, and intelligence testing will be presented. Ethics of test 
development and issues of race, gender and other cultural considerations will be 
presented. (3 credits) 
 
753 
Psychology of Critical Incidents & Trauma 
This course applies psychological theory to both the human impact of being involved in 
critical incidents and trauma and the associated operational procedures, within the law 
enforcement community.  Discussion will focus on the nature of trauma as it relates to 
law enforcement events: line-of-duty death, use of force, hostage incidents, post-event 
debriefings, bombings, and response planning.  Students will learn a working model of 
how to handle effectively stress from the individual level, small groups and throughout 
the police organization.  This course will utilize discussion, lecture, scenario training, 
video and self-directed projects 
 
754 
Psychology of Evil & Criminal Behavior 
This course is designed to explore abhorrent, anti-social and violent human behavior by  
examining how theories of evil, criminal behavior and psychology have attempted to 
explain such conduct. The course will look at how police organizations have historically 
responded to incidents of serial murder, mass killings, cults, riots, organized criminal 
enterprises and other acts of extreme violence. Intervention strategies will be discussed.  
 
755 
Psychology of Terrorism 
This course will introduce students to the concepts, goals, strategies, ideologies, and 
psychological theories associated with terrorist groups.  Emphasis will be placed on 
terrorist motives and on how terrorist actions have affected the course of history and 
current foreign and domestic policies.  We shall examine different types of terrorist 
organizations, based on various criteria – motives, means, objectives, geography and 
others.  Students will learn from this course why terrorism continues to be chosen as a 
mechanism for change in the United States and around the world, and how governments 
can work to limit its effects.  Students will choose relevant topics for original research 
and will present information in small group presentations and a research paper.   
 
756 
Social & Community Psychology  
This course introduces students to the sociocultural factors that impact personality 
development, the formation of attitudes/values and group behaviors. Issues of bias, 
prejudice, authority, conformity, stereotyping, gender roles, race/ethnicity, poverty and 
culture will be discussed. Strategies for addressing these factors within a law enforcement 
agency will be discussed along with mechanisms for maintaining strong community 
relations.   
 
757 
Psychology of Leadership 
This course introduces students to the foundational principles of psychology necessary 
for effective leadership in most areas of law enforcement. Styles of leadership, 
motivational strategies, emotional intelligence, conflict management and leadership 
assessment will be discussed. Students will learn to identify their personal style of 
 
104

 
leadership and explore the assets and limitations of their unique style. Techniques for 
developing and maintaining management groups will be presented along with methods 
for developing diversity and social awareness within management practices.   
 
758 
Thesis & Portfolio Development 
This course contains the two capstone projects required for completion of the Master of 
Arts in Police Psychology. The thesis must focus on an approved topic of research and 
consist of an extensive literature review of a minimum of 35 pages that reflects a 
synthesis of theory and research in psychology with a topic or issue in the field of law 
enforcement. Each thesis must be supervised by an assigned faculty or adjunct faculty 
member of the Adler School of Professional Psychology and be completed by dates set 
by school policy. The thesis must contain a minimum of 15 citations from professional 
literature from either field and/or texts approved by the supervising faculty/adjunct 
member. A grade of “A” or “B” must be assigned to this work in order to meet 
graduation requirements. Each thesis must be reviewed by an approved editor prior to 
final submission. The Portfolio must contain all assignments outlined in the Police 
Psychology Portfolio Development Information Sheet and be approved by the 
supervising faculty/adjunct member. (3 credits) 
 
770 
Advanced Group Interventions: Conflict Resolution 
(Prerequisite: 337)  This course extends theory and research on the use of a range of 
group therapy intervention methods to the resolution of conflict between individuals and 
groups.  Student will be exposed to literature both in the use of group methods for dealing 
with conflict and reconciliation between opposing parties and in the area of conflict 
resolution.  ( 3 credits) 
 
800 
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy: Therapy & Applications 
This course presents major theories of behavior and cognitive behavioral therapy and 
their application.  There is an emphasis on the practical issues involved in the analysis of 
thoughts, feelings, and behavior and prescription of behavioral techniques. (3 credits) 
 
801 
Expressive Arts with the Trauma Population 
This course provides experiences in art making and processing which are applicable to 
therapy and counseling with client who have survived single or multiple traumatic 
experiences.  Included is education on various types of trauma and the potential effect of 
the traumatic experience on the whole person. The frequent co-morbidity observed in 
trauma clients will be looked at in detail.  The course includes an emphasis on assisting 
clients with skills of pacing and containment as they learn to reintegrate feelings. Also 
includes techniques to aid in the safe expression of intense effect through expressive art 
techniques. (2 credits) 
 
802 
Gay, Lesbian & Bisexual Development 
This course introduces and teaches a positive approach to Gay and Lesbian development 
and positive gay and lesbian identity formation.  Students will be introduced to current 
theories and approaches to psychotherapy working with this particular population as well 
 
105

 
as have the opportunity to examine transference and counter-transference issues. (3 
credits) 
 
814 
Psychology & Consumer Culture 
This elective course is intended to be a examination of the historical roots and 
contemporary consequences of materialistic culture on the psychological well-being of 
human beings and society-at-large. The course will examine the roots of consumer 
culture in historical, political and economic factors and the many ways in which 
consumer culture impact our lives. Topics include the impact of materialistic values on 
well-being, the impact of commercialism on children, the relationship between 
consumerism and psychological dysfunctions, the ole of globalization, and ways in which 
psychology can challenge the impact of consumerism and help to effect social changes 
that diminish the adverse impact of materialism. (2 credits). 
 
815 
Mental Health Disaster Response Counseling  
The purpose of this course is to educate the mental health professional in the mental 
health disaster response crisis counseling program model.  This model differs 
significantly from the traditional mental health model.  The mental health disaster 
response crisis counseling model is a specialized approach which requires distinct 
training. The skills, knowledge, and attitudes required for mental health disaster response 
and recovery crisis counseling are quite different from those needed in traditional clinical 
settings.  This course will introduce the student to the mental health disaster response 
crisis counseling program model, the scope and limits of the program, and the elements 
required for effective service system design, and the delivery of those services in an all-
hazards disaster environment. 
 
816 
Journaling for Health 
This course is designed to develop therapists’ skills in the use of journal writing as an 
adjunct to therapy.  The course focuses on empirical research affirming the efficacy of 
journal writing in boosting immune functioning, reducing stress, and the enhancing of 
other mind-body effects.  The course offers students a laboratory experience as the class 
explores a long list of writing applications. (1 credit) 
 
818 
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy: Advanced Applications 
This course extends the use of the techniques learned in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
(800) and applies them to difficult populations (e.g. individuals with personality disorders 
and psychotic disorders).  The class will also cover special techniques to enhance the 
effectiveness of CBT in difficult cases. 
 
901-903 
Doctoral Dissertation I-III 
(Prerequisites: 697, successful completion of the Doctoral Clinical Qualifying 
Examination.)  The Doctoral Dissertation is the final product of the students’ academic 
experience and clinical training in the doctoral program.  The dissertation can be about 
any significant issue or problem that is psychological in content and professionally 
relevant, including clinical case studies, traditional experimental studies, in-depth 
theoretical studies, or other types of studies or projects, that makes a contribution to the 
 
106

 
field of Adlerian Psychology and to the discipline of psychology in general.  Students 
must begin registering for Doctoral Dissertation within three consecutive terms after 
approval of their dissertation proposal or in any term in which they are actively working 
on their dissertation with their committee members.  Once students register for 
dissertation, they must continue registering for three consecutive terms.  Students who 
have failed to complete their dissertation at that time are required to register for 065 
 
Doctoral Dissertation Continuation until they are approved for the Oral Defense.  
Students receive a grade of In Progress for any term in which they are making 
satisfactory progress on their dissertation and a grade of No Progress when they are 
failing to complete the project in a timely manner. Any student who has received three 
consecutive grades of NP for either Dissertation Proposal or Dissertation will be 
automatically referred to the Student Comprehensive Evaluation Committee for review.  
When a student satisfactorily completes the dissertation proposal or dissertation, a grade 
of CR (Credit) will be issued and all prior grades of NP and IP will be changed to Credit.   
(0 credits) 
 
905 
Community Service Capstone Paper 
Prerequisites:  Completion of 200, 201, 202, 203 and approval of faculty advisor.  The 
Community Service Capstone Paper is an integrative task required of all doctoral students 
upon completion of their community service practicum (typically in the first year of 
matriculation).  Students must identify a topic based upon a problem encountered while 
on their community service practicum.  With approval of their faculty advisor, students 
then complete an integrative paper, that conducts a critical review of literature pertinent 
to the topic including course material and outside sources and provide an analysis of the 
problem that includes an innovative perspective aimed at its alleviation.  The paper must 
be completed within 30 days of approval of the topic by the faculty advisor.  Students are 
expected to register for this requirement upon completion of one year full time 
matriculation or the completion of 51 credit hours whichever comes first.  The 
Community Service Practicum must also be completed prior to engaging in the capstone 
task. (0 credits)  
 
990 
Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination—Assessment Competency 
Prerequisite:  Successful completion of 601, 611, 602, 612, approval of the Examination 
Coordinator.  This is a clinical competency examination focusing particularly on 
knowledge and skills in assessment required for entry level practice as well as the ability 
to integration science and practice and provide service in a socially responsible manner.  
Students are required to submit testing protocols from a battery of psychological 
instruments given to a client; a detailed psychological testing report; executive 
summaries; a paper integrating psychological research with an issue presented by the 
case; and a paper discussing an issue pertinent to socially responsible practice posed by 
the case.  Following review by a faculty member, a student meets with the faculty 
member for an oral portion of the examination.  (0 credits) 
 
991 
Doctoral Clinical Qualifying Examination—Intervention Competency 
Prerequisite:  Successful completion of 990, enrollment in 604/614.  This is a clinical 
competency examination focusing particularly on knowledge and skills in intervention 
 
107

 
required for entry level practice as well as the ability to integration science and practice 
and provide service in a socially responsible manner.  Students are required to submit a 
video or audiotape of a therapy session with a client; a detailed case conceptualization of 
the client; a self-critique on their performance in the session being presented; an Adlerian 
formulation of the case; a paper integrating psychological research with an issue 
presented by the case; and a paper discussing an issue pertinent to socially responsible 
practice posed by the case.  Following review by a faculty member, a student meets with 
the faculty member for an oral portion of the examination.  (0 credits) 
 
995 
M.A. Clinical Qualifying Examination  
Prerequisite: Completion or near completion of all M.A. requirements & permission of 
the Registrar.  The Qualifying Examination consists of the presentation of a clinical case 
including an audiotape, an analysis of key interchanges within the session presented, a 
written case conceptualization and treatment plan, a paper integrating research with the 
clinical case, and a paper examining social issues pertinent to the clinical case.  Students 
will meet with two faculty examiners to review the material pertinent to the case.  The 
oral presentation will take between one to one-and-a-half hours.  Students’ performance 
on both the written and oral portions is incorporated into the faculty evaluation.  Students 
who fail to pass on the second attempt are subject to dismissal from the School.  (0 
credits) 
 
996 
Doctoral Written Qualifying Examination  
Upon completion of the prerequisite courses, doctoral students are required to pass a 
Written Qualifying Examination. Students who fail to pass on the second attempt are 
subject to dismissal from the School.  (0 credit hours) 
 
998  
Doctoral Oral Defense  
Prerequisite:  Permission of the Doctoral Dissertation Committee. Students are required 
to defend their Doctoral Dissertation during the Doctoral Oral Defense. (0 credit hours) 
 
108

 
 
Faculty 
Chicago Campus 
 
Dr. Robert Baker is a member of the Core Faculty and Clinical Director of the 
Psychological Services Center’s Prison Aftercare Programs in Chicago. He is also the 
Coordinator of the Sex Offender Treatment Programs. Dr. Baker earned his B.A. in 
Economics at Michigan State University and his M.A. in Counseling Psychology and 
Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology at the Adler School of Professional Psychology. He is a 
Licensed Clinical Psychologist. Dr. Baker teaches courses in psychophysiology, 
cognitive psychology, and clinical skills seminars. His additional interests include 
gerontology, forensics and correctional psychology, neuropsychology, clinical hypnosis, 
and psychotherapy with children, adolescents and adults. 
 
Dr. Dan Barnes is a member of the Core faculty and serves as the Director and Chief 
Psychologist of the Dreikurs Psychological Services Center (PSC).  He, also, serves as 
the Director of Clinical Training and in that capacity oversees the PSC’s training 
programs, which include the Pre-Doctoral Internship in Professional Psychology, the 
therapy and assessment practica and the Post-Doctoral Residency in the PSC’s Prison 
Aftercare Program.  He received his B.S. in psychology from Loyola University Chicago, 
and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Kentucky in Clinical Psychology.  
He is a licensed clinical psychologist and has maintained a continuous clinical practice 
since 1972.  He teaches courses in systems of psychotherapy and constructivist cognitive 
psychotherapy.   
 
Dr. Neil Bockian is a member of the Core Faculty.  He earned his Ph.D. from the 
University of Miami, where he studied personality disorders with Dr. Theodore Millon, 
and mindfulness meditation with Jon Kabat-Zinn.  Dr. Bockian has research and clinical 
interests in the areas of personality disorders, health psychology, meditation, treatment 
planning, and behavioral medicine.  He has written two books on personality disorders, 
and he has extensive experience treating individuals with spinal cord injuries and patients 
with chronic pain. He has employed individual therapy, group therapy, hypnosis, 
relaxation training, and mindfulness meditation in his practice. 
 
Dr. Roseanne Boldt is a member of the Core Faculty and serves as Coordinator of Adler’s 
Psychological Services at Holy Family Parish.  Dr. Boldt earned her B.S. in Psychology 
at St. Mary-of-the-Woods College, her M.A. in Counseling Psychology at the Alfred 
Adler Institute of Chicago, and her Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology at the Adler School of 
Professional Psychology.  She is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. Boldt teaches 
courses in Adlerian theory and methods, parenting and group leadership training, and 
clinical seminars.  Her additional interests include the role of the spiritual in psychology, 
bereavement, marital therapy, forgiveness, and healing; mother-daughter relationships; 
and psychological aspects of health, immunity and disease. 
 
Dr. Cristina Cox is a member of the Core Faculty.  Dr. Cox earned her B.S. in 
Psychology at Michigan State University and her M.A. and Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology 
 
109

 
at Loyola University.  She is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. Cox teaches courses 
in child and adolescent therapy, ethnocultural diversity, gender diversity, psychological 
assessment of children, and clinical seminars.  Her additional interests include models of 
intervention and assessment with children, integrative psychotherapy, bilingual/bicultural 
and language issues, learning disabilities and cognitive deficits, development and 
temperament, and consultation in educational settings. 
 
Dr. Raymond E. Crossman is President of the Adler School and a member of the 
Doctoral Core Faculty.  Dr. Crossman completed his B.S. in psychology and fine arts at 
Fordham University and his Ph.D. in clinical psychology at Temple University.  He is 
President of the National Council of Schools and Programs in Professional Psychology, 
and he is the Chair of the Council of Chairs of Training Councils of the American 
Psychological Association.  He has taught courses, presented, written about, and 
developed programs and initiatives in diversity education, psychology training, family 
therapy and family diversity, and HIV disease prevention and coping. 
 
Dr. Vida Dyson is a member of the Core Faculty.  Dr. Dyson earned her B.A. in 
Psychology at DePaul University and her M.A. and Ph.D. in Psychology/Personality 
Process at the University of Chicago.  She is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. 
Dyson teaches courses in ethnocultural diversity, gender issues, and clinical seminars.  
Her interests include substance abuse assessment and treatment; schizophrenia; and the 
professional development of women, blacks, and other minorities. 
 
Dr. Frank Gruba-McCallister is a member of the Core Faculty and Vice President of 
Academic Affairs.  Dr. Gruba-McCallister received his B.S. in Psychology from Loyola 
University and his M.A. and Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology from Purdue University.  He is 
a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  He teaches courses in history and systems, theories of 
psychotherapy, advanced psychotherapy, existential psychotherapy, and psychology and 
advocacy.  His interests include health psychology, the integration of psychology and 
spirituality, transpersonal psychology, peace studies, and the role of psychology in 
advocacy and activism for social change. 
 
Dr. Olasupo Laosebikan is a member of the Core Faculty.  Dr. Laosebikan received his 
doctoral degree from Loyola University and has taught in a variety of universities in the 
US including Northeastern Illinois, Chicago State, and the Chicago School of 
Professional Psychology as well as in Nigeria.  He has a wide range of professional and 
teaching interests including Family System; the interface of psychology and issues of 
race, ethnicity and poverty; international issues and psychology; spirituality; child and 
adolescent clinical practice; and sports psychology. 
 
Dr. Erik Mansager is a member of the Core Faculty.  Dr. Mansager earned his B.A. in 
humanities from St. Thomas Seminary College in Denver, his M.A. in marriage and 
family counseling at the University of Arizona, and his Ph.D. in depth psychology at the 
Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium.  Previously he was the Director of the 
Counseling Center at the University of North Dakota.  Dr. Mansager is currently 
president of NASAP and has extensive publications and presentations on Adlerian 
 
110

 
Psychology.  He has particular interest in parenting and the integration of psychology and 
spirituality, and he has more than 20 years experience providing therapy and education to 
abused children, adolescent substance abusers and their parents, as well as mediating 
acrimonious divorces. 
 
Dr. Larry Maucieri is a member of the Core Faculty and serves as the Director of the 
Clinical Neuropsychology Certificate Program.  Dr. Maucieri received his Ph.D. in 
clinical psychology from Fordham University and did his clinical internship at Yale 
University School of Medicine.  He recently completed a two year postdoctoral 
fellowship in clinical neuropsychology at Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine.  Dr. Maucieri will be teaching courses in the neuropsychology program in 
addition to courses in biological bases and assessment. 
 
Dr. Steven Migalski is a member of the Doctoral Core Faculty and a licensed clinical 
psychologist.  He is also the Coordinator of Psychological Assessment at Adler’s 
Psychological Services Center.  He received his B.S. in Psychology from Loyola 
University Chicago and both his master's and doctorate from the Illinois School of 
Professional Psychology.  He completed a post-doctoral fellowship in clinical child 
psychology at the Josselyn Center for Mental Health, where he served as Director of 
Psychology for four years.  Dr. Migalski's areas of concentration include clinical 
interviewing, personality assessment, mood disorders across the lifespan, assessment of 
ADHD and learning disabilities, multimodal and constructivist psychotherapies, primary 
and secondary prevention of HIV-risk behavior, and sexual orientation diversity in 
clinical practice.  In his clinical work and in supervision, Dr. Migalski draws heavily 
upon the cognitive-behavioral and interpersonal traditions.  Dr. Migalski is presently the 
consulting psychologist for Lawrence Hall Youth Services, and he maintains a very 
active private practice in Chicago’s Lincoln Square neighborhood. 
 
Dr. Harold Mosak is a Distinguished Service Professor and serves as Chair of the 
Doctoral Scholars in Clinical Psychology Program.  Dr. Mosak earned his A.B. in 
Psychology and Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology at the University of Chicago.  He is a 
Diplomate in Clinical Psychology of the American Board of Professional Psychology, a 
Life Member and Fellow of the APA, and a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. Mosak 
teaches courses in Adlerian theory and methods, clinical seminars, and a year-long 
“Adler from Scratch” series.  His additional interests include the use of humor, the role of 
the spiritual in psychotherapy, multiple psychotherapy, and group and couples therapy.   
 
Dr. John Newbauer is a member of the Core Faculty and Co-ordinator of the Fort Wayne 
campus Doctoral Program.  Dr. Newbauer earned his B.A. and M.S.Ed. in Psychology 
and his M.S. in Pre-Clinical Psychology at St. Francis College, his Ed.D. in Counseling 
and Guidance (Cognates: Psychology and Educational Psychology) at Ball State 
University, a Certificate in Rehabilitation Administration at DePaul University, and a 
Postgraduate Certificate in Adlerian Psychology at the Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago.  
Dr. Newbauer is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist, a Diplomate and Fellow of the College 
of Forensic Examiners, a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist, and a Certified 
Clinical Mental Health Counselor.  Dr. Newbauer teaches courses in Adlerian theory and 
 
111

 
methods, psychological assessment, gender issues and clinical seminars.  His additional 
interests include correctional and forensic psychology, juvenile delinquency, sexual 
offenders, clinical hypnosis, custody and parenting issues, and gender and multicultural 
issues. 
 
Dr. Wendy Paszkiewicz is a member of the Core Faculty and serves as Director of 
Training and Community Service.  Dr. Paszkiewicz earned her B.S. in Psychology at 
Michigan State University and her Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology at the Illinois School of 
Professional Psychology/Chicago.  She is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist and maintains 
a private practice serving children, adolescents and families.  Dr. Paszkiewicz teaches 
practicum and internship seminars.  Her additional interests include managerial 
psychology, social interest and responsibility, diversity issues, the professional 
development of psychologists, and issues of education and training in professional 
psychology. 
 
Dr. Mary Schneider is a member of the Core Faculty.  Dr. Schneider earned her B.A. in 
Communications and Philosophy at Marquette University, her M.A. in Developmental 
Disabilities at West Virginia University, and her Ph.D. in Educational and Counseling 
Psychology at Loyola University.  Her degree in marriage and family therapy is from the 
Family Institute at Northwestern University.  She is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist and 
a Nationally Certified School Psychologist.  A Diplomate in Adlerian Psychology, Dr. 
Schneider teaches courses in child and adolescent counseling, family therapy, and 
Adlerian theory and methods.  She also serves as a clinical representative for the North 
American Society of Adlerian Psychology. 
 
Dr. Nancy Slater is Core Faculty and serves as Director of the Art Therapy Programs. Dr. 
Slater earned her B.A. in Psychology at the University of Michigan, her M.A. in Art 
Therapy at the University of Louisville, and her Ph.D. in Psychology at the Union 
Institute. She is a Registered Art Therapist (A.T.R.) of the American Art Therapy 
Association, and a Board Certified Art Therapist (ATR-BC). Dr. Slater is the coordinator 
of the International Networking Group of Art Therapists. Currently she is the chair of the 
American Art Therapy Association Ethics Committee. Dr. Slater has taught and directed 
graduate art therapy programs in Melbourne, Australia, and in Beer Sheva, Israel. She has 
given conference presentations and consultation in countries outside the US. Dr. Slater’s 
teaching interests include art therapy ethics, art therapy addressing the effects of trauma, 
multicultural approaches to art therapy and clinical supervision. Her additional interests 
include art therapy research, international collaborative training and research, and 
multicultural art therapy intervention in response to domestic violence and sexual assault, 
to substance abuse, and to the effects of interpersonal violence and war. 
 
Dr. Mark Stone is a Distinguished Service Professor, Program Director of the Master’s in 
Counseling and Organizational Psychology Program, and member of the Core Faculty.  
Dr. Stone earned his B.A. and B.M. at North Park College, his M.M. at Roosevelt 
University, his M.S. and Ed.D. at Northern Illinois University, his  C.A.S. at the 
University of Chicago, and his Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology at Forest Institute of 
Professional Psychology.  He is a Diplomate of the  American Board of Professional 
 
112

 
Psychology and a Diplomate and Fellow of the American Board of Medical 
Psychotherapists, a Licensed Clinical Psychologist, a Nationally Certified Career 
Counselor, a Nationally Certified Counselor, a Certified School Psychologist, a 
Nationally Certified Alcohol and Drug Counselor, and a Certified Supervisor and AODA 
Counselor CSADC.  Dr. Stone teaches courses in research methods, statistics, assessment 
of dementia, and other neurological topics.  His additional interests include Rasch 
measurement, data analysis, attention and memory, treatment of sex offenders, 
psychotherapy, organizational consulting, and supervision. 
 
 
Dr. Thomas Todd is a member of the Core Faculty and serves as Program Director of the 
Marriage & Family Program.  Dr. Todd earned his B.A. in Psychology at Princeton 
University and his Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology at New York University.  He is a 
Diplomate of the American Board of Family Psychology; a Fellow of the Division of 
Family Psychology (APA) and of the American Association for Marriage and Family 
Therapy; a  Licensed Clinical Psychologist, and an AAMFT Approved Supervisor.  Dr. 
Todd teaches courses in marriage and family therapy, clinical supervision, and practicum 
seminars.  His additional interests include qualitative research, substance abuse, eating 
disorders, supervision, and outcome assessment. 
 
Dr. Jaye L. Weems is the new Assistant Director for market development at the Dreikurs 
Psychological Services Center.  Dr. Weems comes to us from the Thornton Township 
Youth Committee, where he served as its Executive Director.  In this capacity, he 
successfully secured grants and contracts to provide services for a variety of populations, 
including children, adolescents, adults and elders from diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds.  
Dr. Weems has a work history that mirrors Adler’s mission and vision.   
 
Dr. Jerry Westermeyer is a member of the Doctoral Core Faculty and serves as Dean of 
Clinical Training.  Dr. Westermeyer earned his B.A. in Social Studies at St. Mary’s 
College and his M.A. in International Relations and Ph.D. (Committee on Human 
Development) at the University of Chicago.  He is a Licensed Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. 
Westermeyer teaches courses in psychopathology, human development, and research 
methodology.  His additional interests include successful aging across the lifespan, 
course and outcome of psychopathology, positive mental health, political psychology, 
and children’s issues in developing countries.   
 
Dr. Ian Wickramasekera II is a member of the Core Faculty and Coordinator of the 
Clinical Hypnosis Certificate Program.  Dr. Wickramasekera earned his B.S. in 
Psychology with Honors Distinction from the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana 
and his Psy.D. from the Illinois School of Professional Psychology at Chicago. He is 
licensed in clinical psychology and has worked in a variety of health psychology settings 
such as pain management and mind/body medicine.  In his clinical work he draws upon 
his background in Buddhism, cognitive neuroscience, humanistic/transpersonal 
psychology, and mind/body medicine.  His major clinical and research interests involve 
the application of techniques in mind/body medicine such as hypnosis, meditation, and 
biofeedback to a wide variety of health problems such as chronic pain.  He is the current 
 
113

 
Secretary of the APA’s Division of Psychological Hypnosis (Division 30).  His research 
has appeared in the International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, Journal 
of Humanistic Psychology, and in Dissociation.  Dr. Wickramasekera is also an Associate 
Editor of the American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis. 
 
Dr. Torrey Wilson is a member of the Core faculty and the Program Director for the 
Psy.D. program.  He earned his Ph.D. in Counseling Psychology from Loyola University.  
Dr. Wilson served as the program director at Gilda's Club, a cancer support center.  He 
has also held administrative positions at the American Medical Association and Rush-
Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center-Rush University. He has been involved in 
teaching and training at Rush and as a faculty member at Northeastern Illinois, Loyola, 
and Aurora universities, as well as providing management and diversity training to 
corporations and organizations as a consultant. Dr Wilson is a former president of the 
Chicago Chapter of the Association of Black Psychologists (2003-2004) and serves on 
several non-profit and organizational boards.  Dr. Wilson's interests include multicultural 
psychology, health psychology/behavioral medicine, and public health. 
 
Part-Time Program Faculty 
 
Dr. Nicole Hoffman is a member of the Part-Time Program Faculty and serves as 
Assistant Director of the Psychological Services Center.  Dr. Hoffman earned her B.A. in 
Psychology at Indiana University and her M.A. in Counseling Psychology and Psy.D. in 
Clinical Psychology at the Adler School of Professional Psychology.  She is a Licensed 
Clinical Psychologist.  Dr. Hoffman teaches courses in Adlerian theory and methods and 
appraisal of individuals.  Her additional interests include children, families, 
psychoeducation for parents and teachers, pediatric assessment, pediatric 
psychopathology, domestic court and psychology, and prevention of child and family 
dysfunction. 
 
Mr. Leo Lobl is a Distinguished Service Professor and member of the Part-Time Program 
Faculty.  Mr. Lobl earned his B.A. at Queens College, his M.S.S.A. at the University of 
Pittsburgh, and his Certificate in Psychotherapy at the Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago.  
He is a Diplomate in Clinical Social Work and a Licensed Clinical Social Worker.  Mr. 
Lobl teaches courses in professional development and clinical seminars for M.A. 
students. 
 
Dr. Bill Powers is a member of the Part-Time Program Faculty and serves as the Program 
Director of the Master of Police Psychology Program.  Dr. Powers received his 
bachelor’s degree from DePaul University in Sociology, a Master of Arts degree in 
Substance Abuse Counseling and a Doctor of Psychology degree in Clinical Psychology, 
both from the Adler School of Professional Psychology.  He is a Licensed Clinical 
Psychologist.  Dr. Powers is a recently retired Commander with the Chicago Police 
Department, having served over 30 years with that organization.  During that time, Dr. 
Powers was awarded three of the Department’s top awards; The Police Medal, the Award 
of Valor, and the Superintendent’s Award of Merit.  In addition, Dr. Powers consults and 
provides training for a number of law-enforcement agencies around the country.  
 
114

 
 
Dr. Joseph Troiani is a member of the Part-Time Program Faculty and serves as Program 
Director of the Substance Abuse Program.  Dr. Troiani earned his B.A. in 
Psychology/Sociology at Northeastern Illinois University, his Master’s in Health 
Administration at Governors State University, and his M.A. and Ph.D. in Clinical 
Psychology at the Fielding Institute.  He is a Certified Addictions Counselor.  Dr. Troiani 
teaches courses in substance abuse assessment and treatment.  His additional interests 
include aggression and violence, the mentally ill substance abuser, domestic violence and 
sex offenders, community mental health, behavioral health and public policy, political 
psychology, and health care administration.   
 
Faculty Emeritus 
 
Ms. Jane Griffith is a member of the Faculty Emeritus.  Ms. Griffith earned her B.A. at 
Hollins College, her M.A.T. at the University of Maine, and her M.A. in Counseling 
Psychology at the Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago.  She is a Nationally Certified 
Counselor and a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor.  Ms. Griffith teaches courses 
in Adlerian theory and methods and professional writing.  Her additional interests include 
the psychology of illness and wellness. 
 
Mr. Robert Powers holds the title of Distinguished Service Professor and a member of 
the Faculty Emeritus.  Mr. Powers earned his B.A. in Philosophy at Capital University, 
his M.Div. at Yale University, his M.A. at the University of Chicago, and a Certificate in 
Psychotherapy at the Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago.  He is a Licensed Clinical 
Psychologist.  Mr. Powers teaches courses in Adlerian theory and methods and 
spirituality and psychology.  His additional interests include couple, family, and child 
therapy. 
 
Dr. Norman Silverman is a Distinguished Service Professor and a member of the  Faculty 
Emeritus.  Dr. Silverman earned his B.A. in Social Science at George Williams College, 
his M.A. and Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology at Loyola University, and a Certificate in 
Psychotherapy at the  Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago.  Dr. Silverman teaches courses 
in the history and systems of psychology, comparative psychotherapies, personality 
theory, and Adlerian theory.  His additional interests include the philosophy of 
psychology, human sexuality, social psychology, class structure, politics, ethnic diversity, 
and birth order. 
 
Dr. Judy Sutherland is a Distinguished Service Professor, former Director of the Art 
Therapy programs at the Adler School, and a member of the Faculty Emeritus. Dr. 
Sutherland earned her B.A. in Art and French at Lawrence University, her M.A. in 
Counseling Psychology at the Alfred Adler Institute of Chicago, and her PH.D. in Art 
Therapy at the Union Institute. She is a Registered Art Therapist and Board Certified 
(ATR-BC) of the American Art Therapy Association, and a Licensed Clinical 
Professional Counselor. Dr. Sutherland's teaching interests include integrating art therapy 
with Adlerian theory and methods, heuristic research using art therapy, group art therapy, 
dreams, creativity, and spirituality. 
 
115

 
Adjunct Faculty 
 
Richard Ackley, Ph.D. 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
 
Greg Anderson, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Russell Bishop, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Pamela Brand, Psy.D. 
Illinois School of Professional Psychology/Chicago 
 
Joyce Bookchester, Psy.D. 
Illinois School of Professional Psychology/Chicago 
 
Dora Castro-Ahillen, M.A. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Nancy Chickerneo, M.A. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Rene Dushman, M.A. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Mary Farrell, M.A. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Edward Frischholz, Ph.D. 
University of Illinois at Chicago 
 
Leonard Koziol, Psy.D. 
Forest Institute of Professional Psychology 
 
Russell Leander, M.A. 
 
Antonio Martinez, Ph.D. 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst Campus 
 
John Peterson, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Suzanne Peroutka, M.A. 
 
Mary Pulscher, M.A. 
 
116

 
Bernard Raden, Ph.D. 
Illinois Institute of Technology 
 
Penny Robbins, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Greg Sarlo, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Tracy R. Scott, Psy.D. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Chris Stout, Psy.D. 
Forest Institute of Professional Psychology 
 
Dr. Russell Swayne, Psy.D. 
Illinois School of Professional Psychology 
 
Cheryl Wagner, M.A. 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Charlene Wenc, M.A. 
DePaul University 
 
Vancouver Campus 
 
Dr. Russell King is Dean of the Adler School of Professional Psychology in Vancouver, 
British Columbia and a member of the Core Faculty. Russell provides academic and 
administrative leadership to a dynamic and growing campus. He completed his BA in 
Psychology and English Literature at the University of Victoria, and both his MA in 
Counseling Psychology and Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology at the Adler School of 
Professional Psychology. Dr. King is registered with the College of Psychologists of 
British Columbia, and has maintained a private practice since 1992. He teaches courses in 
Adlerian theory and methods, psychopathology, appraisal of individuals, and clinical 
assessment and interviewing. Additional research interests include developmental 
psychopathology, and personality disorders. 
 
Dr. Christopher A. Shelley is a member of the Core Faculty. He holds a M.A. from the 
Adler School of Professional Psychology, a M.Phil. from King's College, London (UK) 
and a Ph.D. from UBC - Vancouver. His is an accredited Adlerian Counsellor  
(Institute for Individual Psychology, London), a member of the Psychotherapy Section of 
the British Psychological Society (BPS) and a member of the International Society for 
Theoretical Psychology (ISTP). In the 1990s he was co-ordinator of the Institute for 
Individual Psychology in London and remains co-editor of the British Adlerian  
Yearbook (since 1995). He is the author of several journal articles, books and book 
chapters in the fields of psychotherapy, theoretical psychology, and gender studies. In 
 
117

 
addition to teaching at the Adler School, he is an adjunct faculty member in Women's and 
Gender Studies at UBC where he is Lecturer in Gender Relations. Dr. Shelley is also a  
practicing counsellor in Vancouver where he specializes in adult psychotherapy and 
counselling with transgendered people. 
 
Adjunct Faculty  
 
Bob Armstrong, Ph.D., R. Psych  
University of Arizona 
 
Deb Bailey, M.A., R.C.C.  
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
Sheila Boyce, M.A., R.C.C.   
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Carole Carmack, M.A., R.C.C.   
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Doug Cohen, Ph.D., R. Psych   
Simon Fraser University 
 
Connie Coniglio, Ed.D., R. Psych  
University of Toronto 
 
Georgeanna Drew, M.A., R.C.C.  
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Wayne Emery, Psy.D., R.Psych  
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Natacha Ferada, Ph.D., R. Psych  
University of British Columbia 
 
Rick Hancock, Psy.D., R. Psych  
 Southern California University  for Professional Studies 
 
Clair Hawes, Ph.D., R.Psych  
University of Arizona 
 
Barbara Holmes, Ed.D., R. Psych  
University of British Columbia 
 
Pippa Lewington, Ph.D., R. Psych  
University of British Columbia 
 
118

 
Mavis Lloyd, Ph.D., R.C.C.  
 University for Integrative Learning 
 
Teal Maedel, M.A., R. Psych 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Bonnie Mason, M.A., R.C.C 
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Gloria McArter, Ph.D., R.C.C.   
Southern California University for Professional Studies 
 
Jan McNeil, M.A., R.C.C.  
Adler School of Professional Psychology 
 
Martin Shoemaker, Ph.D, ABPP, R. Psych  
 Fuller School of Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119

 
Board of Trustees 
 
Patricia Moten Marshall, MHA  
 
Chair 
Javier Ubarri, MBA  
 
 
Vice Chair  
Audra Akins, MATD  
 
 
Trustee 
Raymond E. Crossman, PhD  
 
President, Trustee 
Reggie Denson 
 
 
 
Trustee 
Samuel Goldman, MD 
 
 
Trustee 
William W. Greaves, PhD 
 
 
Trustee 
Lee Guthrie, MBA, MS 
 
 
Trustee 
Joyce Holmberg, MA  
 
 
Trustee 
Steve Kirn, PhD 
 
 
 
Trustee 
David J. Kreischer, MA 
 
 
Trustee 
Melvin Mishkin, JD, MA 
 
 
Trustee 
Harold Mosak, PhD  
 
 
Trustee 
L. Renee Richardson, MBA  
 
Trustee 
Greg Salustro  
 
 
 
Trustee 
Bernard Shulman, PhD 
 
 
Trustee 
Xichel A. Woods, MHA 
 
 
Trustee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120

 
Administration and Staff 
 
Chicago campus 
Raymond E. Crossman, PhD  
 
President 
Frank Gruba-McCallister, PhD 
 
Vice President of Academic Affairs 
Jo Beth Cup, MS 
 
 
 
Vice President of Administration 
Joel Poemerenk, MBA 
 
 
Vice President of Finance & IT 
Dan Barnes, PhD 
                        
Director, Dreikurs Psychological Services Center 
Lynn Todman, PhD  
 
 
Director, Adler Institute on Social Exclusion 
 
Patricia Austin  
 
 
 
Assistant Registrar 
Chinmayee Barve, PhD 
 
 
Assistant Director of Training and Community Services 
Michelle Brice  
 
 
 
Admissions Counselor 
Jim Cavanaugh 
 
 
 
Student Finance Manager 
Kerry Cochran e, MA, MSW  
 
Director of Library Services 
Carol Davis 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Assistant of Training and Community Services 
Nancy Davis  
 
 
 
Administrative Assistant 
Terri Esch 
 
  
 
 
Financial Aid Officer 
Elaine Francis  
 
 
 
Registration Specialist 
Adrian Hernandez 
 
 
 
Accountant 
Craig Hines 
 
 
 
 
Director of Admissions 
Christopher Jones, PhD 
 
 
Director of Institutional Research 
Asra Kamal, MS 
 
 
 
Director of Student and Alumni Affairs 
Arlene Krizanic, MALS 
 
 
Reference Librarian 
Michelle Molina-Tiwade 
 
 
Admissions Counselor 
Dino Nuhija  
 
 
 
Assistant Systems Administrator 
Megan Odum  
 
 
 
Admissions Counselor 
Wendy Paszkiewicz, PsyD 
 
 
Director of Training and Community Services 
Lani Pieper 
 
 
 
 
Registrar 
Terri Powers  
 
 
 
PSC Office Manager 
Francine Reed  
 
 
 
Receptionist 
Sarah Sapperstein 
 
 
 
Executive Administrative Assistant 
Jaye L. Weems, PsyD  
 
 
Assistant Director, Dreikurs PSC 
Michael Zellner, MALS 
 
 
Reference Librarian 
 
Vancouver campus 
Russell King, PsyD 
 
 
 
Campus Dean 
Ada Christopher 
 
 
 
Assoc. Director of Admissions 
Seema Buksh  
 
 
 
Admissions  
Melody Sousa  
 
 
 
Office Manager/Registrar 
Louisa Hadley  
 
 
 
Receptionist 
Joel Craig 
 
 
 
 
Library/Administrative Assistant 
 
121

 
Academic Calendar 2006-2007 
 
Chicago campus     
 
 
 
 
 
Fall Semester 2006 
Semester Starts 
September 5 
Explorers Day 
 October 9 
Thanksgiving Observed 
 November 23-24 
Semester Ends 
 December 18 
 
Spring Semester 2007 
Semester Begins 
 January 8 
Martin Luther King Day Observed 
 January 15 
Presidents Day Observed 
 February 19 
Good Friday 
 April 6 
Semester Ends 
 April 16 
 
Summer Semester 2007 
Semester Begins 
 May 7 
Memorial Day 
 May 28 
Independence Day  
 July 4 
Semester Ends 
 August 20 
 
 
Vancouver campus 
 
Fall Semester 2006 
Semester Starts        
 
 
 
 
September 5 
 Thanksgiving 
  October 9 
 
122

 
 Remembrance Day 
  November 10 
Semester Ends 
 December 18 
 
Spring Semester 2007 
Semester Begins 
 January 8 
Family Day 
 February 19 
Good Friday   
   April 6 
Easter Monday 
  April 9 
Semester Ends 
 April 16 
 
Summer Semester 2007 
Semester Begins 
 May 7 
Victoria Day 
   May 21 
Canada Day 
   July 2 
BC Day 
 August 6 
Semester Ends 
 August 20 
 
 
 
123

