
The Toxic Meritocracy of Video Games


The Toxic Meritocracy  
of Video Games
Why Gaming Culture Is the Worst
Christopher A. Paul
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis
London

Copyright 2018 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290
Minneapolis, MN 55401-­2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Printed in the United States of America on acid-­free paper
The University of Minnesota is an equal-­opportunity educator and employer.
23 22 21 20 19 18	 	
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Paul, Christopher A., author.
Title: The toxic meritocracy of video games : why gaming culture is the worst / 
Christopher A. Paul.
Description: Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press, 2018. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017018695 (print) | ISBN 978-1-5179-0040-3 (hc) | 
ISBN 978-1-5179-0041-0 (pb)
Subjects: LCSH: Video games—Social aspects. | Merit (Ethics)—Social aspects. | 
Video gamers—Psychology.
Classification: LCC GV1469.34.S52 P38 2018 (print) | DDC 794.8—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017018695

For Erin, Piper, and Ingrid

This page deliberately left blank

Contents
	 	 Introduction: Growing Up Gamer  1
	1.	 Leveling Up in Life: How Meritocracy Works in Society  29
	2.	 A Toxic Culture: Studying Gaming’s Jerks  63
	3.	 Coding Meritocracy:  
Norms of Game Design and Narrative  91
	4.	 Judging Skill: From World of Warcraft  
to Kim Kardashian: Hollywood  111
	5.	 Learning from Others  141
	 	 Conclusion: An Obligation to Do Better  163
	 	 Acknowledgments  181
	 	 Notes  183
	 	 Gameography  227
	 	 Index  235

This page deliberately left blank

	
1
Introduction
Growing Up Gamer
Games, video games in particular, are special to me. I am the 
grown-­up version of one of those kids who went to the arcade on a 
regular basis, who graduated from Atari to Nintendo to PCs, Play-
Station, and Xbox. I have spent my life bouncing back and forth among 
computers, consoles, and mobile devices. There were points where I 
didn’t have time to play much, like college, prompting an evolution 
in what I could play and fit into my daily life. I have transitioned from 
the massive time investment of World of Warcraft to choppier, more 
flexible games that can be better compartmentalized, like FIFA and 
Clash of Clans. However, through almost all of my life, video games 
have been primary elements of my recreational experience and a base 
for my social interactions, both offline and on­.
I have often had to defend video games from concerns about what 
they would do to me or worries about how I could be better spend-
ing my time. When I was young, teachers told me that video games 
were a waste of time; when I was older, other scholars told me that 
video games were trivial and need not be studied. Fortunately, I had 
parents who enabled, or at least allowed, a fair chunk of my play, and 
supportive colleagues who helped me advance my work. I understand 
that there was a time when video games were marginalized, relegated 
to arcades you weren’t supposed to go to, and subject to scorn and 
concerns about your brain rotting, how much time you were wasting, 
or the violence they might inspire in the susceptible. However, while 

Introduction	
2
those complaints can still be seen on occasion, we are no longer in 
the same kind of cultural moment.1 Video games are now a part of 
everyday life, serving as both touchstones for how we construct who 
we are as a people and as an economic engine that generates billions 
of dollars (more than the music or movie industries) and attracts the 
investment of millions of hours of time by people around the world.2
Despite this move from marginalized activity to accepted part of 
mainstream culture, my shame about what video games are and what 
game culture has become is far deeper than ever before. Maybe it is a 
part of getting older, but there are parts of the culture around video 
games I simply cannot defend.3 My interest in and commitment to 
video games is far more conflicted because I see what has happened 
in and around the games I have enjoyed so much. From the limited 
depictions of women and people of color in games to ongoing cam-
paigns of harassment, like GamerGate, the current state of culture 
around video games is dark, and I think those of us who recognize 
problems have an obligation to address them.
A huge part of the problem with video games exists in the in-
teractions between how they are designed and how we think about 
what they are. Video games, like all technologies and media forms, 
express ideologies. The games that are made and played are impor-
tant artifacts that shape the culture around games, yet many of their 
ideological implications are not openly discussed. Both the narratives 
within video games and the way most AAA games are designed cele-
brate merit, which leads to significant problems. Videogame design is 
predicated on an extreme focus on rewarding skill and effort. Merit 
is a key part of the code within games, effectively becoming a central 
ideology that shapes what games get made and how they are played. 
Leveling systems within games sort characters into clear hierarchies 
of power while providing a set of objectives for players to follow in 
cases ranging from World of Warcraft to NBA 2K to Kim Kardashian: 
Hollywood. Game design is praised when it achieves proper balance, 
which leads to a fetish for situations where players are free to choose 
multiple paths through a game, secure in the knowledge that games 
from Street Fighter to BioShock to FIFA are structured so that differ-
ent choices still lead to equitable experiences for players. Those of us 
playing video games all too frequently believe that one of the good 
things about games is that, as one journalist celebrates, “online games 

	
3	
Introduction
remove our physical identity, and all the traumas and inhibitions that 
come with it; everybody starts equal, everyone is judged on their con-
tribution.”4 However, believing that kind of positive spin on games re-
quires ignoring all the structural inequalities that ensure players never 
start from the same place.
The clearest ancestor for contemporary online games is MUD1, 
Richard Bartle and Roy Trubshaw’s 1978 game that is described as 
being created by “two angry young men, feeling oppressed,” who de-
signed “an escape with their own two hands; a place where the laws 
were fairer, where the experience was not so unkind.”5 Elements of 
MUD1’s lineage can be seen in almost every online game, particu-
larly in fantasy role-­playing games like EverQuest, Ultima Online, 
and World of Warcraft. MUD1 was explicitly designed as “a place in 
which players were able to succeed according to their actions and in-
telligence rather than an accident of birth into a certain social class 
or fortune.”6 Bartle contends that he and Trubshaw “were creating a 
true meritocracy. Not because I thought a meritocracy was the one 
true way, but that if we were going to have a system in which people 
ranked themselves, then a meritocracy was the least-­worst approach.”7 
MUD1 gives contemporary games a complex inheritance, one where 
video games have long been designed around principles of ranking 
players based on skill and effort, seemingly replacing the importance 
of birthright, but ignoring the structures around this approach that 
advantage some and disadvantage others.
Pursuing merit as the paramount system of ranking players has 
spread beyond online games. Most competitive multiplayer games 
are designed to enable the best players to win, on the assumption that 
a video game should be an assessment and adjudication of a player’s 
skill, which is a core tenet of eSports and tournament play. Skill is a 
vital part of discussions about video games, which can be seen as in-
tegrated into discussions surrounding them. In one small example 
in July 2016, about six months after the public launch of Supercell’s 
Clash Royale, players sought to assess the state of the game. The cen-
tral thesis of Chief Pat, a prominent YouTuber with over two million 
subscribers, was that Clash Royale would be different from other mo-
bile games, that it would be the place where true skill had a chance to 
shine through in play. Clash Royale features elements of deck building, 
battle arenas, and competitive play, but for the purposes of this argu-

Introduction	
4
ment the game is far less important than the kinds of appeals that are 
made about it. Contextualizing his story to his first experience with 
the game, Chief Pat notes that within five minutes of playing he saw 
a game that would be 100 percent fair because the play would be all 
about skill.8 Similar arguments are easy to find throughout the com-
munity of Clash Royale players, as they lament the evolution of the 
game, design decisions, and what they see as a general devolution of 
play toward a preference for luck or legacy, rather than a promotion 
of player ability.9 The dominant presumption of notable and outspo-
ken players is that competition in video games is supposed to be an 
evenly matched battle, with the most talented player winning. This 
kind of argument dominated that particular discussion about Clash 
Royale, but the general appeal is common in many different kinds of 
videogame genres. This is a particularly notable instance as players are 
making clear appeals justifying, rationalizing, and advancing a meri-
tocratic approach to videogame play and design.
Issues with game design also reach into the industry itself, which 
tends to be far whiter and male dominated than society at large. In 
2005 the International Game Developers Association (IGDA) released 
a thorough report on the demographics of those who make games, 
finding that over 83 percent of developers identify as white and 88.5 
percent identify as male.10 The IGDA now collects demographic data 
as part of its annual “Developer Satisfaction Survey”; in 2015 it found 
that 75 percent of developers identify as male and 76 percent identify 
as white, and described the “prototypical game industry worker/devel-
oper as being a 32 year old white male with a university degree who 
lives in North America and has no children.”11 Age is more accurately 
reported in more recent data, where 67 percent of the respondents in 
2015 fell between the ages of twenty-­five and thirty-­nine. The devel-
oper and academic Robin Potanin puts the lack of diversity in stark 
terms based on her experience, recounting that “at one stage in my 
game production career I was the only female on the production floor 
in a development team of 60.”12 A lack of diversity in people and back-
ground portends to a lack of diversity in new ideas, as those who grew 
up with games make the games they would most enjoy playing. The 
journalist Matthew Handrahan sums up this position from an industry 
point of view in reporting an interview with the creative director of 
Ubisoft: “Be it League of Legends, Destiny, The Division or Overwatch, 

	
5	
Introduction
the majority of gamers are actively seeking out experiences that will be 
consistent and—­to varying degrees—­predictable over long stretches 
of time.”13 Even as the industry has diversified somewhat over time, 
large game developers and publishers are structured to encourage a 
conservative approach to game development, one that replicates the 
meritocratic dependency and audiences of past successes rather than 
striking out on new paths. The growth in development costs creates 
a situation where companies betting $100 million or more on a game 
focus more on what has worked than on what could be.
Focus on meritocracy reaches beyond the design of games and 
into the narrative stories they typically tell. Most major game sto-
rylines, from Grand Theft Auto III to Uncharted to Restaurant Story, 
enable players to grow from a relative weakling into a strong, powerful 
demigod. In Grand Theft Auto games players start out at the bottom 
of a criminal organization or ostracized from the people they used to 
work with; Uncharted features Nathan Drake, an orphan seeking to 
prove his familial connection to famed explorer Sir Francis Drake; 
and Restaurant Story is predicated on an avatar who sets out to build 
a restaurant and starts without an oven to call her own. In all these 
games, if the player keeps playing (with at least a modest amount of 
skill) he or she will become a criminal mastermind, a famed treasure 
hunter, or the operator of an exceptionally successful restaurant.
Grand Theft Auto III epitomizes this kind of development, as 
the story begins with the protagonist, later discovered to be named 
Claude, left shot and betrayed by his girlfriend while robbing a bank 
together. Claude manages to survive but is captured, placing players in 
a position where they are alone and on their way to a ten-­year prison 
sentence for bank robbery. The game’s narrative unfolds from rock 
bottom for Claude, who transforms into a leader of the underworld 
who successfully outfoxes the mafia, a Columbian drug cartel, and 
the Yakuza in the space of a few hours of player-­led intervention and 
exploration. By the end of the game, Claude has eviscerated the car-
tel and exacted his revenge on both the mafia don who sought to kill 
him and the girlfriend who initially betrayed him. Claude lets players 
experience being a strong, silent killer, and the narrative of the game 
lets them take credit for Claude’s ascension from the bottom of the 
underworld to kingpin. It is notable that this version of Grand Theft 
Auto, the one with the clearest development of a meritocratic narrative 

Introduction	
6
arc, changed the face of video games and, in the words of one game 
journalist, makes Claude and his leather jacket “as important to a gen-
eration of gaming as 8-­bit Mario and his blue overalls.”14
Frequently complemented by the designed progress of leveling, 
games tell tales where the character starts at the bottom, often worse 
off than the player, until the player propels the character’s rise to the 
top. The narrative growth of the character may be interrupted and 
stalled in a dramatic second act, but the thrust of the story told in 
most large-­scale games omits problems with structural imbalance or 
differential access to resources, and focuses instead on how the per-
son behind the controller facilitates the character’s success. In Grand 
Theft Auto III Claude is a one-­man wrecking crew, routinely besting 
everyone around him and thriving against all odds. However, all of 
Claude’s success is due to the intervention of the player, as someone 
must successfully complete missions and move the narrative along. 
The story many games tell players is that if you work hard enough, if 
you are good enough, you can follow a straightforward path to power, 
wealth, and resources. As Arthur Chu writes, video games have often 
been seen as a refuge, “a magical world where, despite the violence and 
horror, winning was always possible. Where enemies could always be 
slain. Where gaming experience always led to leveling up, as opposed 
to a real world where trying seemed to get you nowhere. Where the 
capricious unfairness of real human beings was erased and your prin-
cess was always waiting at the end of World 8-­4.”15 Video games de-
pend on these meritocratic tales, like Mario’s obsessive quest to clear 
levels and save the princess, and although other media may appeal 
to similar tropes, the reliance on player valor and individual talent 
in video games is striking and clearly linked to the role of the player. 
Video games are a place where a particular ideology—­meritocracy—­
runs rampant and largely unchecked.
Video games are a key point of insight into what is happening in the 
world and a potential site to realize substantial change. Video games 
are a harbinger of things to come, a model of the world we inhabit, 
and an extreme where certain behaviors and practices were honed 
before being integrated into contemporary political movements in 
the United States and the United Kingdom.16 Video games offer a 
unique space of insight into the interests and practices of white men 
of means. They are a place where meritocracy is made real through 

	
7	
Introduction
consistent interaction and reinforcement. However, they are also an 
excellent place to explore low-­risk, high-­impact experiences where 
players can see, explore, and feel a different subject position. Video 
games are a platform for experimentation and a place for interven-
tion. Video games give space for new perspectives and a chance for 
reflection while offering a way to intervene in modern life. They are 
a location where what they have made can also be unmade—­but to 
do that it is necessary to understand what exactly is going on with, in, 
and around them.
This project contends that the dependence on meritocracy within 
videogame narrative and design is a substantial problem. Meritocratic 
norms limit the potential audience for video games and structure how 
players and designers interact. The meritocratic focus of games is self-­
insulating and self-­replicating. Those who are successful believe they 
have attained their status through the quality of their effort, a com-
pelling ground on which to build the impression that they are sim-
ply better than others are. The prevalence of meritocratic myths in 
games also encourages players to want more meritocratic games and 
deride video games that do not fit that template as lesser, bad games, 
and sometimes even to contest whether non-­meritocratic efforts are 
even proper games at all.
In her study of online trolls, Whitney Phillips makes a clear case 
for how systems and structures matter in any attempt to address online 
culture. She argues that the reason we can’t have nice things is because 
“trolls are born of and embedded within dominant institutions and 
tropes, which are every bit as damaging as the troll’s most disruptive 
behaviors.”17 In detailing the reason for problematic behavior, a huge 
part of Phillips’s argument is that it is not just the people that are a 
problem, but also the systems, structures, and norms that support and 
enable their behavior.
Any step to address larger issues in video games and game culture 
requires subverting meritocratic norms and expectations; falling back 
on meritocratic practices ensures a limit on how much videogame 
culture can change. Fixing game culture would also help develop the 
norms, systems, and structures to create a more positive environment 
that can spread beyond the limited space of games. Addressing the is-
sues in video games would provide a road map for how to deal with 
similar behaviors in other realms and perhaps get us on a path build-

Introduction	
8
ing our own new, nice things. Reconstructing videogame culture re-
quires recontextualizing how we think about games in the first place. 
However, a first step in this process is accounting for the obligations 
of those who are privileged enough to play, write and think about, and 
make video games by pointing to some of the structural inequalities 
that ensure we are not all starting from the same place.
I am an incredibly lucky person. I was born straight, white, and 
male into a two-­parent household in a rich country, which is pretty 
much winning the genetic lottery. I had the opportunity to go to col-
lege and graduate school and now get to teach, think, and write for 
a job. I quite literally play video games for research purposes. That 
doesn’t suck, but it also offers me a platform to create change. More 
pointedly, all those benefits leave me with an obligation to leverage 
my advantages to help make the world a better place.
Although my position and obligations are specific to me, if you 
are reading this book I expect there is also a context for the obliga-
tions you carry as well. One of the ways of framing where we fit and 
how fortunate we are is to think about the world as a village of one 
hundred people, with the same distributive ratios that we have for the 
seven billion people who inhabit the world at large.18 Over the past 
decade the number of people with a college degree in that hypothet-
ical village has grown from one to seven (at the time of this writing), 
but if you are one of those people with such a degree you still have 
ninety-­three fellow villagers who have not had the same opportuni-
ties. If you have access to a computer, you would be one of twenty-­two 
that do, numbers that are largely matched by the seventeen who are 
unable to read and write, the twenty-­three with no shelter from wind 
and rain, and the thirteen who do not have safe water to drink. At the 
point that you are fortunate enough to be in a position where you can 
have the ability, the time, and the resources to read a book about video 
games, you are one of a very small group of people in the world with 
that opportunity. To me, this is one way of thinking about how we all 
carry an obligation to make the world a better place and of reflecting 
on how imbalanced access to resources subverts any attempt to mea-
sure merit. Video games are not everything, but they are important; 
therefore, committing to improving the culture around video games 
is one place to start fulfilling some of our obligations.
One of the key problems with meritocratic ideology is that it self-­

	
9	
Introduction
replicates in a way that discourages critical reflection about the privi-
lege a person possesses. A key piece of the meritocratic myth is that it 
seduces the successful to believe they earned their position in society. 
It is far more comfortable to think that your skills and effort account 
for your accomplishments than to think it was gifted to you through 
a cornucopia of accidents or elements of good fortune. Success in a 
meritocratic system creates a cocoon that encourages a lack of crit-
ical reflection about the breaks and luck that lead to a variety of ad-
vantages enabling a person to ascend to the heights he or she reaches. 
From gender, race, and class to national origin and ability, all the inter-
sections of our identities circumscribe where we start in meritocratic 
systems. Those who succeed under meritocracy are often talented, 
smart, and thoughtful—­I would surely like to think that I am—­but 
the successful typically benefit from a series of structural head starts 
that help them climb the social hierarchy. Thinking you are talented, 
gifted, or better than others is certainly more comfortable than real-
izing you are simply luckier. Self-­insulating meritocratic norms are a 
key part of what has made the culture around video games so nega-
tive, so isolated, and so problematic, because many of the games we 
have teach players that they are special and have earned their success.
Perhaps the biggest takeaway of my career is that those of us who 
have benefited from the current system have an obligation to do more 
than simply sit back and observe. Those fortunate enough to be in a 
position to speak out have a job to do just that. There are not always 
good platforms on which to critique contemporary society; there-
fore, when a person stands on one, he or she should use it to make 
the world a better place. As a person who benefits from a system that 
largely gives me a job for as long as I would like one, as a previous 
author who has contacts with publishers, as a player who has spent a 
lifetime playing video games, and as a person who has benefited from 
structural privilege throughout my life, this project comes directly 
out of my obligation to try to make a difference. Although your story 
may not line up perfectly with mine, I encourage you to do your own 
accounting of how you ended up where you are and how accidents 
of birth and inherited advantages may have moved you forward on 
your path. I believe the culture surrounding video games has gotten 
too bad to simply sit back and watch any longer; the status quo must 
change, and the concept of meritocracy is a formative part of the 

Introduction	
10
toxicity found in the culture around video games. We need to spend 
more time thinking about the ideological implications of video games, 
enough to match the effort put into our obsessions over frame rates, 
hours played, and drama about downloadable content. The beginning 
of this change requires briefly explaining the concept of meritocracy, 
going on a shallow dive into the current state of the culture around 
video games, and then providing an overview of the book as a whole.
Meritocracy, in Brief
Perhaps the most prominent meritocratic narrative is the American 
Dream, according to which people, especially those new to the United 
States, can pull themselves up by their bootstraps and succeed based 
on hard work and perseverance.19 By convincing immigrants to come 
to the United States and persuading those who struggle that if they 
work hard enough their fate will improve, bootstrapping narratives 
individualize responsibility, erase structural barriers, and advance a 
meritocratic story that is typical in contemporary Western society 
and actualized in video games. Meritocratic game narratives partner 
perfectly with elements of meritocratic game design to make video 
games one of the purest spaces of meritocratic rhetoric. Video games 
are a place where the abstract ideology of meritocracy is actualized 
and solidified. In a broader context, meritocratic narratives cover up 
structural inequality and personalize responsibility to make each in-
dividual appear to be responsible for his or her own success or failure, 
resulting in recognition by critics that meritocracy functions more like 
a myth than as a coherent ideology.20 However, as meritocracy has 
become more widely accepted it is increasingly difficult to recognize 
where it came from and how inherited position is often more mean-
ingful than any individual talent.
Meritocracy makes it seem like people are responsible for their 
own success or failure, even when the wealth of someone like U.S. 
president Donald Trump is far more likely to be the result of inher-
itance than individual investment savvy.21 Trump is a case study in 
how we do not actually live in a meritocracy. Substantial parts of his 
success were based on being a connected white man. He is able to say 
things that a woman or person of color simply would not be allowed 
to, while showing little awareness that the body he inhabits gives him 

	
11	
Introduction
a much wider latitude than that given to others.22 He appeals to his 
talent and attempts to promulgate it through his books and his brief 
attempt at a “university.” He minimizes the resources gifted to him by 
birth as a “small loan” to help bolster an argument that he achieved 
his status based on his own merit, when the reality is that he grew up 
in one of the richest families in the United States.23 Instead of devel-
oping real estate and creating some of the most amazing buildings 
in the world, the Trump Organization is mostly a rent-­seeking en-
deavor, making its money based on leasing out the name “Trump.”24 
Donald Trump certainly has talents and puts in work, but his merit 
is magnified and facilitated by being born into a rich family that was 
already prominent in New York real estate. His advantages are mag-
nified by his status as a straight, white man who uses his performance 
of masculinity as a way to appeal to voters. He has since passed many 
of those advantages to his children, who continue to perpetuate a sys-
tem where their jobs are part of a familial inheritance, rather than an 
achievement based on their talent and hard work. The Trump family 
success demonstrates how meritocracies break down as parents pass 
privilege to their children, lessening the amount of skill or effort they 
need to have in order to be successful.
Systems, ideologies, and cultures that seem natural are produced 
through regular social interactions, and neither meritocracy nor video 
games are exceptions to those dynamics. We are in a moment when 
we have to look critically at meritocracy and take it apart. The increas-
ing inequality in which we are living undercuts, subverts, and prevents 
meritocracy from working, while appeals to meritocratic ideology 
give moral justification to the winners.25 Meritocracy eliminates any 
focus on structural problems and systems, focusing us on individu-
als instead. The hallmarks of meritocracy and its effects can be seen 
in areas ranging from the Brexit vote, to criticism of the Black Lives 
Matter movement, to the 2016 Trump presidential campaign. Mer-
itocracy depends on an equal starting position for all, and the world 
around us features constant reminders that equal opportunity is not 
available for everyone. In this light, it is relevant to briefly examine 
where the idea came from and how it came to be so widely accepted 
in many parts of the world.
Popularized by its use in a satirical novel by Michael Young in 
1958, “meritocracy” refers to a society where people rise and fall based 

Introduction	
12
on their personal skills and effort. Prominent supporters of meritoc-
racy, like Daniel Bell, see it “as an emphasis on individual achievement 
and earned status as confirmed by one’s peers.”26 In the 1990s, as the 
term was becoming more widely used, Peter Saunders expounded 
that a meritocracy is a system “based upon a competition in which the 
achieved rather than ascribed characteristics of individuals determine 
the outcome. It is a system which depends upon genuine equality of 
opportunity but which generates unequal outcomes.”27 In specific ap-
plication to his native Great Britain, Saunders writes that “the princi-
ple of meritocracy is widely understood as a ‘fair’ and ‘just’ principle, 
and for most people (even if not most sociologists), evidence that abil-
ity and effort are increasingly being recognised and rewarded in this 
country would be positively welcomed.”28 In the most basic sense, “a 
meritocracy is a social system where individual talent and effort, rather 
than ascriptive traits, determine individuals’ placements in a social hi-
erarchy.”29 Jo Littler, a prominent critic of the ideology, states that “a 
meritocracy is nowadays understood as ‘a social system which allows 
people to achieve success proportionate to their talents and abilities, 
as opposed to one in which social class or wealth is the controlling 
factor.’”30 The idea of a meritocracy generally concerns social order 
and how to allocate resources. Backers of meritocratic norms typically 
believe that skill should be measured, that effort should be tracked, 
and that those who demonstrate the best combinations of talent and 
hard work should rise to the top of the social ladder. By assessing these 
individual traits, meritocracies aspire to cut out considerations of so-
cial class, race, family background, or other characteristics in order to 
dole out rewards to those judged to be the most deserving, allowing 
them to ascend the social hierarchy.31
Saunders is correct is his belief that meritocratic norms have be-
come widely accepted in many contemporary societies, but there are 
fundamental structural problems inherent to a meritocratic system of 
organization. The most basic implication of sorting people based on 
a combination of talent and drive is that meritocracies are predicated 
on “unspecified levels of inequality, but with equal opportunities to 
compete for advantageous positions within it”; yet, as Ruth Levitas 
notes, “you cannot, in fact, have equality of opportunity when there 
are large substantive inequalities.”32 Jo Littler lists three key problems 
of a meritocratic order: one must consider “‘talent’ or ‘intelligence’” 

	
13	
Introduction
to be something that “is inborn from birth”; “that it endorses a com-
petitive, linear, hierarchical system in which by definition people must 
be left behind”; and that it requires a “hierarchical ranking of pro-
fessions and status.”33 Meritocracies require sorting people into cat-
egories where some are adjudged more worthy than others based on 
effects of their life circumstances, not their skill and effort. It is a sys-
tem predicated on inequality, where those who are less successful are 
supposedly struggling because they either are not talented enough or 
are too lazy to improve their lot in life. Meritocracy isolates, individ-
ualizes, and strips out context. In the contemporary world there has 
also been a lack of attention paid to equality of opportunity, as those 
at the top pass their inheritance to those like them, while yanking the 
ladder away that helped them up in the first place.
As an ideology, meritocracy affects people in many different ways. 
Embracing meritocracy makes allocating resources seem straightfor-
ward: as soon as a system for judging merit is established, it becomes 
easy to assess who finished at the top and is most deserving of the 
greatest rewards. In addition to its utility in economics, supporters of 
meritocracy argue that it “is considered by many to be an ideal jus-
tice principle, because only relevant inputs (e.g., abilities) should be 
considered and irrelevant factors (e.g., ethnicity, gender) should be ig-
nored when distributing outcomes. Thus, meritocracy is bias free and 
can be seen as creating social mobility; this is the American dream.”34 
Meritocracy is about making clear, self-­rationalizing decisions. For 
those who buy into the principle that merit can be properly assessed, 
meritocracy functions brilliantly. Meritocracy makes decisions clear, 
as it offers up a straightforward rationale while ensuring decisions ap-
pear fair and proper. These twin dynamics make a meritocratic ideol-
ogy self-­reinforcing for those who believe in it.
As an “ideally” just way to make decisions, meritocracy folds nicely 
into decisions about how to best design reward systems in games, 
as systems relying on evaluations of merit are generally interpreted 
by players as fair. This can translate as the simple lesson that video 
games teach: that killing the boss proves a player’s skill, which means 
the princess is a proper reward for demonstrating merit in play and 
evidence of a player’s superiority over others. However, in practice 
meritocracies are plagued with problems, as any structural biases that 
create inequality of opportunities short-­circuits the ability to properly 

Introduction	
14
judge merit. Meritocracy is a kind of social organization that seems 
sound in a design document; however, as soon as it moves into prac-
tice it becomes impossible to isolate merit from other factors in the 
process of evaluating people. Meritocracy works as a magnifier for any 
sort of structural inequality stemming from differences in things like 
sex, gender, race, class, sexual orientation, age, or many other factors. 
A common critique of standardized exams, like IQ tests, the SAT, and 
the ACT, is that they carry cultural biases. I contend that much of the 
same baggage applies to the skill-­ and effort-­based challenges found 
throughout video games, as both kinds of exams set the terms for en-
gagement, whether the interaction is about getting into college or de-
voting hours to successfully completing a newly released video game. 
Properly judging merit requires starting at the same place, so any ex-
isting barriers hinder certain people, and those shortcomings are then 
blamed on the individual affected, rather than on the society around 
them. By individualizing people, meritocracy has the impact of making 
people judgmental and rude, while making individuals more likely to 
attribute their status in life to their own efforts or lack thereof, which 
makes us less sensitive to others. These cultural dynamics are both a 
natural outgrowth of meritocratic systems and are regularly displayed 
in the culture around video games.
The State of Game Culture
There are problematic parts of any culture, and there are ways in 
which technology enables troublesome behavior.35 Anonymity and 
norms of online communication have led to a situation where being 
outspoken and a woman, or sometimes just being a woman, on the 
internet will lead to death threats and persistent harassment.36 Other 
media, like television, use rape and harassment of nameless women 
as a way to show that characters are complicated or that the show is 
edgy.37 The connections between meritocracy and problematic cul-
ture aren’t just present in the realm of games either: they can be found 
throughout tech culture, where a meritocratic ideology often limits 
diversity in hiring and retention throughout the careers of those who 
are not white and male.38 Sexism is prevalent in college computer 
science programs, online harassment has led to women retiring from 
writing careers because public attention sets the stage for harassment, 

	
15	
Introduction
women are fleeing jobs in technology because of a generally “hostile 
and unwelcoming environment for women,” and research on GitHub 
has found that code written by women is considered lesser as soon as 
a woman’s name is attached to it.39 The dynamics lead to a clear ar-
gument that women are not welcome on the internet, but harassers 
are. It is impossible to extricate the problems in video games from 
broader cultural issues with sexism and racism, but these are precisely 
the kinds of obstacles that undercut a meritocratic order. Instead of 
starting from the same place with a relative equality of opportunity, 
those from marginalized groups typically face substantial obstacles 
simply to catch up to the starting line of those born with advantages 
tied to their sex, gender, race, and/or economic and social status. All 
of these elements and so many more set the stage for a culture where 
what matters is not just merit, but also all the structural advantages 
or disadvantages one faces. Despite this, there are some promising, 
positive steps within sectors of game culture to take on problem-
atic norms, from industry-­led conferences on diversity to academics 
seeking to change conversations and cultural norms around games to 
major gaming news outlets that recognize how important it is to cover 
the dark side of the game industry, even though any progressive move 
faces criticism from some readers.40 However, looking more closely at 
the state of the culture around video games shows just how bleak the 
situation is and why more must be done to address existing problems.
Ranking hate speech or trying to assess which oppression is worse 
is a regressive activity that does not fix problems, but analysis of vir-
ulent sexism is perhaps the easiest starting point for a discussion of 
toxicity in games. The use of the term “rape” is omnipresent through-
out the discussion around games, popping up almost any time certain 
players either win or lose in spectacular, or sometimes even ordinary, 
fashion. Those who lose to computer-­controlled opponents may talk 
about how the game raped them, while victors in battle might mention 
how they raped their opponent. The prevalence of the term, especially 
in conjunction with racist and homophobic speech, can counter efforts 
to make games more inclusive and welcoming to a broad population 
of potential players. Specific examples of misogynistic language that 
has become a hallmark of online games are documented on websites 
like Fat, Ugly, or Slutty and Not in the Kitchen Anymore, with the for-
mer starting in response to the widespread belief among a certain 

Introduction	
16
type of player that all women who play games online must fall into 
one of those three categories and the latter documenting audio clips 
from online games to “raise awareness and educate others about the 
issue of harassment in online gaming, as well as provide a safe place 
through various social media outlets for people to vent about their 
own experiences.”41
Game culture’s issues with women can be clearly seen in the case 
of Anita Sarkeesian and her efforts to develop a Kickstarter-­funded 
video series called Tropes vs. Women in Video Games. The positive 
lesson to take from the campaign was that it raised almost $160,000, 
well more than its $6,000 goal. However, part of the reason for the 
massive amount of fund-­raising was a widespread campaign of mi-
sogynist abuse where, according to one journalist, “every access point 
they [online critics] could exploit was used to get at her.”42 A game 
was created where the objective was to punch Sarkeesian in the face 
and, when attempts were made to shut down hate speech by locking 
down comments on particular messages or videos, the speech simply 
moved to other articles and venues.43 The example of Anita Sarkeesian 
is sometimes chalked up to issues with online misogyny as a whole, 
but it is more specific than that. As Leigh Alexander astutely notes, 
the discourse around games is different from other media and, when 
it comes to sexism, “games have it bad. Anita Sarkeesian has done a 
number of video series about gender stereotypes. Only when she tried 
her hand at games did the monsters come.”44 Games are similar to, 
but different from, other media and technology in general. Arthur 
Chu writes, “I’ve spent time in a lot of places that draw the opinion-
ated and the zealous. I hang out with artsy theater people, with angry 
political activists, and with nerds of all stripes. And never have I met 
a group of people as doggedly convinced that their opinion is ‘ob-
jectively’ correct as gamers.”45 A similar sentiment is shared by the 
media critic who writes under the pen name “Film Crit Hulk,” who 
observes, “hulk can tell you with confidence that the culture of 
video games has a much, much, much, much higher rate of all 
the ‘bad stuff’ than everything else (save politics).”46 GamerGate 
has become the epitome of this culture, the dynamic that prohibits 
critical analysis and assessment of the structural issues surrounding ac-
cess to video games. Research into online harassment by the Pew Re-
search Center has found that “while most online environments were 

	
17	
Introduction
viewed as equally welcoming to both genders, the starkest results were 
for online gaming. Some 44% of respondents felt the platform was 
more welcoming toward men.”47 Although 44 percent is a minority 
of respondents, only 51 percent of respondents felt online gaming is 
equally welcoming to both men and women. Other online activities 
had a minimum of 66 percent of those polled who viewed the activity 
as balanced. Although hate speech and exclusion are suffused through-
out society, some places are worse than others, and if you have ever 
played an online game or spent time reading news about games you 
likely experienced enough of the “bad stuff” to know it.
Beyond actions and discussion in the culture surrounding games, 
the representation of women within games is frequently disappoint-
ing, from the visual representation of individual characters to the way 
avatars of women are used as props within games. One commentary 
contends that “gaming’s obsession with breasts is part of a juvenile me-
dium’s awkward process of floundering towards mature themes,” but 
concluded with an analysis of how “public calls for realistic propor-
tions are sometimes at odds with consumer demands.”48 Effectively, 
public lobbying or designer desire to check unrealistic portrayals in 
games are rapidly shut down because of ambiguous appeals to play-
ers’ interests in ridiculous representations of bodies. When questions 
are asked, notable designers often attribute the issue to “cultural dif-
ferences” in an attempt to find a get-­out-­of-­jail-free card to evade 
criticism.49 Beyond how women are bodily represented, women face 
grave limitations in the roles they are given in games, frequently re-
ceding into the background. A widespread belief throughout the game 
industry is that games with female protagonists don’t sell as well as 
those with men on the cover, despite a lack of data to back up the pre-
sumption.50 Developers play an interesting role in this process, both 
advocating for putting female characters in prominent positions on 
game box art and contending that it would be too much work to add 
women as playable characters or arguing that masculinity is so crucial 
to the story being told that women need to fade into roles as back-
ground, non-­playable characters.51 The eventual inclusion of women 
characters into the popular soccer title FIFA 16 is a particularly in-
structive example of the role of women in games. Noting that adding 
women to FIFA took years and demonstrates how a system explicitly 
designed to house men “struggles to accommodate women even when 

Introduction	
18
it makes efforts to,” the game journalist Nathan Ditum concludes that 
“our industry is one in which it’s possible to conceive of women being 
something that might appear on a checklist of stuff we’d ideally like 
to include. Women, an optional extra dropped from this particular 
reality due to a lack of resources.”52 Women are frequently left out of 
games or included as an afterthought, which substantially limits the 
amount of diversity in video games and creates a baseline condition 
that ensures inequality of opportunity for many, instead of a perfectly 
balanced platform from which to judge merit.
Troubles with racial depictions of characters in video games also 
run throughout the medium. As Evan Narcisse puts it in the intro-
duction to an e-­mail conversation with a number of black critics and 
game developers, “Video games have a blackness problem. . . . When 
they appear at all, black characters are often reduced to outdated, em-
barrassing stereotypes.”53 Narcisse and those with whom he e-­mailed 
go on to discuss that there is no single answer to solve these prob-
lems; instead, it will take a number of conversations and smaller steps 
to move the industry and the audience for games forward. As evidence 
of Narcisse’s premise, one 2015 release encapsulates many of the is-
sues around racial depictions in games. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was 
highly praised in reviews, with the critic Tauriq Moosa contending 
that “it’s one of the greatest games I’ve ever played,” yet also noting 
that “not a single human in the game is a person of color.”54 Moosa 
argues that the dominance of white men in positions as both game de-
velopers and game critics leads to a situation where “we got a hundred 
articles confronting the Witcher 3 devs about less pretty grass phys-
ics, but not a single article asking them about no people of color.”55 
The crucial point of Moosa’s essay focuses on responding to the de-
fense made by backers of the game that a narrative based on Slavic 
mythology requires using white characters. First, Moosa argues that 
with so many stories about white men in games, it is crucial to note 
these moments when women and people of color are written out of 
the stories told within them. Second, for games set in a fantasy world, 
players are often asked to believe in dragons, wraiths, and magic. Why 
are racial depictions the mythical step that goes too far? In the after-
math of Moosa’s essay many in the game community quickly spoke out 
in criticism, to the point where a piece in defense of his article began 
by positing, “Are non-­white characters in fantasy games less ‘realistic’ 

	
19	
Introduction
than dragons? Plenty of video game fans seem to think so.”56 Even-
tually, sustained harassment led Moosa to delete his Twitter account, 
although several prominent game developers and critics voiced sup-
port for his position under the hashtag #IStandWithTauriq.57 Moosa 
did an excellent job of pointing out the blind spot video games have 
with regard to race, and the reaction to his essay emphasizes just how 
limited consideration of race in games is.
Game culture and game design often work in a circular, self-­
reinforcing loop on issues of inclusion. Games that do not attract a 
diverse audience lead to the creation of more games that will not at-
tract a diverse audience. Robin Potanin argues that “publishers are 
predominantly concerned about what will sell best in large family re-
tail chains” and that the economics of the industry “does not encour-
age diversity” because publishers are largely interested in games “that 
promise to be strong sellers.”58 In addition to the economic structures 
of the industry, Potanin argues that there is a correlation between the 
“predominance of young white males represented in games and young 
white males making games,” creating an environment where “video-
games are unique in their extreme gender disparity. No other media 
under-­represents the female population to such a degree as games.”59 
Construction of video games as a space for white males of means has 
a long history, as Carly Kocurek writes; nostalgia about videogame 
arcades is “populated almost exclusively by young white men with 
both the time and the money to play video games as much as they 
wanted.”60 And though issues about representation of women are be-
ginning to be discussed within the industry, there is far less focus on 
race, class, and other intersectional issues that similarly ensure un-
equal starting points.
Looking at representation in games, Kishonna Gray argues that 
many games “illustrate race and gender in stereotypical terms,” which 
has the impact of devaluing those who are not white and male, con-
firming their marginalized status when it comes to video games.61 De-
tailing the role of voice in online gaming, Gray argues that the need to 
talk and the speed at which nonwhite players are identified and called 
out for not conforming to dominant expectations places them in a po-
sition to be harassed and marginalized throughout their play.62 This 
bias reaches beyond casual play and into highly visible contexts like eS-
ports tournaments, where prominent black players are subject to racist 

Introduction	
20
harassment at least in part because their presence is judged by a vocal 
segment of the community as abnormal and unwelcomed.63 Building 
games around repetitive tropes and narratives limits the community 
of people likely to play games, both online and off­, putting players in a 
position where troublesome speech is more readily normalized. Nor-
malizing hate speech limits the audience for video games and repels 
people who would diversify the audience for games and change com-
munity norms. Changing the culture of games requires taking a step 
back and asking a critical set of questions about what video games are 
and how they could look, work, and tell stories differently.
Working from the premise that video games are a significant cul-
tural object, it is important to ask two key categories of questions 
about them. The first type of question is about what counts as a video 
game: Are video games limited to the realm of consoles and PCs? 
What about mobile devices, web browsers, or Facebook? Perhaps 
more important, are these games placed in a hierarchy where some 
kinds are deemed more valuable or worthy than others? Pressed hard 
enough, many players will express a preference for one type of plat-
form over another, and many reading this can think of examples of 
what they don’t consider a proper video game but that could fit as 
a “real” game for others.64 Genre also intersects with this question 
in interesting ways as different regions of the world have different 
values, but World of Warcraft, League of Legends, and Destiny often 
count differently than Madden NFL, Candy Crush Saga, and Farm-
Ville. Further, how do we consider board games, role-­playing games, 
computerized versions of games like solitaire, and interactive experi-
ences like Gone Home?
The second group of questions is about who counts as a gamer or 
player. The term “gamer” itself is contested, as many people who play 
video games do not identify with the term, but this is a crucial ques-
tion when it comes to thinking about game culture, meritocracy, and 
changing the existing order of games.65 In the course of this project, 
the word player is used when talking about the broad, heterogeneous 
group of people who play games. Gamer is used to convey a subset of 
that group, a person whose core identity is often defined around video 
games and who tends to be deeply invested in contemporary videog-
ame culture. Who gets privileged and is given a voice shapes what gets 
counted as a game, as some votes are rendered valid and others are 

	
21	
Introduction
not considered at all. In a world where large publishers and marketing 
teams play an outsized role in how games are presented, the question 
of who counts as a target audience is tremendously important. When 
considering these issues, it is crucial to think about how they intersect 
with one another: How frequently are the kinds of games least likely to 
be considered proper video games played by the kinds of people least 
likely to identify as gamers? How likely are the borderline games to 
resist meritocratic norms in game design and narrative? Do they show 
us a different path? What kinds of spaces can be explored if merito-
cratic game design is resisted in favor of something else?
Games in general and video games in particular offer the oppor-
tunity to explore new and different possibility spaces. They give play-
ers the chance to enact roles that they are not likely to experience in 
ordinary life, from ruler of a great empire (Civilization; Populous) to 
streetwise criminal or outlaw (Grand Theft Auto; Red Dead Redemp-
tion) to professional athlete (FIFA; Madden NFL; NBA 2K). They also 
open space to explore experiences typically rendered outside of core 
games, like fashion model or boutique owner (Kim Kardashian: Hol-
lywood; Fashion Story), service-industry employee (Sally’s Spa; Cook, 
Serve, Delicious), or student (Persona 4 Golden; Bully). Video games 
give players a chance to actualize subject positions, to become a new 
kind of person, which could make games a perfect place for exper-
imentation. Video games could give us a chance to explore almost 
anything, yet cultural constraints limit what ends up actually being 
made and marketed. What counts as a game and who counts as a po-
tential player set the bounds for what kinds of experiences are likely 
to be available. Meritocratic norms limit what kinds of stories are told 
and, by extension, who will become part of videogame culture. Video 
games offer the promise of resisting dominant social narratives, but 
they can also easily fall into the trap of reinforcing a narrow set of 
perspectives. Rethinking what counts in videogame culture offers a 
platform on which to challenge troublesome elements of video games 
and key issues in society at large, particularly when one considers the 
surging, rapidly diversifying audience of people who play video games 
and the widening number of platforms on which games are played.66
The fragmentation of media in contemporary society has created 
a situation where mass culture experiences are relatively rare. Audi-
ences can seek out individually matched content that suits their inter-

Introduction	
22
ests, at the cost of dividing groups of people into smaller and smaller 
pools. Audiences for hit television shows have shrunk considerably, 
and movies, when adjusted for inflation, tend to gross less money 
today than they did historically. Video games offer an opportunity to 
contact an influential audience, often one that can be better reached 
in games than in other media. The limited number of experiences in 
mainstream games also offers a perfect opportunity to challenge what 
has existed thus far. Video games are a relatively new medium and, 
while other media have had a chance to tell a range of stories, video 
games tend to repeat the same tropes over and over. The dependence 
on meritocratic expectations likely stems from a range of causes, but 
other media, like books, music, and board games, have had the time 
and the back catalog to depict a variety of tales. This existing limitation 
in the kinds of experiences within games, combined with the simul-
taneous rise of video games and meritocratic norms in society more 
broadly, makes those who play games a key audience for destabiliz-
ing meritocratic norms. A key, requisite element of detoxifying game 
culture is encouraging reflection about the structural inequities that 
exist within videogame culture and society at large.
Dear Game Designers
Escaping a meritocratic thought process is terribly difficult. It is quite 
likely that everyone reading this book has benefited from a number of 
structural advantages and also faced notable challenges in their life. It 
is also more comfortable to think about how our successes are tied to 
our merit than to advantages we were gifted. However, the challenge 
I am seeking to lay out in this book is to encourage critical thought 
about the assumptions we regularly make and the implications of those 
assumptions in practice.
Think for a moment about the beginning of Bethesda’s The Elder 
Scrolls V: Skyrim. Often cited as one of the best games ever made, 
Skyrim can readily consume over a hundred hours of game play. The 
opening minutes of the game are largely cinematic, as the player re-
gains consciousness and begins to learn of his or her situation.67 En-
gaging from a first-­person perspective, players slowly learn clues of 
where they are and who they are perceived to be. The player is a con-
vict being led to the headsman to be executed along with the leader 

	
23	
Introduction
of the rebellion, a rebel, and a horse thief. Players can look around to 
the other four white men in the horse-­drawn cart with them, one of 
whom is driving the prisoners somewhere. Upon arrival, names are 
read off of those who are to be executed. The horse thief seeks to run 
and is shot down by archers. The player is then mysteriously missing 
from the list of prisoners to be executed and is thrown into a character-­
selection process with a dizzying array of options. It is notable that 
the first choice for race in the game is for “Nord,” which features an 
in-­game description reading, “Citizens of Skyrim, they are a tall and 
fair-­haired people. Strong and hardy, Nords are famous for their re-
sistance to cold and their talent as warriors. They can use a battle cry 
to make opponents flee.” After personalizing their character, players 
are led by the Captain, the first woman depicted in the game, into a 
lineup to be executed. One non-­player character is led to the heads-
man and executed. Then the player is called out, but shortly after 
his or her head is placed on the block a dragon shows up and wreaks 
havoc. Players are able to escape with the help of the rebel on their 
original prison cart and make their way through the early section of 
the game, learning the basics of play, picking up equipment, and bat-
tling the Imperials, largely in hand-­to-­hand combat. As players seek 
to escape from the Imperial soldiers, they learn through background 
discussion that the dragon is a harbinger of the end times. As players 
progress throughout the game they become more powerful, discover-
ing they have special abilities and a key role in the future of the world.
The assumptions and game-­design choices made in the early part 
of the game are notable and important. Players start out as disempow-
ered, about to be executed, but over the course of the game the avatar 
grows increasingly powerful and, with the help of the player, becomes 
crucial to saving the world and averting disaster. As the game unfolds, 
the player’s effort means that his or her avatar moves forward, almost 
on rails, in an effort to defeat the dragons and reach his or her poten-
tial. This straightforward progress in character development stands in 
stark contrast to the narrative design of the game, which is hailed for 
the number of options and possibilities present. It is notable that all 
the early characters are light ­skinned, coded as Nordic, and that they 
are overwhelmingly male. This likely speaks to the established audi-
ence for the game, but it also limits the potential audience for what 
the game could be. Granted, with three and a half years of develop-

Introduction	
24
ment time and $85 million in development costs, Skyrim needed to 
reach an established audience, but the game takes few risks in how it 
chooses to represent those early non-­player characters.68
The point of considering Skyrim critically is to think more deeply 
about the assumptions the game makes about its audience. The game 
effectively assumes a white, male player. The game assumes a person 
who can relate to a modified Nordic mythology. The game assumes 
the player is someone who wants a story that mixes violence, rebellion, 
dragons, magic, and the ability to save the world. All these things can 
be compelling, but they are telling a particular story for a particular 
audience. Additionally, the game is designed in a manner to celebrate 
the player’s intervention in the world. Without the player the world 
would be destroyed, but based on the player’s skills and effort he or 
she is able to avert catastrophe. It is vital to work through the impli-
cations of the assumptions games make.
The game normalizes whiteness and maleness through the choice 
of early non-­player characters and the centrality of the Nord. The 
number of races and key women characters can disrupt this over the 
run of the game, but the introductory moments are meaningful. One 
of the most substantial lessons of the game, however, is that hard work 
and skill pay off in substantial rewards. As long as the player plays hard 
enough and well enough, they will save the world because of their 
merit. The game need not address structural barriers or inequity, as 
the player has ascended from a convict about to be executed into the 
only person who can avert apocalypse.
A single game designed in this manner would be one thing, but 
Skyrim is both an exceptional game based on its critical reviews and a 
typical one based on its focus on merit, men, and whiteness. Repeti-
tion of a single approach makes it real and concrete, which also offers 
promise and potential for games that seek to structure things differ-
ently. The point of this book is to help you think through the impli-
cations of the choices made in game design. Video games matter, and 
the decisions made about what to represent and how to do it are im-
pactful. It is possible to disrupt and change what has been, and hope-
fully this book will demonstrate why things need to be different and 
how that can happen. Skyrim is a great game, but it is a symptom of 
the meritocratic traps that are found all too commonly in video games.

	
25	
Introduction
What’s to Come
Beyond accounting for the background information for what inspired 
this project, it is important to work through the foundational steps in 
my argument. The first key piece to this work is a deeper analysis of 
where the term “meritocracy” came from and how, in contemporary 
society, it has been stripped of its context and twisted to seem normal 
and natural. Understanding the context for meritocracy is vital be-
cause it sets up space for reflection about how games both are and are 
not special. Games are different from other media in some important 
ways, but the dominance of meritocracy as an ideology was something 
they inherited. Backstory and context for that complicated relation-
ship helps illustrate how video games actualize meritocracy and why 
that matters, and suggests ways to find an alternative path forward. 
Critically examining meritocracy requires detailing how Western so-
ciety has gotten to a place where merit is something to be celebrated 
and also finding the spaces in which meritocratic expectations clearly 
do not work. Recent cultural analysis provides excellent examples of 
where basing a culture on merit simply breaks down, cases in which 
skill and talent serve as a pleasant-­looking veil to obscure what lies 
underneath. Meritocracies lead to bad outcomes and perverse incen-
tives that privilege the few over the many. When it comes to video 
games, widespread meritocratic norms lead the successful to believe 
their victories are solely accountable to their skill and effort, which 
can preempt efforts to help other people. The impact of a meritocratic 
ideology is a consistent thread throughout this project. Chapter 1 pro-
vides an extended background on meritocracy, including its history, 
its impacts, and several implications for video games.
A second key piece to my argument is recognizing how various 
parts of video games and game culture can be seen as rhetorical con-
structions. Working from the premise that words and concepts are 
both arbitrary and based on actual interactions, rhetorical analysis 
helps critically examine symbol systems, with a focus on what they 
mean and how they affect our worldview. Quite simply, the words we 
choose and the symbols we select matter. They tell us something about 
what we value, how we think, the environment in which we exist, and 
who we aspire to be. In this case, concepts like “video game,” “gamer,” 
“player,” and “videogame culture” all shape the terrain in which games 

Introduction	
26
are developed and on whom they do their work. Recognizing these 
concepts as social constructions, while also thinking through how 
they affect game development, is a key step in unraveling meritocratic 
norms in gaming.69
The final element that underscores this argument is acknowledg-
ing the special role that video games play when it comes to meri-
tocratic norms. There are two steps to this process. First, chapter 2 
features a discussion of relevant research in game studies, as well as a 
deeper discussion of contemporary videogame culture. Second, it is 
important to examine the two crucial ways meritocracy comes into 
play in video games, in both meritocratic videogame design and nar-
ratives. I contend that most games, especially most big-­budget, AAA 
titles, are predicated on what I call meritocratic game design. Merito-
cratic game design can be seen in almost any instance where a person 
might respond to a problem or a lack of skill with the response that 
he or she “learn to play.” This approach to design applies in situations 
where video games are perceived as battles of skill in which the best 
player should win. Two key premises that support meritocratic game 
design are the belief that games should be properly balanced to ben-
efit the most skilled players and that success in video games is some-
thing that is properly earned by players through their effort and labor. 
In addition to design, meritocratic game narratives are also infused in 
many mainstream games, as players set out to rise from being a relative 
no one to an all-­powerful being. Achieving success is not exclusively a 
hallmark of meritocracy, but when that success is all but assured within 
the context of video games—­where you can often restart as much as 
necessary, when that success seems determined by skill, and when 
there isn’t room for reflection about what made a player successful—­
video games advance meritocratic norms within their narratives.
Games are filled with rags-­to-­riches stories—­they form the center 
of everything from Kim Kardashian: Hollywood to the Final Fantasy 
games; even sports video games typically contain a “My Player” mode 
where players progress from a minor role to eventually become a star. 
In Kim Kardashian: Hollywood players are discovered by the socialite 
in the opening moments, and the narrative of the game is based on 
moving up from a retail employee to a leader of the celebrity A-­list. 
The Final Fantasy games are typically based around stories where a 
central character is ostracized from society at large only to become 

	
27	
Introduction
the savior by the end of the game. The “My Player” option in almost 
all major sports releases allows players to create their own avatar, an 
athlete who typically begins his or her career pinned to the bench, but 
through the ongoing intervention of the player behind the controller 
the avatar can become a superstar.
The overarching narrative in the career mode of sports games is 
all about rising from a lowly beginning, a trend that is being actual-
ized more completely in recent entries to the series. FIFA 17 added a 
mode called “The Journey,” where players play as the seventeen-­year-­
old Alex Hunter, aiding his development from a children’s league to 
the professional ranks. The path is predetermined to feature adver-
sity, as players must succeed at exit trials to be picked up by a team, 
will invariably get loaned out when their chosen team favors a high-­
priced signing, and face a former best friend as a rival, yet Alex will 
almost always overcome those challenges to become a highly success-
ful, decorated player. Alex’s path is set up for him to outperform the 
efforts of his grandfather and father, both professional soccer players 
in their own right, and the narrative is specifically designed to help 
Alex achieve things his family never did—­because of the interventions 
of the person with the controller. The narrative pinnacle of the game 
is the FA Cup Championship, the one trophy that Alex’s grandfather 
never won; to the best of my knowledge and reporting about the 
mode, Alex never gets injured for an extended period of time, which 
was his father’s downfall. Narratively, “The Journey” is a tidy arc, 
where the game player begins creating soccer stars from the moment 
they are pushed out of the professional ranks into a rapid, one-­season 
ascension that typically ends with trophies and a call-­up to England’s 
national team. Even though there are off-­ramps in the game, places 
where Alex can be stymied, the mode is built on the premise that hard 
work and skill are sufficient to overcome any structural barriers or ob-
stacles, including the persistent injuries that can end the most prom-
ising athletic careers.70
There are also tropes in games where meritocratic design and nar-
rative elements intersect. Leveling is a typical videogame convention, 
where players grow from a powerless level one into a much more 
powerful, more skilled, and more able level more than one. Level-
ing in video games is a clear process of progress, as players typically 
know what they need to do and how much they need to do it to move 

Introduction	
28
forward. Working as both a design and narrative element, leveling is 
often constructed in a manner that encourages players to buy into a 
meritocratic world, where those with more levels are more deserving 
than those who have not yet progressed as far in the game—­because, 
after all, the powerful have displayed more skill and invested more ef-
fort. Meritocratic game design and narrative will feature throughout 
the project, as the concepts are developed in chapter 3 and case stud-
ies detailing how they appear are provided in chapter 4.
One of the possible paths out of the dependence on meritocracy 
in video games requires looking outside of games to other fields. In 
chapter 5, I use examples from sports and higher education in the 
United States to give a different perspective on how meritocracies 
can work and how they can be disrupted. The potential for new kinds 
of video games is more fully explored in the conclusion, which offers 
examples of games that break with the standard expectations of con-
temporary games and begin to chart a path out of where games have 
been stuck for years.
The central, animating premise of this book is that people in posi-
tions where they can do something about problematic situations have 
an obligation to do something. One of the core problems in game cul-
ture is the dependence on meritocratic norms, which have the terrible 
impact of magnifying and excusing any structural inequalities among 
those playing video games. I hope this book helps fulfill my obliga-
tion to make things better by focusing attention on current problems 
and how they can be addressed. I hope it helps you recognize what 
your own obligations are and helps point you toward a path of mak-
ing good on them.

	
29
1
Leveling Up in Life
How Meritocracy Works in Society
The idea of meritocracy has been so completely woven into con-
temporary Western society that it seems ahistorical, like this is how 
things have always been, but it is actually a far more recent phenom-
enon. Blending analysis of the history of the concept with contempo-
rary examples of how meritocratic ideals inevitably evolve to be based 
on things that have little to do with merit demonstrates how the over-
dependence of meritocratic norms in video games creates a warped, 
twisted, and negative culture.
A starting place for grounding an analysis of meritocracy is to look 
to ancient China, where attempts at “meritocracy” were tried even 
though they predate the term itself. More recently, Michael Young’s 
book popularized the term, so discussing it provides a framework for 
understanding the more contemporary debates about the use of the 
ideology and how a focus on merit has produced the society many of 
us live in today. An earnest look at the perspective of defenders of the 
term offers a chance to make the case for merit and better demon-
strate why the ideas behind meritocracy are so seductive, particularly 
in the countries that most closely aspire to meritocracy as a system 
of social order: the United States and the United Kingdom. Given 
a more complete understanding of meritocracy, it is possible to turn 
to the effects of meritocracy and what kind of implications a merito-
cratic system of order has for videogame design, narrative, and culture.
Understanding meritocracy is crucially important to comprehend 

Leveling Up in Life	
30
contemporary society, especially how some things are working well 
and how others are broken. We are living through the widespread 
application of a meritocratic approach to distributing resources and 
allocating positions without much sensitivity to or awareness of its fail-
ures. An underlying part of an appeal to recapture the past, with man-
ufacturing jobs and an American dream, is the belief that we have lost 
our meritocratic way and need to recapture it. The reality of things 
is quite different, though, as growing inequality leads to a situation 
where meritocracy cannot work, where it is structurally broken and 
undermined. Meritocracy is blind to context, a feature that contem-
porary identity politics movements like Black Lives Matter and some 
pro-­immigrant groups attempt to put in the foreground. As the polit-
ical scientist Henry Farrell observes, “Meritocracy is blind to the fact 
that some people face structural disadvantages and others do not.”1 
Meritocracy shelters us, individualizes us, and strips out the larger 
context in which we exist. For people who have been lucky enough 
to overcome structural disadvantages or those who were gifted head 
starts, meritocracy instructs us that we have earned our place and de-
serve to have more than those lesser people who are unable to reach 
our heights. Meritocracy is deeply integrated into contemporary cul-
ture, and although video games are special and can offer an escape to 
a different world, they are part and parcel of the culture in which they 
are made. Knowing why meritocracy is important sets the stage for 
better understanding how we got here and how meritocracy is inte-
grated into contemporary video games.
An Old Yet Rising Meritocracy
Although popularized throughout the twentieth century in the United 
Kingdom and the United States, the concept of meritocracy can be 
found in a variety of historical societies and texts. Plato’s case for phi-
losopher kings is effectively an argument for the best, most talented 
people to run society in a meritocratic order. However, I find China’s 
experience with meritocracy to be more instructive for our contempo-
rary experience with the ideology. Chinese references to meritocratic 
principles were first seen in the Guodian Chu Slips, which are dated 
to approximately 300 BCE.2 The primary mentions of merit and skill 
in the texts are in reference to the moral balance between humanity 

	
31	
Leveling Up in Life
and righteousness. According to the historian Kenneth Holloway, con-
siderations of humanity were linked to the family “and when expanded 
to a government perspective emphasizes the aristocratic inheritance 
of bureaucratic positions. In contrast, righteousness is the promoting 
of the most skilled individual and can be seen as government by meri-
tocracy.” The invocation of the actual term “meritocracy” is a modern 
translation of an ancient text, but the principle is quite similar to con-
temporary assertions of meritocratic rule given the importance of con-
sidering skill and effort in the decision-­making process. Writing about 
the original Guodian texts, Holloway holds that “the fascinating con-
tribution of the text is that it does not really see a difference between 
aristocracy and meritocracy, since both similarly contain strengths and 
weaknesses that must be balanced to create unity. In that the text is 
specific, it focuses on the application and not the cultivation of har-
mony.” In this case, Chinese philosophy was focused on balancing 
considerations of birthright and skill in moral decisions. This is the 
fundamental problem meritocracy seeks to solve. Awarding privilege 
and power based on merit certainly makes for good appearances, but 
aristocracy ensures your own family’s success. Merit is considered 
righteous, but it also may cause a person to make a decision in con-
flict with his or her own family. Eventually governance changed, and 
Holloway notes that “meritocracy in early China was quickly replaced 
by a system where the right to rule was passed from father to son.” 
Considerations of family eventually trumped moral guidance based on 
righteousness; meritocracy was made unworkable by familial concerns 
and the inequality of opportunity they brought with them. In the end, 
Holloway observes, “there was no monumental shift from meritocracy 
to aristocracy from the perspective of Guodian, since both sides were 
simply focused on the same goal, harmonizing the state and family.”3 
Meritocracy and aristocracy are two different ways to make decisions 
about how to allocate resources and who to put in leadership positions, 
yet aristocracies quickly sprout out of hierarchical meritocratic orders 
before people are forced to demote those they know because of their 
lack of skill or effort. In the case of China, meritocracy begets aris-
tocracy and vice versa. Meritocratic norms become more prominent 
in a rebellion against the aristocracy, but those meritocratic practices 
eventually end up producing their own aristocracy.
Well after the era detailed in the Guodian Chu Slips, China re-

Leveling Up in Life	
32
visited the process of decision making based on merit. Late imperial 
China focused on education and examinations for its civil service, 
which the historian Benjamin Elman describes as “approximating the 
world’s first political meritocracy in political, social, and intellectual 
life.”4 First reappearing in a systemized manner during the T’ang dy-
nasty, the recruiting of bureaucrats through civil service exams was a 
focal part of Chinese governments during multiple eras.5 Elman found 
that during the Ming and Qing dynasties, Chinese citizens traveled 
throughout the empire to take civil service exams with “the hope that 
they might move from the bottom up to share political power with 
the ruler as civil servants. The dynasty legitimated those who suc-
cessfully passed the examinations to hold office and wield political, 
cultural and legal power. Once holding office, they became merito-
cratically appointed authorities.”6 Somewhat different from the case 
with the Guodian Chu Slips, meritocracy in late imperial China was 
focused on levels well below the ruling class. However, by integrating 
extensive exams that were widely taken by the citizenry, the masses of 
Chinese were offered the opportunity to demonstrate skill and join 
the dynasty as government officials. Without disrupting imperial rule, 
civil servants became co-­opted into the system, and many of the most 
able (at least according to the test) became far more powerful than 
they would have been had they stayed where they were born. In this 
case, the imprimatur of the ruling class in combination with a national 
exam established meritocratic consideration in governance. Eventu-
ally these exams ended, as those promoted into administrative posi-
tions via exams began to use the jobs for patronage rather than the 
promotion of meritocracy.
China’s background with meritocracy offers two key lessons for 
video games. First, meritocratic systems fall apart when they stop 
measuring merit and focus on elements tied to inheritance. For video 
games, this can be seen in limited game offerings and a desire to pro-
duce more of the same, rather than games that are new and different, 
as success is determined by prior experience rather than the results 
of a fresh examination. As Robin Potanin argues about the practices 
of game developers, games are made for preexisting audiences, not 
wholly new ones.7 This rewards those currently part of game culture 
and raises barriers for outsiders. Inheritance of a place at the table is 
a huge issue that limits the ability to accurately assess merit. Second, 

	
33	
Leveling Up in Life
meritocracy is a powerfully attractive idea that quickly co-­opts those 
who are successful into defending the status quo; finding a position 
from which to critique the system is exceptionally difficult. Even for 
those who see deep-­seated problems in game culture’s current state, 
tracing the cause to the design of games is difficult because it impli-
cates everyone involved in the production and consumption of video 
games. Players who find success at games are more likely to keep 
playing, and the developers and publishers catering to that audience 
are more likely to find funding for their next title. China shows how 
a putative meritocracy quickly becomes an aristocracy where success 
hinges on initial access and status, rather than skill or effort. China’s 
use of meritocracy also provides a blueprint for where the application 
of meritocracy may be headed. Although it may seem that meritoc-
racy is an unavoidable, singular approach to society, how it is applied 
now is a relatively new occurrence; the historical context in China 
can help show that there are ways out of where we may find ourselves 
now. Tracing the contemporary context for meritocracy in the West 
requires assessing Michael Young’s book, as the text is a crucial part 
of how we got to where we are.
The popular mythology surrounding the term “meritocracy” orig-
inated with Michael Young’s 1958 book The Rise of the Meritocracy.8 
Young argues that judging people solely based on their ability plus 
their effort will lead to a society that falls apart in a bloody revolution. 
His book is a satirical novel written as a PhD thesis from the future. 
The narrator reflects on how much society has changed for the better, 
but that ends abruptly as the masses rise up, kill the author, and over-
throw the meritocratic elite. The primary takeaway is that meritocra-
cies beget broken systems when structural advantages compound over 
time. The effect of meritocracy is to make the inequality among peo-
ple seem fair and just. The argument that the most talented, hardest-­
working people deserve the greatest rewards is much easier to make in 
contemporary, industrial society than it is to claim that people deserve 
their power solely through the social class into which they are born. 
Meritocracy seems like the answer to aristocracy, until the inequal-
ity inherent to the system inevitably creates a new aristocratic order.
In Young’s book meritocracy is a bad thing, a system so riddled 
with conflicts and inherent limitations that no one should ever choose 
to pursue it. However, meritocracies are exceptionally well suited for 

Leveling Up in Life	
34
technological systems, because, as Young notes, a meritocracy can 
“only exist in any full form if there were such a narrowing down of 
values that people could be put into rank order of worth.”9 Computers 
make these kinds of rankings easy, and with innovations ranging from 
a high-­score list to achievements to Gamerscores or gear scores, video 
games are almost perfectly designed to provide a seemingly objective 
rank ordering of the worth of players. Borrowing from the tendency 
for meritocracy as outlined in MUD1 and executed on computers, 
video games are uniquely placed to make a meritocratic approach 
seem natural and normal.
Beyond the broad strokes of high scores, Blizzard’s first-­person 
shooter Overwatch is an example of how an ideology celebrating merit 
is consistently reinforced in video games. Each match of Overwatch 
consists of two teams of six players battling it out, and after each round 
the game “spends a couple of minutes handing out kudos to star play-
ers.”10 Patricia Hernandez breaks the process down in her review of 
the game, noting that, upon launch, Overwatch first awards a “play of 
the game” and displays the player who executed the maneuver along 
with a video clip; then it shows a bunch of statistics from the match 
and highlights four of the twelve players in the match for their con-
tributions; players are then prompted “to ‘like’ their favorite match 
contributors, and everyone gets to see who got voted the most.”11 This 
is an incredibly meritocratic approach to assessing what happened in 
the game, ultimately terminating in a popularity contest.
The feature that received substantial scorn upon Overwatch’s re-
lease was the play of the game, largely because it takes one moment 
out of context and then chooses to only celebrate one of twelve play-
ers when the efforts of the other members of the team often made 
the moment possible.12 For several reviewers of the game, the effec-
tive result of the focus on showy moves and the overarching design 
of Overwatch is that praise and attention is more regularly focused 
on frontline fighters, rather than the sustained, less flashy support 
players who often play an outsized role in determining who wins and 
loses the match.13 This leads to a small group of characters routinely 
showing up as player-of-the-game winners, while others languish in 
crucial but uncelebrated support work.14 Articles reviewing the game 
frequently suggest alternatives yet note that a more dynamic, holistic 
system would likely be harder to judge and code, which is a problem at 

	
35	
Leveling Up in Life
the heart of meritocracy. Actually judging skill or effort is ridiculously 
difficult to do, as it necessarily also assesses relative starting points 
and social advantages. The algorithm built into selecting what is the 
play of the game and which statistics will be highlighted rewards only 
what it can count and judge, stripping out situation and context, lead-
ing to a decision biased by what it cannot or does not choose to mea-
sure; however, meritocratic norms obscure the final judgment under 
a shroud of skill, effort, and talented execution. Even as Blizzard seeks 
to change the feature to adjust the weighting of contribution or to in-
clude multiple players, the key flaw of play of the game remains unad-
dressed. Selecting a play of the game is a fundamentally meritocratic 
act, as it boils the game down to a single moment and isolates what 
happened from the larger, holistic context of play. The whole point of 
the Overwatch postgame is to enact Young’s fear of a system that puts 
players in a rank order of worth, but the lack of context makes those 
rankings both celebrated for their assessment of merit and partial for 
their lack of context.
Both players and developers drive the focus on skill in Overwatch. 
In an interview with the gaming site Kotaku, the game’s director, Jeff 
Kaplan, notes that an early version of the game prioritized effort over 
skill. Although both elements are components of meritocracy, skill is 
a more traditionally praised metric within games. Instead of a sys-
tem that enabled players to grind to a high rank and then have things 
sorted out based on skill, Kaplan states that he heard players telling 
the developers that “we just want this to be skill based and I want to 
be able to compare my skill against one other person,” adding that 
one-­on-­one skill comparisons are a “very tricky problem to solve in a 
team based game. It’s really, really hard.”15 Emphasizing the focus on 
skill in games, later in the interview, in response to a question about 
the hit boxes for shooting in the game, Kaplan argues that “our in-
tention was never to make the game feel low skill. I think skill means 
a tremendous amount in Overwatch, but we’re trying to make a game 
that feels great to play.”16 Video games are often manically focused on 
the role of skill and how it sorts out the better from the best, so that 
the most talented can ascend to their proper, meritocratic heights.
The role of skill leapt to the forefront a few months after launch 
when Overwatch debuted its competitive mode. In the words of the 
developer, Blizzard, this new mode was “designed for those who truly 

Leveling Up in Life	
36
want to put their skills to the test, and offers a more serious experi-
ence than our Quick Play or Weekly Brawl! Modes.”17 Kotaku intro-
duced the mode by telling readers, “If you’re too dang skilled for the 
mortal riffraff in Overwatch’s regular modes, you’ll be excited to hear 
that the PC version just got a competitive alternative (it’s coming to 
console next week). It’s got rankings, golden guns, golden balls—­all 
that good stuff.”18 The mode was largely hyped as a place for players 
to show off their ability and prove their worth to others. Unlike the 
other modes of the game, where anyone could join games, competitive 
mode was designed to assess the true talent level of players, dividing 
players by rating and offering rewards for success that made an indi-
vidual player’s accomplishments apparent to everyone around them in 
the form of unique icons and markers. Shortly after the release of the 
mode the game’s forums and subreddit lit up with complaints, many of 
which focused on flaws with the game design in the mode, but several 
of which pointed to the way the mode changed how players interacted 
with one another. Patricia Hernandez wrote, “More than other mul-
tiplayer games out there, the Overwatch community is so sweet, that 
the recent addition of a competitive mode almost feels out of place.”19 
Nathan Grayson further explored how competitive mode was chang-
ing the community in an essay for Kotaku:
Similarly, high-­stakes competition and toxicity tend to go hand-­in-­
hand, and Overwatch’s competitive mode already has an ugly toxic 
stain. Don’t get me wrong: Overwatch is absolutely not bereft of 
toxic players even in quick play, but it’s a game whose developer 
and community have at least tried to avoid the pitfalls of other on-
line gaming communities. It’s a game about having fun and being a 
team player, one that thrives when players feel unafraid to experi-
ment with heroes and strategies. That spirit pervades much of the 
game, and it shows in the way tense situations unfold.20
Grayson goes on to argue that when players act poorly in other modes, 
they are dismissed because of the lack of importance of any one match, 
but in competitive mode losses and mistakes are “a big deal, and I’ve 
already watched/listened to some players absolutely go for the throat 
after matches gone awry. Insults, threats, slurs—­you name it.”21 An-
other player announced in a post that he or she was “stopping com-

	
37	
Leveling Up in Life
petitive play from now on, since 50% of the matches have at least one 
or two toxic guys who refuse to play tank or heal,” and that the over-
whelming toxicity of the mode makes it something to avoid.22 After 
competitive play had been out for two weeks, Grayson revisited the 
issue, writing that competitive play drives toxicity and that “even with 
some pretty high highs, the lows were so very, very low.”23 Recount-
ing an interview with Overwatch director Jeff Kaplan, Grayson notes 
that Blizzard flags toxicity as a substantial problem and something that 
must be addressed, but concludes by wondering, “With toxicity levels 
rising, though, can they [Blizzard] keep pace and stem the tide?”24 In 
the language of meritocracy, competitive mode is absolutely designed 
in a manner that ensures toxicity as an inevitable by-­product because it 
is based on a system where players are boiled down to their net worth 
through the creation of a set of numbers that are supposed to represent 
their true skill. Skill is seductive and enticing. The mode will likely 
draw players to the game, but the attempt to clearly convey the merit 
of a player puts people in a situation where they are going to lash out 
and engage in antisocial behavior. Studying critiques of meritocratic 
systems shows why fixing these problems is an issue of design and in-
tent, rather than one of management of a community headed off the 
rails. Much like Whitney Phillips argues that the systems and struc-
tures are at least as big of a problem as people trolling, meritocracies 
encourage norms and behaviors that lead to a toxic environment for 
their subjects and have to be addressed at the level of design.25
Beyond Overwatch, meritocracy is also tightly integrated into mod-
ern Western business culture, where “stack ranking” employees be-
came all the rage at General Electric and then spread throughout the 
business world. Although the practice is waning in popularity, it still 
has advocates, including prominent technology companies like Ama-
zon.26 The logic of ranking employees is predicated on the belief that 
businesses can readily identify their best and worst workers and that 
keeping the worst workers inhibits the productivity and creativity of 
the best, a system that would seem familiar to many high-­level raiding 
guilds. Ranking systems, from games to businesses, tend to obscure the 
logic of their judgments and become self-­insulating under the premise 
that those at the top are the best and most talented, and have earned 
their rewards, including both the knowledge that they are better than 
others and, often, the ability to pass judgment on their lessers.

Leveling Up in Life	
38
For Young, the result of ranking systems is to assign value such that 
we reach a point where “the eminent know that success is just reward 
for their own capacity, for their own efforts, and for their own unde-
niable achievement. They deserve to belong to a superior class.”27 In 
the wake of British prime minister Tony Blair openly embracing the 
term and the concept, Young updated his warning in 2001 to observe 
that “if meritocrats believe, as more and more of them are encour-
aged to, that their advancement comes from their own merits, they 
can feel they deserve whatever they can get . . . the newcomers can 
actually believe they have morality on their side.”28 Meritocracies are 
beautifully self-­reinforcing, self-­sustaining systems until they fall apart 
in crisis because they tell successful people that they earned their re-
wards, and the people at the bottom of the rankings are instructed 
that they must do more, do better in order to succeed. This is clearly 
seen in Overwatch, where a player seeking to get the lowest possible 
skill rating in the competitive mode of the game noticed something 
interesting: the most toxic environment for play was found among 
lower-­rated players who thought they should be doing better at the 
game.29 Instead of focusing on enjoying the game, the meritocratic 
system in which competitive Overwatch players are placed changes the 
context of play; according to a profile of the player seeking a 0 rat-
ing, at the lower reaches of the ratings “players shared precisely two 
qualities: they were astonishingly bad, and—­because they were play-
ing competitive—­they were astonishingly serious about it,” which led 
to plenty of cursing and yelling.30 The system strips out systemic cri-
tique as a possibility because the whole point is evaluating the individ-
ual; when you are assessed as an individual, it is hard to engage with 
feedback when meritocratic ranking systems consistently remind you 
of your failures. Even in this player profile, much more attention is 
placed on individual players and their relative skill and effort than on 
an overarching critique of the meritocratic system structuring these 
reactions. The end of the article mentions that players should focus on 
enjoying their play, rather than winning or losing, but the framework 
of a rating system and competitive play makes that outcome highly 
unlikely. In a world where the noted game scholar Jesper Juul con-
tends that skill-­based video games can be described as “a meritocracy 
that rewards according to skill and accepts the subsequent inequalities 
among players,” there is plenty of room for rot to set in and for play-

	
39	
Leveling Up in Life
ers to forget about the structural advantages that help them succeed.31 
Juul starts his book about failure and video games by discussing how 
his personal failure at a game is something to talk about with trepida-
tion and chooses to immediately contextualize his shortcoming with 
an example where he beat a game on the first try.32 Under the logic of 
a meritocracy, the individualization of play personalizes failure. In this 
case, pairing failure and success adds a positive chaser to a negative 
story, and the combination retains emphasis on what Jesper Juul, as a 
game player, is capable of doing. Readers are encouraged to empathize 
with his loss, content in the knowledge that Juul is skillful enough to 
beat a game in a single try. When people finally stop thinking about 
individuals and start thinking about how the scales are tilted on a 
structural level is the point where the façade of being judged solely 
based on skill and effort is revealed as an illusion and meritocracy is 
acknowledged as a system that simply cannot work.
The move toward meritocracy is driven by social dynamics rang-
ing from neoliberalism to technology and was developed in contrast 
to previous modes of social order based on birth and lineage.33 These 
kinds of changes can be read as opening opportunity, but they also 
drive a critique against meritocracy, as Michael Young puts it: “Under-
pinning my argument [against meritocracy] was a non-­controversial 
historical analysis of what had been happening to society for more 
than a century before 1958, and most emphatically since the 1870s, 
when schooling was made compulsory and competitive entry to the 
civil service became the rule. Until that time status was generally as-
cribed by birth.” However, under meritocracy, birth matters less than 
skill, and “status has gradually become more achievable.” Skill is cer-
tainly a good reason to select people for various positions; however, 
meritocracies tend to solidify into systems, Young notes, where “those 
who are judged to have merit of a particular kind harden into a new 
social class without room in it for others.”34 Put differently by Chris-
topher Hayes, “Where the Establishment emphasized humility, pru-
dence, and lineage, the meritocracy celebrates ambition, achievement, 
brains, and self-­betterment.”35 Meritocracy is a system that rejects the 
birthrights that previously regulated social interaction; however, it 
creates new problems when society calcifies into social structures just 
as rigid as ones based on birth, while teaching those at the top of the 
social hierarchy that their ascent is based on skill and ability, rather 

Leveling Up in Life	
40
than the luck of being born to a specific family at a certain point in 
history and in a place that facilitates their success. Aristocracy may 
seem like an odd fit for games, largely because one is not really born 
a player. However, when considering the traits necessary to play video 
games, certain learned behaviors can be passed from game to game, 
enabling frequent players to benefit from their inherited advantages. 
Those who were lucky enough to be hailed into games early are the 
nobility of video games, as their inherited position makes them more 
likely to succeed in each game they pick up.
Similar logic easily extends into free-­to-­play games, where players 
with means can often buy their way into persistent advantages over 
those who do not spend. There are plenty of examples of what is ca-
sually derided as pay-­to-­win, but particularly interesting are the prison 
servers of Minecraft. Detailed in a lengthy article by Robert Guthrie, 
prison servers are described as a “dystopian experience unlike any-
thing I’ve ever experienced in a video game.”36 Prison servers, which 
are run outside the bounds and rules of the primary version of Mine-
craft, work differently than most other instantiations of the game. In-
stead of jumping into an open world, on a prison server players start 
out with just a pick and perhaps some basic gear and must then set 
out to do hard labor, repeatedly working in stone mines to ascend to 
greater status on the server. Working hard enough eventually awards 
players with special titles, privileges, resources, and maybe even a place 
on the leaderboard. These servers are funded by donations, so a way 
to move up more quickly is to spend money to skip out on the grind, 
which offers an aristocratic approach for players with means. Guth-
rie was surprised to find that players did not object to other players 
being able to buy their way ahead; instead, they stuck around, “hop-
ing for handouts or an opportunity down the road to make their way 
into the upper echelons. Occasional generosity from wealthy players 
and lottery-­style games seems to be what keeps these players engaged, 
but there really isn’t a path to the highest ranks without paying real 
money.”37 Structural advantages matter, as they shape how we engage 
life. In the case of prison servers those advantages are laid bare, but 
that is not necessarily a bad thing for the game design, as it is at least 
clear what is needed to get ahead at the game and rise up the hierar-
chy, a process that is obscured in many other video games.
Young understood just how important luck and circumstance are, a 

	
41	
Leveling Up in Life
theme emphasized by how his book came to be published and the idea 
of a meritocracy subsequently entered the public vernacular. Young 
writes that “for some years I thought the book was doomed never to 
appear. I hawked it around from one publisher to another—­eleven of 
them—­and was always turned down.”38 The only reason the book was 
finally published was because Young “happened to meet an old friend, 
Walter Neurath, on a beach in North Wales,” and Neurath eventually 
released the book “out of friendship.”39 Subsequently picked up by 
Penguin, the book ended up selling hundreds of thousands of copies 
and was translated into several languages. The foundational tome on 
meritocracy only came to light after a chance encounter on a beach 
vacation, something that tells less about Young’s ability and effort, 
and far more about his social connections and means. The popular-
ization of the idea of meritocracy began with one friend doing a favor 
for another.
Meritocracy: Its Defense and Evolution
Young’s book was a satirical critique in which the author is eventually 
murdered in the uprising against meritocracy, but in subsequent de-
cades the ideology he presented was twisted and altered; a handful of 
scholars, among them Daniel Bell, R. J. Herrnstein, and Peter Saun-
ders, emerged as leading cheerleaders for the meritocratic cause. A 
central theme in defense of meritocracy is that post-­industrial society 
necessitates inequality and that pursuing a merit-­based allocation of 
resources is the fairest way to make decisions about who should be at 
the top of the social order. Bell welcomes this change, stating that “the 
post-­industrial society, in its logic, is a meritocracy. Differential status 
and differential income are based on technical skills and higher edu-
cation, and few high places are open to those without such qualifica-
tions.”40 Herrnstein argues that “the biological stratification of society 
looms whether we have tests to gauge it or not, but with them a more 
humane and tolerant grasp of human differences is possible.”41 This 
relative comfort with inequality as a basic fact of contemporary life 
is an ongoing theme in early defenses of meritocracy, Bell writes: “In 
social fact, the meritocracy is thus the displacement of one principle of 
stratification by another, of achievement for ascription. In the past—­
and this was the progressive meaning of liberalism—­this new princi-

Leveling Up in Life	
42
ple was considered just. Men were to be judged—­and rewarded—­not 
by attributes of birth or primordial ties but on individual merit.”42 
For Bell and the men about whom he writes, meritocracy is some-
thing people yearned for, as it is grounded in a historical appreciation 
of individual production instead of birthright.43 Achievement is cel-
ebrated, and those talented enough to get rewards in a meritocracy 
earned them. Through testing and examination, IQ research propo-
nents like Herrnstein held that intelligence measurement was a key 
part of establishing a meritocratic order by facilitating people freely 
taking “their natural level in society.”44 Saunders stresses that “a mer-
itocracy does not reward individuals simply for being born bright. As 
in the parable of the three talents, ability is only rewarded when it is 
put to good social use. . . . Occupational positions are earned. They 
are not allocated like sweets as rewards for doing well in IQ tests.”45 
For Bell, the allocation of rewards among those who are both bright 
and producing social good is something to be celebrated, since under 
“the logic of a meritocracy, these high-­scoring individuals, no matter 
where they are in the society, should be brought to the top in order 
to make the best use of their talents.”46 Meritocracy is about both re-
source allocation in considerations of who gets what rewards and the 
social maximization of talent. Video games make the process of assess-
ing merit straightforward while heaping rewards and achievements on 
those who prove themselves worthy. If you can actually identify the 
most talented people, why would you resist putting them in the most 
crucial positions?
Beyond a general focus on skill and effort, there are two key con-
siderations for backers of meritocracy: equality and open movement. 
Questions of equality focus on what society should try to equalize: op-
portunities or results? Bell focuses extensively on this question, com-
ing down firmly on the side of equality of opportunity and expressing 
disdain for those who think otherwise. Bell sees meritocracy as the 
culmination of a positive social movement and feels that “what is at 
stake today is the redefinition of equality. A principle which was the 
weapon for changing a vast social system, the principle of equality of 
opportunity, is now seen as leading to a new hierarchy, and the current 
demand” is for “the creation of equality of results.” Instead of pursuing 
what he believed to be folly, Bell emphasizes the status of individuals 
“as the basic unit of society” with the understanding that “individuals 

	
43	
Leveling Up in Life
will differ—­in their natural endowments, in their energy, drive, and 
motivation, in their conception of what is desirable—­and that the in-
stitutions of society should establish procedures for regulating fairly 
the competition and exchanges necessary to fulfill these diverse desires 
and competences.”47 Believing in a meritocracy requires that one focus 
on the role of the individual in ensuring his or her own success. When 
a person struggles or fails it is his or her individual responsibility to do 
better. The government’s role is limited, constrained to rule keeping 
and regulating with the intent of establishing and maintaining a level 
playing field. Not every player will finish or win a game; if they do, 
developers can simply unleash more difficult modes to ensure both 
an inequality of results and a proper challenge. Video games osten-
sibly ascribe to a commitment to equality of opportunity, as players 
typically start a game from the same relative level of status. Within 
the game these core design trends are almost perfectly structured to 
produce the kind of meritocracy proponents seek.
Given this competition for unequal rewards, proponents of meri-
tocracy were quick to note that there must be open movement among 
the social classes. As Bell puts it, “The principles of merit, achieve-
ment, and universalism are, it seems to me, the necessary foundations 
for a productive—­and cultivated—­society. What is important is that 
the society, to the fullest extent possible, be a genuinely open one.”48 
Openness is crucial to ensure the proper assessment of merit. For 
each structural barrier, like racism, sexism, classism, or any other sort 
of institutionalized bias, it becomes less possible to actually measure 
merit. Should a test be culturally biased, it ceases to measure skill and 
ability and begins to assess other inputs, inhibiting the establishment 
of the equality of opportunity that meritocracy’s proponents typi-
cally find so critical. Writing decades after Bell, in an attempt to de-
fend meritocracy as a concept, Peter Saunders admits that the system 
is not perfect, as “of course, some bright and hardworking children 
from lower-­class origins still do not achieve as high a position as they 
‘should,’ but the main ‘problem’ with meritocracy today appears to 
be the continuing success of the ‘undeserving’ children of the mid-
dle classes.”49 This becomes an obvious problem for video games as 
sequels and franchises dominate sales, but it also shows up in genre 
standards where common norms, like health systems and inventory 
management, are found in title after title. Skill transfer ensures that 

Leveling Up in Life	
44
certain players will have advantages they do not have to think about as 
they move from one game to the next. Developers also have a vested 
interest in including features that keep players buying new versions of 
games, like a leveling system in the FIFA series that allows players of 
the previous edition to start the new one with perks that a new player 
does not get. As meritocratic norms have been further integrated into 
society since Bell and Herrnstein were writing largely in the 1970s, 
one of the biggest problems a contemporary defender of a merito-
cratic order can see is the fact that parents of means are not willing 
to let their children fail, even if, by the logic of merit, they should. At 
the point that parents can prop up future generations, skill and effort 
become less relevant than birthright and inherited position, subvert-
ing the meritocracy with the very aristocratic dynamics that skill plus 
effort was designed to reject and continuing the cycle seen through-
out China’s history with meritocracy.
In sum, the defense of meritocracy is based on the idea that “the 
meritocracy, in the best meaning of that word, is made up of those 
worthy of praise. They are the men who are the best in their fields, as 
judged by their fellows.”50 The focus on men and fellows is especially 
notable in Daniel Bell’s words here. Writing in 1973, he focuses on a 
world where the best men reap the greatest rewards, yet he does not 
consider the impacts of key issues like structural sexism and racism 
in his writing about meritocracy, which is a trait he shares with many 
of the most vocal proponents of GamerGate. These omissions are 
focal points for those who have written about the problems of mer-
itocracy, even as they chronicle the ideology’s rise to widespread so-
cial acceptance.
The idea underpinning meritocracy, rewarding the most able, has 
been around for an exceptionally long time, but the word itself is rel-
atively new, which increases the importance of its shifts in meaning. 
The term has changed largely in step with those who choose to use it 
for their own ends. Societies have long had to justify inequality. Hi-
erarchy can be rationalized for all kinds of reasons—­from divine right 
to innate superiority of one group of people over another to how re-
incarnation worked in Indian caste societies to legitimize one’s place 
based on performance in past lives.51 According to Stephen McNamee 
and Robert Miller, meritocracy is accepted by its subjects because it 
“is predicated not on what ‘is’ but on the belief that the system of in-

	
45	
Leveling Up in Life
equality is ‘fair’ and it ‘works.’ . . . The most virtuous get and should get 
the most rewards.”52 Meritocracy has become understood as a great 
liberator, freeing citizens from an aristocratic past based on inheri-
tance and lineage.53
Daniel Bell’s intervention changed the trajectory of meritocracy’s 
meaning. As referenced liberally in the defense of meritocracy, Bell’s 
writing “neutralise[d] and erase[d] those more problematic (or ‘dys-
topian’) aspects of the term present in Young’s work.”54 Meritocracy’s 
meaning continued to shift after Bell’s writing, but it was his work 
that portrayed meritocracy as a clear social good.55 Meritocracy runs 
from China to Young to Bell and beyond, developing from a system 
that collapses on itself to a term of insult to a path that should not be 
taken to a prime way to celebrate the individual and resist the dual 
tyrannies of hereditary aristocracy and creeping socialism.56 In the 
most constructive case, meritocracy enables individuals to be judged 
based on the quality of their contributions to society. However, that 
case is overly optimistic and deliberately ignores the structural con-
straints that ensure the inequality of opportunity routinely faced by 
marginalized groups.
The Effects of Meritocracy
Defenders of meritocracy argue that it is the optimal way to make 
decisions about how to organize society. Perfected, it puts the best 
people in the best position to have the greatest impact. However, 
that dream relies on an idealized meritocracy with no leakage for ad-
vantages based on social class, family connections, or other consid-
erations that confuse calculations of skill and effort. Christopher L. 
Hayes produced perhaps the most excoriating recent evaluation of 
meritocracy, contending that “meritocracy offered liberation from the 
unjust hierarchies of race, gender, and sexual orientation, but swapped 
in their place a new hierarchy based on the notion that people are 
deeply unequal in ability and drive.”57 Meritocracy focuses on the in-
dividual, as Shannon McCoy and Brenda Major contend that “locat-
ing the responsibility for social status within the efforts and abilities 
of individuals, the belief in meritocracy legitimizes existing status dif-
ferences among individuals and groups and helps to justify the status 
quo”—­after all, if the system is working, “those who have higher status 

Leveling Up in Life	
46
must also be more talented, valuable, hardworking, or in other ways 
more meritorious than those who have lower status.”58 Meritocracy 
creates a situation, John Beck argues, where “those at the top seem 
to feel increasingly entitled to the rewards and privileges they enjoy. 
Some can even, apparently, feel resentful that their true worth is still 
not sufficiently recognized,” a phenomenon Beck calls “‘because I’m 
worth it’ syndrome.”59 Meritocracy places focus on what a person has 
done or perceptions about what they are able to do, even to the ex-
tent that meritocratic systems are linked to causing poor health out-
comes for those at the bottom.60 Furthermore, Richard Breen and 
John Goldthorpe argue that “the rewards that accrue to merit them-
selves vary depending on the class origins of those who possess it,” 
which enables those already at the top to reap greater rewards than 
those at the bottom, even with similar levels of performance.61 Instead 
of paying attention to systems and structures, meritocracy emphasizes 
each person and what they have done or not, which leaves the priv-
ileged left to enjoy their earned status and the unfortunate to blame 
themselves for what they lack.
A clear place to see this dynamic in video games is to explore the 
case of Geguri and her skills at Blizzard’s first-­person shooter Over-
watch. Rapidly ascending into the top ten players in the world, Geguri 
was extraordinarily successful in tournament play but was accused of 
cheating because other players thought her aiming was too good to 
be done without some sort of assistance.62 Part of the reason for ques-
tioning her skill may be tied to the fact that she was not established 
as a premier player in a game before Overwatch, but as Aja Romano 
notes, “As a predominant female gamer in a culture traditionally dom-
inated by men, Geguri’s success is both impressive and inspirational. 
Naturally, it’s also the reason some of her rivals have accused her of 
cheating.”63 Two of her opponents in a high-­profile match accused 
her of cheating, one of whom threatened to visit her house with a 
knife were the allegations proven.64 As Romano summarizes, the two 
players “were so absolutely, totally, without-­a-­doubt sure that Geguri 
couldn’t attain stats as high as she did, they bet their entire careers on 
their assertion that she must be cheating, agreeing to quit their jobs 
if they turned out to be wrong.”65 Geguri was cleared by Blizzard and 
engaged in a public display that validated her skills. However, when 
prominent male players were accused of cheating, they did not need 

	
47	
Leveling Up in Life
to put on a similar exhibition to evidence their ability.66 Geguri did 
not get the same benefit of the doubt as other players because, based 
on her point of origin as a woman, she was considered to be lesser be-
fore she ever sat down in front of her mouse and keyboard. Players, in 
their pursuit of hierarchy, excuse those they expect or can believe to 
be exceptional, while those on the margins must do more than oth-
ers, thereby placing barriers in front of nontraditional communities 
in games, most notably women and people of color.67 Further, those 
players do not have the same social encouragement to play, making 
Geguri’s version of Overwatch harder than those of her opponents. 
She has to fight both the players in the game and the perceptions they 
hold coming into it, since she is presumed to be lesser before she even 
begins and her exceptional talent has to be proven to a level that far 
exceeds that of any man playing the same game. In emphasizing the 
individual, Geguri’s performance is taken out of the context in which 
it occurs and she has to both display her talent in the game and justify 
that she is not cheating outside of it.
Contending that “the most fundamental problem with meritocracy 
is how difficult it is to maintain in its pure and noble form,” Hayes ar-
gues that “our near-­religious fidelity to the meritocratic model comes 
with huge costs. We overestimate the advantages of meritocracy and 
underappreciate its costs, because we don’t think hard enough about 
the consequences of the inequality it produces,” as “those at the top 
can use their relative power to alter and manipulate existing institu-
tions so as to further consolidate their gains and press their advan-
tage.”68 These problems are compounded by the fact that inequality 
also makes people terrible judges of their own relative social status. 
People routinely underestimate their own place in the social ranking, 
which inhibits their desire to develop policies to help the less fortu-
nate.69 The structures of meritocracy are fundamentally flawed, as 
the process of calculating merit is tremendously important yet fre-
quently obscured. Meritocracy is the product, a system of decisions 
where Craig Haney and Aida Hurtado observe that “what we define 
as performance, how we go about measuring it, what social value we 
attach to which specific measures, and our organized response as a so-
ciety (or as an employer) to apparent differences in performance are 
all part of a socially constructed belief system. Yet, the mythology of 
meritocracy masks these contingencies and obscures the ways in which 

Leveling Up in Life	
48
the assumptions of this system are ‘built into’ the workplace.”70 From 
Robin Potanin’s observation that an overwhelmingly white and male 
game development community makes games that they want to play 
and that feature characters that look like them, to the frank statement 
by developer Ready at Dawn’s Ru Weerasuriya that he develops games 
because he’s a gamer and wants to “see cool things on the platforms 
I play.” Video games are constructed by people who are already part 
of the community and are invested in making games for the people 
who already play video games.71 Instead of developers branching out 
in new directions, a risk-­averse approach to game development and 
a lack of diversity in the community of people making games cre-
ates an echo chamber where recycling content and ideas ensures that 
those who are part of the community already are rewarded and their 
success is justified under the guise of merit. Weerasuriya’s position 
that as a gamer he is interested in making “cool things” is not neces-
sarily wrong, but it does elide key dynamics of videogame consump-
tion and production. Producing the kinds of games he wants to play 
means that he is increasingly speaking to an audience of people like 
him, which undercuts any idea of a true meritocracy by building key 
assumptions into the “workplace” of games. In her history of videog-
ame arcades, Carly Kocurek states the issue quite directly: “An indus-
try of men imagines a consumer base that is like them and so makes 
games that reflect their own interests and experiences; with games 
serving as a point of entry into the industry, this production cycle 
helps maintain the status quo.”72 The CEO of Lockwood Publishing, 
a company targeting young women interested in 3-­D virtual worlds, 
argues that underserved users are key to success; however, he holds 
that standard industry practice gave him the idea to develop for un-
derserved groups because “predominantly male teams at games stu-
dios, free to build the game they always wanted to play, were in fact 
releasing games that would attract and monetize an audience of their 
peers. Young males over the age of 18 were making games for—­you 
guessed it—­young males over the age of 18.”73 From schools to expe-
riences, many different kinds of resources can be brought to bear to tip 
the scales toward obscuring a pure calculation of merit. The process 
of producing meritocracy confounds inborn skill with the effects of 
structural inequity, which then continues in a circular, self-­reinforcing 
pattern. These inequalities permeate discussions about video games, 

	
49	
Leveling Up in Life
as traces of sexism, racism, homophobia, ageism, or any other barrier 
ensures that some players benefit from advantages while others must 
overcome obstacles.74
The point of the meritocratic critique is that the system seems 
like it is properly balanced and only enforcing values that are readily 
understandable and defensible. However, meritocracy imbues ongo-
ing structural advantages in those lucky enough to reach positions of 
power. In a graduation speech at Princeton University, former United 
States Federal Reserve chair Ben Bernanke presents a positive review 
of meritocracy, but one that encourages listeners to acknowledge the 
crucial importance of luck:
A meritocracy is a system in which the people who are the luck-
iest in their health and genetic endowment; luckiest in terms of 
family support, encouragement, and, probably, income; luckiest in 
their educational and career opportunities; and luckiest in so many 
other ways difficult to enumerate—­these are the folks who reap the 
largest rewards. The only way for even a putative meritocracy to 
hope to pass ethical muster, to be considered fair, is if those who 
are the luckiest in all those respects also have the greatest respon-
sibility to work hard, to contribute to the world, and to share their 
luck with others.75
Bernanke is receptive to a meritocracy, but his words also undercut its 
foundational premise. Instead of simply measuring skill, meritocracies 
also inherently assess a person’s good fortune and relative success in 
the genetic lottery. Fellow economist Robert H. Frank stresses the 
role of luck in meritocratic systems throughout a book-­length explo-
ration of meritocracy, arguing that even when luck is only a minor fac-
tor in an outcome, it is often the determining one. Frank argues that 
as modern economic trends ensure a greater number of participants 
in most contests, and in an atmosphere where those competitions are 
more frequently winner-­take-­all, “even when luck has only a minor 
influence on performance, the most talented and hardworking of all 
contestants will usually be outdone by a rival who is almost as talented 
and hardworking but also considerably luckier.”76 Frank specifically 
applies his analysis to the music industry and book publishing, where 
success hinges on getting the first few good reviews to generate buzz 

Leveling Up in Life	
50
for your work. The chance event of the first reviewer liking a spe-
cific song or book is tremendously important to its future—­were it 
assigned to a less friendly reviewer the same output could be far less 
successful.
For Frank, the role of meritocracy is to camouflage “the extent to 
which success and failure often hinge decisively on events completely 
beyond any individual’s control.”77 Where you are born, to whom you 
are born, and so many other factors frame the success you are most 
likely to achieve. When considering personal economics on a global 
scale, studies have found that how much you will earn in your life is 
set by where you happen to be born, a fact that has nothing to do with 
your individual skill or effort. Recent economic analysis in the United 
States shows that “even poor kids who do everything right don’t do 
much better than rich kids who do everything wrong.”78 As a different 
critique observes, “The truth is that the meritocracy was never more 
than partial,” and it goes on to argue that selective admissions systems 
at elite colleges ensure some kinds of diversity, but rarely in terms of 
economic class or parental occupation.79 Colleges in the United States 
also fail at social status equalization, as getting into and succeeding 
in college still leads to lesser life outcomes for graduates who happen 
to be black, Hispanic, or raised poor compared to their classmates.80 
For Jo Littler, meritocracy “functions as an ideological myth to ob-
scure economic and social inequalities and the role it plays in curtailing 
social equality.”81 Skill, talent, and ability become means by which to 
mask the value judgments, norms, and exclusions that are happening 
under the auspices of decisions made solely based on objective mea-
sures. The myth that meritocracy is based on skill and talent is excep-
tionally important, because the myth of merit presumes that the good 
and bad are sorted properly, but McNamee and Miller argue that in 
practice the ideology “provides an incomplete explanation for success 
and failure, mistakenly exalting the rich and unjustly condemning the 
poor. We may always have the rich and poor among us, but we need 
neither exalt the former nor condemn the latter.”82 The process of 
producing a meritocracy has substantial side effects. Meritocracy ex-
alts and punishes individuals based on where they end up, which is 
heavily influenced by where they started. Meritocracy negatively af-
fects physical health for those at the bottom and teaches those at the 
top that they have earned their plaudits. The myth of meritocracy is 

	
51	
Leveling Up in Life
stultifying, as people throughout the spectrum are led to believe that 
they deserve where they end up and ignore structural explanations 
for the inequality inherent to a meritocratic ideology. Although these 
concerns may not initially seem to apply to the study of video games, 
echoes of Richard Bartle’s statements about MUD1 and the lack of 
diversity found in many aspects of videogame design linger alongside 
meritocratic norms that produce similar kinds of problems and assure 
a game culture that is rotting from the inside out.
Game Design and Meritocracy
Those studying game design and play do not always think through 
the consequences of having a system where some are put into a po-
sition to be far superior to others, and one where barriers to entry 
are routinely and consistently raised over time. We do not often talk 
about how being good at one game promises a skill transfer likely to 
carry over to other, similar games. There is rarely an investigation or 
mention of how players can arrive at the starting line of learning to 
play a game with vastly different competencies, giving some players a 
potentially massive advantage over others.83 Certain players sit down 
and know how to move in 3-­D spaces, how to hold a controller, how 
to manage an inventory, where to find save points, how to find and 
navigate a mini-­map, where the default action button is likely located, 
and how to dive into a game menu. Some players know that checking 
all the crates in a room will yield treasure, while others will follow the 
path that is clearly offered by a game. Some players know to look on-
line for optimal build guides for a character or where they can search 
for advice when they get stuck; without that knowledge, other players 
are left struggling and may give up when they cannot solve a puzzle or 
do not realize that the choices they made in character customization 
are making the game much harder, as these things are generally only 
discussed in reviews about or forums for a game. All this knowledge 
gives some players a head start compared to those who know little 
about games and their attendant systems, making success more tied 
to inheritance than to skill or effort.
One way to reflect on how meritocracy affects games is to look 
at key writing from a pair of game designers with different career 
paths and perspectives. Anna Anthropy is an independent game de-

Leveling Up in Life	
52
signer and writer who champions easy-­to-­use tools to create a world 
where everyone can make games. Raph Koster, lead designer on Ul-
tima Online and creative director of Star Wars Galaxies, has written 
extensively about the role of fun in games. Where these two designers 
agree provides a fertile area for reflecting on trouble spots in game 
design and culture. Both have written about the effects of limited di-
versity of design in mainstream video games and how that interrelates 
with a heavy dependence on skill transfer. Anna Anthropy notes that 
“most games are copies of existing successful games. They play like 
other games, resemble their contemporaries in shape and structure, 
have the same buttons that interact with the world in the same way 
(mouse to aim, left click to shoot), and have the same shortcomings.”84 
Raph Koster adds that “the historical trend in games has shown that 
when a new genre of game is invented, it follows a trajectory where 
increasing complexity is added to it, until eventually the games on 
the market are so complex and advanced that newcomers can’t get 
into them—­the barrier to entry is too high.”85 As games build on one 
another, the tower of knowledge needed for access into video games 
keeps getting higher and in a way that frequent players may not even 
notice. However, skill transfer is far from the only obstacle circum-
scribing the gaming audience.
Beyond general issues in game design, we rarely think through 
how the interrelationships among designers, players, journalists, and 
academics mean that games are often targeted to an insular com-
munity with relatively consistent expectations and standards. As the 
balance of resources tilts, expertise and success in video games is 
based less on merit and more on the inheritance of structures that 
let certain players circumvent examinations of ability or skill. Play-
ing a video game is far from a straightforward test of skill. Game 
tutorials, which are increasingly integrated into the first few min-
utes of game play, only exacerbate these issues, as they typically re-
quire a player to have a basic level of competency in moving around 
virtual space and knowing where buttons on the controller or key-
board are located in order to navigate a set of tasks that are rudimen-
tary for veteran players yet may be completely foreign to new ones. 
Merit in video games is assessed by the time a person has been able 
to invest in learning this game and all the similar games a player has 
played before. Being successful in a game depends on the economic 

	
53	
Leveling Up in Life
ability to pay for games and systems, the cultural permission or en-
couragement to play games, and the good fortune to find game nar-
ratives, characters, and genres that are at least somewhat relatable or 
interesting. As Adrienne Shaw established, the representations cho-
sen in media matter, as what is selected for representation “provides 
evidence of what could be and who can be possible.”86 Much like 
Bernanke concludes that the broader culture measures luck in ad-
dition to skill, meritocratic norms in games are influenced by all the 
social factors that affect the ability to actually assess skill and effort 
in game play. In the end, those most able to rally against the pre-
vailing order are cognitively captured by it, as they gather benefits 
from a system that render them less interested in fighting against 
inherent imbalances that work in their favor. Much like a standard-
ized test can be hard to see as a problem if you score well on it, 
video games that cater to one’s own skills, abilities, and habits can 
be hard to see as a systemic problem. Hardcore gamers can often 
be seen calling for more video games that suit them, rather than for 
diverse games that draw in more players or test new kinds of skills. 
The creative director at Ubisoft argues that this predictability and 
consistency in video games is “less about familiarity than it’s just en-
joying the content. That’s the misunderstanding. I think players hon-
estly like it, because if they didn’t it’s still $60 or $70. It’s still a lot of 
money.”87 To Ubisoft, the reuse of common tropes and the promi-
nence of sequels is a player-­driven development. This recycling of 
known intellectual property and design practices is driven by indus-
try dynamics and a general aversion to risk taking, which caters to 
established players over attempts to reach new ones.88 When play-
ers pick up video games, having played the same games or genres for 
years, the video games measure not just their natural abilities but also 
all the inherited advantages that let certain players start well ahead of 
others. Meritocracies are designed to seem balanced and fair, even as 
structural inequality stifles any semblance of a level playing field. As 
we think through our roles as critics, designers, players, or whatever 
else we may be, we must guard against a tendency to become com-
promised by what we study/make/play, especially when many of us 
are often getting a head start on the possible competition.
In considering the broader cultural factors surrounding meritoc-
racy, Hayes observes that “the playing field may be level, but certain 

Leveling Up in Life	
54
kids get to spend nights and weekends practicing on it in advance of 
the competition.”89 Although he is talking about standardized testing 
and the role of external coaching and studying, similar concerns re-
late to video games. Time and money are huge factors in shaping how 
good someone can be and how likely they are to realize their maxi-
mum skill at any given game. As Carly Kocurek found in her analy-
sis of videogame arcades, the population of people currently playing 
games is shaped by the early discussion around video games, putting 
young men in a position where they are far more likely to be encour-
aged to play games and find games related to their interests.90 Con-
sidering additional factors, from speed of internet access to social 
support, the external factors that shape play cannot be forgotten in 
considerations of merit and who deserves the advantages they “earn.” 
Supposed skill at games is also heavily dependent on the distribution 
and kind of luck from which a player has also benefited. Merit is not 
something that is simply out there to be found and discovered; it is 
produced through a system largely developed and chosen by those al-
ready in positions of power.
Even seemingly unbiased arbiters of merit carry judgments about 
what is best, further replicating the status quo. In a social system like 
video games with the regular intermixing of game players with devel-
opers, the culture is routinely developed and designed to reward those 
already there. As Anna Anthropy puts it, “The problem with video-
games is that they’re created by a small, insular group of people. Dig-
ital games largely come from within a single culture.”91 Raph Koster 
takes a slightly milder tack to the issue, observing, “By making gam-
ing their hobby, game designers are making an echo chamber of their 
own work.”92 Being invested in games for longer and learning how 
systems are likely to work enables frequent players to reap rewards 
from all kinds of external factors that can benefit them, and then de-
signers, who are also players, make more of the same.93 From being 
readily accepted into a community because you share social traits to 
having the time and money in the first place to invest in games, the 
meritocracy produced by games considers many factors that have little 
to do with skill. The perceived level playing field is further subverted 
by access to video games in the first place. Anna Anthropy lists several 
core issues with access in her critique of console games:

	
55	
Leveling Up in Life
The amount of both manual dexterity and game-­playing experi-
ence required to operate a game designed for the Xbox 360 makes 
play inaccessible to those who aren’t already grounded in the tech-
nique of playing games. And to attain that level of familiarity with 
games requires a huge and continuous investment of time (and 
money—­keeping up with new games costs bucks). This means that 
older people—­people with families and obligations, people trying 
to raise kids, or any people with a lack of free time to invest—­have 
a harder time gaining access to games.94
Some of the obstacles Anthropy lists are related to skill or arguably to 
effort, but many are also structural; as these barriers rise, the supposed 
meritocracy of games evaluates far more in its players than just merit. 
When subject to meritocracy, part of the function of the ideology is 
to obscure that it is a practice and a series of choices that deliberately 
rewards some things and not others. This has huge implications for 
games, and it is absolutely necessary to think critically about how the 
meritocracy within video games is built, what traits and factors are re-
warded alongside skill and effort, and which are punished.
Another area for thinking about how video games intersect with 
meritocratic norms is to take a step back and examine how merito-
cratic systems are supposed to work and how they end up affecting the 
subjects within them. A first key tenet of meritocracy is that it depends 
on downward mobility. Because there is a limited amount of room at 
the top of the meritocratic pyramid, the less able in the upper classes 
must fall to make room for the more able in the lower classes.95 For 
thinking about games, this means that all players must have a risk of 
falling backward or otherwise losing the advantages they have spent a 
playing career building. It is often the subtle parts of playing games—­
the knowledge that comes with playing game after game and learning 
which buttons to press when and how to navigate the various systems 
that have become genre standards—­that simply will not let frequent 
players drop to the bottom when they move to a new game. Although 
it seems like this would only apply to multiplayer games with a sin-
gle spot at the top of the ladder to award, aspects of it also sneak into 
single-­player games. Such games cannot be so easy that anyone can 
beat them, and yet the skill transfer veteran players take with them 
ensures a head start.

Leveling Up in Life	
56
Video games often feature iterative design that is used to tune the 
difficulty so that players feel challenged, engaged, and mad at them-
selves instead of the game when they fail. Popularized by Shigeru 
Miyamoto and Nintendo, such design is predicated on taking the 
knowledge learned in one game and deploying it in the next game, 
but with a twist.96 Many people can win single-­player games, but 
badges, achievements, leaderboards, and speed runs all push single-­
player games into meritocratic contexts. Athletes face issues with age 
or injury to force them downward, but outside the top end of eS-
ports, players of video games tend to get more sophisticated over 
time, rather than less. Instead of an inheritance of resources passed 
down through generations, games feature skill and knowledge trans-
fers that, combined with limited genres and plentiful sequels, ensure 
that frequent players never slip too far down the social hierarchy. As 
players rarely, if ever, truly fall downward in the avatar and social cap-
ital they have acquired, an actual meritocracy in games is subverted as 
those at the top reap outsized rewards, which means the distribution 
of awards and places is even less likely to be based on skill and effort, 
and more likely to judge the less noticeable traits players bring with 
them into games.
A common issue in actually addressing problems within a meri-
tocracy is the paradox that attempts to reduce discrimination in mer-
itocratic systems actually end up in a loop where, according to Emilio 
Castilla and Stephen Benard, “bias can be triggered by attempts to re-
duce it, particularly in organizational contexts that emphasize meri-
tocratic values.”97 This type of prompting is similar to research about 
addressing discrimination, as both accusations of racism or the mere 
presence of more people of color lead to white people demonstrating 
higher levels of racial resentment.98 I contend that games are pred-
icated on a generally meritocratic organizational structure, which 
makes them particularly resistant to efforts to reduce discrimination 
because of the cues presented in the course of video games. Prim-
ing for meritocracy through playing games is likely to make players 
less prone to be critically reflective about structural bias and more 
likely to uncritically accept the ideology of meritocracy. One expla-
nation for why this happens is the concept of psychological cues and 
prompting. Shannon K. McCoy and Brenda Major argue that “subtle 
meritocratic cues in the immediate environment can induce system 
justifying responses among individuals who are aware of this world-

	
57	
Leveling Up in Life
view, irrespective of personal endorsement.”99 By being prompted 
about meritocracy a person’s individual beliefs matter less than the 
cue, and even the people who are aware of the arguments against the 
ideology are more prone to defend it as proper and just. McCoy and 
Major conclude with the argument that “subtle cues to meritocracy 
in the cultural environment may encourage members of low status 
groups to construe personal and group disadvantage as deserved and 
to minimize the perception that such disadvantage is due to discrimi-
nation. These system justifying responses to meritocracy cues may be 
most likely precisely when individuals would least like them to occur: 
in the presence of clear, meritocracy-­violating inequality.”100 This dy-
namic encourages and propagates meritocratic systems, as those who 
have the best case to demonstrate how the system is broken end up 
defending the system as fair and just. I believe games readily work as 
a meritocratic cue and, based on McCoy and Major’s research, the 
prompting of playing games that contain meritocratic elements leads 
players to be more accepting and defensive of meritocracy. The econ-
omist Robert H. Frank has found similar results in his experiments 
concerning sharing. When participants believe they are more skilled 
than others, they divide resources less fairly, keeping more for them-
selves. Participants’ false beliefs about their skills “apparently induced 
a powerful sense of entitlement to claim the lion’s share, while falsely 
believing themselves to be less skillful had much less of an effect.”101 
Getting out of a meritocratic loop is incredibly difficult, and if games 
function as a meritocratic prompt, dismantling the dominant ideol-
ogy within game culture will require great effort and reflection. This 
may be a key reason why certain people opt out of games in general, 
as players are quickly trained to individualize their failure instead of 
critiquing the system that is stifling their chance at success.
An additional harm of meritocracy within games is that the ideol-
ogy brings discrimination with it. In a legal context, appeals to merit 
have actually made it harder to address claims of discrimination in the 
workplace.102 In attempts to remedy discrimination claims meritoc-
racy is deployed to support the powerful and ends up ensuring that 
organizations maintain an ability to discriminate on the basis of fac-
tors like race and gender.103 Meritocracy is all about judging people, 
and it works on those at the top and the bottom, quickly teaching the 
less successful that their failures are their own.104 Meritocracy causes 
discrimination and encourages people operating under the ideology 

Leveling Up in Life	
58
to justify the exclusion or marginalization of those who are less suc-
cessful because they are considered naturally lesser. Meritocratic sys-
tems are exclusionary and marginalizing, which offers a fine corollary 
to arguments about the relative lack of diversity among players of core 
games and in game design more broadly. By appropriating the logic of 
merit, video games limit their audience, as those who are not initially 
advantaged are pushed away by those who judge them as poorer play-
ers, and by their own adherence to a skill-­based ideology that teaches 
them that they simply are not as good as others. Reflecting on this 
trend in U.S. society more broadly, McNamee and Miller write, “If 
merit were the sole cause of achievement, one would wonder why the 
vast amount of raw talent is found in white males, who clearly domi-
nate leadership positions in key institutions in society.”105 Games cre-
ate the perception that we can find the most qualified quite easily, as 
that can be determined by playing the games themselves. However, 
the lack of diversity among players should prompt questions about 
whether games are actually meritocratic.
Beyond the broad understanding that core games are often a heavily 
white male space, another area to see structural privilege within the 
world of video games is eSports. The dominance of Korean players in 
games like Starcraft and League of Legends is due in part to the large 
systems of support to back them, from state-­run organizations like the 
Korean eSports Association (KeSPA), the large infrastructure and re-
wards enabling players to improve, wide broadcasts and support for 
tournaments, and financial rewards that enable players to focus on 
play.106 All of these elements produce a system where some are led to 
believe they are better than others and those who struggle are led to 
the conclusion that it is their own personal failing, rather than poten-
tial systematic issues that ensure the deck is stacked. Structural fac-
tors are occasionally acknowledged—­Todd Harper finds that some 
fighting game players justify certain players’ performance based on 
their “Asian hands”—­but these elements are tied to creating an envi-
ronment where a particular kind of skill is praised.107 It may be easier 
to see these dynamics at work in a clear case like eSports, but the ho-
mogeneity of game designers and core players should prompt deep 
questions about how video games are designed. The pool of players 
in video games is limited, and part of the reason why is likely the in-
herent inequality and discrimination that comes with following a mer-
itocratic ideology.

	
59	
Leveling Up in Life
A huge part of the reason for the inability to reach out and diversify 
a group under conditions of meritocracy is the focus on individuals and 
what is seen as their proper behavior. As Jo Littler writes, under meri-
tocracy “the act of addressing inequality becomes ‘responsibilised’ as 
an individual’s moral meritocratic task. This process devolves onto the 
individual personal responsibility not just for their success in the mer-
itocratic competition, but for the very will to compete and expectation 
of victory which are now figured as moral imperatives in themselves. 
Not investing in aspiration, in expectation, is aggressively positioned 
as an abdication of responsibility which condemns yourself—­and even 
worse, your child—­to the social scrapheap.”108 Subjects under meritoc-
racy are expected to get better, to drive themselves to attain a higher 
position. Even if the competition may be rigged, participants are asked 
to jump on the treadmill and work themselves forward for fear that 
if they opt out they are not only failing themselves, but all those they 
support. The context of games carries less immediate or lasting stakes 
than meritocracy does as a government program, but the expectation 
that players should get better is woven throughout the dominant cul-
ture around games.
From particular kinds of games players are supposed to like to a 
skill they are expected to demonstrate, players of video games expect 
things of one another, and showing vulnerability or demonstrating a 
lack of merit is a huge risk. This individualized personal drive expected 
of meritocratic subjects is succinctly displayed in the gaming phrase 
“lrn2play n00b.” It is an individual responsibility to learn, not a com-
munal expectation to teach. Players compare what they have done, 
what they can do, and are expected to work to continue to climb the 
ladder of skill, without regard for social circumstances and structural 
barriers, many of which are clear choices made by game developers 
and game companies, rather than objective standards. There are occa-
sions where players help one another out, like EVE University, which 
is a group dedicated to helping new players assimilate into the notori-
ously difficult game EVE Online.109 However, individual skill is a key 
concern for many. In an article for Gameranx, Nick Monroe distills 
this position, beginning by stating plainly, “Most games require some 
skill. Without that requirement, they are not really games.” Monroe 
goes on to note that games are special and valuable because “the in-
stinct of wanting to be the best like no one ever was is a healthy pur-
suit. . . . Gamers with proficiency will naturally have more educated 

Leveling Up in Life	
60
opinions than those without, by sheer virtue of having actual experi-
ence and familiarity with the subject.” Monroe contends that games 
are played to be beaten, “and the only way to do that is to get good, 
and that’s what gaming is all about.”110 Norms celebrating skill and 
effort are encouraged by meritocratic design and narrative, which 
limits the population of people likely to play games, continuing the 
circle of limited options and a limited audience for games. Monroe’s 
perspective is typical of many, but distilling games into examinations 
that assess skill strictly limits what video games can be and who they 
are likely to attract as potential players.
There are games, interactions, and studies that have explicitly 
sought to assess concepts like meritocracy or social inequality in ac-
tion. StarPower, an educational game designed in the 1960s to encour-
age reflection on social status in a classroom setting, is typically used to 
address racial and social inequality.111 The game starts with players on 
a relatively equal playing field, but they are quickly divided into three 
groups, where the most powerful get to make the rules for the game 
going forward and the least powerful quickly find themselves disaf-
fected and removed from the process of playing the game. Those in 
positions of power are given the option to consult others on new rules, 
but they rarely do and proceed to rig the game to favor their group.112 
In the typical debrief conducted after the game, the most powerful 
players also tend to insist that the game was fair and fail to observe the 
systematic oppression they orchestrated. More recently, the psychol-
ogist Paul Piff has conducted research on a modified Monopoly game 
where one player is given substantial advantages over the other as de-
termined by a coin flip at the beginning of the game.113 This experi-
ment, in conjunction with other experimental research, leads Piff to 
an argument that being wealthy affects behavior in profound ways.114 
Across multiple measures, his research has found that being in a pow-
erful position leads a person to be less empathetic, less supportive of 
others, and more likely to ignore structural inequality. This dovetails 
nicely with the research on meritocracy, as the work overwhelmingly 
holds that people in a position to make rules will set out to create sit-
uations that benefit them, ignoring those who are less fortunate and 
have less influence. This structural inequality is routinely part of video 
games, where the already invested and talented seek out more of the 
same, which systematically disenfranchises those who start with less. 

	
61	
Leveling Up in Life
These are clear points at which metrics that seemed to be measures of 
skill or ability are actually indicators of previous structural positions. 
However, games can help both diagnose and challenge these problems 
when designed accordingly.
The final key piece of how meritocracy works is to look at how 
it shapes the terms of interaction in game culture. As detailed more 
thoroughly in the following chapters, video games are rife with ex-
amples of meritocratic game design and narratives. Players are rou-
tinely taught, through both the things they do in play and the stories 
in which they participate, that they earn their success because they 
started from the bottom and have risen to the top through the qual-
ity of their efforts, effectively making this a question of ideology and 
orientation.115 Players are consistently given the message that if they 
try hard enough, work more, and push the buttons better, they will 
succeed. These experiences are at the heart of many of the games we 
play. They also have a noxious effect, as they foreclose critical thought 
about the problems with this kind of approach or about whom games 
may leave behind. They limit the audience for games. They teach the 
skilled at games to revile those who are not as good as they are, and 
instruct the less talented that it is their own fault they are struggling. 
Meritocracy in games teaches players that the only way to succeed is 
based on their own talent and effort, eliminating concerns about the 
structural issues surrounding access. The lack of ability to empathize 
or think beyond one’s circumstance is a hallmark of the problems with 
meritocratic discourse and a key driver of the toxicity of game culture. 
Better understanding the status quo is a key step in breaking the toxic 
culture in and around games, which requires examining relevant work 
in game studies and analyzing the culture around video games, partic-
ularly its most virulent aspects.

This page deliberately left blank

	
63
2
A Toxic Culture
Studying Gaming’s Jerks
One way to start to see additional connections between meritocracy 
and video games is to look at how games have been studied and how 
they are being talked about. Within the field of game studies, scholars 
have examined topics like game culture and gamers, and advocated 
for changes in how video games need to be developed and consid-
ered, occasionally while employing the tools of rhetorical analysis.1 
Also, in light of the deeper discussion of meritocracy, rhetoric, and 
how to study games, it is relevant to circle back and examine the cul-
ture around video games, making a more thorough examination of the 
current state of game culture a crucial part of raising awareness about 
how important it is to change. A deeper investigation of game culture 
also ties into how meritocratic norms are feeding problematic behav-
ior through a dependence on appeals to balance, player skill, and the 
notion that players earn their victories on a level playing field. I begin 
with a brief explanation of rhetoric as a critical tool.
A key to rhetorical criticism is understanding the relationship be-
tween the reality we perceive and the symbol systems we use to de-
scribe it.2 The words and expressions we have shape how we see the 
world, and how we see the world constructs the words and expressions 
we have. As a small example of this, by introducing the idea that peo-
ple have an obligation to help make the world a better place early in 
this book, I am framing how readers engage with what is written and 
laying out a framework for how I sought to write the book. Past vid-

A Toxic Culture	
64
eogame conventions and norms set expectations for future games, as 
successful formulas are regurgitated time and again; the symbol sys-
tems create a reality of what video games can and should be, as well 
as who should be playing them. Particular words, like “terrorism” or 
“freedom,” can help foreclose debate and discussion or enable them. 
The way we see colors in the world, and which colors we can see (or 
not), are likely tied to the words we have available to us, as research 
has indicated that lacking a word for a color or shade makes it more 
difficult to discern.3 As we think about how games work, it is impor-
tant to remember that the existing symbol systems of games set the 
terms on which people engage. A limited, meritocratic culture will 
provoke a certain kind of response, and changing that symbol system 
will require the development of new, different modes of interaction. 
However, the job of a rhetorician is to examine the various influences 
we face in society in an effort to help people better understand how 
symbols do work on us.4 There are many different ways to understand 
any given set of symbols, and rhetorical analysis articulates how we 
are influenced and how symbols frame how we think. Rhetorical crit-
ics can explore how video games work as symbols through the words 
within and around them, the design of games, the community of peo-
ple who play games, and the modes in which we play games. Rhetorical 
analysis, when done well, helps people understand the subtle factors 
that influence them. In the case of video games and meritocracy, rhe-
torical analysis can explore how a series of seemingly small advances 
over time can create a situation where norms and expectations around 
skill and effort shaped the culture that grew up out of those systems, 
and how that affects contemporary games.
Meritocracy is a complicated symbol system that includes pre-
ferred appeals and lines of argument. Thinking about meritocracy as 
a set of symbols, rather than an all-­enveloping culture, helps achieve 
the critical distance to assess how the ideology forecloses debate and 
reflection. Rhetoric can help articulate the links between meritocratic 
norms in games and game design and how they overlap with the cul-
ture created in and around games. Of particular interest in the course 
of analyzing how meritocracy relates to games are the symbol systems 
surrounding the mechanics and design of key games and the narratives 
that regularly set players on a path to value power, overcoming ob-
stacles, and victory over one’s opponents. Rhetorical analysis explores 

	
65	
A Toxic Culture
how decisions repeated in game after game normalize certain belief 
systems, while others are neglected. Audiences who are routinely sub-
jected to certain kinds of appeals are more likely to internalize them, 
but perhaps even more important, the kinds of symbol systems de-
ployed set the terms for engagement with video games. The consistent 
use of one kind of appeal connected to meritocracy sets the terms of 
the vocabulary and imagination that all those who play video games 
are subject to and limited by.
Part of the impact of any discourse is to frame the boundaries for 
what kinds of ideas and imagination are possible. Symbols help shape 
how we live and interact with other people. The rhetoric of meritoc-
racy consistently advances certain ideas as natural and normal while 
dissuading people from thinking about other ways of structuring cul-
tures. Meritocracy encourages thought about how people earn their 
success, how if they work hard enough and are talented enough they, 
too, can make it to the top. Meritocracy leads to rewards being heaped 
on the most talented people and requires rigorous testing systems to 
determine exactly who is worthy of those rewards. In tandem with 
these principles encouraging judgment about the worth of individ-
uals, meritocracy also leads to a lack of thought about structural in-
equality and situations where not all people start from the same point. 
Further, an overarching principle that the successful “earn” their re-
wards leads to a lack of critical analysis about how initial success in a 
meritocracy compounds in value and makes additional rewards even 
more likely. Rhetorical analysis provides a subject position to reflect 
critically on the situation in which we find ourselves. Reappropriating 
the classic line from Marshall McLuhan that “I don’t know who dis-
covered water, but I’m pretty sure it wasn’t a fish,” rhetorical analysis 
separates us from the meritocratic soup and enables a critical look at 
how discourse does work on us.
As a dominant and important media form, games have been sub-
ject to increasing analysis in an effort to better understand how they 
work and what they can do. Game studies, a rapidly expanding field, 
comprises researchers from almost every discipline, and that wealth 
of perspectives adds a heterogeneity to the research perspectives one 
can find about games. Summarizing the whole field is not necessary 
for this book, but three areas deserve extended mention: rhetoric and 
games, assemblage and co-­creativity, and game culture and gamers.

A Toxic Culture	
66
Rhetorical analysis has been a primary mode of analysis for games. 
Ian Bogost developed the concept of procedural rhetoric to analyze 
how games work as a practice of “using processes persuasively.” Todd 
Harper and Gerald Voorhees have used rhetoric to analyze charac-
ter representations and game genres. Ken McAllister broadens the 
application of rhetoric, analyzing games, players, and the industry 
surrounding them in an effort to understand the meaning-­making 
processes at stake in and around video games.5 Rhetoric’s flexibility 
and focus on analyzing symbol systems makes it a good fit for ana-
lyzing media, a theme that can be seen throughout the work that has 
already been done in game studies. There is one piece of rhetorical 
analysis that deserves extended mention in this project, however: a 
deconstruction of the notion of “real games.”
A key rhetorical construction in video games is that some games 
and “gamers” are more “real” than others.6 Concerns along these lines 
are almost always implicit comparisons between an idealized vision 
of what video games should look like and what particular instantia-
tions of video games actually are. Real games are typically played by 
real gamers in a circular discourse that marginalizes new and differ-
ent approaches. In so doing, a broad, diverse discussion is shut down 
in favor of an insular, narrow one. A general belief among some that 
games with meritocratic norms are more authentic than others sets the 
framework for toxicity in games; it normalizes meritocratic discourse 
and implicitly contends that non-­meritocratic games are necessarily 
lesser and should be marginalized.
A second crucial idea that can be borrowed from game studies is 
the understanding that games are a product of assemblage and co-­
creativity. The central idea of the assemblage is that everything needs 
to be analyzed when it comes to games, from the environment of play 
to the means of play to the person playing.7 Assessing and understand-
ing games requires looking well beyond any individual piece of video 
games and often benefits from analyzing how multiple elements work 
in tandem to create specific situations for play and interaction. Part of 
the reason why games cannot be isolated into neatly compartmental-
ized parts is that the co-­creative relationship of players and producers 
of games is crucial to their production. Co-­creativity is the belief that 
media products are constructed in the interactions between producers 
and consumers of content.8 The concept of co-­creativity has substan-

	
67	
A Toxic Culture
tial effects on games, from situations where prominent members of 
fan communities get hired as designers to active solicitation of play-
ers’ opinions through beta testing. However, combining the notions of 
assemblage and co-­creativity facilitates an understanding that there is 
a clear feedback loop in game design. A key part of what video games 
are and what they can be depends on the active participation of and 
feedback from players. This interdependent relationship facilitates a 
conservative game-­design process that gives those who are already in 
the community an upper hand in determining what comes next, what 
is acceptable, and what should be designed. The meritocratic norms 
of games are a key part of the production of games, and they comprise 
a worldview that is advanced and furthered through the co-­creative 
process where players advocate for systems that further their own in-
terests, routinely giving themselves a head start.
The final relevant piece of game studies to this project is the re-
search that has been conducted on game culture and “gamers.” Adri-
enne Shaw argues that the foundational idea of videogame culture 
is problematic, as it defines a culture around the study of a particu-
lar kind of media and makes it more difficult to obtain the distance 
necessary for critique.9 This dominant approach, of seeing a culture 
defined entirely by the play and consumption of games, encourages 
those within it to focus solely on games, largely from a noncritical 
perspective. Placing games at the center of a subject position leads to 
attempts to understand everything through games, rather than seek-
ing multiple, diverse perspectives or looking at other fields, cultures, 
and activities for inspiration and context. This places those within the 
culture in a limited position, where it becomes difficult to think of 
things outside the frame of games and defines all things in terms of 
how they fit games—­like protests in Ferguson, Missouri, or the death 
of a United States Supreme Court Justice—­regardless of how tenu-
ous or relevant the connections may be.10 This is an important lesson 
to keep in mind, as the culture around video games has a history and 
is a subset of a much larger whole that has little to do with games. In 
this case, the dominance of meritocracy in countries that are crucial 
to the development of games affects the ideology those games are 
likely to advance. In others cases, the deep history of games and how 
they are produced is crucially important, as Carly Kocurek evidences 
in her analysis of videogame arcades.11 Beyond a critical assessment 

A Toxic Culture	
68
of game culture, Shaw also critiques the notion of “gamer” and con-
tends that the term itself is laden with assumptions; blithely using the 
term strips the context out of many people’s play experiences. The so-
cial construction of a category called “gamers” puts certain people in 
a position where their role is to consume a particular kind of media, 
and only analyzing “gamers” means that we leave out large sections 
of game players.12 “Gamer” is a term that focuses on consumption, 
and part of thinking critically about how games work requires reas-
sessing the baseline assumptions frequently made about games and 
those who play them.
Finally, it is also necessary to consider how elements of labor are 
intertwined with game play. A key aspect of many games, particularly 
role-­playing games, is ongoing and incessant small tasks that must 
be repeated over and over again to reach a goal. Often referred to as 
“the grind,” this repetitive play can be soothing and relaxing, but it is 
also inextricably linked to considerations of effort in games.13 Video 
games tend to depend on and reward repetitive “hard” work. Players 
are frequently cast in a position where clicking, tapping, or pressing 
similar buttons time and again will help them transcend their initial 
paltry state on a journey to become powerful and/or wealthy within 
the game. Player efforts are generally also rewarded with the ability to 
perform more, and different, moves and skills. This effectively become 
a means by which to continue the labor in a new way or in a different 
situation. Although games are often described with words like “play” 
and “fun,” they are also integrated into larger structures of work and 
productivity on which the relative merits of player effort and skill are 
judged. This idea of celebrating effort and skill makes contemporary 
games well suited for meritocratic norms, as success is typically judged 
by a player’s effort plus skill.
Rhetoric and the use of rhetorical analysis to study games offer a 
way to look at and think about games differently in order to obtain 
the critical distance Shaw seeks. It is crucial to remember that design-
ing and playing video games is the product of a co-­creative relation-
ship between players and designers, and that interaction with games 
is tied to a complex assemblage of many different factors that con-
struct play in specific, situated contexts. Finally, all the questions we 
ask are subject to understanding the larger context of who is playing 
games and how they play. Concepts like “gamer” and contexts like 

	
69	
A Toxic Culture
“labor” help shape how we think about who plays and why. The next 
step is more completely addressing discussions about games, gamers, 
and game culture.
Toxicity and Games
Appropriating the title of an article written by Adrienne Shaw, one 
reason why video games are full of jerks is because the world is full of 
jerks.14 Games are certainly not an exception to the problems found 
elsewhere in the world, but, as Leigh Alexander argues, games seem 
somehow, somewhat different, even worse than other elements of so-
ciety, media, or the internet. Part of the problem of toxicity in games 
can certainly be explained by the fact that there are elements of any 
culture that are troubling, antagonistic, or repugnant. Understanding 
what accounts for the specific situation in video games and discussion 
about them can be partially accomplished by examining some of the 
problems that have crept up in and around games.
Popularization of the blanket term “toxicity” largely comes from 
the work of the League of Legends developer Riot Games, which has 
worked for years in an effort to stamp out particularly offensive be-
havior. League of Legends (or LoL) may be the most played PC game 
in history, debuting in 2009 and featuring billions of cumulative hours 
played.15 The game is a multiplayer online battle arena (or MOBA) 
where two teams, typically of five players, try to destroy an object pro-
tected by defensive structures in the other team’s base. Games gen-
erally last from about twenty minutes to an hour, and players need to 
both cooperate with their teammates and compete against the other 
team. Early stages of the game focus on leveling up your team’s char-
acters and gaining resources while stopping the other team from doing 
the same, all in an effort to eventually overpower the other team and 
their defenses. When players kill opponents on the other team they 
benefit from substantial experience and resource gains, so if your team 
is particularly good (or bad) at killing the other team it will likely shift 
the game’s balance.
In MOBAs, one team leveling up substantially faster than the other 
often leads to a situation where it is clear which team is going to win 
and the losing team cannot do much but wait several minutes to lose, 
often while being repeatedly slaughtered. The waiting, combined with 

A Toxic Culture	
70
the advantages gained by the other team for killing other players, 
means there is plenty of time for blaming other people for what went 
wrong in a losing game of LoL. Relatively early in the game’s life cycle, 
the developers identified that their “vicious player community” had 
the effect of “hurting the game’s reputation and hemming in its po-
tential to grow,” as “toxic players are among the top 2 reasons play-
ers quit the game and never come back.”16 Riot Games established a 
Player Behavior team that created a tribunal system to mete out pun-
ishments, including temporary or permanent bans and full posting of 
relevant chat logs on appeal.17 The developer also started a policy of 
telling players they were acting in a problematic manner, which led 
to some players self-­policing and reducing their own troublesome be-
havior. As of this writing, the efforts of the team were reported to have 
decreased toxic behavior in the game as a whole, but the LoL envi-
ronment remains toxic enough that the company is still experiment-
ing with new efforts, including instant bans and bans of professional 
players.18 Each round of new policies receives substantial attention 
in videogame media, but I contend that the continued need to in-
crease policing and punishment of behavior points to deeper prob-
lems. A squad of people reprimanding players for offensive language 
or disruptive play is addressing symptoms, not the root causes of the 
problem that lead people to behave in troublesome ways in the first 
place. Riot’s attempts are also clearly linked to a desire to attract and 
retain players for their game, rather than addressing the structure of 
videogame culture as a whole. They are a starting point for thinking 
about toxicity in a particular game, but a problem with behavior in any 
single game is a symptom of deeper problems in the culture around 
video games as a whole.
Taking a broad look at videogame culture requires taking a step 
backward and thinking about how the design of particular games crafts 
the interaction of player communities within them.19 The terms on 
which a game is played and the tasks players are seeking to accom-
plish have a tremendous impact on the culture found within any given 
title. With this in mind, it is crucial to look at individual instances in 
a given game and also at the design choices made in specific games, 
with an eye to the broad culture around games as a whole. The in-
teractions among design elements of given games and the biases of 
those making and playing games are at the core of why videogame 

	
71	
A Toxic Culture
culture is the worst. As cultural problems, these issues must be ad-
dressed by better understanding the issues that are widely apparent 
in and around games.
Critiques of the culture surrounding video games are abundant, 
and many of them make the argument that the culture of games is 
different, worse than the culture around other media. Although the 
world is full of jerks and the internet is full of jerks, one can certainly 
make a strong argument that some of the jerkiest are found circulat-
ing around video games. As the gaming editor of Badass Digest An-
drew Todd observes:
The Video Gaming Internet can be a horrible place. Hiding behind 
infinite fake Twitter accounts and message-­board anonymity are 
some of the worst examples of humanity. The abuse gushes forth 
in such torrents that reporting tweets becomes almost useless. You 
block or report one anonymous, anime-­avatared account, and then 
fifteen more take its place: fifteen more slackly flapping mouth-
pieces for cowardly, whining crybaby manchildren. (Because they 
are always, always men.) It’s so bad that hacker groups like Lizard 
Square have gone so far as to commit real, actual acts of terror-
ism, like calling in bomb threats to a plane carrying Sony Online 
Entertainment chief John Smedly. The internet lit up with shock 
that gamers had sunk to the level of real, actual terrorism, but the 
sad truth of the matter is that terrorism had been going on for 
far longer. Terrorism is terrorism regardless of whether the target 
is a nation, an institution, a vehicle or an individual. . . . This is a 
problem endemic to gaming, and everyone is part of that problem. 
There is a culture of harassment, abuse, and bigotry in the rotten 
core of multiplayer gaming; it has been allowed or even encour-
aged to fester by developers, and it has created some of the most 
toxic individuals on the internet.20
This quote is excerpted at length because it does a sound job of illus-
trating the breadth and depth of activity that characterizes online dis-
cussions about video games. From bomb threats inspired by feelings 
about video games to a culture that makes multiplayer gaming inhos-
pitable, the author voices some of the harassment he faces because he 
writes about video games online. Todd presents a case for how bad 

A Toxic Culture	
72
things have become, and he points out that this is a long-­standing 
issue specific to video games aided and abetted by those who play and 
develop them. There are many things that both enable and prop up 
hateful behavior, and there are plenty of blameworthy actors, but the 
common discourse and actions that have become a normal, routine 
part of the environment around video games is troubling.
A way to measure the depth of the problem is simply to look at the 
women who have been harassed for simply inhabiting a space within 
video games. Shortly after Anita Sarkeesian published an episode of 
the video series Tropes vs. Women in Games, she was forced out of her 
house because of specific, detailed threats against her and her family.21 
The game designer Zoë Quinn was the target of harassment after her 
ex published details about her personal life online because he could 
count “on the most reviled hubs of our community to live up to their 
sordid reputations.”22 Based on what she experienced firsthand, Quinn 
wrote that she was motivated “to continue trying to break down bar-
riers and disrupt the culture that enabled the abuse I’ve endured for 
the last two weeks from ever happening to anyone ever again.”23 The 
award-­winning game journalist Jenn Frank suffered such harassment 
after writing an article for The Guardian that she quit game journal-
ism.24 The game developer Brianna Wu spoke out against harassment 
in game culture and promptly received a number of terrifying threats, 
which caused her to flee her home and also precipitated her withdraw-
ing her company’s exhibition at a major industry conference.25 Beyond 
these highly visible cases, Wu argues that “if you are a woman working 
in the games industry, especially in a public way, you’re going to expe-
rience harassment,” and that women in games are subject to an “emo-
tional and even physical minefield they’re signing themselves up for” 
simply by being a part of a community surrounding video games.26 
Putting the blame on women and contending that they should simply 
toughen up is not a remotely viable answer; as one aspiring woman 
in the game industry puts it, “Having a thick skin beneath such mag-
nified attacks—­not criticism—­is nearly impossible when your entire 
being is being mangled.”27
One place to start detailing the culture surrounding video games is 
to examine game conventions as well as presentations by large game 
companies. One would think these would be places where people 
would be on their best behavior, as they know they are being watched 

	
73	
A Toxic Culture
and documented by the various reporters and bloggers present. How-
ever, examining what has actually happened at recent events is just one 
more way to recognize how bad things are. The single biggest videog-
ame industry event is the Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), which 
takes place in late spring and is a showcase for new developments in 
the industry and specific, notable games. E3 news routinely reaches 
outside the videogame community and into mainstream coverage of 
culture, which makes it a great place to locate disconnections between 
videogame culture and the broader society. At an E3 presentation for 
Microsoft’s Xbox One a man (a producer on the game) and a woman 
(a community manager) were brought out to demonstrate a fighting 
game called Killer Instinct. Unsurprisingly, the person who worked 
on building the game was more skilled at it than the person who did 
not.28 Choosing stereotypically coded gender roles was a problem, 
but it went further, as the producer said, “Just let it happen. It will 
be over soon,” to which a journalist added the unspoken conclusion: 
“You know, like a rape.”29 Since the presentation was at a major event, 
the press coverage reached well beyond game-­focused journalists and 
into the mainstream media. The NBC News account of the comment 
included the poignant statement, “We’re talking about a press con-
ference for a company that’s directly involved in the production of a 
sizeable portion of video games worldwide. The representations they 
incorporate into their advertising suggest the types of customers they 
think are worth seeking out.”30 E3 is far from the only conference 
with a troubled track record. In 2013, at the International Game De-
velopers Association party at the Game Developers Conference, one 
of the largest industry events for those who make games, was marked 
by what one journalist described as a mixed group of attendees, in-
cluding “industry leaders, industry hopefuls . . . and scantily clad fe-
male dancers,” that made “IGDA look more like a frat house than the 
voice of an industry. How very disappointing, IGDA.”31 The party 
occurred a day after the widely praised #1ReasonToBe panel, where 
women listed their reasons for being part of the industry and made 
suggestions about how to fix gender imbalances and increase diversity 
in video games.32 The good news of the panel was rapidly undercut 
by the party, which led to several IGDA officials resigning from their 
positions with the organization.33
The Penny Arcade Expo (PAX) presents more troubling cases for 

A Toxic Culture	
74
video games. Penny Arcade is one of the largest consumer-­driven web-
sites dedicated to video games, with a web comic and commentary that 
has positioned its two creators as leading tastemakers for discussing is-
sues from a gamer perspective. Unhappy with the conference options 
for game consumers, particularly E3, and its lack of focus on players, 
Penny Arcade launched its own conference in 2004; it has grown from 
the initial event in Seattle to add PAX East, PAX Dev, PAX Australia, 
and PAX South to the list of annual conferences. Penny Arcade is a key 
rallying point for gamers, offering a chance for ideologically similar 
people to gather both online and off. The first major issue surrounding 
Penny Arcade was the criticism its creators faced for releasing a comic 
strip that featured a rape joke. They then released additional comics 
making fun of their critics, eventually selling merchandise to cele-
brate their initial strip, which centered on a fictional character called 
a Dickwolf.34 In a self-­accounting of why one former PAX regular no 
longer considers attending, Rachel Edidin explains that when asked in 
a PAX question-­and-­answer session about what they learned from the 
incident, the cartoonist for the site, Mike Krahulik, contended that his 
regret three years after the Dickwolves comic was “pulling the Dick-
wolves merchandise from the Penny Arcade store—­merchandise that 
he had created as a ‘screw you’ to rape survivors who had the temer-
ity to complain about a comic strip. When the audience burst into 
applause, [Robert] Khoo nodded sagely and said that now they knew 
better; now they would just leave it [the Dickwolves merchandise in 
their online store] and not engage.”35 PAX has also seen trouble in its 
ranks of volunteers, called Enforcers; in a critique of PAX, Elizabeth 
Sampat writes that one Enforcer “was accused of sexually assaulting a 
woman using the Enforcer network as a way to get closer to her, and 
Penny Arcade covered it up and did not address it publicly. When 
asked, [cofounder] Mike [Krahulik] said he would not have done any-
thing differently, and that not releasing the name of the assaulter or 
the fact that the assault took place was the right call.”36 Conventions 
are a public face for the game industry. They are a place where prod-
ucts are promoted and networking connections are made. They are 
also a space in which there is constant policing of who “belongs,” as 
dominant norms are reinscribed to make women feel less welcome. 
This shapes game culture and becomes the terrain from which judg-
ments about merit will be made. These events are illustrations of the 

	
75	
A Toxic Culture
ground on which gaming’s meritocracy is based and offer a perspec-
tive on just how hard some categories of people have to fight just to 
reach other people’s starting line.
Culture also reaches directly into the play and design of games. 
High-­level eSports, from Counter-­Strike to fighting games, demon-
strate how players actively participate in policing game culture. eS-
ports come in a variety of forms and are typically tied to playing a 
video game as a competitive activity. A number of scholars have in-
vestigated competitive gaming from a variety of different perspec-
tives, with particularly good work being done by T. L. Taylor, Emma 
Witkowski, and Nicholas T. Taylor.37 eSports often appropriate tropes 
from other sporting competitions—­for instance, the use of trash talk 
suffuses much of the culture. Although different games typically have 
norms that are specific to their competition—­real-­time strategy and 
fighting games draw from different communities of players, much 
like soccer and baseball do—­eSports typically present themselves as 
meritocratic spaces open to the best players on the basis of their skill. 
However, competitions and the discourse surrounding them are often 
noxious places to those who are not male and white. In an analysis 
of the fighting game community, Todd Harper found that, to his dis-
may, “players who object to this treatment [harassing speech] aren’t 
really true players, and that if they were true players they would un-
derstand that these are ‘just jokes’ that are inherently and inseparably 
part of the game.”38 Harper extends his analysis to address the com-
munity’s perception that the women who play are often lesser players 
than men and benefit from a different kind of standard, which often 
includes hedges like “she’s good for a girl.” Similar instances of ha-
rassment often occur to prominent black eSports players as well, with 
racist sentiment expressed when they compete in prominent games or 
win tournaments.39 Visible players who do not fit the norms of what a 
frequently sexist and racist audience expects are subjected to harass-
ment they must overcome in order to participate on the same terms 
as those gifted a far less hostile starting position. One of the clearest 
places in which to see toxicity at the root of competitive games is the 
case of Cross Assault.
Cross Assault was a promotional vehicle for a new Capcom fight-
ing game, Street Fighter X Tekken, which combined characters from 
two leading fighting game series, Street Fighter and Tekken. Pulling 

A Toxic Culture	
76
top fighting gamers into teams and placing them into a tournament, 
the event featured prizes, promotion by IGN, and broadcasting by 
Twitch.tv. Set up as a reality show produced by Capcom, IGN billed 
the event as “a social experiment with fighting game players as much as 
it was a fighting game competition[;] Cross Assault mixed up the stan-
dard competitive format and put players in new and unique situations, 
with unprecedented amounts of stress.”40 The competition’s context 
was shaped largely by the fact that the game was new, so players were 
learning strategies and approaches on the fly, rather than using well-­
practiced techniques developed over years. Uniting the teams were 
experts who served in roles akin to coaches; each roster comprised 
four men and one woman who were particularly well-­known in the 
fighting game community.41 The official IGN recap states that “it was 
the responsibility of the coaches to strategize on their team’s behalf, 
and each took a drastically different approach on how to manage their 
team.”42 By day 5 of the competition, the leader of Team Tekken, Aris 
Bakhtanians, had engaged in sustained harassment of the female player 
on his team, Miranda Pakozdi. From asking her bra size to directing 
the webcam to parts of her anatomy to smelling her as part of a dis-
play of dominance on camera, Bakhtanians harassed Pakozdi to the 
point that she refused to actively fight in her final matches, effectively 
throwing the games to her opponents. When asked about the harass-
ing behavior by Twitch.tv community manager Jared Rea, Bakhtani-
ans contended that sexual harassment was a fundamental part of the 
fighting game community, that “they’re one and the same thing. This 
is a community that’s, you know, 15 or 20 years old, and the sexual 
harassment is part of a culture, and if you remove that [sexual harass-
ment] from the fighting game community, it’s not the fighting game 
community.”43 Bakhtanians then continued into an analogy where he 
argued that taking the sexual harassment out of fighting games would 
be like trying to get the National Basketball Association to play with 
an American football rather than a basketball; in Bakhtanians’s mind, 
advocating to remove sexual harassment from fighting games is “ethi-
cally wrong.”44 Additional reporting indicated that the “team leader sat 
at the center of a number of comments made during livestreams that 
made her [Pakozdi] feel uncomfortable, and he had refused to show 
any concern when the issue was brought up.”45 Months after the inci-
dent, the story of harassment at Cross Assault led to a New York Times 
article about harassment of women in videogame culture.46

	
77	
A Toxic Culture
The events of Cross Assault are a single case that is years old at 
the time of this writing. However, they are a near perfect distillation 
of many of the problems with game culture and representative of the 
experience and harassment that many of those playing games have 
to face. As a small example of this, Todd Harper’s book transitions 
from a discussion of Cross Assault into Maddy Myers’s experience 
with harassment while playing video games in her local community.47 
This event and other cases of harassment often are about policing the 
boundaries of an imagined community, fueled by a strong desire to re-
tain what already exists. Typically, the cases are carefully swaddled in 
appeals to skill, to being good enough, and to working hard enough 
to make it. All these tropes are at the center of any sort of merito-
cratic appeal. If the harassed were tough enough to take it, then they 
would be able to reap the rewards of success. Systemic harassment sets 
the terms on which players engage, giving stark advantage to those 
who are not targeted and retaining power for those who have already 
climbed the ladder. This level of harassment also short-­circuits any 
appeal to skill, as an initial test for some is putting up with jerks, not 
playing video games. These problems are carefully rooted in the mer-
itocratic discourse of video games and illustrate how meritocracy in 
games is a sham because it cannot account for context. Another case 
can clearly show how this way of conceiving of video games as skill-­
based enterprises reaches deeply into game design.
Cooperative play is often a tricky thing for video games to master, 
as players who are differentially skilled are often frustrated by their 
partner’s lack of or excess of ability. As many people have difficulty 
finding a person perfectly matched for them, some games, particularly 
those made by Nintendo, come with settings or adjustments that help 
to make the partnership or competition between players more pleasur-
able. Gearbox Software sought to do this by adding a fifth character, 
the Mechromancer, to its game Borderlands 2. One of the skill trees 
for the character was a set of abilities that softened the learning curve 
for the game, giving poor shots a better chance to hit enemies and 
otherwise improving the play of people who were learning the game. 
Officially dubbed “Best Friends Forever” as a skill tree, the feature was 
referred to as “girlfriend mode” in an interview by the lead designer 
of the game, John Hemingway.48 Quickly denounced as a personal 
anecdote by the president of Gearbox, the original story included the 
rationale behind the feature, where the lead designer states, “The de-

A Toxic Culture	
78
sign team was looking at the concept art and thought, you know what, 
this is actually the cutest character we’ve ever had. I want to make, for 
the lack of a better term, the girlfriend skill tree. This is, I love Bor-
derlands and I want to share it with someone, but they suck at first-­
person shooters. Can we make a skill tree that actually allows them to 
understand the game and to play the game?”49 Commentary about the 
feature quickly sprang up after the story, with sharp analysis focusing 
on the flip use of the term “girlfriend mode” and the casual sexism it 
conveyed. A feature that was designed to get more new people play-
ing a game ran the risk of alienating them through the sexism lurk-
ing behind it. As one essay argued, “Their use of the term [girlfriend 
mode] should be treated as a symptom and not a cause—­and a reason 
for us to ask bigger questions and tackle sexism on a larger scale.”50 
For another, the core contention was about the fact that “girlfriend 
mode” rolled off the tongue quite easily, which would not likely be the 
case for “boyfriend mode,” and that “people simply don’t think about 
women that much in the triple-­A game industry, and when they do, 
it’s often as an afterthought, as we see here.”51 There was also a side 
of the discussion that contended that attacking a designer for uttering 
the phrase “girlfriend mode” was political correctness run amuck and 
stood to create a chilling effect whereby developers would feel less 
free to talk with the press.52 After about a month of reflection Leigh 
Alexander wrote that she delayed her essay about the issue for two 
reasons: she doesn’t like that “as a woman writer on games, . . . I am 
conscripted to act as an authority on every gender-­oriented debate,” 
and “because I privately felt it was a case of some problematic wording 
of an otherwise-­good idea.”53 The additional time also gave Alexan-
der a chance to cite a marketing survey that showed how calling the 
feature “girlfriend mode” actually may increase sales and attention.
For my purposes, there are two key issues at stake in this contro-
versy. First, the whole intent of the design feature was to upset the tra-
ditional meritocratic design of games and give newer players a chance 
to play with their more practiced compatriots. For several of the writ-
ers covering this game, this innovation was the key, exciting takeaway: 
a company structuring a game in a manner that subverts the tradi-
tional meritocratic order. Second, women are assumed to be of lesser 
skill by default. Although many claims were made about tremendously 
talented women game players, the informal title of the feature makes 

	
79	
A Toxic Culture
a certain set of assumptions about how men and women play games. 
The inferential leap about the feature is that those who are going to 
need it are more likely to be interested in the game’s cutest character, 
as the Mechromancer was clearly designed to be, and that women are 
far more likely than men to be in a position to need to learn how to 
play a first-­person shooter. A feature like Best Friends Forever mode 
has the potential to change meritocratic norms in games by altering 
the terms on which players interact, but its presentation with such po-
larizing terms offers a vantage point to see the bias threaded through-
out game culture.
Although issues of sexual harassment and sex-­based discrimination 
have been covered to some degree in the gaming press and academic 
literature, issues surrounding assumptions about race are present, but 
far less attention has been paid to them. However, what is there pro-
vides a complementary perspective on the problems inherent within 
game culture. Gamers against Bigotry, founded in 2012, asks game 
players to sign a pledge acknowledging that they “contribute to an in-
credibly diverse social network of gamers around the world, and that 
[their] actions have the ability to impact others,” and requests they 
not use bigoted language, including slurs “based on race, ethnicity, 
gender, religion, sexual orientation, and disability.”54 Within a week 
of launch the site was defaced with racial slurs and eventually brought 
down entirely; shortly thereafter, the site’s database of pledges was 
erased.55 Even a basic, nonbinding effort like signing a pledge against 
hate speech is a target for those who seek to retain a toxic videogame 
community. Organizing for a more harmonious, less spiteful environ-
ment is likely to incur the wrath of those who benefit from the current 
order or at least do not see a problem with it.
Academic analyses about race and ethnicity in video games have 
also found a deep set of problems.56 Playable avatars of color are found 
almost exclusively in sports games (which have the veneer of repre-
senting real life) and fighting games.57 The handful of representations 
of minority characters in games like Grand Theft Auto are likely to 
rationalize fears about people of color and how they live and/or ex-
oticize the characters as others in an effort to rationalize and excuse 
the graphic narrative of the game, which is likely quite foreign to the 
average player’s life.58 In online, interactive play, Kishonna Gray has 
found that minority gamers face substantial amounts of hate speech 

A Toxic Culture	
80
based on the way they sound, much like women are harassed based 
on the simple act of speaking aloud in an online game.59 Being found 
out as something other than a straight, white male in a videogame 
community is likely an invitation to harassment and derision, a situa-
tion for which a meritocratic order cannot account. These processes 
are inextricably tied to masculinity and, as Derek Burrill argues, link 
to how video games have expanded boyhood, offering a safe space 
“to engage in violent and aggressive play without the threat of real 
bodily injury found in sports and other real-­world activities and con-
flicts.”60 Technology and class have altered what masculinity means 
over time, and R. W. Connell argues that masculinity is a social pro-
cess with historical and cultural contexts. This process can be seen in 
computing and gaming, as working with a keyboard has been trans-
formed from secretarial work that should be done by women into a 
techno-­cultural geek masculinity dominated by middle-­ and upper-­
class white men.61 For spaces of play to be safe, one must fit proper 
expectations of the digital boy, which are tied to being white, male, 
and of means. Perhaps the most poignant recent example of the per-
ils of being something other than a white male in game culture is the 
movement dubbed GamerGate.
GamerGate
There are many essays written about the beginnings of GamerGate 
and how it originated, but the earliest moments of the movement can 
be traced to the initial reaction to Anita Sarkeesian’s efforts to Kick-
start her video series.62 With toxic energy waxing and waning over 
the two years since Sarkeesian’s public funding request, Zoë Quinn’s 
release of Depression Quest led to a brief spark of venom as a por-
tion of the game community sought to get the game removed from 
cloud-gaming platform Steam’s Greenlight program.63 The game, a 
text-­based adventure about what it is like to live with depression, was 
distributed for free, with any donations going to the National Suicide 
Prevention Lifeline. The game was pulled from and then put back on 
Greenlight and eventually made it onto the Steam platform, which 
ensured wide availability, after which it seemed as if the ire was dying 
down. But then Eron Gjoni, an ex-­boyfriend of Quinn’s, posted a nine-­
thousand-­word screed about their relationship and how it ended, and 

	
81	
A Toxic Culture
accused her of sleeping with a game journalist to get positive cover-
age for her game.
Gjoni’s post had been deleted from forums like Something Awful 
and Penny Arcade but found traction on 4Chan, which adapted the 
message into a story about “an indie game developer who used sex to 
get ahead professionally.”64 Quinn responded that personal matters 
were personal and should not be discussed as news, the Kotaku editor-­
in-­chief investigated and cleared the journalist of any wrongdoing, and 
things seemed like they might die down.65 However, when Sarkee-
sian posted her latest episode of Tropes vs. Women everything fired up 
again, and Sarkeesian was driven out of her home because of death 
threats. Two days later, the actor Adam Baldwin coined #GamerGate 
and the hashtag took off. Eventually, three women fled their homes be-
cause of death threats and several others, including the award-­winning 
freelance journalist Jenn Frank, pledged to quit writing about games 
because of unyielding harassment. Twitter analysis showed how per-
nicious the commentary was, and Quinn infiltrated the 4Chan mes-
sage board that was organizing the harassment and posted the chat 
logs.66 Quinn eventually wrote a piece titled “5 Things I Learned as 
the Internet’s Most Hated Person” for Cracked, who “were bombarded 
with demands we cover something called the ‘GamerGate Scandal’” 
and deemed it “an Internet harassment campaign against a random 
indie game developer who, like many such targets, was a female and 
feminist.”67 Far more people not mentioned in this brief recap were 
attacked and harassed as part of GamerGate, including academics like 
Katherine Cross, Adrienne Shaw, and Mia Consalvo. The movement is 
interesting for a number of reasons, but perhaps most notable for this 
work is how much it shows the blind spots of segments of videogame 
culture and how the events represent video games in broader society.
One crucial element of GamerGate is that it is a decentralized, 
largely unorganized movement. Surely there were pockets of people 
working together with similar interests, but one of the notable points 
of criticism was the lack of a clear agenda. Each individual seemed to 
have his or her own personal mission of change, which enabled all 
participants to disavow whatever they found displeasing and made 
discussing issues with proponents of the movement frustrating, as 
talking with one person had no bearing on the next. Ostensibly, the 
most charitable read of the movement was that it was about concerns 

A Toxic Culture	
82
surrounding journalistic ethics and corruption. However, for those on 
the outside, Frank Lantz’s experience was common: “I have not been 
able to find a single explanation of a coherent GamerGate position. It 
remains completely unclear what is being called for or denounced. As 
far as I can tell there are no useful ideas with which to engage here—­
only an inarticulate mess of confused feelings, uninformed opinions, 
and second- ­and third-­order meta-­arguments.”68 Or, more simply, in 
the words of Film Crit Hulk, “the end result is that you can’t even 
get to the nugget of disagreement on the world view. there is no 
world view. there is only the attack and the response.”69 Find-
ing common ground among GamerGaters ceased to be practical, but 
there were a couple of themes in the discourse that are largely indic-
ative of what was going on: concerns about a lack of control and the 
harassment of women.
The most frequently cited touch point for GamerGaters was the 
insistence that a key part of their movement was about journalism 
ethics.70 The most constructive read of the group is as a consumer 
boycott of people concerned about journalistic coverage that insulted 
their target audience instead of providing objective coverage of rele-
vant news.71 The most common flashpoint in this regard was a flurry of 
articles that appeared shortly after the #GamerGate hashtag was born 
that decried the death of the gamer. The two most widely circulated 
and referenced essays were those by Leigh Alexander and Dan Gold-
ing.72 The argument about the end of gamers had three key claims. 
First, video games were reaching a broader audience than ever before 
and, as such, game publishers need not focus on the classic gamer ste-
reotypes as their primary audience. This argument largely followed in 
a tradition of cultural criticism that proclaimed the death of the author 
or a variety of other subject positions, and was backed up by data that 
clearly indicate the audience of videogame players is far more diverse a 
group than the white males of means who match the typical stereotype 
of a group of gamers.73 Second, the term “gamer” was at one point a 
key reclamation of space that reframed people away from being a nerd 
or some other insulting label into something more positive. However 
useful “gamer” had been, all progress was now being compromised by 
fractures in the community that led to some subsets of people advo-
cating against and silencing others. This line of thought is akin to lov-
ing an idea so much that you smother it, promoting a gamer-­above-­all 

	
83	
A Toxic Culture
identity so vigorously that the very idea of a “gamer” is conflated with 
“jerk.”74 Finally, Casey Johnston, among others, argued that the hostil-
ity shown toward women engaging in cultural criticism demonstrated 
that the label “gamer” was becoming irretrievable, as each silenced and 
harassed woman “advances the goals of the most poisonous ‘gamers,’ 
while regressing everything else.”75 For those who self-­identified as 
gamers these articles were likely hard to read, as they questioned a 
thing that was core to who gamers were and wanted to be. That this 
tumult happens around video games is one element that makes them 
a different kind of media form, as there are people who care about 
identifying as a gamer so deeply that they can get lost in something 
like GamerGate. It is hard to imagine something happening on such a 
wide, sustained scale in many other communities of media enthusiasts 
(e.g., those passionate about literature, film, or music).76
In the wake of these articles and as the number of posts behind 
GamerGate grew, supporters of the movement launched Operation 
Disrespectful Nod, which targeted advertisers and outlets that pub-
lished what they deemed anti-­gamer articles. There were rallying cries 
for journalists to be fired and for companies to cease their affiliation 
with certain publications. Intel was the first to cave, prematurely ter-
minating an advertising campaign with Gamasutra, the publisher of 
Alexander’s article.77 Intel later released a statement explaining that 
it was not seeking to take sides in the matter and that it valued diver-
sity as a company; later it established a $300 million fund to advance 
diversity in the tech industry.78 Adobe was targeted after a flurry of 
tweets by a Gawker writer, and the company asked that its logo be re-
moved from a page on the site.79 Adobe later clarified that it wished to 
take a stance against bullying and that it was “not and [has] never been 
aligned with Gamergate.”80 GamerGate claimed victory in both cases, 
but these were also points where additional attention was brought to 
the movement and how its members were choosing to conduct their 
business. Max Read of Gawker chose to sum up the events of Disre-
spectful Nod as a story about how the blog got “rolled by the dishon-
est fascists of Gamergate.”81
Beyond focusing on those in the videogame industry, Gamer-
Gate also targeted academics, largely tied to a session at the Digital 
Games Research Association (DiGRA) conference in 2014. In a fish-
bowl panel titled “The Playful Is Political,” game researchers were 

A Toxic Culture	
84
brought into conversation about issues surrounding diversity, repre-
sentation, and video games. Notes were communally taken on a Goo-
gle Doc set up by the organizers, Shira Chess and Adrienne Shaw.82 
As GamerGate was roiling through the internet, GamerGaters found 
a link Shaw had posted on Twitter to the Google Doc, which would 
subsequently be defaced and used as the origin point of a campaign 
to attempt to discredit an academic organization and its members.83 
Ranging from theories of a covert connection to the United States de-
fense-department agency DARPA to decrying members of the board 
as feminists, GamerGaters rallied against academics who allegedly set 
out to censor their favorite games. Primarily focusing on women ac-
ademics, DiGRA president Mia Consalvo, organizer Adrienne Shaw, 
and scholars Katherine Cross and Torill Mortensen, among others, 
were harassed and/or doxxed.84 Members of GamerGate set out on 
Operation Digging DiGRA in an effort to “fact-­check” academic es-
says in the DiGRA Online Library, which led conference organizer 
Jose Zagal to note that this was one of the first times a substantial por-
tion of academic research had “come under [broad public] question, 
scrutiny, and comment.”85 Chess and Shaw argued that a key point 
of divergence in having non­academics review structures that are part 
of academe is that “academia simply does not make sense from the 
outside. More than that it is perceived as threatening.”86 Like many 
cultural products, academia comes with titles and rituals, obscure prac-
tices and judgments that may seem invisible for those in the system 
yet are inscrutable for those outside it. Within academia, those who 
choose to focus on issues of diversity, difference, and issues affecting 
marginalized groups have always had to walk a harder road than those 
who study less radical topics.87 GamerGate’s move to address academia 
is a chance to see the connections that run throughout the whole of 
the culture surrounding video games, as well as a notable point that 
women were overwhelmingly more likely to be harassed than men 
and that the communities and cultures surrounding games reach far 
beyond their initial platforms.88
Gamers rallying under the banner of GamerGate were effectively 
a conservative force within games. As Adrienne Shaw argues, the label 
“gamer” is fundamentally consumerist, as it is defining a group of peo-
ple by their media consumption habits.89 In seeking to limit the kinds 
of games that should be published and how those games should be 

	
85	
A Toxic Culture
discussed, the movement sought to reframe video games and those 
who played them in a particular way. The impact on videogame cul-
ture and its relationship to meritocracy can be best seen in the dif-
ferential treatment of women and in the reception of GamerGate in 
the mainstream media.
Plenty of disturbing things happened within the context of the 
movement, which had the result of scaring every woman in the game 
industry, and any of a number of different situations could be isolated 
and analyzed.90 However, I think there are two particularly illustrative 
moments that show how deeply the problems in game culture run. It 
would be easy to pick the instances of people being run out of their 
homes or opting out of the industry in response to harassment, but 
I would hope anyone reading this book would reject those things as 
obviously terrible. Looking more deeply at what could initially seem 
to be small issues makes it possible to see just how slanted and insidi-
ous the bias in harassment can be. First, one of the cofounders of the 
gaming site Kongregate, Emily Greer, posted about the harassment 
she has received for her participation in the game industry. Prompted 
by GamerGate to reflect on the difference between messages sent to 
her and her brother, she wrote that she had assumed the harassment 
she received was “normal for a co-­founder of a game site” and was 
surprised to hear that her brother and fellow cofounder did not have 
the same experience. Counting up their messages, she found that she 
receives about four times as much harassment as her male sibling.91 
Greer viewed her experience as normal, typical, just the way things 
were. However, that kind of belief is precisely what ensures differen-
tial access to games and subverts any hope for an actual meritocratic 
order within them, as it guarantees structural inequality for some. 
Greer’s experience is different from her brother’s—­it is harder, which 
is not an unusual position for many people who are not white, male, 
and straight in videogame culture, as they are judged by the inter-
sections of many different factors that have nothing to do with their 
skill plus their effort. Greer has been successful and achieved status 
as a cofounder, but the sexism she faced made her journey more diffi-
cult than her brother’s. In a meritocracy, structural obstacles like this 
should not exist, as they interfere with proper assessments of merit by 
denying equal opportunity of starting positions. Unfortunately, situa-
tions like this are all too common.

A Toxic Culture	
86
A second test of difference in a similar circumstance directly re-
lated to GamerGate is the response to Chris Kluwe and Felicia Day. 
Kluwe, a self-­proclaimed gamer and former punter in the National 
Football League, wrote a scathing piece about GamerGate with fas-
cinating use of profanity and name-­calling, and then conducted an 
“Ask Me Anything” on reddit targeted at proponents of GamerGate.92 
Felicia Day, an actor and frequent media personality within the vid-
eogame community, wrote a piece about how GamerGate scared her 
and how she had remained silent on the issue due to concerns about 
“self-­protection and fear.”93 Day’s piece was far more sympathetic 
and worlds less offensive than Kluwe’s. Nonetheless, Day was imme-
diately doxxed in the comments, as “Gaimer8” published her address 
and e-­mail, yet nothing of a similar magnitude happened to Kluwe.94 
Kluwe subsequently noted that the reason no one had come after him 
was evidence of a societal misogyny, and that “until we get to the root 
causes of it, similar things are just going to happen over and over in 
different arenas.”95 Day and Kluwe received different treatment be-
cause one conforms to certain aspects of what is expected and one does 
not. Although sexism is not unique to gaming, the way external media 
covered GamerGate further illustrates what videogame culture is like.
The mainstream media reception of GamerGate only occurred 
after events had been roiling in the videogame community for weeks. 
There are two key elements to consider in the reaction: the tone of 
the pieces and whom the media targeted as experts to either quote 
or to have write editorials. The New York Times came out against 
GamerGate, arguing that the movement “made it impossible to over-
look an ugly truth about the culture that surrounds” video games, and 
subsequently turned to Anita Sarkeesian for an editorial that argued 
“the term ‘gamer’ is no longer useful as an identity because games 
are for everyone.”96 Vox noted that “#GamerGate’s most prominent 
targets are all women,” Newsweek analyzed the discussion to argue 
that women were harassed more than men, Time had Leigh Alexan-
der write an essay, CNN and the Washington Post went to Brianna 
Wu, and Zoë Quinn was the subject of an extended interview for the 
BBC.97 Perhaps the harshest reception for GamerGaters was from 
Stephen Colbert, who used an episode of his late-­night talk show The 
Colbert Report to criticize GamerGate and then turned to Anita Sar-
keesian for an interview.98 In the wake of the Colbert interview, one 

	
87	
A Toxic Culture
journalist summed up the situation as follows: “Gamergate died ironi-
cally from what it wanted most: mainstream exposure.”99 Attention to 
GamerGate may have reached its mass-media peak with the airing of 
an episode of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit that dramatized “a 
virtual carbon copy of [GamerGate’s] darker fantasies.”100 By gaining 
attention, the ideas and actions of GamerGate were exposed to a dif-
ferent kind of audience, and people less intimately tied to the videog-
ame community had a difficult time understanding what was going 
on. I know I found the events hard to explain to anyone who was not 
immersed in it; however, in addition to widespread social problems 
with misogyny and sexism, one of the best explanations for what was 
happening was a desperate effort to hold on to meritocratic norms in 
video games.
The worst part was that the additional exposure did not kill 
GamerGate: the movement just became more concentrated and, in 
many ways, more extreme. GamerGate “is not over, and some of the 
wounds it opened . . . are as fresh as ever.”101 Reflecting on what will 
come out of GamerGate, Natalie Zina Walschots contends that it will 
“take years to sort out the impact on the industry, on the commu-
nity, on the way games are made and played. Years before we figure 
out what game journalism can possibly look like in a post-­Gamergate 
world. Years before we can even begin to get a grip on the personal 
trauma suffered by so many after such a massive campaign of ha-
rassment and violence. And before any of that work can be done, 
Gamergate has to end first. It’s an inevitable victory, perhaps, but one 
that’s going to leave deep, presently unfathomable scars.”102 Summa-
ries of the GamerGate movement dominated end-­of-­year reflections 
in 2014; as an example, Ben Kuchera wrote that “GamerGate’s lasting 
legacy will likely be the fact that they’ve made harassment of women 
in the video game industry impossible to ignore,” and that “it’s be-
come a completely insular network of paranoid, reactionary gamers 
who just want things to go back to the way things were, before they 
had to exist in a world where women played games and outlets wrote 
about more than just ‘fun factor.’”103 GamerGate also managed to be-
come NeoGAF’s Fail of the Year and The Vine’s biggest nerd story of 
2014, and was named in the Electronic Frontier Foundation’s state-
ment about the challenge of online harassment.104 Legal implications 
also began to surface, with women harassed by GamerGate speaking 

A Toxic Culture	
88
in front of Congress, members of Congress calling for prosecution 
in cases of online harassment, the United States Department of Jus-
tice announcing an intent to pursue cases of online harassment, and 
frequent GamerGate target Brianna Wu publishing essays calling for 
involvement by the FBI and prosecutors representing districts from 
which she has received death threats.105 GamerGate is unlikely to end 
quietly, and while it still simmers its targets will continue to feel the 
brunt of the harassment and rage, which ends up silencing many and, 
at the very least, guaranteeing unequal access to video games.
Contemporary society is riddled with sexism, and this is certainly 
part of the problem in GamerGate. However, videogame culture is 
particularly impacted because of the desperate effort of some to cling 
to the ideals of a meritocracy. Meritocracy in video games tells play-
ers that they are special, that they are uniquely gifted; if you were a 
gamer who defined a large part of yourself around video games, why 
wouldn’t you fight tooth and nail to hold on to that feeling? Meritoc-
racies generally function to insulate those who get ahead, a dynamic 
that occurs throughout society. Meritocracy amplifies the real-­world 
effects and harms of social biases. To enact the ideology in practice 
requires equal opportunity. Structural inequality undercuts its func-
tioning by confounding attempts to assess merit, while the preva-
lence of the ideology reassures the most successful that they earned 
their position because they are the most skilled and hardest working. 
Video games actualize meritocracy, as they teach players judging peo-
ple based on their relative merit is right, normal, and something that 
should be encouraged. As one Twitter user put it in the wake of Intel’s 
decision to pull advertising from Gamasutra, “I support meritocracy, I 
support equality, I support #gamergate, I support @intel.”106
GamerGate is about many things, but one crucial lesson it can 
teach concerns how meritocracies fall apart. In his disassembling of 
meritocracy, Christopher L. Hayes argues that one of the first casu-
alties of the ideology’s failings is a growing lack of faith in our insti-
tutions, “since people cannot bring themselves to disbelieve in the 
central premise of the American dream, they focus their ire and skep-
ticism instead on the broken institutions it has formed.”107 Game jour-
nalism is far from perfect, but it is arguably one of the most prominent 
institutions in video games. Short of critiquing the people who pro-

	
89	
A Toxic Culture
duce the games that gamers love, game journalism is the structure that 
shapes what gamers want, how they think, and what should be hap-
pening in the industry. Game journalism is a key component of game 
culture, and the academic study of games, targeted through attacks 
on DiGRA, is tied to prominent universities and key elements of in-
stitutional power. If Hayes is right, it is also reasonable to expect that 
these are the elements of videogame culture that will be vilified well 
before players question their skills or the overall role of meritocracy 
in videogame design.
Within the general critique of game journalism, a specific request 
of many GamerGaters was that reviews should be objective evalua-
tions of a game.108 Cultural criticism holds that an objective review is 
impossible, as merely describing features is imposing ideological val-
ues on a game review, but it is striking that to strive for objectivity in 
game reviews is consistent with a meritocratic position. A different way 
of describing this position would be to say that it is about evaluating 
games based on their merits and what they offer to players. An objec-
tive review would strip out context and subjective claims, building a 
foundation for equality of opportunity in reviewing, where all games 
are judged based on externally verifiable elements like their frame 
rates and length. In large part, the problem is not just that videogame 
culture, like our culture more broadly, is a white, straight, wealthy, 
male space, but that it is an especially meritocratic space. GamerGate 
is a preview of the kind of thing that happens when meritocracies fall 
apart, as those in relative positions of power scramble to hold on to 
what they have. GamerGate was also a forerunner of what happened 
in politics throughout the United States and United Kingdom in 2016, 
as Matt Lees wrote for The Guardian: “This hashtag was the canary 
in the coalmine, and we [broader society and the media] ignored it.”109 
We must stop ignoring moments like this, and deconstructing the 
meritocratic appeals in video games is a key part of disassembling 
a movement like GamerGate. Video games offer a particular route 
into understanding broader culture and, right now, that requires fo-
cusing on the underanalyzed aspects of those games and the culture 
surrounding them. Defining games and gamers in a specific manner 
rewards the investment that a certain subgroup of players has made 
over years. Seeing that cultural capital eroded is hard, making the 

A Toxic Culture	
90
status quo something worth desperately fighting for. Unfortunately, 
certain aspects of game design and production are a base from which 
these problems arise in the first place.
Moving Forward
Video games and game culture are symbol systems rife with implica-
tions and assumptions. Meaning swirls within games, the way they are 
played, and the discussion around them. Game culture is currently a 
toxic place that excludes and ridicules those who are presumed to not 
fit. Critique of what exists is not welcome, and dissent is frequently 
shut down in comments or campaigns to harass those who dare to 
speak out. Rhetorical analysis and critical thought about meritocracy 
offer a chance to examine what works, how it works, what it does, and 
what can be learned from it.
In the case of video games, the meritocratic order is borrowed 
from broad technological culture and most thoroughly applied in the 
case of digital games, where it forecloses reflection about how bro-
ken that assumed meritocracy is. Rather than acting as a test of skills, 
being good at games is about a complex assembly of sociotechnical 
factors that benefit certain people more than others. Being encouraged 
to play games, growing up with them, having the money and time to 
play them, and being born with the physical capabilities to excel all 
help give certain people structural advantages that outweigh individual 
skills or effort. Understanding how meritocracy pairs up with video 
games requires a deeper dive into meritocratic game design and mer-
itocratic game narratives, with a particular focus on how prominent 
both are and why that matters.

	
91
3
Coding Meritocracy
Norms of Game Design and Narrative
Video games can represent anything, a trait that can be used to 
put players into unfamiliar and challenging subject positions. Video 
games can also be seen as glorified rule systems, where fictional worlds 
are laid over obscure axioms and algorithms governed by a computer.1 
Much like any mode of communication, video games are part of a 
larger culture and rely on certain tropes that get recycled time and 
again in a way that makes them seem normal, natural, like doing things 
in a particular manner is simply “the way things are.” Though far from 
the only realm in which meritocratic appeals are used, in videogame 
culture meritocratic norms dominate communication and permeate 
both game design and game narratives.
Video games came into prominence alongside the coining and 
proliferation of the concept of a meritocracy. As Michael Young’s idea 
transformed from the basis for a satirical novel into a dominant phi-
losophy about structuring society, video games were invented and 
transformed into a primary pillar of contemporary entertainment and 
media consumption. In video games, meritocracy becomes an actual-
ized practice, and they are one of the few places where the ideology 
runs rampant, unchecked and celebrated while slipping into the back-
ground and becoming part of the perceived natural order.
Within video games, meritocratic norms appear in both game de-
sign and game narratives. Game mechanics and approaches are de-
signed to offload computational processes onto a computer, which 

Coding Meritocracy	
92
becomes a seemingly perfect, objective arbiter of skills in play. Vid-
eogame design typically revolves around providing a platform where 
luck is limited and talent is praised. This is a historically situated set 
of practices that are highly influenced by the technologies and com-
munities of people playing. However, from the arcade to the console 
to personal computers, video games have often focused on providing 
frameworks for players to develop and showcase their skills. In the 
arcade, players needed to keep winning to hold the machine, while 
contemporary console and PC games challenge players to battle oth-
ers online in a test of ability or to overcome challenging puzzles and 
boss fights in both single-­ and multiplayer games. Mobile games, es-
pecially those produced for iOS and Android, are a possible excep-
tion with the prominence of luck-­influenced card and casino games, 
but there are also of skill-­ and effort-­driven games released for mobile 
devices. Games are often balanced with an eye toward creating a level 
playing field—­one where multiple approaches are possible and, when 
we win, we praise our skill, but when we lose we blame poor game 
design or inferior teammates. Contemporary game design revolves 
around limiting risk and giving players what they already know they 
like, which means limiting the role of luck and building out ways for 
them to prove their merit.2 Beyond the way games work in game play, 
meritocracy is also furthered through game narratives. The story lines 
of many video games teach players that if they work hard enough, if 
they try long enough, if they are good enough, they will be victorious. 
These preconceptions—­central tenets of meritocracies—­are included 
in game after game after game. In addition, there are spaces in which 
design and narrative come together, like the nearly ubiquitous levels 
players can gain, as they give a quick view on where a player stands in 
a hierarchy and teach players to strive to be just a bit better. Beyond 
helping players quickly identify who merits the most, or least, atten-
tion, levels also craft a narrative structure in which we all start from 
the same place and we can all make it to the top. The systematic in-
tegration of leveling systems throughout games helps leveling as a 
process recede into the background, thereby making it hard to notice 
that leveling up is part of a widespread message that meritocracy is a 
default mode of the social organization in and around video games.
Understanding the history of meritocracy and rhetoric facilitates 
analysis of meritocratic design and narrative in two key areas. First, 

	
93	
Coding Meritocracy
rhetorical analysis is a way of seeing the impact of symbol systems 
and how they work to structure interactions among people. By re-
peating meritocratic elements over and over, video games normalize 
those kinds of appeals and make them seem natural. Thinking deeply 
about the structures of games, both how they are built and the sto-
ries they tell, articulates the terms on which players play games. The 
symbols we use structure the ways we think and how we play. Bet-
ter understanding those symbols can help us develop something new 
and different by disrupting what has been there. Second, by relying 
on meritocratic appeals, video games fall into the same traps widely 
discussed in analyses of meritocratic systems. Meritocratic systems 
ossify and become aristocratic, measuring inherited advantage rather 
than merit, while justifying their existence by teaching those at the 
top that they have earned their spot and those at the bottom that they 
deserve their lower status.3 Meritocracies quickly become mythical, as 
they seem like they are judging skill and effort, but they actually judge 
social situation, circumstance, good fortune, and starting points.4 Vid-
eogame culture has developed with merit placed as a key, praiseworthy 
element of play. Meritocracies cognitively capture those within them 
and stymie attempts to break away and build something new. Systems 
that reward those at the top are hard to disrupt precisely because the 
successful are getting seductive messages confirming the quality of 
their abilities and character. Splitting away from a reliance on mer-
itocracy and averting the crumbling demise that Young predicts for 
meritocratic systems requires explaining meritocratic game design and 
meritocratic game narratives.
Meritocratic Game Design
Games are artificial systems that could be designed in any of a broad 
number of ways, but most video games are designed around a con-
sistent set of expectations and approaches. Designing contemporary 
video games for consoles or PCs typically means focusing on balance, 
fairness, skill, and rewarding a talent or time investment over spending 
money to advance. Many of these things may seem innocuous at first 
thought or like a genuinely praiseworthy aspect of design, but further 
exploration demonstrates how they work in tandem to create a certain, 
specific way of thinking about symbol systems in games.

Coding Meritocracy	
94
In his book The Art of Failure Jesper Juul articulates that there 
are three different approaches to success or distributive fairness in 
games: skill, chance, and labor. Games of skill are meritocratic, where 
talent is clearly rewarded and the resulting distribution of players is 
rife with inequality because of differential levels of ability. For Juul, 
skill is “the least controversial of the three paths.” Chance, which is 
primarily about luck, “is the most controversial, mostly for its associa-
tion with gambling.”5 Finally, games of labor are relatively newer and 
generally tied to sustained effort over time. Often actions within these 
games are trivial, with a cost for failure; Juul cites FarmVille and World 
of Warcraft as examples to demonstrate how games of labor revolve 
around the ongoing effort, or grind, made by players. Two of these 
models of game design—­skill and labor—­port quite clearly onto mer-
itocratic systems. They are also the most common design approaches 
for video games. None of the games of chance listed by Juul are video 
games; instead, they are traditional gambling games, like roulette, or 
card and dice games, like solitaire and Yahtzee. All games are designed 
around some kind of fairness in approach, and mass-­market, nonmo-
bile video games have typically chosen to adhere to choices that most 
clearly represent a meritocratic balance in game design based on skill, 
effort, or a combination of the two.
“Balance” is a seemingly neutral term. All games and activities are 
balanced; it is simply a question of how. In most Western video games 
the kind of balance sought is actually one of equality in approach and 
potential outcome for similarly talented players, which ports directly 
on to the equality of opportunity expected in meritocratic systems. 
Western video games are typically designed in a manner where mul-
tiple factions or characters can fight things out and should be able 
to count on various approaches being relatively similar in potential 
power. Although there are occasionally rock, paper, scissors elements, 
where an approach is highly successful against one potential opponent 
yet highly vulnerable to another, multiplayer games are typically de-
signed to minimize variability among in-­game choices. Formal and 
informal rules are often developed and enforced to limit the role of 
certain outside agents, like a computer program that optimized play 
in Blizzard’s card game Hearthstone, which ceased development after 
the company asked the programmer to stop the project because of 
the threat to game play and balance.6 The program, which automated 

	
95	
Coding Meritocracy
and systematized decisions about which cards to play, eliminated the 
human element of choice, which Blizzard decided violated expecta-
tions of fair play. Competitive matchmaking typically works to pair 
up similarly skilled players—­and in the case of a game like FIFA, sim-
ilarly matched teams—­in a battle that should tend toward the most 
even playing field within the bounds of the game itself. Unlike con-
tests between older and younger siblings or between sports teams with 
radically different talent levels, videogame balance is an appeal to mer-
itocratic ideals. In trying to set the terms of engagement as balanced, 
these video games seek to create a framework within which skill is par-
amount and prior status or luck is minimized. Players and developers 
often work together to further norms around balanced play by devel-
oping phases in tournaments where particular characters (League of 
Legends, Street Fighter), teams (Madden NFL), or maps/stages (Super 
Smash Bros.) are banned or restricted from play. Meritocratic game 
design is predicated on creating environments that focus on skill (i.e., 
merit) to ensure that the most talented are most likely to win, which 
further advances the ability to ignore structural inequalities.
Balance in video games rarely stops with the initial release of a 
game, however. The advent of online play and the relative ease of up-
dating games means that most video games are in a constant state of 
flux, in which designers release a game, players play it, and then de-
signers rebalance the game to account for trends in the player base. 
Players and designers now frequently refer to “the meta” in video 
games ranging from card games like Hearthstone to character-­driven 
match-­three games like Marvel Puzzle Quest. Although not unique 
to video games, metagaming is a process of working out the rules 
of the game to find the optimal approach at any given time. Where 
video games differ from other types of games is in how quickly the 
game designers can adjust and adapt the rules of play to account for 
how players behave in practice. Supercell’s Clash Royale is a textbook 
example of this process. A mobile game that blends elements of col-
lectible card games and multiplayer online battle arenas, set in the 
universe originally developed for the smash hit game Clash of Clans, 
Clash Royale built regular game-play balancing into both the plan 
for the game and its business model. In Clash Royale players develop 
decks of eight cards and then use the characters, spells, and buildings 
on the cards in an effort to defeat their opponent by destroying op-

Coding Meritocracy	
96
position towers and defending their own. Cards can be leveled up to 
be more powerful and, like in a collectible card game, a better deck 
makes it easier to win. However, building on the balancing norms in-
herent to contemporary video games, Supercell regularly adjusts the 
power of each card based on player behavior. Cards that are not being 
used are made stronger and cards that are being used most often are 
made weaker. This then incentivizes players to continue to develop 
new cards to take advantage of the current state of the game, driving 
spending and attention across the entire group of cards, rather than 
just the subset of eight each player can use at a time. In my experience 
from playing the game and reading the forums, players rarely object to 
the process of balancing and even make suggestions about how cards 
should be adjusted in the next round of balancing. By appealing to a 
core norm of balance, Supercell has built a free-­to-­play model that 
fits nicely into broadly accepted practices in video games. Processes 
of rebalancing and the requisite agonizing over “nerfs,” which make 
something weaker, and “buffs,” which make something stronger, are 
further testament to a widespread dependence on balance in video 
games. Balance is not something that is inherent to video games; it 
is an iterative practice constantly reinscribed into them. The circular 
process of game balance is widely accepted, and players routinely ap-
peal to balance in order to get changes made in the games they play. 
Although this practice is far more common in multiplayer games than 
in single-­player ones, even single-­player games are occasionally rebal-
anced to either help players overcome particularly difficult moments 
or present a greater challenge if things are too easy.
This notion of balancing and rebalancing video games and the 
hyperfocus on sustaining and advancing a balanced mode of play 
is particular to video games, particularly competitive play in video 
games. Other games and sports may advance discussions about com-
petitive balance or means by which to match up players of similar skill, 
but balance is rarely as central to discussion as it is within videogame 
design. Video games without proper balance are criticized for being 
broken, for being less than games where skill wins out. This is often 
summed up in objections to free-­to-­play games that are monetized in a 
way that leads to complaints about how the game is pay-­to-­win, where 
success is determined more by the size of one’s wallet than one’s skill 
and effort at the game. It can also be seen in objections to cheap tac-

	
97	
Coding Meritocracy
tics, where players use a technically possible maneuver that the com-
munity finds objectionable. From the Clash Royale player building his 
or her deck around the mortar to the fighting game player who relies 
on characters that are commonly banned in tournament play to the 
sports gamer who insists on only using the most powerful teams, the 
online community of players typically expects others to behave in a 
manner that fits norms of fair play.7 Even cheating in video games is 
socially negotiated, with many players arguing that cheating is abhor-
rent in multiplayer games even if it may be acceptable in single-­player 
titles.8 Although this may seem like a basic, sensible kind of appeal 
to many of the people who play video games, it is a meaningful one 
and a key bias in videogame design and play. This particular notion 
of balance is also a perfect starting point for advancing a meritocratic 
agenda within video games, as balance is deployed to ensure that skill 
and effort win out.
There is a substantial hedge to the routine focus on balance in 
video games. Although many games, designed in many different coun-
tries, appeal to a meritocratic kind of balance, there are occasional ex-
ceptions. Two of the most prominent are the Mario Kart and Mario 
Party series of games. Both are designed and published by Nintendo 
for a variety of its game systems, targeted at wide audiences. Both 
games also have a decidedly different approach to balance, as they 
typically punish the most successful person and reward those who are 
struggling. The “best” player can often win these games, but to do so 
he or she will have to overcome substantial additional obstacles not 
presented to other players. Mario Kart is quite contentious among 
hardcore gamers, largely because of item boxes that generally reward 
players with an item of a quality inversely proportionate to their place 
in the race. Perhaps the most infamous is the “blue shell,” also known 
as the “spiny shell.” First appearing in Mario Kart 64, this targets the 
leader of the race to rapidly stop his or her progress and drop back in 
the pack. However, the blue shell is only given to those who are losing 
at the time they reach the box. Writing for Wired, Chris Kohler distills 
the meritocratic stance on the blue shell: “It is widely known that the 
worst, stupidest item in the Mario Kart series is the Blue Shell. When 
you launch it, it flies above the course, homing in on the racer in first 
place, then lands directly on top of them, causing them to explode 
and be slowed down considerably. This is no help to the person who 

Coding Meritocracy	
98
threw the shell since they are still in last place. This is a great help to 
the person in second place, as it allows them to get into first.”9 Much 
of Kohler’s objection centers on the idea that items like the blue shell 
enable players who are not the most skilled to punish those at the 
front of the race. One list of complaints about Mario Kart highlights 
the blue shell as the single most objectionable part of the game, ref-
erencing it as “socialism in action,” “evil,” and “what made Mario Kart 
Wii luck based.”10 However, Mario Kart is designed with a different 
approach to skill and merit. A prominent designer on the Mario Kart 
series, Hideki Konno, notes that he is routinely asked about a version 
of the game without items, but contends that the game is defined by 
them and the blue shell functions to keep everyone in the race until 
the end.11 Konno appeals to a different kind of balance, one based on 
keeping the game competitive and interesting for all, rather than on 
ensuring that the most meritorious player wins. Mario Party 8 has a 
similar feature, where Chump Charity is awarded to the player in last 
place as the game nears its end; the board is then filled with coins to 
maximize the importance of the end of the game, rather than what 
came before. Although the games have been quite successful, players 
complain with comments like the series relies too much “on luck, it 
sucks all the fun out of the experience,” and request a skill-­based mode 
where luck is minimized and the most talented player would win the 
game.12 In both cases, the typical meritocratic underpinnings of vid-
eogame balance are challenged, which is likely why Konno gets so 
many requests to produce a game mode without items. Similar dynam-
ics can be seen in Super Smash Bros., where the stages with the most 
variance and opportunity for luck to play a role are typically banned 
in competitive play.13 The negative reaction to Nintendo’s different 
form of balance is simply more evidence of how deeply meritocratic 
game design is woven into contemporary Western videogame culture.
The maniacal focus on balance feeds into several other norms of 
meritocratic videogame design. The first is that games are generally 
expected to be fair and that players will quickly decry those that are not 
fair as “cheap” or “abusive.” The fairness of games is typically judged 
against something akin to a reasonable person—­perhaps a reasonable 
gamer—­standard where the player making the argument judges rea-
sonableness based on his or her own abilities. These contentions of 
fairness rarely consider infrequent or lesser-­trained players, as fairness 

	
99	
Coding Meritocracy
needs only to be ensured for the game’s perceived target audience. Ef-
fectively, fairness is a subset of balance; balance is a prerequisite for a 
game to be fair. Fairness as a game-design trope feeds into the idea of 
meritocracy by setting a baseline expectation that the game does not 
discriminate against potential players. In fact, if the game is adjudged 
as fair, then failure is the responsibility of the player rather than the 
game. Fairness, when combined with balance, works to isolate and in-
dividualize gaming, placing the player in a position of responsibility 
to perform at a certain level. If players fail in a fair, balanced game, 
then it was because they have not demonstrated sufficient merit to 
warrant success.
Video games are often expected to reward skill. Unlike activities 
like reading or watching television or film to decode additional mean-
ings or story lines, meritocratic game design advances the idea that 
games should be tests of skill. Unlike in games that can be conquered 
through a sheer investment of time or repetitive tapping, players in 
“real” games have to show off their talents. Questionable games, like 
FarmVille, are ridiculed in efforts like Cow Clicker, where repeated 
simple actions are the only necessary and sufficient conditions for 
success. Skill in “proper” video games requires more than simple but-
ton mashing, as meritocratic game design encourages games to be 
built around timing, careful judgment, strategic decision making, and 
other techniques that can be put to the test against the computer or 
other players. Social and mobile games can often require skill or ef-
fort, but the kind of skills and effort in social and mobile games re-
ward traits that are not incentivized by contemporary console and PC 
games.14 Patience and planning are far more common on platforms 
other than consoles and PCs, and the balance between effort and skill 
typically places more focus on effort, while console and PC games 
emphasize fast-­twitch reflexes, hand–­eye coordination, and mastery 
of spatial geography. When it comes to consideration of merit, core 
video games not only require players to show merit but also to show 
socially approved kinds of merit, which often runs counter to what is 
found in mobile and social games. This kind of appeal anchors neatly 
into the notion that videogame players earn their successes, that vic-
tory in a game is proof of talent and skill, rather than a gift of pres-
ence or an inheritance of birthright. The idea that players earn their 
victories is a seductive appropriation of meritocratic norms, since it 

Coding Meritocracy	
100
valorizes players and gives them reason to savor their successes. Earn-
ing rewards through skilled play is at the center of game design, as 
players claim to seek proper challenges to overcome and designers 
advance a meritocratic conception of games through the repeated 
use of these tropes.
Finally, Western PC and console video games are expected to re-
ward talent and time investment—­or in meritocracy’s terms, effort—­
instead of money spent on the game. Somewhat different than design 
predicated on skill, designing in favor of talent and time further fo-
cuses game play on the individual and his or her relative abilities. It 
also creates a situation where it seems like anyone could be successful 
at video games if they were good enough and simply chose to invest 
enough time. These notions are central to meritocratic norms, as they 
focus on individuals and their efforts, not the larger system around 
them. This may feel like a good, reassuring thing, but it ignores how 
prior time, skill, and cultural investment helped put a player in a po-
sition to be successful. Previous time spent playing one video game 
rolls into the next one, as part of a knowledge scaffolding of everything 
from how to move in a 3-­D environment to how to use a controller 
or mouse–­keyboard setup to the intricacies of inventory management. 
All that work is easily erased and rapidly forgotten as it fades into the 
background for experienced players while building additional barri-
ers for anyone new to video games. By also adding in the expectation 
that players should not be able to pay their way forward, hurdles are 
erected for those who could pay to skip steps while meritocratic ex-
pectations are maintained. Free-­to-­play games only get a pass from 
these concerns when the advantages are largely cosmetic, as in League 
of Legends, rather than central to the game, as in games with energy 
timers or purchasable weapons. The fear of a player being able to buy 
progress is substantial enough that the monetization structure for Halo 
Online led one commenter to write, “So far this is like Halo from hell, 
where combat is just abysmally skewed towards players who are will-
ing to shell out cash for victory.”15 A system where players could buy 
their way ahead could be quickly dominated by those with deeper 
pockets, which is the central criticism of free-­to-­play games deemed 
pay-­to-­win. In the case of meritocratic game design, investing money 
is taboo, as it represents an external structural inequity; however, in-
vesting time to develop, hone, and deploy talent is expected, showing 

	
101	
Coding Meritocracy
how much work a player did to earn the accolades he or she accrues, 
even if those elements also carry structural biases with them.
Specific applications of meritocratic game design will be unpacked 
in the next chapter’s case studies, but two examples provide context 
for how video games are more dependent on meritocratic norms than 
the category of games more broadly is. In reflecting on playing a live-­
action game called StreetWars—­where players are given a dossier and 
tasked with shooting a target with a water gun while avoiding some-
one trying to do the same to them—­the noted videogames journalist 
Leigh Alexander writes, “That’s the thing about games. When luck is a 
factor, it’s just one within a generally-­predictable ecosystem. In a video 
game there are only so many things that your enemy can do. You can 
learn what those are. You can, through practice and repetition, gain 
complete control over an environment where there is only so much 
that can go wrong.”16 Video games typically exist in a space that is dif-
ferent from life outside them. Unlike the luck required to have things 
go right when people can act in unpredictable ways, video games are 
subject to a rule set that can be exhausted and memorized. The boss 
will always move in a certain pattern; opposing players are limited to 
a certain set of choices. The focus on this kind of predictability is spe-
cific to, and possibly unique to, video games. In an article about his 
frustration with the distance tracking in the augmented reality mobile 
game Pokémon Go, Stephen Totilo argues that video games comprise 
systems that can be understood, and that the point of playing them 
is to learn those rules and how to exploit flaws in them. He sums up 
his argument with the contention that “the logic of a well-­structured 
game promises the predictability that regular life doesn’t have. If we 
understand how a game works and input something into its system, 
we assume we’ll get a fair output. Players of Diablo know this as they 
kill enemies and pick up loot. Players of Candy Crush know this as 
they plot their moves. Players of Super Mario Bros. know this as they 
time their jumps. Know the system, then take advantage of it.”17 To-
tilo claims to address the general category of games, but he is really 
only addressing how many video games currently work. Designing 
video games in this manner is a choice reinforced by the community 
of designers and players that continue making and playing titles built 
around the general premise of a fair, predictable game. Systems with 
greater human interaction are subject to much more social interac-

Coding Meritocracy	
102
tion and can be far more unfair in their design, especially if they are 
based on the unpredictability of people, like Alexander’s example of 
StreetWars. Although culture binds us in other interactions, we could 
act radically differently than expected. The eventual lack of options 
in video games puts a particular focus on skill and practice while lim-
iting the role of luck as a design consideration, which feeds directly 
into meritocratic norms. Alexander continues, “The beauty in video 
games, in all designed interaction, is that they offer you the delusion 
of grandeur, the intoxicating misconception that all challenge in life 
is simply a matter of systems thinking . . . Video games will always 
protect us from the truth: how smart we are not.”18 Video games are 
typically designed to make players feel like they earned their victories, 
that it is to their own credit that they won. Video games are made to 
be conquered and, outside of competitive forms of video games where 
players are directly pitted against one another, players are generally 
supposed to win. Meritocratic game design creates a situation where 
players are led to believe they are attributable for their successes and 
discouraged from thinking about how the game is set up for them to 
win. Although these are comforting thoughts, they also set up terms 
and expectations that quickly turn sour when players do not encoun-
ter the success they have been taught to expect.
A second example of how the broader category of games parts ways 
from video games is in the case of collectible card games (CCGs) like 
Magic: The Gathering. In a collectible card game, the options and 
resources available to a player are dependent on the cards a player 
has available. In many cases, the cards one has are directly related to 
the amount of money a person has spent buying cards with which to 
play the game.19 As one player notes, “Typically, in the CCG world 
new cards are released as an entire set that you need to chase down 
by opening up packs of cards. In the world of Magic, this makes for 
an awkward couple of weeks as people without the time, money, and 
desire to track down all the new best cards are at a significant disad-
vantage.”20 In effect, the balance in the typical collectible card game 
runs counter to the balance in video games. Instead of focusing only 
on time investment or skill, these games add financial resources to the 
equation, as a lesser player with a better deck will more readily beat the 
most skilled player. Money may not be the best way to subvert mer-
itocracy, but the reliance on amassing a card collection makes CCGs 

	
103	
Coding Meritocracy
lean toward an aristocratic mode of order. Skill and time investment 
still factor in, but they are far less pure concerns, and it is widely un-
derstood that investing in the game increases one’s chances at success. 
Players who buy the occasional pack without focusing on trading or 
purchasing specific cards are effectively playing a more difficult, lim-
ited game than those who invest more money, time, and energy into 
the game.21 There are game types and specific tournaments that limit 
a player’s prior investment, from restricted modes to drafts that limit 
access to a certain set of cards, and games like Ascension and Domin-
ion are based around a common set of cards. However, the addition 
of financial resources into consideration upsets any sort of appeal to 
pure meritocratic expectation and changes the terms on which cer-
tain games are played, potentially opening the door for one example 
of how to subvert a consistent reliance on one approach to design-
ing games.
Meritocratic game design is a key thread throughout many con-
temporary video games that frames the culture that develops around 
them. The tropes advanced by this mode of approaching and design-
ing games leads to a reciprocal relationship between designers and 
players that continually reinforces the importance of merit in games. 
This process limits and constrains the kinds of appeals players and 
designers make while shaping our expectations about what makes 
something a good video game. Buying into the notion of meritocracy 
also sets the terms for our interaction with one another. We think 
about video games as a proper test of skill and effort, rather than as 
something more contingent. Meritocracy is even more thoroughly 
integrated into video games, however, as it is repeatedly used as a key 
narrative trope.
Meritocratic Game Narratives
It is easy to find meritocratic narrative elements in games. One of the 
most consistent examples is how games typically begin from a position 
where the central character is a weak, relatively powerless individual 
who then transforms over the course of the game into something quite 
different. The most recent version of the Tomb Raider franchise set out 
to tell Lara Croft’s origin story, putting her on an island, which gives 
a narrative setting for a series of events that, according to one reflec-

Coding Meritocracy	
104
tion on the game, takes “her from player surrogate to toughened sur-
vivor in a believable manner” in which “the player relationship with 
Lara shifts dynamically from start to end.”22 Part of the point of re-
booting the game was to alter perceptions about Lara Croft and to 
change her from a rich kid of great means into a vulnerable character 
with whom players were likely to identify. Effectively, this recast the 
Tomb Raider series from being centered around a person of privilege 
to a person who suffered and worked her way through great obstacles 
to become successful. According to one critic, rebooting Lara Croft 
and Tomb Raider was about “making Lara into a survivor, both inside 
the game and out on real-­world store shelves.”23 This redescription of 
Lara Croft fits clearly within a meritocratic narrative, where the player 
is given a chance to grow and develop alongside the character that 
represents them within the game. As the player becomes more pow-
erful, the character is also, reflecting processes carefully wrapped in a 
narrative where those who are talented and who work hard become 
powerful and successful through their own, individualized actions.
Meritocratic game narratives can be found in other, similar se-
ries, like Uncharted, in which Uncharted 3: Drake’s Deception tells of 
protagonist Nathan Drake’s origin. Although allegedly related to the 
famed explorer Francis Drake in the lore of the game, care is taken to 
highlight all the obstacles Nathan Drake overcame to get to a place of 
fame, fortune, and adventure. Released into the custody of the state 
after his mother committed suicide and his father gave him up, Drake 
is clearly cast as someone who overcame substantial obstacles through 
his craftiness and hard work. Nathan Drake started with nothing, but 
through the player’s efforts and the character’s canny repartee Drake 
ascends to capture relics all over the world and overcome both natural 
and supernatural enemies. His mentor, Victor “Sully” Sullivan, selects 
Drake because of his skills rather than because of his birthright, pres-
ently a true meritocratic tale. The tie to Francis Drake is even more in-
teresting considered in light of meritocracy and player identification. 
The clear implication of the narrative arc in the series is that if Nathan 
had easily proven his lineage under any sort of aristocratic norms he 
likely would not have become a highly capable explorer and adven-
turer, because he would have been gifted status instead of earning it 
through the player’s efforts. Nathan’s fight to prove his identity also 
gives him a much easier route to identification with players. Instead 

	
105	
Coding Meritocracy
of being a clear heir to an explorer’s legacy, Nathan is someone the 
world has aligned against, giving the player far more agency to help 
him establish his merit and reason to work on his behalf.24
There are also plenty of spaces in which to find tales of merit out-
side the realm of action games. The casual game sector also relies on 
meritocratic tropes, as players are cast as settlers of the wild west in 
Zynga’s The Pioneer Trail, while Glu Mobile’s pair of Stardom games 
and Kim Kardashian: Hollywood (KKH) are all about ascending to the 
status of superstar from nothing. These three games are based on a 
similar game engine and all possess the same basic narrative struc-
ture: players are tasked with becoming famous by climbing the celeb-
rity ladder from E-­list to A-­list and, ideally, holding the number-­one 
spot as the most famous person in their version of the game. Dif-
ferent editions of the games start the player in different positions: 
Stardom: Hollywood sets the player out as a “Starbeans” barista, and 
players in Kim Kardashian: Hollywood are working in clothing retail 
when they have a chance encounter with Kim Kardashian while clos-
ing the store. Seemingly chance encounters and substantial effort at 
tapping dots are wrapped in a narrative of straightforward success, as 
long as the player keeps showing up, working hard, and making good 
choices. Backsliding is all too easy if the game is ignored, as players 
are required to labor attentively to accrue four or five stars on mis-
sions to gain fans and climb the social ladder. Further, if players fail to 
check in daily, they will quickly find that many of their in-­game fans 
have left them, pushing them down the A-­list and back toward being 
forgotten. Stardom and KKH offer worlds where the path to fortune 
and fame are clear because there are no structural barriers to success. 
Anyone can make it, but one must prove oneself appropriately mer-
itorious to get there.
Building narratives around meritocratic character arcs gives play-
ers an easy access point by which to identify with the avatar that em-
bodies them in the game. Basing the story around skill and success is 
also a way of seducing the player, as we are shown just how much we 
matter. These story choices pair well with meritocratic game design, 
helping to solidify a position where video games can frequently be 
seen as empowerment fantasies, where players are allowed to do and 
become things we simply cannot imagine trying outside the frame-
work of a game. These narrative choices also establish worlds where 

Coding Meritocracy	
106
all players are asked to play by the same rules, which sorts the skilled 
from the unskilled. Rarely encouraging reflection about access issues 
or structural impediments, a focus on meritocracy in the narrative of 
the game partners with meritocratic game design to focus on the in-
dividuals playing games, on their skill, and on their responsibility to 
work harder and get better. The story is something all players experi-
ence, putting everyone in a similar position and on common ground so 
that we can be sorted out based on our relative ability in a seemingly 
sensible, balanced, and fair way. We must work to overcome the ob-
stacles in front of us in order to reach the end of the game or the top 
of the ladder, but that journey requests that we prove our merit. The 
story reassures us that if we work hard enough, if we are persistent 
enough, if we are skilled enough, we will meet with success. As we may 
find less and less of that in our real lives, the seductiveness of games 
with stories predicated on being able to make it big will likely become 
more irresistible. Beyond points where there are clear game-­design or 
narrative elements that advance meritocratic norms in games, how-
ever, there are also parts of games that have both design and narra-
tive function. One of the most interesting features to consider is the 
ubiquitous integration of leveling into games.
Leveling: You Just Keep Getting Better
Originating in role-­playing games, player levels have become a widely 
used mechanic across almost all types of games. On its face, leveling 
appears to be a design concern, as it relates to how players interact in 
the world of the game and to what options and abilities they are likely 
to have access. However, leveling also drives an underlying narrative 
of forward progress in games, as player effort is quantified into experi-
ence points and character growth. Leveling has been integrated across 
a variety of genres, including first-­person shooter games like Border-
lands and Destiny, sports games released by both Electronic Arts and 
2K Sports, and throughout the casual gaming sector. Borderlands was 
praised for the integration of role-­playing elements, like leveling and 
loot, in a genre where players typically only became more powerful 
by getting new weapons. Leveling allows the integration of different 
skills, abilities, and options over time, which allows players the oppor-
tunity to further specialize into the kind of roles they wish to play and 

	
107	
Coding Meritocracy
better show off their talent and ability. Leveling in sports games en-
ables EA Sports to create incentives to play repeatedly under a given 
account by earning experience and gaining access to the various perks 
that are locked behind level barriers, thereby transforming the pro-
cess of playing sports games into an ongoing, potentially endless ex-
perience with plenty of rewards along the way. Leveling systems also 
offer players a visible marker of their merit and a compelling reason 
to keep upgrading to the newest version of a series (i.e., to avoid losing 
their progress). Leveling and other role-­playing and CCG-­like ele-
ments in various versions of EA’s “Ultimate Team” features are pow-
erful enough that prominent online power-­leveling sites, like IGXE, 
offer FIFA and Madden NFL coins alongside World of Warcraft gold. 
In casual games, levels can work as paywalls or as a means by which to 
encourage continued play and attention. In contemporary game play 
and design, player leveling is a big deal.
One of the first books in the most recent wave of game criticism, 
Edward Castronova’s Synthetic Worlds, focused largely on his experi-
ence playing games like EverQuest and an early incarnation of World 
of Warcraft. Speaking directly about status gains and player differen-
tiation in online games, he wrote:
Humans seem to prefer the challenge that inequality represents 
rather than the security that equality affords—­with one very im-
portant proviso: everyone’s status at the start of the game must be 
equal. If (and only if) everyone starts with the same opportuni-
ties, the same amount of money (usually none), the same ability to 
choose roles and character types, then the resulting inequality is 
not taken to be unfair. Rather, status inequality happens because of 
the choices people make, and so long as everyone starts out with 
the same opportunities, the inequalities that choices create acquire 
the character of a fun game rather than a crushing of the spirit.25
This brief manifesto for game design, echoing Daniel Bell’s calls for a 
meritocracy based on equality of opportunity, is integrated through-
out contemporary video games. Leveling in video games provides the 
kind of design and narrative function of inequality that Castronova 
praises here. Leveling gives a quick and easy way for players to com-
pare themselves to others. Leveling provides a clear goal for players 

Coding Meritocracy	
108
to strive for, motivating them to keep playing for the next perk that 
will make them stronger. Leveling promises a transparent kind of in-
equality that makes abstract effort at a game concrete and intelligi-
ble. Leveling is the kind of game mechanic that drives commentary 
like the following from Simon Parkin: “There are many reasons that 
video games are a potent draw to the human mind, but perhaps none 
more so than the fact that they are endlessly fair and just. They re-
ward you for your efforts with empirical, unflinching fairness. Work 
hard in a game and you level up. Take the path that’s opened to you 
and persevere with it and you can save the world. Every player is given 
an equal chance to succeed.”26 These ideas are foundational to the es-
tablishment and advancement of meritocratic norms in games. When 
considered in isolation, video games certainly seem fair (e.g., they are 
consistent from player to player), but there is enough difference and 
challenge to them to create inequality among players (and certainly 
in comparison to those who do not play games). As Parkin continues, 
this sort of appeal is alluring, “especially to people whose experiences 
in life have been of injustice and arch unfairness,” but the particular 
notion of fairness embedded in systems like leveling drives the devel-
opment and adoption of meritocratic norms.27
Meritocracy is predicated on inequality of character and effort. 
The ideological drive behind it is to sort people based on their abil-
ity and talents. However, the clear, obvious issue with meritocracy is 
that it can be hard to measure a person’s skills and drive. Certainly, as-
sessments can be developed, interviews can be done, and conclusions 
can be reached about a person’s relative merit; it is attempted all the 
time. However, the design conceit of leveling in contemporary games 
is that it makes those judgments automatic, fluid, and so easy that they 
recede into the background. Leveling ensures the appearance that we 
all start from the same place and then allows us to see how we stack 
up against other players, as we know they are going through the same 
things we are. The status inequality Castronova believes we seek is 
translated into a number that grows slowly over time and broadcasts 
our efforts and skill to everyone we encounter. However, the notion 
that we all start from the same place requires deliberate inattention 
to the resources players bring to a game in the first place. From skill 
transfer to economic resources to free time, players rarely start at the 

	
109	
Coding Meritocracy
same place, much like standardized exams in schools assess far more 
than just talent and effort.
Leveling is perhaps the single most powerful meritocratic trope 
in contemporary games, a design and narrative device that is rapidly 
approaching omnipresence in video games. Fed by the prominence 
of leveling in such a wide variety of games, levels teach players that 
there is a preferred approach to play. Engagement is driven by accru-
ing the next level, the next piece of gear, the next win. Effort in the 
game is readily translated into clear demarcations of skill and ability 
that fundamentally affect how players interact with one another. It was 
generally understood at the launch of World of Warcraft that hitting 
the maximum level in a massively multiplayer online game (MMOG) 
was just the pretext to begin a new game based on the continuous ac-
quisition of newer, better gear. In games like Destiny, levels are inte-
grated as a way to gate progress and require players to grind to get to 
the appropriate spot of progression and then be tested in some new 
way, all of which is just a fancy way of quantifying player effort and 
ability. Leveling is a clear game-­design element, but it is also tightly 
anchored into a narrative of progress, advancement, and winning. By 
integrating leveling into games, designers set up a certain kind of ex-
pectation about how the game will work and how players will interact 
with it. Beyond the primary story of whatever is happening in Azeroth 
or the NFL, game players are encouraged to think about games in 
particular kinds of ways, ones where the allegedly central story often 
recedes and the compulsion to get just one more level or a bit more 
progress becomes the driving narrative experience. Leveling is often 
the key way players interact with the game, as it is the feature that lets 
us believe we are all starting from the same place and establishing our 
power and status through our own skill and effort.
There are a few examples of games where players could actually 
lose levels, most notably in MMOGs like EverQuest and Final Fan-
tasy XI Online. In these games, if players died they faced harsh con-
sequences, from losing experience points to accruing experience debt 
that would have to be paid off before they could level freely again. 
Should a character lose enough experience points they would actually 
drop levels, becoming less powerful and requiring them to earn their 
way back up to reach the same level of status. In my experience this 

Coding Meritocracy	
110
led to a very risk-­averse style of play for most of the game, as players 
sought to limit their chances of dying in ordinary play and focused 
on engaging in battles they knew they were likely to win so as not to 
risk penalties accrued upon death. These design features certainly fit 
norms of meritocracy, as players who could not prove themselves wor-
thy were the ones being punished, but they have largely faded away—­
for instance, a successor to these titles, World of Warcraft, was hailed 
for getting rid of harsh penalties for death and facilitating more dy-
namic, risky play.28
The ubiquity of leveling in games shapes the terms on which we 
interact with them and crafts the environment of what we expect and 
how things work. Leveling is a key part of the symbol system of video 
games that translates the abstract efforts of button pushing into a 
framework of progression, advancement, and skill. Status inequalities 
become clear, and leveling helps us figure out both who we should 
be looking up to and who should be looking up to us, based on what 
players have displayed in the game. Effectively, leveling works to facil-
itate and adjudicate decisions made based on merit. By infusing both 
design and narrative, leveling is a primary ordering premise of con-
temporary video games that frames how we think video games should 
work while requiring us to operate under the auspices of a meritocratic 
system, with all its flaws.
Leveling is a starting point for seeing how thoroughly meritocratic 
elements are integrated into games, one that is particularly powerful 
because of its prevalence. Perhaps a single example of the merito-
cratic norms in games is enough for some, but a deeper dive into spe-
cific cases of games, game elements, and how they work together to 
advance a meritocratic ideology demonstrates just how much video 
games celebrate and depend on a presumed social order based on skill 
and ability, even though initial access points to video games are rid-
dled with inequality.

	
111
4
Judging Skill
From World of Warcraft to Kim Kardashian: Hollywood
I believe the reason meritocratic elements have become so central 
to video games is closely linked to what the target audience of video 
games expects from them. The chance to develop, prove, and show 
off skill is precisely what draws a certain kind of person to a specific 
kind of game, which frames the culture, expectations, and terms of 
engagement surrounding video games. This chapter presents a tour 
through a variety of examples showing just how integral meritocracy 
is to the core of video games.
In the early days of modern videogame studies, by far the most 
frequently studied genre of games was massively multiplayer online 
games (MMOGs). From EverQuest to World of Warcraft (WoW) with 
an occasional Final Fantasy or Star Wars game in between, these on-
line role-­playing games dominated journal publications and confer-
ence proceedings. They also proved quite popular with the larger 
population of people playing video games, as EverQuest and World 
of Warcraft were both huge, high-­water-mark games. WoW specif-
ically, and MMOGs more generally, are easy places in which to see 
meritocratic elements dominating game design and play. Beyond the 
dependence on levels as an ordering principle for the game, players 
at the highest level quickly encounter a gear treadmill, where they 
are enticed into a system by which they play largely to acquire bet-
ter equipment that will surely be made obsolete at some point in the 
not-­too-­distant future. As Jesper Juul explains, MMOGs are games 

Judging Skill	
112
of labor that, in meritocratic terms, are largely about testing the ef-
fort and personal drive of players.1 Effectively, the game of almost any 
MMOG boils down to leveling as high as possible in order to collect 
better gear, then collect even better gear, and on and on. This does 
not necessarily make for a meritocracy, but the way things are read 
and interpreted by the community is clearly meritocratic.
As my play in World of Warcraft moved from launch to the first few 
expansions, I saw players go from judging others based on whether 
they were of an appropriate level to assessing them based on other, 
more nuanced factors. Elements like required achievements and gear 
score, which is a rough calculation of the quality of a player’s equip-
ment, evolved to become key parts of how players interacted with one 
another due to designer decisions and player choice.2 New measures 
for sorting and assessing the capabilities of strangers were developed 
shortly after designers introduced new modes of grouping players. 
As developers released group-­ and raid-­finding systems, players were 
placed in situations where they were judging whether they wanted 
to play with others they may not have previously met. Players were 
being asked to risk their time and potential repair costs for the chance 
to play with people they did not know. Judgments of strangers were 
based exclusively on perceived ability, and the easiest skill-­based deci-
sions were made based on what a character had accomplished before. 
This was a particular interpretation of skill, as it was entirely backward 
looking, and it drove evaluation based on a snap assessment without 
any room to judge the context in which those accomplishments were 
achieved. Meritocratic decisions can be quick and straightforward, 
but they strip out nuance. When trying to pull a raid group together, 
the speed at which one fills out a group often takes precedence over 
judiciousness in the selection process. In the case of WoW it is nota-
ble that the primary objections to things like gear score were not that 
they were based only on skill, but that they did not judge skill appro-
priately since they only looked at what a player had once done and 
not what a player was likely to do now. In my experience, objections 
to judging people based on their skill were muted; rather, the central 
question was about which system was the best at assessing the likely 
talent, capability, and relative merit of players.
Meritocracy in World of Warcraft spreads well beyond putting a 
group together and assessing which strangers with whom to group 

	
113	
Judging Skill
up. WoW, like many MMOGs, is riddled with multiple ladders and 
sorting systems for players to show off their accomplishments. Media 
coverage of players is dominated by reports about highlights and ac-
complishments, from completing all the achievements at any given 
point in the game to accomplishing world-­firsts in raiding and the far 
more common realm-­firsts.3 The design and interpretation of WoW 
was fundamentally based on assessing which players and groups of 
players were the most skilled relative to others at any given point in 
time. Players who were not on the bleeding edge could still sort them-
selves against what they perceived to be their peer group to bench-
mark where they were and where they wanted to be. Focused on 
skill and effort, WoW and other MMOGs tend to be based on design 
elements that further meritocratic expectations among players; this 
builds a community where the default expectation is that all will be 
judged based on their perceived talents and systems will be developed 
to make judgments quick and automated.
One point where merit is most openly assessed in MMOGs is in 
competitive raiding, which is typically only engaged in by high-­level, 
frequent players. In the course of raiding, games like WoW arguably 
shift from games of labor into games of skill, as players are required 
to learn elaborate strategies in order to defeat computer-­controlled 
bosses and acquire new equipment.4 Because new gear is prized, the 
groups of people engaging in raiding need a way to distribute re-
wards. The most commonly accepted method has become the use of 
dragon kill points (DKP).5 As detailed by Mark Silverman and Bart 
Simon, the original form of DKP gave players points for each dragon 
kill they attended, which could then be converted into opportuni-
ties to roll a die to try and win a desired item when it became avail-
able, effectively an effort-­plus-­chance system. However, as Silverman 
and Simon note, DKP has shifted over time, as the system became 
more complicated and the allocation of loot changed from being de-
termined by the game of chance inherent to dice rolls to being re-
placed with “a kind of symbolic currency through which play could 
be exchanged for DKP, which then could be exchanged for in-­game 
goods.”6 The process turned participation in desired activities into 
points that could then be spent on rewards. Silverman and Simon dis-
cuss how some of the best guilds in the world rejected DKP because 
it focuses players on rewards, rather than on group accomplishments, 

Judging Skill	
114
and can encourage players to hoard points in order to get a highly 
prized item, rather than pursuing a handful of incremental upgrades 
that are in the best interest of the group as a whole. The broad adop-
tion of DKP, along with the process of developing and enforcing it, 
disciplines players, thereby incentivizing certain kinds of choices, like 
acting in self-­interest on one’s individual desire, and discouraging oth-
ers, like pursuing collaboration and a utilitarian focus on the group, 
through the development of a personal currency in a group context. 
In so doing, guilds end up using DKP to enforce standards of meritoc-
racy on players. DKP tracks effort through presence at activities, and 
rewards skill by awarding points when the group is successful. Silver-
man and Simon argue that DKP is a form of disciplinary power that 
“associates a quantifiable measure to the value of each guild member 
in terms of their level of contribution.”7 As a system wholly developed 
by players and generally tracked and maintained outside the games 
themselves, DKP is an artifact of how players can intervene in play 
and further meritocratic norms by codifying what counts as merit in 
their own allocation of scarce resources beyond what game develop-
ers originally intended.
A second genre of game also relies on meritocratic norms in both 
design and narrative. Sports games, like the NBA 2K and FIFA series, 
integrate single-­player modes where the player can engage in a “My 
Player” or “My Career” mode. The specifics of each experience de-
pend on the particular game, but the basic outline is that the player can 
create a personal avatar that then tries to make it in the professional 
sports world the game represents. In setup, the player will typically 
name his or her avatar and make some key selections, from appear-
ance and measurables like height and weight to position in the game 
and favorite team. In some games the player can pick the team with 
whom they are affiliated; in others they are subject to a draft or other 
sort of team-­selection mechanism. In some of the newest versions of 
sports games, like NBA 2K16 and FIFA 17, the create-­a-­player mode 
features an extended scripted component to increase immersion and 
integrate a meritocratic narrative within the game. Overall, though, 
the player is placed in a position where his or her avatar starts out rel-
atively unskilled and develops over the course of repeated play. Games 
like the NBA 2K series let the player choose where to spend points 
to make his or her on-­court avatar better. In others, like the FIFA se-

	
115	
Judging Skill
ries, points are earned and distributed based on achievements accom-
plished in various games played. The player starts out as a relatively 
weak, fringe member of the team, but with enough effort, with enough 
playing time and enough personal success, he or she will rise to be-
come one of the best players in the game. Before the end of my first 
season of NBA 2K13, my much taller version of NBA star Chris Paul 
had become a beast, leading the league in both points and rebounds, 
and was clearly established as one of the most dominant players. On 
the other hand, my FIFA 14 avatar took more work and was constantly 
loaned out to lesser teams by my parent club, Juventus. In both worlds, 
I was a top prospect whose progress was constantly moving forward 
and who would become a star if I were good enough and played often 
enough to get my avatar there.
The one thing that might set meritocracy in sports games adrift 
would be injury. However, after playing many seasons in multiple 
games I rarely found my player getting injured for any substantial 
length of time. My experience could certainly be the benefit of short-­
run luck, but it also would make some sense that the developers de-
crease the risk of injuries to allow players to enjoy the game more. 
In any case, the game modes are largely based on the player’s ability 
to elevate his or her avatar’s level of play. In so doing they lay out a 
meritocratic framework where players who work hard enough and 
play frequently will progress forward in their virtual career. Instead 
of being derailed by all the kinds of things that can happen to pro-
fessional athletes, the virtual avatars we create in games will progress 
as long as we are there to play as them and make them better. This 
straight path celebrates merit and ignores any structural barriers to 
life as a professional athlete, as players can achieve far more than most 
real people ever will. Career modes celebrate skill and achievement, 
depicting success in virtual life as simply a matter of showing up and 
playing. The videogame version of a professional sports superstar is 
never a “could have been” or “never was,” because of the skill and ef-
fort displayed by the person behind the controller.
Quite different from MMOGs and almost a genre of its own, the 
Grand Theft Auto series shows a different side of meritocracy in games. 
As a single-­player game for most of its existing run, the game is predi-
cated on telling repeated meritocratic narratives. After the game intro-
duced an overarching narrative with Grand Theft Auto III, the story is 

Judging Skill	
116
almost always based on a criminal who starts at the bottom and rises 
to the top of the criminal underworld through the player’s deftness 
at making choices and pushing buttons in a manner that moves the 
game along. Grand Theft Auto III starts with the player being left for 
dead by his girlfriend, Vice City starts one as a hit man who was re-
cently released from prison and who almost immediately falls into a 
drug deal gone wrong, San Andreas tracks a character who returns to 
his old neighborhood after his mother is murdered, GTA IV tracks a 
survivor of an Eastern European war, and Chinatown Wars is based 
around a character whose father is killed and who himself is then as-
saulted, kidnapped, and left for dead. GTA V deviates from the frame-
work somewhat by introducing three characters as protagonists, but 
all have their own bottom from which to start the game. Michael is 
in witness protection after a botched robbery, Franklin bonds with 
Michael by rebelling against his oppressive boss and getting fired, and 
Trevor is at war with everyone from motorcycle clubs to the Triads, 
an Asian crime syndicate. Grand Theft Auto games mix up the location 
and certain elements of the game play, but they invariably start with a 
character who has fallen from grace and who, through the interven-
tion of the player, will rise to the top.
Grand Theft Auto IV is a high point in the narrative development 
of the series, and the tale the game chooses to tell is intensely meri-
tocratic. The protagonist in the game, Niko Bellic, is introduced to 
players in the opening moments of the game as a recent immigrant 
to Liberty City, which is based on New York City, from Eastern Eu-
rope. Niko is a war veteran who was betrayed in a pivotal battle and 
is setting out to start a new life in Liberty City and to find out more 
about what happened in the war. His only established connection in 
this new life is his cousin Roman, who promised to let Niko in on his 
massively successful business ventures, but Niko quickly learns that 
Roman is prone to hyperbole and that to be successful Niko will have 
to make it on his own. Early in the game, Niko starts out by doing 
grunt work for other people. He delivers packages, metes out justice 
for those his bosses send him out after, and scrabbles together re-
sources to try to upgrade his clothes and housing. As the game pro-
gresses, players unlock new areas of Liberty City, places with more to 
do and higher-­value housing and cars. Through successful play, Niko 
rises through the underworld, transitioning from doing things for oth-

	
117	
Judging Skill
ers to accomplishing his own goals. Players see real, tangible benefits, 
from comedy shows and other features they can access when deeper 
into the game to a greater variety of romantic partners to seduce and 
the wider selection of guns available for those who have proved their 
merit. Niko’s arc is incessantly upward, as players move through the 
story line and Niko establishes himself as a kingpin in Liberty City. 
Any setback is temporary, as a failed mission can easily be restarted and 
tried again. Niko’s arc is a violent version of the American dream: by 
the end of the game, in both material wealth and accomplishment of 
life goals, Niko is far more successful than he was when he arrived in 
Liberty City. The meritorious intervention of the player behind the 
controller is what drives his story forward, and the player completes 
chapters in a meritocratic tale.
Similar to the way MMOGs demonstrate meritocratic norms 
through their design and game play, Grand Theft Auto games integrate 
a focus on success and the ability to overcome the worst of situations 
through hard work and the player’s ability. Casting the character at the 
lowest point in his life gives the narrative a clear place from which to 
rise and also gives players an opportunity to buy in and bond with the 
character they are going to be controlling. The writers get a straight-
forward, appealing story to tell, while players get a chance to start at 
a place that is clearly below their station in life and then make it to a 
place far above where they likely reside. GTA, like WoW, is an actu-
alization of a meritocracy, but in a fundamentally different way. In-
stead of being based on game-­play elements that privilege and reward 
skill, GTA games tell a tidy yet bloody story about how one can rise 
through the world. As low as the characters start in the game, if played 
in any way resembling what the designers intended, they will rise up 
and become rich, powerful, and elite. Although players are unlikely to 
ever follow the life path of the protagonists, the GTA series reinscribes 
a meritocratic world where hard work and skill always win the day.
A fourth genre of game that relies on meritocratic norms are mul-
tiplayer online battle arenas (MOBAs), most prominently represented 
by League of Legends (LoL), which was first discussed in chapter 2. 
MOBA games are typically based on dividing players into two teams 
and having them engage in play with the ultimate goal of destroying 
something in the opposing team’s base. The games typically move 
in stages, with early time being spent on gaining experience and re-

Judging Skill	
118
sources so that players become powerful enough to attack the oppo-
nent’s base. Players typically level up by either battling non-­player 
characters or trying to surprise or overwhelm opponents, as there 
are substantial rewards for killing members of the other team. As one 
team gets more powerful than the other it is easier for them to kill 
their opponents, compounding their advantage as they press forward 
to win. Defenders have an advantage because of defensive structures 
within their own base, but being out-­leveled and out-­resourced can 
quickly make a more powerful team’s victory inevitable. LoL typically 
revolves around teams of five players, which can either be premade 
groups or assembled by the game. Matches typically run from twenty 
to sixty minutes, which means that when one team gains a seemingly 
insurmountable advantage players may be playing for a fair amount of 
time simply to see the game out. The most played title in the world at 
the time of this writing, LoL has probably done more outright work 
to battle problems in gamer culture than any other game. Riot Games 
has gone on a multiyear campaign in LoL to try to “cure toxic behav-
ior.”8 With the premise that negative behavior would never go away 
on its own, Riot developed “Team Player Behavior” with the intent of 
trying to solve issues of griefing, trolling, and harassment.9 The whole 
point has been to encourage good sportspersonship, and progress has 
clearly been made through occasionally restricting the chat options of 
players and nudging them toward good behavior.10 Developing game 
structures like “The Tribunal,” which lets players review complaints 
about bad behavior, and being willing to ban professional players for 
abuse and harassment puts Riot in a position to make strides in com-
batting negative behavior, but I contend the fight will never be over 
because of the game’s reliance on extreme meritocratic expectations.11
Much of the trouble surrounding LoL comes from one particular 
form of play: ranked games. Players in ranked games need to have 
achieved level 30 and have at least sixteen different champions from 
which to choose to play the mode. Specifics of ranked games have 
changed over time, but the general framing dynamic is that players 
are placed within a ladder system and their wins and losses move them 
up and down in accordance with an Elo system, like the one used for 
chess.12 Elo systems are designed to group players of similar skill to-
gether in order to facilitate the most competitive games. Winning and 
losing changes a player’s Elo rating, which moves them up and down 

	
119	
Judging Skill
the rankings and matches them against somewhat different people. As 
players win, their Elo ratings go up in an amount determined by the 
system’s prediction of whether they are expected to win. In their next 
match they will likely be paired with a better opponent, as the system 
tries to divine their “true” talent. The converse happens in the case of 
a loss, as a player’s rating will be lowered and he or she will likely face 
an opponent the system sees as weaker. LoL’s system, like many other 
appropriations of Elo, is divided into levels, and players can move be-
tween labels like Bronze, Silver, Gold, Platinum, Diamond, Master, 
and Challenger, along with five different tiers within each category. 
Being promoted from one tier to the next requires both consistent 
success and regular activity, as the higher levels have a built-­in decay 
where players lose points if they are not playing frequently enough. 
These formulas effectively require players to demonstrate both skill 
and effort, boiling the relative merit of players down to a number and 
a place in the rankings.
Pitting players against one another in this framework has multiple 
notable effects. First, matching players of ostensibly similar skill means 
that players are going to lose roughly as often as they win when they 
find their appropriate level. Second, ratings like Elo get more accu-
rate as more games are played. The ranking system cannot immedi-
ately judge your skill; it needs you to play game after game to finally 
calibrate and assess where you should be. Third, Elo was originally 
developed for a single-­player game, chess, and porting the concept to 
multiplayer games means that your rating is dependent in part on the 
performance of other players. A loss in any Elo system reduces your 
rating, which is not fun, but in a multiplayer game the quality of the 
performance offered by other players affects the likelihood of your 
ability to increase your rating. In a single-­player game, save a distrac-
tion or other circumstantial obstacle, you are largely accountable and 
responsible for your own play. However, in a multiplayer game with 
an Elo system you are accountable for both your play and that of your 
teammates. A player could be the most skilled yet be paired with part-
ners who opt not to engage, and such a player will be hard-­pressed to 
do anything other than lose. Your teammate’s actions have an outsized 
impact on your individual rating. Individualizing the rating means that 
Elo marks are personal and the actions of others can negatively affect 
your score. Although you are losing together, the impact is personal-

Judging Skill	
120
ized as the outcome of the game on each player is different and has 
little to do with how he or she played as an individual. Unless players 
are playing with a premade group, this kind of relationship has little 
in common with raiding groups in an MMOG or with pickup sports 
teams. In those contexts winners and losers are banded together and 
there is far less focus on the individual in the outcome of a game. The 
individual impact on your rating within LoL fosters the perception 
among some of an “Elo hell” that is “populated by griefers/trolls and 
‘bad’ players that prevent them from moving up the ranks.”13 A guide 
to ranked games in LoL contends that Elo hell is a figment of players’ 
imaginations, since “a large misconception is that it is always team-
mates that is bringing you down [sic],” and the answer is that “ratings 
become more accurate the more games are played [sic]. Think ‘big pic-
ture.’ It can take hundreds or thousands of games to be consistently 
matched with similarly skilled players.”14 Although incredibly rational 
and likely true, this kind of thinking is much harder to remember in 
the moment when you believe some other player has cost you some-
thing through his or her inactivity or poor performance. At the same 
time, reports from other games with similar systems, like the com-
petitive mode of Overwatch, indicate that there may be sections of 
the ratings that are more hellish than others, largely based on the gap 
between players’ expectations of their ability and their actual skills.15
Elo is an attempt to develop a meritocratic system that sorts players 
into groups or rankings predicated solely on their skill and effort. Elo 
aims to provide a framework in which skill is the sole determinant of 
where you are placed and how you encounter the game. In porting that 
ideology to LoL, Riot inherited a straightforward way to figure out 
how to put players into matches, but the rankings also inject inequality 
and toxicity into the system by individualizing group results. Layer on 
a healthy dose of needing to depend on others in a multiplayer game 
and it should be no surprise that toxicity in the community is a primary 
outcome of ranked play. As one commentator notes, Riot is fighting 
a never-­ending war on toxic behavior, where “it often feels that when 
you aren’t playing with four other friends, chances are you’re going 
to run into the scum of the earth. Sure, you can just mute them, but 
once someone starts to act this way, it’s immediately reflected in their 
play.”16 Ratings decay is an ideal meritocratic companion for Elo’s 
measurement of skill, as LoL asks players to both demonstrate ability 

	
121	
Judging Skill
and do so often or let their hard work slip away. Elo’s need for hun-
dreds of matches for proper calibration, in conjunction with the re-
quirement to grind to level 30 to enter ranked play, ensures that LoL 
players must demonstrate plenty of effort in addition to skill.
Riot has pursued a variety of efforts to improve community in-
teraction and the quality of player conduct in games. At one point 
“Ranked Restrictions” were introduced, which meant negative players 
faced chat restrictions and were prevented from engaging in ranked 
play until completing a requisite number of games.17 Players quickly 
pointed out that this program essentially “turn[d] draft play [where 
offenders had to play to lift their restrictions] into a ‘prison island’ 
for folks with mile-­long mean streaks. That seems like it could hurt 
non-­offenders over time, fill their matches with bad eggs. Meanwhile, 
reporting tools can be abused, and innocent players could find them-
selves in the clink because somebody—­somewhat ironically—­got mad 
at the game and threw a temper tantrum.”18 Riot contended that the 
game has seen a precipitous decline in bad behavior, which is now lim-
ited to about 2 percent of the player population. However, that expla-
nation does not line up with the experience of players, one of whom 
writes, “At least half of my matches are overwhelmingly negative, at 
least in my memory. Perhaps some of this is due to the gruelingly long 
nature of League of Legends matches. Regardless of whether it’s a win 
or a loss, most matches take a decent amount of mental fortitude. It 
seems rougher when I venture into the Ranked Queue alone, only 
hoping that all four others on my team won’t jump down my throat 
the first chance they get.”19 Although Riot chalks up matters like this 
to negativity bias (our tendency to remember bad experiences more 
vividly than good ones), there’s also the matter that when players re-
port about their games with Riot employees “you better believe that 
everyone is on their best behavior. It’s not like that when they’re not 
around.”20 Riot employees are likely to always see a different version 
of the game, one that is generally less toxic. A frequent player argues 
that one of the key design elements of MOBAs in general and LoL in 
particular is that “they’re a lot less fun when you’re not on the winning 
team. Uniquely so, I mean.”21 Games can last for about an hour, and in 
many matches the advantages accrued by the winning team make that 
victory highly probable long before the match actually ends. Much 
like the endgame of Monopoly and Risk can be arduous as the winner 

Judging Skill	
122
marches to his or her almost assured victory, playing from a perceived 
losing position is not enjoyable, which leads to the perception that LoL 
can be especially brutal to lose. It is certainly reasonable to concede 
that Riot has made improvements in the behavior of players playing 
it game; however, the foundation of the game is built on design un-
derpinnings that weave toxicity into its very fabric.
Beyond the implicit integration of meritocratic norms into the 
structure of ranked play, Riot’s preference for meritocracy can also be 
seen in how it is developing League of Legends as an eSport. Featuring 
World Championships that have massively grown in size and scope, 
aided by streaming viewership numbers that rival the totals traditional 
sports draw on television, LoL is one of the most popular competitive 
games in existence. In Riot’s fostering the development of competitive 
tournaments, however, women have largely been absent. When asked 
questions about the lack of women in competitive LoL in advance of 
the 2014 World Championships, Riot’s spokesperson responded that 
“it’s just a matter of time before there’s either all-­female teams or very 
successful female pros,” leading an analyst to note that “the company 
isn’t looking at ways to actively facilitate anything on that front, which 
implies that they want to treat eSports as purely a meritocracy. They’re 
relying on expanding the game’s general audience and playerbase to 
add more women to the pool of potential professional players.”22 The 
reliance on meritocracy in the competitive version of LoL is certainly 
consistent with the overall design of the game, but in trying to treat 
everyone the same Riot is overlooking the structural obstacles that 
certain communities of players face. Getting more people to play 
LoL is likely to add more diversity to the player base, but it is unlikely 
to prompt a substantial change in the overall trends in player demo-
graphics, especially when the game is deliberately designed for the best 
players, rather than new players or the masses.23 A lack of diversity in 
the player community already demonstrates the fact that the game is 
not a perfect meritocracy and, therefore, simply adding more players 
to a structurally imbalanced system will not fix the problem. When 
the platforms and games already require arcane knowledge and play-
ers benefit from structural advantages, equality of opportunity is illu-
sory at best and the system that remains assesses far more than merit.
The entire structure of LoL is predicated on putting people into 
competition with one another for status, yet the lead designer of so-

	
123	
Judging Skill
cial systems at Riot holds that “every standard in #LeagueofLegends 
is defined by the community. We (the devs) haven’t influenced or con-
tributed at all to the standards.”24 This willful blindness to the impact 
developers have on the game is notable, particularly coming from 
the person at the head of battling toxicity. It points to the structural 
inattention to addressing how design and development issues are a 
key part of toxicity in LoL, not just what is said in a particular game. 
Although Riot has achieved a landmark in lowering the proportion 
of games with abuse to 2 percent, that approach overlooks two key 
points noted by LoL players. First, a “toxic culture is more than just 
using slurs; the machine may be getting very good at preventing play-
ers from calling each other offensive names, but is it teaching them 
not to be massive jerks in other ways?”25 Second, even if one accepts 
the 2 percent number as a meaningful metric, “two percent of 67 mil-
lion League of Legends players is still 1.4 million people. Which isn’t 
a small number, let’s face it.”26 Structurally, the design of LoL ensures 
that players meet in a meritocratic framework that is most likely to 
activate any toxic feelings they may be prone to exhibit.
Any individual’s efforts are dependent on the actions of others, 
often people they do not know. Simmering in this cauldron, it should 
not be a surprise that people act out and push the limits of whatever 
boundaries are put into place. The critiques of meritocracy hold that 
systems based on merit get perverted and become corrupt. Further, 
by setting up a system on which players are assessed based on their 
perceived skill, a community of people is put in a position to question 
the decisions being made by their teammates, their opponents, the 
game logic, and the developer’s intent. LoL is an enormously success-
ful game that is clearly doing a number of things right, but thinking 
deeply about how the game is built demonstrates how the toxicity in 
it can be read as a feature, not a bug. There is sufficient toxicity after 
years of work that player behavior is still a key focus of the game. Riot 
has numbers that are trending in a positive direction, but personnel 
at the company are also insulated from the worst of things, as they do 
not play the game under the same terms as others and they are only 
looking at a particular kind of toxicity. Their mere presence in a game 
as elites warps everything around them, and gathering data from ag-
gregate game logs cannot give a complete picture of the experience 
for more typical players. Further, by recruiting active gamers and LoL 

Judging Skill	
124
players as employees, Riot comprises a homogenous group that does 
not necessarily have the ideological diversity to address problems with 
groupthink. Building a game based on perceptions of skill and getting 
players to buy into the myth of meritocracy is a driving force behind 
the toxicity in LoL. Fixing player behavior in the game will take far 
more than restricting or banning certain players; the system itself is 
broken because it is predicated on teaching those at the top that they 
have earned both their place and the ability to judge others. By fo-
cusing on individual players and their relative merit, it should not be 
a surprise that a team game based on merit and individual rankings 
has problems with bad behavior.
Dependence on merit in game design also stretches into mobile 
gaming, with Marvel Mighty Heroes representing one of the purest 
distillations of an attempt to build the appearance of a meritocratic 
system onto a monetization scheme predicated on inequality. Free-­
to-­play games like Marvel Mighty Heroes are an interesting consider-
ation for meritocratic game design, as their monetization structures 
are typically built in a manner to enable players to spend vast, poten-
tially unlimited, amounts of money in order to buy their way ahead 
in the game. This necessarily imbues a structural advantage for those 
players who have more offline resources to invest. Should a game fol-
low the path of monetization too far, it is frequently derided as pay-­
to-­win, so many games in the genre try to design their game play in 
a manner that lets players progress through their skill and effort, not 
just their pocketbook.
Marvel Mighty Heroes offers a story mode in which players can 
send their heroes into battle alongside a computer-­controlled partner, 
and also a mode called “Fury’s Files” in which players send their un-
used heroes out to complete missions for Nick Fury (a major character 
in the Marvel universe). The main function of these two modes is to 
incentivize players to keep a larger roster of characters and to develop 
all of them, which offers more opportunities to spend money on the 
game. The primary game mode is a multiplayer arena in which play-
ers are sent into battle with three other players on a variety of mission 
types, including defeating bosses, defending supplies, and surviving 
against waves of computer-­controlled opponents. Players pick three 
of their characters, who are placed into battle with similarly matched 

	
125	
Judging Skill
teammates based on the level of their characters, with higher-­level 
teams eligible for greater rewards. For a period ranging up to a few 
minutes, players try to accomplish whatever task they were given by 
moving around and rotating between basic attacks and special moves. 
Players can alternate among the three characters they selected, either 
as they lose health or as one choice might cause more damage than 
another. Upon successful completion of the event, players are ranked 
based on the amount of damage they have done and given rewards 
consummate with their ranking. Those rewards, called event points, 
then correspond to a player’s position on the various leaderboards in 
the game. All players are sorted into brackets of one hundred based 
on five tiers ranging from bronze to vibranium (a fictional metal that 
appears in the Marvel universe). Several times a week the top-­ranked 
group of players in each bracket is promoted to the next tier; at the 
end of a weeklong event, players are awarded prizes based on their 
tier and ranking within it. The primary goal of this mode is to col-
lect event points, which means that the ability to do more damage is 
highly valued and generously rewarded.
On its face, this system appears highly meritocratic. Marvel Mighty 
Heroes rewards skill based on the amount of damage done in each 
battle. The game rewards effort based on consistent play and place-
ment in the brackets and rankings. Paying one’s way forward can be 
mitigated by earning characters through both skill and effort. How-
ever, the game’s design and the immense value of inherited position 
ensure considerable structural inequalities that shape how the game 
plays out in practice. The first major element of the game that com-
promises any attempt at meritocracy is the sorting of characters into 
tiers of value. Characters are rated from one to five stars, with higher-­
star characters typically being much more powerful than lower-­star 
characters. Players procure additional abilities as they collect multiple 
copies of a character, so players who spend to buy many characters or 
get exceptionally lucky are given a huge advantage in battle.27 Almost 
without exception players with higher-­star characters will dominate 
those with lower-­star characters, which enables those with greater re-
sources to readily earn more event points without demonstrating ad-
ditional skill or effort.
A second major inequality is guaranteed through the damage mul-

Judging Skill	
126
tiplier system. Three heroes are selected for each event and given a 
damage boost. Players who choose to play with one of the selected 
heroes get a multiplier of three, two heroes grants a multiplier of 
seven, and if someone plays with all three his or her damage is mul-
tiplied by ten. This means that a player can go into battle with an 
order-of-magnitude advantage against his or her teammates/compet-
itors. Perhaps the most aristocratic part of the arrangement is that the 
required characters for the upcoming week are typically the awarded 
characters from the previous week. This locks in a potentially hefty ad-
vantage for the winners, as they both get to bolster their team and gain 
a huge advantage in the upcoming competition, making it far easier 
to retain their position. It has the effect of holding back new partici-
pants who may be highly skilled, as they are unlikely to be successful 
competing against people who have substantial inherited advantages.
These dynamics shape how players engage in play. In my experi-
ence, both at play and from reading the accounts of other players, the 
vast majority of players are solely focused on increasing their damage 
output and limiting the damage of others. The play becomes far less 
about cooperating with others or working as a team and more about 
trying to boost one’s own score as much as possible. Alternately, in a 
match with superpowered players with built-­in damage multipliers, 
the contest becomes about collecting the meager rewards for finishing 
at the bottom and hoping for a better shot at competing next time. 
Loading screens in the game talk about rewarding the “most effective 
player,” but effectiveness is almost entirely circumscribed by the struc-
tural advantages brought into a fight, rather than the skill that may be 
displayed within it. Highly limited chat options and battles that last 
ninety seconds or less limit the magnitude of toxicity in Marvel Mighty 
Heroes, but for a game that seems on its face to aspire to meritocratic 
norms it actually has little to do with skill and only nominal links to 
effort. By dressing aristocratic behaviors up as a putative meritocracy, 
the game boils down to getting what little you can manage or simply 
accepting your fate (i.e., lesser rewards) if you don’t have a head start 
in battle. The appeal to merit and effectiveness is likely designed to 
appeal to a broad category of players, but the trouble the game has in 
execution points to issues in game design based on a nobility of wallet 
and inheritance of status. However, there are titles trying to thread the 

	
127	
Judging Skill
needle between creating a game based on skill and retaining free-­to-­
play mechanics, most notably Supercell’s Clash Royale.
Based in the fictional world established in Supercell’s game Clash 
of Clans, Clash Royale is a highly successful hybrid game that blends 
various genres to attract players. The core of the game is battling 
against other players in a battle arena reminiscent of MOBAs, all in 
an effort to destroy more of your opponent’s tower than he or she de-
stroys of yours. Combat is simplified, though, in a style reminiscent 
of Clash of Clans, where the primary control players have concerns 
about what to place on the battlefield and where to put it; once the 
item is played the game takes over control of the outcome. Players 
battle with decks of eight cards they have chosen from dozens of op-
tions. Cards are divided into three primary categories: creatures, like 
giants and Valkyries; buildings, like cannons and mortars; and spells 
that can do things like damage opponents or freeze them in place for 
a period of time. Games take three minutes, but if players are tied 
they go to a one-­minute overtime. If neither player destroys an op-
position tower during the overtime the game ends in a tie. Players’ 
success is defined by a combination of their own skill and the cards 
they bring to a match. Possessing both a rock, paper, scissors element, 
where certain decks are highly likely to beat others, and an inheritance 
of privilege through both the rarity and level of cards, Clash Royale 
is far from purely meritocratic. Influence for the card system comes 
from collectible card games, where spending more money gets a per-
son rarer and more powerful cards. Clash Royale magnifies that dy-
namic by allowing players to level cards up, with each level making 
the card about 10 percent more powerful, but the cost of leveling up 
is exponentially more expensive. The main part of Clash Royale is an 
open battle system where players have a ranking like in League of Leg-
ends and move up and down in rating based on their success or lack 
thereof. Higher-­rated players get access to more exclusive battle are-
nas, which can result in obtaining a wider variety of cards. There is 
also a tournament mode, where players enter a time-­limited contest 
and are subject to restrictions in an effort to level the playing field. In 
a tournament, all players start at a zero rating and must win to move 
up the ladder. The rating system is similar to the primary game, but 
the limited time frame magnifies the importance of effort, as a player 

Judging Skill	
128
who loses often can obtain a higher rating than can a player who never 
loses but plays far fewer matches.
The hybridized influences for Clash Royale place it in an interest-
ing position with regard to meritocracy and toxicity. The elements, 
from battle arenas to rating systems, are lifted from the meritocratic 
world of MOBAs, while the card system and free-­to-­play elements 
mean that the game has advantages for the aristocrats who choose to 
spend on the game. Luck also plays a role, as which cards a player gets 
in a pack can help determine his or her success regardless of whether 
they are paying for the game.
There are two key pieces of Clash Royale that warrant longer dis-
cussion: the paywall and the chat function. Clash Royale is a free-­
to-­play game where players can pay almost an unlimited amount of 
money to progress. Although there is no clear way players can buy 
wins, there are three primary ways to spend money in the game: buy-
ing special chests; speeding up the unlocking of chests won in battle; 
and buying cards that are released in the store. Getting additional 
copies of a card enables players to pay a steadily escalating fee to up-
grade them, with thousands of copies needed to upgrade some cards 
to the highest level. The monetization system was set up such that a 
top player spent $12,000 on the game within months of its launch.28 
Play in the primary mode of the game is based on attempting to earn 
trophies to move from the first arena to the last, with rewards and 
cards available upon successfully climbing the ladder. Wins earn tro-
phies and losses lose them, which means that a losing streak can drop 
players down the ladder as quickly as a winning streak can help them 
climb it. The game is set up so that players accrue trophies until they 
hit the point where their combination of cards and skills is quickly 
beaten down by other players, which according to one reviewer can 
feel “like a pay wall, and maybe it is, as for a lot of people the only 
way to progress further is to keep plugging away at getting free cards 
or just spend some money until you get better cards or level up the 
ones you have.”29 Patience and steady effort can help a player sub-
vert the payment mechanisms in the game, but having lesser cards 
means a player needs much more skill to ascend the ladder and pos-
sible payment always lingers as a way to climb more quickly.30 This 
design blends meritocracy and aristocracy, as skill can trump better 
cards, but better cards magnify the importance of greater skill and 

	
129	
Judging Skill
effort for those with lesser decks. The lack of traditional videogame 
balance in the primary mode of the game is constrained somewhat in 
tournament mode, where players are limited in how powerful their 
cards can become, which caused one player to argue that tournaments 
were more fun than ranked mode because players in tournaments do 
not play at as much of a disadvantage, making the game more merito-
cratic.31 Players seek out both inequity and chances to play on a level 
playing field, making efforts to subvert meritocracy difficult. Clash 
Royale attempts to deal with toxicity in an interesting way, however, 
by limiting interaction among competing players.
In addition to the short games, which typically are completed in 
fewer than three minutes, chat options in the game are limited to ten 
choices with six words or phrases and four emotes. As Eli Hodapp 
sums it up for Touch Arcade: “Communication in the game has been 
distilled down to ten buttons, and through the miracle that is human 
nature on the internet, people have figured out how to be total sh*t 
heads with only these ten emotes at their disposal.”32 Typically, play-
ers seeking to harass others spam choices like “Wow!” and a crying 
emote while winning, leading players to request an option to mute 
the emotes and play without them. As player calls for a mute button 
grew, the game’s developer, Supercell, released a statement claiming 
that the core design principle of the game was building cards that 
players either loved or hated, and that “the same principle—­evoking 
strong emotions—­is at the heart of why we’re not planning to imple-
ment a mute option. Emotes are loved by some and hated by others—­
even within the Clash Royale team! We believe these strong emotions 
are integral to the core of the game.”33 The ability for players to ha-
rass one another shines through even with limited options, largely 
because the stakes of the game are both so high and so low. Moving 
forward is fun, but moving backward is not, and being harassed with 
emotes makes it all less enjoyable. As Eli Hodapp concludes his re-
sponse to the decision by Supercell, “Emote spam is one of the many 
reasons I don’t play Clash Royale anywhere near as much as I used to. I 
play games to have fun, not be frustrated, which I guess puts me in the 
minority when it comes to Clash Royale? This all seems real strange 
to me.”34 By placing players in zero-­sum combat, even a limited num-
ber of choices leads some to try to rattle others, leaving the game less 
fun for many. Supercell eventually reversed the decision and added a 

Judging Skill	
130
mute option to Clash Royale; however, the communication between 
players is shaped by the system, and bad behavior does not go away 
when you have the option to silence opponents.35 Meritocratic sys-
tems, combined with competition and the ability for players to in-
teract, leads to toxic cultures, especially when developers are focused 
on unleashing strong emotions among their players. In the wake of 
examining several game genres in general, the celebration of skill in 
videogame design deserves specific attention.
Achievement Culture: Proving Your Skill
The dominance of skill and merit in video games reaches well be-
yond individual games and into the larger framework of video games 
and how they are perceived. The design of game culture celebrates 
achievement, and the roots of that commitment to skill date back at 
least to the Atari systems and the patches that Activision sent out to 
laud certain achievements in games. Now morphed into things like 
leaderboards, Gamerscores, and trophies, the effect of these mechan-
ics becoming so solidly integrated into videogame culture is that their 
gravitational pull changes how games are played and interpreted. Lea-
derboards are a clear place where players are compared with one an-
other. A former highly competitive Madden NFL player writes that 
leaderboards are “a devilish feature,” as they transform “Madden from 
an escapist pastime into another stage on which to prove your self-­
worth.”36 Gamerscore is a measure that turns abstract effort in a game 
into concrete results that are intelligible to others at a mere glimpse. 
Gamerscore bends how games are played, as playing for these meta-­
points becomes a play style to which some adhere and others push be-
yond any reasonable bounds or limits and are then celebrated for their 
exceptional proof of merit. My paltry Gamerscore pales in compari-
son to Raymond Cox’s million-­plus points and ten-­thousand-­person 
audience on Twitch, but the inclusion and search for points layers a 
different kind of game over the top of everything else we play. For 
Cox, having the highest Gamerscore has meant that his efforts are 
tracked and celebrated by Microsoft, are recorded as Guinness World 
Records, and have earned him a modest degree of income through 
his fame.37 Perhaps first and foremost, though, the quest to acquire 
impressive amounts of Gamerscore twists play, as Cox plays as many 

	
131	
Judging Skill
games as possible and with the primary intent of leeching as many 
points from them as he can.38 By adding ranking elements like Activ-
ision’s patches, leaderboards, Gamerscore, and trophies to play, video 
games are altered as players are encouraged to think about them as 
part of a larger, meritocratic system. Motives shift, intent changes, 
and our ability to judge others negatively is magnified; the rhetori-
cal framework in which video games are produced and played shifts 
to accommodate a specific kind of instrumental play. As Joel Good-
win sums up the balance of achievement versus art in video games, “If 
you’re still looking for the Citizen Kane of Game, you’re not going 
to find it on a leaderboard.”39 Although Cox’s single-­minded focus on 
Gamerscore likely seems quite foreign to many game players, it is an 
edge case of what quantifiable systems can do to how we think about 
and play games. Players can opt out of Gamerscore or simply choose 
not to think about it, but Microsoft regularly advertises its premium 
service, Xbox Live Gold; the games players get for subscribing by 
mentioning the achievements available and highlighting how many 
points players can get by paying for the service and playing the games. 
By opting out, players can ignore this metric, but the inclusion of lea-
derboards and achievements means that play is made instrumental. In 
the e-­mail missives that encourage me to subscribe to Xbox Live, Mi-
crosoft spends less space telling me about the game and more space 
talking about the achievements I could get from playing it. That ad-
vertising decision helps construct the means by which players will 
engage a game, encouraging them to focus on the shiny points, de-
fining what makes that particular game compelling, and establishing 
an instrumental relationship with the game. A clear example of how 
skill is a key part of contemporary games can be seen by looking at 
advocacy for a different conception of how games should work: the 
balance between requiring players to read the story in a game and re-
quiring players to play through action sequences, best exemplified by 
the controversy over the BioWare game Dragon Age II.
In 2011, BioWare released Dragon Age II, which was “produced 
under a very tight time budget”; the game was not well received by 
core fans, potentially because “it went a little lighter on the action 
mode of playing, as opposed to a strategic, old-­school strategy style 
playing.”40 Commenters on both the BioWare forums and on red-
dit went back and found a 2006 interview with one of the writers on 

Judging Skill	
132
the game, Jennifer Hepler, in which she said her least favorite part 
of working in the industry was “playing the games” because she has 
“awful hand–­eye coordination, I don’t like tactics, and I can’t read a 
game map to save my life. This makes it very difficult for me to play 
the myriad games I really should be keeping up on as our compe-
tition.”41 Hepler went on to hypothesize that one thing that would 
make games more engaging for her would be to include a fast-­forward 
that would let players skip through action sequences, just as they are 
routinely able to skip through story-­driven cut scenes. She contends 
that a feature like this would make games shorter but far more ac-
cessible to a wider audience of people, and that it would give players 
“the same options that we have with books or DVDs—­to skim past 
the parts we don’t like and savor the ones we do.”42 A version of story 
mode actually ended up shipping in BioWare’s Mass Effect 3, but it 
did so alongside an action mode as a pair of difficulty settings. In ac-
tion mode players’ dialogue choices were automated, while in story 
mode combat sequences were quicker and easier.43 Action mode was 
an expansion of the oft-­used ability to skip cut scenes, as it automated 
choices for the player, but story mode just made combat easier, not 
skippable. The centrality of combat and the acceptance for relegat-
ing narrative to the background is a prime statement on their relative 
values in video games. Action and combat (where players prove their 
merit) matter, while narrative is secondary at best. Something like a 
story mode that Hepler proposes is a substantial change in what games 
are and, potentially, what they should be, as it would disrupt some of 
the skill-­based barriers to entry for new players.
A faction of BioWare’s audience reacted negatively to the sugges-
tion that games should be changed to be less reliant on player skill. 
Hepler was called the “cancer that is killing BioWare”; a page ap-
peared on the Star Wars: The Old Republic wiki titled Jennifer “The 
Hamburglar” Hepler; and an image of an alleged forum post made 
by her laid out a mandatory homosexual story line for players in Mass 
Effect 3, even though she did not work on the game.44 After Hepler 
joined Twitter, the situation became offensive enough that she discon-
tinued her account and one of BioWare’s cofounders released a state-
ment of support for Hepler.45 While a verbal assault on a woman who 
works in video games for voicing her opinion about how they could 
be designed differently, the vitriol in the reaction points to a desire to 

	
133	
Judging Skill
hold on to video games as separate from other forms of media, that a 
special kind of place is expected to be reserved for those who are tal-
ented enough to prove their worth. This is precisely the kind of dy-
namic one would expect to find in a meritocracy, in which the skilled 
elites believe they have earned their high status and then protect the 
hierarchy against encroachment by the less-­worthy masses.
Hepler laid out a different way of thinking about video games that 
was predicated on making games accessible. Instead of putting gates 
and limitations based on skill in a video game, more people could ex-
perience the range of experiences in a game if titles were designed dif-
ferently. Instead of being an actualized meritocratic space where the 
only ones involved in the subculture were those who “deserve” to be 
there because they “earned” their place, video games would become a 
different form of a book, movie, or television show that anyone could 
play. Some people see this kind of approach as an existential threat 
to games, a line of argument that often comes up around pieces of 
interactive fiction, which some argue are not games because they do 
not have sufficient challenge or particularly rich game-­play elements. 
Hepler got attacked because she was a woman speaking out about 
games and also because she dared to question the meritocratic con-
ceit of how games should be designed. The toxicity of the response 
is notable because what Hepler was choosing to advocate was a way 
of thinking about and designing games for everyone. Meritocracies 
do not work like that; meritocracies need to exclude some to build 
the inequality that gives value to status positions at the top. For video 
games to be meritocratic there needs to be an overriding belief that 
players earned their victory, they won their success, they deserve their 
just rewards, and that others cannot just skip over the parts of the 
game that require skill.
Focusing on completion and winning in single-­player games is 
particularly interesting because of what happens when we think more 
deeply about how they are designed and how “winning” works within 
them. In Hepler’s case, there was little outcry about differential diffi-
culty modes, although playing on a harder difficulty mode certainly 
maintains more credibility for players. Variable difficulties are well es-
tablished in games. Difficulty is even used as a means to reach out to 
a “hardcore” audience who believe that things like BioShock Infinite’s 
1999 mode are cool. In a reflection on the design of the exceptionally 

Judging Skill	
134
difficult version of the game, creative director Ken Levine argued that 
“the average gamer stops playing when they fail. The hardcore gamer 
says ‘That’s it, I’m gonna show this game who’s boss.’”46 The mode 
was designed to evoke nostalgia for games of the past, with the tun-
ing intended to evoke how “failure can be fun” and “that old-­school 
feeling of ‘If I fail, I deserved to fail’ instead of ‘the game made me 
fail.’”47 Part of the idea behind differential difficulty modes embed-
ded in Levine’s comments is the individual responsibility of players 
for their fate in the game. As long as the game is properly designed, 
the logical extension of the notion that you deserve your failure is that 
you also earn your success when you attain it. The victory in a single-­
player video game is tied to your actions, your skill, your efforts, and 
your personal drive, absent of any cultural context.
The celebration of skill is an omnipresent thread in discourse about 
video games that sets it apart from other media forms. Game publi-
cations are rife with stories about how the best players do things that 
are unthinkable for most players. There are stories about players who 
conduct speed runs and complete games and objectives faster than 
most would think possible, about how certain players can complete 
key objectives without ever dying and play games in a way that de-
velopers likely never imagined, like playing through levels in Super 
Mario 64 without ever jumping.48 The excessive focus on skill means 
that certain elements of games are not to be questioned, as stepping 
out of line in the celebration of skill is likely to be met by what one 
game journalist describes as “an open invitation to be told how bad 
you are at the game and how you only need to ‘git gud.’”49 This kind 
of approach sets games apart from other media, as a focus on skill 
can be measured and assessed differently. There is certainly a literary 
culture around reading difficult books, like those by James Joyce or 
David Foster Wallace, and film fans can argue about interpretations 
and preferred readings, but video games quantify, measure, and cele-
brate skill in a manner that other media do not.
One place to clearly see the focus on skill is in discussion about the 
series of Souls games developed under Hidetaka Miyazaki. Comprising 
Demon’s Souls, Dark Souls, Dark Souls II, Dark Souls III, and Blood-
borne, the punishing games are best summed up as an “action series 
famous (or infamous) for their merciless difficulty.”50 Discussion sur-

	
135	
Judging Skill
rounding the games includes paeans to players who are able to make 
the “toughest enemies look like chumps” or beat the game without 
ever taking advantage of the ability to level up and make their own 
character stronger.51 The charitable reading of these games is provided 
by Laura Hudson, who sums up their appeal:
If you’re playing a Hidetaka Miyazaki game for the first time, as I 
was, the learning curve is often steep; for hours and hours, it feels 
frustrating and painful, and sometimes incredibly unfair. But here’s 
the trick: it’s not. Over time, you start to realize that the game is 
actually fair in the absolute, and you even learn to trust it. When 
you die, it’s not usually because the game is just mean; it’s because 
you screwed up. Much like a martial arts master who knocks you to 
the floor every time you leave yourself open, it isn’t actually trying 
to crush your spirit; it’s trying to teach you. And if you’re willing 
to listen, it will slowly transform you into an incredible badass.52
The general perspective of those who enjoy the game is that “playing 
Souls is like climbing a mountain. If you’re at the top it’s worth brag-
ging about, since plenty gave up along the way.”53 All the focus on skill, 
though, has a notable impact on how the games are discussed. For the 
most part, the newest entry in the series, Bloodborne, was met with 
praise, as writers focused on how the skill required by the game pushed 
players to their limits and made their eventual successes all the richer.
There were few critical reviews, but two focused on the harms of 
pursuing skill at the cost of all else. First, one reviewer contended that 
the success of beating the first boss “was simply not worth the aggrava-
tion” and, ultimately, “this kind of game isn’t for everyone, and I’m an 
example of who they’re not for.”54 The end result of an insular focus 
on skill is more harmful, however, as it actively screens potential new 
players out based on their lack of skill. Developing skill-­screening tests 
means that the community of people left writing, talking, and think-
ing about games is far different from the pool of potential players 
for games. Bloodborne demonstrates a moment where, for one game 
journalist, those in game journalism and in core game culture more 
broadly “can’t just shout to ourselves about the stuff we like. The 
echo chamber of praise for Bloodborne reminds us what an incredi-

Judging Skill	
136
ble lack of perspective we have within the world of games criticism, 
and that’s not just a practical failure, it’s boring to boot.”55 With an 
extreme emphasis on skill, games like these limit who is likely to play 
them. Instead of broadening the base of potential players, these games 
target those already part of videogame culture, especially when they 
are celebrated as essential, system-­selling releases. It is reasonable to 
have games targeted at existing audiences, but the focus on skill in a 
single-­player game is notable, especially when one considers how the 
computer is such a gracious loser.
A primary difference between single-­ and multiplayer games is lo-
cating where the wins and losses accrue. In most multiplayer games, 
about half the players will win and about half will lose. On the other 
hand, single-­player is a bastion of wins for humans. In addition, instead 
of facing the horrific words that come with a loss in a game like League 
of Legends, when the computer loses there is only joy for the human 
winner. Single-­player video games are typically set up to be defeated, 
for the player to win and claim the inevitable victory. This feeds di-
rectly into the notion of a meritocracy—­just as players deserve their 
failure in a well-­designed game, they are accountable and responsible 
for their eventual wins. Single-­player games are often about testing 
limits, engaging in trial and error, and figuring out patterns that are 
repeated and how to conquer them. This kind of process twists meri-
tocracy, potentially beyond recognition, because in the case of single-­
player video games we are all potentially winners; there quite literally 
is no limit to the number of people at the top and no need for down-
ward mobility. If we are all winning, there is no space in which to get 
the status differential that makes those at the top feel more powerful, 
other than by developing and playing super-­difficult games like Blood-
borne. As such, inequality typically resides in two locations: in compar-
ison to those outside of games and in multiplayer games.
Setting games up on a meritocratic foundation means encourag-
ing inequity and difference. In the case of contemporary single-­player 
games, there are three ways to foment inequality: by adding extra-­
difficult modes, by developing games that let the hardcore show off 
their skills, or by making gamers feel superior by exploiting the space 
in the gap between those who game and those who do not. Policing 
these boundaries is crucial to sustaining the hierarchy necessary to feel 
superior. The notion that anyone could game or anyone could win 
flattens social space far too much and is checked by contentions that 

	
137	
Judging Skill
certain games, techniques, players, designers, and people are more real 
or worthwhile than others. Single-­player games have taught us that 
if we are talented enough and work hard enough we will win, which 
does a lovely job of making everyone feel superior, but it also sets a 
precedent that makes for sore losers and vocal backlash when the last 
few remaining pegs of differentiation between those who can beat 
games and those who cannot are removed.
Multiplayer games are outstanding at demonstrating inequality 
and difference. Because they are executed on computers, it is trivially 
easy to develop measuring systems that track how successful you are 
relative to others. Networked and placed on the Internet, suddenly 
the neighborhood gets a whole lot bigger, as the best person you know 
offline is not nearly as good as the players you can find online. We can 
be ranked and see just how good or bad we are. The singular conceit of 
playing with other people is that, at some point, you will be let down; 
you will lose because of the actions of another. This idea should be 
easy to see in League of Legends, as discussed previously, but it also ap-
pears in a game like World of Warcraft. As WoW released expansions, 
raiding, a primary way in which players interacted with large groups 
of people, became more difficult. Expectations for individual play-
ers were higher and the action, or lack of action, of one person could 
threaten the potential for victory for the other twenty-­four people in 
a raid group.56 As things became more difficult there was a profusion 
of add-­ons to the game with one sole purpose: tracking who screwed 
up. From EnsidiaFails to YouFail to Failbot to WhoFailedWhen, sud-
denly it was important to monitor who was not performing up to ex-
pectations. These player-­created additions to the game were set up to 
enforce meritocratic structures and remind players just who was doing 
the worst and ruining things for everyone else. While single-­player 
gaming is based on your inevitable, earned victory, multiplayer as-
sures that you will inevitably be let down or crushed by someone else.
These twin dynamics—­that you inevitably earn success in one 
version of video games and are disappointed in another—­frame the 
appeals and context in which players interact. Video games are con-
trolled, contrived experiences, but they are also complicated symbol 
systems that structure what players expect and how they are likely 
to act. This kind of framing is perfectly suited for a meritocracy. On 
the one hand, players can feel good because they are successful; they 
can do something that other people cannot. On the other hand, the 

Judging Skill	
138
fault for failure typically resides in the actions of another. Add in the 
dominant masculine norms found in communities built around video 
games, and players are constantly placed in positions where proving 
their merit and their masculinity is an ongoing battle, making their 
status fragile and in need of defense. Assessments of merit and mascu-
linity are clouded and losing erodes both, foreclosing efforts at deliber-
ation and reflection. Building a community around video games based 
on meritocracy has one most likely outcome: toxicity and a tendency 
to lash out at those who question the normal order of video games.
Toxicity and Meritocracy
Video games are far from the only toxic space in the world. Video 
games are also far from the only meritocracy. However, I contend that 
video games represent a special, different place perfectly designed and 
controlled to actualize an idealized form of meritocracy, with all the 
consequences that entails. Video games are predicated on inequality, 
on the perception that some people are better than others and that 
when one is victorious it is precisely because of that player’s actions, 
that player’s timely interventions and button presses. Anything that 
questions that normal, meritocratic order is threatening, from open-
ing games up to more people, to producing “games” where players do 
not have to show sufficient skill to complete them, to being failed by 
teammates you do not think are nearly as good as you are. For many 
years now, video games have built a culture where skill is praised and 
the best believe they should be rewarded because they have earned 
their victories. From the high-­score screens in an arcade to the patches 
Activision would send players who beat its Atari games to the leader-
boards in an online game and the gear that players acquire and then 
show off in a common meeting area, video games are set up to cel-
ebrate feats of skill. In the world of video games you keep what you 
kill, and there is an overwhelming bias in videogame design and vid-
eogame culture to reward merit and treat players as a special, gifted 
group of people that are, quite simply, better than those who do not 
have the same kind of success at play.
There are certainly reasons for toxicity in games that are not re-
lated to meritocracy. Structural barriers and inequalities of opportu-
nity in society are represented in the people playing video games and 

	
139	
Judging Skill
their interactions with one another. However, a dominant norm in 
video games specifically and in technological culture more broadly 
is to reward merit and praise the skill of individual people in a way 
that seems blind to context and circumstance. As Katherine Sierra, a 
woman who has suffered frequent and sustained harassment, puts it 
about technology culture more broadly, “A meritocracy is exactly what 
I and so many others believed tech to be. ‘After all,’ I wrote nearly a 
decade ago, ‘the compiler doesn’t care if the person writing the code 
is wearing a black lace bra.’ I was wrong. Embarrassingly, naïvely, 
wrong. Because while the compiler doesn’t care, the context in which 
programming exists sure as hell does. To ignore that context is the 
essence of privilege blindness.”57 Meritocracy sets the frame and the 
boundaries in which players interact and in which games are devel-
oped. Given that meritocracy was originally popularized as a satirical 
concept pursued by a society on the brink of failure, why should it 
be surprising that an actualized meritocracy, like that found in video 
games, has a toxic culture?
The whole point of rhetorical analysis is to observe how the words 
used, the symbols employed, and the structures built matter. How peo-
ple choose to talk about things and the frameworks they construct end 
up shaping what they design and how they interact. In any community 
the norms that are followed, the terms that are used, and the symbol 
systems that are established end up enabling some appeals while lim-
iting others. In the case of video games, a system has been developed 
that rewards individual skill and ability. It is a system that teaches 
players that they are special, that they are gifted, and that their efforts 
should be rewarded because they have earned their plaudits. It is also 
a symbol system that breaks down when questioned, when people at-
tack the potential of the individual or the quality of his or her work. 
It is a symbol system predicated on toxicity, one where problems are 
inherited because of the focus on individuals, their merit, and what 
they are supposed to be able to do on their own. There are problems 
in any type of culture, but video games certainly suffer from the im-
pact of meritocratic norms and expectations. Addressing those prob-
lems does not have a straightforward, simple solution, but there are 
steps that can be taken to redefine what video games can be and to 
change the culture around them.

This page deliberately left blank

	
141
5
Learning from Others
There is no single element that causes the problems for videogame 
culture, but addressing the toxicity in video games requires facing up 
to the current situation and assessing what cultural solutions can be 
found to make things better. Game culture is stunted because of a 
limited, relatively homogenous group of players, designers, games, 
and experiences. An overarching lack of diversity restricts the kinds 
of ideas that are addressed and topics covered in games. The reach of 
the rhetoric, of discussion in games, is curtailed because of the small 
number of voices present. Diversifying the group of people making 
and playing games is important and should be addressed, but I believe 
fixing those issues will prove impossible as long as game consumers 
and developers valorize games predicated on meritocratic norms.
The dominance of meritocracy and the focus on skill and success in 
games limit the cognitive space for appeals and thought. Meritocracy 
functions as an apologia for why all those diverse populations are not 
present in games. Merit tells a story that if those people were good 
enough, driven enough, worthy enough, then they, too, could actively 
participate in videogame culture. This is a seductive, convincing story 
that tells those at the top of the pyramid that they deserve to be there, 
that they should be in positions of power to set the terms for engage-
ment with games. A culture based on merit is reassuring and highly 
conservative, protecting those at the top and solidifying their control 
in setting the agenda. Rhetorically, using the language of merit limits 

Learning from Others	
142
the kinds of appeals that are made and judged as valid. Meritocracy is 
a restrictive ideology based on inequality, which is readily fueled by 
the lack of diversity in video games.
A limited, focused audience restricts the range of acceptable 
thought in games, a dynamic that is also fed by the role of computers 
in arbitrating what happens in video games. Offline games are subject 
to the human enforcement of rules, which is necessarily a social pro-
cess of negotiation. From house rules to rerolls to subjective decision 
making to human error, offline games are riddled with imperfection. 
On the other hand, video games are adjudicated by computers, which 
are typically read as unbiased agents of rule enforcement. Although 
quality work in platform studies demonstrates just how different com-
puter platforms are and how subjectivity is present in computerized 
systems, computers are perceived to be neutral.1 For those already in-
vested in meritocratic systems, computers and games can seem like a 
perfect pair, as a videogame system will make consistent decisions that 
do not change as different players get behind the controller. Although 
a game may be decried as unfair or cheap, it will stay the same kind 
of unfair for all players, which can convince those playing that their 
own personal, individual skill is the cause of their success. The depen-
dence on computers in video games makes a meritocratic approach to 
gaming even more persuasive and further restricts the symbol system 
surrounding video games.
As it currently stands, the lack of diversity in and around games 
enables a continued focus on meritocracy, which further restricts the 
kinds of people interested and welcomed to play video games. Breaking 
the hold of meritocracy requires looking more broadly, to seeing other, 
related activities that can rattle the focus on skill and outline alter-
nate ways of thinking about games. Breaking the hold of meritocracy 
stands to change game culture and could help facilitate a videogame 
culture that can address the toxicity that currently resides within it.
Deconstructing Merit
One could certainly make a strong argument that all major, contem-
porary Western institutions are riddled with meritocratic norms. A 
possible exception is the strong social safety net programs in Scandi-
navia, but meritocracy is currently a dominant ideology for much of 

	
143	
Learning from Others
the world. Lessons from a pair of major Western social structures in-
dicate some of the ways they stand apart from video games and how 
thinking about them can generate approaches to building a different 
game culture. One of the clearest links to video games can be found 
in the greater institution of sports. Although periodically dismissed 
because of a jock–­geek divide, sports offer another largely merito-
cratic system, but one that is far more aware of how considerations of 
merit are often broken. There are also the clean links between sports 
and video games in the paired content of sports video games and the 
growth of eSports within video games. A second link can be found 
in U.S. higher education, which ostensibly selects students based on 
merit and awards millions a year in merit-­based scholarships, but also 
preserves several areas where meritocracy is disregarded in favor of 
developing a diverse community of people, particularly at highly se-
lective colleges and universities.
These two institutions are largely selected because they are re-
lated to, yet independent from, videogame culture. Associations can be 
made, but the three cultures are largely distinct and only occasionally 
overlap. Sports and higher education cultures have substantial prob-
lems, some of which can be traced to meritocratic norms, but they also 
offer a chance to help see just how dependent on merit videogame 
culture is and a chance to get outside of video game culture to look at 
it differently. The most difficult part of disrupting a symbol system is 
figuring out how to get a vantage point from without to help imagine 
ways in which it could be structured differently. By looking at sports 
and U.S. higher education it is possible to see some lessons that can 
be taken and employed in detoxifying videogame culture. These two 
examples are not perfect, but they set the table for looking differently 
at meritocratic game design and narrative, to create a perspective that 
could then be used to address the toxicity at its root.
Sports and Games
Sports and video games share a substantial number of similarities. 
Both constitute large elements of the culture industry and are pri-
mary recreation activities for many participants, in fandom, play, or 
both. They are massive economic enterprises that capture billions 
of dollars a year. Both have cultural and institutional issues that can 

Learning from Others	
144
be tracked to meritocracy and there are certainly examples of toxic-
ity in the player and fan cultures of both. Sports video games are a 
substantial part of the larger videogame ecosystem, with games like 
FIFA, Madden NFL, and NBA 2K selling millions of copies each year. 
Sports are far from perfect, and a critique of sports cultures and in-
stitutions can be, and is, its own searing book, but examining some 
crucial elements of sports culture enables a more critical look at how 
video games are currently designed in a way that ensures toxicity in 
the broader videogame community.2
The first key area to think about when considering sports and 
video games is the search for perfection and the integration of tech-
nology in that endeavor. Sports video games inhabit an odd space, as 
they are frequently attempts at simulation, but they are often seek-
ing to simulate imperfect people. The history of sports video games 
is filled with examples of how games have sought to re-­create sports 
in an accurate manner. Pong was an early attempt to re-­create tennis, 
Intellivision advertised its football offering as a more accurate rendi-
tion of football than Atari’s using the sportswriter George Plimpton 
and side-­by-­side screenshots of the games, and John Madden famously 
demanded that any football game with his name on it would feature 
eleven players on the field for each team, something that had never 
been done before because of technical limitations. However, sports are 
imperfect and have often sought out technology in an effort to make 
more accurate judgments within the context of individual games. The 
National Football League initially introduced a limited instant-replay 
system in 1986, which was modified and largely solidified into its cur-
rent form by 1999. The system is still subject to substantial rules and 
restrictions, but the general idea is that each coach gets two oppor-
tunities to challenge a referee’s decision during the course of a game. 
Certain decisions cannot be challenged and, late in each half, challenge 
decisions are made by a separate official, but the overarching intent of 
the system is to correct for human error.
The videogame version of the NFL, Madden NFL, is a simulation 
of a National Football League game. However, instead of being offici-
ated by humans, the video game is effectively adjudicated by the game 
platform and game code making judgments about player input and 
computer-­controlled artificial intelligence. In the midst of this, there 
is little need for an instant replay system to review referees’ decisions. 

	
145	
Learning from Others
The NFL system is designed to combat human error, and the com-
puter replication of that system is actually designed to introduce error 
that can then be simulated within the course of the game. Add in va-
garies with the representation of graphics within the game and play-
ers are subject to situations where the game is programmed to give 
them inaccurate information. Effectively, the offline sport is seeking 
to make better decisions by introducing a replay system, while the vid-
eogame analogue has to introduce doubt and error in order to make 
the inclusion of a replay system meaningful. This leads to questions 
and complaints from players, ranging from concern about how “only 
the computer gets successful challenges” to how the game implements 
the challenge resolution—­“the game is smart enough to know that a 
challenge should be done, but its [sic] not smart enough to figure out 
how to adjust the call”—­to unnecessary computer-­initiated challenges 
that function as “pointless comic relief and nothing more.”3 The chal-
lenge feature need not be part of a video game. The call should be 
correct in the first place, but trying to mimic an imperfect game re-
quires introducing elements of error into the video game, even if those 
errors seem ridiculous. Video games are designed from a state where 
we expect them to be perfect, which can make players less willing to 
question decisions made within them and more prone to accept the 
output as an accurate representation of merit. As the game designer 
and competitive game player David Sirlin puts it, “Debates in real 
life are highly subjective, but in games we can be absolutely sure who 
the winner is.”4 For Sirlin, one of the major factors that distinguish 
games is the clear platform they provide for competition; in that con-
text, the deliberate inclusion of error is odd. However, unlike video 
games, sports evolved pre-­digitally, so error is often seen as a prob-
lem to be solved with new digital tools, while the video games seek-
ing simulation then attempt to copy those pre-­digital dynamics into 
a computerized product.
The NFL is not the only league to use technology in an attempt 
to eliminate human judgment and officiating mistakes from the of-
fline version of their sport. Major League Baseball was relatively late 
to instant replay, adding it in 2008 and slowly expanding it to review 
more human decisions in subsequent years. However, in 2006 MLB 
decided to begin installing a PITCHf/x tracking system that uses a 
pair of cameras to track the flight and location of every pitched ball. 

Learning from Others	
146
That information is shared with the public via Major League Base-
ball Advanced Media and used to judge the performance of umpires. 
Including this additional level of review for umpire decisions on balls 
and strikes has resulted in an increased level of accuracy and an expan-
sion of the strike zone, particularly around the knees, a fundamental 
change in the game that may be part of a trend toward rising strikeout 
rates in the league.5 Tennis began using a system called Hawk-­Eye in 
2005, which replaced Cyclops, a system developed in the 1980s, that 
assessed whether serves were in or out. Hawk-­Eye is also used as part 
of cricket television coverage and as a system of goal-­line review by 
the English Football Association. Goal-­line review was integrated 
into the 2014 FIFA World Cup, and the former head of FIFA has ar-
gued for the wider use of technology to potentially overturn refer-
eeing decisions.6 In order to discuss issues in officiating openly, the 
National Basketball Association began releasing reports that review 
all the major decisions in the last two minutes of close games.7 These 
reports often mention errors in officiating with the ultimate goal of 
transparency, even when the mistakes may have resulted in a team los-
ing a game because of an incorrect decision.8 The point of all these 
choices, and the general trend throughout competitive sports, is to use 
technology to eliminate error in human decision making. However, 
there is also resistance to the trend of using technology to overrule 
human mistakes, as it is both expensive and changes the context of the 
sport. Opposition is often the strongest in soccer, as German soccer 
voted against installing goal-­line technology because of cost and the 
argument by many purists that the inevitable human error is a classic 
part of soccer.9 Mistakes ensure debate and discussion, one of the ele-
ments that typify reaction to what is often called “the beautiful game.”
The central line of appeal by those in favor of using technology in 
sport to double-­check human decision is that additional review can 
make contests more accurate. Underlying that belief is the premise 
that the person or team with the most skill should win and that er-
rors in judgment necessarily reward the undeserving. Instant replay, 
coach’s challenges, and goal-­line review are designed to make sports 
more meritocratic and give a better chance for skill to outweigh luck. 
Video games have no such problem. The code may be poorly written 
and players could encounter bugs, glitches, or exploits, but officiating 
decisions can be perfect within the context of a video game. One need 

	
147	
Learning from Others
not have review in a video game, as the incorrect refereeing decisions 
have to be programmed into the game in the first place.
Replay and the integration of review in video games demonstrates 
two things. First, sports games are attempts to replicate and simulate 
their offline analogues. The pursuit of simulation leads to situations 
where elements are integrated into the videogame version that clearly 
need not be there, in an attempt to better imitate the sport with which 
spectators are familiar. Second, because human decisions are crucial 
to sports, sports cannot be perfect meritocracies. Incorrect officiating 
decisions will inevitably be made and, although application of tech-
nology is being used to rectify those mistakes, error is an accepted and 
acceptable part of sports. The rules of soccer are set up to be open to 
interpretation, to the point where a leading sports website can pub-
lish an article about how no one actually understands the rules of the 
game.10 Replay review in baseball has led to decisions that are tech-
nically correct but contravene past practices of the game, like when 
a player slides into a base and has his foot leave safety for a split sec-
ond that could not be spotted without a slow-­motion replay, causing 
a sportswriter to decry the situation as “unbearable.”11 Dustin Johnson 
was assessed a penalty in a golf championship decided after he was fin-
ished, yet he bailed out the governing body by winning anyway (and 
by a large margin), ensuring that the controversy only drove discus-
sion and debate, instead of dictating a winner and a loser.12 The Super 
Bowl–­winning defense of the Seattle Seahawks played with a strategy 
of committing fouls on every play, trusting that officials would not 
call all the infractions for fear of slowing down the game or seeming 
biased against the team.13 Sports are full of human judgments and 
subjectivity, which extend to the selection of players. Research in-
dicates that National Football League teams routinely overestimate 
their skill in picking players in the draft and that the actual outcomes 
are barely better than pure chance.14 Sports are determined by con-
tingency, from the weather, which can reward some athletes and pun-
ish others, to the stadium and pitch dimensions, which can encourage 
building a team to best fit a home park or stadium. Injuries routinely 
affect what happens in sport, as the winner of a season-­long grind is 
just as likely to be the healthiest as the best.15 Sports, driven by con-
temporary society and broadcast networks, are seeking to eliminate 
error, but the serendipity of sports has been a defining characteris-

Learning from Others	
148
tic.16 This indeterminacy of sport stands in stark contrast to sports 
video games, like Madden NFL, where players are given clear, eas-
ily interpreted ratings that are released in advance of the game and 
make the process of evaluating athletes transparent.17 The human 
judgments that are a key part of sports do not extend to video games, 
which are set up to reward skill because they do not involve similar 
kinds of human error. A full integration of error and the potential for 
mistakes, which could upset a strict meritocracy, are typically written 
out of videogame design and culture. When chance is a part of video 
games, gamers frequently lobby for it to be eliminated, as in the case 
of Mario Kart and the blue shell.
A second area of contrast concerns analytics and team building. 
Over the past several years, substantial investments have been made in 
sports analytics in an effort to figure out the best possible ways to play 
the game. Basketball has seen a massive shift, as insights like shot map-
ping have led teams to recognize that a long two-­point shot is the least 
­productive play in the game.18 Because “long twos” are less likely to 
draw fouls and are worth fewer points than shooting from behind the 
three-­point line, an increasing number of teams have changed their 
approaches to attract a different kind of player and teach them to play 
in way more likely to generate additional points (i.e., fewer “long twos” 
and more three-­point shots).19 Acceptance of this change has become 
so complete in a few short years that an aversion to three-­point shots 
has been described by prominent NBA writer Zach Lowe as an “ob-
jectively dumb strategy.”20 Similar baseball analytics were celebrated 
in the best-­selling book and movie Moneyball. The companion activity 
in video games is known as theorycraft or game “meta.” Theorycraft 
is an attempt to figure out the hidden rules behind a video game by 
solving the algorithms that govern interaction in the game world.21 
Meta has emerged as a shorthand version of “metagame,” which ref-
erences the optimal strategies in a given game. In both sports and 
video games the metagame analytics seek to solve changes and shifts 
over time. One approach can be matched by another, or designers 
can alter the rules in order to mitigate a newly dominant approach. 
Videogame designers can use patches and updates to change a game, 
just as sports leagues can develop new rules to combat hand-­checking 
(basketball) or to redefine pass interference (American football). Al-
tered rules spur new developments in analytics and a new meta that 
rewards different strategies.

	
149	
Learning from Others
However, a primary difference between analytics in sports and 
video games is the role of team chemistry in figuring out the opti-
mal course. Figuring out approaches or best practices in sports is one 
thing, but maximizing their value in practice requires getting a bunch 
of human beings to perform in concert. Much like producing a tele-
vision show is more difficult than writing a novel because you simply 
do not know how the actors will interact, building a sports team is 
different than playing a video game because multiple people have to 
work together for a common goal. To some extent, eSports and large 
groups of people playing together face chemistry issues, but freedom 
of movement is far more fluid in videogame guilds or clans than in 
major sports leagues. Much like you do not know when one of your 
star actors in a television show may ask off the program (e.g., Ade-
wale Akinnuoye-­Agbaje famously asked off of Lost because he was not 
happy shooting in Hawai’i), a player on a sports team may demand a 
new contract, a transfer, or a trade.22 As one basketball writer notes, 
judging how players can fit and play together “is a huge factor when 
it comes to, you know, actually winning games.”23 The focus on man-
aging people, on chemistry, is at the center of a dispute between two 
of the NBA’s leading analytics teams, the Houston Rockets and the 
Dallas Mavericks.24 Putting optimal talent together on a sports team 
is only part of the puzzle; one must also figure out how those people 
play with one another. In a video game it is common for the best char-
acters to function smoothly, to the point where top players will often 
use highly similar approaches because there is a standard, commonly 
accepted best approach to be followed and all players are expected to 
fall in line, which places focus on individual or team skill in executing 
the “best” strategy.
Team building is another example of how video games present a 
more perfect meritocracy than sports. Sports have to account for a 
human factor in a way that video games do not. As with replay and 
other forms of technology, teams are turning toward technology in an 
effort to best discern their players’ strengths and weaknesses.25 How-
ever, video games, in their design and execution, demonstrate a kind of 
control of which the general manager of a sports team can only dream. 
The fundamental difference between assembling a team in a sports 
video game and in real life is that, in real life, the team actually has to 
play together. Human limitations and team chemistry are a substan-
tial check on sports analytics, something that makes them partial and 

Learning from Others	
150
imperfect, while theorycraft and the metagame plow through video 
games and can actually solve the black box that resides within them.
A final important difference between sports and video games is the 
role of luck. Luck in video games is typically something to be ruled 
out. A video gamer facing a run of bad luck may attempt to brute 
force a solution and take the role of luck out of the computer’s hands 
through his or her repeated effort. Sports, however, are almost defined 
by luck. One way to conceptualize the difference between the two is 
to think about the role of the short run in sports versus video games. 
In video games, with the exception of competitive match play, play-
ers can typically repeat a scenario as often as they desire in order to 
minimize the role of luck. Although there is clearly a cost in terms of 
time and often in terms of in-­game resources, luck in video games can 
be reduced, or even eliminated, through repeated effort. At the very 
least, in many single-­player games the player can simply restart the 
scenario and try again. In these cases, players are simply facing some 
sort of puzzle they need to solve through moving, jumping, shooting, 
or some other game mechanic. Sports, though, exist almost exclusively 
in the short run. One of the biggest sporting organizations in the 
United States, the NCAA, is nearing a billion dollars in revenue per 
year on the back of a month-­long single-­elimination men’s basketball 
tournament.26 In the United States, major sports champions are deter-
mined by playoffs that are, at most, best-­of-­seven series between the 
most successful regular season teams. Tennis tournaments are based on 
who is most successful on a given day. Ultimately, elite soccer compe-
titions, like the UEFA Champions League and the FIFA World Cup, 
are determined by success or failure in a game or two. Sports are the 
realm of the short run, as players have limited careers and succumb 
to fatigue, while video games and the computers on which they run 
can mitigate the role of luck by simulating the same situation over and 
over and over. Video games are defined by the long run.
This difference in opportunity is a fundamental separation be-
tween how certain elements of sports and video games are defined. 
Connected to the idea of the short run, luck is an accepted factor in 
sports that is generally written out of video games. Baseball has the 
category of a perfect game, where a pitcher allows no base runners, 
and a no-­hit game, where the pitcher allows no hits. Famed pitcher 
Cy Young said, “A pitcher’s got to be good and he’s got to be lucky to 

	
151	
Learning from Others
get a no hit game.”27 Extreme success in sports is generally framed 
and shaped by serendipity. Pitching a perfect game requires some-
thing to break in your favor. Sportswriters freely note how almost 
every no-­hitter is “as much about luck as anything” and openly talk 
about how luck defines success in the NFL; along similar lines, the 
soccer star Javier Mascherano injured himself on a key tackle to clinch 
a win and responded in postgame interviews by saying, “What I did 
anyone could have done. To be in the [World Cup] final you need a 
bit of luck.”28 However, in video games, a perfect game is theoreti-
cally possible. Players talk about a perfect boss fight or a perfect en-
counter in which they hit all the right buttons (because there is a set 
of buttons in many game circumstances that defines perfection). Billy 
Mitchell has been awarded for his perfect game of Pac-­Man.29 As Raph 
Koster notes, a focus on skill is something that differentiates games 
from books, since “when stories and games are good, you can go back 
to them repeatedly and keep learning something new. But we never 
speak of mastering a good story.”30 The perception is that skill plays 
a much larger role, since player skill in a video game can determine 
outcomes, while in sports the outcome is subject to everything from 
the wind to a pebble to a stray bird. Sports are filled with stories of 
players who were among the greatest ever but did not make it to the 
big leagues because things did not break their way. Tales of outstand-
ing players who did not make a major impact as a professional can be 
readily found in basketball, soccer, and American football, among oth-
ers.31 Coaches talk about the best players they have seen that simply 
did not pan out, and star athletes chime in with contemporaries who 
were better but failed at some point due to circumstance. Players, par-
ticularly in high-­cost sports like baseball and hockey, openly talk about 
how the need for sponsors, family wealth, or a chance benefactor is a 
key precondition for being able to continue to play and develop their 
skills while growing up.32 In sports, it is widely accepted that certain 
breaks are required in order to make it to the top, a dynamic that is 
systematically erased from considerations of success in video games.
Luck also plays a role in the success of a team overall. Building a 
sports team requires being ready for a trade or a transfer when it is 
available, and certain markets, like major cities or places with lower tax 
burdens (like Texas and Florida), often have an advantage over other 
localities. This kind of structural advantage can also extend to the level 

Learning from Others	
152
of an entire league. A recent influx of television money has allowed 
teams in England’s Barclay’s Premier League to spend far more than 
peers in other countries, and the director of sport for a German club 
observed that England’s television money “posed a huge challenge for 
all of German football.”33 The 2016 Tour de France was won largely 
because the winning cyclist, Chris Froome, was supported by a team 
of other star riders (who were paid star salaries) to perform the role of 
domestiques.34 Although the Internet makes building a guild a matter 
of collecting some of the best people from around the world, sports 
teams have to assemble their squads within restrictive structures they 
do not wholly control. People playing video games are subject to the 
whims of the corporation in charge of the game, but sports teams act 
within the bounds of nations, states, cities, and leagues.35 The risk of 
injury is also far more likely to derail a group in sports than in video 
games, and staying healthy is a crucial part of winning a championship 
that sports teams cannot fully control.36 Life can certainly intervene 
for a guild chasing a world-­first, but an ill-­placed basketball stanchion 
in a glorified practice led to a compound fracture and a missed year 
for an NBA All-­Star when Paul George ran into a structural support 
in a warm-­up exhibition USA Basketball played in a small, nonstan-
dard gym.37 Sports championships are won in competition with many 
other teams, and any approach to winning a title is described by one 
sportswriter as a “low-­odds proposition filled with lucky breaks and 
moves that play out much differently than the people who make them 
anticipate.”38 Video games seek to eliminate luck through brute force 
and the ability to restart a fight, battle, or game, all effectively attempts 
to construct a perfect meritocracy. The ability to limit the potential 
of luck to wreck a player or team allows video games to focus on skill 
and merit, and to stamp out the variability and chaos that comes from 
simply suffering a bad day or a bad moment. Luck is all about recog-
nizing how skill plus effort is incomplete. The role of luck in sports 
means that the best team does not always prevail in a game or match, 
which encourages reflection about how the playing field is often rid-
dled with structural inequality.39
The role of contingency in sports—­the combination of factors like 
chemistry in team building and the need for luck to be successful—­
means the field is often subject to something akin to serendipity.40 
There is no singular, clear way to move forward, no perfect world to 

	
153	
Learning from Others
which athletes and coaches can ascend. There is discussion in sports 
of mastery, but not nearly in the same manner that exists around video 
games. Sports do not get solved over time, but games can become 
solved problems with a definitively optimal approach. Unlike Bar-
tle and Trubshaw’s designed escape of MUD1, sports present a space 
where the laws are not fairer and the experience can be incredibly 
unkind. Success in sports is contingent, as careers are limited by skill 
that degrades over time, and good outcomes can be driven by cir-
cumstance, like ending up on the right team at the right time.41 Elite 
athletes do all kinds of work to get better, but there is no real way to 
brute force one’s way to a championship like there often is in video 
games. The whole notion of a labor-­based game dependent on a grind 
emphasizes effort and teaches players that if they work hard enough 
and play often enough, they will be successful. Public discussion about 
games, even those about competitive multiplayer games like League 
of Legends, are rife with analyses of how players must play more often 
and try harder in order to get better. Studying sports and their design 
offers an example of how to get outside some of the key design fea-
tures that can prop up toxic notions about masculinity in videogame 
and technology culture. Sports are not a place where simply trying 
harder or inserting more coins is enough. To be successful, athletes 
often need to benefit from luck, serendipity, and structural advantages.
On the face of it, sports seem like a meritocracy. Sports celebrate 
skill and effort at the highest level. However, the design of sports and 
the activities that happen within them check the tyranny of merit by 
adding in human judgment, variance, short-­run odds, and luck. There 
are also occasions where sports develop rules that are explicitly anti-­
meritocratic. In the Olympics, smaller nations get access to univer-
sality places for one male and one female athlete, who can compete 
without making the Olympic qualifying standards required for oth-
ers.42 Universality places ensure that a far greater number of countries 
are able to send athletes to the Olympics, often with the goal of rais-
ing awareness about their country or heightening the profile of sports 
back home. Other rules limit or structure who is able to participate in a 
competition. The NCAA basketball tournaments give automatic entry 
to conference tournament winners—­promoting broad representation, 
rather than selecting the most meritorious entrants—­in choosing half 
the spots for the men’s tournament. Similar rules exist in many Olym-

Learning from Others	
154
pic sports that regulate the number of entrants in the competition, 
negatively affecting U.S. women gymnasts, Chinese table tennis play-
ers, and Brazilian women beach volleyball players, among others.43 All 
of these policies prioritize driving broad interest and inclusion over 
efforts to engage in the best competition. Computerized video games 
are far easier to control, as they typically present problems that can be 
solved and offer the promise of a long run where variance can be min-
imized. There are fewer overarching governing bodies that set out to 
facilitate broad representation of participants. Within the difference 
and instability of sports, there are lessons for video games. Sports seem 
to be pure contests of skill, and the increased integration of technology 
may make that more of a reality, but sports are still imperfect and, in 
videogame terms, broken or ill balanced. Benefiting from errors and 
luck is often key to being successful at sports.
From sports, video games can learn lessons about contingency, hu-
manity, and error. Some Mario games inspire strong negative reactions 
from the most hardcore of gamers, but they are also spaces in which 
video games embrace the most randomness. Mario Party is polarizing; 
for instance, the IGN review of Mario Party 10 argued that “two types 
of people get the most enjoyment out of Mario Party: small children 
and inebriated adults” and that “kids gleefully absorb it, but adults only 
suffer through it for kids’ sake.”44 As Julian Gollop, creator of the crit-
ically acclaimed XCOM: Enemy Unknown observes, random number 
generation and luck “is frowned upon” in modern game design and 
“lots of modern players don’t like it.”45 XCOM is a turn-­based strat-
egy game that heavily rewards planning, one in which decisions can 
have lasting consequences. Luck plays a major role in the game, as the 
best plans can be foiled by a bad roll, which could lead to a miss that 
later causes the death of a key team member or wipes the whole team. 
The argument Gollop makes for luck is based on risk and contingency, 
that luck undermines the development of a clear metagame because 
good planning can always be trumped by an unlucky outcome. How-
ever, contemporary games are rooted in the notion that “the game is 
somehow being ‘unfair’ to a player if something is showing you a 90 
percent chance of happening, and then it doesn’t. You played the odds 
and you lost, which makes you feel cheated.”46 This perspective on 
contemporary players is backed up by the comments in response to 
Gollop’s position, with players arguing that in offline games “it’s very 

	
155	
Learning from Others
frustrating to be unlucky at the dice, but in a digital game it feels like 
the developer doesn’t care for player experience” and “used in critical 
mission objectives, RNG [random number generation] gives a feeling 
of Luck2Win.”47 Both comments are predicated on the belief that, in 
modern video games, proper planning and skill should win out over 
all obstacles. For these kinds of players video games are different from 
other activities because they are proper tests of skill. Dependence on 
luck is considered bad form, largely because it does not represent a 
just adjudication of a player’s merit. Even in games known to employ 
luck as a larger factor, developers have spoken openly about their de-
sire to put their thumb on the scale in the favor of players. As the lead 
designer of XCOM 2 puts it, “There’s actually a number of things that 
tweak the calculations that number in the player’s favor at the lower 
difficulty settings”; in the case of an 85 percent chance, the game ac-
tually plays out with the shot as closer to a 95 percent chance in order 
to “match the player’s psychological feeling about that number.”48 In 
video games our humanity and tolerance for variance is boiled off and 
we expect perfection. When we do not get it we tend to cope poorly.
There can be a humanness to video games that is similar to the 
error built into the design of sports, thereby resisting the establish-
ment of a pure meritocracy. Increased variance and mechanisms that 
upset the dominance of skill permeate the highest level of sports, and 
those lessons can be applied to game design to articulate a future that 
does not exclusively rely on merit to determine outcomes. Cheating, 
prominent in both video games and sports, threatens to short-­circuit 
meritocracy, which is likely part of the reason organizing bodies be-
hind both activities actively seek to stamp it out. From the critically 
reviled Mario Party to the adored XCOM, there are games that have 
followed a model based on randomness and contingency, which need 
to be reclaimed and emphasized.
Higher Education and Games
Higher education in the United States frequently attempts to follow 
meritocratic norms, but it still offers a number of lessons for detox-
ifying games. On its face, higher education may not seem like it has 
much in common with videogame culture. In many ways, however, the 
overlap between the two is tied to the fact that both have been con-

Learning from Others	
156
structed as ostensibly meritocratic spaces where people of acceptable 
merit are welcomed to interact with others. The first part of under-
standing the benefit is to look more deeply at how universities work 
and then turn to positive and negative lessons that can be instructive.
A combination of public and private universities, U.S. higher ed-
ucation is heavily subsidized by federal and state governments with 
the intent of educating citizens. Part of the mission of many of these 
institutions is to serve the greater social good. Most retain nonprofit 
status, which confers tax benefits to the institution in exchange for an 
obligation to serve the public rather than shareholders. Colleges ac-
tively recruit students, often with an eye toward gathering a diverse 
student population. For many institutions, assembling a diverse stu-
dent body is a crucial goal because of the desire to stimulate critical 
thinking, and “cultural diversity inherently brings into the classroom a 
cultural perspective that is fundamentally diverse and thus forces stu-
dents to understand issues from different points of view.”49 Diversity 
is not always a goal in and of itself, but it is a key component in ac-
complishing the deeper goal of provoking thought as a teaching tool.
A second objective in gathering a diverse student population is to 
select the right mix from applicants to the institution, determining 
who makes the cut for admission and who does not. An entire indus-
try exists to help students maximize their chances of admission, from 
test-preparation courses to classes on how to write better application 
essays to organized tours that take potential students from campus 
to campus so they can learn what they need to do to have the best 
chance of being accepted. Colleges can consider many things from 
an application, typically focusing on elements like grades, test scores, 
and class ranking. In some states race can be a consideration, and most 
schools are need ­aware, which means that they take family income 
and likelihood of need for financial aid into consideration. The typ-
ical admissions criteria for a school are designed to give the appear-
ance of a meritocratic selection process; extreme focus is placed on 
personal achievements, while a heavy hand is simultaneously placed 
on the scale for other factors. Legacy considerations are common at 
almost all elite institutions, conferring direct benefits to students who 
had family members previously attend the school. Legacy and need-­
aware admissions create a situation in which Josh Freedman argues 
it is difficult to understand how a premier school can “grant legacy 

	
157	
Learning from Others
preference and take most of its students from upper class households 
while also claiming that it cares deeply about equality, diversity, and 
social mobility. In other words: You cannot have your cake, eat it too, 
and then accept its cupcakes through legacy admissions.”50 From the 
outside, the admissions process is designed to seem meritocratic, but 
there are clear cracks where considerations having little to do with an 
individual applicant’s merit are weighed.
According to Ross Douthat, the higher education system in the 
United States “was overhauled in the middle years of the twentieth 
century to be a force for near universal opportunity—­or so the over-
haulers intended,” but it has transformed into a system where social 
elites respond to interest in restructuring the system with concerns 
like “Why should they [already economically elite Americans] give it 
up? It’s not as if our child doesn’t deserve his advantages.”51 Although 
there is a heavy veneer of meritocracy, current selection processes for 
higher education in the United States largely replicate existing racial 
and class differences across generations of students.52 Studies of white 
adults in California have found that they back a meritocratic selection 
process for college up until it is pointed out that Asian students out-
perform whites on metrics like high school grades and standardized 
test scores.53 College matters, as graduates make more money and are 
more likely to be engaged at work and happy in their lives, and yet the 
appearance of a meritocracy insulates admissions selection from cer-
tain critiques about how already-­privileged students are advantaged 
because it appears fair and just.54
There are plenty of articles that address the myth of meritocracy in 
higher education, as critics frequently note how tilted the admissions 
or academic hiring processes actually are toward those with built-­in 
advantages.55 However, college admissions share a lot in common 
with advertising and marketing departments for videogame compa-
nies. Just as admissions officers fan out across the country each year 
to solicit students for their home institutions, recruiters subject vid-
eogame players to a barrage of ads that seek to draw them in, while 
the industry resists efforts to put women at the center of games (e.g., 
on game covers), often only including women, as Becky Chambers 
puts it, as “just victims and plot points.”56 The situation is not much 
better for racial depictions in games, as people of color represented 
in video games are likely to be exoticized and are relegated largely to 

Learning from Others	
158
roles in sports and fighting titles.57 For black women, the situation is 
especially dire. A count of black female protagonists that excludes cus-
tomizable and licensed characters adds up to a total of only fourteen in 
the entire history of video games by one game journalist’s counting.58 
Where people are reached and on what terms they are contacted mat-
ters. There are some strides that have been made in higher education, 
however, that can demonstrate a different path and a chance to reach 
a broader, more diverse audience for games.
This is not to say that a university system is a perfect match for 
video games. There is a key difference in the relative level of commit-
ment being made in going to a specific college or putting a new disc 
in the tray. College is frequently a four-­plus-­year, tens-­of-­thousands-­
of-­dollars experience, while video games typically require a couple 
dozen hours and around sixty bucks, plus the cost of the console and 
internet access (in the case of mobile devices, free-­to-­play pricing can 
lower the barrier to entry even further). There is also a fundamental 
difference in the structure of the institutions supporting each indus-
try. I expect that university adjuncts could find a number of things in 
common with quality assurance testers running on crunch, but most 
universities are nonprofits whereas most game developers and pub-
lishers are not. This leads to different kinds of incentive structures—­
ostensibly social good for a nonprofit, and profits for a business—­but 
the long-­term motivations of both are likely aligned in the interest of 
growing and sustaining their respective industries. Given these simi-
larities and differences, there are two key lessons that can be learned 
by examining U.S. higher education as it pertains to video games: re-
cruiting for diversity and the connection between inputs and outputs.
As race-­based affirmative action programs have become increas-
ingly contentious and schools have seen their enrollments dominated 
by students of means, many lower-­income students with the poten-
tial for strong applications simply do not apply. For first-­generation 
students, colleges have had to forge a new path for recruitment, as 
not knowing others who have gone to college can lead to mispercep-
tions about how likely students are to get into a school and about how 
much aid they may receive in order to turn an acceptance into atten-
dance. Universities have found that even if they are likely to qualify 
for highly selective schools based on their grades and test scores, most 
low-­income students simply do not apply for admission.59 Effectively, 

	
159	
Learning from Others
the background experience you have with college matters. Some of 
the programs that have had the best results in getting a more econom-
ically diverse population of applicants are straightforward. Targeted 
summer camps, sending potential students packets of information 
about schools, and programs that combine short-­term incentives, like 
laptops, with long-­term benefits, like full-­ride scholarships, are mak-
ing a dent in developing a more diverse student population of people 
who simply would not have applied otherwise.60 Schools have clearly 
found that where people are from and what they have been invited to 
attend shapes what they are likely to do. These programs give a clear 
map about how to address a lack of diversity in games—­one approach 
is to actively invite more people in and find ways to make them com-
fortable. Efforts like Girls Make Games, Girls Who Code, Dames 
Making Games, and the Pixelles give young women a safe space in 
which to develop games.61 Those initiatives should diversify the peo-
ple making games and fundamentally change the kinds of games being 
created. Other changes, like growth in both mobile and casual gam-
ing, are likely to change the population of people playing games, giv-
ing the market reason to develop titles to suit a broader population 
of players. Seemingly basic moves to include people and make them 
feel welcome, while pointing them to the potential of new things, can 
diversify previously homogenous groups.
The second key piece that can be learned from higher education 
is the link between inputs and outputs when it comes to learning and 
experience. Directly linked to the idea of knowledge scaffolding and 
merit, there are extraordinarily clear relationships between gradua-
tion rates and college preparedness.62 The most straightforward ways 
to improve a school’s graduation rate are to improve the incoming 
student body’s grade point average, increase the percentage of full-­
time students, or attract more students from families with means. In-
puts lead to outputs, so changing the composition of the inputs leads 
to a changed set of outputs; schools themselves only do so much to 
change students.
It is reasonable to presuppose that games may work in a similar 
fashion. The skills one brings into a game help shape what happens 
within that game. The more background knowledge, development, 
and time investment that has been made prior to playing a game, the 
more likely one is to be successful. This factor can subvert the notion 

Learning from Others	
160
of a meritocracy before it starts. Your output, your success, is contin-
gent on dynamics leading up to the game. Instead of being indicative 
of your skill, any given game is an examination of what came before, 
which is at least somewhat driven by whether you were encouraged to 
play video games in the first place. I suspect almost anyone who has 
played a fair chunk of video games can talk about how knowledge from 
one game translated directly to a new one. Being well versed in that 
symbol system makes you far more likely to pick it up quickly in a new 
game, which says less about how skilled you are than it does about the 
massive structural input advantages from which some players benefit.
It is notable that the world of sports and U.S. higher education are 
viewed externally as meritocratic, yet there is widespread acknowl-
edgment that conceiving of them as enterprises based solely on merit 
is fundamentally flawed. Meritocratic structures have fallen apart in 
sports, where luck and timing are key, and in higher education, where 
schools are actively seeking diversity and recognizing the relationship 
between inputs and outputs, but they still remain present and promi-
nent in the world of video games. Applying a sense of perfection to the 
meritocratic norms that persist in the tech world, video games hold on 
to perceptions that players earn their positions with true tests of skill. 
The stories in video games further these notions through repeated 
narratives about protagonists overcoming any and all reasonable, and 
some unreasonable, obstacles through their own efforts. Video games 
are built on meritocratic norms, they tell meritocratic stories, and to 
disrupt the toxicity in video-game culture it is necessary for both to 
be corralled.
There are plenty of places to look when thinking about how to 
get the toxicity out of videogame culture. An argument can be made 
that there are jerks in any community because there are jerks in the 
rest of the world, but there is also a real chance to make things bet-
ter. Looking at other meritocracies and how they address elements 
that clearly connect to video games demonstrates just how reliant on 
meritocracy video games are. Paired against sports and education, the 
focus on skill, merit, and earning your position is far more apparent in 
video games. Learning from what other cultures do well or poorly can 
provide a way to think about games with a fresh perspective. Beyond 
the examples discussed here, I expect that links to a lack of diversity 
in the development of television and film, the meritocratic tendencies 

	
161	
Learning from Others
of contemporary technology culture and startups, and the connec-
tions between independent music and independent games all provide 
points from which to rethink video games and how they are designed. 
Increasing diversity is possible in all kinds of areas, from NASA to 
computer science jobs to comics.63 There are many charted paths to 
follow, including the work done at Offworld, where Leigh Alexander 
and Laura Hudson actively recruited and published a diverse group of 
writers to analyze video games and the culture around them.64 Sports 
and higher education were chosen as comparative examples because 
of the clear links to meritocracy, luck, and diversity, but they also set 
the table for engaging in a deeper look at a new path for video games.
In the midst of a toxic game culture built on meritocratic tropes, 
there are some promising things happening in game development 
that point toward a different future for games. However, maximiz-
ing that future and actually addressing the toxicity requires thinking 
differently about games and what they can be. Charting a new path 
for games largely means thinking about ways to add to what is avail-
able and to consider the repercussions of continuing along the same 
path. The primary idea behind rhetorical analysis is that the symbol 
systems we use shape what we do and how we interact with one an-
other. Thinking deeply about the implications of those symbol systems 
can help us alter them. Popular, normal decisions and structures fade 
into the background, as they just seem like the way things are. Earn-
ing your way through a video game, showing off your skill in battle 
to win through your guile, and producing story after story about ris-
ing up from nothing to make it big are the background state of video 
games. It is just how things always have been. However, there are 
changes happening that can help to build a positive culture around 
video games.

This page deliberately left blank

	
163
Conclusion
An Obligation to Do Better
The whole point of a meritocracy is to reward skill, which makes 
the victors feel like they have earned their rewards and relegates oth-
ers to their deserved lesser status. It is a system that forecloses critical 
thought and reflection, as the whole point is to tell the winners that 
they have won their place, so they begin to act accordingly. As in the 
Paul Piff studies that demonstrate how people act like jerks when they 
are winning a rigged game, videogame culture has internalized those 
winning lessons year after year.1 Disturbing this system and construct-
ing something different is a difficult task, but there are steps that point 
to a less toxic future.
The starting point for changing game culture is recognizing that 
the issue is about adding new experiences. There is nothing wrong 
with having games that are based on meritocratic norms if those are 
only some of the games, rather than almost all of the video games. I 
know there are games I find distasteful and I suspect the same is true 
for others; changing the rhetorical construction of video games need 
not be based on restriction and eliminating titles. Instead, the neces-
sary step is to add more new, different types of games that offer an al-
ternate kind of experience and, potentially, target a new kind of player. 
New, different games can open up space for critical reflection and de-
stabilizing norms around merit in video games. Rather than shunning 
new experiences or rejecting certain genres as not “real” games, the 
one thing videogame culture needs to stop doing is heavily policing 

Conclusion	
164
the notion of what constitutes a “game.” A big tent approach, with a 
broad umbrella to include a number of different activities, gives game 
culture the chance to learn from new communities of people and get 
some joy out of doing something new and different alongside the old 
and beloved. New mechanics do trickle into older games, and the first 
step to getting rid of the toxicity in games is embracing the possibilities 
that exist. Meritocratic games have their place—­I certainly enjoyed 
Grand Theft Auto IV and I spent plenty of time competitively raiding 
in World of Warcraft—­but I am also tremendously excited about the 
possibility of exploring new ideas.
One broad way to start thinking about games differently is to assess 
what it is that games let the player do. The typical path of a game is as 
an empowerment fantasy. By way of a meritocratic design trope that 
allows the player to move forward and become more powerful over 
time, video games are often about making the player more capable 
than he or she, or any human, really is. From sports games that have 
players embodying All-­Stars to first-­person shooters that let players 
soak up more bullets and dish out more damage than a human ever 
could, games are about making the fantastic ordinary. Focusing on 
empowerment limits the kind of story that can be told and restricts 
the kind of mechanics players are likely to encounter. These elements 
feed a meritocratic symbol system, as these games instruct players that 
they are special, different, and superior to those who cannot hack it. 
However, there are games emerging that challenge such an expecta-
tion of empowerment.
In 2013, Richard Hofmeier’s Cart Life dominated the Indepen-
dent Games Festival Awards, winning the grand prize, an award for 
game narrative, and a third award given to the best abstract, uncon-
ventional game. Cart Life is a different kind of game; Leigh Alexander 
observes that the player has to “remember to pay rent, buy grocer-
ies, perhaps try to make friends in the community. If you have time. 
Time in Cart Life passes mercilessly, with no opportunity to correct 
for things you’ve missed.”2 One character in the game needs to smoke 
or he slows down, another character needs to pick up her daughter 
after school. The player is placed in a position seeking to balance all 
the kinds of chores and tasks a normal person has to juggle on a reg-
ular basis. Alexander argues that the game is effectively about reflec-
tion, as it “has the odd power to throw your life into sharp relief” and 

	
165	
Conclusion
is effectively “a reminder of how deeply games can communicate the 
value of small victories.”3 Sporting a Metacritic rating of 79, with pos-
itive reviews from a number of mainstream game outlets, Cart Life 
provides a different kind of game experience. Instead of building a 
game around making a player increasingly powerful, the game has 
you live through the life of someone with everyday problems. The 
game is not about a fantasy, aspirational life; it is about reflecting on 
the life of people around you about whom you do not always think. 
The game is all about empathy and, although players are striving to 
make their lives better, it is not driven by the same sort of aspirational 
meritocratic narrative typical of most video games.
Another, related game that demonstrates a different mode of game 
building is Lucas Pope’s Papers, Please. Simulating the life of a border 
patrol agent in Arstotzka, a communist state placed in an imagined 
Cold War period, Papers, Please requires players to make the kinds 
of decisions border patrol agents need to make on a regular basis. 
In the flow of people seeking entry into your country are smugglers, 
spies, and terrorists, as well as visitors simply seeking to reunite with 
loved ones. The game has been highly reviewed by a wide variety of 
sources, earning praise in publications ranging from the paragon of 
core gaming, IGN, the PC-­focused Rock, Paper, Shotgun, and broader 
news sites like the New Statesman.4 Papers, Please—­with an 85 score on 
Metacritic, which would make many AAA game developers envious—­
forces players into a position where they are simultaneously trying 
to make border control decisions and take care of their family. Play-
ers are paid for each person correctly processed and can be fined for 
improper decisions. Side deals can be cut with shady characters, and 
players are often faced with such moral choices as separating families 
or deciding whether to let a human trafficker with proper paperwork 
into the country, all while trying to process enough people to buy food 
and medicine for your own family. The game is dark, stressful, and, as 
the additional levels of paperwork stack up, quite difficult. The game 
is also notable because of how it is built, which is fundamentally dif-
ferent from most video games.
Reviews of the game tell of its core features, describing how Papers, 
Please is an experience, one in which, Justin McElroy believes, play-
ers, in their work at the immigration booth, “will reduce the living, 
breathing humans in front of your window to a series of documents. 

Conclusion	
166
It’s inevitable. Once you’ve made this essential leap, you’ll be staggered 
at the injustice you’re willing to visit on your fellow man.”5 The game 
instructs about the everyday grind faced by bureaucrats, and Richard 
Cobbett observes that “very few other games have so perfectly encap-
sulated just how being trapped in this kind of dehumanising role can 
be, in the best possible way, and both inside and out of the dreaded 
grey booth.”6 Not exactly “fun,” but not exactly not fun; John Walker 
argues that the game “is unquestionably something unique” because 
“it is, undeniably a paperwork sim. And perhaps that’s enough to put 
some off it entirely. But it’s definitely worth getting past that (other-
wise entirely sensible) prejudice in this case. It’s peculiarly engrossing, 
darkly ominous, and a fascinating exploration of morality versus prog-
ress.”7 Players are encouraged to reassess their prior conceptions of 
how they would act in a pressure-­filled situation, since, according to 
Leigh Alexander, they are forced to choose whether they wish to “per-
form nude body-­scans on frail refugees” to prevent terrorism, which 
“forces you to think about the human cost of bureaucracy by creat-
ing empathy with all its living components.”8 Even through the rapid 
pace of the game, in which players seek to process as many people as 
they can, Papers, Please encourages reflection and critical thought. Did 
I really just turn that person down? What choices do I need to make 
to provide for my family? Is the fastest way to process people simply 
to turn everyone down?
Papers, Please feels and plays differently than most video games, 
which Leigh Alexander explains by examining the core of the game: 
“Most computer games are power fantasies, but in exploring the daily 
work of a border control agent, [game designer Lucas] Pope’s con-
cocted a disempowerment fantasy. What if you weren’t the brave spy 
or roguish smuggler, but the guy who has the boring job of stopping 
him?”9 Effectively, the game inverts the typical videogame experience. 
The player is not all-­powerful but rather consistently stressed and 
routinely placed in situations where there are no good, easy choices. 
Playing more often can certainly make one more skilled at process-
ing documentation, but the end state of the game is something more 
like survival than the glorious future that lies at the end of many other 
titles. In fact, beating the game unlocks an “endless mode” where 
all there is to do is process documentation. Papers, Please, dark and 
gloomy, largely breaks away from meritocratic norms in both narra-

	
167	
Conclusion
tive and design. It fosters space for reflection and encourages players 
to think about choices made both within games and within the world 
that exists outside them.
A third game that offers a non-­meritocratic mode of play is Tell-
tale’s series The Walking Dead: The Game.10 Based in the world de-
veloped by the comic books of the same name, the games are episodic 
and individual episodes are packaged into seasons held together by 
overarching stories and adventures. The game starts by placing play-
ers in the role of Lee Everett, a former University of Georgia pro-
fessor who was convicted of murder and is being transported to jail 
when the zombie apocalypse begins. Shortly after beginning he comes 
across Clementine, a young girl whose parents are away and whose 
babysitter has been transformed into a zombie. The game, especially 
the first season, is well reviewed, earning praise from a variety of dif-
ferent outlets, with Metacritic scores in the high 80s and low 90s, de-
pending on the platform being considered. However, one of the most 
notable aspects of the series is how it subverts typical notions of what 
a game is or should be.
Reviews of the series typically focus on the role of choice in its de-
sign. One reviewer contends that “the most engaging moments in the 
series revolve around choice” and that “choices have meaning. Charac-
ters you interact with remember what you’ve said and respond accord-
ingly down the line.”11 The game is morally ambiguous, since the rules 
are different in a zombie apocalypse, and reviewer Hollander Cooper 
found that players are quickly forced to acknowledge that “there’s no 
‘right’ when right can mean shooting an innocent child before it can 
turn into a flesh-­eating beast, and there’s no ‘wrong’ when wrong can 
mean stealing the supplies you need from those just as needy as you. 
The Walking Dead is the story of the choices you can’t live with, and 
the choices you can, coming together to create an experience as de-
pressing and pessimistic as it is remarkable and memorable.”12 The 
game basically funnels players into situations where they are forced 
to make a decision in conversation or where they are forced to quickly 
respond to a quick-­time event in order to defend imperiled charac-
ters. Each episode has a handful of decision points where players can 
choose different routes through the game, which means that, for Greg 
Miller, the game is effectively “like a coloring book: we each have the 
same black and white sketch, but it’s up to us to fill it in as we see fit. 

Conclusion	
168
The relationships I’ve built, the emotions I’ve felt, the choices I’ve 
made—­that’s what makes The Walking Dead: The Game so endear-
ing.”13 Choice means conferring agency to players, even if there are a 
limited number of scripted options from which the player is deciding. 
When it works, Hollander Cooper argues that the game is designed 
in a way that, “despite not always being in control, The Walking Dead 
makes you feel as though you are. Even though you can’t always save 
someone from death, you can give it your best try, shaping the person 
you are. And it’s up to you to decide if it’s worth the effort to change 
what, in all likelihood, can not [sic] be changed.”14 By effectively mak-
ing the game about choices, rather than combat, The Walking Dead 
works differently from many other games and becomes more acces-
sible for a broad audience. By setting the game in a dark, postapoca-
lyptic setting, the design and narrative of The Walking Dead squeeze 
out meritocratic narrative and design because there is no grand, es-
capist victory.
The game does not clearly fit in an established gaming genre; its 
fence ­straddling is best shown in the Touch Arcade reviews of the first 
two seasons. The reviews are written by different people, and the dif-
ficulty of labeling the game is clear. The first season is assessed as “an 
adventure game first and foremost. When there is ‘action,’ it occurs in 
QTE [quick-­time event] segments that have you tapping or swiping 
contextually as a zombie runs towards you.”15 Fewer than two years 
later, the review of the second season notes, “this is less an adventure 
game and more of a visual novel, albeit one that does a very good job 
of keeping the player within the lines while simultaneously making 
them feel like the story is their own.”16 For me, the most interesting 
thing about the two seemingly oppositional statements is that I agree 
with both of them. The game is both an adventure game and a visual 
novel. The Walking Dead: The Game straddles boundaries and sits 
in a space between genres, which makes it distinct from other video 
games. By opting out of traditional categories, and by utilizing the 
narrative tropes that are typical of a zombie apocalypse, The Walking 
Dead bucks the meritocratic trends endemic to most contemporary 
video games.
An extension of defying established game genres is that The Walk-
ing Dead series does not really depend on skill in the traditional sense 

	
169	
Conclusion
of video games. There are quick-­time events, which can be somewhat 
tricky or difficult to manage, but they do not serve as the same sort of 
obstacle as the kinds of interactions found in most traditional titles. 
Instead of needing to jump on platforms, navigate three-­dimensional 
spaces, or master complicated series of button presses, all of which are 
routinely found in adventure games, the actions in The Walking Dead 
are relatively rare and can be repeated as often as one needs in order to 
complete them. Most of the experience of playing the game is reading, 
moving around in small, contained areas, and simple selections made 
from menus. The events add depth and dynamism to play, but they are 
structured in a manner that is forgiving and appeal to a much broader 
audience than most other games. By engaging in a more accessible 
level of design, The Walking Dead and other games by Telltale subvert 
the typical knowledge scaffolding found in video games, as it is acces-
sible to those well versed in video games as well as those who are not. 
These benefits are compounded by the fact that the game is based on 
a world developed in comic books and television shows. Those origin 
points mean that the games implicitly reward transmedia knowledge 
found in other texts, quite possibly inviting a larger audience to play. 
In blending elements of a visual novel with game play, The Walking 
Dead points to another way to avoid the meritocratic trap of video: 
by subverting design based on skill transfer, and thereby rejecting the 
structural inequality that comes with it.
The Walking Dead’s focus on functioning like a visual novel pro-
vides a way of thinking about the Fullbright Company’s Gone Home. 
In this “game” the player takes a first-­person role as Kaitlin Green-
briar, who returns to the house where her parents and sister, Saman-
tha, live, only to find it empty. Samantha left a note on the door to 
instruct Kaitlin to not look for any answers; the player can explore 
throughout the house to unravel what her family has been doing. Set 
in the mid-­1990s and offering rich environmental detail, Gone Home 
is as much an experience as anything else. Unlike the visual novel of 
The Walking Dead, in Gone Home there are no other characters with 
whom to talk. Instead, everything is found through interaction with 
the house and the objects within it. Resonance comes in the interac-
tion with the artifacts Kaitlin discovers and in how the game is de-
signed to make the player “feel like you’re in a space, but that you’re 

Conclusion	
170
also playing a game, and the game is playing back with you.”17 Gone 
Home is a compelling, immersive, and interesting experience that chal-
lenges the traditional structure of games.
One of the most interesting aspects of Gone Home is how the re-
ception of the game encouraged reflection about what actually con-
stitutes a video game. While one review described it as “a first-­person 
exploratory adventure game,” another went out of its way to point out 
that the game play is limited to “walking, reading, and the occasional 
mix-­tape listening” and continued on to note that the game “has no 
action to speak of. You’ll never see a character’s face, and you’ll never 
earn a score on a leaderboard. No online, no multiplayer, no DLC 
[downloadable content].”18 Both reviews were quite positive, but they 
did not know what to do with the game, a dynamic that surprised the 
developers as they found Gone Home becoming “ingrained in the dis-
cussion of what a video game actually is.”19 Gone Home shares elements 
with many video games, from mode of distribution to the profile of 
the designers to the way in which players move through a rich world. 
However, you cannot win Gone Home or prove that you played it 
better than someone else did; it is not a meritocratic proving ground. 
These factors are precisely why Gone Home is an important piece in 
beginning to think about games differently.
Discussion of Gone Home typically focuses on the emotional power 
of the game, which is particularly meaningful because the primary 
characters and themes in the game are not represented in most video 
games. In her review, Danielle Riendeau wrote, “Gone Home resonated 
deeply for me, partially because the particulars of the story are eerily 
familiar. I was surprised by the story, and even more surprised by my 
reaction. I’ve mowed down thousands of bad guys and aliens and evil 
henchmen in my 25-­plus-­year gaming career. And I’ve enjoyed emo-
tional experiences and fallen for a number of memorable characters in 
that time. But I never expected to see myself—­or such a strong reflec-
tion of myself and my own life—­in a video game.”20 For people who 
grew up in the 1990s, Gone Home is a version of our childhood or ad-
olescence. It may not be our tale, but it is close enough to many of our 
experiences that the game prompts feeling, nostalgia, and reflection. 
A less lyrical, more direct assessment states that “games like The Last 
of Us and BioShock Infinite allow us to explore exceptionally realized 
worlds, but Gone Home’s world just feels straight-­up real.”21 A third 

	
171	
Conclusion
review argues that Gone Home’s constraints make it feel “stunningly 
universal, even though from some angles it’s unique, complicated, 
even difficult.”22 Simultaneously possessing a central story and com-
pelling bits and pieces that drive the player to look deeper, Gone Home 
is largely about what it was like to live at a particular point in time.
With a different focus and different mechanics than most games, 
it should not be surprising that classification of Gone Home is difficult. 
The game subverts dominant expectations and is also a compelling 
enough experience that it is eminently worthy of attention and discus-
sion. Gone Home is troublesome because it demonstrates an alternate 
way of doing things, proving that the games we have played up until 
this point were only part of what can be made. In challenging dom-
inant norms and expectations, Gone Home shows how a compelling 
videogame experience can be made without any sort of meritocratic 
element. Without the leaderboards or crosshairs, one can still develop 
a game worthy of awards and extended analysis. Something new can 
be done, but when the new way of playing comes along we won’t al-
ways know what to do with it.
Entire genres of games also challenge parts of the design or nar-
rative endemic in meritocratic video games. A whole raft of so-­called 
casual games offers alternate modes of game design, often in a way that 
maximizes the ability of a wide group of people to play the game and 
minimizes the need for finely honed skill. Often derided as “clicker” 
games, titles like FarmVille, Mafia Wars, and Kim Kardashian: Holly-
wood are not difficult to play. Most of the action in the games is rele-
gated to a simple click, and then bars move, items spray into the air, 
and the cycle is repeated until your energy is exhausted, at which point 
you need to wait until your energy refills to play again. Often played 
on Facebook or mobile devices, many casual games have a fundamen-
tally different audience than console and PC titles do, one that skews 
more heavily toward women and others who are left out of the tradi-
tional category of gamers.
This genre of games often employs elements of meritocratic nar-
ratives, but the mechanics often subvert key elements of meritocratic 
game design. Instead of designing the game around puzzles, compli-
cated series of button presses, or the ability to maneuver with two 
thumb sticks, games like Kim Kardashian: Hollywood reward per-
sistence, patience, and the desire to keep pushing buttons to watch 

Conclusion	
172
bars move, all of which challenge the dominant design norms of video 
games. Effort is certainly involved in these games, but by stripping out 
skill requirements the barrier for entry is lowered and the potential 
audience is vast. Casual games are often regarded as lesser than more 
mainstream video games, but that perception is based almost exclu-
sively on the relative level of skill involved in playing them. Calling 
these games “clickers” or “casual” marginalizes them, and those jeers 
are linked to the games’ resistance of meritocratic design norms be-
cause they don’t require the player to show off any “real” skills.
Core console games can also represent complicated relationships 
with meritocratic norms. Players in No Man’s Sky get more powerful 
over the course of the game in a fairly traditional meritocratic fash-
ion, but the design of the game is more complicated than that. Highly 
promoted in advance of its launch and excoriated, even sued, for not 
meeting prerelease expectations, No Man’s Sky stepped outside the 
meritocratic framework, promoting exploration and long-­term en-
gagement. Separating the game from the hype around it is difficult, 
largely because the developer made so many promises that no game 
could possibly meet.23 However, one of the most interesting parts of 
the game’s release was how reviewers discussed the game. In general, 
game reviews are odd things to read and write. Effectively a statement 
of personal taste about whether an expenditure is “worth” it, game re-
viewers are obligated to demonstrate that they have sufficiently en-
gaged the game and have developed a knowledgeable opinion about 
it. That often leads to an instrumental kind of play based on devel-
oping a perspective that can then be conveyed in an article. Reviews 
for No Man’s Sky are different, largely because the game is different. 
The Kotaku review engages in two quite different approaches within 
a single review. The first was instrumental, as the reviewer sought to 
chew through the story to generate something to write about. The 
second was lyrical and focused on leisurely exploration. In the end, 
Kirk Hamilton concludes, “The first time I played No Man’s Sky, I 
moved forward too fast. The second time, I stood still. Now, I’m ready 
to set out again, anchored by the things I’ll leave behind.” Hamilton’s 
key takeaway is that, when confronted with a different kind of game, 
we must relearn how to play it. Forcing a non-­meritocratic game into 
a highly rigid framework makes it harder to appreciate it on its own 
terms. Certainly the promotion surrounding the game led to criticism, 

	
173	
Conclusion
but there is plenty of room to see how introducing a game based on 
exploration requires that players and journalists take time to reframe 
their perspectives and appreciate it on its own terms.
Another example of a video game that demonstrates resistance 
to meritocratic norms is Faunasphere, a now-­defunct massively mul-
tiplayer online game (MMOG) played on browsers and Facebook. 
Faunasphere, subject to a book-­length analysis by Mia Consalvo and 
Jason Begy, was largely popular with middle-­aged women players and 
resisted the fantasy and science-fiction tropes that dominate most 
other video games. The game allowed players to have multiple pets, 
and the limit on how many they held was tied to whether they were 
paying for the game. Although there were levels to progress through, 
the game did not inspire the kind of competition that typifies most ti-
tles. Instead, increasing levels helped players become more successful 
at breeding their pets, but the best breeding opportunities required 
cooperation. These design choices, in combination with players who 
were largely unaware of typical norms in online games, meant that the 
game featured what Consalvo and Begy deem a “culture of niceness.”24 
The early game play in Faunasphere “depended on players helping one 
another—­usually by giving one another eggs for crossbreeding fauna 
or different items in order to decorate personal spheres [a house-­like 
space].”25 It is quite notable that Faunasphere both attracted a differ-
ent player base than other games and helped structure positive in-
teractions for players. That said, the game only survived for about 
two years. Although there are plenty of other short-­lived MMOGs in 
gaming history, it is notable that a game company was unable to find 
a way to sufficiently market and monetize a title that did not target 
conventional demographics.
A final group of titles that show a different future for games, I 
would deem experimental. Johann Sebastian Joust, Die Gute Fabrik’s 
no-­graphics, motion-­controller version of the folk game Ninja, is a 
great example of an alternate mode of design. Players in Johann Se-
bastian Joust are given motion controllers and tasked with keeping 
their motion in sync with the music while knocking opponents out of 
sync. As the music speeds up, players can move more quickly, but they 
must be ready to slow down when the tempo of the music changes. 
There are certainly barriers to play—­one needs a whole lot of mo-
tion controllers—­but when the game is being played it works as an 

Conclusion	
174
invitation for other people to join in. There are far fewer barriers to 
playing a game like Joust than most video games, as it relies on move-
ments and the kind of interaction that is far more typical of daily life 
than years of sitting behind a controller or a keyboard, even though 
the game design advantages those with long arms and good balance.
Other games, like thatgamecompany’s Journey or David O’Reilly’s 
Mountain, challenge fundamental notions about what games are and 
can be. Journey is a game without words, and reviews laud “its beauti-
ful story without a line of dialogue either spoken or written out” and 
describe it as a game where “you never fight. You don’t score points 
or compete with anyone. You don’t make meaningful choices or ven-
ture about an open world. There is no clear set of goals or obstacles 
to achieve or overcome.”26 In Journey you can play and interact with 
another person in a deep, resonant manner, but you cannot talk with 
them. Further, the primary interaction you share is one of helping the 
other player move forward, instead of competing against them in an 
attempt to reach a mutually exclusive goal. The director of Journey 
argues that player interaction is structured by game design: “I believe 
that very often it’s not really the player that’s an asshole. It’s the game 
designer that made them an asshole. If you spend every day killing 
one another how are you going to be a nice guy? All console games 
are about killing each other, or killing one another together. . . . Our 
games make us assholes.”27 Journey is designed with the explicit intent 
to cause players to interact positively; by changing how characters in 
the game interacted, Journey set up a system designed to encourage 
cooperation by awarding the most feedback to players for acts aiding 
others.28 This parallels the kind of interactions Consalvo and Begy cite 
in Faunasphere: by focusing on something other than killing things, 
the terms of interaction change and the community can become more 
positive and helpful. Changing the terms for engagement and in-­game 
incentive structures can have a massive impact on how players interact 
and what they choose to do.
Mountain is odd and challenging, especially as it is a game you do 
not really play. As an “ambient procedural mountain simulator,” Moun-
tain gives the player “nothing to ‘play’; your mountain exists, sunlight 
and dark play over its green craggy face, weather happens to it. Occa-
sionally a few words appear on the screen: The mountain has thoughts 
or feelings about the weather or the night.”29 In the end, Mountain 

	
175	
Conclusion
is at least in part about talking and thinking about the experience of 
playing it. It has a certain kind of peace and leads some to wax elo-
quent about the game as a deep endurance challenge; others tend to 
uninstall it fairly quickly.30 The game does have an end point, gener-
ally when the mountain is destroyed by something, but the riddle of 
Mountain lies mostly in the empty space of interaction between the 
player and the procedures generating the mountain. The player does 
not have any more control over the mountain than they do over an 
offline mountain; the game feels mainly like an inkblot that resists easy 
categorization. Even if a game like Mountain is quickly uninstalled, 
it is important and worthy of attention because it resists everything I 
thought a game could be.
There is also room for experimentation in game modes and de-
sign. When game companies design multiplayer modes, they have 
clear choices about how those modes will be played and the terms 
for interaction among players. From cooperative to competitive play, 
multiplayer can be designed in a number of ways, but the journalist 
Mark Serrels speaks for many when he notes that multiplayer modes 
in video games often make players “feel a little violent” because they 
often encounter situations where they face verbal harassment for mak-
ing small mistakes, which is “not fun. Not fun at all. A huge barrier to 
entry. No-­one likes to be shouted at or abused.”31 Multiplayer can be 
designed differently, however. Games like Splatoon and Rocket League 
are designed to make it okay for players to not be able to perform as 
well as others. Developing games that do not depend on killing, in-
creasing the dynamics of the visual design, making the game quicker 
so players do not have to dwell on a loss, and giving players a clear role 
to play opens up opportunities and decreases the barriers to entry for 
new players. These kinds of chances offer up a version of multiplayer 
that is more like recreational sports leagues than competitive ones, 
which creates a multiplayer space where, Serrels argues, “everyone 
is playing, everyone’s enjoying the experience. Even if you lose, even 
if you played terribly, everyone leaves happy. Everyone shakes hands 
at the end. Everyone is having a good time.”32 Multiplayer is a place 
where games still have room to innovate; the design choices made in 
those modes are a key factor in disrupting meritocratic norms and re-
placing them with collaboration and fun.
Although many of the games mentioned as positive examples could 

Conclusion	
176
be readily classified as indie darlings, I certainly hope there are more 
interesting games coming on a much wider scale. For now, the inde-
pendent game movement is largely where innovation in games is hap-
pening. This is likely because mainstream, AAA games now require 
massive budgets, which make publishers and developers exception-
ally risk averse. Independent studios have more room for experimen-
tation and exploration, so they often can take a chance and produce 
games that do not fit conventional norms. The important lesson that 
can be taken from these games is that non-­meritocratic games can be 
designed, can be interesting, and can be successful. AAA games like 
Borderlands 2 and the debut of the “Best Friends Forever” mode also 
demonstrate how innovation can happen across games, even if the 
debut of that particular mode was marred by the casual sexism of the 
discussion around it. Although I doubt that a few games here or there 
will resolve the toxicity in game culture, games like these change the 
terms on which players interact. There will still be jerks who play, as 
there are jerks everywhere, but dropping the meritocratic norms of 
video games puts players in a dramatically different position than they 
are in contemporary, mainstream games. Disrupting what currently 
exists is a fundamental part of addressing toxicity, which needs to reach 
beyond banning particular players to affect the design and narrative 
in the games themselves. The abandonment of meritocratic norms is 
likely what makes these games contentious for some, as it is readily 
apparent they symbolize a new future for video games.
Dear Game Designers
Changing the meritocratic norms in games and building better com-
munities in games involves at least two major steps that can be learned 
from other areas where meritocracies are cracking and from the games 
that chart a different path for game design. The first piece of de-
constructing the meritocratic norms in games is to infuse risk into 
or change the way competition works, particularly in single-­player 
games. One of the key effects of the meritocratic design of games is 
that players are largely in control. Through their effort, skill, and per-
sistence, they are assured a win. Competitive multiplayer takes away 
an assured victory, but the fault of the loss is not necessarily yours, as 
so many teammates are clearly performing worse than you are. Video 

	
177	
Conclusion
games do not have to be this way. Early video games, like Space In-
vaders and Donkey Kong, did not have win conditions. Although classic 
arcade games often had kill screens, where the game simply stopped, 
the most common end state for almost all was that the game sped 
up to a point where the player was no longer able to keep up. Video 
games need the risk and contingency that, to some degree, come with 
sports, where players fundamentally understand that the success they 
see is not always their own. Serendipity and luck are primary ways to 
disrupt meritocratic game design, as minimizing elements of skill is 
part of a symbol system that stands in contrast to meritocracy. The 
other route is to follow the path of Gone Home and skip altogether the 
leaderboard, competition, and other elements that typify meritocratic 
video games. Opting out of meritocratic expectations changes both 
the experience of the game and the audience video games are likely 
to reach, all while providing a compelling product.
Developing games that have hints of meritocracy leads to bigger 
problems than one would think. Study after study, from Paul Piff’s 
work with Monopoly to Robert H. Frank’s work on skill and sharing, 
demonstrate how people who find themselves in a stronger position 
act terribly toward others.33 Shannon K. McCoy and Brenda Major 
have found that any sort of meritocratic cue can cause those very 
human feelings to rise up, which disrupts efforts to develop a pos-
itive community around a game.34 However, there is work that also 
shows the promise of a different approach. Inducing feelings of grati-
tude in players produces the opposite kind of response. When people 
are put into a state of gratitude, like when they acknowledge the role 
of luck in their success, Monica Y. Bartlett and David DeSteno have 
found they increase their efforts to help others, even if it costs them 
personally.35 Even better, instead of the negative health benefits that 
come with meritocratic systems, Nancy Digdon and Amy Koble found 
that gratitude tends to make people feel better.36 Perhaps most strik-
ing from a game design perspective, Nathan DeWall and his team of 
researchers found that people put into a state of gratitude are more 
likely to feel empathy toward others and less likely to act aggressively 
when provoked.37 Designing games with an eye toward prompting 
gratitude and reflection about good fortune is far more likely to en-
courage players to engage productively with one another. Instead of 
the relentless focus on the individual that comes with meritocracy, 

Conclusion	
178
gratitude facilitates consideration of a group, of a larger system and 
the well-­being of all.
A second way to disrupt the meritocracy is to think through how 
to seed and recruit new communities of people in an effort to detox-
ify games. As Richard Bartle noted long ago, when the community of 
a game falls out of balance, the attrition of certain player types can 
produce a death spiral in which no one is getting what they want out 
of a game.38 Higher education demonstrates the value of recruitment, 
and some games have made similar efforts. Monaco: What’s Yours Is 
Mine is a PC game in which players work together to execute a heist. 
Fundamentally a cooperative game, the efforts of any one player to 
subvert the mission would make the game far less fun for all of his 
or her teammates. The beta and early community of the game was 
seeded through special invitations given to active readers of Rock, 
Paper, Shotgun, with the intent of attracting positive players. Effec-
tively, Monaco’s developers sought to attract players seeking to play 
the game with other players in an effort to set positive norms before 
the title officially launched. In a game dependent on people working 
together, developing a positive community is a critical step that is far 
harder to fix after people have already seen negative behavior. Craft-
ing a proper, nontoxic symbol system in advance of officially releas-
ing the game at least gave Monaco and its players a chance to develop 
a supportive community.
Another way to think about achieving similar goals would be to 
take a lesson from sports and seek to include a broader representa-
tion of players, with the intent of benefiting the system in the long 
term, displacing a relentless focus on who is best right now. From the 
universality place that ensures representation from a broader range 
of countries to the NCAA bids given to small teams destined to get 
demolished in the first round of a basketball tournament, inclusivity 
has substantial benefits in competitive play. Finding ways to promote, 
celebrate, and advance players throughout the various skill levels can 
encourage others to see a path forward for themselves. When Riot 
relies on simply growing the player base of League of Legends to ad-
dress issues of diversity, it misses opportunities to actually move things 
forward. Instead, it could seek out communities of people who play 
less or who are not as widely represented and give them a chance to 
participate on a prominent platform. An inclusive approach can spur 
the imagination and help players think about how they can become 

	
179	
Conclusion
part of something larger, instead of lamenting that they simply can-
not reach the heights of the best players in the game.
Our Obligation
There is no one, clear answer to fixing games. However, the vid-
eogame community stands apart in its willingness to attack its own. 
As I write, GamerGate is still ongoing—­and I am sure that more 
will occur between when I write this and when you read this—­but 
among the many takeaways from GamerGate is the undercurrent 
that those in the videogame community understand what is going on, 
but those outside it do not.39 There are certainly elements of game 
journalism worthy of questioning—­from the pro-­consumption stand-
point of most reviews to the money paid to YouTubers in exchange 
for favorable coverage of games and the promotion of questionably 
legal, assuredly rigged gambling sites through online videos—­but, as 
a movement, GamerGate functions more like a mob of harassment 
than a bona fide organization for addressing structural problems in 
video games.40 The general technology community calls it “the most 
depressing thing to have happened in games in quite some time,” and 
larger, general-purpose publications refer to it as a “misogynist and 
racist movement” that should be considered a hate group: “There is 
no neutral stance to take on that—­we are either with them or against 
them.”41 Videogame culture is insular, restricted, and toxic. There are 
real impacts to these kinds of campaigns beyond the people harassed 
and bullied out of covering video games—­namely, many won’t take 
on writing about video games as a topic in the first place. One jour-
nalist recounted talking to a colleague who was grateful for not cov-
ering video games even though “here is a guy who spends all day on 
the phone with officials from the Pentagon trying to ferret out which 
multi-­billion dollar weapon systems are actually expensive boondog-
gles and, thanks to Gamergate, he’s terrified to even spill a drop of 
virtual ink covering video games.”42 Toxic culture and repressive cam-
paigns have the effect of pushing people out, silencing voices, and 
cutting off discussion. Reconstructing videogame culture requires rec-
ognizing that many talented, good people are being bullied and have 
stopped thinking about, writing about, and playing games before they 
even started. Although some people at the heart of GamerGate have 
been linked to misogynist, white supremacist, and other hate cam-

Conclusion	
180
paigns, the videogame community provided a fertile ground within 
which to attract adherents to their message and sustain the effort long 
past its sell-­by date.
Games have been telling gamers for a long time that if they are 
good enough and work hard enough they will have earned the wins 
they collect at the end of the level. There is no single cause to all these 
problems, but these concerns are closely linked to the kinds of issues 
Michael Young originally hypothesized would occur under a meritoc-
racy. The hate, the lack of understanding, the feelings of superiority, 
all these elements are tightly linked to symbol systems related to merit 
and earning one’s advancements. As Whitney Phillips observed about 
trolls and discourse online, it is often the systems and structures that 
need to be addressed, as changing problematic norms is a key factor 
in addressing troublesome communities.
The job of rhetorical analysis is to disrupt moments like this one in 
video games. Rhetorical criticism is well designed to assess a symbol 
system and how it works to enable certain kinds of appeals and dis-
courage others. The new perspective that can be given by rhetoric is 
similar to the direct engagement that can be furthered by certain kinds 
of education. In advocating for the active learning that often typifies a 
Jesuit education, Rev. Peter-­Hans Kolvenbach explained that “when 
the heart is touched by direct experience, the mind may be challenged 
to change.”43 The beautiful thing about video games is that they can 
provide a direct experience for their players. The horrible thing is that 
they have primarily offered only a limited, meritocratic experience. 
However, there is plenty of room for change. Addressing toxicity in 
games requires taking on the meritocratic design and narratives woven 
within them. Certain games and elements of other parts of culture give 
a roadmap for how video games can change, which can disrupt what 
exists now with something new. I hope that is a journey we, as a part 
of videogame culture, take on in order to make video games a more 
accepting, less toxic place. It is dangerous for any of us to go alone, 
so we must gather what resources we can to make video games and 
game culture better. We have an obligation and an opportunity to fix 
a desperately broken system. It’s time for change. We can do it. We 
need to do it. Let’s get started.

	
181
Acknowledgments
Although my name is the one on the cover of this book, there are many 
people without whom this project simply could not have happened. 
Thank you to everyone who helped make this possible.
The initial seeds of this project began in the Arrupe Seminar at 
Seattle University. Thank you to Father Peter Ely, SJ, and Jennifer 
Tilghman-­Havens for being exceptional moderators and to all of my 
Arrupe group mates. I would not have thought about this project in 
the way I did without the Arrupe Seminar. Funding for the begin-
ning of this project came as a part of a Seattle University College of 
Arts and Sciences Dean’s Research Fellowship. Thank you to Anina 
Walas and Katheryn Smith for rocking your projects. Thanks to the 
colleagues in my department for supporting my work.
Professional feedback at many conferences and presentations was 
incredibly valuable. My first presentation on this topic was given as 
part of an invitation by Mia Consalvo at her M-­Lab at Concordia 
University. Thank you to Mia for offering the opportunity to pres-
ent the work in a nascent stage and to all who attended. In particular, 
Bart Simon made huge contributions to the early stages of my think-
ing, and many of my responses to his comments show up in the final 
version of the work. Thank you to Adrienne Shaw for answering all 
of my questions about the University of Minnesota Press. Thank you 
to all who made contributions or comments that helped push and 
adapt my thinking or provided an example for how to think about 

Acknowledgments	
182
these concepts. Substantial credit for the quality of the arguments in 
the book is due to the contributions of its reviewers: Mia Consalvo, 
Torill Mortensen, Carly Kocurek, and the anonymous “Reviewer 2.” 
Thank you to Cathy Hannabach and Emma Johnson at Ideas on First 
for the awesome index.
The University of Minnesota Press has been amazing through-
out this process. I am deeply indebted to Jason Weidemann, who 
gave great advice for my first book; I am so glad we got to work to-
gether on this one. His comments on the manuscript were insight-
ful and provocative, and he definitely made the book better. Danielle 
Kasprzak and Erin Warholm gave great guidance and feedback, and 
I hope to work with them more in the future. Nicholas Taylor and 
Mike Stoffel deserve credit for quality copyediting. Thanks to Daniel 
Ochsner for moving the book through the production process. Thank 
you to everyone at the Press who made this possible and consistently 
made it a better book.
Thank you to all the people who kept me going and asked good 
questions. Thank you to Fatima Azami and everyone at Mother’s Place 
for watching Piper. Thank you to Caitlin Ring Carlson for running 
and keeping me sane, and to Wayno for driving us to races and in-
troducing me to SWGOH. Thanks to Rick Malleus for helping me 
keep perspective. Thank you to Beth Slattery for providing the first 
feedback on the written version of this project. Thank you to Me-
lissa Marion Rosenberry and my best friend, Suzanne, for keeping 
me laughing. Thank you to Martha Aby for quality walks and talks. 
Thanks to Eleanor, Addy, Amy, and Beth Meyer for helping me keep 
perspective on life. Thanks to the fine folks at Georgetown Brewery, 
particularly Lauren and Max, for keeping me hydrated. Thank you 
to the people involved in Lost and Battlestar Galactica, who gave me 
something to watch as I wrote.
Most of all, thank you to my family. Lisa, your constant requests 
for a dedication amused me. Maybe one of these days. Mom and Dad, 
thanks for asking questions, giving feedback, and supporting me. I ap-
preciate it. Thanks to the Minnesota crew of Trudie Harris, Greg Har-
ris, Richard Wieser, and Ashley Wieser for making each trip there fun. 
Thanks to Casey Byrne and Chris Lott. Thank you to Adam Conway. 
Most of all, thank you to Erin, Piper, and Ingrid. I could not do what 
I do without you three. Thank you so much for all you add to life.

	
183
Notes
Introduction
	
1.	 Taylor Wofford, “APA Says Video Games Make You Violent, but Crit-
ics Cry Bias,” Newsweek, 20 August 2015, http://www.newsweek.com/apa-video 
-games-violence-364394.
	
2.	 Tom Chatfield, “Videogames Now Outperform Hollywood Movies,” 
The Guardian, 27 September 2009, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/
gamesblog/2009/sep/27/videogames-hollywood; Aphra Kerr, The Business and 
Culture of Digital Games: Gamework and Gameplay (London: Sage, 2006).
	
3.	 In this text I generally use videogame culture and the culture around 
video games as interchangeable terms. I contend that there is a culture around 
video games that is distinct from other cultures. Although the people participat-
ing in the culture around video games are also part of other cultures, the interac-
tions around video games offer a specific set of common texts and experiences. It 
is important to remember that videogame culture is certainly affected by other 
cultural norms, including meritocracy, norms and practices of the internet, and 
various other social and cultural factors. This culture is largely populated by 
people who would describe themselves as gamers and is often referred to as a 
hardcore audience for video games.
	
4.	 Keith Stuart, “Gamer Communities: The Positive Side,” The Guardian, 
31 July 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/jul/31/
gamer-communities-positive-side-twitter.
	
5.	 Leigh Alexander, “GDC Online: Bartle on MUD’s ‘Soul,’ Design ‘Must 
Want to Say Something,’” Gamasutra, 8 October 2010, http://www.gamasutra.
com/view/news/121595/GDC_Online_Bartle_On_MUDs_Soul_Design_
Must_Want_To_Say_Something.php.

Notes to Introduction	
184
	
6.	 Simon Parkin, “The Man Who Made a Game to Change the World,” 
Eurogamer, 30 October 2014, http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-10-30 
-the-utopia-that-never-died.
	
7.	 Ibid.
	
8.	 Chief Pat, “The State of Clash Royale,” YouTube, 15 July 2016, https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=C_vHdhSgGmw.
	
9.	 PandabBoj, “What Part of This Game Is Fun Exactly?” Clash Royale 
Forum, 27 July 2016, http://forum.supercell.net/showthread.php/1213578 
-What-part-of-this-game-is-fun-exactly; QuaternionsRock, “Legendaries Are 
Slowly Breaking the Game (Not Just Another Rant Post),” reddit, 27 July 2016, 
https://www.reddit.com/r/ClashRoyale/comments/4uvxbc/legendaries_are_
slowly_breaking_the_game_not_just/.
	
10.	 International Game Developers Association, “Game Developer De-
mographics: An Exploration of Workforce Diversity,” October 2005, http://c 
.ymcdn.com/sites/www.igda.org/resource/collection/9215B88F-2AA3-4471 
-B44D-B5D58FF25DC7/IGDA_DeveloperDemographics_Oct05.pdf.
	
11.	 International Game Developers Association, “Developer Satisfaction Sur-
vey 2015: Summary Report,” 2 September 2015, https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www 
.igda.org/resource/collection/CB31CE86-F8EE-4AE3-B46A-148490336605/
IGDA%20DSS%202015-SummaryReport_Final_Sept15.pdf.
	
12.	 Robin Potanin, “Forces in Play: The Business and Culture of Videogame 
Production,” in Fun and Games ’10: Proceedings of the 3rd International Confer-
ence on Fun and Games, ed. Vero Vanden Abeele et al. (New York: ACM, 2010), 
138.
	
13.	 Matthew Handrahan, “Ubisoft: Creativity and Commerce in AAA Devel-
opment,” Games Industry, 28 June 2016, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles 
/2016-06-28-ubisoft-creativity-and-commerce-in-aaa-development.
	
14.	 Paul Tamburro, “Top 10 Most Memorable GTA Characters,” Crave, 2 
November 2012, http://www.craveonline.com/site/198965-top-10-most-mem 
orable-gta-characters.
	
15.	 Arthur Chu, “It’s Dangerous to Go Alone: Why Are Gamers So Angry?” 
The Daily Beast, 28 August 2014, http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014 
/08/28/it-s-dangerous-to-go-alone-why-are-gamers-so-angry.html.
	
16.	 Paul Kennedy, “The Dangerous Game: Gamergate and the ‘Alt-­Right,’” 
CBC Radio, 30 November 2016, http://www.cbc.ca/radio/ideas/the-dangerous 
-game-gamergate-and-the-alt-right-1.3874259.
	
17.	 Whitney Phillips, This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things: Mapping 
the Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2015), 11.
	
18.	 The website 100 People: A World Portrait tracks breakdowns in what our 
lives would be like if we were a village of one hundred people; see http://www 

	
185	
Notes to Introduction
.100people.org/statistics_100stats.php. This is also one of Father Steven Sund-
borg’s favorite anecdotes to use in his speeches.
	
19.	 Kovie Biakolo, “The Lie of Meritocracy and the Illusion of the Amer-
ican Dream,” Thought Catalog, 8 January 2014, http://thoughtcatalog.com/
kovie-biakolo/2014/01/the-lie-of-meritocracy-and-the-illusion-of-the-ameri-
can-dream/; Christopher L. Hayes, Twilight of the Elites: America after Mer-
itocracy (New York: Crown, 2012); Leanne S. Son Hing, D. Ramona Bobocel, 
and Mark P. Zanna, “Meritocracy and Opposition to Affirmative Action: Mak-
ing Concessions in the Face of Discrimination,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 83, no. 3 (2002): 493–­509; Leanne S. Son Hing, D. Ramona Bobocel, 
Mark P. Zanna, Donna M. Garcia, Stephanie S. Gee, and Katie Orazietti, “The 
Merit of Meritocracy,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101, no. 3 
(2011): 433–­50.
	
20.	 Matthew H. Barton and Paul D. Turman, “VH1’s ‘Behind the Music’ and 
American Culture: The Role of Myth in a Meritocracy,” Texas Speech Communi-
cation Journal 34 (Summer 2009): 8–­23; Jennifer Goodman, “The Meritocracy 
Myth: National Exams and the Depoliticization of Thai Education,” Sojourn: 
Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia 28, no. 1 (2013): 101–­31; Naa Oyo A. 
Kwate and Ilan H. Meyer, “The Myth of Meritocracy and African American 
Health,” American Journal of Public Health 100, no. 10 (2010): 1831–­34; Ste-
phen J. McNamee and Robert K. Miller, The Meritocracy Myth (Lanham, Md.: 
Rowman & Littlefield, 2004).
	
21.	 Dylan Matthews, “Donald Trump Isn’t Rich Because He’s a Great In-
vestor: He’s Rich Because His Dad Was Rich,” Vox, 2 September 2015, http://
www.vox.com/2015/9/2/9248963/donald-trump-index-fund.
	
22.	 Ezra Klein, “Ta-­Nehisi Coates: ‘I’m a Big Believer in Chaos,’” Vox, 19 
December 2016, http://www.vox.com/conversations/2016/12/19/13952578/ta 
-nehisi-coates-ezra-klein.
	
23.	 Glenn Kessler, “Trump’s False Claim He Built His Empire with a ‘Small 
Loan’ from His Father,” Washington Post, 20 December 2016, https://www 
.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2016/03/03/trumps-false-claim-
he-built-his-empire-with-a-small-loan-from-his-father/.
	
24.	 Alex Abad-­Santos, “Donald Trump and Kim Kardashian Are Kin-
dred Spirits,” Vox, 19 December 2016, http://www.vox.com/culture/2016/12 
/19/13956596/donald-trump-kim-kardashian-kindred-spirits.
	
25.	 Henry Farrell, “How the Chris Hayes Book Twilight of the Elites Ex-
plains Trump’s Appeal,” Vox, 13 October 2016, http://www.vox.com/the-big 
-idea/2016/10/13/13259860/twilight-elites-trump-meritocracy.
	
26.	 Daniel Bell, The Coming of Post-­Industrial Society: A Venture in Social 
Forecasting (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 453; Michael Young, The Rise of the 
Meritocracy (1958; repr., New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 2008).

Notes to Introduction	
186
	
27.	 Peter Saunders, “Might Britain Be a Meritocracy?” Sociology 29, no. 1 
(1995): 27.
	
28.	 Peter Saunders, “Social Mobility in Britain: An Empirical Evaluation of 
Two Competing Explanations,” Sociology 31, no. 2 (1997): 283.
	
29.	 Sigal Alon and Marta Tienda, “Diversity, Opportunity, and the Shift-
ing Meritocracy in Higher Education,” American Sociological Review 72, no. 4 
(2007): 489.
	
30.	 Jo Littler, “Celebrity and ‘Meritocracy,’” Soundings 26 (Spring 2004): 122.
	
31.	 Jo Littler, “Meritocracy as Plutocracy: The Marketing of ‘Equality’ under 
Neoliberalism,” New Formations 80–­81 (2013): 52.
	
32.	 Ruth Levitas, “Shuffling Back to Equality?” Soundings 26 (Spring 2004): 
69.
	
33.	 Littler, “Meritocracy as Plutocracy,” 54.
	
34.	 Son Hing, Bobocel, and Zanna, “Meritocracy and Opposition to Affir-
mative Action,” 433.
	
35.	 Phillips, This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things; Adrienne Shaw, “The 
Internet Is Full of Jerks, Because the World Is Full of Jerks: What Feminist 
Theory Teaches Us about the Internet,” Communication and Critical/Cultural 
Studies 11, no. 3 (2014): 273–­77.
	
36.	 Amanda Hess, “Why Women Aren’t Welcome on the Internet,” Pacific Stan-
dard, 6 January 2014, http://www.psmag.com/navigation/health-and-behavior 
/women-arent-welcome-internet-72170/.
	
37.	 Laura Hudson, “That Game of Thrones Scene Wasn’t a ‘Turn-­On,’ It 
Was Rape,” Wired, 21 April 2014, http://www.wired.com/2014/04/game-of 
-thrones-rape/; Maureen Ryan, “‘Tyrant’s’ Rape Cliches Are Just the Last Straw,” 
Huffington Post, 24 June 2014, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/24/tyrant 
-fx_n_5525441.html.
	
38.	 Zeynep Tufekci, “No, Nate, Brogrammers May Not Be Macho, but 
That’s Not All There Is to It,” The Message, 19 March 2014, https://medium 
.com/technology-and-society/2f1fe84c5c9b.
	
39.	 Lea Coligado, “A Female Computer Science Major at Stanford: ‘Floored’ 
by the Sexism,” Fortune, 17 February 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/02/17/
a-female-computer-science-major-at-stanford-floored-by-the-sexism/; Mi-
chelle Goldberg, “Feminist Writers Are So Besieged by Online Abuse 
That Some Have Begun to Retire,” Washington Post, 20 February 2015, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/online-feminists-increasingly-ask 
-are-the-psychic-costs-too-much-to-bear/2015/02/19/3dc4ca6c-b7dd-11e4-a 
200-c008a01a6692_story.html; Hess, “Why Women Aren’t Welcome on 
the Internet”; Ellen Pao, “Former Reddit CEO Ellen Pao: The Trolls 
Are Winning the Battle for the Internet,” Washington Post, 16 July 2015, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/we-cannot-let-the-internet-trolls 

	
187	
Notes to Introduction
-win/2015/07/16/91b1a2d2-2b17-11e5-bd33-395c05608059_story.html; Julia 
Carrie Wong, “Women Considered Better Coders—­but Only If They Hide 
Their Gender,” The Guardian, 12 February 2016, http://www.theguardian 
.com/technology/2016/feb/12/women-considered-better-coders-hide-gender 
-github. 
	
40.	 Leigh Alexander, “EA’s LGBT Event Aims to Be a First Step toward 
Cultural Change,” Gamasutra, 7 March 2013, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/
news/187769/EAs_LBGT_event_aims_to_be_a_first_step_toward_cultural_
change.php; Mia Consalvo, “Confronting Toxic Gamer Culture: A Challenge for 
Feminist Game Studies Scholars,” Ada, November 2012, http://adanewmedia 
.org/2012/11/issue1-consalvo/; Adrienne Shaw, “Changing the Conversation, 
Not Just the Games,” Antenna, 12 March 2013, http://blog.commarts.wisc 
.edu/2013/03/12/changing-the-conversation-not-just-the-games/; John Walker, 
“Misogyny, Sexism, and Why RPS Isn’t Shutting Up,” Rock, Paper, Shotgun, 6 
April 2013, http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2013/04/06/misogyny-sexism 
-and-why-rps-isnt-shutting-up/.
	
41.	 Jenny Haniver, “About,” Not in the Kitchen Anymore, 21 February 2016, 
http://www.notinthekitchenanymore.com/about/; gtz jaspir, likeOMGitsFE-
DAY, and inklesspen, “Fat, Ugly, or Slutty,” n.d., Fat, Ugly, or Slutty, http://
fatuglyorslutty.com/.
	
42.	 Amanda Marcotte, “Online Misogyny: Can’t Ignore It, Can’t Not Ignore 
It,” Slate, 13 June 2012, http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2012/06/13/on-
line_misogyny_reflects_women_s_realities_though_in_a_cruder_way_than_is_
customary_offline_.html.
	
43.	 Consalvo, “Confronting Toxic Gamer Culture”; Mathew Jones, “Com-
ments Aren’t Disabled: Here’s What People Are Saying about Tropes vs. 
Women,” Gameranx, 8 March 2013, http://www.gameranx.com/features/
id/13300/article/comments-aren-t-disabled-here-s-what-people-are-saying 
-about-tropes-vs-women/.
	
44.	 Leigh Alexander, “Opinion: In the Sexism Discussion, Let’s Look at 
Game Culture,” Gamasutra, 16 July 2012, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/
news/174145/.
	
45.	 Chu, “It’s Dangerous to Go Alone.”
	
46.	 Film Crit Hulk, “Film Crit Hulk Smash: on despair, gamergate and 
quitting the hulk,” Badass Digest, 27 October 2014, http://badassdigest 
.com/2014/10/27/film-crit-hulk-smash-on-despair-gamergate-and-quitting 
-the-hulk/.
	
47.	 Maeve Duggan, “Online Harassment,” Pew Research Center: Internet, Sci-
ence & Tech, 22 October 2014, http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/22/online 
-harassment/.
	
48.	 Edge Staff, “Why Is the Game Industry Still Fixated on Breasts?” Edge 

Notes to Introduction	
188
Online, 15 March 2013, http://www.edge-online.com/features/why-is-the-game 
-industry-still-fixated-on-breasts/.
	
49.	 Rory Young, “Team Ninja Studio Head Says DOA 5’s Female Depiction 
Is Cultural,” Neoseeker, 23 August 2012, http://www.neoseeker.com/news/20486 
-team-ninja-studio-head-says-doa-5s-female-depiction-is-cultural/.
	
50.	 Becky Chambers, “Why Games with Female Protagonists Don’t Sell, and 
What It Says about the Industry,” The Mary Sue, 23 November 2012, http://
www.themarysue.com/why-games-with-female-protagonists-dont-sell-and 
-what-it-says-about-the-industry/.
	
51.	 Rich McCormick, “Adding Female Characters to New ‘Assassin’s Creed’ 
Would ‘Double the Work,’ Says Ubisoft,” The Verge, 11 June 2014, http://www 
.theverge.com/2014/6/11/5799386/no-female-characters-in-assassins-creed 
-unity-too-much-work; Rachel Weber, “Naughty Dog: We’ve Been Asked to 
Push Ellie to the Back of the Box Art,” Games Industry, 12 December 2012, 
http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2012-12-12-naughty-dog-theres-a 
-misconception-that-if-you-put-a-girl-on-the-cover-the-game-sells-less; Mike 
Williams, “Rockstar’s Houser Explains Lack of Female Protagonist in GTA 
V,” Games Industry, 10 September 2013, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles 
/2013-09-10-rockstars-houser-explains-lack-of-female-protagonist-in-gta-v.
	
52.	 Nathan Ditum, “FIFA’s Struggle to Include Women Reveals a Lot about 
Gaming’s Problems with Diversity,” Kotaku, 15 July 2015, http://www.kotaku.co 
.uk/2015/07/15/fifas-struggle-to-include-women-reveals-a-lot-about-gamings 
-problems-with-diversity.
	
53.	 Evan Narcisse, “Video Games’ Blackness Problem,” Kotaku, 19 February 
2015, http://kotaku.com/video-games-blackness-problem-1686694082.
	
54.	 Tauriq Moosa, “Colorblind: On The Witcher 3, Rust, and Gaming’s Race 
Problem,” Polygon, 3 June 2015, http://www.polygon.com/2015/6/3/8719389/
colorblind-on-witcher-3-rust-and-gamings-race-problem.
	
55.	 Ibid.
	
56.	 Sidney Fussell, “Video Games without People of Color Are Not ‘Neu-
tral,’” Offworld, 26 June 2015, http://boingboing.net/2015/06/26/race-video 
-games-witcher-3.html.
	
57.	 Don Crothers, “GamerGate Drives Critic Tauriq Moosa Off Twitter,” 
Inquisitr, 27 June 2015, http://www.inquisitr.com/2207377/gamergate-drives 
-critic-tauriq-moosa-off-twitter/; Jessica Lachenal, “#IStandWithTauriq: Tauriq 
Moosa Leaves Twitter After Sustained Harassment Campaign Led by Gamer-
Gate,” The Mary Sue, 27 June 2015, http://www.themarysue.com/i-stand-with 
-tauriq/.
	
58.	 Potanin, “Forces in Play,” 136.
	
59.	 Ibid., 140, 141.

	
189	
Notes to Introduction
	
60.	 Carly A. Kocurek, Coin-­Operated Americans: Rebooting Boyhood at the 
Video Game Arcade (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015), 188.
	
61.	 Kishonna L. Gray, Race, Gender, and Deviance in Xbox Live: Theoretical 
Perspectives from the Virtual Margins (New York: Routledge, 2014), 16.
	
62.	 Ibid.
	
63.	 Nathan Grayson, “Twitch Chat Racism Changed Hearthstone Pro Ter-
rence Miller’s Career,” Kotaku, 7 October 2016, http://kotaku.com/hearthstone 
-pro-terrence-miller-hopes-to-clean-up-twitc-1787551043.
	
64.	 Mia Consalvo and Christopher A. Paul, “Welcome to the Discourse of 
the Real: Constituting the Boundaries of Games and Players,” FDG (2013):  
55–­62.
	
65.	 Adrienne Shaw, Gaming at the Edge: Sexuality and Gender at the Mar-
gins of Gamer Culture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014).
	
66.	 Stephanie Llamas, “Why all Gamers Matter—­My View as a Female 
Games Analyst,” Superdata, 28 October 2014, http://www.superdataresearch 
.com/blog/why-all-gamers-matter/.
	
67.	 To view the opening cinematics and early game play, see kingdavidgam 
ing, “The Beginning of Skyrim (Part 1)” and “The Beginning of Skyrim (Part 
2),” YouTube, 12 November 2011, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Cdoyqs 
NdaE and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MiqjhkpNqg8.
	
68.	 Statistic Brain, “Skyrim: The Elder Scrolls V Statistics,” Statistic Brain, 
12 April 2015, http://www.statisticbrain.com/skyrim-the-elder-scrolls-v-statis 
tics/.
	
69.	 For more on rhetoric, see Ian Bogost, “Writing Books People Want to 
Read: Or, How to Stake Vampire Publishing,” Ian Bogost, 30 May 2011, http://
bogost.com/writing/blog/writing_books_people_want_to_r/; Ian Bogost, “The 
Rhetoric of Video Games,” in The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, 
and Learning, ed. Katie Salen, 117–­39 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2008); 
Kenneth Burke, A Rhetoric of Motives (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1969); Karlyn Kohrs Campbell and Susan Schultz Huxman, The Rhetor-
ical Act: Thinking, Speaking, and Writing Critically (Belmont, Calif.: Thomson/
Wadsworth, 2009); Ronald Greene, “The Aesthetic Turn and the Rhetorical 
Perspective on Argumentation,” Argumentation & Advocacy 35, no. 1 (1998): 
19; Todd Harper, “Rules, Rhetoric, and Genre: Procedural Rhetoric in Persona 
3,” Games and Culture 6, no. 5 (2011): 395–­413; Christopher A. Paul, Wordplay 
and the Discourse of Video Games: Analyzing Words, Design, and Play (New York: 
Routledge, 2012); Edward Schiappa, “Second Thoughts on the Critiques of Big 
Rhetoric,” Philosophy and Rhetoric 34, no. 3 (2001): 260–­74; Robert L. Scott, “On 
Viewing Rhetoric as Epistemic,” Central States Speech Journal 18, no. 1 (1967): 
9–­17; Gerald A. Voorhees, “The Character of Difference: Procedurality, Rhet-

Notes to Introduction	
190
oric, and Roleplaying Games,” Game Studies 9, no. 2 (2009): http://gamestudies 
.org/0902/articles/voorhees; David Zarefsky, “Knowledge Claims in Rhetorical 
Criticism,” Journal of Communication 58, no. 4 (2008): 629–­40.
	
70.	 For a thorough explanation of “The Journey” and how it plays in prac-
tice, see Chris Tapsell, “FIFA 17 The Journey Walkthrough—­How to Play a 
Full Season and Get All Rewards,” Eurogamer, 25 November 2016, http://www 
.eurogamer.net/articles/2016-11-25-fifa-17-the-journey-walkthrough-how 
-to-play-a-full-season-and-get-all-rewards. Also, the mode was not included 
in PS3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game, as EA claimed there were techni-
cal limitations with the older consoles, likely having to do with their use of the 
Frostbite game engine.
1. Leveling Up in Life
	
1.	 Henry Farrell, “How the Chris Hayes Book Twilight of the Elites 
Explains Trump’s Appeal,” Vox, 13 October 2016, http://www.vox.com/the- 
big-idea/2016/10/13/13259860/twilight-elites-trump-meritocracy.
	
2.	 The Guodian manuscripts are tremendously informative about ancient 
China, to the point where it has been said that they transformed “our under-
standing of the formative era of China’s religious and political philosophy.” See 
Kenneth Holloway, Guodian: The Newly Discovered Seeds of Chinese Religious 
and Political Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 1.
	
3.	 Ibid., 13, 14, 110, 130.
	
4.	 Benjamin A. Elman, Civil Examinations and Meritocracy in Late Imperial 
China (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2013), 1.
	
5.	 The most thorough integrations of meritocracy that I have read about 
in China happened during the T’ang (618–­906), Ming (1368–­1644), and Qing 
(1644–­1912) dynasties. There are also some mentions of a move toward meri-
tocracy in the Sui dynasty (581–­618). For more, see Denis Twitchett, The Birth 
of Chinese Meritocracy: Bureaucrats and Examinations in T’ang China (London: 
China Society, 1976).
	
6.	 Elman, Civil Examinations and Meritocracy in Late Imperial China, 316.
	
7.	 Robin Potanin, “Forces in Play: The Business and Culture of Videogame 
Production,” in Fun and Games ’10: Proceedings of the 3rd International Confer-
ence on Fun and Games, ed. Vero Vanden Abeele et al. (New York: ACM, 2010), 
135–­43. Another excellent argument from a similar perspective is Janine Fron, 
Tracy Fullerton, Jacquelyn Ford Morie, and Celia Pearce, “The Hegemony of 
Play,” DiGRA ’07: Proceedings of the 2007 DiGRA International Conference: Sit-
uated Play 4 (September 2007): 1–­10.
	
8.	 The first published use of the term I have seen actually comes in the 
writing of Alan Fox, who wrote an essay called “Class and Equality” for Socialist 
Quarterly two years before Young’s book. Fox’s use of the term is overwhelm-

	
191	
Notes to Chapter 1
ingly negative, as the meritocracy is seen as an extension of a social system that 
furthered the “distance between the extremes of the social strata.” Fox also casts 
meritocracy in moral terms, with those at the top taking advantage of the “un-
blessed” and not recognizing that they are “blessed.” See Alan Fox, “Class and 
Equality,” Socialist Commentary, May 1956, 11–­13.
	
9.	 Michael Young, The Rise of the Meritocracy (1958; repr., New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Transaction, 2008), xvii.
	
10.	 Patricia Hernandez, “Overwatch: The Kotaku Review,” Kotaku, 1 June 
2016, http://kotaku.com/overwatch-the-kotaku-review-1779831636.
	
11.	 Ibid.
	
12.	 Nathan Grayson, “Overwatch Doesn’t Do Enough for Its Support He-
roes,” Kotaku, 1 June 2016, http://kotaku.com/overwatch-doesnt-do-enough-for 
-its-support-heroes-1779909864; Philippa Warr, “Overwatch: Why We Need a 
2-­Person Play of the Game,” Rock, Paper, Shotgun, 31 May 2016, https://www 
.rockpapershotgun.com/2016/05/31/overwatch-play-of-the-game/.
	
13.	 Grayson, “Overwatch Doesn’t Do Enough for Its Support Heroes.”
	
14.	 Nathan Grayson, “The Overwatch Characters Who Get Play of the 
Game Most (and Least) Often,” Kotaku, 7 September 2016, http://kotaku.com/
the-overwatch-characters-who-get-play-of-the-game-most-1786354626.
	
15.	 Nathan Grayson, “Overwatch’s Director on Competitive Mode, Contro-
versies, and the Future,” Kotaku, 18 July 2016, http://kotaku.com/overwatchs 
-director-on-competitive-controversies-and-1783869335.
	
16.	 Ibid.
	
17.	 Blizzard Entertainment, “Welcome to Competitive Play,” Overwatch, 28 
June 2016, https://playoverwatch.com/en-us/blog/20167051.
	
18.	 Nathan Grayson, “How Overwatch’s Competitive Mode Works,” Ko-
taku, 29 June 2016, http://kotaku.com/how-overwatchs-competitive-mode 
-works-1782839858.
	
19.	 Patricia Hernandez, “Overwatch Fans Have Turned Soldier 76 into a 
Dad,” Kotaku, 29 July 2016, http://kotaku.com/overwatch-fans-have-turned 
-soldier-76-into-a-dad-1784531869.
	
20.	 Nathan Grayson, “Overwatch’s Competitive Mode Is at Odds with the Rest 
of the Game,” Kotaku, 1 July 2016, http://kotaku.com/overwatchs-competitive 
-mode-is-at-odds-with-the-rest-of-1782990226.
	
21.	 Ibid.
	
22.	 InternetBitch6969, “Competitive Community Is Mostly Toxic,” reddit, 
1 July 2016, https://www.reddit.com/r/Overwatch/comments/4qsntg/competi 
tive_community_is_mostly_toxic/.
	
23.	 Nathan Grayson, “How Blizzard Is Trying to Fix Overwatch’s Toxicity 
Problem,” Kotaku, 15 July 2016, http://kotaku.com/how-blizzard-is-trying-to 
-fix-overwatchs-toxicity-probl-1783749976.
	
24.	 Ibid.

Notes to Chapter 1	
192
	
25.	 Whitney Phillips, This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things: Mapping 
the Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2015).
	
26.	 Geoff Colvin, “A CEO’s Passionate Defense of ‘Stack Ranking’ Employ-
ees,” Fortune, 19 November 2013, http://fortune.com/2013/11/19/a-ceos-passion 
ate-defense-of-stack-ranking-employees/; Jodi Kantor and David Streitfeld, “In-
side Amazon: Wrestling Big Ideas in a Bruising Workplace,” New York Times, 15 
August 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/technology/inside-amazon 
-wrestling-big-ideas-in-a-bruising-workplace.html.
	
27.	 Young, Rise of the Meritocracy, 96.
	
28.	 Michael Young, “Down with Meritocracy,” The Guardian, 28 June 2001, 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2001/jun/29/comment.
	
29.	 Nathan Grayson, “The Guy with the Lowest Possible Rank in Over-
watch,” Kotaku, 23 August 2016, http://kotaku.com/the-guy-with-the-lowest 
-possible-rank-in-overwatch-1785662123.
	
30.	 Ibid.
	
31.	 Jesper Juul, The Art of Failure: An Essay on the Pain of Playing Video 
Games (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013), 81.
	
32.	 Ibid., 1.
	
33.	 David Harvey summarizes many of these changes, arguing that the ac-
celeration of consumption in modern society was driven by two key factors 
that permeated society: the expansion of mass markets in video and children’s 
games, and a transition toward the consumption of services and away from the 
consumption of goods. For more, see David Harvey, The Condition of Postmo-
dernity (Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell, 1989).
	
34.	 Young, “Down with Meritocracy.”
	
35.	 Christopher L. Hayes, Twilight of the Elites: America after Meritocracy 
(New York: Crown, 2012), 45.
	
36.	 Robert Guthrie, “Inside the Grim World of Minecraft’s Prison Servers,” 
Kotaku, 24 June 2016, http://kotaku.com/inside-the-grim-world-of-minecrafts 
-prison-servers-1782517890.
	
37.	 Ibid.
	
38.	 Young, Rise of the Meritocracy, xi.
	
39.	 Ibid., xi–­xii.
	
40.	 Daniel Bell, “On Meritocracy and Equality,” Public Interest 29 (Fall 1972): 
30.
	
41.	 R. J. Herrnstein, I.Q. in the Meritocracy (Boston: Little, Brown, 1971), 
221–­22.
	
42.	 Daniel Bell, The Coming of Post-­Industrial Society: A Venture in Social 
Forecasting (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 426–­27.

	
193	
Notes to Chapter 1
	
43.	 Bell consistently uses the universal “man” to refer to all people. Claiming 
that there are not substantial structural barriers to exhibiting skill and effort is 
particularly rich when relying on sexist language to make the case.
	
44.	 Herrnstein, I.Q. in the Meritocracy, 221.
	
45.	 Peter Saunders, “Social Mobility in Britain: An Empirical Evaluation of 
Two Competing Explanations,” Sociology 31, no. 2 (1997): 282.
	
46.	 Bell, “On Meritocracy and Equality,” 31–­32.
	
47.	 Ibid., 40.
	
48.	 Ibid., 67.
	
49.	 Saunders, “Social Mobility in Britain,” 562.
	
50.	 Bell, Coming of Post-­Industrial Society, 454.
	
51.	 Stephen J. McNamee and Robert K. Miller, “The Meritocracy Myth,” 
Sociation Today 2, no. 1 (2004): 3.
	
52.	 Ibid., 4.
	
53.	 Naa Oyo A. Kwate and Ilan H. Meyer, “The Myth of Meritocracy and 
African American Health,” American Journal of Public Health 100, no. 10 (2010): 
1831–­34.
	
54.	 Jo Littler, “Celebrity and ‘Meritocracy,’” Soundings 26 (Spring 2004): 60.
	
55.	 Ibid.
	
56.	 Meritocracy and meritocratic norms can also be seen in plenty of other 
contexts and in many other countries. For more, see Livia Barbosa, “Meritocracy 
and Brazilian Society,” Revista de Administração de Empresas 54, no. 1 (2014): 
80–­85; Jennifer Goodman, “The Meritocracy Myth: National Exams and the 
Depoliticization of Thai Education,” Sojourn: Journal of Social Issues in Southeast 
Asia 28, no. 1 (2013): 101–­31; Surinder S. Jodhka and Katherine Newman, “In 
the Name of Globalisation: Meritocracy, Productivity and the Hidden Language 
of Caste,” Economic and Political Weekly 42, no. 41 (2007): 4125–­32; Takehiko 
Kariya, Education Reform, and Social Class in Japan: The Emerging Incentive Di-
vide, trans. Michael Burtscher (New York: Routledge, 2013); Kenneth Paul Tan, 
“Meritocracy and Elitism in a Global City: Ideological Shifts in Singapore,” In-
ternational Political Science Review 29, no. 1 (2008): 7–­27; Godfrey B. Tangwa, 
Road Companion to Democracy and Meritocracy: Further Essays from an African 
Perspective (Bamenda, Cameroon: Langaa RPCIG, 2010).
	
57.	 Hayes, Twilight of the Elites, 22.
	
58.	 Shannon K. McCoy and Brenda Major, “Priming Meritocracy and the 
Psychological Justification of Inequality,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy 43, no. 3 (2007): 341.
	
59.	 John Beck, Meritocracy, Citizenship and Education: New Labour’s Legacy 
(London: Continuum, 2008), 25.
	
60.	 Kwate and Meyer, “Myth of Meritocracy and African American Health.”

Notes to Chapter 1	
194
	
61.	 Richard Breen and John H. Goldthorpe, “Class Inequality and Meritoc-
racy: A Critique of Saunders and an Alternative Analysis,” British Journal of So-
ciology 50, no. 1 (1999): 22.
	
62.	 Brian Ashcraft, “Korean Woman Kicks Ass at Overwatch, Gets Accused 
of Cheating [Update],” Kotaku, 21 June 2016, http://kotaku.com/korean-woman 
-kicks-ass-at-overwatch-gets-accused-of-ch-1782343447.
	
63.	 Aja Romano, “How a Teen Girl’s Mad Overwatch Skills Struck a 
Major Blow to Sexism in Gaming,” Vox, 23 June 2016, http://www.vox.com 
/2016/6/23/12002454/how-a-teen-girl-s-mad-overwatch-skills-struck-a-major 
-blow-to-sexism-in-gaming.
	
64.	 Ashcraft, “Korean Woman Kicks Ass at Overwatch, Gets Accused of 
Cheating.”
	
65.	 Romano, “How a Teen Girl’s Mad Overwatch Skills Struck a Major Blow 
to Sexism in Gaming.”
	
66.	 Samuel Lingle, “Blizzard Vows Zero Tolerance for Overwatch Cheaters 
but Adds: ‘Some Players Are Just Really Good,’” Daily Dot, 13 May 2016, http://
www.dailydot.com/esports/blizzard-overwatch-anti-cheat/.
	
67.	 The treatment of people of color in video games is complicated, particu-
larly given the prominence and success of many high-­profile Asian, particularly 
Korean, players. Racism is a massive issue in game culture regardless.
	
68.	 Hayes, Twilight of the Elites, 225.
	
69.	 Jeff Spross, “You’re Probably Richer Than You Think You Are: How In-
equality Screws with Our Perspective,” The Week, 27 January 2015, http://theweek 
.com/articles/535887/youre-probably-richer-than-think-are-howinequality 
screws-ourperspective.
	
70.	 Craig Haney and Aida Hurtado, “The Jurisprudence of Race and Mer-
itocracy: Standardized Testing and ‘Race-­Neutral’ Racism in the Workplace,” 
Law and Human Behavior 18, no. 3 (1994): 240.
	
71.	 James Brightman, “I’m Doing This Because I’m a Gamer,” Games Indus-
try, 2 June 2016, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-06-02-im-doing 
-this-because-im-a-gamer; Potanin, “Forces in Play.”
	
72.	 Carly A. Kocurek, Coin-­Operated Americans: Rebooting Boyhood at the 
Video Game Arcade (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015), xxiii.
	
73.	 Halli Bjornsson, “Smart Lessons 17 Million Organic Installs Taught Us 
about Mobile,” Games Industry, 19 July 2016, http://www.gamesindustry.biz 
/articles/2016-07-19-smart-lessons-17-million-organic-installs-taught-us 
-about-mobile.
	
74.	 Ageism is relatively under-­discussed as it pertains to video games, but 
one take on it can be found in Jeff Vogel, “Age, Pleasing Apple, and Trying to 
Climb Out of the Hole,” Bottom Feeder, 10 June 2015, http://jeff-vogel.blogspot 
.com/2015/06/age-pleasing-apple-and-trying-to-climb.html.

	
195	
Notes to Chapter 1
	
75.	 Neil Irwin, “Ben Bernanke on Life, Love, and Intestinal Parasites,” Wash-
ington Post, 2 June 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/
wp/2013/06/02/ben-bernanke-on-life-cynicism-beauty-and-love.
	
76.	 Robert H. Frank, Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meri-
tocracy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2016), Kindle ed., loc. 318.
	
77.	 Ibid., loc. 82.
	
78.	 Zack Beauchamp, “One Graphic That Shows Your Mom Was Right: The 
World Isn’t Fair,” Vox, 28 May 2015, http://www.vox.com/2015/5/28/8663065/
inequality-global-income; Matt O’Brien, “Poor Kids Who Do Everything 
Right Don’t Do Better Than Rich Kids Who Do Everything Wrong,” Washing-
ton Post, 18 October 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/
wp/2014/10/18/poor-kids-who-do-everything-right-dont-do-better-than-rich 
-kids-who-do-everything-wrong/.
	
79.	 William Deresiewicz, “Don’t Send Your Kid to the Ivy League: The Na-
tion’s Top Colleges Are Turning Our Kids into Zombies,” New Republic, 21 July 
2014, http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118747/ivy-league-schools-are-over 
rated-send-your-kids-elsewhere.
	
80.	 Danielle Douglas-­Gabriel, “College Is Not the Great Equalizer for 
Black and Hispanic Graduates,” Washington Post, 17 August 2015, http://www 
.washingtonpost.com/news/wonkblog/wp/2015/08/17/college-is-not-the 
-great-equalizer-for-black-and-hispanic-graduates/; Christopher Ingraham, 
“Still Think America Is the ‘Land of Opportunity’? Look at This Chart,” 
Washington Post, 22 February 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
wonk/wp/2016/02/22/still-think-america-is-the-land-of-opportunity-look-at 
-this-chart/.
	
81.	 Jo Littler, “Meritocracy as Plutocracy: The Marketing of ‘Equality’ under 
Neoliberalism,” New Formations 80–­81 (2013): 55.
	
82.	 Stephen J. McNamee and Robert K. Miller, The Meritocracy Myth (Lan-
ham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004), 208.
	
83.	 Thank you to Mia Consalvo for lending this phrasing.
	
84.	 Anna Anthropy, Rise of the Videogame Zinesters: How Freaks, Normals, 
Amateurs, Artists, Dreamers, Drop-­Outs, Queers, Housewives, and People Like You 
Are Taking Back an Art Form (New York: Seven Stories Press, 2012), Kindle ed., 
loc. 100.
	
85.	 Raph Koster, Theory of Fun for Game Design (Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 
2013), Kindle ed., loc. 1314.
	
86.	 Adrienne Shaw, Gaming at the Edge: Sexuality and Gender at the Mar-
gins of Gamer Culture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014), 41.
	
87.	 Matthew Handrahan, “Ubisoft: Creativity and Commerce in AAA De-
velopment,” Games Industry, 28 June 2016, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/ 
articles/2016-06-28-ubisoft-creativity-and-commerce-in-aaa-development.

Notes to Chapter 1	
196
	
88.	 Potanin, “Forces in Play.”
	
89.	 Hayes, Twilight of the Elites, 40.
	
90.	 Kocurek, Coin-­Operated Americans.
	
91.	 Anthropy, Rise of the Videogame Zinesters, loc. 105.
	
92.	 Koster, Theory of Fun for Game Design, loc. 1343.
	
93.	 Kocurek, Coin-­Operated Americans; Potanin, “Forces in Play.”
	
94.	 Anthropy, Rise of the Videogame Zinesters, loc. 236.
	
95.	 Peter Kellner, “Yes, We Still Need Meritocracy,” New Statesman, 9 July 
2001, http://www.newstatesman.com/node/153755; Ruth Levitas, “Shuffling 
Back to Equality?” Soundings 26 (Spring 2004): 69.
	
96.	 Jennifer de Winter, Shigeru Miyamoto: Super Mario Bros., Donkey Kong, 
The Legend of Zelda (New York: Bloomsbury, 2015).
	
97.	 Emilio J. Castilla and Stephen Benard, “The Paradox of Meritocracy in 
Organizations,” Administrative Science Quarterly 55, no. 4 (2010): 572.
	
98.	 Robin DiAngelo, “White Fragility,” International Journal of Critical 
Pedagogy 3, no. 3 (2011): 54–­70; Ryan D. Enos, “Casual Effect of Intergroup 
Contact on Exclusionary Attitudes,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 111, no. 10 (2014): 3699–­704; German 
Lopez, “Research Says There Are Ways to Reduce Racial Bias: Calling Peo-
ple Racist Isn’t One of Them,” Vox, 15 November 2016, http://www.vox.com/
identities/2016/11/15/13595508/racism-trump-research-study; Dylan Mat-
thews, “Donald Trump Has Every Reason to Keep White People Thinking 
about Race,” Vox, 30 November 2016, http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics 
/2016/11/30/13765248/donald-trump-race-priming-political-science.
	
99.	 Shannon K. McCoy and Brenda Major, “Priming Meritocracy and the 
Psychological Justification of Inequality,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy 43, no. 3 (2007): 342.
	 100.	 Ibid., 351.
	 101.	 Frank, Success and Luck, 1472.
	 102.	 Craig Haney and Aida Hurtado, “The Jurisprudence of Race and Mer-
itocracy: Standardized Testing and ‘Race-­Neutral’ Racism in the Workplace,” 
Law and Human Behavior 18, no. 3 (1994): 224.
	 103.	 James Fraser and Edward Kick, “The Interpretive Repertories of Whites 
on Race-­Targeted Policies: Claims Making of Reverse Discrimination,” Socio-
logical Perspectives 43, no. 1 (2000): 26–­27.
	 104.	 McCoy and Major, “Priming Meritocracy and the Psychological Justifi-
cation of Inequality,” 342.
	 105.	 McNamee and Miller, Meritocracy Myth, 40.
	 106.	 For much more on eSports, see “e-­Sports and Pro Gaming Literature,” 
T. L. Taylor, n.d., http://tltaylor.com/teaching/e-sports-and-pro-gaming-litera 

	
197	
Notes to Chapter 2
ture/. For more on competitive gaming and Korea, see Dal Yong Jin, Korea’s 
Online Gaming Empire (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2010).
	 107.	 Todd Harper, The Culture of Digital Fighting Games: Performance and 
Practice (New York: Routledge, 2014).
	 108.	 Littler, “Meritocracy as Plutocracy,” 66.
	 109.	 Christopher A. Paul, “Eve Online Is Hard and It Matters,” in Internet 
Spaceships Are Serious Business: An Eve Online Reader, ed. Marcus Carter, Kelly 
Bergstrom, and Darryl Woodford, 17–­30 (Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press, 2016).
	 110.	 Nick Monroe, “‘Git Gud’ Culture Gives Us the Best of Gaming,” Gam-
eranx, 18 May 2016, http://gameranx.com/features/id/54186/article/git-gud 
-culture-gives-us-the-best-of-gaming/.
	
111.	 Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, “StarPower: Experiencing a Stratified Soci-
ety,” What’s Race Got to Do with It?, 2004, http://www.whatsrace.org/pages/
starpower.htm; Simulation Training Systems, “StarPower—­Use & Abuse of 
Power, Leadership & Diversity,” n.d., http://www.simulationtrainingsystems 
.com/schools-and-charities/products/starpower/.
	 112.	 Donella Meadows, “Why Would Anyone Want to Play Starpower,” Do-
nella Meadows Institute, 4 December 2011, http://www.donellameadows.org/ 
archives/why-would-anyone-want-to-play-starpower/.
	 113.	 Lisa Miller, “The Money-­Empathy Gap,” New York Magazine, 1 July 
2012, http://nymag.com/news/features/money-brain-2012-7/.
	 114.	 Jessica Gross, “6 Studies on How Money Affects the Mind,” TED Blog, 
20 December 2013, http://blog.ted.com/2013/12/20/6-studies-of-money-and 
-the-mind/.
	 115.	 Current norms of merit and success in games were set by early players, 
and the most successful helped craft systems that were self-­beneficial; those prac-
tices then filtered out to the wider community of players. For more on ideology, 
see Antonio Gramsci, Prison Notebooks: Volume One, trans. Joseph A. Buttigieg 
and Antonio Callari (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992).
2. A Toxic Culture
	
1.	 John Banks and Sal Humphreys, “The Labour of User Co-­creators: 
Emergent Social Network Markets?” Convergence 14, no. 4 (2008): 401–­18; John 
Banks and Jason Potts, “Co-­creating Games: A Co-­evolutionary Analysis,” New 
Media & Society 12, no. 2 (2010): 253–­70; Ian Bogost, Persuasive Games: The 
Expressive Power of Videogames (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2007); Mia Con-
salvo and Jason Begy, Players and Their Pets: Gaming Communities from Beta to 
Sunset (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015); T. L. Taylor, “The 

Notes to Chapter 2	
198
Assemblage of Play,” Games and Culture 4, no. 4 (2009): 331–­39; T. L. Taylor, 
Play between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Culture (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2006); Gerald A. Voorhees, “I Play Therefore I Am: Sid Meier’s Civiliza-
tion, Turn-­Based Strategy Games and the Cogito,” Games and Culture 4, no. 3 
(2009): 254–­75.
	
2.	 Kenneth Burke, Language as Symbolic Action: Essays on Life, Literature, 
and Method (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966); Kenneth Burke, A 
Rhetoric of Motives (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969).
	
3.	 Ellie Zolfagharifard, “Could Our Ancestors See Blue? Ancient People 
Didn’t Perceive the Colour Because They Didn’t Have a Word for It, Say Scien-
tists,” Daily Mail Online, 2 March 2015, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/
article-2976405/Could-ancestors-blue-Ancient-civilisations-didn-t-perceive 
-colour-didn-t-word-say-scientists.html.
	
4.	 David Zarefsky, “Knowledge Claims in Rhetorical Criticism,” Journal of 
Communication 58, no. 4 (2008): 629–­40.
	
5.	 Bogost, Persuasive Games; Jeroen Bourgonjon, Kris Rutten, Ronald Soe-
taert, and Martin Valcke, “From Counter-­Strike to Counter-­Statement: Using 
Burke’s Pentad as a Tool for Analysing Video Games,” Digital Creativity 22, no. 
2 (2011): 91–­102; Todd Harper, “Rules, Rhetoric, and Genre: Procedural Rhet-
oric in Persona 3,” Games and Culture 6, no. 5 (2011): 395–­413; Ken S. McAl-
lister, Game Work: Language, Power, and Computer Game Culture (Tuscaloosa: 
University of Alabama Press, 2004); Christopher A. Paul, Wordplay and the Dis-
course of Video Games: Analyzing Words, Design, and Play (New York: Routledge, 
2012); Gerald A. Voorhees, “The Character of Difference: Procedurality, Rhet-
oric, and Roleplaying Games,” Game Studies 9, no. 2 (2009): http://gamestudies 
.org/0902/articles/voorhees.
	
6.	 Mia Consalvo and Christopher A. Paul, “Welcome to the Discourse of 
the Real: Constituting the Boundaries of Games and Players,” FDG (2013):  
55–­62.
	
7.	 Taylor, “Assemblage of Play.”
	
8.	 Banks and Humphreys, “Labour of User Co-­creators”; Banks and Potts, 
“Co-­creating Games.”
	
9.	 Adrienne Shaw, “What Is Video Game Culture? Cultural Studies and 
Game Studies,” Games and Culture 5, no. 4 (2010): 403–­24.
	
10.	 Charlie Hall and Danielle Riendeau, “Mass Surveillance, Watch Dogs 
and the Militarized Police: When Strapping Cameras on People Is a Good 
Idea,” Polygon, 14 August 2014, http://www.polygon.com/2014/8/14/6000267/
ferguson-police-cameras-watch-dogs; Htown, “Polygon—­‘What Watch Dogs 
Can Teach Us About the Situation in Ferguson,’” NeoGAF, 14 August 2014, 
http://www.neogaf.com/forum/showthread.php?t=874691; Stephen Totilo, “An-
tonin Scalia’s Landmark Defense of Violent Video Games,” Kotaku, 13 Feb-

	
199	
Notes to Chapter 2
ruary 2016, http://kotaku.com/antonin-scalias-landmark-defense-of-violent 
-video-games-1758990360.
	
11.	 Carly A. Kocurek, Coin-­Operated Americans: Rebooting Boyhood at the 
Video Game Arcade (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
	
12.	 Adrienne Shaw, “Do You Identify as a Gamer? Gender, Race, Sexuality, 
and Gamer Identity,” New Media & Society 14, no. 1 (2012): 28–­44; Adrienne 
Shaw, “On Not Becoming Gamers: Moving beyond the Constructed Audience,” 
Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology 2 (2013): http://adanew 
media.org/2013/06/issue2-shaw/.
	
13.	 Mia Consalvo, Timothy Dodd Alley, Nathan Dutton, Matthew Falk, 
Howard Fisher, Todd Harper, and Adam Yulish, “Where’s My Montage? The 
Performance of Hard Work and Its Reward in Film, Television, and MMOGs,” 
Games and Culture 5, no. 4 (2010): 381–­402; Nick Yee, “The Labor of Fun: How 
Video Games Blur the Boundaries of Work and Play,” Games and Culture 1, no. 
1 (2006): 68–­71.
	
14.	 Adrienne Shaw, “The Internet Is Full of Jerks, Because the World Is Full 
of Jerks: What Feminist Theory Teaches Us about the Internet,” Communication 
and Critical/Cultural Studies 11, no. 3 (2014): 273–­77.
	
15.	 Brad McCarty, “70 Million Users, 1+ Billion Hours Every Month: 
League of Legends Is the World’s Most Played Video Game,” The Next Web, 
12 October 2012, http://thenextweb.com/shareables/2012/10/12/70-million 
-users-1-billion-hours-every-month-league-of-legends-is-the-worlds-most 
-played-game/; Paul Tassi, “Monstrous Viewership Numbers Show ‘League of 
Legends’ Is Still eSports King,” Forbes, 11 December 2015, http://www.forbes 
.com/sites/insertcoin/2015/12/11/monstrous-viewership-numbers-show-league 
-of-legends-is-still-esports-king; Paul Tassi, “Riot’s ‘League of Legends’ Reveals 
Astonishing 27 Million Daily Players, 67 Million Monthly,” Forbes, 27 January 2014, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/insertcoin/2014/01/27/riots-league-of-legends 
-reveals-astonishing-27-million-daily-players-67-million-monthly/.
	
16.	 Jeffrey Lin, “Why Do You Hate ‘Toxic’ Players? They Are Fun and If 
Needed They Can Be Muted Anyway,” ask.fm, 2015, http://ask.fm/RiotLyte/ 
answer/130575100866; Christian Nutt, “League of Legends: Changing Bad Player 
Behavior with Neuroscience,” Gamasutra, 5 December 2012, http://www.gama 
sutra.com/view/news/178650/League_of_Legends_Changing_bad_player_ 
behavior_with_neuroscience_.php.
	
17.	 Game Politics Staff, “Riot Cracking Down on Unruly ‘League of Leg-
ends’ Players,” Game Politics, 22 July 2014, http://gamepolitics.com/2014/07/22/
riot-cracking-down-unruly-league-legends-players.
	
18.	 Megan Farokhmanesh, “Riot Continues to Crack Down on ‘Toxic’ 
League of Legends Pro Players,” Polygon, 2 June 2014, http://www.polygon 
.com/2014/6/2/5772642/riot-league-of-legends-ban-pro-players; Ethan Gach, 

Notes to Chapter 2	
200
“League of Legends Pro Suspended during Worlds for Toxic Chat, Will Be Fined 
$2,000,” Kotaku, 9 October 2016, http://kotaku.com/league-of-legends-pro 
-suspended-during-worlds-for-toxic-1787589483; Michael McWhertor, “The 
League of Legends Team of Scientists Trying to Cure ‘Toxic Behavior’ On-
line,” Polygon, 13 October 2012, http://www.polygon.com/2012/10/17/3515178/
the-league-of-legends-team-of-scientists-trying-to-cure-toxic; Jenna Pitcher, 
“Riot Tests New League of Legends Insta-­Ban Feature,” IGN, 27 August 2014, 
http://www.ign.com/articles/2014/08/27/riot-tests-new-league-of-legends-insta 
-ban-feature.
	
19.	 Timothy Burke, “Hell Is Other Gamers (and Some Games),” Easily Dis-
tracted, 2 August 2012, http://blogs.swarthmore.edu/burke/blog/2012/08/02/
hell-is-other-gamers-and-some-games/.
	
20.	 Andrew Todd, “Video Games, Misogyny, and Terrorism: A Guide to 
Assholes,” Badass Digest, 26 August 2014, http://badassdigest.com/2014/08/26/
video-games-misogyny-and-terrorism-a-guide-to-assholes.
	
21.	 Colin Campbell, “Sarkeesian Driven out of Home by Online 
Abuse and Death Threats,” Polygon, 27 August 2014, http://www.polygon 
.com/2014/8/27/6075679/sarkeesian-driven-out-of-home-by-online-abuse 
-and-death-threats.
	
22.	 Zoë Quinn, “Once Again, I Will Not Negotiate with Terrorists,” 
Quinnspiracy, August 19, 2014, http://ohdeargodbees.tumblr.com/post/9518865 
7119/once-again-i-will-not-negotiate-with-terrorists.
	
23.	 Zoë Quinn, “Final Thoughts on This Whole Kerfuffle,” Zoë Quinn, 
29 August 2014, http://ohdeargodbees.tumblr.com/post/96115946094/final 
-thoughts-on-this-whole-kerfuffle.
	
24.	 Carolyn Cox, “[updated] Female Game Journalists Quit over Harass-
ment, #GamerGate Harms Women,” The Mary Sue, 4 September 2014, http://
www.themarysue.com/gamergate-harms-women/.
	
25.	 Anna Merlan, “A Man Is Making Bizarre, Terrifying YouTube Videos 
about Brianna Wu,” Jezebel, 2 February 2015, http://jezebel.com/a-man-is 
-making-bizarre-terrifying-youtube-videos-abou-1683221832; Stephen To-
tilo, “Another Woman in Gaming Flees Home Following Death Threats,” 
Kotaku, 11 October 2014, http://kotaku.com/another-woman-in-gaming 
-flees-home-following-death-thre-1645280338; Brianna Wu, “Why GSX Is 
Withdrawing from PAX East,” Space Channel 6, 2015, http://spacechannel6 
.com/post/111384260988/why-gsx-is-withdrawing-from-pax-east.
	
26.	 Brianna Wu, “No Skin Thick Enough: The Daily Harassment of 
Women in the Game Industry,” Polygon, 22 July 2014, http://www.polygon 
.com/2014/7/22/5926193/women-gaming-harassment.
	
27.	 Crystal K. M., “Having Thick Skin: Harassment in the Industry,” Phoe-

	
201	
Notes to Chapter 2
nixDown, 23 July 2014, http://iphoenixdown.com/2014/07/23/having-thick 
-skin-harassment-in-the-industry/.
	
28.	 It is notable how having two people who likely have vastly different 
amounts of experience with a game or game genre leads to the more experi-
enced person being more successful. This certainly seemed to be testing some-
thing other than merit or skill at Killer Instinct.
	
29.	 Rebecca Greenfield, “The Rape ‘Joke’ at Microsoft’s E3 Reveal Is a Big-
ger Deal Than Another Bad ‘Joke,’” The Atlantic, 10 June 2013, https://www 
.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/06/microsoft-e3-rape-joke/314326/.
	
30.	 Jillian Scharr, “What the Xbox Press Event Rape Joke Says about 
the Gaming Industry,” NBC News, 11 June 2013, http://www.nbcnews.com/
id/52175677/ns/technology_and_science-tech_and_gadgets/t/what-xbox-press 
-event-rape-joke-says-about-gaming-industry.
	
31.	 Carol Pinchefsky, “Really? IGDA Party at GDC Brings on the Female 
Dancers,” Forbes, 27 March 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/carolpinchefsky 
/2013/03/27/really-igda-party-at-gdc-brings-on-the-female-dancers/.
	
32.	 Megan Farokhmanesh, “Women in the Gaming Industry Share Their 
Reason to Be in the Business,” Polygon, 28 March 2013, http://www.polygon 
.com/2013/3/28/4155650/women-in-the-gaming-industry-share-their-number 
-one-reason-to-be-in.
	
33.	 Griffin McElroy, “IGDA Draws Backlash, Member Resignations over 
Female Dancers at GDC Party (Update: IGDA Responds),” Polygon, 28 March 
2013, http://www.polygon.com/2013/3/28/4157266/igda-gdc-party-brenda 
-romero-resignation.
	
34.	 Lesley, “What Are Dickwolves, and What Do They Have to Do with 
Rape Culture? A Cautionary Tale of How Not to Respond to Feminist Crit-
icism,” xoJane, 4 September 2013, http://www.xojane.com/issues/dickwolves 
-penny-arcade-pax-rape-culture-mike-krahulik; Maddy Myers, “Gaming, Rape 
Culture, and How I Stopped Reading Penny Arcade,” Boston Phoenix, 7 March 
2011, http://thephoenix.com/boston/life/116456-gaming-rape-culture-and 
-how-i-stopped-reading-pe/; Anastasia Salter and Bridget Blodgett, “Hypermas-
culinity & Dickwolves: The Contentious Role of Women in the New Gaming 
Public,” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56, no. 3 (2012): 401–­16.
	
35.	 Rachel Edidin, “Why I’m Never Going Back to Penny Arcade Expo,” 
Wired, 5 September 2013, http://www.wired.com/2013/09/penny-arcade-expo 
-dickwolves/.
	
36.	 Elizabeth Sampat, “Quit Fucking Going to PAX Already, What Is Wrong 
with You,” Elizabeth Sampat, 3 September 2013, http://elizabethsampat.com/
quit-fucking-going-to-pax-already-what-is-wrong-with-you/.
	
37.	 Nicholas T. Taylor, “Play Globally, Act Locally: The Standardization of 

Notes to Chapter 2	
202
Pro Halo 3 Gaming,” International Journal of Gender, Science and Technology 3, 
no. 1 (2011); T. L. Taylor, Raising the Stakes: The Professionalization of Com-
puter Gaming (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2012); Emma Witkowski, “On the 
Digital Playing Field: How We ‘Do Sport’ with Networked Computer Games,” 
Games and Culture 7, no. 5 (2012): 349–­74.
	
38.	 Todd Harper, The Culture of Digital Fighting Games: Performance and 
Practice (New York: Routledge, 2014), 125.
	
39.	 Nathan Grayson, “Twitch Chat Racism Changed Hearthstone Pro Ter-
rence Miller’s Career,” Kotaku, 7 October 2016, http://kotaku.com/hearthstone 
-pro-terrence-miller-hopes-to-clean-up-twitc-1787551043.
	
40.	 IGN Staff, “Cross Assault: The Full Story,” IGN, 21 March 2012, http://
www.ign.com/articles/2012/03/21/cross-assault-the-full-story.
	
41.	 Dylan Garner, “Capcom Announces Cast for ‘Cross Assault’ Reality Se-
ries,” Video Game Writers, 16 February 2012, http://videogamewriters.com/cap-
com-announces-cast-for-cross-assault-reality-series-39004.
	
42.	 IGN Staff, “Cross Assault.”
	
43.	 Patrick Klepek, “When Passions Flare, Lines Are Crossed [updated],” 
Giant Bomb, 2012, http://www.giantbomb.com/articles/when-passions-flare-
lines-are-crossed-updated/1100-4006/.
	
44.	 Ibid.
	
45.	 Jim Sterling, “Sexual Harassment and Fightin’ Drama, Together at 
Last!” Destructoid, 28 February 2012, http://www.destructoid.com/sexual 
-harassment-and-esports-drama-together-at-last-222877.phtml.
	
46.	 Amy O’Leary, “In Virtual Play, Sex Harassment Is All Too Real,” New 
York Times, 1 August 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/02/us/sexual 
-harassment-in-online-gaming-stirs-anger.html.
	
47.	 Harper, Culture of Digital Fighting Games; Maddy Myers, “One 
Woman’s Battle against the Anxious Masculinity of the Fighting-­Games 
Scene,” Boston Phoenix, 16 October 2012, http://thephoenix.com/boston/rec 
room/145892-one-womans-battle-against-the-anxious-masculinity/.
	
48.	 Wesley Yin-­Poole, “Borderlands 2: Gearbox Reveals the Mechromancer’s 
‘Girlfriend Mode’ Update: Randy Pitchford Unhappy with Connotations,” Eu-
rogamer, 13 August 2012, http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2012-08-13-border 
lands-2-gearbox-reveals-the-mechromancers-girlfriend-mode.
	
49.	 Ibid.
	
50.	 Ian Miles Cheong, “Girlfriend Mode: Casual Sexism in the Game Indus-
try,” Gameranx, 13 August 2012, http://www.gameranx.com/features/id/8535/
article/girlfriend-mode-casual-sexism-in-the-game-industry/.
	
51.	 Brandon Sheffield, “Opinion: Borderlands 2’s ‘Girlfriend Mode’ and Ca-
sual Sexism,” Gamasutra, 14 August 2012, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/

	
203	
Notes to Chapter 2
news/175878/Opinion_Borderlands_2s_Girlfriend_Mode_and_casual_sexism 
.php.
	
52.	 Colin Moriarty, “Opinion: Borderlands 2 and the Girlfriend Mode 
Farce,” IGN, 13 August 2012, http://www.ign.com/articles/2012/08/14/opinion 
-borderlands-2-and-the-girlfriend-mode-farce.
	
53.	 Leigh Alexander, “The Mixed Blessing of ‘Girlfriend Mode,’” Gama-
sutra, 20 September 2012, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/177006/The_
mixed_blessing_of_Girlfriend_Mode.php.
	
54.	 “The Pledge,” Gamers against Bigotry, 2014, http://gamersagainstbigotry 
.org/.
	
55.	 Jason Schreier, “Anti-­bigotry Gaming Site Defaced with Racial Slurs,” 
Kotaku, 24 July 2012, http://kotaku.com/5928723/anti+bigotry-gaming-site 
-defaced-with-racial-slurs; Jason Simon, “Gamers against Bigotry Targeted 
by Hackers, 1500 Pledges Erased,” Kill Screen Daily, 24 July 2012, http://
killscreendaily.com/articles/news/gamers-against-bigotry-targeted-hackers 
-pledges-erased/.
	
56.	 One of the best analyses of race in video games is Kishonna L. Gray, 
Race, Gender, and Deviance in Xbox Live: Theoretical Perspectives from the Vir-
tual Margins (New York: Routledge, 2014).
	
57.	 David Leonard, “Not a Hater, Just Keepin’ It Real : The Importance of 
Race-­ and Gender-­Based Game Studies,” Games and Culture 1, no. 1 (2006): 
83–­88.
	
58.	 David Leonard, “Young, Black (& Brown) and Don’t Give a Fuck: Virtual 
Gangstas in the Era of State Violence,” Cultural Studies ↔ Critical Methodolo-
gies 9, no. 2 (2009): 248–­72; Paul, Wordplay and the Discourse of Video Games.
	
59.	 Kishonna L. Gray, “Deviant Bodies, Stigmatized Identities, and Racist 
Acts: Examining the Experiences of African-­American Gamers in Xbox Live,” 
New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 18, no. 4 (2012): 261–­76.
	
60.	 Derek A. Burrill, Die Tryin’: Videogames, Masculinity, Culture (New York: 
Peter Lang, 2008), 138.
	
61.	 R. W. Connell, Masculinities: Knowledge, Power, and Social Change 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), 54–­56.
	
62.	 Many of the articles referenced in this section have at least some ele-
ment of the origins of GamerGate in them, though I am partial to Jack Gard-
ner’s. An ongoing timeline of GamerGate is being maintained as of this writing 
at GamerGhazi, “A Comprehensive Timeline of Gamergate (with Sources),” 
reddit, 3 September 2015, https://www.reddit.com/r/GamerGhazi/wiki/time 
line. Additional histories can be found in the following: Zachary Jason, “Game 
of Fear,” Boston Magazine, May 2015, http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/
article/2015/04/28/gamergate/; Helen Lewis, “Gamergate: A Brief History of 

Notes to Chapter 2	
204
a Computer-­Age War,” The Guardian, 11 January 2015, http://www.theguard 
ian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer 
-age-war.
	
63.	 Jack Gardner, “GamerGate’s Origins and What It Is Now,” Game In-
former, 20 October 2014, http://www.gameinformer.com/blogs/members/b/
jackalope38_blog/archive/2014/10/20/gamergate-39-s-origins-and-what-it-is 
-now.aspx.
	
64.	 Ibid.
	
65.	 Quinn, “Once Again, I Will Not Negotiate with Terrorists.” There is an 
interlude here, wherein Quinn is accused of ruining an event put on by the Fine 
Young Capitalists. 4Chan raised money to fund the Fine Young Capitalists and 
spite Quinn, which also led to the creation of Vivian James, who was taken up 
as a symbol for the movement, was to feature in video games, was designed as 
the average female gamer, and whose color scheme is a reference to a rape GIF.
	
66.	 Andy Baio, “72 Hours of #Gamergate,” The Message, 27 October 
2014, https://medium.com/message/72-hours-of-gamergate-e00513f7cf5d; 
Cox, “[updated] Female Game Journalists Quit over Harassment”; Aja Ro-
mano, “Zoe Quinn Claims 4chan Was Behind GamerGate the Whole Time,” 
Daily Dot, 6 September 2014, http://www.dailydot.com/geek/zoe-quinn-outs 
-4chan-behind-gamergate/; Brianna Wu, “Rape and Death Threats Are Ter-
rorizing Female Gamers: Why Haven’t Men in Tech Spoken Out?” Washing-
ton Post, 20 October 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/
wp/2014/10/20/rape-and-death-threats-are-terrorizing-female-gamers-why 
-havent-men-in-tech-spoken-out/.
	
67.	 Zoë Quinn, “5 Things I Learned as the Internet’s Most Hated Person,” 
Cracked, 16 September 2014, http://www.cracked.com/blog/5-things-i-learned 
-as-internets-most-hated-person/.
	
68.	 Frank Lantz, “#Gamergate,” Gamasutra, 24 October 2014, http://www 
.gamasutra.com/blogs/FrankLantz/20141024/228523/GamerGate.php.
	
69.	 Film Crit Hulk, “Film Crit Hulk Smash: on despair, gamergate and 
quitting the hulk,” Badass Digest, 27 October 2014, http://badassdigest 
.com/2014/10/27/film-crit-hulk-smash-on-despair-gamergate-and-quitting 
-the-hulk/.
	
70.	 This was also turned into a meme in critique of GamerGate. Cf. Victo-
ria McNally, “Gamergate Roundup: IGN & Occupy Wall Street Comment on 
GG, Internet Makes Hella Memes,” The Mary Sue, 24 October 2014, http://
www.themarysue.com/gamergate-round-up/.
	
71.	 There are various arguments to make about how game journalism is bro-
ken, but I am partial to ones like Dave Cook, “How Modern Games Coverage 
Has Reduced Critics to Human Punching Bags,” Vice, 13 April 2015, http://

	
205	
Notes to Chapter 2
www.vice.com/en_uk/read/how-modern-games-coverage-has-reduced-critics 
-to-human-punching-bags-224.
	
72.	 Leigh Alexander, “‘Gamers’ Don’t Have to Be Your Audience: ‘Gamers’ 
Are Over,” Gamasutra, 28 August 2014, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news 
/224400/Gamers_dont_have_to_be_your_audience_Gamers_are_over.php; 
Dan Golding, “The End of Gamers,” Dan Golding, 28 August 2014, http:// 
dangolding.tumblr.com/post/95985875943/the-end-of-gamers.
	
73.	 Andy Chalk, “BioWare Breaks Down Mass Effect 3 Game Modes,” The 
Escapist, 11 January 2012, http://www.escapistmagazine.com/news/view/115186 
-BioWare-Breaks-Down-Mass-Effect-3-Game-Modes.
	
74.	 Jonathan Holmes, “Why Does the Term ‘Gamer’ Feel Important?” Destruc-
toid, 31 August 2014, http://www.destructoid.com/why-does-the-term-gamer 
-feel-important-280451.phtml.
	
75.	 Casey Johnston, “The Death of the ‘Gamers’ and the Women Who 
‘Killed’ Them,” Ars Technica, 28 August 2014, http://arstechnica.com/gaming 
/2014/08/the-death-of-the-gamers-and-the-women-who-killed-them/.
	
76.	 The saga of the “Sad Puppies” and the 2015 Hugo Awards for science 
fiction points to how readers can have substantial cultural conflicts. For more, 
see Amy Wallace, “Who Won Science Fiction’s Hugo Awards, and Why It 
Matters,” Wired, 23 August 2015, http://www.wired.com/2015/08/won-science 
-fictions-hugo-awards-matters/.
	
77.	 Rich McCormick, “Intel Buckles to Anti-­feminist Campaign by Pull-
ing Ads from Gaming Site,” The Verge, 2 October 2014, http://www.theverge 
.com/2014/10/2/6886747/intel-buckles-to-anti-feminist-campaign-by-pulling 
-ads-from-gaming.
	
78.	 Owen S. Good, “Intel Issues Apology Regarding Its Advertising and 
‘Gamergate,’” Polygon, 4 October 2014, http://www.polygon.com/2014/10/4 
/6906909/intel-gamergate-advertising-gamasutra; Josh Lowensohn, “Intel 
Opposes Gamergate as Part of $300 Million Effort to Fix Diversity in Tech,” 
The Verge, 6 January 2015, http://www.theverge.com/2015/1/6/7505929/intel 
-investing-300-million-to-fix-diversity-ces-2015.
	
79.	 Eric Johnson, “Adobe Distances Itself from Gawker after Writer’s Gamer-
gate Tweet,” Recode, 22 October 2014, http://recode.net/2014/10/22/adobe 
-distances-self-from-gawker-after-writers-gamergate-tweet/.
	
80.	 Adobe Corporate Communications, “When Anti-­bullying Efforts Back-
fire,” Adobe News, 28 October 2014, http://blogs.adobe.com/conversations 
/2014/10/when-anti-bullying-efforts-backfire.html.
	
81.	 Max Read, “How We Got Rolled by the Dishonest Fascists of Gamer-
gate,” Gawker, 22 October 2014, http://gawker.com/how-we-got-rolled-by-the 
-dishonest-fascists-of-gamergat-1649496579.

Notes to Chapter 2	
206
	
82.	 In an effort at disclosure, I was elected a board member of DiGRA at 
this conference, am serving as vice president as of this writing, and was both an 
invited member of the fishbowl and an active note taker for the session.
	
83.	 Shira Chess and Adrienne Shaw, “A Conspiracy of Fishes, or, How We 
Learned to Stop Worrying about #Gamergate and Embrace Hegemonic Mas-
culinity,” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 59, no. 1 (2015): 208–­20; 
Shira Chess and Adrienne Shaw, “We Are All Fishes Now: DiGRA, Feminism, 
and Gamergate,” Transactions of the Digital Games Research Association 2, no. 
2 (2016): 21–­30; Torill Elvira Mortensen, “Anger, Fear, and Games: The Long 
Event of #Gamergate,” Games and Culture, 13 April 2016, 1–­20.
	
84.	 Mortensen, “Anger, Fear, and Games.”
	
85.	 Jose Zagal, “On Chairing a Games Research Conference,” Transactions 
of the Digital Games Research Association 2, no. 2 (2016): 16.
	
86.	 Chess and Shaw, “Conspiracy of Fishes,” 214.
	
87.	 Chess and Shaw, “We Are All Fishes Now.”
	
88.	 Mortensen, “Anger, Fear, and Games.”
	
89.	 Adrienne Shaw, “Do You Identify as a Gamer? Gender, Race, Sexuality, 
and Gamer Identity,” New Media & Society 14, no. 1 (2012): 28–­44.
	
90.	 Keith Stuart, “Brianna Wu and the Human Cost of Gamergate: ‘Every 
Woman I Know in the Industry Is Scared,’” The Guardian, 17 October 2014, 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/17/brianna-wu-gamergate 
-human-cost.
	
91.	 Emily Greer, “A Natural A/B Test of Harassment,” Kongregate Developer 
News, 23 October 2014, http://developers.kongregate.com/blog/a-natural-a-b 
-test-of-harassment.
	
92.	 Chris Kluwe, “Why #Gamergaters Piss Me the F*** Off,” The Cauldron, 
21 October 2014, https://medium.com/the-cauldron/why-gamergaters-piss 
-me-the-f-off-a7e4c7f6d8a6; Sarah Gray, “‘Gamergate Is Now Irredeemably 
Toxic’: The Top 10 Takeaways from Chris Kluwe’s Reddit AMA,” Salon, 23 Oc-
tober 2014, http://www.salon.com/2014/10/23/gamergate_is_now_irredeemably 
_toxic_the_top_10_takeaways_from_chris_kluwes_reddit_ama/.
	
93.	 Felicia Day, “The Only Thing I Have to Say about Gamer Gate,” 
Felicia’s Melange, 23 October 2014, http://thisfeliciaday.tumblr.com/post 
/100700417809/the-only-thing-i-have-to-say-about-gamer-gate.
	
94.	 Brandon Griggs, “Actress Harassed Online over #Gamergate,” CNN, 23 
October 2014, http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/23/living/felicia-day-gamergate/
index.html; Kirk Hamilton, “Felicia Day and Gamergate: This Is What Happens 
Now,” Kotaku, 24 October 2014, http://kotaku.com/felicia-day-and-gamergate 
-this-is-what-happens-now-1650544129.
	
95.	 Sam Laird, “Chris Kluwe: GamerGate a Symptom of Society’s Misog-

	
207	
Notes to Chapter 2
yny Problem,” Mashable, 26 October 2014, http://mashable.com/2014/10/25/
gamergate-chris-kluwe/.
	
96.	 Chris Suellentrop, “Can Video Games Survive?” New York Times, 
25 October 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/opinion/sunday/the 
-disheartening-gamergate-campaign.html; Anita Sarkeesian, “It’s Game 
Over for ‘Gamers,’” New York Times, 28 October 2014, http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/10/29/opinion/anita-sarkeesian-on-video-games-great-future.html.
	
97.	 Dave Lee, “Zoe Quinn: Gamergate Must Be Condemned,” BBC News, 
29 October 2014, http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-29821050; Todd 
VanDerWerff, “#Gamergate Has Won a Few Battles: It Will Lose the War,” 
Vox, 23 October 2014, http://www.vox.com/2014/10/23/7044593/gamergate; 
Leigh Alexander, “Sexism, Lies, and Video Games: The Culture War Nobody 
Is Winning,” Time, 5 September 2014, http://time.com/3274247/video-game 
-culture-war/; Taylor Wofford, “Is Gamergate about Media Ethics or Harass-
ing Women? Harassment, the Data Shows,” Newsweek, 25 October 2014, http://
www.newsweek.com/gamergate-about-media-ethics-or-harassing-women 
-harassment-data-show-279736; Wu, “Rape and Death Threats Are Terroriz-
ing Female Gamers.”
	
98.	 Alex Abad-­Santos, “#Gamergate Loves Stephen Colbert: Stephen Col-
bert Does Not Love Them Back,” Vox, 30 October 2014, http://www.vox.com/
xpress/2014/10/30/7131071/stephen-colbert-anita-sarkeesian-gamergate; Brian 
Crecente, “Brianna Wu: ‘I’m Not Going to Get Bullied out of This Industry,’” Poly-
gon, 14 October 2014, http://www.polygon.com/2014/10/14/6974547/brianna 
-wu-im-not-going-to-get-bullied-out-of-this-industry; Lee, “Zoe Quinn.”
	
99.	 Chris Plante, “Gamergate Is Dead,” The Verge, 30 October 2014, http://
www.theverge.com/2014/10/30/7131931/gamergate-is-dead.
	 100.	 Adi Robertson, “The Law & Order Gamergate Episode Manages to 
Be Even More Depressing Than Gamergate,” The Verge, 12 February 2015, 
http://www.theverge.com/2015/2/12/8026175/law-and-order-svu-gamergate 
-episode. Discussion about the episode was widespread both before and after 
it aired. Other perspectives on it can be found in Leigh Alexander, “Law & 
Order: SVU ‘Intimidation Game’ Is Not What Games Are About,” Hopes& 
Fears, 13 February 2015, http://www.hopesandfears.com/hopes/culture/video 
-games/168413-gamergate-svu-episode-reviewed-by-leigh-alexander; Cait-
lin Dewey, “This Is the Final Word on Gamergate—­and It’s from ‘Law & 
Order: SVU,’” Washington Post, 11 February 2015, https://www.washington 
post.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2015/02/11/this-is-the-final-word-on-gamer 
gate-and-its-from-law-order-svu/; Philip Kollar, “Law & Order: SVU to Air 
Episode Based on GamerGate,” Polygon, 29 January 2015, http://www.poly 
gon.com/2015/1/29/7949153/law-order-svu-gamergate-episode-nbc-tv; Jason 

Notes to Chapter 2	
208
Schreier, “So That Was Law & Order’s Gamergate Episode,” Kotaku, 11 Feb-
ruary 2015, http://kotaku.com/so-that-was-law-orders-gamergate-episode 
-1685333828.
	 101.	 Eric Johnson, “Shadows of Gamergate, but Few Answers, Material-
ize at Gaming Industry Shindig,” Recode, 9 February 2015, http://recode.net 
/2015/02/09/shadows-of-gamergate-but-few-answers-materialize-at-gaming 
-industry-shindig/.
	 102.	 Natalie Zina Walschots, “Finish Him!” This, 10 March 2015, http://this.org 
/magazine/2015/03/10/finish-him/.
	 103.	 Ben Kuchera, “The Year of GamerGate: The Worst of Gaming Cul-
ture Gets a Movement,” Polygon, 30 December 2014, http://www.polygon.com 
/2014/12/30/7460777/gamergate-2014-just-the-worst.
	 104.	 mr stroke, “GAF FOTY 2014-­Fail of the Year-­Results-­ Winner of the 
2014 Shit Sandwich Goes to . . . ,” NeoGAF, 23 December 2014, http://www 
.neogaf.com/forum/showthread.php?t=957568; Paul Verhoeven, “The Big-
gest Nerd Stories of 2014,” TheVine, 28 December 2014, http://www.thevine 
.com.au/life/tech/the-biggest-nerd-stories-of-2014-20141228-292442/; Nadia 
Kayyali and Danny O’Brien, “Facing the Challenge of Online Harassment,” Elec-
tronic Frontier Foundation, 8 January 2015, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015 
/01/facing-challenge-online-harassment.
	 105.	 Brian Crecente, “Depression Quest Creator Speaks at Congressional 
Briefing on Cyberstalking,” Polygon, 15 April 2015, http://www.polygon.com/2015 
/4/15/8420237/depression-quest-creator-speaks-at-congressional-briefing-on; 
Jeff Grubb, “Massachusetts Congresswoman Urges FBI to Take Gamergate 
Seriously,” VentureBeat, 10 March 2015, http://venturebeat.com/2015/03/10/
massachusetts-congresswoman-urges-fbi-to-take-gamergate-seriously/; Mary 
Elizabeth Williams, “Twitter Trolls, Your Days Are Numbered: The Depart-
ment of Justice Is Finally Taking Online Harassment Like #Gamergate Seri-
ously,” Salon, 29 May 2015, http://www.salon.com/2015/05/29/twitter_trolls 
_your_days_are_numbered_the_department_of_justice_is_finally_taking_on-
line_harassment_like_gamergate_seriously/; Brianna Wu, “It’s Time for the 
FBI to Prosecute Gamergate Trolls,” Daily Dot, 12 March 2015, http://www 
.dailydot.com/opinion/brianna-wu-fbi-death-threats-gamergate/; Brianna Wu, 
“[updated] Gamergate Death Threat Is a Slam Dunk for Prosecutors: Will 
They Act?” The Mary Sue, 22 May 2015, http://www.themarysue.com/will 
-prosecutors-act-on-gamergate-death-threat/.
	 106.	 Benjamin Barber, Twitter, 15 October 2014, https://twitter.com/endo 
morphosis/status/522520577249001473.
	 107.	 Hayes, Twilight of the Elites.
	 108.	 Lantz, “#GamerGate.”
	 109.	 Matt Lees, “What Gamergate Should Have Taught Us about the ‘Alt-­

	
209	
Notes to Chapter 3
Right,’” The Guardian, 1 December 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/tech 
nology/2016/dec/01/gamergate-alt-right-hate-trump. See also Paul Kennedy, 
“The Dangerous Game: Gamergate and the ‘Alt-­Right,’” CBC Radio, 30 No-
vember 2016, http://www.cbc.ca/radio/ideas/the-dangerous-game-gamergate 
-and-the-alt-right-1.3874259.
3. Coding Meritocracy
	
1.	 Jesper Juul, The Art of Failure: An Essay on the Pain of Playing Video 
Games (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013).
	
2.	 Robin Potanin, “Forces in Play: The Business and Culture of Videogame 
Production,” in Fun and Games ’10: Proceedings of the 3rd International Confer-
ence on Fun and Games, ed. Vero Vanden Abeele et al. (New York: ACM, 2010), 
135–­43.
	
3.	 Christopher L. Hayes, Twilight of the Elites: America after Meritocracy 
(New York: Crown, 2012); Ruth Levitas, “Shuffling Back to Equality?” Sound-
ings 26 (Spring 2004): 59–­72; Jo Littler, “Meritocracy as Plutocracy: The Mar-
keting of ‘Equality’ under Neoliberalism,” New Formations 80–­81 (2013): 52–­72; 
Kenneth Paul Tan, “Meritocracy and Elitism in a Global City: Ideological Shifts 
in Singapore,” International Political Science Review 29, no. 1 (2008): 7–­27; Mi-
chael Young, “Down with Meritocracy,” The Guardian, 28 June 2001, http://
www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2001/jun/29/comment; Michael Young, The Rise 
of the Meritocracy (1958; repr., New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 2008).
	
4.	 Jennifer Goodman, “The Meritocracy Myth: National Exams and the 
Depoliticization of Thai Education,” Sojourn: Journal of Social Issues in South-
east Asia 28, no. 1 (2013): 101–­31; Naa Oyo A. Kwate and Ilan H. Meyer, “The 
Myth of Meritocracy and African American Health,” American Journal of Public 
Health 100, no. 10 (2010): 1831–­34; Stephen J. McNamee and Robert K. Miller, 
The Meritocracy Myth (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004).
	
5.	 Juul, Art of Failure, 74–­75.
	
6.	 Ben Barrett, “Getting Better at Hearthstone with Computers,” Rock, 
Paper, Shotgun, 4 September 2014, http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2014 
/09/04/getting-better-at-hearthstone-with-computers/.
	
7.	 At the first ever Clash Royale tournament the mortar player was merci-
lessly booed and the card was made weaker shortly after the tournament. The 
card creates a building that enables players to attack from their side of the map, 
which is a more defensible position and does not facilitate “fun” play. In tourna-
ment fighting games, certain characters and stages are often banned as players 
find them too powerful and unbalanced, thereby subverting the contest of skill 
they are seeking. Sports games are based on unbalanced teams, but those teams 
are all given ratings. It is typically considered bad form to use a radically more 

Notes to Chapter 3	
210
powerful team than your opponent does, unless an agreement was made to do 
so in advance. That agreement typically is made to pursue a more equal contest 
where the more skilled player (I’m looking at you, Miguel Sicart) takes a lesser 
team and still beats me.
	
8.	 Mia Consalvo, Cheaters: Gaining Advantage in Videogames (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2007).
	
9.	 Chris Kohler, “Why Can’t Nintendo Stop Ruining Mario Kart?” Wired, 
15 May 2014, http://www.wired.com/2014/05/mario-kart-8-wii-u/.
	
10.	 Celestius, “Most Annoying Mario Kart Wii Items,” TheTopTens, 19 July 
2016, http://www.thetoptens.com/annoying-mario-kart-wii-items/.
	
11.	 Stephen Totilo, “The Maker of Mario Kart Justifies the Blue Shell,” 
Kotaku, 9 March 2011, http://kotaku.com/5780082/the-maker-of-mario-kart 
-justifies-the-blue-shell.
	
12.	 BlazeAssassin, “I Wish They Would Add a ‘Skill’ Mode to MP Games,” 
GameFAQs, 28 March 2012, http://www.gamefaqs.com/boards/632974-mario 
-party-9/62381927; Turbo_TRex, “There’s Too Much Reliance on Luck in 
This Game,” GameFAQs, 19 January 2014, http://www.gamefaqs.com/boards 
/711406-mario-party-island-tour/68375685.
	
13.	 “Banned Stage,” SmashWiki, n.d., http://www.ssbwiki.com/Banned_
stage.
	
14.	 Mia Consalvo, “Hardcore Casual: Game Culture Return(s) to Raven-
hearst,” FDG ’09: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Foundations 
of Digital Games (New York: ACM, 2009), 50–­54.
	
15.	 Derek Strickland, “Halo Online Pay to Win Microtransactions Re-
vealed,” VR World, 26 March 2015, http://www.vrworld.com/2015/03/26/halo 
-online-pay-to-win-microtransactions-revealed/.
	
16.	 Leigh Alexander, “Watergun Assassin: The Grand Game Story of Street 
Wars,” Gamasutra, 6 August 2014, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news 
/222713/Watergun_assassin_The_grand_game_story_of_Street_Wars.php.
	
17.	 Stephen Totilo, “The Uncracked Secrets of Pokémon Go Egg-­Hatching,” 
Kotaku, 28 July 2016, http://kotaku.com/the-uncracked-secrets-of-pokemon-go 
-egg-hatching-1784339902.
	
18.	 Alexander, “Watergun Assassin.”
	
19.	 Ethan Ham, “Rarity and Power: Balance in Collectible Object Games,” 
Game Studies 10, no. 1 (2010): http://gamestudies.org/1001/articles/ham.
	
20.	 Eli Hodapp, “‘Hearthstone’ Curse of Naxxramas Review: Easily the 
Best Way New Collectable Card Game Cards Have Ever Been Released,” 
Touch Arcade, 21 August 2014, http://toucharcade.com/2014/08/21/hearthstone 
-curse-of-naxxramas-review/.
	
21.	 Ibid.
	
22.	 Eugene Lee, “Tomb Raider to Survivor, Reimagining Lara Croft,” En-

	
211	
Notes to Chapter 4
tropy, 30 June 2014, http://entropymag.org/tomb-raider-to-survivor-reimagin 
ing-lara-croft/.
	
23.	 Evan Narcisse, “Tomb Raider: The Kotaku Review,” Kotaku, 25 February 
2013, http://kotaku.com/5986619/tomb-raider-the-kotaku-review.
	
24.	 This is especially interesting in consideration of how Lara Croft was re-
booted away from her lineage of inheritance and wealth in the newest install-
ment of the series.
	
25.	 Edward Castronova, Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture of Online 
Games (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 114.
	
26.	 Simon Parkin, “If You Love Games, You Should Refuse to Be Called a 
Gamer,” New Statesman, 9 December 2013, http://www.newstatesman.com/if 
-you-love-games-you-are-not-a-gamer.
	
27.	 Ibid.
	
28.	 Elizabeth Harper, “Should You Lose Experience When You Die?” En-
gadget, 7 April 2007, https://www.engadget.com/2007/04/07/should-you-lose 
-experience-when-you-die/.
4. Judging Skill
	
1.	 Jesper Juul, The Art of Failure: An Essay on the Pain of Playing Video 
Games (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013).
	
2.	 Benjamin Sell and Michael Hartman, “Gear Score in World of War-
craft: What Is It and How Do I Know What Mine Is?” Altered Gamer, 18 April 
2012, http://world-of-warcraft.alteredgamer.com/wow-basics/71203-gear-score 
-in-world-of-warcraft-what-is-it-and-how-do-i-know-what-mine-is/; “Gear 
Score,” WoWWiki, n.d., http://wowwiki.wikia.com/wiki/Gear_score.
	
3.	 Gus Mustrapa, “Gamer Earns Every World of Warcraft Achievement,” 
Wired, 3 December 2009, http://www.wired.com/2009/12/world-of-warcraft 
-achievement/; Starym, “A History of World Firsts: Vanilla,” Manaflask, 
1 March 2014, http://manaflask.com/en/articles/a-history-of-world-firsts 
-vanilla#; Gergo Vas, “The First Player to Unlock All 2,057 of World of War-
craft’s Achievements,” Kotaku, 22 April 2014, http://kotaku.com/russian-player 
-unlocks-all-2-057-achievements-in-world-1566029494.
	
4.	 For general background on raiding, please see Mark Chen, Leet Noobs: 
The Life and Death of an Expert Player Group in World of Warcraft (New York: 
Peter Lang, 2011).
	
5.	 A general background on DKP can be found in Krista-­Lee Malone, 
“Dragon Kill Points: The Economics of Power Gamers,” Games and Culture 4, 
no. 3 (2009): 296–­316.
	
6.	 Mark Silverman and Bart Simon, “Discipline and Dragon Kill Points in 
the Online Power Game,” Games and Culture 4, no. 4 (2009): 364.

Notes to Chapter 4	
212
	
7.	 Ibid., 371.
	
8.	 Michael McWhertor, “The League of Legends Team of Scientists Trying 
to Cure ‘Toxic Behavior’ Online,” Polygon, 13 October 2012, http://www.poly 
gon.com/2012/10/17/3515178/the-league-of-legends-team-of-scientists-trying 
-to-cure-toxic; Paul Tassi, “Riot’s ‘League of Legends’ Reveals Astonishing 27 
Million Daily Players, 67 Million Monthly,” Forbes, 27 January 2014, http://
www.forbes.com/sites/insertcoin/2014/01/27/riots-league-of-legends-reveals 
-astonishing-27-million-daily-players-67-million-monthly/.
	
9.	 McWhertor, “League of Legends Team of Scientists Trying to Cure 
‘Toxic Behavior’ Online.”
	
10.	 Colin Campbell, “How Riot Games Encourages Sportsmanship in 
League of Legends,” Polygon, 20 March 2014, http://www.polygon.com 
/2014/3/20/5529784/how-riot-games-encourages-sportsmanship-in-league 
-of-legends.
	
11.	 Luke Plunkett, “Pro League of Legends Player Banned for Harass-
ment, Abuse & ‘Negative Attitude,’” Kotaku, 4 December 2012, http://kotaku 
.com/5965713/pro-league-of-legends-player-banned-for-harassment-abuse 
-negative-attitude. For academic studies of the governance systems in League 
of Legends, see Jeremy Blackburn and Haewoon Kwak, “stfu noob! Predicting 
Crowdsourced Decisions on Toxic Behavior in Online Games,” in WWW ’14: 
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web (New York: 
ACM, 2014), 877–­88; Yubo Kou and Bonnie Nardi, “Governance in League of 
Legends: A Hybrid System,” FDG (2014): https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/; 
Haewoon Kwak, Jeremy Blackburn, and Seungyeop Han, “Exploring Cyber-
bullying and Other Toxic Behavior in Team Competition Online Games,” in 
CHI ’15: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (New York: ACM, 2015), 3739–­48.
	
12.	 Elo is a system originally designed for chess that has found its way into a 
number of technical products in some form, from video games to the forerun-
ner to Facebook. The system is based on trying to match players of equal skill 
against each other. Players start out with a baseline rating, which goes up and 
down as they lose matches. Beating a higher-­rated player leads to a larger boost 
than beating a player with a similar rating to your own. Conversely, losing to 
a lower-­ranked player can lead to a substantial lowering of your own rating. In 
my experience, Elo makes games feel weightier as there are somewhat durable 
consequences to each match.
	
13.	 YurdleTheTurtle, “Beginner’s Guide to Ranked Games,” League of Leg-
ends Community, 5 May 2013, http://forums.na.leagueoflegends.com/board/
showthread.php?t=1194168.
	
14.	 Ibid.
	
15.	 Nathan Grayson, “The Guy with the Lowest Possible Rank in Over-

	
213	
Notes to Chapter 4
watch,” Kotaku, 23 August 2016, http://kotaku.com/the-guy-with-the-lowest 
-possible-rank-in-overwatch-1785662123.
	
16.	 Dillion Skiffington, “League of Legends’ Neverending War on Toxic 
Behavior,” Kotaku, 19 September 2014, http://kotaku.com/league-of-legends 
-neverending-war-on-toxic-behavior-1636894289.
	
17.	 Riot Socrates, “Ranked Restrictions,” League of Legends Boards, 24 
September 2014 http://boards.na.leagueoflegends.com/en/c/miscellaneous 
/1LJP1ovA-ranked-restrictions.
	
18.	 Nathan Grayson, “League of Legends Restricting Toxic Players from 
Ranked Games,” Kotaku, 23 September 2014, http://kotaku.com/league-of 
-legends-restricting-toxic-players-from-ranked-1638305092.
	
19.	 Skiffington, “League of Legends’ Neverending War on Toxic Behavior.”
	
20.	 Ibid.
	
21.	 Yannick LeJacq, “Losing in MOBAs Should Be More Fun,” Ko-
taku, 29 April 2015, http://kotaku.com/losing-in-mobas-should-be-more 
-fun-1701067967.
	
22.	 Philippa Warr, “Wot I Learned: League of Legends Q&A,” Rock, Paper, 
Shotgun, 26 October 2014, http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2014/10/26/lol 
-2015-changes/.
	
23.	 Yannick LeJacq, “Why Riot Tweaks League of Legends to Make It Better 
for Its Best Players,” Kotaku, 19 May 2015, http://kotaku.com/why-riot-tweaks 
-league-of-legends-to-make-it-better-for-1705527275.
	
24.	 Jeffrey Lin, “Tweet,” Twitter, 28 May 2015, https://twitter.com/riotlyte/
status/604005785245335552.
	
25.	 Brenna Hillier, “Only 2% of League of Legends Matches Include Abuse, 
Says Riot,” VG247, 9 July 2015, http://www.vg247.com/2015/07/09/only-2-of 
-league-of-legends-matches-include-abuse-says-riot/.
	
26.	 Vikki Blake, “‘Online Harassment Is Not an Impossible Problem,’ Says 
Riot,” Destructoid, 9 July 2015, http://www.destructoid.com/-online-harassment 
-is-not-an-impossible-problem-says-riot-295658.phtml.
	
27.	 Five-­star heroes have a 0.01 percent chance of being drawn out of the 
free pack that players get once a day and a 0.25 percent chance of being drawn 
out of a paid pack. A paid character costs about five dollars as of this writing.
	
28.	 Paul Tassi, “The World’s Best ‘Clash Royale’ Player Has Spent $12k 
on the Game, and for Good Reason,” Forbes, 1 April 2016, http://www.forbes 
.com/sites/insertcoin/2016/04/01/the-worlds-best-clash-royale-player-has 
-spent-12k-on-the-game-and-for-good-reason.
	
29.	 Eli Hodapp, “Seven Ways ‘Clash Royale’ Should Be More Like Pepper-
oni Pizza,” Touch Arcade, 20 May 2016, http://toucharcade.com/2016/05/20/ 
seven-ways-clash-royale-should-be-more-like-pepperoni-pizza/.
	
30.	 Dean Takahashi, “With Patience, I Defeated Supercell’s Monetization 

Notes to Chapter 4	
214
Strategy in Clash Royale,” VentureBeat, 28 April 2016, http://venturebeat.com 
/2016/04/28/with-patience-i-defeated-supercells-monetization-strategy-in 
-clash-royale/.
	
31.	 dragonroar3, “Tournaments Make Me Not Want to Play Ranked,” red-
dit, 10 July 2016, https://www.reddit.com/r/ClashRoyale/comments/4s45yv 
/tournaments_make_me_not_want_to_play_ranked/.
	
32.	 Eli Hodapp, “Supercell Doubles Down on Never Muting Emotes in 
‘Clash Royale,’” Touch Arcade, 14 June 2016, http://toucharcade.com/2016/06/14 
/supercell-doubles-down-on-never-muting-emotes-in-clash-royale/.
	
33.	 Clash Royale Team, “Emotes,” Clash Royale, 14 June 2016, https://
clashroyale.com/blog/news/emotes.
	
34.	 Hodapp, “Supercell Doubles Down on Never Muting Emotes in ‘Clash 
Royale.’”
	
35.	 Clash Royale Team, “Rethinking Emotes,” Clash Royale, 6 September 
2016, https://clashroyale.com/blog/news/rethinking-emotes.
	
36.	 David Amsden, “‘Madden’ and Me: How Football’s Biggest Video Game 
Took Over My Life,” Rolling Stone, 28 August 2015, http://www.rollingstone.com 
/sports/features/madden-and-me-how-footballs-biggest-video-game-took 
-over-my-life-20150828.
	
37.	 Owen S. Good, “Meet the Million-­Point Man of Xbox Live,” Polygon, 22 
March 2014, http://www.polygon.com/2014/3/22/5533384/meet-the-million 
-point-man-of-xbox-live; Greg Kumparak, “It Took 8 Years, but Someone 
Just Broke One Million Gamerscore on Xbox Live,” TechCrunch, 12 March 
2014, http://techcrunch.com/2014/03/12/it-took-8-years-but-someone-just 
-broke-one-million-gamerscore-on-xbox-live/; Luke Plunkett, “Meet the First 
Gamer to Get One Million Achievement Points,” Kotaku, 13 March 2014, 
http://kotaku.com/watch-live-as-a-hero-gets-a-gamerscore-of-over-one-mill 
-1542821937/1542852654.
	
38.	 Good, “Meet the Million-­Point Man of Xbox Live.”
	
39.	 Joel Goodwin, “The Trouble with Serious Games,” Electron Dance, 
14 September 2014, http://www.electrondance.com/the-trouble-with-serious 
-games/.
	
40.	 Jen Gerson, “Dragon Age Writer Jennifer Hepler Talks about Leaving 
Bioware, but Not for Being Harrassed,” National Post, 19 August 2013, http://
news.nationalpost.com/2013/08/19/jennifer-hepler/.
	
41.	 Susana Polo, “Inclusion: What Jennifer Hepler’s Story Is All About,” 
The Mary Sue, 20 February 2012, http://www.themarysue.com/inclusion-what 
-jennifer-heplers-story-is-all-about/.
	
42.	 Ibid.
	
43.	 Andy Chalk, “BioWare Breaks Down Mass Effect 3 Game Modes,” The 

	
215	
Notes to Chapter 4
Escapist, 11 January 2012, http://www.escapistmagazine.com/news/view/115186 
-BioWare-Breaks-Down-Mass-Effect-3-Game-Modes.
	
44.	 Tina Amini, “BioWare Writer Describes Her Gaming Tastes; Angry 
Gamers Call Her a ‘Cancer,’” Kotaku, 20 February 2012, http://kotaku.com 
/5886674/bioware-writer-describes-her-gaming-tastes-angry-gamers-call-her 
-a-cancer; Stephanie Gutowski, “Attack of the Internet: Saving Bioware’s Jen-
nifer Hepler,” RipTen Videogame Blog, 24 February 2012, http://www.ripten 
.com/2012/02/24/attack-of-the-internet-saving-biowares-jennifer-hepler/.
	
45.	 Chris Priestly, “Our Statement Supporting a Valued Employee,” BioWare 
Forum, 21 February 2012, http://forum.bioware.com/topic/259859-our-state 
ment-supporting-a-valued-employee/.
	
46.	 Mike Fahey, “Average Gamers Are Going to Hate Bioshock Infinite’s 1999 
Mode,” Kotaku, 23 January 2012, http://kotaku.com/5878338/average-gamers 
-are-going-to-hate-bioshock-infinites-1999-mode.
	
47.	 Ibid.
	
48.	 Patricia Hernandez, “GTA Players Beat All of the Heists without Ever 
Dying,” Kotaku, 16 March 2015, http://kotaku.com/gta-v-players-beat-all-of 
-heists-without-ever-dying-1691705013; Patricia Hernandez, “The Man Who 
Does the Impossible in Super Mario 64,” Kotaku, 17 March 2015, http://kotaku 
.com/the-man-who-does-the-impossible-in-super-mario-64-1656869221; Jason 
Schreier, “Someone Beat Pillars of Eternity in under 40 Minutes,” Kotaku, 
14 April 2015, http://kotaku.com/someone-beat-pillars-of-eternity-in-under 
-40-minutes-1697709938.
	
49.	 Nic Rowen, “Review: Evolve,” Destructoid, 13 February 2015, http://www 
.destructoid.com/review-evolve-287650.phtml.
	
50.	 Laura Hudson, “In Bloodborne’s Brutal World, I Found Myself,” Off-
world, 10 April 2015, http://boingboing.net/2015/04/10/bloodborne.html.
	
51.	 Patricia Hernandez, “Incredible Bloodborne Player Beats Game without 
Ever Leveling Up,” Kotaku, 3 April 2015, http://kotaku.com/incredible-blood-
borne-player-beats-game-without-ever-le-1695418129; Patrick Klepek, “Skilled 
Dark Souls II Player Makes Toughest Enemies Look Like Chumps,” Kotaku, 10 
February 2015, http://kotaku.com/skilled-dark-souls-ii-player-makes-toughest 
-enemies-loo-1684963271.
	
52.	 Hudson, “In Bloodborne’s Brutal World, I Found Myself.”
	
53.	 Patrick Klepek, “Apparently I’m Not Playing Demon’s Souls the ‘Right 
Way,’” Kotaku, 19 February 2015, http://kotaku.com/apparently-im-not-playing 
-demons-souls-the-right-way-1686815820.
	
54.	 Dan Stapleton, “How and Why Bloodborne Lost Me,” IGN, 26 March 
2015, http://www.ign.com/articles/2015/03/26/how-and-why-bloodborne-lost 
-me.

Notes to Chapter 5	
216
	
55.	 Dave Thier, “Echo Chamber: ‘Bloodborne’s’ Critical Praise Is Gam-
ing Journalism’s Failure,” Forbes, 27 March 2015, http://www.forbes.com/sites 
/davidthier/2015/03/27/echo-chamber-bloodbornes-critical-praise-is-gaming 
-journalisms-failure/print/.
	
56.	 Or nine, or thirty-­nine, depending on when and what you were raiding.
	
57.	 Katherine Sierra, “Silicon Valley Could Learn a Lot from Skater Cul-
ture: Just Not How to Be a Meritocracy,” Wired, 23 February 2015, http://www 
.wired.com/2015/02/silicon-valley-thinks-can-learn-skater-culture-terrible 
-idea/.
5. Learning from Others
	
1.	 Steven E. Jones and George K. Thiruvathukal, Codename Revolution: The 
Nintendo Wii Platform (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2012); Nick Montfort 
and Ian Bogost, Racing the Beam: The Atari Video Computer System (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2009).
	
2.	 An excellent example of a book about sports culture is Dave Zirin, Game 
Over: How Politics Has Turned the Sports World Upside Down (New York: New 
Press, 2013).
	
3.	 feedmeacid, “Challenging the Play Is Broken,” GameFAQs, 9 October 
2012, http://www.gamefaqs.com/boards/656454-madden-nfl-13/64260364, 
robd42; “Challenging the Refs Call?” GameFAQs, 5 October 2011, http://www 
.gamefaqs.com/boards/625123-madden-nfl-12/60536576; Ebenezer Samuel, 
“System Update: Madden 15 Fumbled a Couple of Details,” Daily News, 29 
August 2014, http://nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv/system-update-madden 
-15-fumbled-couple-details-article-1.1921335.
	
4.	 David Sirlin, Playing to Win: Becoming the Champion (n.p.: David Sirlin, 
2005), Kindle ed., loc. 96.
	
5.	 David Leonhardt, “The Strike-­Zone Revolution,” New York Times, 23 Oc-
tober 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/24/upshot/the-strike-zone-revo 
lution.html; Jeff Sullivan, “Umpires Are Improving,” FanGraphs Baseball, 28 
February 2013, http://www.fangraphs.com/blogs/umpires-are-improving/.
	
6.	 Rich Trenholm, “Coaches Could Challenge Refs with TV Replays, Says 
Soccer Boss Sepp Blatter,” CNET, 8 September 2014, http://www.cnet.com/news 
/coaches-could-challenge-refs-with-tv-replays-says-soccer-boss-sepp-blatter/.
	
7.	 “NBA to Share ‘Last Two Minutes’ Officiating Reports Beginning 
March 2,” National Basketball Association, 27 February 2015, http://www.nba 
.com/2015/news/02/27/officating-reports-official-release/.
	
8.	 Kevin Draper, “NBA Says Refs Missed Five Calls on Final Thunder- 
Spurs Possession,” Deadspin, 3 May 2016, http://deadspin.com/nba-says-refs 
-missed-five-calls-on-final-spurs-thunder-1774523941.

	
217	
Notes to Chapter 5
	
9.	 Kit Holden, “Why Did the Bundesliga Turn Down Goal Line Technol-
ogy?” The Independent, 24 March 2014, http://www.independent.co.uk/sport 
/football/european/why-did-the-bundesliga-turn-down-goal-line-technology 
-9213017.html.
	
10.	 Bobby Warshaw, “No One Understands Soccer’s Rules, and That’s 
a Problem,” Deadspin, 14 June 2016, http://screamer.deadspin.com/no-one 
-understands-soccers-rules-and-thats-a-problem-1781973591.
	
11.	 Tom Ley, “Replay Is Turning Baseball into Football and I Hate It,” Dead-
spin, 12 October 2015, http://deadspin.com/replay-is-turning-baseball-into 
-football-and-i-hate-it-1736111661.
	
12.	 Jaime Diaz, “After Further Review, the USGA Got Real Lucky Dustin 
Johnson Won the U.S. Open by More Than One Stroke,” Golf Digest, 20 June 
2016, http://www.golfdigest.com/story/after-further-review-the-usga-got-real 
-lucky-dustin-johnson-won-the-us-open-by-more-than-one-stroke.
	
13.	 Barry Petchesky, “The Secret of the Seahawks’ Defense? Fouling, 
Maybe,” Deadspin, 10 January 2014, http://deadspin.com/the-secret-of-the 
-seahawks-defense-fouling-maybe-1498806994.
	
14.	 Daniel Rich, “For Wharton Professor Cade Massey, the NFL Draft Is 
a Crapshoot,” Daily Pennsylvanian, 14 October 2013, http://www.thedp.com/ 
article/2013/10/nfl-draft-analysis-cade-massey.
	
15.	 Dave McMenamin, “LeBron James: Warriors Are ‘Most Healthy Team 
I’ve Ever Seen in NBA History,’” ESPN, 23 November 2015, http://espn.go 
.com/nba/story/_/id/14204846/lebron-james-says-golden-state-warriors-most 
-healthy-team-ever-seen.
	
16.	 Claire McNear, “The End of Mike Carey, and the Twilight of Human 
Error,” The Ringer, 13 June 2016, https://theringer.com/nfl-mike-carey-rules 
-analyst-human-error-edd2226e9a29.
	
17.	 EA Sports, “Madden NFL 16 Player Ratings,” 2015, https://www.easports 
.com/madden-nfl/player-ratings.
	
18.	 Mark McClusky, “This Guy’s Quest to Track Every Shot in the NBA 
Changed Basketball Forever,” Wired, 28 October 2014, http://www.wired.com 
/2014/10/faster-higher-stronger.
	
19.	 Dylan Burkhardt, “How Iowa State Eliminated the Mid-­Range Jumper,” 
Shot Analytics, 18 March 2014, http://www.shotanalytics.com/2014/03/18/iowa 
-state-eliminated-mid-range-jumper/.
	
20.	 Zach Lowe, “The Tiers of the NBA: Ranking the Teams from Top to 
Bottom,” Grantland, 28 October 2014, http://grantland.com/the-triangle/nba 
-rankings-san-antonio-spurs-los-angeles-clippers-oklahoma-city-thunder 
-cleveland-cavaliers/.
	
21.	 Christopher A. Paul, “Optimizing Play: How Theorycraft Changes 
Gameplay and Design,” Game Studies 11, no. 2 (2011): http://gamestudies.org 

Notes to Chapter 5	
218
/1102/articles/paul; Christopher A. Paul, Wordplay and the Discourse of Video 
Games: Analyzing Words, Design, and Play (New York: Routledge, 2012); Karin 
Wenz, “Theorycrafting: Knowledge Production and Surveillance,” Information, 
Communication & Society 16, no. 2 (2013): 178–­93.
	
22.	 Jennifer Armstrong, “Life after Death for the Man behind Lost’s Mr. 
Eko,” Entertainment Weekly, 3 November 2006, http://www.ew.com/ew/article 
/0,,1553848,00.html.
	
23.	 Brett Koremenos, “Assets and Fit,” Grantland, 5 March 2015, http://
grantland.com/the-triangle/nba-shootaround-physical-graffiti/.
	
24.	 Adrian Wojnarowski, “Rockets GM Daryl Morey Fires Back at Mav-
ericks Owner Mark Cuban,” Yahoo Sports, 29 September 2014, http://sports 
.yahoo.com/news/rockets-gm-daryl-morey-fires-back-at-mavericks-owner 
-mark-cuban-082844311.html.
	
25.	 Pablo S. Torre and Tom Haberstroh, “New Biometric Tests Invade the 
NBA,” ESPN, 6 October 2014, http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/11629773/
new-nba-biological-testing-less-michael-lewis-more-george-orwell.
	
26.	 Gary Jacobson, “Inside the Final Four Finances: The March toward $1 
Billion in Revenue,” Dallas Morning News, 4 April 2014, http://www.dallasnews 
.com/sports/college-sports/ncaa-tournament/the-scene/20140403-inside-final 
-four-finances-cuban-ncaa-tournament-won-t-get-fat-like-nfl.ece.
	
27.	 Cy Young, “Cy Young Perfect Game Box Score,” Baseball Almanac, n.d., 
http://www.baseball-almanac.com/boxscore/05051904.shtml.
	
28.	 Jeff Passan, “Tim Lincecum’s No-­Hitter Shows His Very Best Is Still 
Better Than Most,” Yahoo Sports, 25 June 2014, https://sports.yahoo.com/news/
tim-lincecum-still-good-enough-for-no-hitter-even-if-he-s-a-different-than 
-before-011427676.html; Maxi Rodriguez, “Javier Mascherano Says He Tore 
His Anus During Semifinal against Netherlands,” Yahoo Sports, 10 July 2014, 
https://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/soccer-dirty-tackle/javier-mascherano-says-he 
-tore-his-anus-during-semifinal-against-netherlands-154255457-soccer.html; 
Chris Sprow, “The NFL’s ‘Luckiest’ Teams,” ESPN, 30 December 2011, http://
insider.espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/id/7400317/the-luckiest-teams-nfl-sometimes 
-turn-the-greatest-nfl.
	
29.	 Mike Fahey, “Pac-­Man World Record Broken,” Kotaku, 11 September 
2009, http://kotaku.com/5357260/pac-man-world-record-broken.
	
30.	 Raph Koster, Theory of Fun for Game Design (Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 
2013), Kindle ed., loc. 890.
	
31.	 Angel Diaz and Rafael Canton, “The 20 Greatest Basketball Players 
to Never Play in the NBA,” Complex, 9 November 2012, http://www.complex 
.com/sports/2012/11/the-20-greatest-players-who-never-played-in-the-nba/; 
“World Football: The Top 10 Most Promising Players That Never Made It,” 

	
219	
Notes to Chapter 5
Bleacher Report, 3 June 2011, http://bleacherreport.com/articles/708618-guti-and 
-the-top-10-promising-players-that-never-made-it-and-busted; Adam Lazarus, 
“10 Best NFL Players That Never Were,” Bleacher Report, 12 April 2012, http://
bleacherreport.com/articles/1143472-the-10-best-nfl-players-that-never-were.
	
32.	 Andrew McCutchen, “Left Out,” The Players’ Tribune, 13 February 2015, 
http://www.theplayerstribune.com/left-out/.
	
33.	 PA Sport, “Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne Offer ‘Astonishing’—­
Wolfsburg Chief,” ESPN FC, 28 August 2015, http://www.espnfc.us/story 
/2584407/manchester-city-kevin-de-bruyne-offer-astonishing-chief.
	
34.	 Patrick Redford, “How Chris Froome Dominated the Tour De France,” 
Deadspin, 26 July 2016, http://fittish.deadspin.com/how-chris-froome-dominated 
-the-tour-de-france-1784285012.
	
35.	 One example of the importance of corporations being in charge of eSports 
and how that affects play can be seen in the debate surrounding relegation and 
League of Legends. For more, see Vince Nairn, “LCS Owners Send Letter to Riot 
Games about Concerns Regarding Relegation, Financial Stability and Char-
ter Membership,” Slingshot, 12 November 2016, https://slingshotesports.com 
/2016/11/12/riot-games-lett-lcs-owners-league-of-legends-concerns-relegation 
-financial-stability/.
	
36.	 Andrew Sharp, “The Warriors Were Too Good at Everything to Ever 
Really Lose Anything,” Grantland, 17 June 2015, http://grantland.com/the-tri 
angle/the-warriors-were-too-good-at-everything-to-ever-really-lose-anything/.
	
37.	 Dan Diamond, “Paul George Injury: Why the Stanchions Were So 
Close, and How to Fix It,” Forbes, 2 August 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites 
/dandiamond/2014/08/02/paul-george-injury-how-one-expert-would-make 
-sure-it-never-happens-again/.
	
38.	 Zach Lowe, “A Playoff Problem: If the Celtics Are Trying to Rebuild, 
Then Why the Postseason Push?” Grantland, 31 March 2015, http://grantland 
.com/the-triangle/a-playoff-problem-if-the-celtics-are-trying-to-rebuild-then 
-why-the-postseason-push/.
	
39.	 Sports certainly has its own structural inequalities, not the least of which 
is the cost to play certain sports. For a perspective on how this affects hockey, see 
Geordie Tait, “The Puck Stops Here,” Star City Games, 20 October 2010, http://
www.starcitygames.com/magic/misc/20314_The_Puck_Stops_Here.html.
	
40.	 I deeply appreciate this suggestion from the anonymous “Reviewer 2,” 
who read an earlier version of this chapter.
	
41.	 The best example of this may be the AAAA baseball player, who is good 
enough to dominate AAA baseball but not good enough to play consistently in 
Major League Baseball.
	
42.	 Rodger Sherman, “The Story of the Slowest Athletes at the Rio Olym-

Notes to Chapter 5	
220
pics, and Why They Compete,” SBNation, 19 August 2016, http://www.sbnation 
.com/2016/8/19/12467438/rio-olympics-2016-athletes-small-nations-richson 
-simeon.
	
43.	 Rodger Sherman, “This Is Why Gabby Douglas Isn’t in the Olympics 
Gymnastics All-­Around Finals,” SBNation, 11 August 2016, http://www.sbnation 
.com/2016/8/7/12400004/team-usa-gymnastics-olympics-all-around-simone 
-biles-aly-raisman-gabby-douglas-2-per-country-rule.
	
44.	 Samuel Claiborn, “Mario Party 10 Review: Party Yawn,” IGN, 17 March 
2015, http://www.ign.com/articles/2015/03/17/mario-party-10-review.
	
45.	 Phill Cameron, “A Quick Argument for ‘Luck’ in Strategy Game Design, 
from XCOM 2’s Creator,” Gamasutra, 6 August 2015, http://www.gamasutra.com 
/view/news/249978/A_quick_argument_for_luck_in_strategy_game_design 
_from_XCOMs_creator.php.
	
46.	 Ibid.
	
47.	 Tiago Raposo, comment on ibid.; Anton Temba, comment on ibid.
	
48.	 Roy Graham, “Jake Solomon Explains the Careful Use of Randomness 
in XCOM 2,” Gamasutra, 1 March 2016, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news 
/266891/Jake_Solomon_explains_the_careful_use_of_randomness_in_XCOM 
_2.php.
	
49.	 Matthew Lynch, “Diverse Conversations Recruiting a Diverse Student 
Population,” Huffington Post, 4 February 2014, http://www.huffingtonpost.com 
/matthew-lynch-edd/diverse-conversations-rec_b_4724817.html.
	
50.	 Josh Freedman, “The Farce of Meritocracy: Why Legacy Admissions 
Might Actually Be a Good Thing,” Forbes, 14 November 2013, http://www 
.forbes.com/sites/joshfreedman/2013/11/14/the-farce-of-meritocracy-in-elite 
-higher-education-why-legacy-admissions-might-be-a-good-thing/.
	
51.	 Ross Douthat, “Does Meritocracy Work?” The Atlantic, 1 November 
2005, http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2005/11/does-meritocracy 
-work/304305/.
	
52.	 Tamar Lewin, “Colleges Seek New Paths to Diversity after Court Rul-
ing,” New York Times, 22 April 2014 http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/us/
turning-to-new-means-of-promoting-diversity.html.
	
53.	 Scott Jaschik, “Meritocracy or Bias?” Inside Higher Ed, 13 August 2013, 
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/08/13/white-definitions-merit-and 
-admissions-change-when-they-think-about-asian-americans.
	
54.	 Libby Nelson, “The Formula for a Good Life after College,” Vox, 6 May 
2014, http://www.vox.com/2014/5/6/5683788/the-science-of-a-good-life-after 
-college.
	
55.	 Jia Tolentino, “All the Greedy Young Abigail Fishers and Me,” Jezebel, 
28 June 2016, http://jezebel.com/all-the-greedy-young-abigail-fishers-and 
-me-1782508801; Marcus Woo, “Infoporn: College Faculties Have a Serious 

	
221	
Notes to Chapter 5
Diversity Problem,” Wired, 19 February 2015, http://www.wired.com/2015/02/
infoporn-college-faculties-serious-diversity-problem/.
	
56.	 Becky Chambers, “Why Games with Female Protagonists Don’t Sell, 
and What It Says about the Industry,” The Mary Sue, 23 November 2012, 
http://www.themarysue.com/why-games-with-female-protagonists-dont-sell 
-and-what-it-says-about-the-industry; Matthew Handrahan, “No Female 
Assassin’s Creed Characters a ‘Reality of Development,’” Games Industry, 
12 June 2014, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2014-06-11-no-female 
-assassins-creed-characters-a-reality-of-development; Cameron Kunzelman, 
“In Watch Dogs, Women Are Just Victims and Plot Points,” Paste, 28 May 
2014, http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2014/05/in-watch-dogs-women 
-are-victims-and-plot-points.html; Carolyn Petit, “Fear of a Woman Warrior,” 
GameSpot, 22 February 2013, https://www.gamespot.com/articles/fear-of-a 
-woman-warrior/1100-6404142/; Rachel Weber, “Naughty Dog: We’ve Been 
Asked to Push Ellie to the Back of the Box Art,” Games Industry, 12 December 
2012, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2012-12-12-naughty-dog-theres-a 
-misconception-that-if-you-put-a-girl-on-the-cover-the-game-sells-less; Mike 
Wehner, “Devs Had to Demand Female Focus Testers for The Last of Us,” The Es-
capist, 8 April 2013, http://www.escapistmagazine.com/news/view/123139-Devs 
-Had-to-Demand-Female-Focus-Testers-for-The-Last-of-Us.
	
57.	 David Leonard, “Not a Hater, Just Keepin’ It Real: The Importance of 
Race-­ and Gender-­Based Game Studies,” Games and Culture 1, no. 1 (2006): 
83–­88.
	
58.	 Jef Rouner, “Would You Believe There Have Been Only 14 Playable 
Black Women in Gaming?” Houston Press, 5 June 2015, http://www.houstonpress 
.com/arts/would-you-believe-there-have-been-only-14-playable-black-women 
-in-gaming-7484017.
	
59.	 Richard Pérez-­Peña, “Generation Later, Poor Are Still Rare at Elite Col-
leges,” New York Times, 25 August 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/26/
education/despite-promises-little-progress-in-drawing-poor-to-elite-colleges 
.html.
	
60.	 David Leonhardt, “‘A National Admissions Office’ for Low-­Income Striv-
ers,” New York Times, 16 September 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09 
/16/upshot/a-national-admissions-office-for-low-income-strivers.html; David 
Leonhardt, “A Simple Way to Send Poor Kids to Top Colleges,” New York 
Times, 29 March 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/31/opinion/sunday/a 
-simple-way-to-send-poor-kids-to-top-colleges.html; Peg Tyre, “Improving Eco-
nomic Diversity at the Better Colleges,” New York Times, 5 February 2014, http://
opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/02/05/improving-economic-diversity 
-at-the-better-colleges/.
	
61.	 Leigh Alexander, “These Girls Are Ready to Shape the Future of Game 

Notes to Conclusion	
222
Development,” Gamasutra, 29 July 2014, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news 
/221883/These_girls_are_ready_to_shape_the_future_of_game_development 
.php; Tanya X. Short, “Gaming the System: How Pixelles Make (More and 
More) Games,” Gamasutra, 20 March 2015, http://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/
TanyaXShort/20150320/238808/Gaming_the_System_How_Pixelles_Make 
_More_and_More_Games.php.
	
62.	 Paul Fain, “Inputs Trump Outputs,” Inside Higher Ed, 1 August 2013, 
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/08/01/incoming-student-charac 
teristics-determine-graduation-rates-studies-find.
	
63.	 “Please Come Work with Me,” Brie Code, 2015, http://briecode.tumblr 
.com/post/123327104135/please-come-work-with-me; Jenny Kutner, “Feminist 
Thor Selling Way More Comic Books Than Dude Thor,” Salon, 29 March 2015, 
http://www.salon.com/2015/03/19/feminist_thor_selling_way_more_comic 
_books_than_dude_thor/; Melissa Jun Rowley, “How NASA Broke the Gen-
der Barrier in STEM,” Fast Company, 23 June 2015, http://www.fastcompany 
.com/3047618/strong-female-lead/how-nasa-broke-the-gender-barrier-in-stem.
	
64.	 Leigh Alexander, “The Good News,” Leigh Alexander, 10 March 2015, 
http://leighalexander.net/the-good-news/.
Conclusion
	
1.	 TEDxMarin, “Paul Piff: Does Money Make You Mean?” TED, October 
2013, https://www.ted.com/talks/paul_piff_does_money_make_you_mean.
	
2.	 Leigh Alexander, “Gamer’s Paradise: The Bleak, Toilsome World of Cart 
Life,” Creators Project, 13 March 2013, http://thecreatorsproject.vice.com/blog 
/gamers-paradise-the-bleak-toilsome-world-of-icart-lifei.
	
3.	 Ibid.
	
4.	 Alexander, “Gamer’s Paradise”; Richard Cobbett, “Papers, Please Review,” 
IGN, 12 August 2013, http://www.ign.com/articles/2013/08/12/papers-please 
-review; John Walker, “Wot I Think: Papers, Please,” Rock, Paper, Shotgun, 12 Au-
gust 2013, http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2013/08/12/wot-i-think-papers 
-please/.
	
5.	 Justin McElroy, “Papers, Please Review: Mundane Tyranny,” Polygon, 
9 August 2013, http://www.polygon.com/2013/8/9/4606420/papers-please 
-review-mundane-tyranny.
	
6.	 Cobbett, “Papers, Please Review.”
	
7.	 Walker, “Wot I Think.”
	
8.	 Leigh Alexander, “GTA V Is Not Subversive—­but These Games Are,” 
The Guardian, 27 September 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technology 
/2013/sep/27/gta-v-transgressive-video-games.
	
9.	 Leigh Alexander, “Papers, Please: Why Make a Computer Game about 

	
223	
Notes to Conclusion
Border Control?” New Statesman, 16 September 2013, http://www.newstatesman 
.com/sci-tech/2013/09/papers-please%20why-make-computer-game-about 
-border-control.
	
10.	 Thank you to Nicholas T. Taylor for suggesting I analyze The Walking 
Dead.
	
11.	 Brad Nicholson, “‘Walking Dead: The Game’ Review—­a Dark Zombie 
Tale,” Touch Arcade, 27 November 2012, http://toucharcade.com/2012/11/27 
/the-walking-dead-the-game-review-a-dark-zombie-tale/.
	
12.	 Hollander Cooper, “The Walking Dead Game Review,” GamesRadar, 26 
November 2012, http://www.gamesradar.com/the-walking-dead-review/.
	
13.	 Greg Miller, “The Walking Dead: The Game Review,” IGN, 12 De-
cember 2012, http://www.ign.com/articles/2012/12/12/the-walking-dead-the 
-game-review.
	
14.	 Cooper, “Walking Dead Game Review.”
	
15.	 Nicholson, “Walking Dead.”
	
16.	 Shaun Musgrave, “‘The Walking Dead: Season Two’ Review: Experience 
the Apocalypse from a Different Perspective,” Touch Arcade, 29 August 2014, 
http://toucharcade.com/2014/08/29/the-walking-dead-season-two-review/.
	
17.	 Brandon Sheffield, “What Makes Gone Home a Game?” Gamasutra, 
20 March 2014, http://gamasutra.com/view/news/213612/What_makes_Gone 
_Home_a_game.php.
	
18.	 Dale North, “Review: Gone Home,” Destructoid, 1 October 2013, http://
www.destructoid.com/review-gone-home-262626.phtml.
	
19.	 Kris Graft, “For Gone Home’s Designer, ‘What Is a Game?’ Is a Question 
Worth Exploring,” Gamasutra, 14 March 2014, http://www.gamasutra.com/view/
news/212853/For_Gone_Homes_designer_what_is_a_game_is_a_question_ 
worth_exploring.php.
	
20.	 Danielle Riendeau, “Gone Home Review: Living Room,” Polygon, 15 
August 2013, http://www.polygon.com/2013/8/15/4620172/gone-home-review 
-if-these-walls-could-talk.
	
21.	 Marty Sliva, “Gone Home Review,” IGN, 15 August 2013, http://www 
.ign.com/articles/2013/08/15/gone-home-review.
	
22.	 Leigh Alexander, “How Gone Home’s Design Constraints Lead to a 
Powerful Story,” Gamasutra, 15 August 2013, http://gamasutra.com/view/
news/198340/How_Gone_Homes_design_constraints_lead_to_a_powerful_
story.php.
	
23.	 Jason Schreier, “The No Man’s Sky Hype Dilemma,” Kotaku, 18 August 
2016, http://kotaku.com/the-no-mans-sky-hype-dilemma-1785416931.
	
24.	 Mia Consalvo and Jason Begy, Players and Their Pets: Gaming Commu-
nities from Beta to Sunset (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015), 
44.

Notes to Conclusion	
224
	
25.	 Ibid., 67.
	
26.	 Erik Kain, “‘Journey’ Review: Making Video Games Beautiful,” Forbes, 
4 December 2012, http://www.forbes.com/sites/erikkain/2012/12/04/journey 
-review-making-video-games-beautiful/. 
	
27.	 Simon Parkin, “Jenova Chen: Journeyman,” Eurogamer, 21 July 2015, 
http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2012-04-02-jenova-chen-journeyman.
	
28.	 Ibid.
	
29.	 Leigh Alexander, “There Is Nothing to ‘Do’ in O’Reilly’s Mountain—­
and That’s a Good Thing,” Gamasutra, 8 July 2014, http://gamasutra.com/view/
news/220443/There_is_nothing_to_do_in_OReillys_Mountain__and_thats_a_
good_thing.php.
	
30.	 Ben Kuchera, “Mountain Could Be a $1 Joke, and I Think I’m the Butt,” 
Polygon, 3 July 2014, http://www.polygon.com/2014/7/3/5868087/mountain 
-indie-game-joke-satire-self-loathing; Cameron Kunzelman, “Mountain Re-
view (PC/Mac/iOS),” Paste, 3 July 2014, http://www.pastemagazine.com/articles 
/2014/07/mountain-review-pcmacios.html.
	
31.	 Mark Serrels, “Multiplayer Games Where It’s Okay to Suck,” Ko-
taku, 28 July 2015, http://kotaku.com/multiplayer-games-where-its-okay-to 
-suck-1720756255.
	
32.	 Ibid.
	
33.	 TEDxMarin, “Paul Piff: Does Money Make You Mean?”; Robert H. 
Frank, Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meritocracy (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2016), Kindle ed.
	
34.	 Shannon K. McCoy and Brenda Major, “Priming Meritocracy and the 
Psychological Justification of Inequality,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy 43 (2007): 341–­51.
	
35.	 Monica Y. Bartlett and David DeSteno, “Gratitude and Prosocial Behav-
ior: Helping When It Costs You,” Psychological Science 17, no. 4 (2006): 319–­25.
	
36.	 Nancy Digdon and Amy Koble, “Effects of Constructive Worry, Imag-
ery Distraction, and Gratitude Interventions on Sleep Quality: A Pilot Trial,” 
Applied Psychology: Health and Well-­Being 3, no. 2 (2011): 193–­206.
	
37.	 C. Nathan DeWall, Nathaniel M. Lambert, Richard S. Pond Jr., Todd 
B. Kashdan, and Frank D. Fincham, “A Grateful Heart Is a Nonviolent Heart: 
Cross-­Sectional, Experience Sampling, Longitudinal, and Experimental Evi-
dence,” Social Psychological and Personality Science 3, no. 2 (2012): 232–­40.
	
38.	 Richard Bartle, “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who Suit 
Muds,” Muse, 28 August 1996, http://www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm.
	
39.	 Jay Hathaway, “What Is Gamergate, and Why? An Explainer for Non-­
Geeks,” Gawker, 10 October 2014, http://gawker.com/what-is-gamergate-and 
-why-an-explainer-for-non-geeks-1642909080; Matt Lees, “What Gamergate 
Should Have Taught Us about the ‘Alt-­Right,’” The Guardian, 1 December 

	
225	
Notes to Conclusion
2016, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/gamergate-alt 
-right-hate-trump.
	
40.	 Mike Fahey, “YouTube Corruption Sinks Even Deeper into the Gutter,” 
Games Industry, 8 July 2016, http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-07-08 
-youtube-corruption-sinks-even-deeper-into-the-gutter; Rob Fahey, “Dirty 
Videos,” Games Industry, 10 October 2014, http://www.gamesindustry.biz 
/articles/2014-10-10-dirty-videos.
	
41.	 Jennifer Allaway, “#Gamergate Trolls Aren’t Ethics Crusaders; They’re 
a Hate Group,” Jezebel, 13 October 2014, http://jezebel.com/gamergate 
-trolls-arent-ethics-crusaders-theyre-a-hate-1644984010; Tadhg Kelly, “The 
#Gamergate Question,” TechCrunch, 7 September 2014, http://techcrunch 
.com/2014/09/07/the-gamergate-question/; Leo Reyna, “#Gamergate Revealed 
as Misogynist and Racist Movement from 4chan,” The Examiner, 6 September 
2014, http://www.examiner.com/article/gamergate-revealed-as-misogynist-and 
-racist-movement-from-4chan; Jon Stone, “Gamergate’s Vicious Right-­Wing 
Swell Means There Can Be No Neutral Stance,” The Guardian, 13 October 
2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/13/gamergate-right 
-wing-no-neutral-stance.
	
42.	 Aaron Sankin, “Why the Trolls Are Winning #Gamergate,” The Daily Dot, 
17 October 2014, http://www.dailydot.com/opinion/trolls-winning-gamergate 
-anita-sarkeesian/. 
	
43.	 Peter-­Hans Kolvenbach, “The Service of Faith and the Promotion of 
Justice in American Jesuit Higher Education,” Santa Clara University, 6 Octo-
ber 2000, https://www.scu.edu/ic/programs/ignatian-tradition-offerings/stories/
the-service-of-faith-and-the-promotion-of-justice-in-american-jesuit-higher 
-education.html.

This page deliberately left blank

	
227
Gameography
Games discussed in this book are listed here in alphabetical order by 
title. More information about most of the console and PC games men-
tioned can be found at MobyGames.com. Other games can be found 
on Wikipedia, apps are most likely to be found on the iOS App Store, 
and board games are likely to be found on BoardGameGeek.com.
Ascension: Deckbuilding Game. Card game. Designed by John Fiorillo and Jus-
tin Gary. Stone Blade Entertainment, 2010. Also available on iOS. https://
boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/69789/ascension-deckbuilding-game.
Bioshock (series). The first game was developed by 2K Australia and 2K Bos-
ton. 2K Games, 2007. http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/bioshock 
-series.
Bioshock Infinite. PS3. Developed by Irrational Games. 2K Games, 2013. http://
www.mobygames.com/game/bioshock-infinite_.
Bloodborne. PS4. Developed by FromSoftware. Sony Computer Entertainment, 
2015. http://www.mobygames.com/game/playstation-4/bloodborne.
Borderlands (series). The first game was developed by Gearbox Software. 2K 
Games, 2009. http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/borderlands-series.
Borderlands 2. Xbox 360. Developed by Gearbox Software. 2K Games, 2012. 
Android, Linux, PS3, Windows. http://www.mobygames.com/game/border 
lands-2.
Bully. PS2. Developed by Rockstar Vancouver. Rockstar Games, 2006. PS3, PS4. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/bully.

Gameography	
228
Candy Crush Saga. iOS. Developed by Midasplayer AB. King.com, 2012. An-
droid, browser, Windows Apps. http://www.mobygames.com/game/candy 
-crush-saga.
Cart Life. Windows. Developed by Richard Hofmeier. Open source, 2011. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cart_Life.
Civilization (series). The first game was developed by MPS Labs. MicroProse 
Software, 1991. http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/civilization 
-series.
Clash of Clans. iOS. Developed by Supercell. Supercell, 2012. Android. http://
www.mobygames.com/game/clash-of-clans.
Clash Royale. iOS. Developed by Supercell. Supercell, 2016. Android. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clash_Royale.
Cook, Serve, Delicious. iOS. Developed by Vertigo Gaming. Vertigo Gaming, 
2013. Windows. https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/cook-serve-delicious!/
id582153229.
Cow Clicker. Browser. Developed by Ian Bogost. Ian Bogost, 2010. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cow_Clicker.
Dark Souls. PS3. Developed by FromSoftware. FromSoftware, 2011. Xbox 360. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/dark-souls.
Dark Souls II. PS3. Developed by FromSoftware. Namco Bandai, 2014. Win-
dows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/dark-souls-ii.
Dark Souls III. PS4. Developed by FromSoftware. FromSoftware, 2016. Win-
dows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/dark-souls-iii.
Dear Esther. Windows. Developed by The Chinese Room. The Chinese Room, 
2012. Linux, Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/dear-esther.
Demon’s Souls. PS3. Developed by FromSoftware and Sony Computer Enter-
tainment Japan. Atlus USA, 2009. http://www.mobygames.com/game/ps3/
demons-souls.
Destiny. PS4. Developed by Bungie. Activision Publishing, 2014. PS3, Xbox 360, 
Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/destiny_.
Diablo. Windows. Developed by Blizzard Entertainment and Blizzard North. 
Blizzard Entertainment, 1996. Macintosh, PlayStation. http://www.moby 
games.com/game/diablo.
Dominion. Card game. Designed by Donald X. Vaccarino. Rio Grande Games, 
2008. Also available on iOS. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/36218/
dominion.
Donkey Kong. Arcade. Developed by Ikegami Tsushinki and Nintendo. Nin-
tendo, 1981. Available on many, many platforms. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/donkey-kong.
Dragon Age II. PS3. Developed by BioWare. Electronic Arts, 2011. Macintosh, 
Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/dragon-age-ii.
The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim. PS3. Developed by Bethesda Game Studio. 

	
229	
Gameography
Bethesda Softworks, 2011. Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/elder-scrolls-v-skyrim.
EVE Online. Windows. Developed by CCP Games. Crucial Entertainment, 
2003. Linux, Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/eve-online.
EverQuest. Windows. Developed by Verant Interactive. 989 Studios, 1999. Mac-
intosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/everquest.
FarmVille. Browser. Developed by Zynga Game Network. Zynga Game Net-
work, 2009. iOS. http://www.mobygames.com/game/farmville.
Fashion Story. iOS. Developed by TeamLava. TeamLava, 2011. Android. http://
www.mobygames.com/game/fashion-story.
Faunasphere. Browser. Developed by BigFish Games. BigFish Games, 2009. 
http://www.mmorpg.com/faunasphere.
FIFA 14. PS4. Developed by Electronic Arts Canada. Electronic Arts, 2013. 
Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/fifa-14.
FIFA 16. PS4. Developed by Electronic Arts Canada. Electronic Arts, 2015. 
Windows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/fifa-16.
FIFA 17. PS4. Developed by Electronic Arts Canada and Bucharest. EA Sports, 
2016. PS3, Windows, Xbox 360, Xbox One. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
FIFA_17.
Final Fantasy (series). The first game was developed by Square. Square, 1987. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/final-fantasy-series.
Final Fantasy XI Online. PS2. Developed by Square Enix. Square Enix, 2003. 
Windows. http://www.mobygames.com/game/final-fantasy-xi-online_.
Gone Home. Windows. Developed by The Fullbright Company. The Fullbright 
Company, 2013. Linux, Macintosh, PS4, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/gone-home.
Grand Theft Auto (series). The first game was developed by DMA Design Lim-
ited. BMG Interactive Entertainment, 1997. http://www.mobygames.com/
game-group/grand-theft-auto-series.
Grand Theft Auto III. PS2. Developed by DMA Design Limited. Rockstar 
Games, 2001. Android, iOS, Macintosh, PS3, PS4, Windows. http://www 
.mobygames.com/game/grand-theft-auto-iii.
Grand Theft Auto IV. PS3. Developed by Rockstar North. Rockstar Games, 
2008. Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/grand 
-theft-auto-iv.
Grand Theft Auto V. PS4. Developed by Rockstar North. Rockstar Games, 2013. 
PS3, Windows, Xbox 360, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/
grand-theft-auto-v.
Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars. Nintendo DS. Developed by Rockstar 
Leeds and Rockstar North. Rockstar Games, 2009. Android. iOS, PSP. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/grand-theft-auto-chinatown-wars.
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas. Windows. Developed by Rockstar North. 

Gameography	
230
Rockstar Games, 2004. Android, Fire OS, iOS, Macintosh, PS2, PS3, PS4, 
Windows, Windows Apps, Windows Phone, Xbox, Xbox 360. http://www 
.mobygames.com/game/grand-theft-auto-san-andreas.
Halo (series). The first game was developed by Bungie Studios. Microsoft Cor-
poration, 2001. http://www.mobygames.com/game/halo-combat-evolved.
Halo Online. Windows. Developed by Saber Interactive. Innova Software, 2015. 
https://www.reddit.com/r/HaloOnline/.
Hearthstone: Heroes of Warcraft. iOS. Developed by Blizzard Entertainment. 
Blizzard Entertainment, 2014. Android, Macintosh, Windows. http://www 
.mobygames.com/game/hearthstone-heroes-of-warcraft.
Johann Sebastian Joust. PS3. Developed by Die Gute Fabrik. Die Gute Fabrik, 
2014. Linux, PS4, Windows. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sportsfriends.
Journey. PS4. Developed by thatgamecompany. Sony Computer Entertainment 
America, 2012. PS3. http://www.mobygames.com/game/journey.
Killer Instinct. Xbox One. Developed by Double Helix Games. Microsoft 
Studios, 2013. Windows Apps. http://www.mobygames.com/game/killer 
-instinct_.
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood. iOS. Developed by Blammo Games. Glu Mobile, 
2014. Android, Browser, Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/
kim-kardashian-hollywood.
The Last of Us. PS4. Developed by Naughty Dog. Sony Computer Entertain-
ment America, 2013. PS3. http://www.mobygames.com/game/ps3/last-
of-us.
League of Legends. Windows. Developed by Riot Games. Riot Games, 2009. 
Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/league-of-legends.
Madden NFL (series). The first game in the series was John Madden Football. 
Developed by Electronic Arts. Electronic Arts, 1988. http://www.moby 
games.com/game-group/madden-series.
Mafia Wars. Browser. Developed by Zynga Game Network. Zynga Game Net-
work, 2008. http://www.mobygames.com/game/browser/mafia-wars.
Magic: The Gathering. Card game. Designed by Richard Garfield. Wizards of the 
Coast, 1993. https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/463/magic-gathering.
Mario Kart (series). The first game in the series was Super Mario Kart. Devel-
oped by Nintendo EAD. Nintendo, 1992. http://www.mobygames.com/
game-group/mario-kart-series.
Mario Kart 64. Nintendo 64. Developed by Nintendo EAD. Nintendo, 1996. 
Wii, Wii U. http://www.mobygames.com/game/mario-kart-64.
Mario Kart Wii. Wii. Developed by Nintendo EAD. Nintendo, 2008. http://
www.mobygames.com/game/mario-kart-wii.
Mario Party (series). The first game was developed by Hudson Soft Company. 
Nintendo of America, 1999. http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/ 
mario-party-series.

	
231	
Gameography
Mario Party 8. Wii. Developed by Hudson Soft Company. Nintendo of Amer-
ica, 2007. http://www.mobygames.com/game/mario-party-8.
Mario Party 10. Wii U. Developed by Nd Cube. Nintendo of America, 2015. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/mario-party-10.
Marvel Mighty Heroes. iOS. Developed by DeNA. DeNA, 2015. Android. http://
dena.com/intl/press/2015/03/dena-and-marvel-release-marvel-mighty 
-heroes-a-real-time-multiplayer-brawler-for-iphone-ipad-ipod-to.html.
Marvel Puzzle Quest. iOS and Windows. Developed by Demiurge Studios. D3 
Publisher of America, 2013. Android. http://www.mobygames.com/game/
marvel-puzzle-quest.
Mass Effect 3. PS3. Developed by BioWare Corporation. Electronic Arts, 2012. 
Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/mass-effect-3.
Minecraft. Windows. Developed by Mojang. Mojang, 2010. Browser, Linux, 
Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/minecraft.
Monaco: What’s Yours Is Mine. Windows. Developed by Pocketwatch Games. 
Headup Games GmbH & Co., 2013. Macintosh. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/monaco-whats-yours-is-mine_.
Mountain. iOS. Designed by David O’Reilly, 2014. Android, Linux, Macintosh. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/mountain.
MUD1. Designed by Roy Trubshaw and Richard Bartle, 1978. https://en.wiki 
pedia.org/wiki/MUD1.
NBA 2K (series). The first game was developed by Visual Concepts Enter-
tainment. SEGA of America, 1999. http://www.mobygames.com/search/
quick?q=nba2k.
NBA 2K13. PS3. Developed by Visual Concepts. 2K Sports, 2012. Android, 
iOS, PSP, Wii, Wii U, Windows, Xbox 360. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
NBA_2K13.
NBA 2K16. PS4. Developed by Visual Concepts. 2K Sports, 2015. Android, 
iOS, PS3, Windows, Xbox 360, Xbox One. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
NBA_2K16.
Ninja. Folk game. http://ultimateninjacombat.com/.
No Man’s Sky. PS4. Developed by Hello Games. Hello Games, 2016. Windows. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/no-mans-sky.
Overwatch (Origins Edition). PS4. Developed by Blizzard Entertainment. Bliz-
zard Entertainment, 2016. Windows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/overwatch-origins-edition.
Papers, Please. iOS and Windows. Developed by 3909. 3909, 2013. Linux, Mac-
intosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/papers-please.
Persona 4 Golden. PS Vita. Developed by Atlus Co. Index Digital Media, 2012. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/ps-vita/persona-4-golden.
The Pioneer Trail. Browser. Developed by Zynga East. Zynga, 2010. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Pioneer_Trail.

Gameography	
232
Pokémon Go. iOS. Developed by Niantic, Nintendo, and The Pokémon Com-
pany, 2016. Android. http://www.mobygames.com/game/pokmon-go.
Pong. Arcade. Developed by Atari and Atari, Inc., 1972.
Populous. SNES. Developed by Bullfrog Productions. Electronic Arts, 1989. 
Multiple platforms. http://www.mobygames.com/game/populous.
Red Dead Redemption. Xbox 360. Developed by Rockstar San Diego. Rockstar 
Games, 2010. PS3. http://www.mobygames.com/game/red-dead-redemption.
Restaurant Story. iOS. Developed by TeamLava. TeamLava, 2010. Android. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/restaurant-story.
Risk. Board game. Designed by Albert Lamorisse and Michael I. Levin, 1959. 
https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/181/risk.
Rocket League. PS4. Developed by Psyonix. Psyonix, 2015. Linux, Macintosh, 
Windows. http://www.mobygames.com/game/rocket-league.
Sally’s Spa. iOS. Developed by GamesCafe.com. RealArcade, 2008. Android, 
BlackBerry, Macintosh, Windows, Windows Phone. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/sallys-spa.
Solitaire. Card game. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patience_(game).
Space Invaders. Arcade. Developed by Taito. Taito, 1978. Multiple platforms. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/space-invaders.
Splatoon. Wii U. Developed by Nintendo EAD. Nintendo of America, 2015. 
http://www.mobygames.com/game/wii-u/splatoon.
Star Wars Galaxies. Windows. Developed by Sony Online Entertainment. Lucas-
Arts, 2003. http://www.mobygames.com/game/windows/star-wars-galaxies 
-an-empire-divided-collectors-edition.
Star Wars: The Old Republic (series). The first game was developed by BioWare. 
LucasArts, 2003. http://www.mobygames.com/game-group/star-wars-the 
-old-republic-games.
Starcraft. Windows. Developed by Blizzard Entertainment. Blizzard Entertain-
ment, 1998. Macintosh. http://www.mobygames.com/game/starcraft.
Stardom: The A-­List. iOS. Developed by Blammo Games. Glu Mobile, 2011. 
Android. http://www.mobygames.com/game/stardom-the-a-list.
Stardom: Hollywood. iOS. Developed by Blammo Games. Glu Mobile, 2013. 
Android. http://www.mobygames.com/game/stardom-hollywood.
StarPower. Live action game. Designed by R. Garry Shirts, 1969. https://
boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/32398/starpower.
Street Fighter. Arcade. Developed by Capcom. Capcom, 1987. Multiple plat-
forms. http://www.mobygames.com/game/street-fighter.
Street Fighter X Tekken. PS3. Developed by Capcom and Dimps. Capcom En-
tertainment, 2012. PS Vita, Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames 
.com/game/street-fighter-x-tekken.
StreetWars. Live action game. Designed by Franz Aliquo and Liao Yutai, 2004. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/StreetWars.

	
233	
Gameography
Super Mario 64. Nintendo 64. Developed by Nintendo EAD. Nintendo, 1996. 
Wii, Wii U. http://www.mobygames.com/game/super-mario-64.
Super Mario Bros. NES. Developed by Nintendo and Systems Research & De-
velopment. Nintendo, 1985. Arcade, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo 3DS, 
Wii, Wii U. http://www.mobygames.com/game/super-mario-bros.
Super Smash Bros. Nintendo 64. Developed by HAL Laboratory. Nintendo, 
1999. Wii. http://www.mobygames.com/game/super-smash-bros.
Tekken. Arcade. Developed by Namco Limited. Namco Limited, 1994. Android, 
PlayStation, PS3, PSP, PS Vita. http://www.mobygames.com/game/tekken.
Tom Clancy’s The Division. PS4. Developed by Ubisoft Massive. Ubisoft, 2016. 
Windows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/tom-clancys 
-the-division.
Tomb Raider. PS3. Developed by Crystal Dynamics. Square Enix, 2013. Linux, 
Macintosh, Windows, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/tomb 
-raider__.
Ultima Online. Windows. Developed by ORIGIN Systems. Electronic Arts, 
1997. http://www.mobygames.com/game/windows/ultima-online.
Uncharted (series). The first game was developed by Naughty Dog. Sony Com-
puter Entertainment America, 2007. http://www.mobygames.com/game 
-group/uncharted-series.
Uncharted 3: Drake’s Deception. PS3. Developed by Naughty Dog. Sony Com-
puter Entertainment America, 2011. http://www.mobygames.com/game/
ps3/uncharted-3-drakes-deception.
The Walking Dead: The Game. iOS. Developed by Telltale. Telltale, 2012. An-
droid, PS3, Xbox 360. http://www.mobygames.com/game/walking-dead 
-episode-1-a-new-day.
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. PS4. Developed by CD Projekt RED. CD Projekt, 
2015. Windows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/witcher-3 
-wild-hunt.
World of Warcraft. Windows. Developed by Blizzard Entertainment. Blizzard 
Entertainment, 2004. http://www.mobygames.com/game/world-of-warcraft.
XCOM: Enemy Unknown. iOS and Xbox 360. Developed by Firaxis Games. 
2K Games, 2012. Android, Linux, Macintosh, PS3, Windows. http://www 
.mobygames.com/game/xcom-enemy-unknown.
XCOM 2. PS4. Developed by Firaxis Games. Feral Interactive, 2016. Linux, 
Macintosh, Windows, Xbox One. http://www.mobygames.com/game/
xcom-2.
Yahtzee. Dice game. Designed by Edwin S. Lowe. Milton Bradley, 1956. https://
boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2243/yahtzee.

This page deliberately left blank

	
235
INDEX
#1ReasonToBe, 73
2K Sports, 106. See also NBA 2K
4Chan, 81, 204n65
100 People: A World Portrait, 
184n18
AAA games, 2, 26, 78, 165, 176
academics, 1, 4, 15, 38, 41, 63, 75, 
79, 89, 157; GamerGate attacks 
on, 81, 83–84
Activision, 130, 138
Adobe, 83
affirmative action, 158
ageism, 49, 194n74
Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Adwale, 149
Alexander, Leigh, 16, 69, 78, 82–3, 
86, 101–2, 161, 164, 166
Amazon, 37
American dream, 10, 13, 30, 88, 117
analytics, 148–49
Android, 92
Anthropy, Anna, 51–52, 54–55
arcades, 1, 19, 48, 54, 67, 92, 138, 
177
aristocracy, 31, 33, 40, 45, 93, 
103–4, 126, 128–29. See also 
meritocracy
Ascension, 103
assemblage, 65–68
Atari, 1, 130, 138, 144
avatars, 5, 17, 23, 27, 56, 71, 79, 
105, 114–15
Badass Digest, 71
Bakhtanians, Aris, 76
Baldwin, Adam, 81
Barclay’s Premier League, 152
Bartle, Richard, 3, 51, 153, 178
Bartlett, Monica Y., 177
baseball, 75, 145, 147–48, 150–51, 
219n41. See also Major League 
Baseball
basketball, 76, 146, 148–53, 178
shot mapping, 148. See also 
National Basketball Association
BBC, 86
Beck, John, 46
Begy, Jason, 173, 174, 
Benard, Stephen, 56
Bell, Daniel, 12, 41–45, 107, 193n43

Index	
236
Bernake, Ben, 49, 53
Bethesda, 22
BioShock, 2
BioShock’s Infinite, 134, 170
BioWare, 131–32
Black Lives Matter, 11, 30
blackness, 18. See also race
Blair, Tony, 38
Blizzard, 34–35, 37, 46, 94–95
board games, 20, 22
Bogost, Ian, 66
Borderlands, 106
Borderlands 2, 77, 176
Best Friends Forever mode, 77
Breen, Richard, 46
Brexit, 11
buffs, 96
Bully, 21
Burill, Derrick, 80
business culture, 37
Candy Crush, 20, 101
Capcom, 75–76
Cart Life, 164–65
Castilla, Emilio, 56
Castronova, Edward, 107, 108
casual games, 19, 105–7, 159, 171–72
Chambers, Becky, 157
characters, 6, 17–19, 25–27, 77–79, 
103–4, 107, 116–17, 124–26, 
169–70; non-playable, 17, 23–24, 
118
cheating, 46–47, 97, 155
Chess, Shira: The Playful Is Political 
fishbowl panel, 84
Chief Pat, 3–4
China, 29–34, 44–45, 154, 190n2
Chu, Arthur, 6, 16
Civilization, 21
Clash of Clans, 1, 95, 127
Clash Royale, 3–4, 95, 97, 127–30, 209n7
class, 3, 8–12, 14, 19, 32–33, 39–40, 
43, 45–46, 50, 55, 60, 80, 89, 104, 
117, 151, 157, 191n90, 210n24
classism, 14, 43
CNN, 86
Cobbett, Richard, 166
co-creativity, 65–68
code, 2, 15, 23, 34, 73, 139, 144, 146, 
159
Colbert, Stephen, 86; The Colbert 
Report, 87
Cold War, 165
collectible card games (CCGs), 96, 
102–3, 107, 127
Connell, R. W., 80
Consalvo, Mia, 81, 84, 173–74
consoles, 1, 20, 36, 54, 92–93, 99–
100, 158, 171–72, 174, 190n70
conventions, 64, 72, 75; sexual 
violence at, 73–74
Cook, Serve, Delicious, 21
Cooper, Hollander, 167, 168
cost of games, 19, 40, 53–55, 90, 93, 
100, 102–3, 107, 124, 127–28, 
158
Counter-Strike, 75
Cow Clicker, 99
Cox, Raymond, 130–31
Cracked, 81
Croft, Lara, 103–4
Cross, Katharine, 81, 84
Cross Assault: sexual violence at, 
75–77
Cyclops, 146
Dallas Mavericks, 149
Dames Making Games, 159
DARPA, 84
Day, Felicia, 86

	
237	
Index
Depression Quest, 80
DeSteno, David, 177
Destiny, 4, 20, 106, 109
DeWall, Nathan, 177
Diablo, 101
Dickwolf, 74
Die Gute Fabrik, 173
Digdon, Nancy, 177
Digital Games Research Association 
(DiGRA), 83, 89, 205n82; The 
Playful Is Political fishbowl 
panel, 84
disability, 79
discrimination, 56–58, 79, 99
Ditum, Nathan, 18
diversity, 83, 161; conferences about, 
15, 84; developers and, 4–5, 14, 
48, 51, 124; in education, 50, 84, 
143, 156–60; in games, 18–19, 
53, 73, 141–42, 159; players and, 
20–21, 58, 79, 82, 122, 158, 178. 
See also race
The Division, 4
Dominion, 103
Donkey Kong, 177
Douthat, Ross, 157
doxxing, 84, 86
Dragon Age II, 131
Drake, Sir Francis, 5, 104
Edidin, Rachel, 74
The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim, 22–24
Electronic Arts (EA), 106, 190n70
EA Sports, 107; Ultimate Team, 107
Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), 
73–74
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 
87–88
Elman, Benjamin, 32
Elo systems, 118–21, 212n12
England, 27, 146, 152. See also Great 
Britain; United Kingdom
English Football Association, 146
equality, 3, 11–13, 15, 44–45, 60, 
86, 88–89, 94, 107–8, 209n7; of 
opportunity vs. results, 42–43. 
See also inequality
eSports, 3, 56, 58, 75, 122, 143, 149, 
219n35
EVE Online, 59
EverQuest, 3, 107, 109, 111
EVE University, 59
Facebook, 20, 171, 173
failure, 10, 30, 38–39, 43–44, 50, 
56–60, 87–88, 94, 99, 117, 134, 
136,–39, 150–51
fairness, 3–4, 6, 12–13, 33, 41, 43, 45, 
49, 53, 57, 60, 93–102, 106–8, 
135, 142, 153–54, 157
FarmVille, 20, 94, 99, 171
Farrell, Henry, 30
Fashion Story, 21
Fat, Ugly, or Slutty, 15
Faunasphere, 173–74
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 88
feminism, 81, 84
Ferguson, MO, 67
FIFA, 1–2, 21, 44, 95, 107, 144
FIFA 14, 115
FIFA 16, 17
FIFA 17, 27, 114, 190n70
FIFA World Cup, 146, 150
Film Crit Hulk, 16, 82
Final Fantasy, 26, 111
Final Fantasy XI Online, 109
Fine Young Capitalists, 204n65
first-person shooters, 34, 46, 78–79, 
106, 164

Index	
238
football (American), 76, 86, 144, 
147–48, 151. See also National 
Football League
Fox, Alan, 190n8
Frank, Jenn, 72, 81
Frank, Robert H., 49–50, 57, 177
Freedman, Josh, 156
free-to-play games, 40, 96, 100, 124, 
127–28, 158
Froome, Chris, 152
Fullbright Company, 169
fun, 36, 52, 68, 87, 98, 107, 119, 121, 
129–30, 134, 166, 175, 178
Gaimer8: misogynist attacks on 
Felicia Day, 86
Gamasutra, 83, 88
game design, 2–7, 13–14, 19, 21–29, 
33–36, 40, 43–44, 64, 67–69, 77, 
92, 107, 134, 145, 154, 173–75; 
meritocracy and, 10, 51–61, 
89–110, 113–14, 117–18, 122–30, 
133, 136–38, 143, 146, 148–49, 
155, 161, 164, 167–72, 176–77, 
180; toxicity and, 37, 70–72, 
75, 78–79, 90, 121–26, 129–30, 
138–39, 143–44, 153, 176, 180, 
204n65
game designers, 7, 17, 22–24, 51–54, 
58, 67–68, 72, 77–78, 95, 98, 
100–1, 103, 109, 112, 117, 123, 
137, 141, 145, 148, 155, 166, 170, 
176–79; gender demographics 
of, 4, 48; racial demographics of, 
18–19
Game Developers Conference: 2013 
International Game Developer’s 
Association party, 73
Gameranx, 59
GamerGate, 2, 16, 44, 80–90, 
179–80, 203n62. See also Opera-
tion Disrespectful Nod
gamers, 5, 16, 25–26, 46, 48, 53, 59, 
63, 65–66, 69, 29, 76, 97–98, 118, 
124, 134, 136, 148, 150, 154, 171, 
180, 183n3; antiviolence activism 
of, 79; limits of concept, 20–21, 
25, 67–68; violence of, 2, 16, 44, 
71, 74, 80–90, 179–80, 204n65. 
See also players
Gamers against Bigotry, 79
Gamerscore, 34, 130–31
game studies, 26, 38, 61, 65–67
game tutorials, 52
Gardner, Jack, 203n62
Gawker, 83
Gearbox Software, 77
Geguri, 46–47
gender, 9, 13–20, 45, 57–58, 73, 
78–79; among game designers, 
4, 48; among players, 19, 24, 80, 
82, 85, 173. See also feminism; 
masculinity; misogyny
General Electric, 37
genre, 4, 20, 43, 52–53, 55–56, 66, 
106, 111, 114–15, 117, 124, 
127, 130, 163, 168–72. See also 
individual genres
George, Paul, 152
Germany, 146, 152
“girlfriend mode,” 77–78
Girls Make Games, 159
Girls Who Code, 159
GitHub, 15
Gjoni, Eron, 80–81
Glu Mobile, 105
Golding, Dan, 82
Goldthorpe, John, 46
Gollop, Julian, 154
Gone Home, 20, 169–71, 177

	
239	
Index
Goodwin, Joel, 131
Grand Theft Auto (GTA), 21, 79, 115, 
117; Chinatown Wars, 116; III, 
5–6, 115–16; IV, 116, 164; San 
Andreas, 116; V, 116; Vice City, 116
gratitude, 177–78
Gray, Kishonna, 19, 79
Grayso, Nathan, 36–37
Great Britain, 12, 38. See also 
England; United Kingdom
Greer, Emily, 85
Grey, Kishonna, 19
“the grind,” 35, 40, 68, 94, 109, 121, 
153
Guardian, 72, 89
Guinness World Records, 130
Guodian Chu Slips, 30–32, 190n2
Guthrie, Robert, 40
Halo Online, 100
Hamilton, Kirk, 172
Handrahan, Matthew, 4
Haney, Craig, 47
Harper, Todd, 58, 66, 75, 77
Harvey, David, 192n33
hate speech, 15–17, 20, 79
Hawk-Eye, 146
Hayes, Christopher, 39, 45, 47, 53, 
88–89
Hearthstone, 94, 95
Hemingway, John, 77
Hepler, Jennifer, 132–33
Hernandez, Patricia, 34, 36
Herrnstein, R.J., 41–42, 44
higher education, 1, 8, 11, 14, 28, 41, 
50, 143, 155, 159–61, 178; attacks 
on academics, 81, 83–84, 89; 
race and, 4, 50, 156–58. See also 
academics; affirmative action
Hodapp, Eli, 129
Hofmeier, Richard, 164
Holloway, Kenneth, 31
homophobia, 15, 49. See also doxxing; 
jerks; trolls; violence
Houston Rockets, 149
Hudson, Laura, 135, 161
Hurtado, Aida, 47
ideology, 2, 6, 8, 10–14, 25, 29–30, 
34, 41, 44, 50–51, 55–58, 61, 64, 
67, 74, 88–89, 91, 108, 110, 120, 
124, 142. See also meritocracy
IGN, 76, 154, 165
IGXE, 107
Independent Games Festival Awards, 
164
India, 44
inequality, 18, 30–31, 43, 45, 120
in games, 38, 94, 107–10, 124, 126, 
136–39; meritocracy and, 12–13, 
30–31, 33, 41, 44, 47–51, 53, 
57–59, 133, 142; structural, 3, 8, 
10–14, 22, 28, 53, 60, 85, 88, 95, 
125, 152, 169, 219n39. See also 
equality
Intel, 83, 88
International Game Developers 
Association (IGDA): 2013 game 
Developers Conference party, 73
Developer Satisfaction Survey, 4
iOS, 92
#IStandWithTauriq, 19
James, Vivian, 204n65
jerks, 69, 71, 77, 83, 123, 160, 163, 
176. See also ageism; classism; 
GamerGate; misogyny; racism; 
toxicity; trolls; violence
Johann Sebastian Joust, 173

Index	
240
Johnson, Dustin, 147
Johnston, Casey, 83
journalism, 2, 4, 6, 16, 18, 52, 72–73, 
81–83, 87, 89, 101, 134–36, 158, 
173, 179, 204n71
Journey, 194
Juul, Jesper, 38–39, 94, 111
Kaplan, Jeff, 35, 37
Khoo, Robert, 74
Killer Instinct, 73, 201n28
Kim Kardashian: Hollywood (KKH), 
2, 21, 26, 105, 111, 171
Kluwe, Chris, 86
Koble, Amy, 177
Kocurek, Carly, 19, 48, 54, 67
Kohler, Chris, 97–98
Kolvenbach, Peter-Hans, 180
Kongregate, 85
Konno, Hideki, 98
Korea, 58
Korean eSports Association (KeSPA), 
58
Koster, Raph, 52, 54, 151
Kotaku, 35, 36, 81, 172
Krahulik, Mike, 74
Kuchera, Ben, 87
labor, 26, 40, 68–69, 94, 105, 112–13, 
153
The Last of Us, 170
Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, 
87
leaderboards, 40, 56, 125, 130–131, 
138, 170–71, 177
League of Legends (LoL), 69, 118–21, 
123–24, 153, 178, 219n35; Player 
Behavior team, 70, 117; World 
Championships, 122
Lees, Matt, 89
leveling systems, 2, 6, 27–28, 44, 69, 
92, 106–10, 112
Levine, Ken, 134
Levitas, Ruth, 12
liberalism, 41–42
Littler, Jo, 12, 50, 59
Lizard Square, 71
Lockwood Publishing, 48
loot, 101, 106, 113
Lost, 149
Lowe, Zach, 148
LRN2PLAY NOOB, 59
Madden, John, 144
Madden NFL, 20–21, 95, 107, 130, 
144, 148
Mafia Wars, 171
Magic: The Gathering, 102
Major, Brenda, 45, 56–57, 177
Major League Baseball (MLB): 
Advanced Media, 146; PITCHf/x 
tracking system, 145
Mario Kart 64, 97; blue/spiny shell, 
97–98, 148; Wii, 98. See also 
Super Mario Bros.
Mario Party, 97, 155; 8, 98; 10, 154; 
Chump Charity, 98
Marvel Mighty Heroes, 124–26
Fury’s Files, 124
Marvel Puzzle Quest, 95
Mascherano, Javier, 151
masculinity, 11, 17, 80, 138, 153
Mass Effect 3, 132
massively multiplayer online game 
(MMOG), 109, 111–12, 15, 
117, 173; competitive raiding, 
113, 120, 164; dragon kill points 
(DKP), 113–14
McAllister, Ken, 66
McCoy, Shannon, 45, 56–57, 177

	
241	
Index
McElroy, Justin, 165
McLuhan, Marshall, 65
McNamee, Stephen, 44, 50, 58
meritocracy, 3, 7–15, 24–50, 85, 
87–90, 120, 122–133, 141–43, 146, 
178, 183, 190n8, 193n56; Chinese 
history of, 29–33, 44, 190n2; in 
game design, 5–6, 21–22, 51–68, 
75–80, 91–114, 136–38, 176–77; in 
game narratives, 103–10, 114–18, 
163–73; gamer identity and, 20; 
in higher education, 143, 155–60; 
in sports, 143–55, 160–61; toxicity 
and, 138–44, 161, 180; “the meta,” 
95, 148. See also theorycraft
Metacritic, 165, 167
Microsoft, 73, 130–31
Miller, Greg, 167
Miller, Robert, 44, 50, 58
Minecraft: prison servers, 40
misogyny, 14–16, 43–44, 49, 72, 
76, 78, 85–88, 179–80, 193n43. 
See also doxxing; GamerGate; 
“girlfriend mode”; jerks; 
Operation Digging DiGRA; 
Operation Disrespectful Nod; 
sexual violence; toxicity; trolls; 
violence
Mitchell, Billy, 151
Miyamoto, Shigeru, 56, 134–35
mobile games, 1, 20, 92, 95, 99, 101, 
124, 158–59, 171
Monaco: What’s Yours Is Mine, 178
Moneyball, 148
Monopoly, 60, 122, 177
Monroe, Nick, 59–60
Moosa, Tauriq, 18–19
Mortensen, Torill, 84
Mountain, 174–175
MUD1, 3, 34, 51, 153
multiplayer online battle arena 
(MOBA), 69, 95, 117, 121, 127–28
Myers, Maddy, 77
Narcisse, Evan, 18
narrative, 2, 5–7, 18, 20–21, 23, 
26–29, 53, 60–61, 64, 79, 90–93, 
132, 143, 160, 164, 176, 180; 
meritocratic, 10, 26, 103–10, 
114–18, 163–73
NASA, 161
National Basketball Association 
(NBA), 76, 115, 146, 148–49; 
All-Stars, 152, 164
National Football League (NFL), 86, 
109, 144–45, 147, 151
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, 
80
NBA 2K, 2, 21, 144; 13, 115; 16, 114
NBC News, 73
NCAA, 150, 153, 178
NeoGAF, 87
nerfs, 96
Neurath, Walter, 41
New Statesman, 165
Newsweek, 86
New York City, 11, 116
New York Times, 76, 86
Ninja, 173
Nintendo, 1, 56, 77, 86, 97–98
No Man’s Sky, 172
Not in the Kitchen Anymore, 15
Offworld, 161
Olympics, 153
Operation Digging DiGRA, 84. See 
also DiGRA
Operation Disrespectful Nod, 83
O’Reilly, David, 174
Overwatch, 4, 34–38, 46–47, 120

Index	
242
Pac-Man, 151
Pakozdi, Miranda, 76
Papers, Please, 165–66
Parkin, Simon, 108
pay-to-win games, 40, 96, 100, 124, 
128
PC games, 1, 20, 36, 69, 92, 93, 99, 
165, 171, 178
Penguin, 41
Penny Arcade, 74, 81
Penny Arcade Expo (PAX), 73; 
Enforcers, 74
perfect game, 150–51
Persona 4 Golden, 21
Pew Research Center, 16
Phillips, Whitney, 7, 37, 180
Piff, Paul, 60, 163, 177 
The Pioneer Trail, 105
Pixelles, 159
Plato, 30
players, 2–6, 22–23, 25, 34–40, 
44, 46–47, 66–67, 91, 111–39, 
141–42, 145–55, 157, 159, 
177–80, 197n115, 209n7, 212n12, 
213n27; gamer identity and, 
20–21, 68; gender and, 15–16, 19, 
24, 46–49, 71, 74–80, 82, 85, 89, 
173; meritocracy and, 7, 9, 13, 
26–28, 33, 51–61, 63–64, 88–89, 
92–110, 160, 163–76, 197n115; 
race and, 18–19, 24, 58, 75, 79, 
82, 89, 122, 194n67; toxicity 
and, 69–71, 74–75, 144. See also 
gamers
PlayStation, 1
Plimpton, George, 144
Pokémon Go, 101
Pong, 144
Pope, Lucas, 165, 166
Populous, 21
Potanin, Robin, 4, 19, 32, 48
Princeton University, 49
Quinn, Zoë, 72, 80, 86, 204n65; 
“5 Things I Learned as the 
Internet’s Most Hated Person,” 
81
race, 6, 8–12, 14–15, 20, 23, 56, 58, 
79; in higher education, 50, 
84, 143, 156–60; among game 
designers, 4, 48, 58; among 
players, 18–19, 24, 58, 75, 79–80, 
82, 85, 89, 122, 180, 194n67. See 
also affirmative action; blackness; 
diversity; whiteness
racism, 15, 19, 43, 49, 56, 75, 79, 179, 
194n67. See also doxxing; jerks; 
toxicity; trolls; violence
ranking systems, 3, 34–40, 118–22, 
124–25, 127, 129, 131, 137, 
212n12. See also stack ranking
Rea, Jared, 76
Read, Max, 83
Ready at Dawn, 48
Red Dead Redemption, 21
reddit, 36, 86 
representation, 24, 53, 66, 91, 104, 
145, 153–54, 170, 172, 178; 
gendered, 17–19, 73; racialized, 
18–19, 79, 157. See also avatars
Restaurant Story, 5
rhetorical analysis, 25, 63–66, 68, 90, 
93, 139, 161, 180
Riendeau, Danielle, 170
Riot Games, 69–70, 120, 122–24, 
178; Ranked Restrictions, 121; 
Team Player Behavior, 118; The 
Tribunal, 118
Risk, 122

	
243	
Index
Rock, Paper, Shotgun, 165, 178
Rocket League, 175
role-playing games, 3, 20, 68, 106–7, 
111
Romano, Aja, 46
Sally’s Spa, 21
Sampat, Elizabeth, 74
Sarkeesian, Anita, 80, 86–87
Tropes vs. Women in Video Games, 16, 
72, 81
Saunders, Peter, 12, 41, 42, 43
Seattle Seahawks, 147
Serrels, Mark, 175
Shaw, Adrienne, 53, 67–69, 81; The 
Playful Is Political fishbowl 
panel, 84
Sicart, Miguel, 209n7
Sierra, Katherine, 139
Silverman, Mark, 113–14
Simon, Bart, 113–14
Sirlin, David, 145
skill, 2–6, 73, 159–61, 166, 168, 
171–72, 178, 193n43, 200n28, 
209n7, 212n12
achievement and, 130–36
judging, 111–40
meritocracy and, 9, 11–14, 24–33, 
35–39, 41–61, 63–64, 68, 75, 
85, 88–110, 141–42, 146–51, 
163, 176–77; versus luck, 40, 53, 
53–54, 92, 151–55, 177
skill transfer, 43, 51–52, 55, 108, 169
skill trees, 77–78
Smedly, John, 71
soccer, 17, 27, 75, 146–47, 150–52
solitaire, 20, 94
Something Awful, 81
Sony Online Entertainment, 71
Souls: Bloodborne, 135–36; Dark 
Souls, 134; Dark Souls II, 134; 
Dark Souls III, 134; Demon’s 
Souls, 134
Space Invaders, 177
Splatoon, 175
sports, 75, 79–80, 95–96, 120, 122, 
150–55, 158, 160–61, 175, 
177–78, 219n39; analytics, 
148–49; meritocracy in, 28, 
143–55, 160–61; replay systems, 
144–47, 149; television coverage, 
122, 146, 152
sports games, 79, 97, 106–7, 114–15, 
143–44, 147–48, 164, 209n7; “My 
Player” option, 26–27. See also 
eSports
stack ranking, 37
standardized tests, 14, 53–54, 109, 
157
Starcraft, 58
Stardom: Hollywood, 105
StarPower, 60
Star Wars, 111; Galaxies, 52; The 
Old Republic, 132
Steam: Greenlight program, 80
Street Fighter, 2, 75, 95
Street Fighter X Tekken, 75
StreetWars, 101, 102
Sundborg, Steven, 185n18
Super Bowl, 147
Supercell, 3, 95, 96, 127, 129–30
Super Mario 64, 97, 134; Bros., 101. 
See also Mario Kart
Super Smash Bros., 95, 98
Taylor, Nicholas T., 75
Taylor, T. L., 75
Tekken, 75, 76
television, 14, 22, 99, 133, 149, 161, 
169; sports coverage, 122, 146, 152

Index	
244
Telltale, 167, 169
tennis, 144, 146, 150, 154
thatgamecompany, 174
theorycraft, 148, 150. See also “the 
meta”
Time magazine, 86
Todd, Andrew, 71
Tomb Raider, 103–4
Totilo, Stephen, 101
Touch Arcade, 129, 168
Tour de France, 152
toxicity, 10, 15, 36, 38, 61, 69–90, 
118, 120, 133, 138–40, 160, 
163–64, 178–79; game design 
and, 37, 121–26, 129–30, 138–39, 
143–44, 153, 176, 180, 204n65; 
meritocracy and, 128, 138–44, 
161, 180. See also ageism; clas-
sism; GamerGate; homophobia; 
jerks; misogyny; racism; trolls; 
violence
trolls, 7, 37, 118, 120, 180. See also 
ageism; classism; GamerGate; 
homophobia; jerks; misogyny; 
racism; toxicity; violence
Tropes vs. Women in Video Games, 16, 
72, 81
Trubshaw, Roy, 3, 153
Trump, Donald, 10–11
Trump Organization, 11
Twitch.tv, 76
Twitter, 19, 71, 81, 83–84, 88, 132
Ubisoft, 4, 53
UEFA Champions League, 150
Ultima Online, 3, 52
Uncharted, 5; 3: Drake’s Deception, 
104
United Kingdom, 29–30. See also 
England; Great Britain
USA Basketball, 152
U.S. Congress, 88
U.S. Department of Justice, 88
U.S. Federal Reserve, 49
U.S. Supreme Court, 67
TheVine, 87
violence, 1, 6, 19–20, 24, 71–72, 
117–18, 129, 132, 139, 175; bul-
lying, 83; at gaming conventions, 
73–74; sexual violence, 2, 14–16, 
73–90, 179. See also ageism; 
classism; doxxing; GamerGate; 
hate speech; homophobia; jerks; 
misogyny; Operation Digging 
DiGRA; Operation Disrespectful 
Nod; racism; toxicity; trolls
Voorhees, Gerald, 66
Vox, 86
Walker, John, 166
The Walking Dead: The Game, 
167–69
Walschots, Natalie Zina, 87
Washington Post, 86
Weerasuriya, Ru, 48
whiteness, 6, 8, 10–11, 14, 23–24, 56, 
58, 75, 80, 82, 85, 89, 157, 180; 
among game designers, 4, 18–19, 
48. See also race
winning, 3–4, 6, 8, 11, 15, 26–27, 
34, 38, 40, 43, 49, 56, 69, 72, 75, 
81, 92, 95–98, 100, 102, 109–10, 
113, 117–122, 124, 126–29, 133, 
136–137, 145–49, 151–53, 161, 
163–64, 170, 176–77
Wired, 97
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, 18
Witkowski, Emma, 75
World of Warcraft (WoW), 1–3, 20, 
107, 109–13, 117, 137, 164
Wu, Brianna, 72, 86, 88

	
245	
Index
Xbox, 1; 360, 55, 190n70; One, 73; 
Live, 131
XCOM: Enemy Unknown, 154–55
Yakuza, 5
Yahtzee, 94
Young, Cy, 150
Young, Michael, 11–12, 29, 35, 
38–41, 45, 91, 93, 180, 190n8; 
The Rise of the Meritocracy, 33–34
YouTube, 3, 179
Zagal, Jose, 84
Zynga, 105

Christopher A. Paul is associate professor of communication at 
Seattle University. He is author of Wordplay and the Discourse of 
Video Games: Analyzing Words, Design, and Play.

