

PRAISE FOR THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF
TOTALITARIANISM
“As I walk through the halls of a major US medical center, I see eyes that
divert themselves away from me as I pass. When we engage in our usual
discussions on patients, the topic of COVID-19 vaccination brings a
halting response: ‘We don’t want to talk about it.’ I see fear, shame, and a
never-ending cycle of groupthink that has been more contagious among
physicians than aerosolized SARS-CoV-2 in a crowded elevator. Mattias
Desmet, like a guided missile, has hit the target. The medical community is
in mass formation and this led to a much larger penumbra that has
enveloped the general population. In this book, Desmet has constructed an
explanatory framework from which the cohesive fabric is suspended that
clearly and concisely explains what is happening and what the next steps
are that each and every one of us need to take to break the ‘spell’ and
restore normalcy. A must read for our time.”
—PETER A. MCCULLOUGH, MD, MPH; chief medical advisor, Truth
for Health Foundation
“Transcending medical controversies, this book offers an indispensable
window into the social phenomenon we call COVID.”
—CHARLES EISENSTEIN, author of Sacred Economics and The
Coronation
“Mattias Desmet is the world’s expert on the phenomenon of mass
formation—and one of the most sincere, thoughtful, and important
intellectuals of the twenty-first century. If you want to understand why and

how the coronavirus pandemic response unfolded the way it did at a
societal level and—even more importantly—how to prevent such a
travesty from happening again, The Psychology of Totalitarianism is
essential reading. Desmet shows us how to reclaim our humanity in an
increasingly dehumanized and mechanized world.”
—DR. REINER FUELLMICH, trial attorney; cofounder, Berlin’s Corona
Investigative Committee
“In this masterful book, Desmet asks how we have arrived at the doorstep
of totalitarianism. Taking the reader on a wild, scholarly ride through
history, science, and psychology, he delivers answers both necessary and
unexpected.”
—HEATHER HEYING, PhD, evolutionary biologist; coauthor of A
Hunter-Gatherer’s Guide to the 21st Century
“Desmet is waking a lot of people up to the dangerous place we are now
with a brilliant distillation of how we ended up here.”
—ROBERT F. KENNEDY, JR.
“Mattias Desmet’s theory of mass formation is the most important lens
through which we can understand the COVID-19 pandemic and the social
aberrations that accompanied it. In The Psychology of Totalitarianism,
Desmet explains how and why people will willingly give up their freedom,
how the masses can give rise to a totalitarian leader, and—most
importantly—how we can resist these phenomena and maintain our
common humanity. This is the most important book of 2022.”
—DR. ROBERT MALONE, author of Lies My Gov’t Told Me
“Mattias Desmet’s [theory of mass formation hypnosis] is great.… Once I
kind of started to look for it, I saw it everywhere.”
—ERIC CLAPTON

THE
PSYCHOLOGY
OF
TOTALITARIANISM
MATTIAS DESMET
TRANSLATED BY ELS VANBRABANT
Chelsea Green Publishing
White River Junction, Vermont
London, UK

Copyright © 2022 by Mattias Desmet and Pelckmans Uitgevers nv.
Originally published in Belgium by Pelckmans Publishers in 2022 as De Psychologie van
Totalitarisme.
English translation copyright © 2022 by Chelsea Green Publishing.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be transmitted or reproduced in any form by any means without permission
in writing from the publisher.
This edition published by Chelsea Green Publishing, 2022.
Translator: Els Vanbrabant
Project Manager: Patricia Stone
Developmental Editor: Brianne Goodspeed
Copy Editor: Angela Boyle
Proofreader: Nancy A. Crompton
Indexer: Shana Milkie
Designer: Melissa Jacobson
Printed in Canada.
First printing May 2022.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  22 23 24 25 26
Our Commitment to Green Publishing
Chelsea Green sees publishing as a tool for cultural change and ecological stewardship. We strive to
align our book manufacturing practices with our editorial mission and to reduce the impact of our
business enterprise in the environment. We print our books and catalogs on chlorine-free recycled
paper, using vegetable-based inks whenever possible. This book may cost slightly more because it
was printed on paper that contains recycled fiber, and we hope you’ll agree that it’s worth it. The
Psychology of Totalitarianism was printed on paper supplied by Marquis that is made of recycled
materials and other controlled sources.
ISBN 978-1-64502-172-8 (hardcover) | ISBN 978-1-64502-173-5 (ebook)
| ISBN 978-1-64502-174-2 (audio book)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
Chelsea Green Publishing
85 North Main Street, Suite 120
White River Junction, Vermont USA
Somerset House
London, UK

www.chelseagreen.com

CONTENTS
Introduction
PART I
Science and Its Psychological Effects
  1:  Science and Ideology
  2:  Science and Its Practical Applications
  3:  The Artificial Society
  4:  The (Im)measurable Universe
  5:  The Desire for a Master
PART II
Mass Formation and Totalitarianism
  6:  The Rise of the Masses
  7:  The Leaders of the Masses
  8:  Conspiracy and Ideology
PART III
Beyond the Mechanistic Worldview
  9:  The Dead versus the Living Universe
10:  Matter and Spirit
11:  Science and Truth
Acknowledgments
Notes

Introduction
To write a book about totalitarianism—the idea first occurred to me on
November 4, 2017. Or rather, it first appeared then in my scientific diary, a
notebook I use to scribble down anything that might be useful for a later
article or book.
At the time, I was staying at a chalet in the Ardennes, owned by a
couple of friends. In the early morning hours, as the rising sun illuminated
the surrounding woods, I opened my diary to write down thoughts that had
spun during the night. Perhaps it was the peace and quiet of the natural
environment that made me more sensitive than usual, but on that November
morning, I was gripped by the palpable and acute awareness of a new
totalitarianism that had left its seed and made the fabric of society stiffen.
Even by 2017, it could no longer be denied: The grip of governments on
private life was growing tremendously fast. We were experiencing an
erosion of the right to privacy (especially since 9/11), alternative voices
were increasingly censored and suppressed (particularly in the context of
the climate debate), the number of intrusive actions by security forces was
rising dramatically, and more.
It was not only governments behind these developments, however. The
rapid emergence of “woke” culture and the growing climate movement was
giving rise to the call for a new, hyper-strict government that emerged from
within the population itself. Terrorists, climate changes, heterosexual men,
and, later, viruses were considered too dangerous to be tackled with old-
fashioned means. The technological “tracking and tracing” of populations
became increasingly acceptable and was even deemed necessary.
The dystopian vision of the German-Jewish philosopher Hannah Arendt
loomed at society’s horizon: the emergence of a new totalitarianism, no
longer led by flamboyant “mob leaders” such as Joseph Stalin or Adolf
Hitler but by dull bureaucrats and technocrats.

That November morning, I drafted the blueprint for a book in which I
would explore the psychological roots of totalitarianism. At the time, I
wondered: Why did totalitarianism as a form of statehood emerge for the
first time in the first half of the twentieth century? And moreover: What is
the difference between it and the classical dictatorships of the past? The
essence of this difference, I realized, lies within the field of psychology.
Dictatorships are based on a primitive psychological mechanism,
namely on the creation of a climate of fear amongst the population, based
on the brutal potential of the dictatorial regime. Totalitarianism, on the other
hand, has its roots in the insidious psychological process of mass formation.
Only a thorough analysis of this process enables us to understand the
shocking behaviors of a “totalitarized” population, including an exaggerated
willingness of individuals to sacrifice their own personal interests out of
solidarity with the collective (i.e., the masses), a profound intolerance of
dissident voices, and pronounced susceptibility to pseudo-scientific
indoctrination and propaganda.
Mass formation is, in essence, a kind of group hypnosis that destroys
individuals’ ethical self-awareness and robs them of their ability to think
critically. This process is insidious in nature; populations fall prey to it
unsuspectingly. To put it in the words of Yuval Noah Harari: Most people
wouldn’t even notice the shift toward a totalitarian regime. We associate
totalitarianism mainly with labor, concentration, and extermination camps,
but those are merely the final, bewildering stage of a long process.
*   *   *
In the months and years after I made these initial notes, more and more
references to totalitarianism appeared in my diary. They spun into longer
and longer threads that organically connected with other areas of my
academic interests. For example, the psychological problem of
totalitarianism touched upon a crisis that had erupted in the scientific world
in 2005, a theme that I explored extensively in my doctoral dissertation.
Sloppiness, errors, biased conclusions, and even outright fraud had become
so prevalent in scientific research that a staggeringly high percentage of
research papers—up to 85 percent in some fields—reached radically wrong
conclusions. And the most fascinating thing of all, from a psychological

point of view: Most researchers were utterly convinced they were
conducting their research more or less correctly. Somehow, they failed to
realize that their research was not bringing them closer to the facts but
instead was creating a fictitious new reality.
This, of course, is a serious problem, especially for contemporary
societies that place their faith in science as the most reliable way of
understanding the world. Furthermore, the foregoing problem is directly
related to the phenomenon of totalitarianism. In fact, this is precisely what
Arendt exposes: The undercurrent of totalitarianism consists of blind belief
in a kind of statistical-numerical “scientific fiction” that shows “radical
contempt for facts”: “The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the
convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the
distinction between fact and fiction and the distinction between true and
false no longer exist.”1
The poor quality of scientific research reveals a more fundamental
problem: Our scientific worldview has substantial shortcomings, the
consequences of which extend far beyond the field of academic research.
These shortcomings are also the origin of a profound collective unease,
which, in recent decades, has become increasingly palpable in our society.
People’s view of the future is now tainted with pessimism and lack of
perspective, more so everyday. Should civilization not be washed away by
rising sea levels, then it certainly will be swept away by refugees. The
Grand Narrative of society—the story of the Enlightenment—no longer
leads to the optimism and positivism of yesteryear, to put it mildly. Much of
the population is trapped in almost complete social isolation; we see a
remarkable increase in absenteeism due to mental suffering; an
unprecedented proliferation in the use of psychotropic drugs; a burnout
epidemic that paralyzes entire companies and government institutions.
In 2019, this predicament was clearly perceptible in my own
professional environment. I saw so many colleagues around me drop out
from work due to psychological problems, hindering the capacity to
perform even basic day-to-day work. For example, that year, it took me
nearly nine months to obtain a signature on a contract that was required for
me to get started on a research project. The university departments that had
to review the contract and grant their approval were dealing with so much
absenteeism that there was always someone on sick leave due to mental

suffering, so that the contract simply didn’t get finalized. During that
period, all social stress indicators rose exponentially. Anyone familiar with
systems theory knows what this means: The system is heading for a tipping
point. It is on the verge of reorganizing itself and seeking a new
equilibrium.
At the end of December 2019—in the same Ardennes chalet I
mentioned earlier—I ventured to make a small prediction in the company of
friends: One of these days, we will wake up in a different society. This
intuitive premonition even enticed me to take action. A few days later, I
went to the bank to pay off the mortgage on my house. Whether or not that
was a wise thing to do depends entirely on your perspective. Maybe it
wasn’t wise from a purely economic or tax point of view, but that was of no
concern to me. First and foremost, I wanted my sovereignty back; I did not
want to feel indebted to and complicit in a financial system that, in my
view, played a part in the social impasse that was about to occur. The bank
manager listened to my story; he even agreed with me. But he insisted on
knowing why I felt so determined about it. Even after we spoke for an hour
and a half, it wasn’t enough to fill the emptiness of his question. I ended up
leaving him wondering, well past the closing time of his branch office,
which was to be shut down forever shortly thereafter.
*   *   *
A few months later—in February 2020—the global village began to shake
on its foundations. The world was presented with a foreboding crisis, the
consequences of which were incalculable. In a matter of weeks, everyone
was gripped by the story of a virus—a story that was undoubtedly based on
facts. But on which ones? We caught a first glimpse of “the facts” via
footage from China. A virus forced the Chinese government to take the
most draconian measures. Entire cities were quarantined, new hospitals
were built hastily, and individuals in white suits disinfected public spaces.
Here and there, rumors emerged that the totalitarian Chinese government
was overreacting and that the new virus was no worse than the flu. Opposite
opinions were also floating around: that it must be much worse than it
looked, because otherwise no government would take such radical
measures. At that point, everything still felt far removed from our shores

and we assumed that the story did not allow us to gauge the full extent of
the facts.
Until the moment that the virus arrived in Europe. We now began
recording infections and deaths for ourselves. We saw images of
overcrowded emergency rooms in Italy, convoys of army vehicles
transporting corpses, morgues full of coffins. The renowned scientists at
Imperial College confidently predicted that without the most drastic
measures, the virus would claim tens of millions of lives. In Bergamo,
sirens blared day and night, silencing any voice in public space that dared to
doubt the facts. From then on, story and facts seemed to merge and
uncertainty gave way to certainty.
The unimaginable became reality: We witnessed the abrupt pivot of
nearly every country on Earth to follow China’s example and place huge
populations of people under de facto house arrest, a situation for which the
term “lockdown” was devised. A surreal silence descended— ominous and
liberating at the same time. The sky without airplanes, traffic arteries
without rushing blood; the dust of chasing vain desires settling down, and in
India, the air became so pure that, for the first time in thirty years, in some
places the Himalayas became once more visible against the horizon.2
It didn’t stop there. We also saw a remarkable transfer of power. Expert
virologists were called upon as George Orwell’s pigs—the smartest animals
on the farm—to replace the unreliable politicians. They would run the
animal farm with accurate (“scientific”) information in a time of plague.
But these experts soon turned out to have quite a few common, human
flaws. In their statistics and graphs, they made mistakes that even
“ordinary” people would not easily make. It went so far that, at one point,
they counted all deaths as coronavirus deaths, including people who had
died of, say, heart attacks.
Nor did they live up to their promises. These experts pledged that the
Gates to Freedom would reopen after two doses of the vaccine, but when
the time came, things didn’t change and they came up with the need for a
third. And just like Orwell’s pigs, they sometimes changed the rules
overnight, inconspicuously. First, the animals had to comply with the
measures because the number of sick people could not exceed the capacity
of the health care system (flatten the curve). But one day, everyone woke up
to discover writing on the walls stating that the measures were being

extended because the virus had to be eradicated (crush the curve).
Eventually, the rules changed so often that only the pigs seemed to know
them. And even that was not so sure.
Some people became suspicious. How is it possible that these experts
make mistakes that even laymen wouldn’t make? Aren’t they scientists, the
kind of people who took us to the moon and gave us the internet? They
can’t be that stupid, can they? What is the endgame? Their
recommendations take us further down the road in the same direction: With
each new step, we lose more of our freedoms, until we reach a final
destination where human beings are reduced to QR codes in a large
technocratic medical experiment.
That’s how most people eventually became certain. Very certain. Yet of
the most opposing things. Some people were convinced that we were
dealing with a killer virus, others that it was nothing more than the seasonal
flu, and still others believed that the virus did not even exist and that we
were dealing with a worldwide conspiracy. And there were also a few who
continued to tolerate uncertainty and kept asking themselves: How can we
adequately understand what is going on in our society?
*   *   *
The coronavirus crisis did not come out of the blue. It fits into a series of
increasingly desperate and self-destructive societal responses to objects of
fear: terrorists, global warming, coronavirus. Whenever a new object of fear
arises in society, there is only one response and one defense in our current
way of thinking: increased control. The fact that the human being can
tolerate only a certain amount of control is completely overlooked.
Coercive control leads to fear and fear leads to more coercive control. Just
like that, society falls victim to a vicious circle that inevitably leads to
totalitarianism, which means to extreme government control, eventually
resulting in the radical destruction of both the psychological and physical
integrity of human beings.
We have to consider the current fear and psychological discomfort to be
a problem in itself, a problem that cannot be reduced to a virus or any other
“object of threat.” Our fear originates on a completely different level—that
of the failure of the Grand Narrative of our society. This is the narrative of

mechanistic science, in which man is reduced to a biological organism. A
narrative that ignores the psychological, symbolic, and ethical dimensions
of human beings and thereby has a devastating effect at the level of human
relationships. Something in this narrative causes man to become isolated
from his fellow man, and from nature; something in it causes man to stop
resonating with the world around him; something in it turns the human
being into an atomized subject. It is precisely this atomized subject that,
according to Arendt, is the elementary building block of the totalitarian
state.
Totalitarianism is not a historical coincidence. In the final analysis, it is
the logical consequence of mechanistic thinking and the delusional belief in
the omnipotence of human rationality. As such, totalitarianism is the
defining feature of the Enlightenment tradition. Several authors have
postulated this, but it hasn’t yet been subject to a psychological analysis.
This book fills that gap. We will analyze the symptom of totalitarianism and
situate it within the broader context of the social phenomena of which it
forms a part.
Part 1 (chapters 1 to 5) covers how the mechanist–materialist view of
man and the world creates the specific social-psychological conditions in
which mass formation and totalitarianism thrive. Part 2 (chapters 6 to 8)
details the process of mass formation and its relationship to totalitarianism.
Finally, part 3 (chapters 9 to 11) investigates a way to transcend the current
condition of man and the world, so as to render totalitarianism superfluous.
As a matter of fact, part 1 and part 3 of this book only marginally refer to
totalitarianism. It is not my aim with this book to focus on that which is
usually 
associated 
with 
totalitarianism—concentration 
camps,
indoctrination, propaganda—but rather the broader cultural-historical
processes from which totalitarianism emerges. This approach allows us to
focus on what matters most: Totalitarianism arises from evolutions and
tendencies that take place in our day-to-day lives.
Ultimately, this book explores the possibilities of finding a way out of
the current cultural impasse in which we appear to be stuck. The escalating
social crises of the early twenty-first century are the manifestation of an
underlying psychological and ideological upheaval—a shift of the tectonic
plates on which a worldview rests. We are experiencing the moment in
which an old ideology rears up in power, one last time, before collapsing.

Each attempt to remediate the current social problems, whatever they may
be, on the basis of the old ideology will only make things worse. One
cannot solve a problem using the same mindset that created it. The solution
to our fear and uncertainty does not lie in the increase of (technological)
control. The real task facing us as individuals and as a society is to
construct a new view of man and the world, to find a new foundation for
our identity, to formulate new principles for living together with others, and
to reappraise a timely human capacity—speaking the truth.

PART I
SCIENCE AND ITS
PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS

CHAPTER 1
Science and Ideology
It is a summer day in 1582. A young student by the name of Galileo Galilei
sits in the cathedral of Pisa. Before him stands a priest, reciting scripture. A
chandelier attached to the vaulted ceiling by a thin chain hangs over the
priest’s head. The warm summer breeze blows in through the open doors,
setting the chandelier in motion. Sometimes, the breeze swings the lamp far
from its resting place above the altar; other times it moves it only a little bit.
The priest’s voice disappears into the background. Galileo’s eyes follow the
lamp—back and forth, back and forth. He checks his pulse and counts the
number of heartbeats. Regardless of how far it swings, the pendulum
always takes the same amount of time to return to its starting point.
The events in the cathedral of Pisa later took on mythical proportions,
embodying the cultural and social upheaval that characterized the centuries
that followed. Religious discourse, with its system of dogmas derived from
ancient texts, lost its authority. Instead of something that had to be revealed
to man by God, knowledge became something man could come to on his
own. All he had to do was observe phenomena with his eyes and think
logically.
Religious discourse had turned man’s gaze inward for thousands of
years, revolving around the conception of man as a sinner, who lies and
deceives and loses himself in worldly temptations, who must ready himself
for death because it will catch up with him eventually. If man suffered in
this world, the creation of God, it was because he failed to measure up as a
moral and ethical being, because he was living in sin. It was not the world
that had to be questioned but man himself.
That all changed with the emergence of science: Man believed that, with
the power of reason, he could adjust the world, while he himself could

remain unchanged. He gathered his courage and took charge of his destiny:
He would use his own intellectual power to understand the world and to
shape a new, rational society. For too long, he had been forced to remain
silent in the name of a God no one had ever seen; for too long, society had
been burdened by dogmas that lacked any rational foundation. The time had
come to dispel the darkness with the light of reason. “Enlightenment is
man’s release from his self-incurred tutelage. Tutelage is man’s inability to
make use of his understanding without direction from another … ‘Dare to
think! Have the courage to use your own reason!’ is therefore the motto of
the Enlightenment,” as stated in 1784 by the great German Enlightenment
philosopher Immanuel Kant.1
Galileo dared—to think. After Mass, he rushed to his dorm room and
began experimenting with pendulums: He altered the weight of the
swinging object, the force with which the object was put into motion, the
length of chain by which the object was suspended. Only a few months
later, he was able to formulate the basic law governing pendulum motion:
Only the length the chain (the pendulum arm) has an impact on the duration
of motion.
Other brilliant thinkers, such as Nicolaus Copernicus and Isaac Newton,
also pulled the dogmatic wool from their eyes to register the world around
them with an open mind. They demonstrated that certain aspects of reality
could be captured in mathematical and mechanistic formulas with
incredible accuracy and precision. It seemed incontrovertible: The book of
the universe is written in the language of mathematics.
These thinkers not only reached great intellectual achievements, they
also assumed a unique humanistic and ethical stance with regard to the
world and its material objects. They had the courage to set aside the
prejudices and dogmas of the time. They admitted their ignorance and were
curious and open to what phenomena have to say for themselves. This “not
knowing” gave birth to a new knowledge, a new knowledge for which they
would do anything, for which they were willing to give up their freedom,
sometimes even their lives.
This newborn science—this budding knowledge—showed all the
characteristics of what the French philosopher Michel Foucault defines as
truth-telling.2 Truth-telling is a way of speaking that breaks through an
established, if implicit, social consensus. Whoever speaks the truth breaks

open the solidified story in which the group seeks refuge, ease, and security.
This makes speaking the truth a dangerous endeavor. It strikes fear in the
group, and results in anger and aggression.
Truth-telling is dangerous. Yet it is also necessary. No matter how
fruitful a social consensus may be at a certain time, if it is not dismantled in
time and renewed, it will putrefy and eventually have a suffocating impact
on society. In such times, the truth will emerge as a sincere voice that
breaks through the dull refrain of an established story and lends a new
sound to old and ageless words. “Le vraie est toujours neuf” (Truth is
always new) (Max Jacob).3
Science can, in essence, be defined as open-mindedness. The original
practice of science, that which formed the basis of the Enlightenment,
briefly suspended prejudice about the things being observed. It was open to
the greatest possible diversity of ideas and thoughts, assumptions, and
hypotheses. It cultivated doubt and considered uncertainty a virtue. It let the
facts speak for themselves and decide for themselves what kind of thought
or theory they preferred to unite with. In this way, facts were reborn into
words as fresh, budding truths.
It was not only the facts that had the liberty to assert themselves. “I may
disagree with what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say
it,” Voltaire declared (or rather, his biographer Evelyn Beatrice Hall,
declared). Science also liberated man from his self-incurred immaturity. It
broke through rule by religious dogma that, in the public sphere, had largely
decayed into coercion and oppression, pretense and hypocrisy, deceit and
lies.
This open-mindedness bore abundant fruit. The scientific method was
used to understand and predict the movement of the celestial bodies, to
describe pendulums and calculate gravitational acceleration, and also to
study the behavior of animals, to understand how the mind works, to map
the structure of languages, to compare cultures with one another. It could be
flexibly adapted to every domain of inquiry, every object of research, and it
brought forth sublime discoveries in every field. Shapes and colors were
delineated sharper than ever in science’s light; sounds sounded clearer than
ears had ever heard.
This openness of mind, this faithful pursuit of Reason at any cost
eventually yielded, through incessant endeavor over several centuries, the

most sublime insights. Surprising insights, too. The great physicists of the
first half of the twentieth century proved in the most rigorous way that the
core of matter cannot be separated from the observing subject. They
demonstrated that the observation of a material object changes the object
itself (“Looking at something, changes it,” Erwin Schrödinger declared).
Moreover, they relinquished the illusion that man could ever attain
certainty. With his uncertainty principle, Werner Heisenberg demonstrated
that it is impossible to unambiguously determine even purely material
“facts,” such as the location in time and space of material particles.4 The
great minds who followed reason and facts most rigorously came to the
conclusion that, ultimately, the essence of things is beyond logic and cannot
be grasped. Niels Bohr concluded that only poetry can describe the absurd
behavior of elementary particles: “When it comes to atoms, language can
only be used as poetry.”
Also the very idea of predictability in the material world—fanatically
proclaimed by French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace in the eighteenth
century—was 
invalidated 
by 
the 
American 
mathematician 
and
meteorologist Edward Lorenz in the twentieth century. Even if you’re able
to capture a complex and dynamic phenomenon (which includes most
natural phenomena) in mathematical formulas, you still, even with formulas
in hand, wouldn’t be able to predict their behavior a second in advance.
And finally, the image of the universe as a dead and nondirectional
(nonteleological) mechanical process also proved scientifically untenable.
Chaos theory showed in a truly revolutionary way that matter is constantly
organizing itself in ways that cannot possibly be explained in mechanistic
terms. The universe is endowed with direction and volition. We’ll explore
this more in detail in the last part of this book.
Newton had already stated as much in the seventeenth century: The
laws of mechanics apply to only a very limited part of reality. As science
progressed, this only became clearer—at least, for those who had eyes to
see it. In the twentieth century, the great mathematician René Thom put it
this way: “That portion of reality, which can be well described by laws
which permit calculations, is extremely limited.” He continued, even more
importantly, “All major theoretical advances, in my opinion, have arisen
from the capacity of their inventors to ‘get into the skin of things,’ to be
able to empathize with all entities of the external world. It is this kind of

identification that transforms an objective phenomenon into a concrete
thought experiment.”5
This sheds surprising light on the nature of science. Most are of the
opinion that science consists of making dry, logical connections between
“objectively” observable facts. However, science is, in fact, characterized
by empathy, a resonant affinity between the observer and the phenomenon
under investigation. As such, science stumbles upon an unknowable and
mysterious essence that escapes logical explanation and which can be
described only in the language of poetry and metaphor.
Encounters with that essence often result in what we might describe as
the seminal religious experience—a religious experience that precedes and
is untainted by religious institutions or dogma. Max Planck testified to that
experience, in perhaps the most direct and vulnerable way: Science
eventually arrives where religion once started, in a personal contact with the
Unnameable (see also chapter 11).
Based on this experience, the physicists of the twentieth century
reappraised the great religious and mystical writings, such as the
Upanishads. The content and structure of those texts, the imagery and the
symbolism, offer a better grip on reality than any logical, rational discourse.
Science freed itself from all the dogmas of religious discourse, only to
rediscover—at the end of a long journey—the mystical and religious texts
and reendow them with their resplendent, original status: symbolic,
metaphorical texts for that which is eternally hidden from the human mind.
As we will discuss in the latter part of this book, the faithful pursuit of
Reason attained the highest and most sublime achievement: mapping its
own boundaries. The human mind had accepted its own limitations and
once more relocated the ultimate knowledge beyond and outside itself. The
ultimate achievement of science is that it finally surrenders, that it comes to
the realization that it cannot be the guiding principle for man. It is not
human reason that is at the heart of the matter, but man as an individual
who makes ethical and moral choices, man in relation to fellow man, man
in relation to the unnameable, which, at the heart of things, speaks to him.
*   *   *

However, from the beginning, the tree of science also sprouted a branch in
another direction—the exact opposite direction of that original scientific
practice. Based on the great achievements of science, some people tipped
from open-mindedness to belief; for them, science became ideology. It was
mainly the mechanistic-materialistic branch, the so-called hard sciences,
that most enraptured us. Simple in its principles (the laws of mechanics),
specific in its object (the tangible, visible world), and awe-inspiring in its
practical applicability (from the steam engine to television and the atomic
bomb to the Internet), this science has everything to seduce human beings.
With this branch of science, man conquers space; it enables us to see and
hear what is happening on the other side of the planet and visualize brain
activity; it gives us the ability to move faster than sound and to perform
microsurgical procedures. In the past, people waited in vain for God to
perform miracles, but this science made them actually happen. Man had left
the stage of believing and could now rely successfully on what he knew. At
least, so he believed.
From the Enlightenment forward, mechanistic thinking provided the
Grand Narrative in Western civilization. According to that story, it begins
with a big bang that sets an expanding universe in motion, generating a
series of phenomena of growing complexity. Hydrogen is formed first, then
helium, and then all the other elements through alternating processes of
fusion and explosion. The elements clump together and form stars and
planets and one of them, the Earth, contains water. This water allows for the
formation of amino acids, often regarded as the first form of life. From
here, guided by natural selection, simple forms of life gradually give way to
more complex forms until, at long last, man emerges—the provisional end
point of evolution. In this way, the scientific discourse spun its own creation
myth.
From this perspective, the entirety of human subjectivity becomes an
insignificant by-product of mechanistic processes.
Man may not realize it, but his humanity does not really
matter, it is nothing essential. His whole existence, his
longing and his lust, his romantic lamentations and his
most superficial needs, his joy and his sorrow, his doubt
and his choices, his anger and unreasonableness, his

pleasure and his suffering, his deepest aversion and his
most lofty aesthetic appreciations, in short, the entire
drama of his existence, can ultimately be reduced to
elementary particles that interact according to the laws of
mechanics.
This is the credo of mechanistic materialism.
“Whoever doubts this creed, voluntarily declares himself foolish or
insane.” One is still allowed to doubt, but only about the “right” things. In
this way, the tree of science sprouted a branch that grew in the opposite
direction from the original shoots. At its birth, science was synonymous
with open-mindedness, with a way of thinking that banished dogmas and
questioned beliefs. As it evolved, however, it also turned itself into
ideology, belief, and prejudice.
Science thus underwent a transformation, as all ideologies do. At first, it
was a discourse by which a minority defied a majority; then it became the
discourse of the majority itself. In the course of this transformation,
scientific discourse aligned itself with objectives that were opposed to the
original ones. It enabled manipulation of the masses, allowed people to
build a career (“publish or perish”), promote products (“Research shows our
soap washes the whitest”), spread deception (“I only believe the statistics I
faked myself,” Winston Churchill), and belittle and stigmatize others
(“Whoever believes in alternative medicine is an irrational fool”). Indeed,
even to justify segregation and exclusion (no access to public spaces unless
you bear the sign—a mask, a vaccine passport—of the scientific ideology).
In short, the scientific discourse, like any dominant discourse, has become
the privileged instrument of opportunism, lies, deception, manipulation, and
power.
*   *   *
To the extent that the scientific discourse became an ideology, it lost its
virtue of truth-telling. Nothing illustrates this better than the so-called
replication crisis that erupted in academia in 2005. This crisis emerged
when a number of serious cases of scientific fraud came to light. Scientific
scans and other imaging were proven to have been manipulated,6

archaeological artefacts were found to be counterfeit,7 embryo clones had
been forged;8 some researchers claimed to have successfully transplanted
skin from mice, whilst they had simply dyed the skin of the test animals
without performing any surgical procedure.9 Other researchers had
manufactured missing links from pieces of skulls of humans and monkeys;10
and yes, it appeared that some even completely made up their research.11
This kind of full-fledged fraud was relatively rare, however, and not
actually the biggest problem. The biggest problem was with less dramatic
instances of questionable research practices, which were reaching epidemic
proportions. Daniele Fanelli conducted a systematic survey in 2009 and
found that at least 72 percent of researchers were willing to somehow
distort their research results.12 On top of that, research was also replete with
unintentional calculation mistakes and other errors. An article in Nature
rightly called it “a tragedy of errors.”13
All of this translated into a problem of replicability of scientific
findings. To put it simply, this means that the results of scientific
experiments were not stable. When several researchers performed the same
experiment, they came to different findings. For example, in economics
research, replication failed about 50 percent of the time,14 in cancer research
about 60 percent of the time,15 and in biomedical research no less than 85
percent of the time.16 The quality of research was so atrocious that the
world-renowned statistician John Ioannidis published an article bluntly
entitled “Why Most Published Research Findings Are False.”17 Ironically,
the studies that assessed the quality of research also came to diverging
conclusions. This is perhaps the best evidence of how fundamental the
problem is.
In recent decades, academics have attempted to improve the quality of
research through a number of initiatives. They questioned the pressure on
researchers to publish, urged researchers to make their data publicly
available, pushed for more transparency around financial interests, and
more. Overall, these measures don’t seem to have had much effect. In 2021,
50 percent of surveyed academics anonymously admitted that they
sometimes presented their findings in a biased way. Half is already a
problem, but according to Fanelli, it almost certainly represents a
substantial underestimation. This is because a significant percentage of the
researchers, even if surveyed anonymously, will not admit to engaging in

questionable research practices. The measures taken to improve the quality
of scientific research, however well-intentioned, failed to address the
problem.
The replication crisis does not simply indicate a lack of seriousness and
scrupulousness in research. It first and foremost points to a fundamental
epistemological crisis—a crisis of the way in which science is conducted.
Our interpretation of objectivity is wrong, excessively based on the idea
that numbers are the preferred approach to facts. If we look at the scientific
fields with the worst replicability outcomes, it becomes clear that the
measurability of phenomena plays a significant role. In chemistry and
physics, for example, it wasn’t that bad. However, in psychology and
medicine, the situation is wretched. In those fields, researchers assess
extremely 
complex 
and 
dynamic 
phenomena—the 
physical 
and
psychological functioning of human beings. Such “objects” are, in essence,
only measurable to a very limited extent, as they cannot be reduced to
unidimensional characteristics (see chapter 4). And yet, all too often, we see
desperate attempts to mold them into data.
In both medicine and psychology, measurement is usually done on the
basis of tests that result in numerical scores. These figures give the
impression of being objective; however, this needs some perspective.
Studies into so-called “cross-method agreement” start from a question that
is as simple as it is interesting: If you measure the same “object” using
different measurement methods, to what extent will the results coincide? If
the measurement methods are accurate, the results should be virtually
identical. However, this is not the case. Not even close. In psychology, for
example, the correlation between the results obtained by different
measurement methods rarely exceed 0.45. This, of course, is an abstract
number, which is why I like to give a concrete example in my university
lectures. Imagine you are building a house and a carpenter comes to take
measurements for eight windows. He uses three different tools on each
window: a folding rule, a tape measure, and a laser measure. If the
carpenter’s measurements are as inadequate as a psychologist’s, he would
report the following results (see table 1.1).
Table 1.1. A Carpenter’s Measurements with a Psychologist’s Accuracy

Folding Rule
(in cm)
Tape Measure
(in cm)
Laser Measure
(in cm)
Folding Rule
(in cm)
Tape Measure
(in cm)
Laser Measure
(in cm)
Window 1
180
130
60
Window 2
100
200
150
Window 3
160
220
130
Window 4
100
170
210
Window 5
30
100
20
Window 6
120
80
160
Window 7
110
150
60
Window 8
30
90
10
With the folding rule, the carpenter concludes that window 1 is 180 cm
wide; with the tape measure, the same window is 130 cm wide; and with the
laser measure, it is 60 cm wide. It is the same scenario with the second
window: The folding rule shows that window 2 is 100 cm wide, the tape
measure shows that it is 200 cm wide, and the laser measure shows that it is
150 cm wide. The correlation among all sets of the three measurements is
0.45.
Would you hire this carpenter? This is about the best you can expect
when psychologists use three different measuring instruments. This doesn’t
mean that all psychological measurements are meaningless, but the idea that
they are “objective” needs to be put into perspective.18
As a young researcher, I intended to tackle the measurement problem,
thinking that only the field of psychology was burdened with this problem
to such an extent. I later discovered that it applies equally to medical
sciences (and many other fields of science, as well, as we’ll see in chapter
4). The tests and measuring instruments in medicine are—this may surprise
you—on average no better than those used in psychology. Take a look at the
in-depth survey study by Gregory Meyer and his colleagues.19
During the coronavirus crisis, the public became aware—perhaps for
the first time—of the relativity of medical measurements, as we witnessed
the manifest problems with the PCR test. It quickly became clear that the

test can be administered in different ways, that it produces widely variable
results, that the results can also be interpreted in different ways, and so on.
Johann Goethe once said, “Measuring a thing is a crude act, which cannot
be applied in any other way than extremely imperfectly to living bodies.”
By attempting to measure the unmeasurable, measurement becomes a form
of pseudo-objectivity. Instead of bringing the researcher closer to his
research object, the measurement procedure leads him further away. It hides
the examined object behind a screen of numbers.
Low-validity tests and data collection methods are not only problematic
per se; they also prevent a researcher from attempting to understand his
object in a different, maybe less sophisticated-looking, but often more
appropriate way, just by using means of words, for example. This is the real
drama of fields like medicine and psychology: They have abandoned the
classic research, such as thorough case studies conducted by experienced
clinicians, and replaced it with research that might look scientific but often
is not. Metrical data might seem like a more sophisticated and objective
way of describing the research object, but it often conveys less than a
skillful description by means of words. This led, in part, to the other
problems that surfaced in the scientific crisis: the ubiquitous errors,
sloppiness, and biased conclusions, which we talked about earlier. Anyone
who tries to squeeze the unmeasurable into numbers will sense that his
research has little real value and will be less motivated and lack a sense of
duty to deliver accurate work.
The lack of quality in scientific research raises a few pressing questions,
including about the blind peer review system, which is used in all scientific
journals and is considered the ultimate seal of approval for scientific
legitimacy. Peer review requires that a study be read and critically evaluated
by two or three independent experts in the field before publication. These
experts are supposed to be “blind” (they don’t know who conducted the
study), but in reality, they usually do know the authors because they know
the other researchers working in their field. Hence, they can usually guess
who conducted the research. For this reason, a fair assessment by an expert
requires not only that he is willing and able to free up sufficient time and
energy—far from given in the current academic climate. Moreover, it
requires that he is capable of identifying his personal prejudices with regard
to the research and its authors, and put them aside. In other words: Peer

review stands or falls on the ethical and moral quality of the expert—that is,
his subjective, human characteristics.
*   *   *
And just like that, this chapter has come full circle. Both great Science (the
science that maintains an open mind and pursues Reason) and small science
(the science that degenerates into ideology) eventually re-encounter what
they originally had pushed out of view: man as a subjective and ethical
being. The first kind of science does so in a positive way, by recognizing
the importance of that dimension and anchoring it in its theories. It started
as a courageous, young science by looking outwards to the material world,
registering phenomena and establishing logical connections between them.
It assumed—and rightly, to a degree—that this was the way to sovereign
knowledge. In great Science, the human being, in its psychic, symbolic,
moral, and ethical dimension, disappeared into the background. But that
didn’t last long. It was discovered that the observer, in his subjective
qualities, has an essential influence on the objects being observed. The
theories in which those insights have been anchored, such as quantum
mechanics and complex, dynamic systems theory, have to be considered
among the greatest achievements man has ever produced. (We will explore
this in more detail in part 3.)
To the extent that science has degenerated into ideology, belief, and
dogma—small science—it has also confirmed that the human being, in its
subjective dimension, is the central point of focus. In this case, however,
science does so in a negative way, by testifying to this with its own failure.
It increasingly ignored the register of subjective experience, eventually
considering it to be a kind of insignificant, quasi-unreal by-product of
material, biochemical processes in the brain, for example. But that didn’t
make the subjective dimension cease to exist. It proliferated, took on
grotesque proportions, and manifested itself as a torrent of errors,
sloppiness, questionable research practices, and outright fraud. Ultimately,
human subjectivity also reclaimed its throne in small science as well.
As we will discuss more extensively in chapter 3, the most striking
thing of all is that, in general, researchers themselves hardly realize that
there is something wrong with their methodology. They generally take their

scientific fiction for reality, confusing their numbers with the facts of which
they are a distorted echo. The same applies to a large part of the population,
blindly trusting this scientific ideology, with no other ideological hiding
place, given the fall of religion. Numbers and graphs presented in the mass
media by someone with credentials are considered de facto realities by
many people. It is at this level that Hannah Arendt situates the ideal subject
of the totalitarian state: the subject that no longer knows the difference
between (pseudo)-scientific fiction and reality. Never before were there so
many such people as in the beginning of the twenty-first century; never
before were the societal conditions so prone to totalitarianism.

CHAPTER 2
Science and Its Practical
Applications
Science not only leads to knowledge and intellectual advances, it also has
effects in the real world through its practical applications. Mechanistic
science, in particular, had high ambitions in this regard. It wants to adapt
the world to people, to make life easy and comfortable, and ultimately
eliminate suffering and even death.
To a certain extent, science also fulfilled those ambitions. Galileo’s
discovery allowed Christiaan Huyghens fifteen years later to build a
mechanical device to measure time: the pendulum clock. Until then, people
mainly depended on natural cycles to measure time; now, people were able
to create artificial cycles of any duration by altering the length of the
pendulum arm. As such, a day could be broken down into 86,400 identical
pendulum seconds. Time changed from an elusive stream of natural cycles
into a quantifiable process, hopping forward in strictly identical mechanical
steps.
What came next was an almost endless series of practical applications:
the steam engine, the camera, artificial light, the radio, the television, the
automobile, the airplane, the internet. In the two centuries following
Newton’s formulation of the basic laws of motion—no more than a blink of
an eye in human history—society became mechanized and industrialized in
a dizzying number of ways. During thousands of years, man had been
subjected to the world; now he imposed his will upon it. For the first time,
he was able to radically change his troubled condition and make life easier.
Or at least, he had that impression.

Yet there was, undeniably, another side to the coin. Each added
convenience came at a price, including a weakened connection to the
natural and social environment. Artificial light broke the rhythm that the
sun and moon had hitherto imposed on daily activities; the clock separated
the human mind from cyclical natural processes (meeting up as soon as the
dew has dried, eating when the sun is at its highest point, going to sleep
when the night falls); the compass alienated man from the stars; industrial
labor drew him away from the fields and the woods. The psychological
impact of all this usually wasn’t considered important—if it was even
considered at all. But it was undoubtedly immense. Prior to mechanization,
man’s world of experience constantly resonated with nature’s ever-varying
language of forms; after mechanization, he was mainly absorbed by a
monotonous, mechanical rhythm.
Social connections were also transformed beyond recognition. The
invention of radio and television led to the rise of the mass media and a
corresponding decline in direct human interactions with a merely social
function. Evening meetings between neighbors, pub gatherings, harvest
festivals, rituals, and celebrations—they were progressively replaced by
consumption of what the media presented. This seduced us into certain
social laziness. It was no longer necessary to make the effort that is required
for interaction with fellow human beings.
No risk of arguing; no confrontation with painful jealousy, shame, or
embarrassment; no need to dress up or to even leave the house. It also
uniformized social exchanges. Public space, including the political sphere,
was increasingly dominated by a shrinking number of voices that conquered
the living room via the mass media.1 In other words, social relationships
lost their diversity and originality.
The mechanization of the labor process also engendered a profound
transformation of social structures and connections, a dimension explored
by Marx’s historical materialism. The steam engine, for example, could
power such a large number of looms and provide employment to such a
large number of people that new forms of society, such as factory villages,
rose around it. These communities were merely focused on mass
production, wage labor being the only point of collective identification. As
such, industrialization broke up traditional social structures formed by the
existence of varied professions, public offices, and authority (the priest, the

mayor). Although these structures curbed man’s freedom for centuries, or
even radically suppressed it, they also offered him a psychological basis and
frame of reference. They gave him rules and laws, commandments and
prohibitions, boundaries to his lusts and urges, well-defined objects of
anxiety, frustration, and anger. Their disappearance left man confused, in
the darkness of his own existence; haunted by existential anxiety and
unease that could not be identified. As we will see in chapter 6, this
unfettered anxiety plays a crucial role in mass formation and totalitarianism.
The mechanization of the world also had a direct effect at the level of
meaning making. Mass production rendered the end result of labor less
tangible. In the past, man worked to produce the objects needed to sustain
the bodily existence of oneself and the people around him. He worked to
feed himself, to warm the house, to clothe himself against harsh conditions
and the gaze of others. That changed with the rise of the industrial
environment. He now worked to produce objects—for people far away. The
answer to the question of what is the meaning of one’s work no longer
welled up from one’s own body.
In addition, the Other for whom one worked was anonymous. The effect
of one’s work on the Other could no longer be seen or felt. With the
disappearance of (much of the) local, small-scale, and craft production, the
direct link between producer and consumer was broken. In most cases, the
person who produced the material good no longer came into contact with
the person who was about to use it. When a product was delivered, the
person who produced it no longer witnessed the joy or gratitude on the
recipient’s face. It’s these visible, subtle physical effects that primarily
provide human satisfaction in work; they are the most direct sign that work
is meaningful. In this way, not only one’s own body but also the other faded
as sources of meaning making. The worker became, as they say, a cog in the
industrial machine, lubricated only by the thought of wages due. Labor
changed from a cumbersome but inherently meaningful existential task into
a disembodied utilitarian necessity.
*   *   *
Besides 
waning 
meaning, 
another 
problem 
arose. 
Surprisingly,
industrialization and mechanization of labor didn’t mean that less work

needed to be done. In the early twentieth century, British economist John
Maynard Keynes predicted that by the end of the century, technological
advances would translate to a 15-hour work week, which would be
sufficient for society to produce everything it needed.2 He was correct on
that last point—more than correct, in fact. It probably requires even fewer
than fifteen hours of labor for society to achieve that. But his prediction
didn’t come true. By the end of the twentieth century, people worked longer
hours than ever before.
What Keynes failed to consider was the creation of meaningless and
useless work on an incredible scale. Professor of anthropology David
Graeber described this in his by now well-known book Bullshit Jobs. He
asked a random sample of people whether they thought their jobs made a
meaningful contribution to society. About 37 percent answered with a
definite “no” and an additional 13 percent were unsure.3 These bullshit jobs
were mostly created in the administrative and economic sectors, and the
countless occupations that support these sectors. Graeber tells the story of
“Kurt,” who works at a company providing auxiliary services for the
German army, and illustrates the degree of absurdity that gradually began to
characterize so many people’s working lives, and existence:
Kurt: The German army hires a subcontractor for their IT
work. The IT company hires a subcontractor who takes
care of the logistics side. The logistics company hires a
subcontractor for their personnel management, and I
work for that company.
Suppose a soldier moves to an office two doors down
the hallway. Instead of simply picking his computer up
and taking it there, he has to fill out a form.
The IT company receives the form, people read it and
approve the application, and send it to the logistics
company. The logistics company then approves the
computer to be moved to the office two doors down the
hallway and asks us for staff. My company’s office
workers then do their thing, and that’s where I come in.
I receive an e-mail: “Come to barrack C at time B.”
Usually those barracks are about a hundred to three

hundred miles from my house, so I rent a car. I drive the
rental car to the barracks, I let the dispatcher know that I
have arrived, fill out a form, disconnect the computer, put
the computer in a box, seal the box, ask someone from
logistics to carry the box to the room five meters further
down the hallway, I reopen the box there, fill out another
form, reconnect the computer, call the coordinator to let
him know how long it took me, have a few people sign off,
drive my rental car home, send all the paperwork to the
coordinator and get paid.
So instead of the soldier being allowed to move his
computer five meters further down the hallway, two
people have to drive a total of six to ten hours, fill out
about fifteen forms and waste more than four hundred
euros in tax money.4
This is an intriguing aspect of the phenomenon of meaningless work: You’d
think that in private companies, dominated by capitalist pursuits and
dictated by profit, such absurd work wouldn’t exist. Why would a for-profit
company hemorrhage money on unprofitable workers? However, this idea
can be relegated to the realm of illusions.5 Even in the private sector, there
is a proliferation of meaningless work. We can attribute this in the first
place to the changes in corporate culture. Today’s executives rarely have a
true personal stake in the success or failure of the company they lead. They
can afford to create pointless jobs, perhaps to do friends a favor, or to give
the company a sophisticated image by employing any manner of “experts,”
if need be even solely to optimize their employment statistics. By the time
the company goes bust, the executive will have been employed elsewhere
for a while anyway.
But there’s more to it than that. The rampant growth of the
administrative and economic sectors has to do with much more fundamental
psychological tendencies in our society. Endless proliferation of rules,
procedures, and administration usually stems from interpersonal mistrust
and inability to tolerate uncertainty and risk. Both the government and the
population are ever more demanding that everything be done correctly. This
involves endless procedural provisions, necessary to determine who is

financially and legally liable if anything goes wrong. As we will discuss in
chapter 5, today’s compulsion to regulate and control is a frenetic attempt to
master ever-growing anxiety.
If human relationships are characterized by fundamental distrust, life
becomes hopelessly complicated and society spends its energy at creating
all kinds of “security mechanisms,” which in fact fuel mistrust even more
and are, above all, psychologically exhausting. That’s why the phenomenon
of bullshit jobs is also directly associated with the epidemic of workplace
burnout. What makes work performance unbearable, is usually not the
actual demands but the impossibility of experiencing meaning and
satisfaction, of experiencing work as an act of creation. Put someone in an
office and pay him a generous wage to perform a useless task, like pushing
a button every ten minutes. Does such a job free you from the burdens of
life, or does it make your life unbearably light?
In the end, a paradox arises: feelings of resentment and revenge toward
those who have meaningful work. It’s remarkable that it’s mainly the people
who perform work that is directly useful—health care workers, garbage
collectors, craftsmen, farmers—who get fired or whose work is so poorly
rewarded that they have to almost live on the breadline or survive from
subsidies (think of farmers, who produce food, the most necessary material
object of all). On the other hand, the most meaningless jobs, such as
administrative work, are steadily increasing in number and are, in
comparison, rewarded more and more generously. This is more or less the
(unconscious) reasoning of: “If you are lucky enough to have a meaningful
job, you should not expect to be adequately rewarded on top of that.” And
just like that, we’ve ended up in a situation in which it almost seems foolish
to choose meaningful work.
The rise of meaningless professions shows us that the real problem of
humanity lies in human relationships, more so than in the struggle with
natural forces or in the physical demands of work. Simply put, in a society
in which human relationships are satisfying, life will be bearable even if it
has only primitive means of production. Whereas in a society where human
relationships are impoverished and toxic, life will be difficult and
unbearable, however “advanced” such society may be in terms of
mechanical-technological evolutions.

*   *   *
To summarize, science led to a formidable ability to alter the material world
through industrialization and mechanization. But this also gave rise to
problems, especially regarding our relationships, both with each other, and
with nature. Furthermore, we’re faced with problems that are caused by the
fact that science—or that which passes for science today—is often neither
accurate nor reliable.
In chapter 1, I explained that the quality of research is most problematic
in medical science. No less than 85 percent of medical studies come to
questionable conclusions due to errors, sloppiness, and fraud. This allows
us to understand, for example, why drugs that are found to be safe in
research trials may, in practice, cause thousands of deaths, or generate
significant side effects. The most well-known example might be the
thalidomide scandal. Thalidomide (Softenon) was marketed in 1958 as an
anti-nausea medication for pregnant women. By 1961, it was clear that
thalidomide had caused severe malformations in at least ten thousand
fetuses, mostly underdeveloped limbs or the absence of limbs altogether.
The most mind-boggling aspect of the scandal is that pharmaceutical
companies continued to produce the drug for years, and that in some
countries (including Belgium), it was sold over the counter until 1963. This
drug that deformed thousands of babies and destroyed thousands of lives
wasn’t withdrawn from the market until 1969. The justification is
perplexing, to put it mildly: The government first wanted to be 100 percent
sure that there was, indeed, a link between the drug and fetal
malformations.
Another 
dramatic 
example 
concerns 
the 
artificial 
hormone
diethylstilbestrol (DES), which was widely administered between 1947 and
1976 to prevent miscarriages. Around 1976, it became clear that the use of
DES was a terrible mistake. It did not prevent miscarriages, but it did have
a series of serious side effects that affected multiple generations.6 The
women who took it developed a higher risk of breast cancer. The first
generation of female offspring were at higher risk of abnormalities in the
endometrium, pregnancy complications, genital deformations, and an
increased risk of cervical, breast, and vaginal cancer. The first-generation of
male offspring were at increased risk of nodules on the epididymis, while

the second-generation of male offspring had a higher rate of ureteral
abnormalities. Nobody knows if, and in which generation, the abnormalities
caused by DES will cease to exist.
Thalidomide and DES are probably the most well-known medical
scandals, but they’re not the ones that resulted in the greatest number of
victims. In 2019, a massive lawsuit was filed against several pharmaceutical
companies for their role in the opioid crisis, killing as many as four hundred
thousand people over the past twenty years and ruining untold millions of
American lives. One takeaway from this tragedy is that even
pharmaceutical drugs that enjoy long-term and widespread use aren’t
necessarily safe. Only in 2021, it was discovered that the popular painkiller
acetaminophen (Tylenol), which has been on the market since 1955,
contains carcinogens and can be harmful to fetuses.
But aren’t the effects and side effects of pharmaceutical drugs tested
extensively before they are brought to market? How is it possible that all
these harmful side effects are not discovered? Here is the problem: The
phenomenon of “health” or “reaction to a drug” is a complex and dynamic
phenomenon that cannot possibly be measured or understood in its entirety.
A researcher can only record and monitor a very limited number of
responses (for example, the effect on the symptom, the effect on blood
pressure, or respiration). He remains largely in the dark about everything
else. Additionally, research is only conducted for a limited period of time.
The side effects that manifest after that period, even generations later, such
as with thalidomide, can’t be fully accounted for. And finally, side effects
can also be too subtle to detect immediately but quite serious over time,
such as a decrease in general immunity.
Accurate prediction is further complicated by strong psychological
factors. The placebo effect (where a treatment has positive effects, merely
because the patient believes in its effectiveness) and nocebo effect (where a
treatment has negative effects because the patient believes it is harmful) are
widely accepted phenomena. And they’re not minor, as some might say.
Some researchers (such as Shapiro7 and Wampold8) estimate that up to 90
percent of the effects of medical treatments can be attributed to
psychological factors. If this is correct, most medical treatments would
more accurately be described as (unacknowledged) psychotherapy.

Although these data, like all data, are relative, it is clear that the
influence of psychological factors is significant (chapter 10 is completely
dedicated to this). That’s why the effects of pharmaceuticals and medical
interventions are difficult to predict, and they can also change over time as
the zeitgeist changes. Different discourse leads to different expectations and
different expectations lead to different effects. This helps explain why drugs
appear to lose their initial efficacy after being on the market for a while. A
new therapy often raises high expectations, creating a strong placebo effect.
Only from a naïve mechanistical perspective does one believe that the
effects of medical interventions can be objectively measured through
experiments.
The poor quality of medical research also raises pressing ethical
questions. For instance, it shines a harsh light on the merciless drive to
conduct experiments. Every year the number of laboratory animals used for
medical experiments increases.9 In 2005, about one hundred million animals
were sacrificed worldwide (!); by 2020, this nearly doubled to just under
two hundred million (!). The fate of these animals is horrific, often too
horrific for words. If we take into account that 85 percent of medical studies
are erroneous, biased, or even fraudulent (see chapter 1), we can only
conclude that, in the majority of cases, this inferno of suffering is
meaningless and unnecessary on top of that. Where exactly do we draw the
line between experimentation and torture? If such a practice reaches such
magnitude and such a degree of absurdity in a society, we cannot but
conclude that such a society is seriously ill.
*   *   *
Mechanistic thinking gave man an enormous capacity to manipulate the
material world. Combined with the (self-) destructive tendency intrinsic to
man, this has put him in the most precarious situation he has ever been in.
For the first time in history, man is able to raze the “natural resources” on
which he depends, depleting the world’s fish stocks, for example, and
clearing entire rainforests. Furthermore, with the industrialization and
mechanization of war, mechanistic thinking showed its destructive potential
in an overt and direct way. The tens of millions of victims of the destruction
machines that were deployed in the world wars are silent witnesses thereof.

And even more so in the years to follow, the sinister marriage between
science and murderous rage wreaked such havoc that the war misery of
yesteryear paled in comparison. To give just one example, Monsanto
produced seventy-six million liters of Agent Orange, which was sprayed in
Vietnam to defoliate the trees and drive the Vietcong out of the jungle. The
result? Millions of both Vietnamese and American soldiers became
seriously ill, often with tumors and cancers, causing deformities in at least
150,000 children.
While mechanistic science sought to make the human condition more
comfortable, in many respects it also made it more dangerous. Man could
not help but feel threatened by the powers he himself unleashed from
nature. And, for the most part, those powers ended up in the hands of a few.
Due to the industrialization, mechanization, and technologization of the
world, production capacities, economic power (via a self-centralizing
banking system), and psychological power (via mass media) fell into the
hands of an ever-decreasing number of people. The Enlightenment tradition
had promised people autonomy and freedom, but, in a way, it brought
people greater (feelings of) dependence and powerlessness than ever before.
This powerlessness caused people to increasingly mistrust those in power.
Throughout the nineteenth century, fewer and fewer people felt that
political leaders really represented their voice in public space or defended
their interests. As a result, man also became disassociated from the social
classes that were represented by the politicians and was left uprooted, no
longer connected to the whole of society, no longer belonging to a
meaningful social group.
Although the Enlightenment tradition arose from man’s optimistic and
energetic aspiration to understand and control the world, it has led to the
opposite in several respects: namely, the experience of loss of control.
Humans have found themselves in a state of solitude, cut off from nature,
and existing apart from social structures and connections, feeling powerless
due to a deep sense of meaninglessness, living under clouds that are
pregnant with an inconceivable, destructive potential, all while
psychologically and materially depending on the happy few, whom he does
not trust and with whom he cannot identify. It is this individual that Hannah
Arendt named the atomized subject. It is this atomized subject in which we
recognize the elementary component of the totalitarian state.

CHAPTER 3
The Artificial Society
What is the endgame of the mechanistic ideology? To answer this question,
we must return to the cathedral of Pisa where the eyes of seventeen-year-old
Galileo Galilei follow a swinging lamp. With his youthful openness and
curiosity, Galileo sees something that countless eyes had never noticed:
Whether the pendulum makes a long or a short swing, the time it takes to
swing hence and forth is always the same. Upon closer analysis, this makes
sense. Long swings start from a higher position and as the object begins its
downward motion, it accelerates in its path. Shorter swings start from a
lower position, and as the object begins its downward motion, it accelerates
less. The speed at which the pendulum travels on its path is directly
proportional to the length of the arc it makes—and therefore the movement
of the pendulum always lasts the same amount of time.
Galileo’s discovery was brilliant, no doubt. But it wasn’t quite right.
Christiaan Huyghens noticed something when he was building his
pendulum clocks: If he attached several clocks to the same wall, their
pendulums would eventually move in a perfect simultaneous manner.1 He
couldn’t help but conclude that somehow the clocks were in communication
with one another. Huyghens assumed—rightly, as it turned out—that the
vibrations of the pendulums spread through the wall, causing small
deviations in duration that, in a way that is difficult to understand,
eventually cause the pendulum movements synchronize.
That is to say, pendulums are more complex than Galileo’s simple law
suggests. Apparently, they have the ability to adjust their movements under
the influence of their environment. Precision measurements of the duration
of motion confirm Huyghens’s view, at least to the following extent:
Contrary to what Galileo thought, pendulums do not always swing for

exactly the same amount of time. Sometimes it takes just a little longer,
sometimes just a little less time to complete its movement.2 And this also
turned out to be the case if a pendulum is swinging in an isolated state,
without the process of synchronization: The swings’ durations are not
exactly the same. Initially, these deviations were dismissed as a form of
insignificant “noise.” The irregularity in the pendulum was believed to be
the result of coincidental mechanical factors, such as changes in
surrounding airflow or the chain twisting.
It took until the second half of the twentieth century to discover that this
is not correct. These apparently random deviations form a pattern that can
be described with a mathematical formula but is nevertheless strictly
unpredictable. (Pendulums have the characteristic of deterministic
unpredictability, which we will revisit in chapter 9). What’s more, the
aforementioned pattern is unique to each pendulum. Pendulums had been
regarded as dull, mechanical phenomena that dutifully followed Galileo’s
laws, but those elementary mechanical devices were, in fact, creative in
nature and idiosyncratically capable of disobedience. In Chaos, James
Gleick puts it this way: “Those studying chaotic dynamics discovered that
the disorderly behavior of simple systems acted as a creative process. It
generated complexity: richly organized patterns, sometimes stable and
sometimes unstable, sometimes finite and sometimes infinite, but always
with the fascination of living things.”3
Reducing the pendulum’s behavior to Galileo’s law robs it of its
“social” qualities, as well as its individuality and creativity. If you were to
create a virtual pendulum in a computer program that behaves strictly
according to Galileo’s law, it would look very much like a real pendulum,
but it would be a death phenomenon, lacking the lively chaos of a real
pendulum.
*   *   *
Galileo’s pendulum illustrates a universal law: The logic and rational
explanation of a natural phenomenon—however comprehensive it may be
—always makes an abstraction of that phenomenon. Theoretical models
never capture anything fully; they always leave an unexplained remainder.

This remainder is not just insignificant, random “noise.” It is the essence of
the object. It is its living component.
You can see this, for example, in the difference between “natural” and
“artificial” products. Whether it’s a genetically engineered plant, lab-printed
meat, vaccine-induced immunity, or high-tech sex dolls—whenever we
artificially reproduce a natural phenomenon from rational analysis, the
artificial phenomenon is not identical to the original. The loss is not always
immediately visible. Sometimes it is barely visible at all. And yet, it is
crucial, both on a physical and psychological level. The digitalization of
human interactions—replacing real human interactions with digital ones—
is a good example thereof.4
With the coronavirus crisis, the trend toward a digital society made a big
leap forward. Teleworking became the norm, student life took place online,5
aperitif and coffee were consumed in front of a television or computer
screen,6 even sex was mediated through technological machinery7 and the
death penalty was carried out from a safe digital distance.8 Initially, it was
mainly seen as a necessity and occasionally as an advantage. People felt
protected from the virus, saved time, avoided traffic jams, reduced their
ecological footprint, and spared themselves the stress and discomfort that
can characterize human encounters.
However, this acceleration of online existence also accelerated burnout
and exhaustion, to the extent that some now speak of digital depression.9
Perhaps the heart of the problem lies in the following: A conversation not
only conveys information; there is also a subtle but equally profound bodily
exchange and this is disrupted by digitalization. This physical aspect of
speaking is of vital importance. It makes language a matter of love and lust,
charged with a refined eroticizing power. That’s why we physically crave a
real conversation after a week of working online.
A digital conversation is not the same as a real conversation. We see this
most clearly in infants. During the first six months, they learn to distinguish
language sounds at an astonishing pace, but only while listening to someone
who is physically present, not when listening to an audio or video recording
(see Kuhl’s experiments10). Early language learning is inseparable from the
physical presence of the “other.” The child internalizes the mother’s (body)
language, as it satisfies its physical needs with the warmth of her body, the
milk of her breasts. The child breathlessly fixates on the mother’s face and

imitates the expressions that play on it; it listens with the closest attention to
the sounds she makes and even with its earliest sobbing and crying already
echoes the melody and tones of her speech.
What’s more: This synchronization already takes place before birth, in
the womb. Annie Murphy Paul’s experiments (“What babies learn before
they are born”11) show that the infant’s crying immediately after birth
already bears melodic resemblance to its mother’s voice. And if a newborn
listens to its mother’s voice through headphones while nursing on the left
breast and someone else’s voice while nursing on the right, it will begin
nursing significantly more on the left. The conclusion is inescapable: The
child has already become familiar with its mother’s voice in the womb; life
in the womb has predestined it to resonate with that specific voice.
After birth, the child further develops this primal resonance. This
doesn’t happen haphazardly. The child achieves a kind of symbiosis with
the mother through its creative imitations of her sounds and facial
expressions; in this way, it will feel what she feels. As it takes on its
mother’s happy expression, it also feels her joy; if it takes on her sad
expression, it shares in her unhappiness. Something similar applies to the
exchange of sounds: In the clinking and clanging of the mother’s language
trembles the well and woe of her being, and the child who imitates that
language resonates with it on the same psychological wavelength.
This early resonance between child and its (social) environment leads to
a unique phenomenon: The young child’s body gets “loaded” with a series
of vibrations and tensions that become embedded in the deepest and finest
fibers of its body. They form a kind of “body memory” that not only
programs the function of the musculature, glands, nerves, and organs, but
also predisposes the child to certain psychological conditions, or disorders.
The human body is, in the most literal sense, a stringed instrument. The
muscles that span the skeleton, and the body’s other fibers, are put on a
certain tension in early childhood through imitative language exchanges.
This tension determines with which (social) phenomena one will resonate;
it determines the frequencies to which one will be sensitive in later life.
That’s why certain people and certain events can literally strike a chord;
they touch the body and, as such, touch the soul. It is for this reason that the
voice can make the body ill. Or, conversely, heal it.

That is why the voice is of vital importance, especially at an early age.
Lack of a voice is fatal to the young child. The Austrian-American
psychiatrist René Spitz studied two groups of children whose biological
needs (food, drink, clothing, housing) were satisfied in identical ways,
except that one group had a stable psychological bond with a caretaker and
the other did not. Spitz found that the mortality rate was significantly higher
in the latter group.
This subtle physical dimension of linguistic exchange remains
important throughout life. While speaking, adults, like young children,
constantly mirror the facial expressions and postures of their interlocutor
without even realizing it (see research into the so-called mirror neurons).12
This happens through a kind of inner imitation, through slight and
imperceptible increases in muscle tensions. No matter how subtle, this is
more than enough to gauge, in an immeasurably short time span, the deeper
layers of the other’s subjective experiencing—whether that person is in
pain, feels sad or happy, is perhaps just pretending—and to mimic it.
This leads to a remarkably direct connection between interlocutors.
Professionally, I have been studying (psychotherapeutic) conversations in
detail for fifteen years and have been able to ascertain this in a concrete
way. To highlight a single aspect: People react incredibly quickly to one
another during conversations. When one person stops speaking, the other
usually begins in less than 0.2 seconds (the response time to a traffic light
is, on average, five times longer). And this happens even if the speaker
doesn’t finish his sentence, so that the other person cannot possibly predict
when he will stop on the basis of the semantic structure of the sentence.
When people talk to one another, they sense each other very sharply
because they perceive the slightest changes in intonation, voice timbre,
facial expression, body position, rate of speech, and so on. Like flocking
starlings, they form one organism. They are connected with one another
through a psychic membrane that transfers the slightest ripple in body and
soul. In every exchange of words, no matter how trivial, people show
themselves to be perfect dance partners; they are subtly united through the
eternal music of language. We make love more often than we realize.
This 
complex 
phenomenon 
degrades 
when 
digitized. 
Digital
interactions always have a certain delay; exclude certain aspects of contact,
such as scent and temperature; are selective (you see only someone’s face);

and create the constant, unpleasant preapprehension that the connection
may drop. As a result, digital interactions are not only experienced as
reticent and stiff; they also give us the feeling that we cannot really
(physically) sense the other. In the words of workplace leadership expert
Gianpiero Petriglieri: “In digital interactions, our minds are tricked into
believing that we are together, but our bodies know that we are not; what’s
so exhausting about digital conversations is being constantly in the presence
of the other person’s absence.”13
From here, we see a direct association between digitalization and
depression. In classical psychoanalytic theory, depression is associated with
the frustrating experience of helplessness, induced by the passivity or
absence of a loved one (usually a parent, in childhood).14 Subsequently, you
pay the “Other” with the same currency: You yourself become passive (i.e.,
depressed). Digital “connection” leads to a similar dynamic: You feel
helpless with respect to an Other, whom you experience as absent and
unreachable, and react with frustration and passivity (i.e., feeling
exhausted).
Digitalization dehumanizes a conversation. This usually happens in a
hidden, insidious way, but sometimes it can also be felt very sharply. A
recent example from my psychotherapeutic practice: A woman in her early
forties wakes up one night with her hands covered in blood and realizes she
is miscarrying the baby she’s been yearning for her entire life. She asks me,
sobbing, for a conversation—a real conversation. In such a situation,
anyone can sense that the digital wall will not be scalable for the words in
which the drama seeks its expression. Unless there really isn’t any other
possibility, offering a digital conversation in such a situation seems indeed
almost inhumane.
Similar examples can be extracted from educational settings (the
enthusiasm of the teacher, which is almost physically palpable in a
classroom does not tolerate the journey through a fiber optic cable); work
environments (the support of a project leader is diluted in an online
meeting); love life (try to salvage a wavering love, with all the linguistic
torment that characterizes it, through online communication); and actually
any situation to which a person must be fully accompanied by his humanity.
If all this is true, then why are digital interactions so attractive? Why
did we happily give up chitchatting for text messages, long before the

coronavirus crisis? It is convenient to communicate in this way with people
who are far away; this is certainly true. However, there is also another,
psychological factor at play. Uncertainty is the preeminent characteristic of
human experience—no other animal is so haunted by doubt or plagued by
existential questions—and this is especially true of our relationship to the
Other. How can I do good for the Other? Does he like me? Does he find me
attractive? Do I mean something to him? What does he want from me?
In a digital conversation, in which the Other is literally kept at a
distance but can still be reached, these eternal questions and the associated
uncertainty and fear become less acute. The sense of control is far greater;
it’s easier to selectively show some things and hide others. In short, people
feel psychologically safer and more comfortable behind a digital wall but
pay a price for it with the loss of connectedness. This brings us to a theme
that will recur repeatedly in this book: The mechanization of the world
causes man to lose contact with his environment and become an atomized
subject, the kind of subject in which Hannah Arendt recognized the
essential component of the totalitarian state.
*   *   *
Science adapts its theory to reality, whereas ideology adapts reality to
theory. This includes mechanistic ideology, which attempts to adapt reality
to its theoretical fiction. It aims to optimize nature and the world. We
already mentioned genetically engineered plants and animals, lab-printed
meat, and other artificial products, but it extends much further than that.
Some argue that menstrual periods are a superfluous inconvenience and
advocate for eliminating them with artificial hormones and turning the
female cycle into a single, flat line.15 And after years of experimenting with
“growing” cow and dog fetuses in an artificial womb,16 which is little more
than a plastic bag (see figure 3.1), some people believe that it’s also time to
replace a mother’s womb with a synthetic sack.17
The only thing missing to make such practices completely identical to
the breeding programs in Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World is for the
mother’s voice to be replaced by the monotonous repetition of conditioning
messages. In such a case, the melodious echoes of the mother’s voice will
no longer be reflected in her newborn’s cries. Instead, the baby will arrive

in the world, already “socially adapted.” Other advantages cannot be
underestimated. The future parents will be able to continue their normal
lives during the nine months of “pregnancy.”18 It isn’t yet entirely clear as to
whether the presence of the child will be allowed to change life at all after
the synthetic womb opens and the child is “born.”
Figure 3.1.
The synthetic womb is not as far away as we think. The only thing
required to persuade a society that is gripped by the mechanistic ideology is
a slew of “experts” daily presenting statistics and data in the media,
informing us that artificial wombs protect fetuses a few percentage points
better against viruses and pathogens than the not-so-sterile mother’s body.
Within this logic, anyone who chooses natural pregnancy will be considered
unfit as a parent—such people would expose their child to unnecessary
risks, even before birth. Whether dissident voices could override such logic
remains to be seen. Life itself can be defended only in terms of metaphor
and poetry, yet these usually sound less loud than the monotonous droning
of mechanistic arguments.
These trends fit within the broader vision of an ideal society. Institutions
that preoccupy themselves with the society of the future, such as the World
Economic Forum, consider it a matter of course that the world will move
toward a digicosm, a “society” in which human life is mainly conducted
online. Strangely enough, the twenty-first century environmental movement
is following this trend in lockstep. Insofar as it travels the “ecomodernist”
route, it aims to save nature by protecting it from man. In those terms,
living in the countryside is a crime, just like lighting a wood stove and

eating a piece of real (read: not lab-printed) meat. Within such logic, the
ideal life is spent indoors, on an intravenous drip. The fact that man and
nature form a mystical unity and can exist in harmony is considered to be a
romantic and unrealistic idea, even downright dangerous, considering the
pressing issue of the climate change.
This social vision tends to intersect with so-called transhumanism. This
is a contemporary iteration of the mechanistic ideology that considers it
desirable, even necessary, that future humans merge physically and
mentally with machines. Transhumanists want to replace the chaos of
writhing bodies with a strictly technological internet of bodies. To this end,
bodies have to be saturated with microchips and be monitored via a
powerful internet. Once this is achieved, it will not only be possible to fight
crime and sexual harassment more efficiently than ever before, but also to
carry out genetic correction and preventive medicine through the collection
of biometric data and replacing the body’s natural resilience with vaccine
generated artificial immunity. Even the human mind would benefit from
these developments. In 2020, Elon Musk announced that, within five years,
we will no longer need clumsy human language—that source of eternal
misunderstanding—because he will provide a microchip that can be built
into the brain and that will allow humans to communicate via flawless
digital signals.19
What follows should come as no surprise: Within this utopia, they also
want to control weather conditions—that source of angst for farmers
worldwide since time immemorial—by means of radical mechanical-
technological means. Such measures are considered indispensable due to
global warming, and the technologists believe they can do so. For example,
they can obscure the sun by placing “smart” mirrors between the Earth and
the sun, by launching sulphate clouds from rockets, or by detonating chalk
bombs in the stratosphere.20 Mechanistic ideology always lives on credit! In
the future, once perfect knowledge has been achieved and perfect
technology has been mastered, it will translocate the man-machine into
paradise. Yet for now, it mainly makes people sick and depressed.
The triumphant music of the mechanistic ideology always contains a
discordant note. If we know anything by now, it’s that the achieved
convenience always comes at a price, and that price usually becomes
apparent only after it’s too late. The fluorine compounds in Teflon pans and

the PFAS in water repellent raincoats turn out to be carcinogenic.21 So is the
ethylene oxide used in hundreds of everyday products.22 The connection
between chemicals and chronic, noninfectious, degenerative diseases, the
so-called diseases of civilization, is basically well known, but that doesn’t
stop or redirect the relentless drive to push “civilizing” further down that
road.23 The greater the impact of mechanistic science on the world, the more
it becomes clear that we’re creating problems for which we can hardly find
a solution. The ever-thickening plastic soup in the oceans and the nuclear
waste that remains active for hundreds of thousands of years are just a few
examples. Those problems were, in principle, clear from the start to those
who had the eyes to see it. In the eighteenth century, the British painter and
poet William Blake, for example, already had a keen sense of the
destructive and dehumanizing nature of the mechanization of the world. In
a sense, his entire oeuvre testifies to it. Unfortunately, he was, and remains,
an exception.
Why is mankind so hopelessly seduced by the mechanistic ideology?
Partly because it’s under the influence of the following illusion: that one is
able to remove the discomforts of existence without having to question
oneself at all. This is best illustrated by modern medicine. The cause of
suffering is typically traced to a mechanical “defect” in the body or to an
external entity, such as a pathogenic bacterium or virus. Its cause is
localized and can (in principle) be controlled, managed, and manipulated
without the patient having to wrestle with any psychological, ethical, or
moral complexity. “A pill helps you to get rid of your problems,” “Plastic
surgery frees you from your complexes without having to question the
origin of your shame and embarrassment.” While the practical applications
of mechanistic science make life easier, in a sense, the essence of life eludes
us ever more. Much of that process takes place below conscious awareness,
but the sharp increase in acute mental suffering is an unmistakable sign that
is discernible at society’s surface.
The Enlightenment man could hardly help but cling to utopian
optimism. In the nineteenth century, industrialization heralded the
disappearance of the aristocratic and class society, and associated local
social structures. Man tumbled out of his social and natural context, and as
he fell, meaning dropped away too (see chapter 2). In this “disenchanted”
mechanistic world (Max Weber), life became meaningless and a-

teleological (the machinery of the universe runs without meaning or
purpose), and religious frames of reference also lost coherence.24 Anxiety
and unease, once tied to the oppression and abuse of the aristocracy and
clergy, began to drift ineffably around in the human soul. Frustration and
aggression, once held in check by fear of hell and the last judgment, proved
increasingly easy to mobilize. The prospect of an afterlife dwindled and
was readily replaced by belief in an artificially created, mechanistic-
scientific paradise.25
It is here that we, together with Hannah Arendt, situate the undercurrent
of totalitarianism: a naive belief that a flawless, humanoid being and a
utopian society can be produced from scientific knowledge.26 The Nazi idea
of creating a purebred superman based on eugenics and social Darwinism,
and the Stalinist ideal of a proletarian society based on historical-
materialism are prototypical examples, as is the current rise of
transhumanism. When we hear about such ideologies, we like to believe
that they are the products of deranged minds. This is a misconception.
Plato, for example, found eugenics a commendable practice that had a place
in his ideal state.27 And the twentieth century taught us that this practice
does indeed lead to certain “successes.” The systematic abortion of fetuses
with genetic predispositions to thalassemia in Cyprus resulted in this
hereditary blood disease almost completely disappearing from the island.
We have to seriously ask ourselves the following question: Why not
follow the principles of eugenics? As a social strategy, it can be rejected on
purely ethical grounds, but it is crucial that we also be capable of rejecting
it on rational grounds. The essence on rational grounds might be this:
Eugenics may sometimes lead “locally” to desired results, insofar as it
concerns “combating” “undesirable” characteristics; from an overall point
of view, however, it has more disadvantages than advantages. Government
regulation of the intimate sphere leads to psychological despair and,
ultimately, to a decline in physical health. (We will further elaborate on this
theme in the final chapters.) Even within the context of an ideology that
would make physical health its ultimate goal, eugenics is a questionable
strategy that ignores the complexity and subtlety of the human being.
As Hannah Arendt states, totalitarianism is ultimately the logical
extension of a generalized obsession with science, the belief in an
artificially created paradise: “Science [has become] an idol that will

magically cure the evils of existence and transform the nature of man.”28 In
the next chapter, we will delve more deeply into one of the core features of
both the mechanistic and totalitarian discourse: a naive belief in the
measurability of reality and the excessive use and misuse of data and
statistics.

CHAPTER 4
The (Im)measurable Universe
In the chapter 3, we subjected the (utopian) goal of mechanistic ideology to
critical analysis. In this chapter, we will focus on the method this ideology
uses to gather knowledge. The universe is a machine, the components of
which are measurable—that is the basic assumption of this ideology.
Measurements and calculations form the basis of the mechanistic research
methods. This epistemological point of departure has bearing on the
ideology’s conception of the ideal society. Ideally, society is led by expert
technocrats who make decisions based on objective, numerical data. With
the coronavirus crisis, this utopian goal seemed very close at hand. For this
reason, the coronavirus crisis is a case study par excellence in subjecting the
trust in measurements and numbers to critical analysis.
Until this recent crisis, societies were not primarily governed on the
basis of numerical data. They were guided by stories, first by mythical and
religious stories and later by political stories. The mechanistic ideology
cannot accept this trust in stories because they are essentially irrational and
subjective in nature; they say more about the author of the story than about
any so-called objective reality it represents. Stories consist of words, words
that can mean anything; they have no solid, rational relationship to facts.
And without a rational basis, man drifts astray—or so mechanistic
ideology believes. Ultimately, all these stories usually favor their authors;
think of the indulgences of the clergy and the no-show jobs granted to
politicians. We should not take this lightly. It leads to the abuse of power, or
eventually to absurd horror. The ritually burned widows of India and the
drowned witches of Europe are but a few silent witnesses from an endless
array of victims. This is the way in which past societies went from bad to

worse: stories – subjectivity – irrationality – poignant injustice – absurd
horror.
The coronavirus crisis offered an unexpected window of opportunity for
the mechanistic ideology: The uncertainty and fear of the virus provided a
basis for the formation and development of a society in which decisions are
based on numbers rather than stories. Today, we are talking about relatively
“simple” numbers on infections, hospitalizations, and deaths; in the future,
we might be talking about high-tech, biometric data that precisely map
every aspect of physical function.
Unlike words, numbers offer an objective basis for transparent and
rational decisions. As such, they are an antidote to the abuse of power and
absurd horror. Moreover, they offer an opportunity to minimize human
suffering. This is the path to the rational society of the future: data –
objectivity – rationality – accuracy – minimization of suffering. In this
light, the coronavirus could become the crowning achievement of humanity.
At least, that’s more or less how the story goes.
Figure 4.1.
Have a look at figure 4.1. If you measure the length of the coastline of
Great Britain based on a unit of measurement of 200 kilometers, it is 2,400
kilometers long. If you measure it with a unit of 50 kilometers, it is 3,400
kilometers long. As you decrease the unit of measurement, the length of the
coastline of Great Britain increases to infinity. The reason is simple: As the
measurement unit becomes smaller, it more closely follows the irregular

coastline and the border becomes longer. This is how the brilliant Polish-
Jewish mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot showed that measurements are
always relative, depending on a series of subjective choices, such as the unit
of measurement.1
*   *   *
And even in the rare cases where measurements themselves can be
considered accurate and quasi-objective (for example, measuring the length
of strictly unidimensional objects, such as a stick, or counting members of
discrete categories), there still is an important subjective factor at the level
of interpretation. This is illustrated by an example known in statistics as
Simpson’s paradox.2 Table 4.1 shows the number of executions carried out
for the crime of murder in the state of Florida, divided between white and
black offenders. The conclusion is clear: White people are more likely to
receive the death penalty than black people in Florida. Researchers
concluded that the prejudice against black people must be incorrectly
attributed as a driver of capital punishment—that is, until a statistician
presented the same numbers in a slightly different way. He not only divided
the perpetrators’ race into white and black; he also divided the victims’ race
accordingly (see table 4.2). This led to the opposite conclusion.
Table 4.1. Executions in Florida by Race of the Offender
Race offender
Capital punishment
Execution percentage
YES
NO
WHITE
19
141
11.9
BLACK
17
149
10.2
Table 4.2. Executions in Florida by Race of the Victim
Race offender
Race victim
Capital punishment
Percentage
YES
NO
WHITE
WHITE
19
132
12.6
BLACK
0
9
0

Race offender
Race victim
Capital punishment
Percentage
YES
NO
BLACK
WHITE
11
52
17.5
BLACK
6
97
5.8
Black people are more likely to get the death penalty if they kill a white
person than white people are if they kill a black person. It’s tempting to
think that this is the final analysis, but there is no doubt that the numbers
can be presented in a still different way, which could lead to still different
conclusions.
Numbers have a unique psychological effect. They create an almost
irresistible illusion of objectivity, which is further enhanced when numbers
are presented visually in charts or graphs. When people see numbers, they
believe them to be objects or facts. This illusion blinds people to the
nonetheless obvious truth that numbers are always relative and ambiguous,
that they are constructed and produced from an ideologically—and
subjectively—shaded story. At first glance, the numbers seem only true to
the facts, yet on closer inspection, it becomes clear that they slavishly serve
every story.
*   *   *
In chapter 1, we saw that the so-called replication crisis that erupted in the
sciences in 2005 was never really resolved. Since then and up until now,
science has continued to struggle with an epidemic of errors, sloppiness,
forced conclusions, and fraud. The coronavirus crisis was, in a sense, just a
continuation of this crisis. The difference is that this time the spectacle did
not take place within academia but openly in the public square. All the
problems that had surfaced a decade prior now played out in the mass
media, in plain sight, in front of the world. Many people could hardly
believe their eyes and ears when they witnessed scientists at the highest
levels contradicting themselves and their colleagues, making simple
calculation and counting errors, changing their minds injudiciously, being
transparently influenced by financial interests in their scientific

pronouncements, even openly admitting that they had deliberately misled
the population.
Numbers played a crucial role in this saga. In principle, the coronavirus
crisis was about calculating relatively simple phenomena, such as the
number of infections, hospitalizations, and deaths. However, it was plain as
day that the data were anything but objective. The number of infections was
usually determined by PCR tests, which didn’t run smoothly. These tests are
designed to determine whether RNA sequences from a virus are present in
the body.3 Those RNA sequences can come from a virulent virus but also
from a “dead” virus. As a result, people may, even months after an infection
(and therefore long after they are contagious), still test positive. And this
was just one of the many limitations of the test.
Estimating the change in infection rate based on the positive test result
rate also proved very problematic. Public health experts who spoke to the
media about infection trends, for example, stubbornly refused to adjust for
the total number of tests performed. (In technical terms, they reported the
absolute number of positive tests instead of the positivity ratio.) In the
summer of 2020, virologist and former rector of the University of Liège,
Bernard Rentier, was given access to raw data about the so-called summer
wave (called, at that time, the second wave). He subjected these data to a
critical analysis and concluded that the estimated number of infections after
adjustment for the total number of tests performed was between twenty to
seventy times lower than the estimates reported in the media.4 If you think
mistakes like this could only be made once, you would be wrong. In the
summer of 2021, the scenario repeated itself. This time, the positivity ratio
was occasionally mentioned, but once again, we were warned of a summer
wave based on graphs depicting the absolute number of infections.
Data on hospital admissions were also extremely relative. Throughout
the crisis, any patient who tested positive upon admission was considered a
COVID-19 patient, regardless of whether they had COVID-19 symptoms
or, let’s say, a broken leg. At a certain point, the Scottish government
changed its methodology and began counting someone as a coronavirus
patient only if they tested positive and were also admitted with COVID-19
symptoms. The result? They were left with 13 percent of the original
number of COVID-19 patients.5

This was not the only factor that distorted hospital data. In the spring of
2021, Jeroen Bossaert of the Flemish newspaper Het Laatste Nieuws
published one of the few thorough pieces of investigative journalism of the
entire coronavirus crisis. Bossaert exposed that hospitals and other
healthcare institutions had artificially increased the number of deaths and
COVID-19 hospitalizations for financial gain.6 This in itself is not
surprising, since hospitals have been using such methods for a long time.
What was surprising is that, during the coronavirus crisis, people refused to
acknowledge that profit motives played a role and had an impact on the
data. The entire healthcare sector was suddenly graced with quasi-sanctity.
This, despite the fact that prior to the coronavirus crisis, many people
critiqued and complained about the system of for-profit healthcare and Big
Pharma. (See, for example, Deadly Medicines and Organised Crime by
Peter Gøtzsche.7)
Furthermore, the data around death counts—perhaps the most
elementary variable among all the data—proved to be anything but
unambiguous. About 95 percent of registered COVID-19 deaths showed
one or more underlying conditions. According to the US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), barely 6 percent of deaths account
for those whose only condition was COVID-19.8 In addition, coronavirus
victims were usually of advanced age, on average eighty-three years old in
Belgium during the first wave, slightly older than the average life
expectancy. It’s a good question: How do you determine who dies “from”
COVID-19? If someone who is old and in poor health “gets the
coronavirus” and dies, did that person then die “from” the virus? Did the
last drop in the bucket cause it to spill over more so than the first?
*   *   *
All of this is to say that the basic numbers in the coronavirus crisis are not
objective data; they are constructed on the basis of subjective assumptions
and agreements. Depending on how those agreements are made, the
numbers can differ by a factor of no less than fifteen or even twenty. In this
“forest of subjectivity,” everybody, whether consciously or unconsciously,
follows their own prejudices and usually opts for numbers that support their
own subjective beliefs. Therefore, some people conclude from the numbers

that we are dealing with a problem at the magnitude of the Spanish flu,
while others believe that there is nothing especially unusual going on. And
these two opposing opinions can, in fact, both be underpinned by “objective
data.”
The numbers of the dominant coronavirus narrative tend to highly
overestimate the danger of the virus. And this tendency is also reflected in
the epidemiological models on which the dominant narrative is based. The
choice for the lockdown strategy was mainly based on the models
developed at Imperial College London. Those models predicted 40 million
deaths worldwide by the end of May 2020 if far-reaching measures were
not taken to contain the pandemic. Several renowned researchers—for
example, Michael Levitt, Nobel laureate in Chemistry; and John Ioannidis,
a legend in medical statistics—protested vehemently. They pointed out that
the models of the Imperial College were based on wrong assumptions and
greatly overestimated the danger of the virus.
By the end of May 2020, it was utterly clear that these critics were
correct. None of the countries, whether they went into lockdown or not,
came even close to the death count predicted by the models. Sweden is
perhaps the most interesting example. This country, according to Imperial
College models, would have 80,000 deaths by the end of May if it didn’t go
into lockdown, which of course it didn’t. Its death count was 6,000. And to
reach this figure of 6,000 required the “enthusiastic” counting methods
described above. Otherwise, it could even have been much less.
The interesting thing is that you’d expect the public narrative and
measures to be adjusted (in this case, the introduction of more lenient
measures) as soon as the models they’re based on are proven incorrect
beyond doubt. But that’s not what happened at all. Neither public health
officials nor the population dialed it back. Something caused society to
collectively continue reacting in the same, frenetic way, as if it were acting
out a pressing, psychological need. In chapter 6, we will discuss this
psychological phenomenon.
The limited reliability of the basic data—the number of infections,
hospitalizations, and deaths—had an impact on other epidemiological
statistics, as well. The infection fatality rate (IFR), case fatality rate (CFR),
mortality rate, positivity ratio, and reproduction number—they are all based
on these basic numbers. If these numbers vary by a factor of twenty, the

statistics based on them will also vary by the same factor. In other words,
the epidemiological-statistical discourse sounds sophisticated and looks
impressive with its acronyms, calculations to four decimal places, and
mathematical modeling of the course of the pandemic, but it is mostly an
impressive demonstration of fake accuracy and pseudo-objectivity.
*   *   *
Some people will object and argue that numbers cannot be relativized onto
infinity. Indeed, at some points numbers are open to discussion, but there
are matters that cannot be doubted, matters that unequivocally prove the
danger of the virus and the usefulness of the measures—don’t you think so?
For example, the ICUs are clearly overloaded by COVID-19 patients,
aren’t they? That’s correct. But the way in which we should interpret that
fact is another question. Rather than an indication of COVID-19’s
exceptional danger, the overload seems to be the result of two colliding
trends over recent decades: 1. A sharp rise in susceptibility to developing
serious symptoms in viral lung diseases in a major part of the population
(especially people suffering from obesity and diabetes); and 2. Systematic
reduction in ICU beds. The upward trend in the number of patients at risk
and the downward trend in the number of ICU beds inevitably had to cross
sooner or later. As a matter of fact, this intersection occurred years ago,
long before the coronavirus outbreak. The ICU overload has also occurred
during recent flu epidemics, for example, resulting in delayed treatments
and procedures during those times as well.
So the burden on hospitals can be interpreted as proof of the virus’s
extreme threat, but it can equally be interpreted as a symptom of inadequate
management (progressive reduction of hospital beds), or as a result of
declining health (high obesity and diabetes),9 or as the result of the
coronavirus measures themselves (that is, an influx of anxious people,
increase in psychosomatic complaints). Depending on the interpretation,
radically divergent policies need to be followed.
And yet another remarkable fact: While the limited capacity of the ICUs
was the first and main reason for the introduction of the drastic and, from an
economic and psychological point of view, extremely destructive measures,
no additional ICU beds were created during the crisis. There were no

attempts whatsoever to do so. As with individuals, societies also seem to
derive some “disease gain” from their psychological symptoms and
therefore angle to maintain those symptoms.
Furthermore, the severe lung symptoms associated with COVID-19 in
some patients seems to halt any discussion about data. There can be little
doubt that those symptoms are real. But how much more severe they are
than the symptoms of a normal flu is difficult to determine. There were
hardly any lung scans of flu patients, which makes it hard to compare. And
in those cases where the comparison was drawn, it sometimes produced
unexpected results. At the end of 2020, a study was published that gathered
the rare lung scans from flu patients around the world and compared them
with lung scans from COVID-19 patients.10 The study concluded that there
was no significant difference. It’s hard to say whether this study presents an
accurate picture. Since the replication crisis (see chapter 1), we know we
cannot assume any study is carefully conducted or that the results present
an accurate picture. Furthermore, it is highly probable that the coronavirus
has a particularly bad effect on the lungs, based on testimonials from
healthcare staff and patients.
The third factor commonly regarded as unshakable evidence of COVID-
19’s severity is excess mortality. The numbers regarding infections, hospital
admissions, and deaths may be subjective, but at the end of the day we can
also just check whether there were more deaths during the coronavirus
crisis than in prior years. Unfortunately, while this might seem like the most
objective measure, there is an intrinsically subjective nature to these data as
well, which has also been ignored. As the Ghent University psychologist
and statistician Els Ooms showed, excess mortality can be calculated in
many ways.11 For instance, differences in the reference period (the period to
which one compares death rates) alone can lead to substantial differences in
determining excess mortality.
And after the excess mortality data have been gathered, there is a more
difficult task: interpreting these data. Excess mortality is not necessarily an
indicator of virus mortality. It may also be a consequence of collateral
damage of the coronavirus mitigation measures themselves (reduced
immunity, delayed treatment, suicide, depression, addiction, poverty,
starvation, and so on), or possibly even the result of the treatment. For
example, in 2020, thousands of elderly people in Dutch residential care

settings died due to loneliness and neglect during the lockdowns.12 And a
German study suggested that about half of the high mortality in ICUs
during the first wave was due to mass intubation (ventilation).13 It is
difficult to say whether these numbers are entirely accurate, but we do
know hospitals backpedaled on this protocol in mid-2020 due to its
counterproductiveness. It is an important question we need to ask ourselves:
What would the virus mortality graphs look like if they were adjusted for
these factors?
The following might be the most inconvenient truth of the crisis: that
we have called the misery that has been so dramatized in the mass media
down on ourselves to a large extent; that the remedy itself has become a
significant part of the problem. At the very beginning, in March 2020, I
wrote in an opinion piece that fear arises only to a limited extent from real
dangers, but that it, in any case, does create real dangers.14 Radical isolation
of the elderly and the use of invasive ventilation for ICU patients are
probably prime examples.
Vaccination might belong in the same category. All around the world, a
decision was made to proceed with a type of vaccine that has been
researched to only a limited extent, or at least, the effects of which have
been investigated much less thoroughly and for a much shorter period of
time than other vaccines. In this, too, we can see that the numbers raise
many questions, regarding both effectiveness and side effects. The
dominant narrative draws a predominantly positive picture, but out of the
enormous flow of data we could just as easily select numbers that draw a
predominantly negative picture. Who has heard in the media about the
Harvard University study that found no difference in the course of the
pandemic between countries with high and low vaccination rates?15 Who
has heard in the media about the study that found the miscarriage rate in
vaccinated pregnant women is eight times higher than normal?16 We are not
sure whether these studies paint an accurate picture. But we also don’t
know whether the numbers that are presented in the media and that confirm
the dominant coronavirus narrative do so. Stories make the numbers, rather
than the other way around. That’s what is at issue.
*   *   *

Just like that we’ve arrived at another flaw in the numerical approach to the
coronavirus crisis: It largely ignored the collateral damage of the measures,
despite them being a crucial factor. There have been hardly any publicly
available data and statistics on the number of victims of delayed treatment,
suicide, vaccination, food insecurity, and economic disruption. This is all
the more remarkable since, from the beginning of the crisis, scientific
articles and press releases appeared on a regular basis, pointing out those
risks.17 At the start of the first lockdown, Oxfam, the WHO, and the UN
were already warning that death from malnutrition and starvation as a result
of lockdowns in developing nations would probably exceed the death count
attributable to the virus, even in the worst-case scenario if no measures
were taken at all.18
The same remarkable disregard could be observed around the
mathematical models built to map the course of the crisis. A mathematical
model that, apart from the possible victims of the virus, would also
represent the possible victims of the coronavirus measures had never been
built. When the experts who had built some of the models were asked
during their testimony before the British House of Commons why they had
not included the collateral damage of the measures in their models, they
replied, disarmingly honestly, that this was beyond their expertise as
epidemiologists. It was not their job to quantify and draw attention to the
collateral damage.19 This not only shows the limits of the expert and
specialist model, in it we can also ascertain a remarkable psychological
blindness. And so we see that an entire society can completely ignore what
is undoubtedly the most basic question in medicine: Are we sure that the
cure is not worse than the disease? In chapter 6, we will see that this
narrowing of the field of attention is an effect of the social- psychological
process of mass formation.
Furthermore, surprisingly little attention was paid to evaluating the
effectiveness of the draconian measures. To the extent that it did receive
attention, it underscored that the interpretation of numbers is far from
unambiguous. Perhaps, the case of Sweden—the country that, unlike almost
all other Western European countries, chose not to go into lockdown and
took generally milder measures—provides the best illustration. First, the
mainstream media compared the number of deaths in Sweden with
countries such as Belgium and the Netherlands. Sweden had fewer victims

and therefore, the talking heads concluded, strict measures seemed futile.
Then they started to compare Sweden with its neighbors, Norway and
Finland, assuming that these two countries had imposed the “normal,”
stricter measures. Sweden had more than twice as many victims as Norway
and Finland, so the talking heads concluded that strict measures were
indeed useful. Subsequently, a study appeared, stating that the measures in
Norway and Finland had been misjudged: They were actually more lenient
than the measures in effect in Sweden.20 So the conclusion changed once
again in the other direction: Strict measures were futile, after all. Whether
that will be the final conclusion remains to be seen. What is certain,
however, is that, once more, the numbers can be easily adapted to opposing
stories.
Comparisons within the United States present us with the same
problem. Those comparisons show hardly any difference in absolute
numbers of coronavirus victims between the twenty-five states that imposed
the strictest measures and the twenty-five states that imposed the most
lenient. More or less at the same time, however, a comparison between the
ten strictest and the ten most lenient states did show a difference in favor of
the strictest states. The story reported in the media interprets the numbers in
favor of the dominant narrative, without holding back. If a state that
imposed few measures has few victims, it was almost always attributed to
an external factor (such as climate or sparse population). Such a state was
lucky. If a state that imposed strict measures had many victims, it was also
attributed to external factors. Such a state was unlucky, it was hit
exceptionally hard by the virus. However, if a state that imposed few
measures had many victims, then that was its own fault. It should have
taken more measures! And if a state that imposed strict measures reported
few casualties, it was reaping the benefits of its decisiveness. In other
words, however it turns out, within the dominant narrative, the dominant
narrative is always correct.
In addition to country-to-country comparisons, there are also various
analyses of the infection curves against the introduction of various
measures: the introduction of masking, the start of social distancing, the
introduction of lockdowns, the rollout of vaccination campaigns. When
such analyses are presented by proponents of the dominant narrative, they
usually show that the curve responds immediately to the measures and that

infections go down after implementation. However, when the same analyses
are performed by coronavirus-critical researchers, they usually conclude
that the curve is in no way affected by the measures.
Maybe you think all this applies to information in the popular media but
not to articles in high-quality scientific journals? Alas. Whether it concerns
the origin of 
the virus 
(bat or 
laboratory), the efficacy of
hydroxychloroquine, the (side) effects of vaccines, the usefulness of face
masks, the validity of the PCR test, transmissability among schoolchildren,
or the effectiveness of the Swedish approach, scientific studies lead to the
most conflicting conclusions.
The German philosopher Werner Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel
Prize for his uncertainty principle—“It’s not a matter that we’re not yet sure
now; the point is that we can never be sure”—but we don’t like it. If the
data don’t provide certainty yet, we’ll collect more. In this way, as a society,
we are mesmerized by an endless procession of numbers and never arrive at
what really matters: an open debate about the subjective and ideological
frameworks from which we interpret the numbers. It is the unspoken
tensions, fears, and disagreements on an ideological level that prevent the
numbers from settling down and that makes society polarize. The real
questions to be asked are situated at the ideological level. For instance: Do
we view man as a biochemical machine that has to be technologically
monitored and pharmaceutically adjusted, or as a being that finds its
destination in mystical resonance with the Other and with the eternal
language of nature?
*   *   *
This chapter opened with some simple examples that challenge a naïve
belief in the objectivity of numbers. The Great Britain border measurement
example (see figure 4.1, page 50) showed that measurements are always
relative and dependent on the measurement unit used; Simpson’s paradox
demonstrates that even simple, accurate numbers can lead to opposite
interpretations. What applies to these simple numbers, applies a fortiori to
the frenzied dance of numbers in the coronavirus crisis: Everyone can select
numbers that match their own prejudices, everyone can interpret them in
such a way that they support their subjective ideological fiction. The almost

irresistible illusion that numbers represent facts ensures that people become
increasingly convinced that their own fiction is reality.
The use of numbers in this crisis makes us barely realize that what we
do respond to are not so much the facts but the stories constructed around
facts. Those stories are spun by healthcare workers who genuinely do their
best to help, by people who don’t want to see their families suffer, by
politicians who want to make the right decisions, by academics who want to
provide information as objectively as possible. However, they are also
constructed by politicians who are under the pressure of public opinion and
feel compelled to act decisively, by leaders who have lost control and see
their opportunity to take back the reins, by experts who have to hide their
ignorance, by academics who see a chance to assert themselves, by man’s
inherent propensity for hysteria and drama, by pharmaceutical companies
that smell dollar bills, by media that thrive on sensational stories, by
ideologies that see in a technocratic totalitarian system the only solution to
the seemingly insoluble problems of our time.
The influence of subjectivity in constructing and interpreting numbers is
so strong that even scientists, whose profession it is to be objective, fall
prey to it as well. For example, it’s known that in psychotherapy research
results usually confirm the researcher’s subjective preferences. A
psychoanalyst typically concludes from this research that psychoanalysis is
the most effective discipline, a behavioral therapist concludes that
behavioral therapy is the best therapy, a systems therapist observes that
systemic therapy is preferable. This is commonly referred to as the
allegiance effect—the effect of a researcher’s loyalty to a particular theory.
And to be perfectly clear: That effect also manifests itself in strictly
controlled, experimental research and also in other scientific domains, such
as research into the effectiveness of pharmaceutical medicines.
Most interestingly, this effect manifests itself largely without
researchers realizing it. Like hikers on the road without a map or compass,
they walk in a circle and return to the point of departure: their own
subjective prejudices. That is, of course, a serious problem since the aim of
science is to make objective assessments and to exclude subjective
preferences from having an impact on the conclusions drawn.
How is it possible for researchers to fall prey to their subjective
prejudices? The explanation can be found, in part, among the following

issues: Every research procedure requires countless choices, for which there
are no strictly logical grounds. Which measuring instruments will I use?
How will I interpret the measurements? How do I deal with missing data?
And so on. From this vast array of possibilities, researchers unconsciously
choose options that will ensure the results they deem desirable.
The fanatical belief in the objectivity of measurements and numbers,
which is typical of the mechanistic ideology, is not only unfounded, it is
also dangerous. There arises a kind of mutual reinforcement between
subjective biases and numbers: The stronger the biases, the more one
selects the numbers that confirm these biases. And the more the numbers
confirm the biases, the stronger the biases subsequently become. Applied to
the coronavirus crisis: A society saturated with fear and unease selects from
the myriad of numbers those that confirm its fear. The chosen numbers then
reinforce the fear.
As a result, people react in a disproportionate way with all the ensuing
consequences: from an economic viewpoint, the recession and the
bankruptcy of countless companies and small businesses; from a social
viewpoint, permanent damage to the (physical) bond among people; from a
psychological viewpoint, even more fear and depression; and yes, from a
physical viewpoint, a collapse of immunity and physical health (see chapter
10) as a result of the stressful psychological and social predicament. And
we might add: from a political viewpoint, the rise of the totalitarian state.
Indeed, if you’re convinced that your own subjective fiction is reality, you
will also think your reality is superior to the fiction of others. This is how
we become convinced that our fiction can be imposed on the other by any
possible means.
At the beginning of the chapter, we described that the mechanistic
ideology aims to instate a technocratic society that is governed on the basis
of “objective,” numerical information and in which subjective preferences
and abuse of power are eliminated. But at the end of this chapter, we
conclude that naïve belief in the objectivity of numbers leads to the exact
opposite. The dominant ideology repeatedly presents numbers in the mass
media that confirm its own narrative, resulting in a largely fictitious reality
in which a large part of the population firmly believes. The perception of
reality is determined time and again by numbers that, a few months later,
turn out to be very relative, sometimes plainly wrong, or even deceptive.

But in the meantime, these numbers are used over and over to impose the
most far-reaching measures and to set aside all basic tenets of humanity:
Alternative voices are stigmatized by a veritable Ministry of Truth, crowded
with “fact-checkers”; freedom of speech is curtailed by censorship and self-
censorship; people’s right to self- determination is infringed upon by
imposed vaccination, which imposes almost unthinkable social exclusion
and segregation upon society.
The discourse surrounding the coronavirus crisis shows characteristics
that are typical of the type of discourse that led to the emergence of the
totalitarian regimes of the twentieth century: the excessive use of numbers
and statistics that show a “radical contempt for the facts,”21 the blurring of
the line between fact and fiction,22 and a fanatical ideological belief that
justifies deception and manipulation and ultimately transgresses all ethical
boundaries.23 We will describe these characteristics in detail in chapters 6
and 7. But first, in chapter 5, we consider the social conditions that prime a
society to cling to this numerical illusion of certainty. We will see that the
flight into false security is a logical consequence of the psychological
inability to deal with uncertainty and risk, an inability that has been
building up in society for decades, perhaps even centuries.

CHAPTER 5
The Desire for a Master
In previous chapters, we discuss how science tipped from open- mindedness
to dogma and blind conviction (chapter 1), how its practical applications
isolate people from one another and from nature (chapter 2), how its
utopian pursuit of an artificial and rationally controllable universe equates
to the destruction of the essence of life (chapter 3), and how its belief in
objectivity and measurability of the world leads to absurd arbitrariness and
subjectivity (chapter 4). In this chapter, we will discuss the fate of another
great ambition of science: to liberate man from his anxiety and insecurity
and his moral commandments and prohibitions.
Religious discourse for centuries darkened the human soul with
irrational fear of hell and damnation. Suffering and disease were God’s
punishment, aging and infirmity were something to be accepted, carnal
pleasures were tarnished with the stigma of sin, society was suffocated with
sullen commandments and prohibitions.
Sometime during the seventeenth century, the star of the human intellect
appeared in the sky. Man started to look outward; neither God nor devil
appeared before his rational eye. The fear instilled by the religious
discourse was declared unfounded; there was no longer any reason to accept
the social contract imposed on society by the clergy. Man started to explore
the world that surrounded him, studied the human body and the causes of
disease and suffering. The human condition was not to be accepted—it had
to be improved. For three centuries, an energetic optimism prevailed. The
human condition could be made enjoyable. Disease and suffering would be
cured by the power of the human intellect.
The commandments and prohibitions of the past were declared
superfluous, unnecessary to steer society in the right direction. An

increasingly loose morality would eventually reconcile man with carnal
desires, formerly perceived as threatening. The crippling censorship of
anything contrary to the religious discourse disappeared. Freedom of speech
became a basic right, education became universally available, legal
assistance became a right for all, love was stripped of its duty to marry and
have children, sexuality was restored and its coupling with sin and
corruption was undone.
Somehow, however, this process turned in the opposite direction. The
idealization of the human intellect eventually led to an intensification of
fear of disease and suffering, while interhuman relationships were marked
by uncertainty and confusion. The old commandments and prohibitions
were eventually replaced by a jungle of rules and regulations and a new,
hyper-strict morality. How can we understand this from a psychological
perspective?
*   *   *
No matter how much the knowledge of the mechanistic aspects of the
human body increased and how much money was spent on health care
(which, in Western European countries, easily exceeds 10 percent of the
gross national product), the fear of disease and suffering did not disappear
at all. Headlines in recent years have left no doubt about it: It is
irresponsible to send teenagers to school on a moped,1 swimming in rivers
or ponds in hot weather is not recommended due to the risk of bacterial
contamination,2 oral sex may cause throat cancer,3 shaking hands is too
dangerous because of virus transmission,4 yes, even sitting next to a smoker
who is not smoking may cause harm to your health.5 These are just a few of
the endless stream of media reports that illustrate how much twenty-first-
century people’s lives are dominated by fear of physical adversity.
Suffering is by definition unpleasant, but there have been times when
people were more resilient to it. In the seventeenth century, when Jesuits
tried to convert Native Americans to Christianity by burning them at the
stake, the missionaries discovered, to their great frustration, that the
Indigenous people were unimpressed. Over time, the Native Americans
themselves suggested other, much more painful forms of torture. “Why
always at the stake?” they asked the missionaries.6

Not only has the thought of physical suffering become more unbearable,
people have increasingly become less risk tolerant. The insurance mania
that spread over the last few centuries is perhaps the best illustration. It
started meritoriously during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries when
accident 
and 
fire 
insurances 
gradually 
became 
established 
and
institutionalized. Then it expanded to life, hospital, travel, and cancellation
insurances, and ultimately to insurance for just about everything. Today, not
only trees, plants, dogs and cats,7 but also Christiano Ronaldo’s legs,
Jennifer Lopez’s bum, Taylor Swift’s breasts, Julia Roberts’s smile, and
David Lee Roth’s sperm have been insured against damage for up to
millions of dollars.8 Not to mention the insurance against heartbreak,
meteorite impacts, and damage caused by spirits and ghosts and alien
abduction.9 It should come as no surprise that nowadays, you can also
insure your insurance (with Lloyd’s of London, for example).
Desperate attempts to avoid any risk take their toll, however, and not
only in terms of insurance premiums. Medical interventions, which should
eliminate suffering, are increasingly a source of despair themselves. The
widespread consumption of psychotropic drugs, painkillers, and other
pharmaceutical products has led to tens of millions of addicts and countless
deaths. Screening for cancer and other diseases is not only harmful in and
of itself but also leads to ever more unnecessary, harmful interventions,
such as unnecessary breast amputations and side effects of chemotherapy.10
In addition, preventive medicine threatens to render life sterile and
inhumane. The COVID-19 response is a good example: Maniacal
avoidance of infections led to an incalculable increase in suffering due to
delayed treatments, domestic violence, psychological despair, and food
insecurity in the developing world.11 In other words, frantically trying to
avoid any danger has, paradoxically, become very dangerous.
The effects of this desperate attempt to control life go beyond a
detrimental impact on our physical health. It also severely affects our
freedom and rights, as individuals. At the beginning of the twenty-first
century, the War on Terror, for example, led to a serious violation of
privacy. In fact, it was part of an ongoing and growing endeavor to attempt
to control and isolate “dangerous elements” in society. The tradition of the
Enlightenment led unintentionally to what Foucault called le grand
renfermement: More and more “dangerous” groups were imprisoned.12 In

the nineteenth century, it affected “only” psychiatric patients, prostitutes,
and criminals; in the twenty-first century, it affects just about everything
and everyone. Animals are caged because of the bird flu, the global
population is placed under house arrest because of the coronavirus. Humans
and animals—potential spreaders of disease—are too dangerous to each
other to be let loose.
*   *   *
The societal increase of fear and insecurity leads to two other psychological
phenomena: narcissism and something I call regulation mania. In order to
understand this connection, we need another piece of developmental
psychology. We will start by explaining the connection between human
insecurity and narcissism.
In chapter 3, when we discussed the difference between digital and
“real” conversations, we described how an infant resonates symbiotically
with its mother through the early exchange of body language and, in this
way, realizes the primal desire for blending with the Other. There is a lack,
however, in this early paradise. In a certain sense, the child hardly exists
there as a separate psychological being. During the first months of life,
before it can recognize itself in the mirror, a child cannot form a mental-
visual image of its own body. As a result, it does not know where its body
ends and where the surrounding world begins, and it situates its own
sensations not only in its own body but also in the people and objects
surrounding it (animism). A concrete example: When it gets a jab in its arm,
it doesn’t look at its arm because it does not realize that the pain sensation
is located there. And the reverse is also true: The child feels the sensations
of others directly in its own body. For example, when it looks at someone
being beaten, its face shows the same grimace and it cries as if it were being
beaten itself (transitivism).
In this symbiotic but also chaotic amalgamate of experience, the child
has to mentally grasp what is at the core of its existence: It has to find out,
through interactions with the mother figure, what it needs to do to ensure
her care and closeness. At this point, it is interesting to make the
comparison with a young animal. Young animals and mammals are also
dependent on their mothers, and they also try to ensure themselves of her

care. However, there is a crucial psychological difference with the human
child, situated at the level of the communication system.
An animal establishes the bond with another animal through the
exchange of signs. The signs—typical cries, postures, movements—have a
well-established connection to their point of reference. One sign refers to
danger, another sign indicates that food is on its way, yet other signs
indicate sexual availability, submission, or dominance. Whether an animal
sign system is simple or complex, whether its mastery is innate or passed on
from generation to generation through learning, the signs are generally
experienced by the animal as unambiguous and self-evident. Their
exchange can lead to a fierce battle under certain circumstances—for
example, the battle between male sticklebacks when their red bellies
indicate that they want to reproduce—but it will not usually lead to
persistent doubt or uncertainty.
In humans, this is different. Human communication is full of
ambiguities, misunderstandings, and doubts. This has all to do with the
following: The signs—or more correctly, the symbols—of human language
can refer to an infinite number of things, depending on context. For
example: The sound image sun refers to something completely different in
the sound sequence sunshine than in the sound sequence sundering.
Therefore, each word only acquires meaning through another word (or
series of words). Furthermore, that other word, in its turn, also needs
another word to acquire meaning. And so on to infinity. There is always a
word missing to definitively capture the meaning of words. For this reason,
language as a rational system—as a system in which words acquire
meaning axiomatically—has an intrinsic, irreparable lack. This immediately
makes clear that even the insurance-of-the-insurance cannot free man from
his linguistic uncertainty.
This has direct consequences for interpersonal interactions. We, as
human beings, can never convey our message unambiguously, and the other
can never determine its definitive meaning. It goes even further: We don’t
even really know our own message. We never know exactly what we want
to say, simply because our thoughts also work with words and so there is
always a word lacking on that level, too. That’s the reason why we so often
have to search for words, so often struggle with saying what we really want
to say, so often feels like we’re saying something we didn’t really want to

say or that we meant something slightly different. There is no trace of this
in the animal world: Their communicative behavior does not show these
hesitations and stammerings.
We tend to think that humans distinguish themselves from animals by
greater knowledge and awareness, but the most typical difference is that,
unlike animals, we are almost constantly tormented by a lack of knowledge.
Therefore, the central questions in a human’s life, those that relate to his
position in the desire of the Other, never receive a definitive answer. What
does the Other think about me? Does he love me? Does he find me
attractive? Do I mean something to her? What does the Other expect from
me? What does he want from me? It is around these questions that every
human encounter and, by extension, the whole of human existence,
gravitates. There is no indication whatsoever of this in the animal world:
You will never see an animal sitting on a couch worrying about the meaning
of its life or about what it means to another animal.
This indefiniteness of the human world of symbols has, a bit
surprisingly, been going on from the very beginning of a human life, at a
time when language is still rudimentary and does not yet refer to objects.
The great French developmental psychologist Henri Wallon noted that from
the very beginning, you see something on the faces of children who interact
with their caregivers that you do not see in any other living being. When a
newborn child fixates and imitates the facial expressions of the mother, its
face already expresses a subtle sentiment of question, as if, even at this very
early stage of its existence, it is confronted with something that is missing
in the form language of the Other.
Therefore, a human child is, in contrast to a young animal, in a state of
deep uncertainty about its mother’s messaging. And that makes it difficult
to gain mental control over her. What does she want from me? What should
I do to ensure her presence? However undifferentiated the mental system
may be at that moment, these questions do arise even in these earliest
months of life. This explains one of the most curious phenomena that occur
in a child’s development. Around six to nine months old, a child recognizes
itself in the mirror for the first time, usually while the mother points
enthusiastically at the mirror image. That in itself is not unique to humans;
dolphins and higher monkey species are also able to do this without
problems. However, as Charles Darwin noted, the recognition in a human

child is accompanied by something that does not occur in any other animal:
The child cheers with joy.
What makes that recognition in the mirror so pleasing, while it leaves
other animals completely indifferent? Unlike an animal, the human child
suffers from a constant tension due to the eternal elusiveness of the world of
symbols, in which it is immersed from the first moments of its existence.
And this applies in particular with regard to the most central question: What
does my mother want from me? That tension is instantly removed when he
sees there, before his very eyes, a mirror image with which it coincides and
at which the mother is pointing with great enthusiasm. This reflection
instantaneously tells the child who it is and needs to be in order to be the
object of the mother’s desire. That image in the mirror seems, all at once
and in all its concreteness, to offer an answer that language never can: I am
it for the Other. This experience is the archetype of the narcissistic
experience. It is so overwhelming that some people obsessively look for
such experience later in life in an effort to avoid the feeling of lack and
insecurity in human relationships.
However, this experience also takes a toll, both for the relationship and
the individual. In order to avoid the re-emergence of the underlying
insecurity, the child has to engage in an aggressive rivalry with everyone
else that also draws the mother’s (later, a love object’s) attention: Only one
person can be the mother’s object. The more one chooses to master
insecurity through identification with the mirror image, the more he has to
outperform, belittle, and even destroy others—basically the more he loses
his humanity.
Additionally, this dehumanization is reinforced by the fact that
identification with one’s own mirror image reduces the capacity for
empathy. This identification provides the child, for the first time, with a
global visual picture (or a substitute for that in blind children) of its own
body. This global image enables the child, for the first time, to draw a
boundary—literally, a mental line—around its body. To a certain extent, this
is necessary to build a stable Ego structure. Without such an image, the
child cannot mentally experience itself as a unit. However, in excessive
narcissism, the mental-visual boundary between the subject and the Other
becomes so thick and pronounced that the subject becomes mentally locked
up in this self-image. The visual self-image then attracts the mental energy

and attention to such an extent that the image of the Other no longer “lights
up” in the mental experience. As a result, one can no longer feel affinity or
empathize with the other person or the world. In other words: Excessive
narcissism comes at the expense of empathy. To the extent that it diminishes
a person’s ability to resonate with others and with the world, it renders that
person lonely and isolated.
From this line of reasoning, we conclude that excessive investment in
the mirror image is an overcompensation for the uncertainty that human
language generates in interpersonal relationships. But in the extreme, this
overcompensation is always a fallacious solution. One tries to assure
oneself of symbiosis with the Other, but ends up in psychological isolation
from and destruction of the Other. And also in self destruction. It’s best to
imagine this in a concrete-visual way: All energy that is inside the
psychological system is sucked away and invested in the surface of the
body, meaning in the visual image of the body. It is no coincidence that
people who focus heavily on appearances often say that they feel “empty”
during psychotherapy sessions.
In recent decades, we have seen that, along with an increase in fear and
insecurity, narcissism is also on the rise. It has become a cliché to say that
our society focuses more and more on external ideals, but there is
unmistakably something true about it. The number of surgical procedures
that “fix” the body in order to resemble a social ideal is rapidly increasing,
the sale of steroid and protein cocktails to force the body machine into a
visual ideal has grown spectacularly, taking selfies forms part of the
established repertoire of (a)social behavior, houses and gardens resemble
staged photos from home decor magazines, commercials and billboards
present stylized ideals of cars, haircuts, and clothing. In essence, this trend
boils down to a growing obsession with fallacious visual “solutions” in an
attempt to eliminate the irresolvable uncertainties in human relationships.
At the same time, we naturally also see a sharp increase in the
psychological phenomena associated with excessive investment in the outer
ideal image: experiences of loneliness and inner emptiness, and of feeling
consumed by an exhausting competition with others (the so-called rat race).
*   *   *

In addition to narcissism, there is a second social phenomenon that is
directly linked to the increase in fear and insecurity: the enormous increase
in the number of rules, sometimes referred to as regulitis. We can situate
this regulation mania very simply within the same developmental
psychology that I described above.
Recognition of its own mirror image ensures that the child is able to
psychologically demarcate its own being (body) from the surrounding
world. It is only at this point that external objects mentally begin to exist for
the child. This causes the function of language to change. The words now
begin to refer to those external objects (they take on a referential function)
and thus also acquire meaning. Previously, this was hardly the case. Prior to
the “mirror moment,” the child’s expressions were mainly physical,
instinctive “acts” that expressed bodily sensations to realize a symbiotic
resonance with the Other.
The moment that words acquire meaning, the relationship with the
Other will also be raised to another level. The child now obsessively tries to
understand the words that the other person uses to express his desires. What
exactly does it mean to be “good”? What do I have to do to be “a brave
girl”? Simply put, it wants to know the rules it must follow in order to be
loved. At certain moments, this takes the form of a demand for rules; no
matter how well a rule is defined, it is still too unclear and requires
additional definition. And since the words in which the rules are formulated
acquire meaning only by means of other words, the child starts to wonder
about the meaning of every possible word.
Around the age of three and a half, this obsession with the meaning of
words culminates in the so-called “why” phase. In this phase, a child
endlessly poses “why” questions.” “Why is this a donkey?” “Because he is
braying.” “Why is he braying?” “Because he is angry.” “Why is he angry?”
And so on. In this stage, the child sees the parent as an omniscient master,
and despite the fact that he sometimes resists submission with extreme
stubbornness, he also demands that the parent takes that position. He has to
know everything. If the parent cannot determine what she wants, the child
doesn’t know how to comply with her desire. That’s the point at which the
child is confronted with the human primal insecurity and is overtaken by
the human primal fear: being left behind by the Other (primarily by the
mother) because it is unloved.

The child’s attempts to make the rules unambiguous and conclusive are
doomed to failure because, again, human language can never acquire
definitive meaning. The more persistently the child tries to make the rules
unambiguous by questioning the parents, the more he inevitably loses
himself in complex and contradictory interpretations. In children with a
compulsive disposition, this happens clearly, and they end up in almost
complete inhibition, entangled in an endless pursuit of mental perfection
that gets more and more bogged down. We will see later that children are
eventually liberated from their demand for rules by accepting that a
definitive answer to the question with respect to the desire does not exist.
This, at the same time, will require that they give up the narcissistic striving
to be the object of the Other (which usually is, at that stage, the mother).
*   *   *
This developmental psychology can also be applied at a social level.
Society is—it’s hard to ignore—increasingly bogged down in an endless
proliferation of rules. On the one hand, such rules are imposed by the
government, but on the other hand, there is also a call for more rules—a
hyper-strict morality—from the population itself. Like narcissism, this is a
frantic attempt to contain the surge of fear and insecurity in human
relationships.
It is indeed a striking phenomenon: Since the beginning of the twenty-
first century, a new morality has arisen from the belly of Enlightenment
thinking, which in a number of respects is stricter, more vagarious, more
irrational, and more hypocritical than the prior religious morality, which the
Enlightenment sought to obliterate in order to set people free. With the rise
of the woke culture, society fell prey to implicit and explicit rules that made
every detail of human interaction more precarious. In the wake of the
#MeToo movement, students were taught how to flirt legally and
compliantly,13 freshmen initiations were subjected to increasingly strict
regulations,14 Sweden introduced a law stating that sex is only legal if the
parties involved give their consent in advance via a signed contract,15 nude
figures of the paintings by Flemish masters were no longer allowed to be
posted on social media,16 and Netflix introduced a rule stipulating that eye
contact between employees should not last longer than five seconds and that

employees are not allowed to ask for each other’s phone numbers without
asking permission for asking first (!).17 The new norm has become so
stringent that even suggesting that there is a physical difference between a
man and a woman can be considered a violation of sexual integrity.18
The Black Lives Matter movement is captured in this trend as well. The
tendency toward increasingly exhaustive standards with respect to racism
intensified to little productive end: The chances that such rules truly
contribute to the overcoming of the narcissistic superiority feelings that are
involved in racism is, in fact, rather small.
The climate movement has also given rise to a new category of crimes:
environmental. To the point that using a wood-burning stove, eating meat,
or living off-grid in the countryside are considered environmental
violations, environmental ideology has been taken to such an extreme that it
has become opposed to that which it originally aspired to: getting back to
nature. Environmental violations are also rather selective and inconsistent
in their strictness. For example, reducing one’s carbon footprint is taken to
extremes, while there is remarkable leniency regarding energy consumption
through internet use (which is as high as the energy consumption from all
air traffic combined) and the “mining” of Bitcoins (which is as high as the
energy consumption of an average Western European country). And also the
environmental damage caused by mining ores for batteries for electric cars
is rarely discussed. The environmental movement was once a dissident
voice, but with its turn toward “ecomodernism,” it has clearly merged into
the dominant mechanistic ideology.
This regulation mania is also directly visible in the public space. My
office at Ghent University looks out over a major intersection. Over the past
twenty years, I have watched this intersection change from a large asphalt
plain with a few sparse white lines to a mosaic of lines and colored areas,
indicating where cyclists, pedestrians, and cars are and are not allowed to
go, with ever more traffic signs and traffic lights mounted thereon. And it
isn’t only the intersections. In train stations, you have to buy a ticket to have
access to the toilets, yellow squares indicate where smokers can indulge in
their dangerous addiction, and you’re allowed to park only in certain
delineated—paid—parking spaces for a certain period of time. During the
coronavirus crisis, this phenomenon reached its temporary peak with an
endless number of arrows indicated on floors and stairs, showing where to

walk and in which direction, signs reminding you that you are required to
wear a face mask, confined spaces demarcated by crash barriers preventing
one bubble from coming into contact with another one at festivals and
cultural events, red and green dots on chairs indicating where you are and
are not allowed to take a seat in the theatre. The moment at which the rules
will be abolished is postponed endlessly and will actually never arrive, if it
depends on the proponents of the current coronavirus approach. Indeed, the
possibility of a few hundred thousand deaths from a “normal” flu virus
would surely justify the introduction of similar measures in the future.
Furthermore, the jungle of rules that are activated in response to all
kinds of threats varies from location to location. During the coronavirus
crisis, mayors are able to adjust rules in their own jurisdictions at their
discretion. And the rules also change over time. During thunderstorms,
terrorism, and viruses, they can easily switch between green, yellow,
orange, or red codes. In the long run, the rules also become so detailed that
one either gets angry or has to laugh: In the summer of 2020, it was ruled
that an opening dance would be allowed at weddings, however, not the
polonaise.19 The coronavirus apparently knows something about dancing.
Keeping up with the rules proves an impossible task, which puts the
competent authorities themselves in a state of hopeless confusion. At a
certain point during the second lockdown in 2020, the website for the
Belgian Ministry of Health stated that noncohabiting partners were allowed
to visit one another, yet the police could still fine people for doing so.
The problems exposed by the New Morality are legitimate. Sexism and
racism are symptoms of cultural decline; people have to take care of nature
(or the climate) or we will irreparably destroy it, and solidarity with victims
of the coronavirus (and victims of the public health response) is evidence of
our humanity. This doesn’t mean however that the suggested solutions are
legitimate. They are excessive, inconsistent, and counterproductive in many
respects. In the #MeToo discourse, the lines between clumsy flirtation and
rape are blurred; in the Black Lives Matter discourse, to make any reference
to skin color is like walking on eggshells; the climate movement alienates
man even more from nature; and with the coronavirus crisis, health care has
become an attack on life and liberty. Moreover, as Freud pointed out, the
repressive nature of the new morality is fueling an exacerbated “return of
the repressed”: Between 2015 and 2020, the use of sexist language doubled

and the use of racist and menacing language tripled on social media.20 This
counterproductivity must be acknowledged, albeit with the reservations we
always have with regard to numbers and statistics.
The new morality is also more and more aggressively enforced, both by
the government and by the population itself. Support for free speech,
freedom of the press, artistic freedom, and basic self-determination is
decreasing at an alarming rate: J. K. Rowling was fiercely attacked (to the
point of her house being molested) when she scorned a full-woke reference
to “people who menstruate” instead of “women”;21 German insurers want
an alcohol lock in every new car;22 the New York Times editorial page editor
was fired for publishing an op-ed by a right-wing politician about the death
of George Floyd;23 in Australia, a man was declared a public enemy of the
worst sort and hunted by the police and army for not complying with the
mandatory quarantine after a positive COVID-19 test (which actually may
well have been a false positive test).24
*   *   *
You could still doubt whether these excessive, absurd, and inconsistent
regulations are typical of contemporary society. Were there really fewer
rules in the past? And were the rules less absurd in the past? The 613
commandments and prohibitions of Jewish religious regulations (the
halacha) have been around for thousands of years. They subject the lives of
Orthodox Jews to rules down to the smallest detail. And Jews themselves
are often the first to admit they are not always logically understandable. In
addition to the rules that have a logical basis (the mishpatim), there are also
those that perpetuate the bond between man and the Eternal and which
cannot be logically understood (the chukim, which include the dietary laws
and circumcision).
Rules were also rampant among Indigenous peoples. Totemic tribal
societies often maintain a complex system of rules of conduct, precepts, and
taboos that substantially strip everyday life of its spontaneity. Specific
objects, such as weapons and clothing, cannot be touched in specific
situations, certain foods are prohibited (including the flesh of a totem
animal), and even certain footprints cannot be followed (among the natives
of Leper Island, for example, brother and sister avoid each other’s tracks).25

And contrary to what a romantic revisionist portrayals of tribal societies
might suggest, there is no free love and sexuality in the wilderness. Among
certain Australian Aborigines, for example, a given tribe might have
historically been divided into twelve clans. Both casual sexual relations and
long-term sexual relations were allowed only with members of three
specific other clans. Therefore, for a man, three out of four women were
already taboo beforehand. Violations of both men and women are punished
by no less than death. The Ta-Ta-thi tribe in New South Wales has a
somewhat milder history. They killed the man, and the woman was
“merely” beaten and impaled on a pole until she was almost dead.26
The comparison between religious, indigenous, and modern systems of
law is far beyond the scope of this book, but there’s no doubt that
differences exists. For example, both religious and indigenous systems of
law were, in general, categorical and as such rather clear. And another
important difference: They were also stable. The current modern legal
systems are not. They change quickly and unpredictably. If you buy a car in
Ghent today, it is possible you will not be allowed to visit a different city
next year because your new car will have the wrong Euro standard.
Moreover, the rules are constantly increasing in volume. For instance, data
show that, proportionally, more and more time and energy is being spent on
the formulation, observance, and implementation of all kinds of rules. On a
political level, we see how the regulation mania historically advanced
through increasingly bureaucratic forms of government, first in the
imperialism of the late nineteenth century (as a logical sequel to
colonialism, the nature of which, in itself, was not yet bureaucratic), then in
the rogue gang-totalitarianism of the first half of the twentieth century
(Nazism and Stalinism-style regimes) and subsequently in the rising
technocratic totalitarianism of the early twenty-first century. All these state
systems were characterized by increasingly complex and absurd
regulations.
This change in regulation is also reflected in the spectacular increase of
administrative jobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Between 1840 and 2010, jobs in administration, management, and services
increased from 20 percent to 80 percent of the total number of jobs.27
Administrative staff at American universities more than doubled in thirty
years.28 It is not only the number of administrative jobs, the number of

administrative tasks is also increasing, even in professions that by nature
have little or nothing to do with administration. Whether shopkeepers,
farmers, or teachers, they all have to deal with a growing number of
regulations and are forced to spend more and more time on administrative
tasks.29
*   *   *
The regulation mania, in all its extravagance and absurdity, undoubtedly
contributes to the psychological troubles of our time. The contradiction and
ambiguity of so many rules creates a neurotic dog-of-Pavlov effect and its
excessive nature takes away the satisfaction, spontaneity, and joy of life.
There is less and less space for autonomy and freedom. For example, at first
glance, there are only advantages to the so-called “zipper rule” that requires
late merging on European roads. However, it constitutes a subtle
psychological disadvantage. Enforced late merging removes the personal
choice, as well as the possibility of a small but powerful human encounter
—a situation in which one person chooses to give priority to another. A
driver no longer has the option of acting with spontaneous generosity,
because he is obligated to do so. This may seem inconsequential but it isn’t.
It is precisely those moments of human-to-human encounters that nourish
the social bond from within. Without those moments, the social fabric
shrivels, and it is only a matter of time until society disintegrates into a
loose collection of atomized individuals.
The suffocating effect of an excess of rules is most noticeable when it
suddenly disappears, for instance, when you arrive in a small French village
and there are no white lines painted on the streets that tell you exactly
where to drive and where to park your car. You can park along the road,
without paying and for an unlimited period of time. Or a rural train station
where you don’t have to pay at a parking meter in the parking lot, where the
toilets are freely available, and where the platforms are accessible at all
times. It is somewhat reminiscent of the buzz of the air conditioner in your
office. You don’t notice that it bears down on you until it disappears at six
o’clock, and you experience a moment of blissful peace.
The over-regulation has mostly advanced without us realizing it. It also
exerts its suffocating influence mostly without us realizing it. But every

time the regulation machine is tuned up higher, we lose some space for our
existence as living, human beings. It creates a kind of vicious circle: In
order to reduce unease and frustration in social spaces, we make more rules,
protocols, and procedures. Those rules subsequently lead to more
discomfort and frustration. We respond to that with even more rules. And
each time the regulatory fabric is woven a little more tightly, the human
being receives less oxygen. If the trend toward a hyper- regulated society
continues, an increase in suicide attempts will be a logical consequence.
The euthanasia machine—a box in which you can relieve yourself of life
painlessly with helium gas—will be the ultimate consequence of
mechanistic thinking.
Regulation mania, as manifested in government bureaucracy, attempts
to render social interactions rational and logical by squeezing them into
preformed templates. In this respect, the ideal bureaucrat is identical to a
computer: They strictly adhere to the logic of their system without being
“distracted” by the individuality of the people they “assist.” For this reason,
a bureaucratic system generates exactly the same frustration as a computer:
We are confronted with a mechanical Other who is in no way sensitive to
our individuality as human beings. A computer is not so much an unfair or
unjust Other; it is an Other who imposes a relentless logic. It doesn’t matter
if we have to go to a meeting in five minutes and urgently need to print
another report—the computer won’t be more understanding or lenient
(“computer says no”). In this respect, the computer resembles the ideal
totalitarian leader: He strictly and ruthlessly imposes his logic on the
population. We’ll talk about this more in part 2.
*   *   *
This is why narcissism and regulation mania are fallacious solutions for the
uncertainty and fear that language introduces into human relationships.
They lead to social isolation and are ultimately self-destructive. But there
are also real solutions. We return one last time to developmental
psychology.
We arrived at the “why” phase, in which a child keeps asking his
parents (and sometimes all the adults around him) “why.” The result of that
persistent questioning is that the child eventually starts to sense something

crucial: If it continues to ask “why,” the parent eventually has to admit the
limitation of his knowledge. It is at this stage, for most children, that the
belief that his parents are omniscient and omnipotent comes to an end. After
recognizing himself in the mirror, this is the second revolution in
psychological development.
From then on, the child intuitively understands that even his authorities
do not fully understand the meaning of the words and that the uncertainty
can never recede. At that point, there are two possible responses: fear or
creativity. To the degree that fear predominates, the child may cling to
narcissism and the craving for rules. But the realization of the inevitable
also opens up another possibility: Since no one definitively knows the
meaning of words—What is “being good,” What does it mean to be a
“brave girl” and so on—a child can emancipate himself from the discourse
of its parents and give its own creative answers to these questions and hence
start to realize its own, unique way to live its life.
On the one hand, the child has to seize his opportunity and realize
himself creatively in the space that has arisen. On the other hand, the
parents play an important role in this process as well. They can confirm and
support the child’s efforts to, little by little, give meaning to life and make
his own choices. Or they may, in overt or more covert ways, try to maintain
the status of their omniscience and continue to make choices on behalf of
the child. In the first case, the path to individuality will probably be smooth.
In the second case, there is a good chance it will encounter crises and
storms. It is difficult to predict which of these two scenarios in the end will
yield the most original results.
With the realization that the discourse of the parental gods is not
entirely accurate, we see a fledgling sensitivity to a discourse that does not
intend to be completely accurate: fiction and poetry. During this period, the
child mainly hungers for stories about parents and grandparents, stories
that, in their Dichtung und wahrheit (facts and fiction), provide the child
with a basis for its identity and principles about how to behave (“a member
of our family is polite, works a lot, likes to eat and drink”). Psychologically,
these principles differ radically from the rigid rules it relied on before: They
are loose guidelines that are followed faithfully but flexibly in every new
situation the child is confronted with. It is these principles that free the child
from the rampant craving for rules.

The looser use of language and words, not aimed at definitively
assigning meaning, allows the child to rediscover something in the unique
context in which he finds himself. After the long detour of acquiring a self-
image in the mirror stage and the period of nascent rationality, the child
finds, in stories and poetry, echoes and scents of the lost maternal paradise
of its earliest months of life.
Therefore, the creation of individuality, through the transition from a
logical-rational to a evocative-creative use of language, is a third possible
response to the fundamental uncertainty of the human condition. That does
not equal a fall into irrationality (we will come to this in detail in chapter 9).
However, this creative act, in contrast to narcissism and regulation mania, is
indeed a real solution to the uncertainty inherent in human relationships and
human existence in general. It connects man with the Other and leads to
resonance with (love) objects instead of psychological isolation and (self-)
destructiveness. At the same time, it also creatively realizes individuality
and psychological sovereignty.
*   *   *
Let us return for a moment to the questions we asked ourselves at the
beginning of the chapter. How is it that the Enlightenment tradition led to
more fear and insecurity and, eventually, hyper-strict morality? Didn’t it
explicitly aim at the opposite? The developmental psychological scheme, as
outlined above, makes the answer quite simple. The Enlightenment
tradition, the ideology of Reason, was a persistent attempt to squeeze life
into logic and theories. It placed all symbolism, mysticism, fiction, and
poetry secondary. But this is exactly the kind of discourse that allows us the
ability to respond to the uncertainty of life with creation and individuality
and to find words that resonate with the Other.
That’s how uncertainty turned into fear, and the only psychological
means available to combat that fear were narcissism and an endlessly
rampant regulatory discourse. It is especially this second attempt to “solve”
the fear that is especially important here. The more we attempt to eliminate
the fear and uncertainty through rationality and rules, the more we collide
with failure. Remember what we said about the structure of language: The
last word, which should remove uncertainty and bring final resolution, does

not exist. Both logically (from the developmental perspective, as we
discussed in this chapter) and historically (as we’ll see in subsequent
chapters), it is precisely at this point that man turns to the opposite of what
he pursued in his desire for freedom: the absolute master—the totalitarian
leader—who claims to have the last word.
This sheds a different light on social phenomena such as #MeToo, Black
Lives Matter, the climate movements, and the coronavirus crisis. They are
related to real problems, but those problems are not the real reason for the
existence for these phenomena. They arise mainly from the pressing need
among the population for an authoritarian institution that provides direction
to take the burden of freedom and the associated insecurity off their
shoulders.30 And the government is eager to fill that vacancy. Little by little,
it limits the individual’s freedom of choice and makes choices for him: It
imposes tobacco, sugar, and fat taxes; it determines how health and
immunity should be pursued (no access to public spaces or the workplace
without a vaccine); it determines how much alcohol you can consume when
you are in COVID-19 quarantine (six beers a day in Australia); it bans
religious symbols from public spaces, and makes the signs of its own
ideology mandatory (without a QR code, the doors will remain shut). The
individual will eventually lose even the right to make decisions about his
own life. When patients report suicidal thoughts, therapists are under
pressure to proceed to collocation; suicide is not allowed under any
circumstances. However, if the government approves, you can get
permission for euthanasia for reason of mental suffering. In other words,
from now on, the government determines when you are allowed to die. The
educating and disciplining function of the government is becoming more
complex every day and, for this reason, an efficient system becomes
necessary. At first, a social credit system seemed like something that would
only be possible in communist- totalitarian China, but Australia is preparing
to introduce a similar system31 and some municipalities in Belgium are
already using their own virtual currency, which you can earn with
“exemplary conduct.”32 (I suppose an unelected technocrat will define what
that means.) Should we fear that here, too, like in China, people will be
placed in re-education camps, based on an Orwellian computer algorithm, if
they have collected too many bad points?33 The government apparatus,
impersonal but crafty, has already anticipated that naughty children will

demand some space for individuality: It has disarmed the population
beforehand and secures a monopoly on violence.
Ultimately, the position of the totalitarian leader is impossible, simply
because, despite his megalomaniac faith and ideological fanaticism, he too
is subject to the structure of language. He can only pretend to have the last
word. This last word floats elusively in the resounding spaces of poetry,
fiction, and symbolism—that is, in the space of the type of discourse that
admits that it is incomplete. The person who still wants to be in the position
of the absolute master falls into errors and inconsistencies, and eventually
into outright lies and deceit. We have already discussed this phenomenon in
chapters 1 and 4 where we talked about the crisis in the sciences, but we see
it just as well at the level of public discourse.
The excessive pursuit of transparency and hypercorrectness also tilts in
the opposite direction, namely in pretense and deceit. Just look at the media
coverage: Government labels of quality products are often unreliable;34 the
government bans pesticides but then sends officials out to explain to
farmers how to bypass the tests that can detect these pesticides (as aptly
described in Isabelle Saporta’s Vino Business);35 the encryption companies
from which you buy the software to protect your privacy turn out to be
owned by secret services of the government.36 Even making health care
more transparent and correct—one of the main twenty-first century
government’s priorities—turns out to be the opposite. Electronic patient
records are shared en masse without the patient’s consent,37 they are
hackable (as happened to tens of thousands of records in Finland),38 and
insurance agents have access to these records.39
*   *   *
That’s how the rationalistic approach to life led to an inability to manage
fear and uncertainty in a productive way: Narcissism and regulation mania
intensified the problem they seemed to solve, resulting in a psychologically
exhausted population that craves an absolute master. It paradoxically looks
for that master, in accordance with the dominant view of man and the
world, in the mechanistic ideology—that is, the ideology that caused the
problem to begin with. This is also the ideology that tempts the minds with
its immense manipulations of matter and that seems to have the facts on its

side with numbers and statistics. It is that condition of the population—
fearful, socially atomized, and yearning for direction and authority—that is
the perfect breeding ground for the emergence of a specific social group,
which increasingly manifested itself through the Enlightenment and beyond
and which formed the psychological-social basis of the totalitarian state: the
masses.

PART II
MASS FORMATION AND
TOTALITARIANISM

CHAPTER 6
The Rise of the Masses
“Enlightenment is man’s release from his self-incurred tutelage. Tutelage is
man’s inability to make use of his understanding without direction from
another … ‘Dare to think! Have the courage to make use of your own
reason!’ is therefore the motto of the Enlightenment.”1
With these words in 1784, the great German Enlightenment philosopher
Immanuel Kant summarized what he considered the essence of the
Enlightenment tradition. A century and a half later, however, a horrifying
phenomenon unfolded: The Enlightenment had led to the exact opposite of
what Kant envisioned. “Science” had given rise to stories that were frankly
absurd; people nonetheless went along with them in blind enthusiasm and
fanaticism, with little ability for critical reflection, even up to the point of
radical self-destruction.
In Germany, a race theory, propagated by a fanatical demagogue,
propelled a large part of the population into a curious state of mind. People
denounced relatives, friends, and colleagues who, in their opinion, were not
unconditionally loyal to the German People and its leader; they accepted
that fellow human beings with physical impairments be exterminated like
vermin; they nodded in agreement when the Führer deemed the elimination
of every German with heart and lung problems to be necessary in the long
term; they agreed, overtly or covertly, with the industrialized annihilation of
“inferior races.”
In Russia, an equally “scientific” story led to the same fanatical ecstasy:
The whole “historical-materialist process” would focus on the creation of a
society without private property, in which “the proletariat” would have the
power. This also required a fair bit of extermination. At first, this took place

according to a certain “logic”; at a later stage, everybody randomly fell prey
to it. Tens of millions of people were deported to the gulags, where the
majority of people perished. Half of the members of the communist party
were also eventually liquidated, usually without the slightest hint of sedition
or treason. And the most astonishing thing of all was that most victims
made no effort whatsoever to refute the mostly unfounded allegations. They
even made unequivocal admissions of guilt and willingly went to the
gallows.
The first half of the twentieth century saw the emergence of Nazism and
Stalinism, a completely new form of government commonly referred to as
totalitarianism. It is immediately distinguishable from democracies by its
one-party structure and its disregard for basic democratic principles, such as
the right to free speech and self-determination. However, the totalitarian
state also radically differs from dictatorial forms of government, both in its
structure (its internal organization) and in its dynamics (its process-oriented
progression). In her monumental book, The Origins of Totalitarianism,
Hannah Arendt situates the essence of this difference at a psychological
level. While dictatorships are essentially based on instilling a fear of
physical aggression—the population is struck by such a degree of fear that
the dictator (or the dictatorial regime) is able to unilaterally impose a social
contract—the totalitarian state is grounded in the social-psychological
process of mass formation.2
We have to take this process into account in order to understand the
astounding psychological characteristics of a totalitarian population: the
willingness of the individuals to blindly sacrifice their personal interests in
favor of the collective, radical intolerance of dissident voices, a paranoid
informant mentality that allows government to penetrate the very heart of
private life, the curious susceptibility to absurd pseudo-scientific
indoctrination and propaganda, the blind following of a narrow logic that
transcends all ethical boundaries (making totalitarianism incompatible with
religion), the loss of all diversity and creativity (making totalitarianism the
enemy of art and culture), and intrinsic self-destructiveness (which ensures
that totalitarian systems invariably annihilate themselves in the end).
An analysis of the psychological process of totalitarianism is extremely
relevant in the twenty-first century. There are several signs that a new kind
of (technocratic) totalitarianism is on the rise: an exponential increase in the

number of intrusive actions by security agencies (opening mail, searching
IT systems, installing eavesdropping devices, tapping telephones);3 the
general advance of surveillance society;4 the increasing pressure on the
right to privacy (especially since 9/11);5 the sharp increase in the last decade
in citizens snitching on one another through government-organized
channels;6 the increasing censorship and suppression of alternative voices,
in particular during the coronavirus crisis;7 loss of support for basic
democratic principles;8 and the introduction of an experimental vaccination
program and QR code as a condition for having access to public spaces, and
so on. The moment Arendt had anticipated in 1951 seems to be rapidly
approaching: the emergence of a new totalitarian system led, not by “ring
leaders” like Stalin and Hitler, but by dull bureaucrats and technocrats.9
In the first five chapters of this book, I described how the emergence of
the mechanistic worldview brought society into a specific psychological
condition over the past centuries. Society was increasingly gripped by a
fanatical, mechanistic ideology that degenerated into dogma and blind
belief (chapter 1); experiences of meaninglessness and social isolation
increased hand over fist (chapter 2); hopes were increasingly placed on a
utopian, technological solution to the problems inherent in human existence
(chapter 3); public space was increasingly dominated by a pseudoscientific
discourse of numbers, data, and statistics that completely blurred the line
between scientific facts and fiction (chapter 4); and epidemic fear and
uncertainty made the population yearn for absolute authority (chapter 5). In
the present chapter, I’ll describe how, from here, the socially fragmented
population suddenly reunites into a unit through the process of mass
formation.
*   *   *
A crowd is a specific kind of group. Its distinguishing feature is a far-
reaching “uniformization” of individuals. In the crowd, everyone becomes
equal to everyone else, people think together, and they tend to identify with
the same ideals. Gustave Le Bon—the French sociologist and psychologist
who published one of the most important works on mass formation,
Psychologie des foules in 1895—argued that the “individual soul” in the
masses is completely taken over by the “group soul.”10 This uniformization

is accompanied by an almost absolute loss of rational thinking and the
ability for critical reflection, even among people who, under “normal
circumstances,” are extremely intelligent and capable of well-founded
criticism.11 It is also accompanied by a strong tendency to surrender to
impulses that, under normal circumstances, would be considered radically
unethical.
Mass formation is as old as humanity itself and has appeared in many
different forms. Historical examples bear witness to this diversity: the short-
lived mass formation during Saint Bartholomew’s night as opposed to the
long-term mass formation of the French Revolution; the totally unstructured
mass of the dancing plague in Strasbourg as opposed to the organized
masses we find in the army and church; the religious masses of the
Crusades as opposed to the pseudoscientific masses of the twentieth and
twenty-first centuries; the gigantic masses of Nazism and Stalinism; the
small-scale mass formation that occurs time and again in trial juries, and so
on.
This last example, the mass formation that occurs in trial juries, is
interesting because its small scale allows for a detailed investigation. Time
and again, it appears that juries, in their final verdict, are hardly (or not at
all) influenced by the argumentative qualities of a plea. An attorney who
delivers a perfectly fact-based and rationally structured message will have
little effect. Juries are almost exclusively susceptible to frequent repetition
of simple emotional messages and poignant visual images (including
numbers presented in graphs).12 Think of all the successful trial lawyers:
This is exactly how they build their plea.
Masses have been around since time immemorial, but Le Bon noted
that, beginning in the nineteenth century, they steadily gained momentum.13
Where they used to have only a short-lived influence that was curtailed and
suppressed by the leaders of society, they became steadily more persistent
and influential in policy making during and following the Enlightenment.
This prompted Le Bon in 1895 to warn that the masses could take hold of
society, leading to the emergence of a new form of governance.14 Le Bon
was not devoid of prophetic gifts, as this is exactly what happened thirty
years later with the rise of totalitarian states in the twentieth century.
*   *   *

Where did this intensification of mass formation come from? It was a
logical consequence of the effects of rationalization and mechanization of
the world, as discussed in the previous chapters. More and more people
entered a condition of social atomization and as soon as their numbers
exceed a critical limit, the process of mass formation begins. Mass
formation is a complex and dynamic phenomenon that can be compared to
the way convection patterns arise in water or gas when they are heated up.
In the first instance, the heat in individual water molecules rises, but the
molecules are not yet moving. Then small, moving patterns, which quickly
disappear, emerge locally. Subsequently, increasingly larger and more
durable patterns occur. Finally, we see patterns that permanently set most of
the water into motion. In doing so, the convection patterns completely
change the behavior of the individual water molecules, bringing them into a
completely new state of motion. In the same way, mass formation brings
individual people into a new psychological “state of motion.” And just as
with convection patterns in water and gas, these patterns are small and
short-lived at first. At a later stage, they set larger and larger societal
“volumes” in motion over a longer period of time. The medieval mass
formations were mostly local and ephemeral in nature; the mass formations
of the French Revolution were already larger in scale and lasted a little
longer; those of Stalinism and Nazism were much more significant and a lot
more enduring. With the coronavirus crisis, we have, for the first time in
history, reached a point where the entire world population is in the grip of a
mass formation over a prolonged period of time.
*   *   *
There are four conditions in particular that have to be present in a society
for large-scale mass formation to occur. These four conditions were present
prior to the rise of Nazism and Stalinism, and they are also present now.
I’ve already mentioned them as consequences of the mechanistic ideology.
I’ll summarize them again below.
*   *   *

The first condition is generalized loneliness, social isolation, and lack of
social bonds among the population. The Enlightenment is characterized by
an emergence of this phenomenon, but today the scale has grown to such an
extent that the US Surgeon General Vivek Murthy began referring to it as
the loneliness epidemic, and Theresa May in Great Britain actually
appointed a Minister of Loneliness.15 Not insignificant to my argument,
loneliness is strongly associated with the use of social media and
communication technology.16 (Remember the effect of digitalized
conversations, which I covered in chapter 3.) The problem is greatest in
industrialized countries, those that are most firmly in the grip of
mechanistic ideology.17 About 30 percent of people living in these countries
report chronic experiences of loneliness and isolation, and this percentage is
increasing every year. I refer to Arendt who argued that this first condition
is the most important: “The chief characteristic of the mass man is not
brutality and backwardness, but his isolation and lack of normal social
relationships.”18
This deterioration of social connectedness leads to the second condition:
lack of meaning in life. This second condition follows mainly from the first.
Man, as a social being par excellence, lives for the Other. Remove the bond
with the Other and he will experience his life as meaningless (whether he
sees the connection with his loneliness or not). For instance, I describe in
chapter 2 how industrialization removed meaning from work, in part by
breaking the connection between the person who produces something and
the person for whom it is intended. Moreover, the mechanistic worldview
also led to meaninglessness in a more direct way: the machine of the
universe, as well as the person-machine who is stuck in it, runs without
purpose or meaning. The material particles interact with each other
according to the laws of mechanics, but they have no intention whatsoever.
Viewing life through this lens, whether justified or not, renders life
meaningless. The phenomenon of bullshit jobs (see chapter 2) is perhaps
the best illustration of this: In the second decade of the twenty-first century,
half of the people were of the opinion that their job was meaningless.19 A
2013 Gallup World Poll found that only 13 percent of people worldwide
were truly engaged in their job; 63 percent said they were not engaged (they
“sleepwalk through their work and may put time into it, but are not
passionate about their job”); and 24 percent are actively disengaged,

meaning they actively demoralize and demotivate their colleagues.20 This is
very significant.
The third condition is the widespread presence of free-floating anxiety
and psychological unease within a population. Free-floating anxiety is a
form of anxiety that is not image-bound, in contrast to anxiety that is
image-bound (for example, fear of thunder, snakes, war). Such anxiety is
mentally difficult to manage and presents the constant risk of turning into
panic, which is perhaps the most aversive psychological state for human
beings. For that reason, a person in that state seeks to link their anxiety to
an object. Free-floating anxiety can be traced back to the first two
conditions. A person who has lost his bond with the Other and does not feel
meaning typically experiences an indefinable unease and anxiety. This
condition has been strongly present in the first decades of the twenty-first
century. For example, the World Health Organization (WHO) reports that
one in five people worldwide has been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder.
These numbers are striking, all the more so because they are likely an
underestimation. And the incidence of mental suffering in general,
including the cases that go undiagnosed, is of course even higher. This can,
amongst others, be concluded from the enormous consumption of
psychotropic drugs. In a small country like Belgium, with eleven million
inhabitants, no fewer than three hundred million (!) doses of antidepressants
are taken every year.
The fourth condition, in turn, also follows from the first three: a lot of
free-floating frustration and aggression. The link between social isolation
and irritability is logical and has also been established empirically.21 People
perturbed by loneliness, lack of meaning, and indefinable anxiety and
unease generally feel increasingly irritable, frustrated, and/or aggressive
and look for objects to take these feelings out on. The sharp increase of
racist and threatening language on social media during the last decade
(tripling between 2015 and 2020, see chapter 5) is a striking example. What
accelerates mass formation is not so much the frustration and aggression
that are effectively vented, but the potential of unvented aggression present
in the population—aggression that is still looking for an object.
*   *   *

How exactly do these conditions lead to mass formation? The catalyst for
mass formation is a suggestion in the public sphere.22 If, under the
aforementioned circumstances, a suggestive story is spread through the
mass media that indicates an object of anxiety—for example, the
aristocracy under Stalinism, the Jews under Nazism, the virus, and, later,
the anti-vaxxers during the coronavirus crisis—and at the same time offers
a strategy to deal with that object of anxiety, there is a real chance that all
the free-flowing anxiety will attach itself to that object and there will be
broad social support for the implementation of the strategy to control that
object of anxiety.
This process yields a psychological gain. Firstly, the anxiety that
previously roamed through society as a tenebrous fog is now linked to a
specific cause and can be mentally controlled via the strategy put forward in
the story. Secondly, through a common struggle with “the enemy,” the
disintegrating society regains its coherence, energy, and rudimentary
meaning. For this reason, the fight against the object of anxiety then
becomes a mission, laden with pathos and group heroism (for example, the
Belgian government’s “team of 11 million” going to war against the
coronavirus). Thirdly, in this fight all latent brewing frustration and
aggression is taken out, especially on the group that refuses to go along
with the story and the mass formation. This brings an enormous release and
satisfaction to the masses, which they will not let go of easily.
Through this process, an individual pivots from a highly aversive and
painful psychological state of social isolation to the maximum
interconnectedness that exists among the masses. This creates a kind of
intoxication, which is the actual impetus to go along with the mass- forming
narrative. In the prolonged mass formations that led to the rise of the
totalitarian states, this intoxication was often merely latent but sometimes
fully manifests itself overtly. Think, for example, of a crowd that sings
together or chants slogans in a football stadium, for instance. The voice of
the individual dissolves into the overwhelming, vibrating group voice; the
individual feels supported by the crowd and “inherits” its vibrating energy.
It doesn’t matter what song or lyrics are sung; what matters is that they are
sung together. An equivalent to this exists on a cognitive level: What one
thinks does not matter; what counts is that people think it together. In this

way, the masses come to accept even the most absurd ideas as true, or at
least to act as if they were true.
*   *   *
The essence of mass formation amounts to the following: A society
saturated with individualism and rationalism suddenly tilts toward the
radically opposite condition, toward radically irrational collectivism. To put
it in Nietzschean-classical terms: Dionysus, in one fell swoop, overthrows
the dictatorship of Apollo and seizes power in society. This is also
immediately apparent from the following: In all major mass formations, the
main argument for joining in is solidarity with the collective. And those
who refuse to participate are typically accused of lacking solidarity and
civic responsibility. This is one reason why the absurd elements in a story
do not matter to the masses: The masses believe in the story not because it’s
accurate but because it creates a new social bond.
The strategy of dealing with the object of anxiety fully accomplishes the
purpose of a ritual. The function of ritualistic behaviors is to create group
cohesion. It is a symbolic behavior that aims to subject the individual to the
group. As such, it must ideally have as little practical use as possible and
require sacrifice on the part of the individual. Think of the ritual sacrifices
of food, animals, and humans in primitive societies. That is exactly why the
absurdity of the coronavirus measures does not encounter any resistance
from part of the population. In a sense, the more absurd and demanding the
measures are, the better they will fulfill the function of a ritual and the more
enthusiastically a certain part of the population will go along with it. Think,
for example, of the fact that some people wear a mask when driving, even if
they are the only person in the car.
The ritual function of mass behavior is always present. The experts in
the coronavirus crisis have also been more or less aware of this. At times,
they let it slip that the measures actually have hardly any practical use. In
March 2020, an expert virologist stated on Belgian national television that
the lockdowns would barely reduce the number of deaths;23 in August 2020,
an expert virologist suggested that the face masks have a largely symbolic
function;24 in October 2020, the health minister of Belgium said the same
about the closure of bars and restaurants (implying that countless people

saw their livelihood ruined for symbolic reasons).25 The message is clear:
The individual must at all times show that he submits to the interest of the
collective, by performing self-destructive, symbolic (ritualistic) behaviors.
Ultimately, the reasons individuals participate in mass formation are
rarely, if ever, rational in nature. The justification of the strategy is
promoted by experts with fancy titles, often on national television, making
it seem like a given measure is generally accepted. For many people, this
suffices as proof of correctness of the measures: “Surely the experts know
what they’re doing.” “Surely, they can’t all be wrong.” “They obviously
wouldn’t say it if it weren’t true?” And so on. In other words, the
argumentum ad populum (appeal to popularity) and the argumentum ad
auctoritatum (appeal to authority), known as logical fallacies since ancient
times, are enough for most people to accept the story. In everything, you
feel that the underlying motivation to go along with the story is the group
formation and the group pressure, not the accuracy of the story.
*   *   *
The well-known conformity experiment by Solomon Asch demonstrates in
a very convincing way the enormous impact of mass formation on
individual judgment.26 Asch conducted his experiment shortly after World
War II. He did so in an effort to understand how the often-absurd theories of
Nazism and Stalinism gained such a strong grip on the population and
sought to gain insight into the psychological mystery of mass formation and
totalitarianism.
Take a good look at figure 6.1. Which of the segments A, B, and C has
the same length as line 1? That was the question Asch asked the participants
of his conformity experiment. Each group of eight test subjects included
seven of Asch’s employees, all of whom had been instructed to answer “line
segment B” without blinking an eye. The eighth participant, the only
genuine test subject, usually gave the same answer as the seven persons
before him. Only 25 percent consistently stated what even a blind person
could see: Not line B but line C has the same length as line 1. After the
experiment, some test subjects said that they did know the correct answer
but did not dare go against the group. Even more interestingly, others

admitted that they had started to doubt their own judgment under group
pressure and eventually accepted the absurd group judgment as true.
These three groups are always present in mass formation. There is
always a group that is in the grip of mass formation and “believes” the story
(this group constitutes the totalitarized part of the population), a second
group that does not really believe it but remains quiet and goes along with
the masses (or at least, does not oppose them), and a third group that does
not believe in the mass-forming story and also speaks or acts out against it.
These three groups typically intersect with all pre-existing social groups.
This is shown, time and again, in historical examples of large-scale mass
formation.27 And it also became apparent during the coronavirus crisis. At
the beginning of the crisis, new societal “camps” emerged at lightning
speed, crossing all the pre-existing camps—people either went along with
the virus story or not. Left or right of the political spectrum, regardless of
skin color and social status, profession and hobbies: All these boundaries
blurred. The only thing that counted was what people thought of the virus.
Figure 6.1.
Typically, these three groups are highly diverse, but for specific reasons
this diversity is most visible in the group that protests loudly against the
masses. In the mass itself, diversity disappears under the typical

uniformizing effect of the masses (the masses make all individuals equal to
everyone else) and the silent middle group does not stand out anyway,
whereas the third, nonconformist group typically comes to life and all the
individuals express themselves in their own specific way, which sharply
highlights its diversity.
*   *   *
As Le Bon noted in 1895, the effect of mass formation is identical to
hypnosis.28 Both hypnosis and mass formation are largely caused by a
voice, in the literal sense—through the physical, vibrating qualities of the
voice. Totalitarian leaders are well aware of this, sometimes intuitively,
sometimes consciously. Totalitarian systems have always been maintained
primarily by systematic indoctrination and propaganda, injected into the
population on a daily basis via mass media (without mass media, it is not
possible to generate such long-lasting mass formation as that which gave
rise to Stalinism and Nazism). This way, the population is literally kept on
the vibrational frequency of the voice of totalitarian leaders.
On the one hand, the population is systematically exposed to the voice
of the totalitarian leaders. On the other hand, every alternative voice is
systematically eliminated. The first thing totalitarian leaders do is make
sure their voices are the only ones left. To a certain extent, this is also what
classical dictators do, but they limit the monopoly on the voice to the public
sphere. They silence the political opposition. Totalitarian systems operate in
a more thorough way. They censor alternative voices in the private sphere
as well. On the one hand, this happens “spontaneously” due to a paranoid
informant mentality that accompanies mass formation (which, in fact, is a
result of a typical intolerance to alternative opinions, which we will discuss
later). On the other hand, totalitarianism also expurgates the private sphere
of alternative voices by inducing far-reaching social fragmentation and
isolation. Totalitarian systems typically make it nearly impossible for
people to gather in larger groups, and they strive to sever all social and
family ties and replace them with the only allowable bond: the one between
the individual and the totalitarian system (that is, the collective). In the
Soviet Union, this process was implemented in a much more systematic

way than in Nazi Germany; this is why the process of totalitarization in the
Soviet Union persisted in a more far-reaching way.29
To return to the similarity between hypnosis and mass formation: In
both cases, a suggestive statement or a suggestive story (conveyed by a
voice) focuses attention on a very limited aspect of reality. Compare it to
the circle of light emitted by a lamp, which is focused and makes
everything outside of this circle disappear into darkness (see figure 6.2). In
addition to the ritual function of the mass behaviors, this narrowing of the
field of attention is a factor that ensures the logic will extend to its absurd
conclusions.
Figure 6.2.

For example, in the coronavirus crisis, we’ve seen a narrowing of the
field of attention in the following way: People who fall victim as a result of
the measures—for example, deaths due to emotional and physical neglect
during the lockdowns in residential care centers, non-COVID-19 patients
whose treatment was postponed, victims of domestic violence, people
affected by side effects of vaccinations, and so on—receive little attention
compared to COVID-19 victims, or at least they are given remarkably little
weight in decision-making. Furthermore, also very striking: The collateral
damage of the victims may be mentioned occasionally, but it is rarely, if
ever, presented in a numerical-visual way.
This is crucial because, as I described in chapter 4, what’s expressed in
numbers and graphs has the effect of being (wrongly) perceived as facts. As
such, the psychological process of mass formation seems to ensure that
mass media, almost intuitively, chooses to perpetuate the mass formation by
using graphics for only the information that supports the story.
The narrowing of the field of attention also extends to the emotional
field: Victims of the pandemic response measures have elicited remarkably
little empathy. For these victims, there are no daily statistics, no case
descriptions, no testimonials from relatives covered in the media. Also
consider a virologist’s statement that a boy who died at a so-called
lockdown party deserved “zero pity.”30 These victims fall outside the circle
of light, both cognitively and emotionally.
This emotional insensitivity to suffering that falls outside of the circle of
attention should not be confused with ordinary egoism. Le Bon noted that
both mass formation and hypnosis enable individuals to radically ignore
their self-interest, yes, even their own pain.31 The hypnotic story focuses
attention on a small aspect of reality to such a degree that everything
outside it, including one’s own pain and to a broader extent, one’s own
interests, passes unnoticed. With a simple hypnotic procedure, patients can
be anesthetized to such a degree that surgical incisions can be made
painlessly (see chapter 10). Similarly, during the coronavirus crisis, a large
part of the population accepted with remarkable ease measures that
destroyed their enjoyment of life, freedom, and prosperity.
This was, by far, the most astonishing observation for the chroniclers of
twentieth-century totalitarianism: The almost limitless tolerance for the
enormous personal damage the population endured. For example,

totalitarized Germans were devoutly grateful to Hitler for having a plan B
in case their Great Mission would fail: death with grace—the gas chamber
—for every German citizen.32
The phenomenon of mass formation not only has a profound impact on
a cognitive and emotional level, but sometimes also on sensory perception.
In some circumstances, collective hallucinations occur under the influence
of mass formation, a phenomenon that challenges the understandings in
modern psychology. A well-known historical example is the appearance of
Saint Gregory on the city ramparts of Jerusalem, which was witnessed by a
full army of crusaders.33 Another example, from more recent times, is the
raft of drowning persons observed in broad daylight by a whole crew of
marines and described by each of them in the same way, in great detail. On
closer inspection, it was no more than a few branches with seaweed on
them.34 The impact of mass formation on the mental functioning of humans
is virtually unlimited. It has an impact on the individual’s experience of
reality to such an extent that it is justified to ask: For an individual in the
grip of mass formation, is there still a reality beyond the one created by the
masses?
*   *   *
We have to add one more important characteristic to the problematic
psychological properties of mass formation: radical intolerance of other
opinions and a strong tendency toward authoritarianism. To the masses,
dissident voices appear 1) antisocial and devoid of solidarity, because they
refuse to participate in the solidarity that the mass formation creates; 2)
completely unfounded, as critical arguments are not assigned any cognitive
or emotional weight within the narrow circle of attention of the masses; 3)
extremely aversive because they threaten to break the intoxication, and in
this way confront the masses again with the negative situation that preceded
the mass formation (lack of social bond and meaning, indefinable fear and
unease); 4) extremely frustrating because they threaten to remove the
venting of latent aggression.
This radical intolerance ensures that the masses are convinced of their
superior ethical and moral intentions and of the reprehensibility of
everything and everyone who resists them: Whoever does not participate is

a traitor of the collective. Snitching is therefore commonplace; the
population itself is the main branch of the secret police.35 Combined with
the fourth factor, the opportunity mass formation offers to act out frustration
and aggression without limit, this creates a well-known phenomenon: The
masses are inclined to commit atrocities against those who resist them and
typically execute them as if it were an ethical, sacred duty. Historical
examples are the Deus lo volt (God wills it) and the Got mit uns (God with
us) with which the Crusaders and the Nazis respectively committed their
atrocities; the Bolshevik belief that the ultimate justice was being practiced
by massacring the Romanovs and other alleged enemies of the proletariat; a
butcher who, during the French Revolution, slit the throat of the defenseless
(and innocent) director of the Bastille with a knife and demanded a medal
for doing so;36 the Septemberists of the French Revolution who
conscientiously ensured that all citizens were able to closely watch the
executions of clergy and noblemen.37
According to Le Bon, authoritarianism and intolerance are essential
characteristics of mass formation.38 We also see this characteristic of mass
formation steadily on the rise in coronavirus society. As the crisis continues
to unfold, the dominant discourse imposes itself in an increasingly
authoritarian way and censors and represses alternative voices in an ever
more radical way. Publications that don’t fit with the dominant narrative are
blocked on social media, even if they’ve been published in top medical
journals such as The Lancet; doctors and researchers critical of coronavirus
measures are fired by their institutes; in early 2021, the Belgian Order of
Physicians issued a general rule that any doctor who casts doubt on the
effectiveness and safety of the vaccine would be barred; from November
2021, one was no longer allowed to enter restaurants, bars, and a number of
other places without a QR code, and so on. This is ultimately the difference
between the solidarity of the masses and loving connectedness: The former
is always at the expense of a particular group, the latter is not.

CHAPTER 7
The Leaders of the Masses
In the previous chapter, I described the phenomenon of mass formation—
the psychological basis of totalitarianism—as a form of hypnosis. However,
there is an important difference between mass formation and classical
hypnosis. In classical hypnosis, only the field of consciousness of the
hypnotized person is narrowed; the person who conveys the hypnotizing
story (the hypnotist) is “awake.” In mass formation, to the contrary, the
person who conveys the story is usually in the grip of the story as well.1 In
fact, this person’s field of attention is usually even more narrow than that of
the masses. The reason is clear: The leader usually fanatically believes in
the ideological basis of the narrative (not in the narrative itself!) that
controls the masses.
With respect to the leaders, mass-formation gives rise to two opposing
attitudes: Either one trusts the leaders blindly (and disappears into the
mass), or one completely distrusts them and sees them as people who
knowingly carry out an evil plan (i.e., conspirators). In a certain sense, both
extreme perspectives are based on a similar misunderstanding: They
fallaciously endow the leaders with a virtually absolute knowledge (and
power); the first group does so in a positive sense, the second group in a
negative sense.
Other misconceptions are that the leaders are primarily driven by money
(i.e., “follow the money” and “cui bono”) or sadistic pleasure (i.e., they
have a psychopathic or perverted personality). Such statements are not
really confirmed by historical research either. To give one example: The
head of the Nazi party had a reluctant attitude toward illicit profits, and
personalities with tendencies toward perversion and psychopathy were
systematically excluded from recruitment.2 As opposed to the “classical”

criminal, who finds an intrinsic pleasure in violating social rules, in this
case totalitarian criminality lies more in the uncritical and mindless
adherence to a system of totalitarian social rules, even when this system
becomes radically inhumane and transcends each and every ethical
boundary. Hence Hannah Arendt’s famous expression that totalitarianism
was a true demonstration of the banality of evil: Totalitarianism is not about
monstruous people—it is about normal people who stick to a morbid,
dehumanizing way of thinking or “logic.”3
In the initial phase of the totalitarization process, such a logic first takes
hold of the population. The masses (or at least a large part of the
population) become imbued with certain ideological convictions that, to
them, are no longer distinguishable from reality. The emerging mass
movements of Pan-Slavism and Pan-Germanism in Russia and Germany in
the early twentieth century are good examples. Germans typically became
convinced that, as a race, they were superior to others and that
stigmatization and oppression of, among others, Poles and Jews could be
justified by “the facts.” We see something similar happening during the
coronavirus crisis, where a certain segment of the population is becoming
convinced that the facts justify the social discrimination of people who
refuse to be vaccinated. The numbers show that they are spreading the
virus, don’t they?
These dynamics slowly give rise to the emergence of totalitarian parties
and totalitarian leaders who gradually institutionalize this logic and impose
it on society. And this typically happens in a fanatical, blind, and merciless
way. Hitler believed that his strength came from his ability for “ice-cold
reasoning,” and Stalin believed that the secret of his success lay in his
“merciless dialectics.”4 Races that were “unfit for life” and “dying classes”
were, under the justification of this logic, expelled from society with
surgical precision. For this reason, what characterizes the leaders of the
masses is not greed or sadism, but their morbid ideological drive: Reality
must and will be adjusted to the ideological fiction.
Such drive leads to a mental and emotional blindness, which can
assume truly astonishing proportions. This is illustrated by the mind-
boggling way Nazi leader Adolf Eichmann testified during his trial in
Jerusalem about organizing the deportation of Jews to the concentration
camps. During the trial, he was still so imbued with the conviction that he

only intended to do the very best for everyone that he described with pride
how he encouraged the Jews to participate in his “project.” For example, in
occupied European cities, he promoted the establishment of Jewish
councils, consisting of Jews who occupied key social positions within their
communities. Eichmann thought it was normal that the victims—who,
within the Nazi doctrine, were regarded as people unfit for life—organize
the practical arrangements of their own demise. In his trial, Eichmann
described his attitude in the following way:
The Jewish council—who it consisted of, what their
hierarchy was and how they organized the division of
tasks—it was all left to them. We were, of course, in
charge. But as I said, we did not treat them in a
dictatorial way, we played it very carefully with the
officials with whom we had to deal on a regular basis;
therefore, our people intervened as little as possible, for
the simple reason: if we had acted in an authoritarian
way towards those top officials—like: you must—then that
would not serve the purpose. Because if those involved do
not want to cooperate, then the whole work suffers as a
result; we tried everything to make the cooperation
attractive.5
The Nazis were indeed often convinced of their good intentions; a
willingness to acknowledge this is a sign of maturity and essential to
learning from history. But of course, this should in no way be interpreted as
an argument to excuse their crimes. A human in the grip of mass formation
may, in a sense, not know what he is doing, but that does not mean that he
should be forgiven just like that. In a state of mass formation or hypnosis,
people do still have the ability to make ethical choices. It is well known
that, while under hypnosis, people may be made to do things they would be
painfully ashamed of otherwise (undressing themselves, performing
ridiculous dance moves) and be led to perform physical feats that they are
normally incapable of (laying stiff as a plank between two chairs, for
example), but they cannot be persuaded to cross ethical boundaries that they
respect in an “awake” state.

The anonymity offered by the masses—the individual disappears into
the crowd and feels unseen—is essentially just an excuse and a cover for
letting one’s own compulsions run wild. Whoever commits crimes in a
crowd shows, above all, that under normal circumstances, he controls
himself only for tactical, and not ethical, reasons. The explanation for the
immorality of the masses does not mean that mass formation removes a
normally present ethical awareness.6 It means that it temporarily suspends
the concealment of its lack. In this way, the masses reveal the real ethical
dimensions of man.
Eichmann was not the only Nazi who believed in his remarkable
ideological “benignness.” The entire Nazi discourse on the extermination
camps testified to this. They called death in the gas chambers the “death of
grace” (i.e., the least painful solution for people they felt were better off
dead than alive). The Führer had that same death in mind even for the entire
German people if Germany were to lose the war: He promised on his word
of honor that he had set aside a sufficient volume of gas in case of this
scenario. Even at the Nuremberg Trials, the Nazi leaders continued to speak
matter-of-factly of such death as a “medical act,” a precision therapeutic
intervention to render society “healthy.”
Arendt notes that there was something even more remarkable than the
appeal for cooperation that Eichmann addressed to the Jews: that he also
obtained that cooperation. Arendt writes:
The Jewish Councils of Elders were informed by
Eichmann or his men of how many Jews were needed to
fill each train, and they made out the list of deportees.
And the Jews registered, filled out innumerable forms,
answered pages and pages of questionnaires regarding
their property so that it could be seized the more easily.
And then, right on time, they assembled at the collection
points and boarded the trains. The few who tried to hide
or to escape were rounded up by a special Jewish police
force. As far as Eichmann could see, no one protested, no
one refused to cooperate, that thanks to the “general
cooperation” everything was right. “Immerzu fahren hier

die Leute zu ihrem eigenen Begräbnis.” They knew it. All
of them.7
The Jewish councils went along with Eichmann’s “project,” “until they,
too, were deported, usually ‘only’ to Theresienstadt or Bergen- Belsen, if
they happened to be from Central or Western Europe, but to Auschwitz if
they were from an Eastern European community.”8 Sometimes there was
heroic resistance and the gruesome manner in which it was crushed must
have played a role in discouraging it. Think of 425 young Dutch Jews who,
after fighting with a German security police detachment, were tortured for
months on end in Buchenwald, to the point of death.9 Still, the extent to
which victims repeatedly complied with the plans of Nazi executioners
should not be ignored from a psychological perspective; apparently many of
them were also in the grip of mass formation.
The Jews were by no means exceptional in this regard. Many Germans
remained loyal to Hitler even when his plans included purges among
themselves; it was planned, for example, to exterminate Germans with heart
and lung problems, and subsequently, those with all kinds of other
deficiencies—plans that were not carried out because of the course of the
war. Similarly in the Soviet Union, people passively awaited their turn to be
picked up and taken to the gulags (read The Gulag Archipelago by
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn).10 I myself listened in astonishment to a woman
who had grown up in the Soviet Union and lost her father and uncle to the
gulags, but shrugged her shoulders and said the system “had its pros and
cons.” Mass formation takes both victims and perpetrators in its grip.
The fact that totalitarian leaders are themselves caught in a form of
hypnosis is illustrated by the psychological response to being removed from
the crowd. When Nazi leaders were stationed for a prolonged time in
countries that proved unsusceptible to mass formation, such as Denmark
and Bulgaria, something predictable happened: They began to feel insecure
about the cause they were serving, and the Nazi regime could no longer rely
on them.11 In other words, they woke up. This shows that the leaders are not
only hypnotized by their ideology but also by the masses. The leader
himself is entranced by the effects he produces in the crowd. Between the
psychological condition of the masses and their leaders, there is a kind of
circular causality: They hypnotize one another.

The fact that the totalitarian leader is himself under hypnosis and blind
doesn’t mean that he believes everything he tells the population. On the
contrary. It is more accurate to put it this way: He blindly believes in the
ideology he is trying to impose but not in the discourse he uses to promote
it. He believes so fanatically in his ideology that he considers it justified to
limitlessly manipulate, lie, and deceive in order to realize that ideology.
Mankind (or part thereof) is on its way to the best of all worlds and
therefore everything is permissible.
This can be seen in the way Nazism and Stalinism made use of numbers
and statistics—including them profusely in their propaganda—consistent
with the scientific allure of their story (and the story of every totalitarian
system). Over time, the numbers showed a “radical contempt for the facts”
to the extent that the facts were modified to make the numbers add up. In
the Soviet Union, it was not uncommon to randomly pick “traitors” off the
streets at the end of the week if a predetermined quota had not yet been
reached.12 In this way, the scientists who allowed themselves to be
hypnotized by totalitarianism quickly turned into “charlatans.”13 They often
ended up entrenched in a discourse that didn’t even bother to disguise its
deceitful and manipulative nature.14
Curiously, the masses are always willing to forgive their leaders.
Undeniable evidence of manipulation and deceit is whitewashed with
phrases like, “It may be mean, but it’s smart” and “In the end, they do it for
our good.” Of this, Arendt writes:
The totalitarian mass leaders based their propaganda on
the correct psychological assumption that, under such
conditions, one could make people believe the most
fantastic statements one day, and trust that if the next day
they were given irrefutable proof of their falsehood, they
would take refuge in cynicism; instead of deserting the
leaders who had lied to them, they would protest that they
had known all along that the statement was a lie and
would admire the leaders for their superior tactical
cleverness.15

Just like the population (see chapter 6), the leaders are also capable of
fanatical self-denial.16 One of the most astonishing observations of the
executions of convicted Communist Party leaders during the Moscow trials
was the repentant acceptance they showed (also masterfully described by
George Orwell in Animal Farm).17 Although they were mostly completely
innocent of the crimes they were charged with, they meekly accepted their
sentence and pleaded guilty. What’s more: They often diligently adduced
evidence to prove their own guilt and cooperated in their own conviction, if
only to ensure that their status as a party member would be preserved.18
They perpetuated the hypnosis to the point of death. Waking up just before
such a terminal moment would be very painful indeed.
This resulted in a perplexing dynamic in which party members
continued to let friends, colleagues, and everyone else around them fall prey
to the absurd brutality of the system (including fatal torture), until they
themselves were devoured by the monster of totalitarianism. Of this
Solzhenitsyn writes, “The majority of those in power, up to the very
moment of their own judgment, were pitiless in arresting others, obediently
destroyed their peers in accordance with those same instructions and
handed over to retribution any friend or comrade in arms of yesterday.”19
This shows us again: The essence of totalitarianism is not utilitarian or
selfish in nature. Money and power only constitute intermediate ends. The
ultimate goal is to realize an ideological fiction, and the totalitarian leader
blindly sacrifices his own interests to achieve it.20 This is what Le Bon
refers to when he states that the leaders of the masses are themselves also
hypnotized, especially by the ideology in which they fanatically believe.21
This anti-utilitarian nature is also reflected in the recklessness with
which totalitarian regimes destroy their own economies and wreak
economic havoc. For example, labor camps could be considered to be
aimed at cheap labor and monetary yields, but nothing could be further
from the truth.22 They were organized in such a way that they were not
profitable at all, barely even self-sufficient. Those labor camps were
primarily experimental spaces, pilot projects for an ideal society, where an
elite learns how to subject a population to its ideology.23 Experimentation
on humans is the prototypical activity of totalitarianism. It is the ultimate
submission of reality to the pseudoscientific, ideological fiction.

This does not mean that the totalitarian leader is a typical idealist. He
differs from an idealist in that he shows a radical, fanatical blindness but
definitely also because of a remarkable lack of principle and aversion to
laws. For example, he typically rules by decree on the basis of temporary
rules that can be adjusted at his discretion.24 The only law he really upholds
is that there are no laws.25 This is a risk we also run with the coronavirus
pandemic, where emergency rules have superseded established laws and
fundamental rights. In such an emergency, there is no right to protest, no
need for a government to have its actions approved by parliament or
Congress, no need to respect private property. Combined with the fact that
medical tests with questionable validity have become an accepted basis on
which to declare a pandemic emergency at virtually any time, the
magnitude of risk to individuals and society is incalculable.
Each law forms an obstacle to the enforcement of totalitarianism’s iron
logic. “If we want to realize the ultimate goal of history—the reign of the
proletariat, the creation of the super race, and so on—then we must
eliminate all aristocrats and peasants, we have to exterminate all disabled
people and Jews, and so on.” But also, “if we want to prevent the ICUs
from filling up, we have to go into lockdown and shut down the entire
society, prohibit the elderly from seeing their grandchildren, no longer
administer first aid in accidents, prevent women who have just given birth
from holding their newborn babies, prohibit any further protests, prohibit
people without a vaccine from traveling and working in healthcare, etc.” If
someone had presented such a line of reasoning prior to the coronavirus
crisis, people would have wondered, with pity, about that person’s mental
health. Nowadays, it seems unshakable to many people. “You can’t say A
without saying B and C, and so on to the end of the deadly alphabet,”
Arendt said.26 Once one has accepted the premise of the logic, everything
else inevitably follows from there.27 Every logical counterargument is
systematically banned from the field of attention and rendered impotent,
and step by step, all normal ethical boundaries are violated.
The frenetic urge of totalitarianism to impose a basic logic on society
also manifests itself in the obsession with signs, sometimes used as a
distinguishing feature for the elite (uniforms, medals, badges, etc.),28
sometimes as a stigma for the “objectified enemies” of the regime, which is
burned into the flesh, if deemed necessary (e.g., the tattooed numbers in

Auschwitz; but also in the gulags, each group properly had its signs). With
its sign system, totalitarianism tries to imprint its logic on reality, to
permanently link it to the real world. Importantly, the assignment of signs
and stigmas is usually the first step in the process of destruction.29
At this point, we are able to pinpoint the psychological essence of
totalitarianism: an attempt to reduce the polysemy of human language to the
monosemy of a sign system. As discussed in chapter 5, the difference
between humans and animals lies primarily in the communication system.
Animals use signs, which relate in an unambiguous and relatively invariable
way to what they refer to (e.g., the silvery white belly of the stickleback
female refers to sexual receptivity; it is consistent, across all individuals,
contexts, eras, and locales), whereas people use symbols or words
(signifiers) which, depending on the context in which they appear, may
mean something completely different. This characteristic of human
language introduces an endless richness and variety to human experience
and culture, an endless possibility for the creation of new forms of
expression and identities. But it also creates a fundamental uncertainty,
which constitutes man’s greatest anguish. No other living being is
tormented by questions such as “Who am I?,” “What do I want?,” “What do
I mean to the Other?”
Totalitarianism is the ultimate attempt to rid ourselves of this
uncertainty by withdrawing into a (pseudo)scientific certainty and merciless
logic, by trying to reduce symbols to signs, and by trying to annihilate all
variety in cultural expression. Totalitarianism obliterates such diversity in
every possible way.30 The systematized and industrialized transportation,
exploitation, and murder of population groups in labor and extermination
camps are historical examples indelibly engraved in our minds.
The logic of a totalitarian system is in constant flux and typically
becomes ever more absurd. The raison d’être of a totalitarian system
consists of, among others, channeling anxiety, which is why it must
constantly identify new objects of anxiety. When the system is no longer
able to link anxiety to an object, it loses its raison d’être. Both Nazism and
Stalinism were constantly restructuring themselves; the essence of the
phenomenon of totalitarianism lies in its dynamics. The directives and
decrees are constantly changing because it is imperative to create new

responses to new threats. Think of the pigs in Animal Farm,31 who wrote
new rules on the wall overnight.
Also in recent decades, we have seen the emergence of many objects of
anxiety in our society; they have appeared at an accelerating pace, leading
to more and more restrictions on civil liberties: terrorism, climate change,
coronavirus. Especially during the coronavirus crisis, we see the constant
drive of new threats and need for new actions (the endless series of
coronavirus variants, which necessitates the introduction of new measures).
Moreover the whole trajectory on which the story developed was marked by
curious changes: First the lockdowns were justified to “flatten the curve.”
The virus would spread anyway; it was just a matter of slowing the spread.
Subsequently, we had to “crush the curve”: It was suddenly no longer a
matter of slowing the spread but of bringing infections to zero, something
initially considered impossible. And when infections had virtually
disappeared, measures were taken to prevent them (you could say we
switched to “prevent the curve”). Over time, the rules changed at such a
pace that no one seemed to know them anymore, and people accepted more
and more passively that henceforward, they could be fined for anything and
everything without an ounce of legal protection against such arbitrariness.
Throughout this whole process, the story shows itself immune to
criticism, affirming itself to the point of absurdity. For instance, in a
paradoxical way, the people who fall victim as a result of the measures (for
example, due to isolation in residential care centers) are used as an
argument in favor of the measures. These victims are carelessly added to
mortality counts and are therefore used to justify the measures. In the same
vein, the UN warned that famines resulting from lockdowns could kill
millions of people.32 We run the risk that these will also be wrongly counted
among the COVID-19 victims and that the fear, and thus support for stricter
measures, will increase exponentially. And the same problem is likely to
occur with victims of the vaccination campaign. In this way, society could
end up in a vicious circle: The stricter the measures, the more victims; the
more victims, the stricter the measures.
The fact that this should be understood in terms of mass psychology
rather than malicious, intentional deception (i.e., a conspiracy; see chapter
8) doesn’t make it any less dangerous. On the contrary. The lack of critical
reflection, the irrational allocation of empathy, and the willingness among

part of the population to accept great personal loss are an extremely
dangerous cocktail. The way in which unvaccinated people are denied
access to parts of public spaces, which now even engenders support within
the population for denying them access to grocery stores and hospitals,
evokes the most unpleasant reminiscences and may indeed become the first
step of an infernal cycle of dehumanization.
Don’t underestimate where this could go in the future, and not just for
the people in opposition. The idea put forward during the coronavirus crisis
to place infected individuals in quarantine centers is still largely considered
“unrealistic” and “disproportionate,” but within a narrow virological line of
reasoning, it could easily become the next logical step. Insofar as we’re
unable to think outside of the story, it requires only a heightened level of
anxiety (or frustration and aggression) for this to be “necessary for public
health.” Combined with the manipulability of the COVID-19 tests and a
feudal redistribution of power (mayors and governors are endowed with
unprecedented power due to the impasse of national politics), we can see
what appears on the horizon: random roundups, arbitrary isolation, and
discretionary “treatment” of “infected” people. Societal systems that tend
toward totalitarianism all lead to more or less the same phenomena,
however different their stories might be in terms of substance.
The vicious circle in which mass formation and totalitarianism typically
end up is, in a cynical way, also “reassuring”: Mass formation and
totalitarianism invariably destroy themselves by way of logical necessity.33
They are intrinsically self-destructive. The underlying mechanism of self-
destructiveness can be understood in this way: Mass formation feeds on
anxiety and aggression; without the fear and the prospect of venting this
aggression, the mass dynamics grind to a halt. The leaders realize that, if
this happens, the masses will wake up and become aware of the damage
they have suffered, whereupon they will turn against the leaders in a lethal
fashion. Consequently, the leaders have no choice but to keep identifying
new objects of anxiety and introducing new measures to destroy such
objects. And the totalitarized part of the population follows them willingly,
for reasons described in chapter 6 (see group 1 in mass formation): In this
way their anxiety remains linked to an object, they are able to vent their
frustration and destructiveness, and realize time and again a new social

connection via new rituals of death. This is how the vicious, self-destructive
cycle of totalitarianism (and mass formation) works.
The self-destructiveness of totalitarian systems typically reaches its
peak the moment the system succeeds in gagging any dissenting voice and
silencing the opposition. The Soviet Union reached this point around 1930
(when Stalin had acquired almost unlimited power and started his great
purges), while Nazi Germany reached this point around 1935. Here as well,
we see a radical difference with dictatorships, which almost always
moderate their aggression from the moment they firmly hold the power. At
that point, a dictator will, in fact, typically use his common sense: If I want
to stay in power, I have to convince the population that it will be to their
benefit. A totalitarian leader, on the contrary, is blinded by ideology and the
accompanying mass formation, and for this reason, he lacks that common
sense. When the moment of total power has arrived, he just continues to
follow the madness of his logic to its limit. While dissenting voices are
extremely aversive to individuals in the grip of mass formation, they are
literally vital to him—a bitter drug he desperately tries to avoid but without
which he is doomed. Without dissenting voices to break the massive
resonance of the mass narrative, a totalitarian system lapses into radical
self-destructiveness; the hypnosis becomes complete. The totalitarian state
then becomes, as Arendt described, “a monster that devours its own
children.”34
Anyone who wants to understand how unpredictable and absurd such
destructiveness can become can read Solzhenitsyn’s account of the various
waves of persecution and genocide under Stalin.35 During this period, the
regime constantly targeted new groups of the population, to be identified as
“objective enemies”—people who had not committed any hostile act but
were deemed capable of doing so by virtue of the group to which they
belonged. Time and again, these new enemies were isolated and
eliminated.36 At first, it was possible to discern some logic in the great
purges: They started by deporting the bourgeoisie, then the army officers
who returned from abroad (they were too indoctrinated by capitalist logic),
then anyone who had anything to do with religion (they were not
convertible to communism), then all the people who might own gold
(dentists, watchmakers, jewelers), then the peasants who were just a bit
better off than other peasants, and at a later stage all peasants, tout court.

These were all people who were too “petty-bourgeois” or possibly too
affected by contact with capitalists. However, a little later—after all those
groups had been deported or exterminated—the system still had to
discharge its destructive instinct, and random “criminal” population groups
became the object of destruction.37 The tempestuous, destructive dynamics
of totalitarian systems also occurred in Nazi Germany but did not develop
all the way to their ominous end.38 After Hitler deported the gypsies and the
Jews to the concentration camps, he aimed to target not only the Ukrainians
and the Poles, but also all Germans with heart and lung problems. The war
ultimately ensured that these plans could never be carried out.
There are many reasons to assume that totalitarianism starts from
megalomaniac albeit “good” intentions. It aspires to no less than a total
transformation of society into an ideological ideal (for example, the racially
pure society of Nazism or the rule of the proletariat under Stalinism).
However the creation of the paradise typically ends in an inferno. The
history of Stalinism illustrates this in the most poignant way. The
Bolsheviks started out with a determination to remedy the abuses of tsarist
Russia. Under the tsars, about seventeen death sentences were carried out
each year. The communist revolutionaries thought that outrageous. They
screamed bloody murder: The death penalty should be abolished. However,
the contract contained a small footnote: In the beginning, there still would
be executions if it was necessary to install communism itself as a system. In
the first months after the Russian Revolution of 1917, there were 540
executions per year; after a few years, this increased to 12,000 per year; and
between 1937 and 1938 more than 600,000 executions were carried out per
year.39
Even more astounding than the numbers of victims was the arbitrary
way in which people were sentenced to death. Each city and region was
given weekly and monthly quotas that stipulated how many “traitors” had to
be arrested. If, at the end of such a period, the local mandate holders
observed that the target number had not yet been reached, they took to the
streets and arrested people at random:
This submissiveness was also due to ignorance of the
mechanics of epidemic arrests. By and large, the Organs
had no profound reasons for their choice of whom to

arrest and whom not to arrest. They merely had over-all
assignments, quotas for a specific number of judgments.
These quotas might be filled on an orderly basis or whole
arbitrarily.40
The revolutionaries aimed to not only abolish the death penalty, they
would also end all forms of slavery. But that didn’t turn out as expected
either. Solzhenitsyn presents a baffling comparison between the living
conditions of “the proletariat” under the tsars and under Stalin. He describes
how serfs under the tsars were only allowed to work a maximum of seven
hours a day in the winter and twelve hours a day in the summer. When
assigning orders and work, workers’ physical limits were always taken into
account. Moreover, the labor camps themselves were, all in all, tolerable.
Fyodor Dostoevsky described them as so comfortable that the nobles began
to fear they would eventually fail to instill fear. Under Stalinism, there was
indeed a profound change in the fate of prisoners, unfortunately not for the
better. A poignant point of comparison: Under the tsars, prisoners were
required to mine 118 pounds of ore a day; under the communists this
became 28,800 pounds!41
Another good intention of the Bolsheviks was to improve the lot of
peasants. But along the way, they changed their minds. In their attachment
to their land and their animals, the kulaks proved to be too “petit
bourgeois,” and therefore unfit to passionately love the communist
Leviathan.42 The communists decided by decree that the peasantry as a class
should be exterminated. They hastily introduced a deportation policy,
which, in many ways has no equal in history. Peasants were driven by tens
of millions into so-called “special settlements” where they often died down
to the last person due to unequivocally inhumane conditions.43 So, once
again, they were reduced to serfs, serfs whose conditions were, in almost
every way, a lot worse than they were under the tsars.
Le Bon famously stated that “Crowds are only powerful for
destruction.”44 Devoted to solidarity, they aim for the greater good in the
belief that it will lead to an ideological paradise. The outcome, however, is
invariably the same: an infernal abyss. Crowds and their rulers are blindly
dragged into a maelstrom of destruction, until they are confronted with the
ultimate consequence of the rationale that has monopolized their mind: the

mechanistic logic of a dead, soulless universe. As I will elaborate on in
chapter 8, the real masters of the predicament are not the leaders of
totalitarian systems but the stories and their underlying ideology; these
ideologies take possession of everyone and belong to no one; everyone
plays a part, nobody knows the full script.

CHAPTER 8
Conspiracy and Ideology
If only there were evil people somewhere insidiously
committing evil deeds, it were necessary only to separate
them from the rest of us and destroy them. But the line
dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every
human being, and who is willing to destroy a piece of his
own heart?
ALEXANDRE SOLZHENITSYN1
Try out the following: Put three dots far apart on a sheet of paper.
Randomly put a fourth dot on the sheet, anywhere you like. Then take a
ruler, measure the distance between this fourth dot and any of the three
other dots and divide it by two; put a new dot there. Measure the distance
between this new dot with any of the three initial dots (randomly indicated)
and divide the distance again by two, put a new dot there.
Repeat this process a few hundred times and you will witness an
astonishing phenomenon. You will see that, from the nebula of points, a
Sierpinski triangle will arise—a fractal pattern that, from its overall
composition to its tiniest detail, shows an identical pattern, in this case a
triangle with an inscribed triangle (see figure 8.1).
You can easily carry out this process with ten, a hundred, or even more
people, who each take turns adding a point to the sheet of paper, blindly
following the rules stipulated above, without knowing what the purpose of
their actions is. You will create this pattern together by all individually
applying the same simple rule over and over again. This is relevant to what
I will discuss in this chapter: Upon seeing how a Sierpinski triangle arises

on the sheet of paper, a naive viewer would inevitably be under the
impression that the people making the points have detailed prior knowledge
of this pattern and are working together in a planned and coordinated way.
But the reality is different: Nobody needs to know or have ever even seen
this pattern. It is enough that all people independently follow the same
simple rules as they place their points. Keep this Sierpinski triangle in mind
as you read this chapter, it will resonate here and there.
Figure 8.1.
*   *   *
Are the leaders of the masses conspirators? Are mass formation and
totalitarianism set in motion by a grand sophisticated scheme coordinated

by a few people behind the scenes? This is a legitimate question. Hannah
Arendt, for example, frequently pondered this in her work on
totalitarianism.
One thing is certain: Throughout history, the leaders of the masses have
often been perceived as conspirators. As the masses grew in strength and
intensity throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, conspiracy
theories also emerged. These conspiracy theories were typically used to
explain complex social processes and mass formations. The mother of them
all is Protocols of the Elders of Zion, whose popularity, according to Henri
Rollin, was second only to the Bible in the early twentieth century.2 It
proclaimed that there was some kind of secret Jewish world government
that controlled and ruled over all national governments.
Despite its massive popularity, “the Protocols” were a fabrication. Their
fictitious origin is beyond dispute. They are based on a text published by
French lawyer Maurice Joly in 1864 under the title Dialogue in Hell
between Machiavelli and Montesquieu, a kind of pamphlet in which the
author denounced Napoleon III’s hunger for power.3 The text was edited
and distorted by the Russian secret service Okhrana in the late 1800s with
the intention of fueling anti-Semitism in Russia. The Okhrana retained
about half of the original text, added a few paragraphs left and right, and
consistently replaced France with world and Napoléon III with Jews. In this
way, they manufactured a text in which Theodor Herzl, founder of Zionism,
was the head of a Jewish conspiracy that aspired to world domination. The
forged pamphlet was published in 1905, at which point Russian
conservatives and the Russian Orthodox eagerly adopted it to justify their
anti-Semitic agenda. From there, it made its way into Germany during the
first half of the twentieth century and to the Middle East, where it remains
extremely popular to this day.
The tendency to reduce large-scale mass formation to the machination
of an evil elite, however, dates back to earlier times, at least from the
beginning of the Enlightenment. For example, in 1813 Chevalier de Malet
described theories asserting that the heroes of the French Revolution were
actually secret agents of masonic lodges, who in turn belonged to a wider
“revolutionary sect” whose aim it was to manipulate the public rulers like
pawns from behind the scenes.4 This theory was, in turn, based on the
Monita Secreta,5 an even older booklet describing a Jesuit conspiracy in an

attempt to instigate a hate campaign against the establishment. Monita
Secreta was first published in 1612 and sold at book markets all over
Europe until the end of the twentieth century.
*   *   *
The above theories are, in fact, full-fledged conspiracy theories. But
nowadays the term conspiracy theory is bandied about, even when it
concerns theories that don’t make any mention of conspiracy at all. For this
reason, it is good to first pursue some conceptual rigor and to define the
term. According to Wikipedia, a conspiracy is: “A secret plan or agreement
between persons […] for an unlawful or harmful purposes, […] while
keeping their agreement secret from the public or from other people
affected by it.”6 This definition shows that at least three core characteristics
must be present for an activity to be classified as a conspiracy: 1) There has
to be a conscious, intentional and planned endeavor. 2) This endeavor has
to be hidden or secret. 3) The endeavor has to be aimed at inflicting harm
(i.e., there must be some malice toward someone involved).
In current usage, however, the term denotes a wide range of theories. It
is sometimes used accurately to refer to theories about global shadow
governments (such as the Illuminati, or the Cabal) that would steer world
history in its entirety, or even more exotically, about elites of extraterrestrial
origin, more reptilian than human, who have the world in their grip (see for
example, QAnon discourse). But the term is also currently used—
incorrectly—to deride critiques of power structures at the levels of banking,
politics, industry, economics, and media.
The term therefore has become a stigma, a discursive means by which
the dominant discourse protects itself from critical reflection. Likewise, the
term conspiracy is rarely, if ever, used to refer to theories that are in line
with the dominant story and yet are actual conspiracy theories. For
example, consider claims that Russia is trying to steer US elections, that the
Chinese government is behind cyberattacks, that Steve Bannon is secretly
circulating reports that the virus originated in a lab in Wuhan, that Russia
funds all kinds of anarchist newspapers in the West, and so on. Whether
these assertions are accurate or not, they are, in essence, conspiracy
theories. The only reason they are not stigmatized as such is that they

belong to the dominant social discourse as it is constructed every day
through the mainstream media.
*   *   *
That said, we return to the question: Should we consider mass formation the
result of a conspiracy? In the crowd, the individual soul is replaced by a
common group soul, noted Gustave Le Bon.7 The crowd acts in a
coordinated way and repeats the same slogans. It engages thoughts and
expressions that spread through its ranks at lightning speed (Le Bon
described the “contagiousness” of thoughts in a crowd).8 Every segment of
society participates in that pensée unique—politicians, academics, the press,
experts of all kinds, judges, and police officers. In this way, the masses give
the impression of a highly organized phenomenon. Those who, for one
reason or another, are not sensitive to the mass formation and who observe
this social phenomenon “from the outside” tend to think this must be the
result of a large-scale, conscious, and planned coordination.
In chapter 6, I explained that mass formation is largely the result of
individuals being gripped by a common narrative that unites them in a
heroic battle against an object of anxiety. Exactly how much this line of
reason explains about the phenomenon of mass formation remains to be
seen. For instance, there seems to be a real physical resonance among
individuals who form a mass that cannot be explained solely on the basis of
sharing the same narrative. The phenomenon has direct similarities with the
way complex, dynamic systems organize themselves in nature. A well-
known example is the way starlings swarm. At dusk, the starlings fly
toward each other from all directions and begin to move together in a
harmonic pattern, so perfect that Nobel Prize–winner Nikolaas Tinbergen
called the flock a “super individual,” a kind of overarching entity in which
all the individuals are connected to one another like cells of the same body.9
They sense each other perfectly, without any observable form of
communication directing their behavior.
The way in which individuals in a crowd establish connection with one
another is similar. This is particularly visible when a crowd physically
gathers. Elias Canetti describes it in the following way:

The crowd, suddenly there where there was nothing
before, is a mysterious and universal phenomenon. A few
people may have been standing together—five, ten or
twelve, not more. Nothing has been announced, nothing is
expected. Suddenly everything is swarming with people
and more come streaming from all sides as though streets
had only one direction. Most of them do not know what
has happened and, if questioned, have no answer; but
they hurry to be there where most other people are. There
is a determination in their movement that is clearly
different from the expression of ordinary curiosity. It
seems as if the movement of one transmits itself to the
others. But that is not all; they also have one goal, which
is there before they can find words for it. The goal is the
most intense darkness where the most people are
gathered.10
This means that the crowd is not only united by the same thoughts,
beliefs, and behaviors. It also seems to form a kind of physical unity, which
contributes to the overwhelming impression that it is the product of an
immense, planned scheme.
*   *   *
It is not only coordination in the mental and physical movements of the
crowd that make it come across as the product of a conspiracy. Its
threatening nature also contributes to that impression. The crowd typically
tries to impose its will on society; it seeks control over society. This has
always been the case, but this may have become more obvious over time as
crowds have taken on a more durable character and started to exert a
constant influence on the fabric of society. The modern crowd is always
pushing in the same direction: the hyper-controlled society. With each new
object of anxiety—terrorism, climate problems, viruses—the call for greater
technological control rises up from its belly. And such control can swing
sharply and unexpectedly. After the 2016 terrorist attacks in Brussels,
hundreds of cameras were installed in Antwerp’s Jewish quarter to ensure

better protection against terrorists. During the coronavirus crisis, those same
cameras were used to monitor whether Jews were visiting the synagogue.11
Things can turn in a strange direction.
The coronavirus pass (and QR code) is also part of this trend toward
ever more control. The plan to replace this pass in the long (or short) term
with a more sophisticated system, more efficient and difficult to falsify,
rests easily within the logic of the mechanistic ideology. In 2021, a Belgian
minister had already argued that an electronic bracelet would actually be
better (why not an ankle bracelet?). The part of the population that is in the
grip of the mechanistic ideology will certainly go along with it, and the
current state of technology undoubtedly offers the prospect of even more
efficient “solutions” to this problem. At the end of this process, we will be
moving in the direction of a society as described by, amongst others, the
Israeli historian Yuval Noah Harari, in which subcutaneous sensors
constantly monitor the state of our blood and will not only be able to detect
diseases at an early stage but will also know our state of mind, whether we
are feeling sad or happy, angry or calm.12
People who are not in the grip of mass formation initially find
themselves in an extremely diffuse situation that they do not understand—
the phenomenon of mass formation appears absurd and bewildering to those
who are not in its grip—and they feel threatened by its controlling
appearance and its typical intolerance toward those who refuse to partake
(see chapter 6). In this state, the confused spectator typically develops an
intense need for a simple frame of reference, which allows him to mentally
master the complexity, and in which to place and control the anxiety and
other intense emotions that arise. An interpretation in terms of a conspiracy
meets that need. It reduces the enormous complexity of the phenomenon to
a simple frame of reference: All anxiety is linked to one object (a group of
people who intentionally deceives, the supposed “elite”) and thereby
becomes mentally manageable. All blame can be placed outside oneself,
with the Other and, subsequently, all the frustration and anger can also be
directed at that singular object. For this reason, fanatical conspiracy
thinking testifies to the almost irresistible tendency of human beings to find
someone who can be held responsible in the face of adversity and can
thereby be made the object of aggression. This can probably be seen as one

manifestation of a more general, psychological rule: The more anger people
feel, the more intentional malice they perceive.
As such, in a certain sense, conspiracy thinking—the thinking that
reduces all world events to one big conspiracy—fulfills the same function
as mass formation. As with mass formation, conspiracy theorizing fills
humans with a kind of enthusiasm. The anxiety, anger, and discontent that
are now associated with a few simple mental images transform a strongly
negative state into a (symptomatic) positive one. Everything is now
explainable by means of a simple frame of reference; the world is no longer
absurd but logical; one knows where the enemy is and has a point to direct
his frustration and anger on; you can absolve yourself of responsibility and
forego the need to question your own self. This is how conspiracy thinking
acquires enormous psychological importance. Due to the multiplicity of
effects attached to these mental images, the images draw all mental energy
in like a mental magnet and eventually impose themselves as explanations
for almost everything that happens.
For these reasons, thinking in terms of conspiracies becomes tempting.
That’s why the conspiracy logic has a tendency to drift further and further
off course, eventually ending up in the realm of the absurd, even among
highly intelligent rational people. Ultimately, there is such fundamental
distrust that many people assume that whatever “the mainstream” considers
right must certainly be wrong: For example, if the mainstream story says
the Earth is round, it must be flat. Conspiracy thinking also leads invariably
to the dehumanization of a certain group (in fact, dehumanization
sometimes has to be taken literally: The elite consists of reptiles or aliens).
The elite is pure evil, they intentionally make us sick through toxic
substances in our food and the environment, and are responsible for
brainwashing children through education for ages, and so on. In this way of
thinking, the knowledge and power of the elite are easily overestimated.
The elite do not struggle with the lack of knowledge that characterizes
human beings, they do not doubt or hesitate, they don’t face unexpected
hurdles, they do not miscalculate. They are able to manipulate all world
events. Conspiracy thinking inflates the sizableness of the perceived enemy
into infinity so that in the end one can only feel powerless compared to such
a giant. In this way, conspiracy thinking also embodies an aspect of self-
destruction.

*   *   *
Thinking in terms of conspiracies often arises from the appeal of those
psychological “benefits” more than the facts (which, of course, applies to
many forms of thinking). The internal logic is often strong, but the theories
often fail to meet the facts. For example, if you get to know the people who
are the subject of a conspiracy theory more closely, the theory usually
spontaneously loses all persuasiveness. For example, during the coronavirus
crisis, many people started to believe that the experts intentionally misled
the population because they systematically made blatant statistical and other
errors. Experts cannot be that stupid, can they? However, if you get to know
the experts, you often immediately sense that you can’t squeeze their
mistakes into the simple reference frame of lucid manipulation. In July
2021, just before the summer holidays, I met with a few statisticians
involved in the modeling that mapped the course of the infection counts.
One of them reported his concern: The number of infections was rising
again. I immediately replied: “A lot of people go on holiday during this
period, and they are all being tested. Have you accounted for the influence
of the higher number of tests performed?” He looked at his colleagues with
despair and objected: “No, but nobody does that when conducting estimates
of the number of infections,” and “The predictions of the number of
infections based on those models do follow the number of hospital
admissions, do they not?” and “We saw last year what happened in the fall
when we didn’t follow those models,” and so on. The fact that all his
arguments were textbook examples of false arguments (argumentum ad
populum, argumentum ad auctoritatum, false consensus) completely
escaped this intelligent man. Nothing could convince him that more tests
naturally lead to more positive tests. Remember Asch’s experiment in
chapter 6? Mass formation blinds both intelligent and less intelligent people
to the same extent. People really don’t have to be part of a conspiracy to
systematically make the most foolish mistakes.
Furthermore, the one-sidedness with which the mainstream media
reported about the coronavirus crisis seemed to indicate at first that there
was an intentional and planned manipulation of the reporting. Why do we
hear hardly any “dissident” voices? How can one repeat the same
misinformation over and over again? And yet, I know several

“coronacritical” journalists who told me that there was no systematic,
planned steering of the reporting. There was sometimes implicit pressure,
that’s true. For example, some politicians suggested that it was not the right
time to sow confusion by broadcasting all kinds of criticism with respect to
the national policy. In a sense, that was undemocratic influence over the
press—journalists knew that politicians would give them fewer scoops if
they allowed too many critical voices to be heard—but that is still more
accurately described as self-censorship rather than censorship.
I had the same impression in my own contact with politicians: They are
generally people who have doubts, who wonder to what extent they can
afford to deviate from the measures taken by other countries, who are afraid
of being held accountable for coronavirus victims if they introduced more
lenient measures, who respond to the demand of the masses to act
decisively against dissidents. And there are indeed also a few who see their
chance to impose their ideology on society. However, most politicians
merely follow the story obediently, and to do so, they don’t have to gather
at “secret” meetings.
Incidentally, I also had the privilege of being the subject of a few
conspiracy theories myself. Like many people who speak out critically in
one way or another, I was accused of being so-called controlled opposition
(i.e., cooperating covertly with the coronavirus policy). My sole intention, it
seemed, was to keep the opposition calm and quiet with my psychological
theories. Some went further and thought I was a satanist.
In interviews, I had made a number of more or less correct predictions
about the course of the coronavirus crisis, for example that the measures
would not be lifted after the vaccine rollout. To some conspiracists, it was
clear: I had been informed in advance about the plan. And to confirm the
devil worshippers, I had also announced the evil that was about to happen
beforehand. To this day, I am unaware of my membership in any sinister
society and I believe that my “predictions” were made on simple grounds.
In the psycho-logic of the coronavirus story, I found nothing that could
prevent the continuation of the measures after the vaccine rollout. The fear
was already present prior to the coronavirus crisis and it would not go away
with vaccination, regardless of whether the vaccine was effective or not. I
think I am somewhat entitled to have a word in this matter but nevertheless

understand that an explanation in terms of satanism is more appealing to
some people.
It’s also worth mentioning that people who identified with the dominant
narrative also sometimes saw me as a conspirator. They were of the opinion
that I didn’t believe my own theory of mass formation, it was just shrewd
manipulation to detract from social support for the measures; I was only
aspiring to obtain a position in some right-wing political party. I can only
say: I myself would be very surprised to find my name on any ballot in the
next election.
*   *   *
Is there not any steering and manipulation at all then? The answer is a
resounding yes, there most certainly is all kinds of manipulation. And with
the means available to today’s mass media, the possibilities are simply
phenomenal. Such steering, however, is primarily not a steering by
individuals; the most fundamental steering is impersonal in nature. The
steering is first and foremost driven by an ideology—a way of thinking.
Ideologies organize and structure society progressively and organically. As
we have described in detail in the previous chapters, the dominant ideology
is mechanistic in nature. This ideology typically derives its appeal from the
utopian vision of an artificial paradise (see chapter 3). The world and man
are a machine and they can be comprehended and manipulated as such. The
hitches in the machine that cause suffering can be mechanically “repaired.”
Yes, even death can be eliminated in the long run. Moreover, all this can be
done without man having to reflect on his role in his own misfortune,
without questioning himself as a moral and ethical being. This ideology
makes life easy in the short term; the price for convenience will be paid in
arrears (see chapter 5).
It is at this fundamental level that we have to situate the “secret” forces
that direct individuals in the same direction and ultimately organize society
as a whole. As with drawing the Sierpinski triangle, if everyone follows the
same rules, it results in strictly regular patterns emerging in society. Like
iron filings scattered in the force field of a magnet, individuals arrange
themselves in a perfect pattern under the influence of these forces. Man has
always fallen prey to the aforementioned “temptations”—the illusion of

rational understanding and control, the resistance to questioning oneself
critically as a human, the pursuit of short-term convenience, and so on.
Within the religious discourse, these temptations were considered
dangerous, but that changed with the rise of mechanistic thinking. From
then on, they became anchored in the dominant narrative, which also
became their justification. Leaders and followers were captivated by the
limitless possibilities the human mind seemed to offer. The whole evolution
toward a hyper-controlled technological society—the surveillance society—
is simply unavoidable as long as the human mind remains trapped in that
logic and is (to a large extent unconsciously) controlled by those attractors.
It is this ideology that redesigned society, created new institutions, and
selected new authority figures. The transition from a democracy to a
totalitarian technocracy, in which the coronavirus crisis was a Great Leap
forward, actually formed part of the logic of the mechanistic ideology from
the very beginning. In a mechanistic universe, it is inevitably the technical
expert who has the last word, based on his superior mechanistic knowledge.
Based on this ideology, institutions were created that make plans about
what future society should look like and how the ideal future society should
respond to crisis situations. Operation Lockstep from the Rockefeller
Foundation,13 Event 201 of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (in
collaboration with Johns Hopkins University and the Rockefeller
Foundation),14 and COVID-19: The Great Reset by Klaus Schwab15 are
examples of such endeavors. For many people, these events and
publications are the ultimate proof that the social developments we’re
experiencing are planned and the product of a conspiracy. Since long before
the outbreak, these “plans” described how society would go into lockdown
as the result of a pandemic, that a biopassport would be introduced, that
people would be tracked and traced with subcutaneous sensors, and so on.
If we keep in mind the definition of a conspiracy—a secret, planned,
intentional and malicious scheme—we immediately notice two things: It’s
not much of a secret since all the aforementioned “plans” are openly
available on the internet. And whether those plans guide the discourse and
action of experts through targeted instructions is at least questionable. The
experts’ communication is full of contradictions and inconsistencies,
retractions and corrections, clumsy wording and transparent errors. This is
nothing like a streamlined execution of a pre-established plan. If these are

conspirators, they are the lousiest ones ever. Obviously, psychological
warfare may also make use of confusion and confusing messages, but that
does not explain experts trying to correct their mistakes of the day before,
with visible unease and discomfort.
The only consistency within the experts’ discourse is that the decisions
always move toward a more technologically and biomedically controlled
society, in other words, toward the realization of the mechanistic ideology.
As such, we see exactly the same problems in the coronavirus crisis as
those revealed by the replication crisis in academic research: a maze of
errors, sloppiness, and forced conclusions, in which researchers
unconsciously confirm their ideological principles (the so-called allegiance
effect, see chapter 4).
In the whole process of exercising power—i.e., shaping the world to the
ideological beliefs—there usually is little need to make secret plans and
agreements. As Noam Chomsky put it, if you have to tell someone what to
do, you’ve chosen the wrong person.16 In other words: The dominant
ideology selects who ends up in key positions. Someone who does not share
the ideology is usually less successful in society, apart from a few
exceptions. Consequently, all people in positions of power automatically
follow the same rules in their thinking and in their behavior and are under
the influence of the same “attractors” (to use a term from complex
dynamical systems theory). Furthermore, they all succumb to the same
logical fallacies and the same absurd behavior because they all,
independently of each other, or at least without having to gather in secret
meetings, follow the same distorted logic. Compare it to computers running
on the same, wrong software: Their “behavior” and their “thinking” will all
deviate in the same direction, without “communicating” with one another.
This is exactly what the Sierpinski triangle shows us: Mind-blowingly
precise and regular patterns can arise because individuals independently
follow the same simple rules of behavior by being attracted to the same set
of attractors. The ultimate master is the ideology, not the elite.
Those plans and visions for the future are not so much “forced” on the
population. In many ways, the leaders of the masses—the so-called elite—
give the people what they want. When fearful, the population wants a more
controlled society: The lockdowns were, for many, a liberation from the
unbearable and meaningless routine of working life, the fragmented society

was in need of a common enemy, and so on. The “plans” do not precede the
developments, as a conspiracy logic likes to suggest. They rather follow
them. Those who guide the masses are not real “leaders” in the sense that
they do determine where the masses will go. Instead they sense what people
crave and they adjust their plans in that direction, in an opportunistic way.
They wallow in the narcissism of one who controls and directs the chain of
events, but they are more like a child sitting on the bow of a ship and
turning a toy steering wheel every time the tanker changes direction. Or we
can think of King Cnut, who stood before the sea at low tide, ordered the
waves to retreat, and narcissistically beamed with pride because it actually
happened. It goes even so far that some of those institutions have even
adapted previously released films, thereby suggesting that they can predict
the future. (For example, the Digi-kosmos film was adapted in such a way
that it seemed to predict the course of the coronavirus crisis exactly as it
happened.17) Ironically, conspiracy thinking confirms the leaders’
narcissism by taking them seriously and believing that they are truly
steering the ship, or causing the waves to recede.
There are countless other examples that seem to point in the direction of
a plan being implemented, such as the fact that the definition of pandemic
was adjusted shortly before the coronavirus crisis; that the definition of
herd immunity was changed during the crisis, implying that only vaccines
can achieve it; that the counting method for COVID-19 deaths was adjusted
by the WHO so it was higher than the number of flu deaths; that the
registration methodology of vaccine side effects could not but lead to
serious underestimation (for example, by labeling the side effects that
become apparent during the first fortnight after vaccination as not vaccine
related); that all key political positions when the crisis started were held by
politicians who were pro-technocracy (referred to as the World Economic
Forum’s Young Global Leaders); and so on.
These, too, are examples of how an ideology gets a grip on society
rather than evidence of the execution of a conspiracy. For instance: Similar
things happen during almost all major reorganizations in large companies
and government institutions. Indeed, anyone who would like to reorganize a
company or institution and holds the right position(s) will try to adjust the
rules here and there in ways that they think are conducive to the goals of the
reorganization. And they will do their best to install the right people in the

right positions beforehand and will try to mold those minds for the
reorganization and restructuring through all kinds of formal and informal
influence. Anyone who experiences this up close at a company or
institution will probably not experience this as a conspiracy. We could even
say that every biological organism does the same: It tries to adjust its
environment in the desired direction.
At certain points, however, the aforementioned practices may turn into
something that does have the structure of a conspiracy. Large institutions do
use all kinds of questionable strategies to impose their ideals on society, and
the means to do so have increased spectacularly in recent centuries. The
whole 
mechanization, 
industrialization, 
“technologization,” 
and
“mediatization” of the world has indeed led to the centralization of power,
and no sane person can deny that this power is pursued in a relentless way,
with a radical lack of ethical and moral awareness. It is well documented:
Whether in governments, the tobacco industry, or the pharmaceutical lobby,
there is bribery, manipulation, and fraud. Who doesn’t partake in these
practices can hardly remain at the top.
In their endeavors to impose their ideals on society, institutions and
people do indeed cross ethical boundaries, and when this goes far enough,
their strategies may indeed devolve into a full-fledged conspiracy: a secret,
intentional, planned, and malicious project. It is also well known that, as the
process of totalitarianization continues, the totalitarian regime is
increasingly organized as a full-fledged “secret society.”18 For example, we
have seen that the Holocaust came about through a mind-boggling process
of mass formation that blinded both the perpetrators and the victims and
drew them into an infernal dynamic (see chapter 7). However, at a certain
level, there was also an intentional plan, which systematically aimed to
optimize racial purity through sterilization and elimination of all impure
elements. There were approximately five people who neatly and
systematically prepared the entire Holocaust destruction apparatus, and they
managed to make all the rest of the system cooperate with it in total
blindness for a long time. And those who did see what was going on—
namely that the concentration camps were in fact extermination camps—
were accused of being … conspiracy theorists.19
The preparation and implementation of such plans are by no means the
exclusive privilege of totalitarian regimes. Throughout the twentieth

century, large numbers of men and women whose genetic material was
considered “inferior” have been secretly sterilized under the doctrine of
eugenics. By 1972, the term eugenics had taken on a too-negative
connotation and was replaced by social biology, but the practice remained
the same and continued into the twenty-first century (for example, the
sterilization of California inmates without informed consent).20 Do we have
good reason to believe that, in recent years, such practices have ceased?
The fact that, in the current social climate, there is hardly any latitude to
expose this decay in the exercise of power is highly dangerous. This is
precisely the detrimental influence of the rise of the masses: It is so
radically intolerant of dissent opinions that it labels any analysis of
dangerous influence from institutions, companies, and so on as “conspiracy
theory.” La passion de l’ignorance (the passion for ignorance) is flourishing
like never before. And paradoxically, fanatical conspiracy thinking
contributes to this problem because it makes more nuanced analyses less
visible and more prone to stigmatization. They are tarred by the same brush
and guilty by association.
This makes it difficult for everyone to assess the presence and extent of
malicious manipulation. Either it is completely ignored or it is perceived to
be everywhere. The appeal of these two opposites can always be situated on
an affective-impulsive level; both interfere with an authentic, sincere
intellectual passion to want to know the truth. In the end, it is usually only a
small group of people who manage to escape these forces and are able to
make more nuanced and subtle assessments.
This gives rise to a polarization in society, which becomes divided
between two camps: a large group (the crowd), who believes everything
that appears in the mainstream media, however absurd it may be; and then
another group, who completely distrusts the same story. Just as in Edgar
John Rubin’s famous drawing (see figure 8.2) in which one can see either a
vase or two faces, but never both at the same time, these two groups
perceive in the social developments a different picture of reality, a different
gestalt, and cannot imagine that the other group perceives a totally different
picture.

Figure 8.2.
The risk of a violent confrontation between these two groups is not
nonexistent. Conspiracy thinking itself can also give rise to the emergence
of a mass phenomenon. The famous witch hunts of the Middle Ages,
leaving some cities and towns with hardly a woman alive, are examples of
such phenomenon. And conspiracy theories such as The Protocols of the
Elders of Zion also played an important role in the rise of the anti-Semitic
masses of the Middle East and Nazi Germany. Nazi propaganda mimicked
The Protocols in many ways; Heinrich Himmler and Adolf Hitler knew
them by heart.21 The narrow, causal attribution of all suffering to a small
Jewish elite was adopted by the Nazis. This causal reasoning was a
monstrosity in itself, but the absurdity inherent in the masses ensured that it
was not so much the supposed Jewish elite, but millions of ordinary Jews
who fell victim to it.
In this way, conspiracy thinking can be a reaction to mass formation, an
interpretation of it, but it can also give rise to mass formation itself. It is not
expected, however, that current conspiracy narratives will lead to large-
scale mass formation. In 1951, Arendt already foreshadowed that the
masses of the future would be dull, bureaucratic, and technocratic in
nature.22 Nowadays, certain conspiracy theories such as QAnon lead to

small-scale mass formation, as we saw to a certain extent during the
storming of the US Capitol. In this way, a small crowd can come face to
face with a large one. However, in a physical confrontation, the smaller
crowd will lose out. In doing so, it testifies in its own way to the blindness
and, above all, the self-destructiveness inherent to mass formation. If one
wants to slow down the masses, one must do so primarily by psychological
means (discussed later in this chapter). Physical violence, on the other hand,
will mainly incite the masses and make them more fanatically convinced of
their righteousness and their sacred duty to persecute and destroy the
minority.
For this reason, conspiracy thinking is something to be dealt with
carefully, on an intellectual level as well as on an ethical and pragmatic
level. It often arises as an explanation for the phenomenon of mass
formation, but it shows a tendency to drift off course into theories that are
increasingly distant from a nuanced view of reality and, on a psychological
level, often lead to simplistic and caricatural views. Arendt gave a moderate
and, in all respects, sensible answer to the question of what extent mass
formation and totalitarianism can be traced back to a conspiracy: There is a
certain conspiracy dimension in most social upheavals—those in power
may even have little choice but to contrive things behind closed doors—but
it is easily overestimated. If anything rules from the behind the scenes, it’s
not so much secret societies, but ideologies. There is a steering and
organizing body, but it does not primarily consist of a conspiracy elite that
manages the world in a planned and coordinated way, but rather of a typical
way of thinking, an ideology. To put it in the words with which Charles
Eisenstein rejected a one-sided interpretation in terms of conspiracies:
“Events are indeed orchestrated in the direction of more and more control,
only the orchestrating power is itself a zeitgeist, an ideology … a myth [and
not a conspiracy].”23 Such a consideration never attributes the cause of
social dynamics to one single point. The whole of society has a part in its
rise in one way or another; every person bears a responsibility in it. That’s
why this nuanced statement is usually unsatisfactory for those who thirst for
certainty and seek to vent anger and frustration by pointing out one main
culprit.
*   *   *

In the previous three chapters, we have discussed the psychology of mass
formation and totalitarianism theoretically. At this point, it is useful to pose
the question: Can we also do something with this theory in practice? Our
analysis mainly highlighted the complexity of the phenomenon; to explain
it in terms of a large-scale conspiracy doesn’t help us any further. For this
reason, we have to conclude that, first and foremost, the problem cannot be
solved by the violent elimination of an evil elite. The essence of the
problem of totalitarianism lies in enormous mass dynamics. This means the
elimination of totalitarian leaders will be to no avail; they are utterly
replaceable. This is how Arendt put it:
In substance, the totalitarian leader is nothing more nor
less than the functionary of the masses he leads; he is not
a power-hungry individual imposing a tyrannical and
arbitrary will upon his subjects. Being a mere
functionary, he can be replaced at any time, and he
depends just as much on the masses he embodies as the
masses depend upon him.24
The leader is, so to speak, just the apex of the pyramid of the mass
movement, and if he is eliminated, he will be replaced without the system
destabilizing.
Violence as a reaction against mass formation and totalitarianism is, of
course, effective when carried out by external enemies of a totalitarian
system—for example, the war of the Allies against Nazi Germany—but it
offers 
few 
prospects 
for 
internal 
resistance 
and 
is 
generally
counterproductive. When the opposition uses violence, the crowd merely
sees justification and a “get-out-of-jail-free” card to unleash its already
enormous potential of frustration and aggression and take it out on those it
views as the enemy (those who do not go along with the New Solidarity).
Arendt noted that nonviolent resistance, on the other hand, is
remarkably successful against totalitarianism.25 She comes to that
conclusion on the basis of historical observations—for example, the
effectiveness of the resolute refusal of the Danish government and
population to participate in the anti-Semitic measures that the Nazis tried to
impose, but she fails to offer a psychological explanation. We can do that to

some extent on the basis of the psychological description we have provided
thus far. Furthermore, we can also describe the idea of “nonviolent
resistance” in a more refined way.
Both the masses and their leaders are gripped by an ideologically
colored narrative, the masses are hypnotized, the leaders are under a form
of self-hypnosis. Both, so to speak, are in the grip of a voice (see the
importance of indoctrination and mass media propaganda described in
chapter 6). Mass formation, as a form of hypnosis, is a phenomenon where
individuals are in the grip of the resonance of a voice—the voice of the
leader of the crowd. However, not all of the population falls prey to this
process. In chapter 6, we identified three groups that form when a mass
rises: the masses themselves, who truly go along with the story and are
“hypnotized” (usually about 30 percent); a group that is not hypnotized but
chooses to not go against the grain (usually about 40 to 60 percent); a group
that is not hypnotized and actively resists the masses (ranging from 10 to 30
percent).
The first and foremost guideline for members of this third group is that
they should let their voices be heard and in as sincere a way as possible so
as to not let the resonance of the dominant, hypnotic voice become
absolute. The way in which this can happen varies throughout the process
of totalitarianism (the dissident voice is progressively more censored and
banned from mass media and from the public sphere), but there always
remain opportunities. The assertion of a different voice always has an effect
on the other two groups. As Gustave Le Bon described in the nineteenth
century, dissonant voices (i.e., the voices of the third group) usually do not
succeed in breaking through the hypnosis of the first group, but it does
reduce the depth of the hypnosis and prevent the masses from committing
atrocities. Also, the leaders prove sensitive to the dissonant voices, which is
what we described in the previous chapter where we referred to the “waking
up” of the Nazi leaders who were deployed to Denmark and Bulgaria.
Asserting one’s voice should typically be done in the calmest and most
respectful way possible, never in an intrusive way and always with
sensitivity to the irritation and anger it may generate but with determination
and persistence. Although the dissident voice typically provokes rejection,
and under certain circumstances also aggression, it is worth realizing that
the masses also need this in order to not fall prey to themselves. We

described this in chapter 7: If the opposition is silent, the totalitarian system
becomes a monster that devours its own children. For this reason, it is an
illusion to think that silence is the safest option, from whomever concerned.
The dissident voice also has an effect on the second group, the group
that is compliant but not hypnotized. In contrast to the first group, this
group is responsive to the quality of rational argument. Therefore, it is
important that the dissident voice analyzes and refutes the indoctrination
and propaganda of the totalitarian narrative in the clearest and most
substantiated way possible. In a sense, this isn’t difficult since the
totalitarian discourse, especially its typical excessive use of numbers and
statistics, is usually simply absurd. For the opposition, it is a matter of
repeatedly and persistently, through the (limited) channels available for that
purpose, piercing the web of appearances and showing, insofar as possible,
the way in which a false image is being created. It is important to note that
the counterargument should never aim at reversing the process of mass
formation and a return to the prior prevailing state (“the old normal”)
because this is precisely the environment from which mass formation arose
—from a profound psychological unease and suffering, which I described in
chapter 6 (the four psychological conditions for mass formation).
Attempting to convince people to return to this is completely nonsensical
and will provoke the opposite effect: Those who are in the grip of the mass
formation will cling even more stubbornly to their narrative. In general,
counterarguments should be formulated in a disciplined and organized
manner, through a specially created structure of working groups, specialized
in certain themes and topics. The formation of such groups, in itself, also
provides an antidote to one of the most pernicious effects of totalitarianism:
the destruction of every social bond and structure.
Finally, the third group speaks for itself. This group usually becomes, to
a greater or lesser extent, the object of the frustration and aggression of the
masses (see chapter 6). It is typically dehumanized, presented as creatures
of inferior humanity. If this group ceases to assert its voice, it confirms the
stigma. Speaking and rational reasoning is what distinguishes humans from
animals; to stop speaking out paves the way for dehumanization. This in
itself shows the importance of continuing to speak out as calmly and wisely
as possible. But there is another important reason to do so. Speaking leads
to experiences of meaning and existence, at least if the one who speaks tries

to express his subjective truth as honestly and sincerely as possible.
Dissident speech doesn’t have to be primarily tactical or rhetorical in
nature, but it should be authentic and honest (see chapter 7). Even if
speaking out has no effect on the Other, it will still do something for
oneself. Eventually, it is in this act of truth-telling that the absurdity of
totalitarianism becomes meaningful: Those who do not join in the collective
madness and quietly and sincerely continue to assert their opposing voice
are, by doing so, steadily elevated in their humanity. Read, for instance,
Solzhenitsyn’s poignant testimony on the effects on himself that speaking
out and writing had during his eight-year stay in the gulags.26
The first and foremost task is to keep speaking out. Everything stands or
falls with the act of speaking out. It is in the interest of all parties. The
specific manner in which the act of speaking out takes place—in books,
publications or interviews, in front of the cameras, in shops or at the kitchen
table, in the company of a limited or large group of people—is of less
importance; everyone who, in his own way, speaks out about the truth,
contributes to the cure of the ailment that is totalitarianism. It is not
necessary to have a huge number of people who unite in speaking out to
form a meaningful social group. Remember that the masses (the
totalitarized portion of the population) usually consist of only about 30
percent of the total population, and the 40 or 50 percent who meekly follow
do so mainly because the masses form the largest contiguous block and
have the loudest voice, which to them is the most convincing. However, the
absurdity of the discourse of the masses also plays to their detriment. If this
remaining 10 to 20 percent can form a countergroup (without becoming a
crowd themselves!) and is able to assert an alternative voice in a sensible
way, this group will then be able to undo the mass formation, or at the very
least, to free society from its grip. Moreover, the nonconformist group has
to always bear in mind that the masses (and the totalitarian system) are
intrinsically self-destructive and always destroy themselves in the long run
(see chapter 7). The totalitarian system doesn’t have to be overcome so
much as one must somehow survive until it destroys itself.
A more strategic option to break through the mass formation could also
be considered: replacing one object of anxiety with another. Mass formation
occurs when free-floating, unbound anxiety attaches itself to an object of
anxiety (see chapter 6). This connection can be undone if another object

that instills even more anxiety is presented. For example, one could try to
circulate an alternative narrative that puts the totalitarian regime itself
forward as an object of anxiety (thus, evoking the atrocious consequences
of totalitarianism). If at the same time, this story also offers a strategy to
deal with that new object of anxiety, one could indeed achieve a more
durable reorientation of the anxiety in individuals. This could work to some
extent. If such a strategy is applied moderately, this amounts to a warning
for a real danger with good reason. However, if this is made to be the
primary strategy, whose entire focus lies on the instillment of anxiety, one
crosses ethical boundaries and will drift into a dehumanization process,
which is in no way different from the one that is typical for mass formation.
*   *   *
I have provided a few guidelines for defense against the psychological
mechanism of mass formation. Of course, these guidelines in themselves
are only superficial. The rise of the masses and totalitarianism is ultimately
grounded in mechanistic thinking (as we discussed in the first five chapters
of this book). For this reason, ultimately, we have to get beyond the
mechanistic ideology in order to come to a substantive sociocultural
solution. In the final three chapters, we will examine whether the
mechanistic ideology has some openings that could offer us another vision
of the world, and of mankind.

PART III
BEYOND THE MECHANISTIC
WORLDVIEW

CHAPTER 9
The Dead versus the Living
Universe
The following is broadly the causal reasoning we have presented in this
book: The mechanistic ideology has put more and more individuals into a
state of social isolation, unsettled by a lack of meaning, free-floating
anxiety and uneasiness, as well as latent frustration and aggression. These
conditions led to large-scale and long-lasting mass formation, and this mass
formation in turn led to the emergence of totalitarian state systems.
Therefore, mass formation and totalitarianism are in fact symptoms of
the mechanistic ideology. Just like an individual physical or psychological
symptom, these social symptoms signal an underlying problem: In this case,
that a large proportion of the population feels socially isolated and suffers
from intense experiences of anxiety and meaninglessness. And just like
individual symptoms, they generate a disease gain. For example, they
transform the experiences of social isolation and fear into an illusion of
connectedness. And as with individual symptoms, they generate this disease
gain while failing to solve the underlying problem itself.
For this reason, we need an analysis of the underlying problem—that is,
the cause of the symptom, namely the mechanistic ideology. Societies are
primarily besieged by ideas. The most fundamental change that we as a
society have to aim for is not a change in practical terms but a change in
consciousness. In the first part of this book, we examined the psychological
problems caused by the mechanistic ideology; in the final part, we will
examine how we can transcend this ideology. In this chapter, we will reflect
upon one of the core characteristics of the mechanistic ideology. This
ideology sees the universe as a logically knowable, predictable,

controllable, and undirected mechanical process. And above all, it sees the
universe as a dead and meaningless given, as the blind, mechanistic
interaction between dead, elementary particles. While such a view of the
world and matter imposes itself as the only scientifically valid view, a
thorough examination teaches us that, from a scientific point of view, this
world view is actually outdated.
*   *   *
The mechanistic worldview is, in fact, as old as man himself, or at least, it
was already present in what we usually consider the early days of Western
civilization. In the era of the ancient Greeks, about 400 BCE, atomists such
as Leucippus and Democritus were already defending the idea that the
universe, in its entirety, was essentially a collection of mechanically
interacting material particles. Those particles were already called atoms,
which means “indivisible” or, more literally, “unsliceable” (atomos).
It was not until the Enlightenment, however, that mechanistic thinking
became dominant and provided the only remaining Grand Narrative of
Western culture. As we discussed in chapter 1, this ideology even furnished
a kind of creation myth: Everything starts with a big bang that sets the
machine of the universe in motion and, through a series of mechanistic
effects, produces first a series of inorganic elements and subsequently also
living beings. Within this reasoning, the world is a dead mechanistic
process, an enormous chain reaction of collisions of elementary particles
that continues endlessly, without purpose or direction, and somewhere
along the way, randomly produces life and mankind.
This entire process is seen as strictly predictable. The French
mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace expressed this in perhaps the most
direct way:
We ought then to regard the present state of the universe
as the effect of its anterior state and as the cause of the
one which is to follow. Given for one instant an
intelligence which could comprehend all the forces by
which nature is animated and the respective situation of
the beings who compose it […] it would embrace in the

same formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the
universe and those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing
could be uncertain and the future, as the past, would be
present to its eyes.1
Most philosophers have considered such a worldview to be naive.
Bertrand Russell, for example, argued in his Russell’s paradox that there
can never be an entity, however much computing power it has, that can
have complete knowledge.2 Such an entity would also have to have a
complete knowledge of itself, and also a complete knowledge of itself as an
entity possessing complete knowledge of itself, and so on to infinity. In the
twentieth century, Werner Heisenberg also proved this concretely: One
cannot speak of elementary particles in terms of certainty. The more
accurately their position in time is determined, the more uncertain becomes
their location in space. “Not only is the universe stranger than we think; it is
stranger than we can think.” (See Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle.)3
These elementary building blocks of the universe—atoms—appeared to
be both more complex and more elusive than previously thought. The more
the researcher’s hand tried to close itself around them, the more they
slipped through his fingers. Rather than the tiny, massive spheres
envisioned by the ancient Greeks, twentieth-century physics showed them
to be swirling, energetic systems, patterns of vibration rather than solid
matter. Yes, in the final analysis, they even turned out not to be material
phenomena at all but rather to belong to the order of consciousness. The
great physicists of the twentieth century believed them to be mere thought-
forms, mental phenomena that respond to the consciousness of researchers
(as we shall discuss further in the chapter 10).
We could of course delve deeper into the findings of quantum
mechanics to further relativize the idea of a mechanistic universe. But the
phenomena of which quantum mechanics speaks are situated in a dimension
that most people will never have access to. Who will ever get a direct look
at the subatomic world? In this respect, there is another field of science that
offers better, more concrete perspectives, namely the complex and dynamic
systems theory and the chaos theory. These theories deal with phenomena
that everyone, in principle, can sensorily perceive and that illustrate the
limitations of the mechanistic vision in an equally convincing way.

*   *   *
When Benoit Mandelbrot—a brilliant mathematician, considered one of the
founders of chaos theory—joined IBM, he was confronted with the problem
of noise that interferes with computer signals transmitted over telephone
lines.4 This noise occurred due to a series of external factors, such as
humidity, irregularities in the material of the lines, and small
electromagnetic disturbances that hampered signal transmission in an
accidental and incalculable way. We can only assume that these factors
acted in a random way and independently from one another and therefore,
normally, there cannot be any consistency in the noise on the telephone
lines.
Mandelbrot was not a person who believed what everyone else believed,
however. He was bold enough to assume that there might be a pattern in the
noise after all. “Just because it doesn’t make sense doesn’t mean it can’t
exist,” he said. And he was correct. In the noise, he discovered a well-
known mathematical pattern, known as Cantor dust. Anyone can easily
reproduce this pattern by repeatedly dividing a line into three segments and
omitting the middle segment each time.
The big question, of course, is the following: How is it possible that a
series of random factors, manifesting independently, can lead to a regular
pattern? How could it be that damage caused to a cable by, say, a
screwdriver and the magnetic disturbances of a thunderstorm become part
of the same pattern? It is as if all these accidental, mechanical disturbances
are drawn into a stable and strictly mathematically ordered field in order to
be stripped of any coincidence. James Gleick put it this way: “Life sucks
order from a sea of disorder.”5 The noise on a telephone line seems to
organize itself. In living organisms, we have—erroneously—come to
consider this quality of self-organization to be normal. Living beings
breathe air, and eat and drink, and all these disparate elements bring about
the ordered pattern of their bodies. However, when this phenomenon
manifests itself in the inorganic world, we perceive it as a perplexing
phenomenon and contrary to the prevailing worldview (which it is).
Another example is the regularity of water droplets, dripping from a
faucet, as demonstrated by Robert Shaw.6 This is an example from everyday
life, observable by anyone. A relatively simple mathematical procedure

suffices to show that there is mathematical regularity in the lapse of time
between the drops dripping down, which, when represented visually,
produces beautiful organic patterns. In this case as well, we encounter the
curious paradox that the moment a drop of water drips down is, on the one
hand, caused by a series of disconnected, external factors—the surface
tension of the water, the temperature, vibrations in the surrounding air, the
texture of the faucet’s rim. But on the other hand, it seems to follow a strict
pattern. The reason all these unrelated factors lead to a consistent pattern is
difficult, even impossible, to explain within a mechanistic worldview.
Obviously, this pattern can be disrupted by certain interferences—for
example, by intentionally blocking the mouth of the faucet with your finger.
However, after the cessation of this interference, where it is difficult to
determine in which way it differs from the other external factors, the system
returns to its spontaneous equilibrium and the pattern reinstates itself.
Gleick had the following to say about it: “Those studying chaotic
dynamics discovered that the disorderly behavior of simple systems acted
as a creative (italics added) process. It generated complexity: richly
organized patterns, sometimes stable and sometimes unstable, sometimes
finite and sometimes infinite, but always with the fascination of living
things.”7 Please, take note of the qualifications creative and living. This
aspect of creation and life in matter was overlooked by the classical
scientific approach.
More or less in line with these examples, fractal theory (a subdomain of
chaos theory) showed an unsuspected, mathematical determinacy of sets of
natural forms, such as those of leaves, plants, trees, sea sponges, algae. The
best-known examples are perhaps seashell patterns studied by Hans
Meinhardt;8 the Mandelbrot set; and the spiral shapes determined by the
Fibonacci sequence. This last determination is so simple that it is easily
understandable, even to nonmathematicians. The Fibonacci sequence
consists of a series of numbers that is obtained by starting with the numbers
0 and 1 and then continuing with a number that is the sum of the two
previous numbers (so 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, etc.). This series of numbers
determines the curves of a spiral that can be found everywhere in nature.
Galileo’s famous statement in 1623 that “The book of nature is written in
the language of mathematics” must be taken literally, it seems.9

Let’s take a closer look at one example. Lorenz’s chaotic waterwheel is
a mechanical device that makes movements that show direct similarities
with the dynamics of convection patterns in liquid and gas. (See figure 9.1.)
It was designed by MIT professor Willem Malkus in 1972 to illustrate the
work of Edward Lorenz, a mathematician and meteorologist and one of the
founders of chaos theory. It consists of a rotating wheel to which small
buckets with a bottom hole are attached. At the top, there is a tap that
provides water flow into the top bucket. At a very low influx, the wheel
does not move, simply because the water flows out of the hole in the bottom
of the bucket faster than it flows in. At a slightly higher influx, the bucket
will fill up and the wheel will start to move, sometimes in one direction,
sometimes in the other. Once the wheel has chosen a certain direction, the
behavior of the wheel is regular and predictable and directly correlated with
the influx of water: The greater the influx, the faster it turns.

Figure 9.1. Lorenz’s water wheel
If the influx exceeds a certain limit, however, a series of complex
effects occur that cause the wheel to behave erratically. The top bucket
initially fills to the brim, causing the wheel to turn at a high speed. But then,
because of the high speed, the other buckets hardly get a chance to fill up as
they pass by the top. This causes the wheel to slow down and possibly come
to a temporary stop, whereupon it continues to rotate in the same direction,
or sometimes in the opposite direction. This process is repeated with
countless variations; the wheel sometimes moves quickly, sometimes
slowly, sometimes in the same direction for a prolonged period of time,

sometimes constantly changing direction. The irregularity in the chaotic
phase was shown to be total in nature. This means that there is no (strictly)
repeating pattern or repeating period in the wheel’s movements.
No matter how chaotic the movements appear, they surprisingly turned
out to be strictly determined. They can be described by a mathematical
model consisting of three iterative differential equations with three
unknowns (which in themselves are actually a simplification of the much
more complex Navier-Stokes convection equations). In conformity with the
chaotic behavior of the wheel, the (endless) series of solutions of these
equations shows no periodicity either. Or, in other words, there is no
recurring pattern in the set of values of the unknowns generated by the
equations.
Therefore, the dynamics of the wheel closely resemble the structure of
irrational numbers, such as pi, whose digits after the decimal point do not
show any periodicity either. The qualification of such numbers as
“irrational” primarily refers to the fact that such numbers cannot be written
as a fraction, as a ratio. However, in laymen’s terms, “irrational” in the
sense of not rational is not incorrect either. It is true that such numbers
cannot be rationally envisaged. That makes them disruptive in a logically
ordered, rational worldview. Hippasus (a follower of Pythagoras)—who is
considered the person who discovered these irrational numbers—
experienced this to his own detriment. Legend has it, he was on a ship with
his brethren Pythagoreans and was promptly thrown overboard when he
articulated his intuition that there exists something such as irrational
numbers. This illustrates clearly: The limits of the ratio always lead initially
to uncertainty, fear, and aggression.
The combination of chaotic behavior and determinism gives the
waterwheel the fascinating property of “deterministic unpredictability.”10 It
amounts to the following: Even with the waterwheel formulas at hand, it is
not possible to predict, even only one second in advance, how it will
behave. The reason for this is simple: To be able to predict how the
waterwheel will behave in the future, you need to measure the wheel’s state
of motion in the present and enter it into the formulas. But due to the nature
of the wheel, even immeasurably small differences in the current state of
motion can lead to radical differences in future behavior (in systems theory,

this is called the property of “sensitivity to initial conditions”). Therefore,
the wheel continues to shroud its future in mystery forever.
What is most fascinating about the story of Lorenz’s waterwheel is this:
At some point, Lorenz got the idea to plot the successive values of the three
quantities in the equations on a three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate
system, also called phase space in chaos theory. Curiously enough, it was
not just a random nebula of points that appeared, as one would initially
expect with a chaotically behaving system. What emerged was a very
regular figure with striking aesthetic features, which has since been known
as the Lorenz attractor (see figure 9.2).
Figure 9.2. The Lorenz attractor

As Gleick said, “Phase-space portraits of physical systems exposed
patterns of motion that were invisible otherwise, as an infrared landscape
photograph can reveal patterns and details that exist just beyond the reach
of perception.”11 Lorenz was the first to show that certain chaotically
manifesting behaviors are nevertheless determined by a strict (and sublime)
order and can be visually represented in phase space. Hidden beneath the
apparent chaos of the superficial experience of the wheel is an aesthetically
magnificent order of universal forms, in many ways reminiscent of Plato’s
ideal world. The quantum physicists also arrived at Plato’s famous ideal
world, albeit via a different route. Heisenberg expressed this in perhaps the
most direct way: “I think that modern physics has definitely decided in
favor of Plato. The smallest units of matter are not objects in the ordinary
sense; they are forms, ideas.…”12
This is without doubt the most important lesson that the waterwheel has
to teach us: We cannot predict the specific behaviors of the waterwheel (at
least not in its chaotic phase), but we can learn the principles by which it
behaves and learn to sense the sublime aesthetic figures hidden beneath the
chaotic surface of those behaviors. Hence, there is no rational predictability,
but there is a certain degree of intuitive predictability. In 1914 already,
Henri Poincaré argued that logical understanding is not always necessary to
intuitively understand some phenomena and to make predictions based on
one’s intuition.13 It is possible to accurately sense the globality of the
underlying structure of a phenomenon—for example the Lorenz attractor—
without having any significant logical understanding of that phenomenon.
Poincaré even went a step further, stating that pursuing logical knowledge
about the phenomenon might, once a certain point is reached, be
counterproductive. When confronted with the irrational aspect of a
phenomenon, the persistence to obtain rational understanding will prevent
us from coming to conclusions based on more direct receptiveness.
The way in which you experience the wheel as a spectator will strongly
depend on the level at which your attention is focused. If you look at each
isolated movement or motion sequence separately, the movements are
perceived as chaotic and disparate. The wheel seems like a cacophony of
abruptly interrupted back and forth movements. However, if you are able to
feel affinity with the wheel and get to sense the deeper rhythms present in
the variety of movements (as represented in the figure of the Lorenz

attractor), then you experience the timeless, creative harmony that is present
underneath the variety of superficial movements and the wheel becomes an
appeasing phenomenon.
In this respect, the wheel teaches us something that applies to a far
broader extent to the human being, society, life, and nature. Just like the
wheel, most phenomena in nature are complex and dynamic and, in their
complexity, are rather unpredictable. But like the wheel, life follows certain
principles and sublime phenomena are hidden beneath its seemingly chaotic
surface. And this is perhaps a person’s greatest task: to discover the timeless
principles of life, in and through all the complexity of existence. The better
we can sense those principles, the more we feel that we start to understand
some of the essence of life and that we are connected with the majestic,
ordering principle that speaks to us from across the universe. And the more
we stick to our principles, even if it seems to our own detriment in the short
term, the more real these principles become and the more we develop, as
human beings, a real sense of existence and fortitude. Being too
opportunistic and relinquishing our principles because “smart” analysis of a
situation suggests it might be advantageous, often leads to a loss of
individuality and experiences of meaninglessness. If one focuses too much
on the superficial appearances of life and loses touch with the underlying
principles and figures, life will increasingly be experienced as a
meaningless chaos, just like Lorenz’s waterwheel.
The same applies at the societal level: A society primarily has to stay
connected with a number of principles and fundamental rights, such as the
right to freedom of speech, the right to self-determination, and the right to
freedom of religion or belief. If a society fails to respect these fundamental
rights of the individual, if it allows fear to escalate to such an extent that
every form of individuality, intimacy, privacy, and personal initiative is
regarded as an intolerable threat to “the collective well-being,” it will decay
into chaos and absurdity. The belief in the mechanistic nature of the
universe and the associated overestimation of the powers of human
intellect, typical of the Enlightenment, were accompanied by a tendency to
lead society in a less and less principled manner. Within a purely
mechanistic way of thinking, it is extremely difficult (not to say impossible)
to ground ethical principles. Why should a machine man in a machine
universe have to adhere to principles and ethical rules in relationships with

others? Isn’t it ultimately about being the fittest in the struggle for survival?
And therefore, aren’t ethics and principles a hindrance rather than a merit?
In the final analysis, it was no longer a question for Enlightenment people
to adhere to commandments and prohibitions or ethical and moral
principles, but to move through this struggle for survival in the most
efficient way possible based on “objective knowledge” of the world. This
culminated in totalitarian and technocratic forms of government, where
decisions are not made on the basis of generally applicable laws and
principles but on the basis of the analysis of “experts.” For this reason,
totalitarianism always chooses to abolish laws, or fails to implement them,
and prefers to rule “by decree.” This means that, each new situation will
require the formulation of new rules on the basis of a (pseudo)rational
assessment of such situation. History abundantly illustrates that this leads to
erratic, absurd, and ever-changing rules, which ultimately destroy all
humanity in society.
This is perhaps the most direct and concrete illustration of Hannah
Arendt’s thesis that ultimately totalitarianism is the symptom of a naive
belief in the omnipotence of human rationality. Therefore, the antidote to
totalitarianism lies in an attitude to life that is not blinded by a rational
understanding of superficial manifestations of life and that seeks to be
connected with the principles and figures that are hidden beneath those
manifestations.
Chaos theory and the complex and dynamic systems theory open a
breathtaking new perspective on the universe. In his widely acclaimed book
Chaos, Gleick states that chaos theory is the third great scientific revolution
of the twentieth century (after the relativity theory and quantum
mechanics).14 Mechanistic-materialistic science started from the assumption
that the world is logical and predictable and, in particular, that it essentially
is a dead mechanical process. Science aimed to reduce living phenomena—
the organic, the consciousness, etc.—to dead processes (for example, to
mechanical chemical processes). Quantum mechanics and chaos theory
shake this worldview. They initiated the reverse momentum and lean much
more toward a vitalist worldview. They suggest that there is life and
consciousness in all kinds of phenomena that we previously considered to
be dead, mechanical processes. Think of the noise on telephone lines: It
proved to not be the passive effect of all kinds of mechanical factors, but to

be self-organizing; it is characterized by purposefulness and a sense of
aesthetics.
Perhaps the most revolutionary aspect of chaos theory is that its
observations allow us to see that there is indeed a final and formal cause at
work in nature. These concepts are derived from the causality theory of
Aristotle and are indispensable when considering the process of causation.
In a nutshell, this theory states that there are four kinds of causes: the
material, the efficient, the formal, and the final. Aristotle illustrated the
difference between these four causes using the metaphor of making a statue.
The material cause of the statue is the matter from which it is made
(without such matter, no statue). The efficient cause is the movements of
the sculptor, who uses chisel and hammer to transform the stone into a
statue. The formal cause is the idea or form of the statue as it has taken
form in the mind of the sculptor and determines how he will direct his
movements. The final cause is the intention to make a statue (for example,
because someone has ordered a statue from the sculptor). It is clear that,
within a mechanistic worldview, only the material and the efficient cause
are considered to be active. Once upon a time, the mechanistic universe, as
a collection of material particles, set itself in motion, and all the rest
followed from the initial movement of the particles. So the particles in
themselves are the material cause; their movements, which generate all
kinds of effects, are the efficient cause. However, within such a worldview,
it cannot be presumed that certain “forms” or “ideas” exist in advance
(those of certain organisms, for example) that would influence the way the
material process unfolds.
Chaos theory proves that such forms do exist and that they operate in a
coordinated manner. What has been demonstrated with the noise on
telephone lines and drops dripping out of faucets can be broadened to a
much larger scope. Chaos theory shows us that the mountain landscape that
transports us in breathless admiration is not simply the effect of a lifeless
mechanistic process—accidental mechanistic processes between tectonic
plates, erosion, and eruptions of lava—but that a timeless and sublime idea
coordinated the myriad of mechanical processes involved in its formation.
Chaos theory heralds, maybe even more than quantum mechanics, the era
that historically and logically follows the Enlightenment; an era when the
universe is once again pregnant with meaning.

CHAPTER 10
Matter and Spirit
The first basic assumption of the mechanistic-materialistic worldview is
that the universe is a machine-mechanistic given that can be fully
understood by means of logical reasoning. In the previous chapter, we
discussed the relativity of this theorem. In this chapter, we will tackle the
second great assumption of mechanistic materialism: Everything belonging
to the domain of consciousness and the psychological realm is a
consequence of material phenomena—matter over mind.
Contemporary public discourse shows a certain ambiguity when it
comes to the psychological dimension of being human. On the one hand,
psychological well-being is considered to be of crucial importance. It is
believed that stress has adverse health effects, it is recognized that placebo
effects play a major role in medical interventions, it has become more or
less commonly recognized that it is important to “talk about our problems,”
and so on.
On the other hand, the world is still firmly in the grip of the mechanistic
view of the world and mankind. Maybe even more than ever before. Within
this ideology, everything belonging to the domain of consciousness and the
psychological experience is ultimately considered an insignificant by-
product of the biochemistry of the brain. Man’s desires and aspirations, his
romantic longings and his most superficial needs, his joys and his sorrows,
his doubts and his choices, his pleasures and his sufferings, his deepest
aversion and his most lofty aesthetic appreciations—in short, his complete
subjective world of experience—is reduced to a consequence of elementary
particles in his brain that interact according to the laws of mechanics.
Obviously, such a viewpoint has to consider any psychological
approach to life—and by extension any religious or spiritual practice—as a

form of irrationality. And any therapeutic application of such conceptual
frameworks is, at best, designated as a temporary Band-Aid, a fringe
therapy that may be tolerated until a real, biological treatment is discovered
that will address the real, biological cause of human suffering. Depression
originates in the brain, and if we look hard enough, one day, we will be able
to show clearly which mechanical error is its underlying cause and, at that
point, mechanistically repair such glitches in the machine.
Within such a worldview, one implicitly or explicitly assumes that there
is a hierarchy in the sciences. The most fundamental level is that of physics,
of the mechanistic interactions between the elementary particles, and
everything else merely follows from this process. Physics determines
inorganic chemistry; inorganic chemistry determines organic chemistry;
organic chemistry determines anatomy and physiology; anatomy and
physiology determine psychology; psychology determines economics,
politics and sociology (see figure 10.1). Ultimately, everything can be
traced back to physics and chemistry.
As widespread as this worldview is and as compelling as it may be in its
simplicity, science has actually rendered it obsolete. First of all, quantum
mechanics, as a science of elementary material particles, showed that it
makes no sense to try to fully explain the domain of consciousness at the
level of material knowledge. To a certain extent, elementary particles
themselves are determined by the domain of consciousness—for example,
by the mental act of perception during experiments. As inconceivable as
this may seem, it is a fact that, if a particle is observed by two people at the
same time, this same particle can be in two places at the same time.
Moreover, not only is the momentary localization of the particle
determined by the observation but also the entire trajectory traveled by this
particle in the billions of years prior to the moment of the observation.1 It is
only at the time of observation that the past trajectory is determined.
According to world-famous physicist Stephen Hawking, “The choice [of a
particle] whether to take one or both paths in this case would have been
made billions of years ago, before the Earth or perhaps even our sun was
formed, and yet with our observation in the laboratory we will be affecting
that choice.”2 These insights are so contrary to the way in which we
experience and understand time, space, and matter that the human mind is
hardly able to grasp them. Niels Bohr expressed the strangeness of the

observations of quantum mechanics as follows: “Anyone who is not
shocked by quantum theory has not understood it.”3
Figure 10.1. Hierarchical organization of the sciences within a strictly mechanistic- materialistic way
of thinking
For this reason, we see that this hierarchy in the sciences, where the
material domain determines the realm of physics, the realm of psychology
is not universally valid: Man as a psychological being equally determines
the domain of material objects. Therefore, we have to at least assume a
mutual influence or circular causality between consciousness and matter
(figure 10.2). The founders of quantum mechanics went even much further
and considered the material domain to essentially form part of the realm of
consciousness. As Werner Heisenberg says: “In fact the smallest units of
matter are not physical objects in the ordinary sense; they are forms,
ideas.”4 The logical positivist philosopher Bertrand Russell also took the

same view: “All our data, both in physics and psychology, are subject to
psychological causal laws.… In this respect psychology is nearer to what
actually exists.”5
Figure 10.2. Circular causality between the different scientific domains
The mechanistic worldview is based entirely on the idea of material
particles as solid, absolute, “objective” data from which everything else can
be inferred. But quantum mechanics shows us something radically different.
The more intricately one examines matter, the more the act of observation
itself influences the perception, and thus, the more subjective the perception
becomes. Fully in line with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, we can
therefore state that matter—once regarded as the rock-solid foundation of

mechanistic materialism—turns out to be essentially a subjective
phenomenon. What exactly is matter? Nobody knows.
For this reason, a complete understanding of the materiality of the brain
will never lead to a complete understanding of consciousness. Every study
of the brain as the material basis of consciousness will, at some point,
encounter an absolute limit beyond which consciousness itself starts to
determine matter. This shows that the psychological realm is a primary
dimension, which, under no circumstances, can be reduced to the physical,
the chemical, or the biochemical domain. At the therapeutic level, this also
means that psychological treatments can indeed be full-fledged causal
treatments.
*   *   *
Quantum mechanics may be the most fundamental refutation of the illusion
of mechanistic-material determinacy of psychological experiences, but it is
not the most concrete. There are observations that show in a more direct
way that the psyche is difficult or impossible to reduce to a mechanistic
brain apparatus.
For example, there are people in whom almost all brain tissue has died,
who sometimes have less than 5 percent left, but whose mental functioning
is still completely normal and who, for instance, score higher than 130 on
an intelligence test. For the sake of clarity, I am not talking about obscure
assertions but about scientific observations reported in journals such as The
Lancet and Science.6 Imaging or autopsy showed unequivocally that the
brain cavity in such people was almost completely filled with fluid (see
figure 10.3).

Figure 10.3. Comparison between scans of a person with intact brain tissue (right), and a person
whose brain tissue has almost completely died off (left) but who still functions fine mentally. The
black areas in the left skull show how the space released by the died-off brain tissue has been filled
with fluid.7
In principle, these observations do not exclude a biological determinacy
of consciousness. They only show that such a determinacy, if it does exist,
has to be extremely complex in nature, and that the brain—to speak in
terms of complex and dynamic systems—at least possesses the property of
self-organization and self-reorganization. The little remaining brain tissue
appears to have spontaneously taken over the functions of the dead brain
tissue. However, such reorganization in and of itself presupposes a certain
form of consciousness and intention in the brain tissue. Therefore, the
hypothesis that consciousness is strictly determined by the material
substrate of the brain ends up in circular reasoning: Consciousness is an
effect of the material functioning of the brain, the material functioning of
the brain is (to a certain extent) an effect of consciousness.
Along those lines, there are also the experiments on so-called
neuroplasticity. Mental exercise (e.g., mathematical or memory training)
leads to observable changes in the biochemistry and architecture of the
brain, even in the relatively short term.8 This also shows that the causal
relationship between consciousness and brain is not a one-way relationship.
*   *   *
We could also refer to a series of observations that show in a direct way that
the psychological realm can be the cause of the physical realm, rather than

vice versa. Some of those observations can be made from occurrences that
present themselves abundantly in everyday life. The most mundane, of
course, is how certain emotions affect our body, or how human hair can turn
completely gray in a few hours under the influence of, for example, intense
fear or sadness. Or in a positive sense, we could refer to events where
people gain an almost unimaginable strength, in circumstances where it
empowers them to save a loved one. A well-known example is the story of
Laura Schultz, a 63-year-old grandmother from Florida, who, in 1977, was
able to lift the front wheel of a school bus with one hand to pull her
grandchild out from underneath the bus with her other hand.
Such examples should open our eyes and convince us that we need to
devote a lot more effort to better understanding psychological experiences.
Strangely enough, in many cases man is blind to such direct evidence from
his own experience and is more easily convinced by what “scientists” have
“observed,” although, in the latter case, he has to depend on “blind belief.”
Be that as it may, I’m happy to present some scientific findings in this
matter.
*   *   *
The field of so-called psycho-neuroimmunology allows us to estimate the
role that anxiety and stress play in the course of viral infections (which, of
course, is not without relevance to the coronavirus crisis). Several studies
report that mice are 40 percent more likely to die from viral infections due
to experimentally induced stress.9 The working mechanism is known: The
stress leads to a reduction in immunity (mainly due to changes in hormone
and white blood cell concentrations) and thus to greater susceptibility to
viruses. In 2016, a study confirmed that the same mechanisms are also at
work in humans and have a significant impact on mortality rates in a variety
of severe physical conditions.10 Important for the coronavirus crisis is a
report from 2008 that stress leads to a higher mortality rate, especially in
viral lung diseases, and that this effect is significantly greater in men than in
women.11 This corresponds with the difficult-to-explain observation that
there are more male than female fatalities in the coronavirus crisis.
Observations are also being made in other fields of science that require
neither statistics nor animal testing to convince us of the deadly nature of

anxiety. It is well known in anthropology that in so-called primitive
societies, people sometimes die after a shaman casts a curse on them.
Herbert Basedow describes the typical course of such a ritual, as performed
among Aboriginal peoples in Australia:
A man who realizes that he is being pointed out with the
magic bone makes a pitiful impression. He is perplexed,
his eyes staring at the dreaded bone, he stretches out his
hands as if to stave off a deadly force that seeks to
penetrate his body. His face turns white and his eyes
become glassy, the expression on his face is hideously
distorted, like a person suddenly paralyzed. He tries to
scream, but usually the sounds get stuck in his throat and
all that happens is foam forming on his lips. His body
begins 
to 
tremble 
and 
his 
muscles 
contract
uncontrollably. He flips backwards, falls to the ground
and appears to swoon for a moment; but he soon begins
to writhe as if in agony, covering his face with his hands,
he begins to moan. After a while, he recovers somewhat
and crawls to his cabin. From then on, he withers away
and becomes increasingly ill, refusing to eat and taking
no part in any of the tribe’s daily activities. Unless there
is another shaman to undo the curse, he will die within a
short period of time.12
This type of demise has been widely observed and, in the literature, it is
known as a psychogenic death. Henry Ellenberger additionally specifies
that it is important that the entire community to which the shaman and
victim belong believe in the authority of the shaman. We’ll come back to
that later.
This may apply to an irrational primitive person who failed to outgrow
magical thinking, but surely not to a rational Western person in the twenty-
first century? Nothing could be further from the truth. There are countless
observations that show that Western man, in his physical functioning, is
equally subject to such phenomena. Professor Marie- Elisabeth
Faymonville, anesthetist at the University Hospital of Liège, has been

performing surgeries on patients under hypnosis for decades. The
procedure, which was shown in a documentary on Belgian national
television, looks astonishingly uncomplicated. Faymonville speaks to the
patient, who is lying on the operating table, in a soothing way, leads him
along in a relaxing mental world, and then gives an unobtrusive sign to the
surgeon, conveying that he can start with the surgery. The surgeon is then
easily able to make the required incisions in the body and carry out the
prescribed medical procedures without the patient being aware of anything.
And let’s be clear: It does not only concern minor interventions, it also
involves procedures like the surgical removal of the thyroid gland, the
placement of breast prostheses, or the removal of tumors.13
As a matter of fact, such phenomena take place on a daily basis and en
masse in medical practice, in the form of what became known as the
placebo effect. This term came into vogue after curious observations were
made on the battlefields of World War II. When doctors ran out of
morphine, one of them came up with the idea to reassure soldiers just
before an amputation by giving them an injection with a saline solution. To
their surprise, they noticed that most soldiers were equally sedated, as if
they were given morphine. Since then, there has been a growing body of
research showing that placebos are capable of the most amazing physical
effects, from opening coronary arteries in angina pectoris to reactivating
dead areas of the brain. Authors such as Arthur Shapiro and Bruce
Wampold, experts in the field, believe that the placebo effect accounts for
the lion’s share—often more than 80 percent—of the effects of medical
interventions.14 Some researchers, whether sensibly or not, argue for an
almost generalized use of placebos instead of real medication. I should
mention that other researchers arrive at substantially lower estimates on the
basis of statistical research (some report only a 10 percent placebo effect).15
Maybe this should all lead us to the conclusion that numerical research has
to be put into perspective. The simple case studies of sedation via hypnosis
and saltwater anesthesia are ultimately more scientifically valuable and
leave no doubt that the impact of psychological factors on the body is, at
least under certain circumstances, no less than phenomenal.
The placebo effect shows us the enormous importance of the patient’s
subjective experience of a therapeutic intervention. If someone is positive
about the intervention, that in itself is an important part of the cure. But the

reverse also applies: If someone has a negative attitude toward a treatment,
this may have negative effects. This is known as the nocebo effect. There is
extensive literature suggesting that a diverse range of conditions may be
generated by this effect.16 The psychogenic death, discussed above, is an
extreme example and it shows that these effects can also be extremely
strong. This shows us that, in addition to ethical reasons, there is a
pragmatic, intellectual argument to never make medical treatments
mandatory and to strictly enforce the right to self-determination.
On closer inspection, the mechanism of psychogenic death, hypnotic
sedation, and placebos is the same every time: An authority figure evokes a
powerful mental image in the individual who is being addressed. This
mental image can be positive (e.g., healing) or negative (e.g., dying,
becoming ill), but it has to be vividly and clearly present in the experience
and it has to draw the attention away from all other mental activity.
Thereupon, the body, so to speak, “merges” with that mental image, and the
body takes the form or condition of this mental image (i.e., it gets well, it
dies, it gets sick).
The curious, far-reaching influence of mental images on the body may
have most convincingly been demonstrated by biologists. Harrison-
Matthews showed in repeatedly replicated experiments that the ovary of
female pigeons does not mature if the pigeon never sees the image of a
congener (particularly if bred in complete isolation in a cage).17 Follow-up
experiments showed that it suffices to put up a mirror in the pigeon’s cage
for the pigeon to become fertile (albeit slightly less than when a pigeon
grows up in the presence of a real congener). Rémy Chauvin did similar
experiments with grasshoppers with even more far-reaching effects: As with
the pigeons, there were strong influences on the functioning of the organs,
but the color patterns on the shells were also different (there were no green
stripes) and the anatomy of the rear legs differed consistently.18 All kinds of
variations on these experiments were carried out and each time the
conclusion was the same: The decisive factor is whether or not visual
images are present in the experiences of the animal in question.
What is important for the coronavirus crisis is the following: Several
authors (e.g., Gustave Le Bon) have pointed out that the beliefs of a crowd
(the group of individuals who identify with one another) have the same
influence on the body as hypnosis. When society as a whole is in the grip of

anxiety and the accompanying images of illness and death, those images in
themselves become a causal factor. As described above, this happens in part
because psychological distress radically changes the biological environment
in which the virus enters by diminishing the immunity of such environment.
Also think of the statement by Antoine Béchamp, which Louis Pasteur also
endorsed at the end of his life: “The microbe is nothing, it is the
environment that counts.”
In this chapter, we mainly focused on the impact of visual images on the
body. However, these images themselves inextricably form part of an even
more important psychological register: the register of stories and ideologies,
the symbolic register. The way in which narratives hold man and society in
their grip is simply astonishing and also largely misunderstood. As we have
already described in chapters 3 and 4, every child is involved in linguistic
processes from an early age. It grows up within a narrative provided by the
parents, which is usually shared by wider social groups and ultimately by an
entire society. At its core, such a story always takes the form of a myth that
provides a symbolic answer to the unanswerable questions. It provides a
certain perspective on life, explains what is important and less important,
determines what brings peace and what strikes fear. In fact, ethnographers
like Marcel Mauss showed us that it determines even much more than
that.19 It determines what you will like and what you will reject (e.g., fish
eyes are a delicacy in Congo, but are usually found to be repulsive in
Europe), how the body moves (compare the gait of the Japanese people
with that of African people), which basic reflexes we adopt when in pain
(for example, the manner of pulling back a hand when in pain differs
between cultures), and so on. It is no exaggeration to state that our bodies
are completely absorbed and colonized by the mythical narrative in which
we grew up.
This is why a medical procedure that works solely or mostly with words
and narratives can have such enormous effects on the body. One can read
texts such as L’efficacité symbolique by the great Belgian-French
anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss to ascertain the enormous hold that
symbolic structures have on societies, and on individuals who make up
those societies.20 It controls both mental and physical functioning in great
detail. For example, Lévi-Strauss describes how, when a woman was
experiencing complications during childbirth, shamans in the Brazilian

rainforest repeatedly induced birth through a ritual that used an established
tribal text that was read or sung in a ritualized way to the woman in labor.
The text featured a series of characters from tribal mythology and told how
a number of good spirits made their way through a narrow corridor leading
to a cave where evil spirits imprisoned the baby. The good spirits negotiated
with the evil ones until they were willing to let the child go. When the chant
reached this point in the story, labor started. Lévi-Strauss showed that the
chants “summoned” the woman’s body, which means that they reconnected
her disordered body with the myth in which the woman had grown up and,
in this way, could move her body in the desired direction. Lévi-Strauss
emphasized that, to the best of his knowledge, this method was always
successful. And most curiously, the shamans carried out their operations
intuitively, without really being aware that they were producing their effects
through the efficacy of their symbolic framework (the myth).
Twenty-first-century Western man is, in this respect, no different from
the Native Brazilians of whom Lévi-Strauss speaks. The Enlightenment
man, too, was brought up in a myth, a story that tells something about his
origin, that makes him take a certain perspective on life and links his
negative and positive emotions and affects to specific stimuli. This myth is
the story of the mechanistic universe, the great machine that was set in
motion by the Big Bang, in which man is gripped like a small machine in
the great machine of the universe. When it comes to sickness and health,
then the authority in this story is not the shaman but the medical expert.
And that expert, like the shaman, performs a ritual by which he calls the
patients’ bodies to order. And yes, just like the shaman, the contemporary
physician has only a limited awareness of the enormous impact that the
symbolic framework within which he operates has on his interventions and
he too often believes that psychology has nothing to do with the healings he
sees happening in his practice. The enormous contribution of the placebo
effect shows us not only how heavily medical practice is based on the
impact of visual images, but above all, how overwhelmingly it is based on
symbolic effects.
No matter how strong and directly observable the influence of the
psychological realm on the physical domain may be, humans—and perhaps
Westerners in particular—have a bad habit of focusing attention on the
material-biological dimension of life and to consider the psychological

realm to be of subordinate importance. And I feel only partially an
exception in this regard. However, denying an important determining factor
in the causation of a problem usually leads only to an escalation of the
problem.
The good news of this story should not go unnoticed, however. The
findings on placebos and hypnosis show unequivocally that not only
negative images affect the body: Positive images have a similar but inverse
effect. I tend to doubt whether we can expect too much from placebos and
hypnosis as such. Both have an aspect that is ethically questionable,
placebos because they are in essence a form of deception, and hypnosis
because the mind of the person hypnotized is subjected to the suggestion of
the hypnotist.
Of greater importance are probably the examples of people who, by
adhering strictly to ethical principles, have demonstrated they possess the
most astonishing physical resilience. In The Gulag Archipelago,
Solzhenitsyn describes, amongst others, the moving story of Grigory
Ivanovich Grigoryev, a prisoner who first spent years in the Nazi
concentration camps and then ended up in the gulags under Stalinism. He
stood out from everyone else for his legendary honesty and nobility. He
refused to carry out assignments that he considered to be unethical, even
though he was severely punished for doing so; he refused to participate in
the common practice among inmates to steal food from one another when
the opportunity presented itself; he adhered strictly to the ethical rules he
believed to be appropriate. Solzhenitsyn describes the following about the
influence of his spiritual purity on his body:
And even more: because of the astounding influence on
his body of his bright and spotless human spirit (though
no one today believes in any such influence, no one
understands it) the organism of Grigory Ivanovich, who
was no longer young (close to fifty), grew stronger in
camp; his early rheumatism of the joints disappeared
completely, and he became particularly healthy after the
typhus from which he recovered: in winter he went out in
cotton sacks, making holes in them for his head and his
arms—and he did not catch a cold.21

One thing is certain: To explore and tap into the possibilities offered by a
more psychological approach to human beings, as an alternative to the
biological-reductionist approach, is undoubtedly one of the great challenges
of the future. If we fail to rise up to this challenge, we are unlikely to find a
durable solution to current and future crises.
Our tendency to perceive the above-mentioned scientific observations
about psychological causality as strange or unbelievable can only be
explained by the fact that ultimately, we are all greatly susceptible to
mechanistic-materialistic illusions. But science does not oblige us at all to
consider psychological experiences as passively determined by the material
domain. On the contrary, the outposts of science—see, for example, the
words of Heisenberg, Bohr, Max Planck, and Erwin Schrödinger, as
previously cited—came rather to the opposite conclusion. The road to a
better understanding of biology and matter will undoubtedly be through the
understanding of the structure of our psychological life. For this reason,
science must consider as one of its most fundamental tasks to map out the
structure of the psychological experience, to clarify its laws, and to study
the possibilities this gateway to the human being might open up.
In my opinion, matters such as the placebo effect have to be
scientifically investigated. They should not give rise to an immersion in an
esotericism that is at odds with the intellect. With his structural
anthropology, Lévi-Strauss showed that it is indeed possible to almost
entirely describe the effects of stories and images in a rational way. His
description is breathtakingly rigorous in scientific terms and at the same
time radically anti-mechanistic in nature. This is the way to go: a science
that does not allow itself to be blinded by mechanistic ideology but which
pushes the rational analysis of reality to the maximum, to the absolute limit
of the rationally knowable, to the point where reason transcends itself.

CHAPTER 11
Science and Truth
Totalitarianism is the belief that human intellect can be the guiding
principle in life and society. It aims to create a utopian, artificial society led
by technocrats or experts who, based on their technical knowledge, will
ensure that the machine of society runs flawlessly. In this view, the
individual is completely subordinated to the collective, reduced to being a
cog in the machine of society (see, for example, Bertrand Russell in The
Impact of Science on Society).1
The ideal of a technocratic society was inherent to the Enlightenment
tradition, especially in its positivist branch. Positivist thinkers like Henri de
Saint-Simon and Auguste Comte expressed their fanatical belief in a
humanistic-technocratic society in which scientists and technocrats would
take the place of popes and priests.2 Not God, but human Reason should be
glorified. This is the way to a utopian society without war or conflict, a
Realm of Freedom.
Nazism, and even more so Stalinism, are the most ambitious historical
attempts to put totalitarian ideology into practice. They would realize
paradise, and to this end, everything was considered justified: exclusion,
stigmatization, and ultimately industrial extermination of every population
group that did not fit within the ideal image. In both historical examples, the
new utopian society had to be created through the ruthless application of a
rock-solid logic (see chapter 7).
However, it would be a capital mistake to identify the phenomenon of
totalitarianism only in totalitarian regimes. There is an ever-present,
totalitarian undercurrent that consists of a fanatical attempt to steer and
control life in far-reaching ways on the basis of technical, scientific
knowledge. Technocratic thinking always walks on two legs. On the one

hand, it appeals to people by intimating a positive image of an artificial
paradise with which it claims we can be delivered from all adversity and
suffering. On the other hand, it imposes itself based on anxiety, as a
necessity to solve problems. With every “object of anxiety” that has
emerged in our society in recent decades—terrorism, the climate problem,
the coronavirus—this process has leapt forward. The threat of terrorism
induces the necessity of a surveillance apparatus, and our privacy is now
seen as an irresponsible luxury; to control climate problems, we need to
move to lab-printed meat, electric cars, and an online society; to protect
ourselves against COVID-19, we have to replace our natural immunity with
mRNA vaccine–induced artificial immunity.
The fourth industrial revolution, in which man is expected to physically
merge with technology—the transhumanist ideal—is increasingly seen as
an unavoidable necessity. The entire society has to change into an internet
of bodies, in which the human body is digitally monitored, tracked, and
traced by a technocratic government. This is the only way we will be able to
master the problems of the future. There is no alternative. Anyone who
refuses to go along with the technological solution is naive and
“unscientific.”
*   *   *
Totalitarianism and technocracy like to present themselves as the pinnacle
of rationality and science. The technocratic paradise will make the
population happy and healthy; or at least offer the greatest chance of
achieving this. With subcutaneous sensors, every biochemical change can
be registered and reported. Anyone showing signs of illness can be
immediately examined and receive adequate treatment. In order to achieve
this in an efficient way, everything has to be permanently and
monotonously exposed to the artificial light of monitoring and government
control. The fact that the human being is like a flower that only blooms
when it can enjoy the shade of privacy once in a while is of minor
importance in a technocratic worldview. Anyone who refuses to go along
with the system lacks civic sense, considers oneself more important than the
collective. Your health is no longer your personal business, because some
diseases are contagious. However, even within an objectifying biological-

reductionist perspective, it has been clear for decades that too much
(government) control is harmful to health in itself. To use the example of a
viral infection: Control leads to stress and stress in its turn leads to a greatly
reduced physical resistance in viral infections (see chapter 10, for example,
up to 80 percent more mortality). Acting on the basis of a biological-
reductionist analysis is effectively a recipe for failure, even on a purely
physical level. One cannot understand the course of a viral infection on the
basis of the mechanistic processes seen through the small ring light of a
microscope—the whole psychological, sociological, and economic context
plays an essential role. Hegel already knew that “Das Wahre ist das Ganze”
[The truth is the whole].3
This is exactly what twentieth-century science has primarily shown us
in an astonishing way: All things small and all things large are connected,
everything is part of an overarching, complex, and dynamic system.
In order to understand the course of a viral disease—and more broadly,
health and happiness—we have to contemplate man and society and
observe the principles of nature. This way, the great questions of life, which
were relegated to the second plane by mechanistic ideology, are brought to
the fore again: Who are we as desiring beings? How do we relate to other
people, to our bodies, to pleasure, to nature, to death? What is our place in
nature? There will never be a definitive answer to these questions. Each
person has to reformulate the answers to these questions in every new
situation, and they can never be definitively determined in a purely rational
way (see chapter 9). The end point of science is not reached with a perfectly
rational understanding and control of reality; instead, it lies in the final
acceptance that there are limits to human rationality, that knowledge does
not belong to man, but has to be situated in the wider system of which man
forms a part.
*   *   *
Herewith, we have arrived at an interesting field of tension. On the one
hand, you can see the development of science as a steady growth of rational
knowledge, as an ever-increasing multitude of phenomena show us which
laws they obey. But on the other hand, you can also see the course of
science as a process that leads to an a-rational core in things, to something

that eludes human understanding. And this something is not just a
negligibly minor aspect of all things observed, it is the very essence of life
(see chapter 3). It’s at this level that we can discern that, as the
rationalization of the world continues, human beings also increasingly feel
that the essence of life is eluding them and that they are more and more
often 
confronted 
with 
experiences 
of 
meaninglessness, 
anxiety,
psychological discomfort, and frustration (part 1). It is to be expected that
the series of crises in which we find ourselves will make the inconsistencies
in the mechanistic ideology and the failure of associated pseudo-rational
remedies increasingly apparent, and a certain group of people will see more
and more clearly what the founders of science already saw: The essence of
things is not rationally knowable, and reality cannot be reduced to
mechanistic frameworks. When realizing this, we can finally start to look
for the essence of life where it truly can be found: in that which always
escapes rationalization and mechanization, in that which disappears from a
conversation when you digitalize it, in the difference between the mother’s
womb and an artificial plastic womb, in the difference between the heat of
an electric heater and that of a wood-burning stove, and so on.
*   *   *
The journey of science does not end in superior knowledge but in a kind of
Socratic modesty. A human who has traveled this journey far enough knows
better—he just knows—that all rational knowledge is relative and remains
alien to the essence of the object he is trying to understand. At the end of
this journey awaits an encounter with something that cannot be grasped
with logic and rationality. The great minds of science have testified to such
encounter in many different ways. Albert Einstein liked to talk about the
elusive mystery that he found everywhere in the universe and about the
wonderful structure of reality. Niels Bohr understood that poetry has more
grip on all things Real than logic.4 And Max Planck said that all matter is
grounded in a conscious and intelligent Mind that holds the fate of the
world and every human being in its almighty hand:
As a man who has devoted his whole life to the most
clearheaded science, to the study of matter, I can tell you

as a result of my research about the atoms this much:
There is no matter as such! All matter originates and
exists only by virtue of a force which brings the particles
of an atom to vibration and holds this most minute solar
system of the atom together.… We must assume behind
this force the existence of a conscious and intelligent
Mind. This Mind is the matrix of all matter.
Both religion and science require a belief in God. For
believers, God is in the beginning, and for physicists He
is at the end of all considerations. To the former He is the
foundation, to the latter, the crown of the edifice of every
generalized world view.
That God existed before there were human beings on
Earth, that He holds the entire world, believers and non-
believers, in His omnipotent hand for eternity, and that
He will remain enthroned on a level inaccessible to
human comprehension long after the Earth and
everything that is on it has gone to ruins; those who
profess this faith and who, inspired by it, in veneration
and complete confidence, feel secure from the dangers of
life under protection of the Almighty, only those may
number themselves among the truly religious.5
It is the rule rather than the exception that the founders of science left the
rationalistic worldview behind them. Just have a look at their more
contemplative works—Einstein, Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger,
Louis de Broglie, Planck, Bohr, Wolfgang Pauli, Sir Arthur Eddington, Sir
James Jeans—all of them had a mystical worldview because they were
confronted in their research objects with an irresolvable mystery.6 That in
no way means a minimization of the importance of rationale and logic. But
it does mean that rationality is not humanity’s final destination. Humanity
has to step firmly onto the path of logic in order to ultimately transcend
rationality.
*   *   *

Great scientists have left the logical-factual discourse of science behind and
returned in an enlightened way to the type of discourse that during the
Enlightenment was initially deemed subordinate: a poetic or mystical
discourse, a discourse that shows an original respect and a genuine awe for
the unnameable, for that which time and again eludes the human mind.
Here, we see something interesting: The trajectory that science took is
structurally identical to the trajectory that every human child (or at least the
majority of children) takes during the transformation into a subject. I’ll
repeat the developmental psychological reasoning I presented in chapter 5
in order to put this in a broader perspective.
Each child starts life in a symbiotic resonance with the mother, which is
realized through early (body) language. From the mirror stage, this direct
resonance comes to an end. From then on, the child stubbornly tries to
determine in a logical way which word refers to which object. The ultimate
object it tries to get a grip on is always the desire of the Other. What does
the Other want? Ultimately, the eagerness to understand the discourse of the
Other always arises from the urge to become the Other’s object of desire.
This position, on the one hand, opens up a prospect of narcissistic pleasure
and, on the other hand, induces an immersion in dependence and anxiety.
The persistent attempts to fixate the meaning of words deprive them of their
ability to induce symbiosis; the fixation of their meaning causes the words
to lose their resonating power and the sounds no longer produce the
connection they produced in the first months of life. This way, we see a
connection between a number of elements: fanatic pursuit of logical-
rational understanding, narcissism, dependence, anxiety, social isolation.
Around the age of three and a half, after the mirror stage, a second
enormous revolution takes place in the subjective experience of the child. It
starts to realize that words cannot have a definitive meaning—he comes to
realize that human language is affected by an irresolvable lack and that
there can never be any definitive certainty. The narcissistic illusion of
becoming the ultimate object of the Other’s desire is shaken and, at first, the
child is inevitably confronted with the primal fear in the narcissistic
universe: being left behind as an object for disposal that does not meet the
requirements of the Other. At that point, the child can choose between two
possible paths. On the first path, it shies away from the narcissistic fear and
tries to undo the uncertainty by clinging even more stubbornly to narcissism

and (pseudo)rationality. This way, it inevitably slides into an increasingly
isolated existence and, ultimately, also into more and more anxiety and
unease.
The second possibility is that the child discovers in that uncertainty the
space to give substance to life in a creative way and to develop
individuality: No longer having to be the object of the Other opens up a
space to be oneself and to realize one’s own personality. The child no
longer aspires to the enjoyment of being the object of the Other but rather to
being liked in its individuality as a human being; in its own, personal way
in which it makes choices and relates to other people as a human being. On
this path, children become increasingly sensitive to nonfactual and
nonlogical use of language, a use of language that shows individuality and
creativity. It is precisely by practicing this use of language that the child
partly rediscovers the resonating function of language and the connection
with the Other. The flexibility of such use of language, the fact that not
every word has to be linked to one specific meaning, allows the exchange
of sounds to transfer something of the (logically elusive) individuality of
interlocutors to each other. At this point, speaking changes from a vehicle
for transferring knowledge into subjective truth.
On this path, the child will, in all respects, make the transition from the
narcissistic position of his majesty the baby, from the child who finds it
normal that the Other is always there for him, to its position of a human
among other humans. In this transformation, it also emancipates itself. It is
no longer dependent on the parents to know what is allowed and what is not
allowed, what is accepted and what is not accepted in every new situation,
and it becomes aware of the broad principles that regulate human
relationships and which it has to substantiate itself to a certain extent. Here
as well, we can see a connection between a number of elements: ability to
tolerate uncertainty, sensitivity to resonating language, humanism,
individuality, sovereignty, connection with the Other.
This revolution takes place in different degrees in every child and it is
never conclusive. In a sense, all of life consists of an attempt to find space
for oneself in the relationship with Others. Some people exert themselves
intensively toward this goal, others less so, but no one escapes this
existential task in life. The more man advances in this process, the more
energy and creative power he will have. The ultimate potential that can be

realized on this path is unclear, but the enormous influence of the
psychological realm on the body, which we discussed in the previous
chapter, shows that its possibilities are extraordinary. It is on this track that
the future of humanity lies and not on the mechanistic- transhumanistic
track.
*   *   *
Science, as well as the Enlightenment society based thereon, have now
arrived at the same crossroads, as encountered by every child when
confronted with the fundamental uncertainty of its existence and of its
position in relation with the Other. As a society, we can shy away from
anxiety and deny our uncertainty, or we can defy our narcissistic anxiety
and accept the uncertainty. The first choice means that we look for the
solution in an even more (pseudo)scientific ideology, false rationality, false
certainty, and technological control; this way, we end up with even more
anxiety, depression, and social isolation. And we will respond to that by
trying even more stubbornly to control the uncontrollable, resulting in even
more despair. In this book, we have shown that the logical end point of this
vicious circle is mass formation and totalitarianism, that is, the radical
destruction of all human creativity, individuality, diversity, and every form
of social connectedness (except the bond between the individual and the
state collective). We can see, in all facets of society, how this process is
now evolving toward its limit. For the first time in history, the entire global
village has been caught up in the same process of mass formation and the
“technologization” and “mechanization” of the world has been scaled up to
such an extent that the omnipresent control reaches into the core of
intimacy and private life. Therefore, we are experiencing the end point of a
cycle, the moment at which a ruling ideology is driven to its ultimate
consequence, rears up with its full power for one last time, and thereby
shows its powerlessness in a definitive and final way.
When choosing the second path, society defies its anxiety and
recognizes that uncertainty is inherent in the human condition and is a
necessary condition for the emergence of creativity, individuality, and
human connectedness. On this path, society becomes a space in which
connectedness and individual differences mutually reinforce one another—

as opposed to totalitarian systems in which the collectivity radically
encroaches upon the individual liberty of every person and where all
diversity disappears and is replaced by a monotonous state identity. The
Great Science has preceded us on this path—it followed Reason to its
absolute limit, whereupon it opened up a view to a new form of knowing, a
new form of connecting with the Other, and to a human existence based on
different principles.
The way in which it arrived at this point is structurally the same as the
process a young child goes through. Young science, too, starts from a belief
that the object being studied can be fully understood by means of logical
reasoning. Facts are logical—how could they not be? However, the further
the logical analysis of the phenomenon under investigation is carried, the
more clearly one sees the emergence of a core that is intrinsically illogical
and inaccessible to the human mind. And just like with a child, that moment
gives rise to an awareness of the relativity of all logic as well as a
heightened sensitivity to forms of language that don’t aim to be logically
understood but lead to a more direct affinity, to resonance with the object
(poetry, mysticism, etc.).
I started this book by stating that the emergence of the mechanistic view
of the world and mankind was a revolution at the level of acquiring
knowledge about the world. Within a religious worldview, knowledge was
revealed to man by God. Therefore, the source of all knowledge lay outside
man. Within the mechanistic worldview this all changed: Man situated the
source of knowledge within himself. He could come to knowledge himself
by observing facts and exploring their mutual connections by means of
logical reasoning. But at the end of the journey, science again has to
conclude that knowledge lies outside of man (see, for example, the quote
from Planck earlier in this chapter).
The ultimate knowledge lies outside of man. It vibrates in all things.
And man is able to receive it, by tuning his vibrations, like a string, to the
frequency of things. And the more man is able to set aside prejudices and
beliefs, the more purely he will vibrate with the things around him and
receive new knowledge. This is one possible interpretation of René Thom’s
thesis that great scientists do not necessarily have an exceptional logical-
thinking capacity but rather an extraordinary ability to empathize with the
things they study (see chapter 1).7

Science is only one of the ways that leads to this empathy. Learning a
craft also leads to this ability. The starting point is a logically coherent
knowledge of the object to be manufactured and of the artisanal procedure
to do so. And as you learn to apply that knowledge in a practical way, you
develop a feeling with the tools and the materials, which transcends any
logical knowledge. This is precisely what constitutes the essence of a
craftsman, a feeling—his affinity with and knowledge of his craft, his
craftsmanship—can only be acquired through prolonged and disciplined
practice. This is the reason you can’t become a craftsman merely by
accumulating theoretical knowledge.
Learning an art is also an excellent example. At first, you learn a
logical, coherent set of rules and after years of practice, you acquire an
affinity that transcends these rules. What’s more: The rules ultimately
become a ballast and have to be thrown overboard. In Japan, there is a
proverb that says that one must protect the rules of an art only long enough
to be able to break them. Masaaki Hatsumi, 34th Grandmaster of Togakure
school of ninjutsu, said that the techniques of his martial art must be learned
to be ultimately forgotten.8 Letting go of the techniques, after they have
been practiced and they have trained and cultivated the body, is more
difficult than learning them. But it is crucial. Anyone who still needs to
think about techniques on the battlefield will die. The same grandmaster
also stated that prolonged practice of martial arts leads to the realization
that weapons have a will of their own and that you should never enslave
them. Each sword has its own character, wants to move in a certain way;
only if you can feel where it wants to go, will it bring you what you expect
it to do.
The ability to empathize also plays a role in relation to our own body.
Our bodies are in essence foreign to ourselves. It responds to all kinds of
stimuli—food, other people, all kinds of situations—and they do so
autonomously, without our knowledge or volition. We can learn to feel our
body throughout our lives, for example through certain movement-based
arts or meditation, by attentively observing the effects of all kinds of factors
(nutrition, exercise, etc.) on our body, possibly by repeatedly putting our
physical experiences into words during psychoanalytic therapy. Whoever
listens to his body and learns to understand its language holds the key to
health. The feeling with one’s own body is more important than any

medicine and also more important than any “objective” rational knowledge
of, for instance, healthy food.
In the same way, man also has to come to know himself as a
psychological being, as a confluence of subjective experiences, thoughts,
feelings, especially as they arise in relations with others. The ability to
sense one’s own experience and to put it into words and to express it in
relation to another is what constitutes the core of our existence as human
beings. In line with what I discussed in chapter 3, we exist as human beings
when we can give something of our individuality to another through full
speech—a kind of speaking in which something of the human being we are
vibrates and resonates. It is through the art of full speech—which is the art
learned, for example, in psychoanalytic therapy—that we are able to realize
a real connection with others and the world around us (without thereby
losing ourselves).
It is also through this art that we, as human beings, and more broadly as
a culture and society, can relate differently to death. Within a mechanistic
and biological-reductionistic view of man, suffering, decay, and death can
only be meaningless; they cannot be seen as something that has something
to say and teach us as human beings. This is perhaps the biggest problem
with the Great Mechanistic Narrative: The ultimate master of the sublunary
—death—has not been given an acceptable part in it. And he doesn’t like
that. Banned from the story, he terrifies us and creates frantic responses to
every threat, whether terrorism or viruses, that end up being more damaging
than the problem itself. It is not so much through the belief in a new Great
Narrative that our culture will be able to give death a new place but by
cultivating the art of integral speaking and by engendering contact with the
object. The connection with the Other and the world, the resonance with the
wider whole, removes the narrow constraints of the Ego. Literally: To the
degree that we can connect with what is outside ourselves, we are able to
transcend our own boundaries and our own world of experience gets
expanded to an existence that extends endlessly in time and space. Through
resonance with the greater plain, we participate in the timelessness of the
universe, like a reed rustling in the eternal air of life.
*   *   *

At the heart of things, there is something that never can be definitively
captured in the categories of logic and, therefore, has to be reworded time
and again. Each attempt to put it into words can be only ephemeral; each
new encounter brings forth new words, words directly born from contact
with the object. “Le vrai est toujours neuf” [The truth is always new], said
Max Jacob.9 The encounter with the object produces truth, an ever-
renewing way of speaking, the core characteristic of which is not so much
that it is logically correct but that it resonates freshly and sincerely with
what it is about. Poetry, sometimes nonsensical from a logical point of view,
can carry a lot more truth than a discourse built up strictly from syllogisms.
Truth has become an anachronistic concept—it sounds old- fashioned.
In The Courage of Truth, the French philosopher Michel Foucault makes an
interesting distinction between rhetoric and truth.10 A person who uses
rhetoric tries to arouse in another ideas and beliefs that he does not share
himself. For someone who adheres to speaking the truth, the reverse is true.
He sincerely tries to convey an idea or experience that lives within himself
to the Other through his speaking; he tries to make something he feels in
himself resonate in an Other.
In recent centuries, and especially in recent decades, the public sphere
has been increasingly filled with rhetoric. We were already used to such
rhetoric from politicians. No one expected them to even try to fulfill their
election promises during their term of office. In the long run, the population
simply accepted it: A politician’s election discourse only serves to convince.
And in fact, the same goes for commercials. Only an idiot believes that they
paint an accurate picture of the product being advertised. Moreover, during
the coronavirus crisis, we learned that it is not really different for those who
present themselves as scientists. What they say today is guaranteed to be
retracted tomorrow.
The real volte-face and revolution that society has to face is to shake off
rhetoric and resolutely turn to truth as a guiding principle. Foucault
distinguished four forms of truth-telling: prophecy, wisdom, techné, and
parrhesia (speaking boldly).11 Each of the four has to do with the ability to
resonate with an object and to make that resonance resound in sincere
speaking and to transfer it to others. Prophecy is a predictive power that
does not come from logical understanding, but—as the great French
mathematician and philosopher of science Henri Poincaré suggested—from

the ability to sense the story that grips reality. Wisdom is the ability to keep
silent and allow the Other to hear his own words. The techné is the ability
to speak technically correctly, to produce a logical-factual discourse that
adequately reflects the structure of the object to which it refers. And finally,
the parrhesia refers to the courage to publicly express words that break
through the fallacious discourse of society. The reappraisal of the
phenomenon of truth-telling will be the indicator par excellence of the
progress of the revolution, which is necessary to overcome the tendency
toward totalitarianism inherent in the Enlightenment tradition.
*   *   *
Finally, we can ask ourselves: Isn’t it dangerous to give up rationality as an
ideal? This question prompts me to a small reflection, which only due to the
seriousness of its subject is not banal. Thirty-five thousand children die of
hunger every day. Why doesn’t this upset the masses, while a virus does? In
our rational view of humanity, why don’t we save these young, hungering
lives at a much lower cost than those threatened by the coronavirus, without
the risk of losing civil liberties, and without the dangers associated with
experimental medical interventions? No one panics for a child that is dying
on the other side of the world. This is the inconvenient truth. The rationality
and humanism of the Enlightenment are in many ways a masquerade and a
fig leaf. Strip man of this masquerade and you look into the eyes of
irrationality; look behind the fig leaf of rationality and you will find the
ancient human vices.
A rational worldview does not prevent us from giving free rein to
irrational thinking. On the contrary, it prevents us from recognizing
irrationality. And as such, irrationality takes on grotesque proportions. On
the other hand, one who knows the limits of his intellect usually becomes
less arrogant and more humane, more capable of allowing the other to be
different. When his intellect stops shouting, he is able to hear the things of
life murmur their own story. He realizes that he is also entitled to his own
story. The awareness that no logic is absolute is the prerequisite for mental
freedom. The gap in the logic literally opens up a space for our own style
and for the desire to create. “I became healthy while creating”—this is how

Goethe described his medicine against the ailment that is life. Perhaps, it
might also work against viruses?
In any case, this remedy ensures that we can honor the right to free
speech and the right to self-determination without feeling threatened by one
another. It encompasses the potential to mitigate anxiety, discomfort,
frustration, and aggression, without the need for an enemy. This is the point
at which we no longer need to lose ourselves in the crowd to experience
meaning and connectedness, this is the point where the winter of
totalitarianism gives way to a new spring of life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We cannot describe in words where words come from. But we do know
where words go—they are always on their way to Another. Man is a narrow
passage through which words pass on their journey from source to Other.
The words that found their place in this book rested for years in
scribbles and notes. It was the coronavirus crisis that finally moved me to
send them out into the world. It was during the crisis that an Other arose for
whom those words longed. I would like to thank the people who were open
to what I had to say in opinion pieces, podcasts, and interviews. It was their
human responses—as I received them through social media, emails or
letters—that allowed the words to blossom within me and that gave me the
desire to continue to speak and to put my thoughts down in writing.
I would like to thank the many people who offered me a forum from
which to speak out. I am thinking in particular of Marlies Dekkers and Ad
Verbrugge. Meanwhile, the studio of De Nieuwe Wereld feels familiar— to
get together with a glass of wine after the recordings feels like coming
home. The circumstances under which this book was written made speaking
and writing a delicate matter—an act that had to be performed amid great
social resistance. I would like to thank the people who shared the
experience of going against this resistance and, in doing so, came into my
life in an unexpected way, only to become dear friends. You are too
numerous to list here, but you all know, every single one of you, that it is
with you in mind that I write these words. You will forever hold a special
place in my heart and in my thoughts.
In August 2021, I effectively took up the pen and started writing the text
of this book. I was strictly held to a predetermined writing schedule by
publisher Nancy Derboven—thank you for this! In the same vein, I want to
thank Margo Baldwin for her enthusiasm about my book. Els Vanbrabant
and Brianne Goodspeed: Thank you so much for your unwavering

commitment to deliver a high-quality English translation of this book.
Special thanks go to Dr. Robert Malone for his continuing efforts to bring
my work to the attention of the Anglo-Saxon world—Robert, it was great
meeting you in Spain and I hope we will meet again in the future!
I collected the many thoughts and musings on totalitarianism from my
scientific journal, opinion pieces, and articles and let them merge into the
text of this book. I would like to thank the people who have read and
commented on the draft chapters of this book during the writing process:
Debora Desmet, Liesje Breyne, Nathalie De Neef, Steven Wouters, and
Tineke De Cock. Without your willingness to be my sounding board, the
text-to-be would never have matured. Debora, my youngest sister, thank
you for making me reconsider verb tenses and reminding me time and again
of Nietzsche’s ten writing commandments; Liesje, you always found
simpler forms of expression where words were entangled in stiff knots;
Nathalie, your amusing comments and suggestions of temperance and
moderation kept me on the right track; Steven, thank you for providing me
with crucial additional references and corrections; Tineke, thank you so
much for taking the text to the next level by critically questioning every
sentence, up to the last letter, and mercilessly demanding logical clarity.
And finally: Valerie—thank you for proofreading, but above all, for putting
up with my absentmindedness and short nights during the months leading
up to the birth of this book and for always being there to listen to my
endless reflections and thought improvisations.
MATTIAS DESMET, November 2021, Meigem

NOTES
Introduction
  1.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): 622.
  2.  Maaike Schwering, “Himalaya voor het eerst in dertig jaar zichtbaar
door schonere lucht” [Himalayas visible for the first time in thirty years
through cleaner air], Knack, August 4, 2020, https://weekend.knack.be
/lifestyle/reizen/natuur/himalaya-voor-het-eerst-in-dertig-jaar-zichtbaar
-door-schonere-lucht/article-news-1586287.html.

Chapter 1: Science and Ideology
  1.  Immanuel Kant, “Beantwortung to the Frage: Was it Aufklärung?”
[Answer to the question: What is Enlightenment?], Berlinische
Monatsschrift (December 1784): 481–94.
  2.  Michel Foucault, De moed tot waarheid [The courage to truth]
(Amsterdam: Boom, 1978).
  3.  Max Jacob, Cornet a dés [Dice box] (Paris: Jourde and Allard, 1917).
  4.  W. Heisenberg, “Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der
quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik” [On the physical
content of the quantum theoretical kinematics and mechanics],
Zeitschrift für Physik 43, (1927): 172–98.
  5.  René Thom, Prédire n’est pas expliquer [To predict is not to explain],
Champs sciences, Editions Eshel, trans. Roy Lisker (IHES edition,
2010): 92.
  6.  Elisabeth Margaretha Bik, Arturo Casadevall, and Ferris Fang, “The
Prevalence of Inappropriate Image Duplication in Biomedical Research
Publications,” mBio 7, no. 3 (July 2016): e00809-16.
  7.  Owen Jarus, “Famed Archaeologist ‘Discovered’ His Own Fakes at
9000-Year-Old Settlement,” Live Science, March 12, 2018, https://
www.livescience.com/61989-famed-archaeologist-created-fakes.html.
  8.  I. M. D. Souza and A. M. L. Caitite, “The Amazing Story of the
Fraudulently Cloned Embryos and What It Tells Us about Science,
Technology, and the Media,” Historia, Ciencias, Saude—Manguinhos
17, no. 2 (2009): 471–93.
  9.  Joseph Hixson, The Patchwork Mouse (Garden City, New York:
Anchor Press, 1976).
10.  Isabelle De Groote et al., “New Genetic and Morphological Evidence
Suggests a Single Hoaxer Created ‘Piltdown Man’,” Royal Society of
Open Science 3, no. 8 (August 2016): 160328, https://doi.org/10.1098
/rsos.160328.
11.  Gretchen Vogel, “Psychologist Accused of Fraud on ‘Astonishing
Scale’,” Science 334, no. 6056 (November 4, 2011): 579–79, https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.334.6056.579.
12.  Daniele Fanelli, “How Many Scientists Fabricate and Falsify Research?
A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Survey Data,” Plos One 4,

no. 5 (2009): e5738, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005738.
13.  Mona Baker and Dan Penny, “Is There a Reproducibility Crisis?”
Nature 533 (May 26, 2016): 452–54.
14.  C. Glenn Begley and Lee M. Ellis, “Drug Development: Raise
Standards for Preclinical Cancer Research,” Nature 483 (March 2012):
531–33, https://doi.org/10.1038/483531a.
15.  Andrew Chang and Phillip Li, “Is Economics Research Replicable?
Sixty Published Papers from Thirteen Journals Say ‘Usually Not’,”
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-083 (September 2015):
http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.083, retrieved from https://www
.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015083pap.pdf.
16.  C. Glenn Begley and John P. Ioannidis, “Reproducibility in Science:
Improving the Standard for Basic and Preclinical Research,”
Circulation Research 116, no. 1 (January 2015): 116–26, https://doi.org
/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.303819.
17.  John P. Ioannidis, “Why Most Published Research Findings Are False,”
PLoS Medicine 2 (August 2005): e124, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal
.pmed.0020124.
18.  Mattias Desmet, The Pursuit of Objectivity in Psychology (Ghent:
Borgerhoff & Lamberigts, 2018).
19.  G. J. Meyer et al., “Psychological Testing and Psychological
Assessment: A Review of Evidence and Issues,” American
Psychologist 56, no. 2 (February 2001): 128–65.

Chapter 2: Science and Its Practical Applications
  1.  Benjamin Kidd, The Science of Power (New York/London: Putnam’s
Sons, 1918): 18–19.
  2.  David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs (Amsterdam: Business Contact, 2018):
16.
  3.  Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: 23.
  4.  Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: 27.
  5.  Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: 18.
  6.  R. M. Giusti, K. Iwamoto, and E. E. Hatch, “Diethylstilbestrol
Revisited: A Review of the Long-Term Health Effects,” Annals of
Internal Medicine 122, no. 10 (May 1995): 778–88, https://doi.org/10
.7326/0003-4819-122-10-199505150-00008.
  7.  Arthur Shapiro, The Powerful Placebo: From Ancient Priest to Modern
Physician (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997).
  8.  Bruce Wampold et al., “The Placebo Is Powerful: Estimating Placebo
Effects in Psychotherapy and Medicine from Randomized Clinical
Trials,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 61, no. 7 (July 2005): 835–54,
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20129.
  9.  Gaia, “Nieuwe cijfers: wereldwijd 79,9 miljoen dierproeven” [New
figures: 79.9 million animal tests worldwide], Gaia, April 24, 2020,
https://www.gaia.be/nl/nieuws/wereldproefdierendag-nieuwe-cijfers-
wereldwijd-799-miljoen-dierproeven.

Chapter 3: The Artificial Society
  1.  James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (London: Penguin Books,
1987): 292.
  2.  Gleick, Chaos: 41–44.
  3.  Gleick, Chaos: 43.
  4.  Mattias Desmet, “Waarom digitale gesprekken zo uitputtend zijn”
[Why digital conversations are so exhausting], Knack, May 6, 2020,
https://www.knack.be/nieuws/wetenschap/waarom-digitale-gesprekken
-zo-uitputtend-zijn/article-opinion-1606309.html.
  5.  A. Hautekeet, “Online leven is schadelijker dan coronavirus” [Life
online is more harmful than the coronavirus], De Standaard, May 26,
2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200525_04971253.
  6.  C. De Kock, “Om echt te kletsen moet je kunnen klinken” [You can’t
have a good chat without raising a glass together], De Standaard, May
27, 2020.
  7.  P. Cabenda, “Met slimme seksspeeltjes kun je—heel veilig—van elkaar
genieten” [With smart sex toys you can have sex without risk], De
Morgen, May 26, 2020.
  8.  JCA, “Maleisiër via Zoom ter dood veroordeeld” [Malaysian sentenced
to death via Zoom], De Standaard, May 20, 2020, https://www
.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200520_04966951.
  9.  S. Kelepouris,“‘De slinger van het thuiswerken is doorgeslagen’:
experte ergonomie Veerle Hermans” [“The pendulum of working from
home has swung”: ergonomics expert Veerle Hermans], De Morgen,
May 21, 2020, https://www.demorgen.be/nieuws/de-slinger-van-het-
thuiswerken-is-doorgeslagen-experte-ergonomie-veerle-
hermans~bc2fcac7.
10.  Patricia Kuhl, “Is Speech Learning ‘Gated’ by the Social Brain?”
Developmental Science 10, no. 1 (January 2007): 110–20, https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00572.x.
11.  Annie Murphy-Paul, Origins: How the Nine Months Before Birth Shape
the Rest of Our Lives (Amsterdam: Free Press, 2011).
12.  G. di Pellegrino et al. “Understanding Motor Events: A
Neurophysiological Study,” Experimental Brain Research 91, no. 1
(1992): 176–80.

13.  Gianpiero Petriglieri, “I spoke to an old therapist friend today, and
finally understood why everyone’s so exhausted after the video calls.
It’s the plausible deniability of each …” Twitter, 4:43 PM, April 3,
2020, https://twitter.com/gpetriglieri/status/1246221849018720256.
14.  Mattias Desmet, “Some Preliminary Notes on Empirical Test of Freud’s
Theory on Depression,” Frontiers in Psychology 4 (May 2013): 158,
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00158.
15.  Marjolijn Vanslembrouck, “Nooit meer die tijd van de maand: volgens
artsen is menstrueren ‘compleet nutteloos’” [Never that time of the
month again: according to these doctors, menstruating is “completely
useless”], De Morgen, July 19, 2020, https://www.hln.be/fit-en-gezond
/nooit-meer-die-tijd-van-de-maand-volgens-artsen-is-menstrueren-
compleet-nutteloos~ac76aebc.
16.  Emily A. Partridge et al., “An Extra-Uterine System to Physiologically
Support the Extreme Premature Lamb,” Nature Communications 8:
15112, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15112.
17.  Tech Insider, “Concept Incubator Would Grow Your Babies at Home,”
YouTube, 1:46, July 4, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=cgmdF9l7K9o.
18.  Tech Insider, “Concept Incubator.”
19.  PVZ, “Volgens Elon Musk hebben we binned 5 jaar geen menselijke
taal meer nodig” [According to Elon Musk, we will no longer need
human language within 5 years], De Morgen, May 9, 2020, https://
www.hln.be/ihln/volgens-elon-musk-hebben-we-binnen-5-jaar-geen-
menselijke-taal-meer-nodig~a35bc439.
20.  Sven de Jong, “Geo-engineering als laatste redmiddel”
[Geoengineering as a last resort], Nemo Kennislink, January 8, 2010,
https://www.nemokennislink.nl/publicaties/geo-engineering-als-laatste-
redmiddel.
21.  George van Hal, “Wetenschappers binden strijd aan met anti-
aanbaklaag en waterafstotende regenjas” [Scientists challenge the
adverse effects of non-stick coatings and water-repellent raincoats] De
Morgen, July 1, 2020, https://www.demorgen.be/tech-wetenschap
/wetenschappers-binden-strijd-aan-met-anti-aanbaklaag-en-
waterafstotende-regenjas~b79d1f20.

22.  Wim Schepens and Tijs Neirynck, “Supermarkten halen opnieuw
tientallen producten uit winkelrekken door ethyleenoxide, wat is er aan
de hand?” [Supermarkets once again have to remove dozens of
products from store shelves due to ethylene oxide, what’s going on?],
VRT NWS, September 22, 2021, https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2021/08
/06/ethyleenoxide-terugroepingsactie.
23.  M. Martin, “Waarschuwing voor directe link tussen chemicaliën en de
‘wildgroei’ aan beschavingsziekten: zo zit het” [Warning for direct link
between chemicals and the “proliferation” of civilization diseases: this
is how it is], De Morgen, August 7, 2019, https://www.demorgen.be
/nieuws/waarschuwing-voor-directe-link-tussen-chemicalien-en-de-
wildgroei-aan-beschavingsziekten-zo-zit-het~bd2839f3.
24.  Max Weber, “Wissenshaft als Beruf” [Science as a profession], 1919,
https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Wissenschaft_als_Beruf.
25.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): 585.
26.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 507.
27.  Plato, De ideale staa [The ideal state], Politeia (Amsterdam:
Athenaeum—Polak & Van Gennep, 2010): 182.
28.  Eric Voegelin, “The Origins of Scientism,” Social Research: An
International Quarterly 15, no. 4 (December 1948): 462–94, cited in
Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 453.

Chapter 4: The (Im)measurable Universe
  1.  Benoit Mandelbrot, “How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-
Similarity and Fractal Dimensions,” Science 156, no. 3775 (May
1967): 636–38, https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.156.3775.636.
  2.  E. H. Simpson, “The Interpretation of Interaction in Contingency
Tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 13, no. 2
(July 1951): 238–41, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1951.tb00088
.x.
  3.  C. Peeters et al., “De PCR test is onbetrouwbaar en het testbeleid faalt”
[The PCR test is unreliable and the test policy is failing], September
27, 2020, HP/De Tijd.
  4.  Luc Gochel, “Le Liégeois qui a fait plier les experts” [The Liège
professor who causes problems for the experts.] Sudinfo Lameuse,
December 8, 2020, https://lameuse.sudinfo.be/619193/article/2020-08-
12/le-liegeois-qui-fait-plier-les-experts.
  5.  Scottish Government, “Counting People in Hospitals with COVID-19,”
September 15, 2020, https://blogs.gov.scot/statistics/2020/09/15
/counting-people-in-hospital-with-covid-19.
  6.  Jeroen Bossaert, “Sjoemelen ziekenhuizen met coronacijfers?
Documenten wijzen op ‘financiële optimalisatie’” [Are hospitals
cheating with corona figures? Documents point to “financial
optimization”], HLN May 14, 2021, https://www.hln.be/binnenland/hln
-onderzoek-sjoemelen-ziekenhuizen-met-coronabeelden-schrijven-wijs
-op-financiele-optimisatie~aef03627.
  7.  Peter C. Gøtzsche, Dodelijke medicijnen en georganiseerde misdaad:
achter de schermen van de farmaceutische industrie [Deadly drugs and
organized crime: behind the scenes of the pharmaceutical industry]
(Rotterdam: Lemniscate, 2021).
  8.  National Center for Health Statistics, “Weekly Updates by Select
Demographic and Geographic Characteristics: Provisional Death
Counts for Coronavirus Disease (COVID-26),” Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, August 26, 2020, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view
/cdc/92550.
  9.  Redactie, “Studie: ‘90% coronadoden valt in landen met veel obesitas’”
[Study: “90% of corona deaths occur in countries with a lot of

obesity”], De Morgen, March 6, 2021, https://www.demorgen.be
/nieuws/studie-90-coronadoden-valt-in-landen-met-veel-
obesitas~ba1823fc.
10.  Liaoyi Lin et al., “CT Manifestations of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-
19) Pneumonia and Influenza Virus Pneumonia: A Comparative
Study,” American Journal of Roentgenology 216, no. 1 (January 2021):
71–79.
11.  E. Ooms, “Wetenschap in haar blote kont: de illusie van de zekerheid
der cijfers” [Bare-assed science: the illusion of the certainty of
numbers], March 24, 2021, https://www.artsenvoorvrij.be/blog/2021
/03/24/wetenschap-in-haar-blote-kont-de-illusie-van-de-zekerheid-der-
cijfers-de-speurtocht-naar-sciensanos-108-000-verwachte-doden.
12.  Luc Bonneux, “De slechtst georganiseerde ouderenzorg van de EU”
[The worst organized elderly care in the EU], De Standaard, June 12,
2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200611_04988858.
13.  JVH, “Duitse longarts: ‘Grootste fout tijdens eerste golf was massale
intubatie’” [German pulmonologist: “Biggest mistake during first wave
was massive intubation”], Het Nieuwsblad, December 24, 2020, https://
www.nieuwsblad.be/cnt/dmf20201224_96693948.
14.  Mattias Desmet, “De angst voor het coronavirus is gevaarlijker dan het
virus zelf” [The fear of the coronavirus is more dangerous than the
virus itself], VRT NWS, March 25, 2020, https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl
/2020/03/25/angst-voor-het-virus.
15.  S. V. Subramanian and Akhil Kumar, “Increases in COVID-19 Are
Unrelated to Levels of Vaccination across 68 Countries and 2947
Counties in the United States,” European Journal of Epidemiology, 36
(2021): 1237–40, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-021-00808-7.
16.  A. R. Brock, “Spontaneous Abortions and Policies on COVID-19
mRNA Vaccine Use During Pregnancy,” Science, Public Health Policy,
and the Law 2021, no. 4 (2021): 130–43.
17.  Günter Kampf and Martin Kulldorf, “Calling for Benefit-Risk
Evaluations of COVID-19 Control Measures,” The Lancet 397, no.
10274 (February 13, 2021): 576–77, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(21)00193-8.
18.  Oxfam, “Honger kan eind 2020 dodelijker worden dan coronavirus
zelf” [Hunger could become more deadly than the coronavirus itself by

the end of 2020], Knack, June 9, 2020, https://www.knack.be/nieuws
/wereld/oxfam-honger-kan-eind-2020-dodelijker-worden-dan-
coronavirus-zelf/article-news-1618511.html; World Health
Organization, “Impact of COVID-19 on People’s Livelihoods, Their
Health and Our Food Systems,” October 13, 2020, https://www.who.int
/news/item/13-10-2020-impact-of-covid-19-on-people’s-livelihoods-
their-health-and-our-food-systems; and United Nations World Food
Program, “2020—Global Report on Food Crises,” April 20, 2020,
https://www.wfp.org/publications/2020-global-report-food-crises.
19.  House of Commons, “Science and Technology Committee— Oral
Evidence: UK Science, Research and Technology Capability and
Influence in Global Disease Outbreaks, HC 136,” April 16, 2020,
https://committees.parliament.uk/download/file/?url
=%2Foralevidence%2F289%2Fdocuments%2F3825%3Fconvertiblefil
eformat%3Dpdf&slug=oe00000289pdf.
20.  Jon Miltimore, “How Finland and Norway Proved Sweden’s Approach
to COVID-19 Works,” FEE Stories, November 13, 2020, https://fee.org
/articles/how-finland-and-norway-proved-sweden-s-approach-to-covid-
19-works.
21.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): xxxviii.
22.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 622.
23.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 621.

Chapter 5: The Desire for a Master
  1.  Sofie Geusensand Jens Vancaeneghem, “Bromfiets gevaarlijkst voor
schoolverkeer: ‘Puber op brommer naar school in de spits is vragen om
problemen’” [Mopeds most dangerous for school traffic: “Adolescents
on a moped to school in rush hour is asking for problems”], De
Standaard, December 20, 2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt
/dmf20200212_04845116.
  2.  MTM, “Een verfrissende duik in de rivier of de vijver de komende
dagen? Geen goed idee: ‘Te gevaarlijk, doe het niet’” [A refreshing dip
in the river or pond in the coming days? Not a good idea: “Too
dangerous, don’t do it”], Het Nieuwsblad, June 23, 2019, https://www
.nieuwsblad.be/cnt/dmf20190623_04475442.
  3.  BELGA, “Orale seks veroorzaakt meer keelkanker bij Belgen” [Oral
sex causes more throat cancer in Belgians], VRT NWS, May 8, 2014,
https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2014/05/08/orale_seks
_veroorzaaktmeerkeelkankerbijbelgen-1-1961069.
  4.  Marjan Temmerman, “Is elkaar de hand schudden voorgoed verleden
tijd? ‘Ik hoop het een beetje,’ zegt viroloog Marv Van Ranst” [Is
shaking hands a thing of the past? “I kind of hope so,” says virologist
Marc Van Ranst], VRT NWS, June 16, 2020, https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws
/nl/2020/06/16/elkaar-de-hand-schudden-voorgoed-verleden-tijd.
  5.  EVDG, “Zelfs naast een roker zitten die niet rookt, kan schadelijk zijn
voor de gezondheid” [Even sitting next to a smoker who is not smoking
can be harmful to health], De Standaard, July 7, 2020, https://www
.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200306_04879315.
  6.  Henry David Thoreau, Walden: Life in the Woods (Utah: Gibbs M.
Smith Inc, 2017): 77.
  7.  Annick Wellens, “Onweersschade? Verzekeringsmaatschappij legt uit
wat je moet doen” [Lightening and thunderstorm damage? Your
insurance company will explain what to do], HLN, September 8, 2018,
https://www.hln.be/binnenland/onweersschade-
verzekeringsmaatschappij-legt-uit-wat-je-moet-doen~a61148aa.
  8.  Donna van der Kolk, “Sterren verzekeren hun benen, kont en …
sperma” [Stars insure their legs, ass and … sperm], Metro, March 10,

2015, https://www.metronieuws.nl/entertainment/2015/03/sterren-
verzekeren-hun-benen-kont-en-sperma.
  9.  Dylan Haegens, “10 gekste verzekeringen!” [10 craziest insurance
policies!], September 14, 2014, YouTube video, 2:33, https://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=KNpc6jHjXQA.
10.  Koen Snoekx, “Proffen stellen screening borstkanker in vraag: ‘Niet
minder kans om kankerpatiënt te worden, integendeel’” [Professors
question breast cancer screening: “No less chance of becoming a
cancer patient, on the contrary”], De Standaard March 16, 2019,
https://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20190316_04261562.
11.  Michaéla Schippers, “For the Greater Good? The Devastating Ripple
Effects of the COVID-19 Crisis,” Frontiers in Psychology 11
(September 29, 2020): https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.577740.
12.  Michel Foucault, Histoire de la folie à l’âge classique [A history of
insanity in the age of reason] (Paris: Gallimard, 1972).
13.  Manon Dupont, “Universiteit Gent leert studenten ‘legaal flirten’: ‘Ik
heb nog geen klacht gehad, dus ik flirt wel goed’” [Ghent University
teaches students about “legal flirting”: “I haven’t had a complaint yet,
so I assume my flirting is OK”], VRT NWS, January 23, 2020, https://
www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2020/01/23/universiteit-gent-leert-studenten-
legaal-flirten-ik-heb-nog.
14.  Michiel Martin, “Studentendopen liggen meer dan ooit onder vuur:
‘Meisjes kregen een banaan om te tonen wat ze ermee konden.
Vreselijk’” [Freshmen baptisms are under fire more than ever before:
“Girls were given a banana to show what they could do with it.
Despicable”], De Morgen, September 15, 2021, https://www.demorgen
.be/nieuws/studentendopen-liggen-meer-dan-ooit-onder-vuur-meisjes-
kregen-een-banaan-om-te-tonen-wat-ze-ermee-konden-
vreselijk~b1e908633.
15.  A. G. Fransen, “Pas als het sekscontract getekend is, mogen de Zweden
vrijen” [Only when the sex contract has been signed, the Swedes are
allowed to have sex] De Morgen, June 20, 2018, https://www
.demorgen.be/nieuws/pas-als-het-sekscontract-getekend-is-mogen-de-
zweden-vrijen~b5b55230.
16.  P. van Tyghem, “Zijn blote borsten gevaarlijker dan de Holocaust
ontkennen?” [Are bare breasts more dangerous than denying the

Holocaust?], De Standaard, July 23, 2018, https://www.standaard.be
/cnt/dmf20180722_03627256.
17.  MVO, “Netflix legt vreemde regels op tegen misbruik: ‘Iemand niet
langer dan 5 seconden aankijken’” [Netflix imposes strange rules
against abuse: “Don’t look at someone for more than 5 seconds”],
HLN, June 14, 2018, https://www.hln.be/showbizz/netflix-legt-
vreemde-regels-op-tegen-misbruik-iemand-niet-langer-dan-5-seconden
-aankijken~af8736b6.
18.  M. Boudry, “Ook links omarmt ontkenners” [The left also embraces
deniers], De Standaard, May 11, 2019, https://www.standaard.be/cnt
/dmf20190510_04390639.
19.  Wim Winckelmans, “Nieuwe coronaregels eindelijk bekend:
openingsdans kan, polonaise liever niet” [New coronavirus rules finally
known: opening dance is possible, polonaise rather not], De Standaard,
June 30, 2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200630_94008414.
20.  Stijn Cools, “Online zingt het vogeltje ranziger dan ooit tevoren”
[Online, the bird is singing more raunchy than ever before], De
Standaard, June 17, 2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20200616
_04992948.
21.  Doha Madani, “JK Rowling Accused of Transphobia after Mocking
‘People who Menstruate’ Headline,” NBC News, June 7, 2020, https://
www.nbcnews.com/feature/nbc-out/j-k-rowling-accused-transphobia-
after-mocking-people-who-menstruate-n1227071.
22.  TTR, “Duitse verzekeraars willen alcoholslot in alle nieuwe auto’s in
Europese Unie” [German insurers want alcohol locks in all new cars in
the European Union], HLN, January 26, 2020, https://www.hln.be
/buitenland/duitse-verzekeraars-willen-alcoholslot-in-alle-nieuwe-auto-
s-in-europese-unie~a12f69c7.
23.  Michael Persson, “Opiniechef New York Times sneuvelt na rechts
opruiend stuk” [New York Times editor in chief has to resign after right-
wing incendiary opinion piece] De Morgen, June 11, 2020, https://
www.demorgen.be/politiek/opiniechef-new-york-times-sneuvelt-na-
rechts-opruiend-stuk~b1ea2933.
24.  TIB, “‘Fawlty Towers’ te racistisch voor BBC” [“Fawlty Towers” is
too racist for BBC], Het Nieuwsblad, January 26, 2013, https://www
.nieuwsblad.be/cnt/dmf20130126_022; BELGA, “San Francisco

verwijdert standbeeld Columbus” [San Francisco removes Columbus
statue], De Morgen, June 19, 2020, https://www.zeelandnet.nl/nieuws
/san-francisco-verwijdert-standbeeld-columbus; and GHO, “Met
corona besmette man slaat op de vlucht in Australië, polite opent jacht
op ‘volksvijand nummer één’” [Man infected with coronavirus flees in
Australia, police open a man hunt for “public enemy number one”],
Gazet van Antwerpen, August 24, 2021.
25.  Sigmund Freud, Cultuur en Religie 4: Totem en taboe [Culture and
religion 4: Totem and taboo] (Amsterdam: Boom, 1984): 39.
26.  James Frazer, Totemism and exogamy (London: McMillan, 1910):
retrieved from https://archive.org/details/totemismexogamyt01fraz.
27.  David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs (Amsterdam: Business Contact, 2018):
155.
28.  Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: 170.
29.  Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: 49.
30.  Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Rinehart & Co.,
1952).
31.  James Anthony, “Australian Government Plans Chinese-Style ‘Social
Credit’ System for Social Media Users,” The Post Millennial,
September 2, 2021, https://thepostmillennial.com/watch-australian-
government-plans-chinese-style-social-credit-system-for-social-media-
users.
32.  Mathieu Verstichel, “Sint-Niklaas heeft vanaf 2022 een eigen digitale
stadsmunt: ‘125 handelaars doen al mee’” [The town of Sint-Niklaas
will have its own digital city currency from 2022: “125 retailers are
already participating”], VRT NWS, June 15, 2021, https://www.vrt.be
/vrtnws/nl/2021/06/15/betalen-mensen-hun-brood-in-2022-met-een-
digitale-stadsmunt-in-s.
33.  R. Andersen, “Opgepakt door het algoritme: hoe China met
orwelliaanse technologie massaal burgers vastzet” [Picked up by the
algorithm: how China is detaining civilians en masse with Orwellian
technology], De Morgen, November 26, 2019, https://www.demorgen
.be/politiek/opgepakt-door-het-algoritme-hoe-china-met-orwelliaanse-
technologie-massaal-burgers-vastzet~b1b6aa682.
34.  Tobias Santens, Gianni Paelinck, “Peeters en De Block: ‘Dit is
alarmerend. Label voor rundvlees moet onderzocht worden’” [Peeters

and De Block: “This is alarming. Beef label needs to be investigated”],
VRT NWS, November 16, 2018, https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2018/11
/16/peeters-over-onbetrouwbaar-kwaliteitslabel-rundsvlees-zeer-ala.
35.  Isabelle Saporte, Vino Business: The Cloudy World of French Wine
(New York: Grove Press, 2016).
36.  MV, VHN, and LOB, “Rubicon, de geheime ‘inlichtingencoup van de
eeuw’” [Rubicon, the secret “intelligence coup of the century”], De
Standaard, February 12, 2020, https://www.standaard.be/cnt
/dmf20200211_04844292.
37.  Cathy Galle, “Patiënten klagen over privacy e-dossiers: ‘Data worden
gedeeld zonder toestemming’” [Patients complain about e-file privacy:
“Data is shared without permission”], De Morgen, December 24, 2019,
https://www.demorgen.be/nieuws/patienten-klagen-over-privacy-e-
dossiers-data-worden-gedeeld-zonder-toestemming~b0eba24c.
38.  Galle, [Patients complain about e-file privacy].
39.  Cathy Galle, “Verzekeringsartsen kunnen meekijken in uw medisch
dossier” [Insurance doctors have access to your medical file], De
Morgen, January 23, 2020, https://www.demorgen.be/nieuws
/verzekeringsartsen-kunnen-meekijken-in-uw-medisch-
dossier~bbcbb6c3.

Chapter 6: The Rise of the Masses
  1.  Immanuel Kant, Beantwortung to the Frage: Was it Aufklärung?
[Answer to the question: What is enlightenment?] Berlinische
Monatsschrift [Berlin Monthly] (December 1784): 481–94.
  2.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): 399.
  3.  Committee P, Annual Report 2019, https://comitep.be/document
/jaarverslagen/2019NL_act.pdf.
  4.  MatthiasVerbergt, “Camera’s in joodse wijk controleren nu
synangogegangers” [Cameras in Jewish quarter are now used to surveil
synagogue-goers], De Standaard, March 13, 2021, https://www
.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20210312_98151173.
  5.  Kristof Clerix, “Privacy in corontijden: ‘Op de duur zijn we niet meer
veraf van Chinese toestanden’” [Privacy in coronavirus times: “In the
end, we will not be far away from situations as in China”] Knack,
February 3, 2021, https://www.knack.be/nieuws/belgie/privacy-in-
coronatijden-op-den-duur-zijn-we-niet-meer-veraf-van-chinese-
toestanden/article-longread-1695703.html.
  6.  Melinda Pater, “Je buren verklikken als ze zich niet aan de anderhalve
meter houden, het kan” [Denouncing your neighbors if they don’t stick
to the one and a half meters, it’s accepted], NPO Radio 1, April 10,
2020, https://www.nporadio1.nl/binnenland/22996-je-buren-verklikken
-als-ze-zich-niet-aan-de-anderhalve-meter-houden-het-kan.
  7.  Collectief van academici [Collective of Academics], “Zonder
tegenspraak kan er van wetenschappelijke vooruitgang geen sprake
zijn” [There can be no scientific progress without contradiction] Knack,
April 9, 2021, https://www.knack.be/nieuws/belgie/zonder-tegenspraak
-kan-van-wetenschappelijke-vooruitgang-geen-sprake-zijn/article-
opinion-1721153.html.
  8.  International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance
Nobelprijswinnaars en wereldleiders: “Coronacrisis bedreigt
democratie” [Nobel laureates and world leaders: “Coronavirus crisis
threatens democracy”] Knack, June 5, 2020, https://www.knack.be
/nieuws/wereld/nobelprijswinnaars-en-wereldleiders-coronacrisis-
bedreigt-democratie/article-news-1614169.html.

  9.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 428.
10.  Gustave LeBon, Psychologie des foules [The crowd: a study of the
popular mind] (Paris: Books on Demand, 1895): 17.
11.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 40.
12.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 95–98.
13.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 11–12.
14.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 11.
15.  Vivek Murthy, “Work and the Loneliness Epidemic,” Harvard Business
Review, September 26, 2017, https://hbr.org/2017/09/work-and-the-
loneliness-epidemic.
16.  Liana DesHarnais Bruce, “Loneliness in the United States: A 2018
National Panel Survey of Demographic, Structural, Cognitive, and
Behavioral Characteristics,” American Journal of Health Promotion
33, no. 8 (November 1, 2019): 1123–33, https://doi.org/10.1177
/0890117119856551.
17.  DesHarnais Bruce, “Loneliness in the United States.”
18.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 415.
19.  David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs (Amsterdam: Business Contact, 2018).
20.  Steve Crabtree, “Worldwide, 13% of Employees Are Engaged at
Work,” Gallup World Poll, October 8, 2013, https://news.gallup.com
/poll/165269/worldwide-employees-engaged-work.aspx.
21.  DesHarnais Bruce, “Loneliness in the United States.”
22.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 25-30.
23.  VRT, De Afspraak [The Appointment], “Het journal—22 maart 2020,”
YouTube, 35:23, March 22, 2020, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=NliNQquAH5M.
24.  Freek Willems, “Virologe Vlieghe: ‘Mondmasker verplichten creëert
bewustzijn dat virus er nog is,’ De Block: ‘Discussie niet gesloten’”
[Virologist Vlieghe: “Mandating a face mask creates awareness that the
virus is still there,” De Block: “Discussion not closed”] VRT NWS,
June 28, 2020, https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2020/06/28/erika-vlieghe-
over-mondmaskers-creeren-awareness-dat-virus-nog.
25.  KVE, De Wever (N-VA) haalt uit naar premier en minister
Vandenbroucke: “Als je middenstanders te gronde wil richten, dan
moet je het zo aanpakken” [De Wever (N-VA) lashes out at Prime
Minister and Minister Vandenbroucke: “If you want to destroy retailers,

you have to approach it like this”], HLN, November 29, 2020, https://
www.hln.be/binnenland/de-wever-n-va-haalt-uit-naar-premier-en-
minister-vandenbroucke-als-je-middenstanders-te-gronde-wil-richten-
dan-moet-je-het-zo-aanpakken~a808260d.
26.  Solomon E. Asch, “Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification
and Distortion of Judgment,” in H. Guetzkow (ed.), Groups,
Leadership, and Men: Research in Human Relations (Pittsburgh, PA:
Carnegie Press, 1951).
27.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 148–49.
28.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 21-22.
29.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 422–24.
30.  Torck, L. (2021, April 12). Marc Van Ranst na tragisch weekend:
“Onfortuinlijk, maar nul compassie voor feestende jongeren” [Marc
Van Ranst after a tragic weekend: “Unfortunate, but zero compassion
for young people who party”], Het Nieuwsblad, April 12, 2021, https://
www.nieuwsblad.be/cnt/dmf20210412_92686979.
31.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 34.
32.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 455–57.
33.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 26.
34.  Félix Julien, Courants et révolutions de l’athmosphère et de la mer
[Currents and revolutions of the atmosphere and the sea] (Montana:
Kessinger Publishing, 1860); Le Bon, [The crowd]: 27.
35.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 563–64.
36.  Paul Aubry, La contagion du meurtre: étude d’anthropologie
criminelle. [The contagion of murder: a study of criminal
anthropology] (Paris: Alcan, 1888).
37.  Taine, H. (1893). Les origines de la France contemporaine: La
Revolution (tome IIV). [The origins of contemporary France: The
revolution (volume IIV)] Paris: Hachette.
38.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 32–33.

Chapter 7: The Leaders of the Masses
  1.  Gustave Le Bon, Psychologie des foules [The crowd: a study of the
popular mind] (Paris: Books on Demand, 1895): 67.
  2.  Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem [Eichmann in Jerusalem]
(Amsterdam: Olympus, 1963): 195.
  3.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem.
  4.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 211.
  5.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 220–21.
  6.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 33–36.
  7.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 208–9.
  8.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 212.
  9.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 63.
10.  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (London: The Harvey
Press, 1986).
11.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 307.
12.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 19–38.
13.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): 452.
14.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 575.
15.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 500.
16.  Gunter D’Alquen, Die SS. Geschichte, Aufgabe, und Organisation der
Schutzwaffen der NSDAP [The SS. History, mission and organization
of the Schutztaffeln of the NSDAP] (Berlin: Junker und Dunnhaupt
Verlag, 1939).
17.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 402–3; George Orwell, Animal
Farm (London: Secker and Warburg, 1945).
18.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 402–3.
19.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago.
20.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 601.
21.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 67–70.
22.  Bruno Bettelheim, On Dachau and Buchenwald. Nazi Conspiracy, vol.
VII (1946): https://forum.axishistory.com/viewtopic.php?t=68993;
David J. Dallin, From Purge to Coexistence: Essays on Stalin’s and
Krushchev’s Russia (Chicago: Henri Regnery Company, 1964); and
Eugen Kogon, The Theory and Practice of Hell: The German

Concentration Camps and the System Behind Them (New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1956).
23.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 571, 562, 597, 601.
24.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 318–19.
25.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 515–16; Solzhenitsyn, The
Gulag Archipelago: 120-128.
26.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 621.
27.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 619.
28.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 589.
29.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 348.
30.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 593–94.
31.  Orwell, Animal Farm.
32.  United Nations World Food Program, “2020—Global Report on Food
Crises,” April 20, 2020, https://www.wfp.org/publications/2020-global-
report-food-crises.
33.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 628.
34.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 402.
35.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: chapter 2.
36.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 566; Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag
Archipelago: 19–38.
37.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 436–38.
38.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 446–508.
39.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 130–31.
40.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 9.
41.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 216–17, 221–23.
42.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 13.
43.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago: 430.
44.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 13.

Chapter 8: Conspiracy and Ideology
  1.  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (London: The Harvey
Press, 1986).
  2.  Henri Rollin, L’apocalypse de notre temps: Les dessous de la
propagande Allemande d’après des documents inédits [The apocalypse
of our times: The hidden side of German propaganda according to
unpublished documents] (Paris: Gallimard, 1939), 40.
  3.  Maurice Joly, Dialogue aux enfers entre Machiavel et Montesquieu ou
la politique de Machiavel au XIX siècle [Dialogue in hell between
Machiavelli and Montesquieu or the politics of Machiavelli in the XIX
century] (Brussels: A. Mertens et fils, 1864).
  4.  Chevalier de Malet, Recherches politiques et historiques qui prouvent
l’existence d’une secte revolutionnaire [Political and historical research
that proves the existence of a revolutionary sect] (Paris: Gide Fils,
1817).
  5.  Hieronim Zahorowski, Monita Secreta (1612), last accessed March 3,
2022, https://ia800503.us.archive.org/32/items/secretamonitasoc00brec
/secretamonitasoc00brec.pdf.
  6.  “Conspiracy,” Wikipedia, last updated November 4, 2021, https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conspiracy.
  7.  Gustave Le Bon, Psychologie des foules. [The crowd: a study of the
popular mind] (Paris: Books on Demand, 1895): 17.
  8.  Le Bon, [The crowd]: 70–73.
  9.  Niko Tinbergen, Inleiding tot de diersociologie [Introduction to animal
sociology] (Gorinchem: Noorduijn and son, 1946).
10.  Elias Canetti, Massa en macht [Mass and power] (Amsterdam:
Athenaeum—Polak & Van Gennep, 2017).
11.  Matthias Hides, “Camera’s in Joodse wijk controleren nu
synagogegangers” [Cameras in Jewish Quarter now monitor
synagogue-goers] De Standaard, March 13, 2021, https://www
.standaard.be/cnt/dmf20210312_98151173.
12.  Yuval Noah Harari, Homo Deus (London: Vintage, 2015).
13.  Zia Khan, “Innovating for a Bold Future,” Rockefeller Foundation
[blog], October 27, 2020, https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/blog
/innovating-for-a-bold-future.

14.  “Event 201,” Center for Health Security, last accessed March 3, 2022,
https://www.centerforhealthsecurity.org/event201.
15.  Klaus Schwab and Thierry Malleret, COVID-19: The Great Reset
(Agentur Switzerland: World Economic Forum, 2020).
16.  Noam Chomsky, Necessary Illusions: Thought Control in Democratic
Societies (Boston: South End Press, 1989).
17.  Departement MOW [MOW Flemish Government Department],
“Vlaamse mobiliteitsvisie 2040 : Digi-kosmos” [Flemish mobility
vision 2040: Digi-cosmos], YouTube, 1:15, August 11, 2020, https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfN3EJMVOQ4.
18.  Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Penguin
Books, 1951): 541, 569.
19.  Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem [Eichmann in Jerusalem]
(Amsterdam: Olympus, 1963): 209.
20.  Alex Stern, “Sterilization Abuse in State Prisons: Time to Break with
California’s Long Eugenic Patters,” Huffington Post, updated
September 22, 2013, https://www.huffpost.com/entry/sterilization-
california-prisons_b_3631287.
21.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 470.
22.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 428.
23.  Charles Eisenstein, “The Conspiracy Myth, Charles Eisenstein” [blog],
May 2020, https://charleseisenstein.org/essays/the-conspiracy-myth.
24.  Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism: 426.
25.  Arendt, Eichmann in Jeruzalem: 286.
26.  Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago.

Chapter 9: The Dead versus the Living Universe
  1.  Pierre-Simon Laplace, Essai philosophique sur les probabilités [A
philosophical essay on probabilities] (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1795): 4.
  2.  Bertrand Russell, Letter to Frege (1902), in Jean van Heijenoort (ed.)
From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–
1931 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1967):
124–25.
  3.  Werner Heisenberg, “Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der
quantentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik” [On the physical
content of the quantum theoretical kinematics and mechanics],
Zeitschrift für Physik [Journal of Physics], 43 (1927): 172–98.
  4.  James Gleick, Chaos: Making a New Science (London: Penguin Books,
1987): 93.
  5.  Gleick, Chaos: 299.
  6.  Gleick, Chaos: 262–67.
  7.  Gleick, Chaos: 43.
  8.  Hans Meinhardt, The Algorithmic Beauty of Sea Shells (Berlin:
Springer, 1995).
  9.  Galileo Galilei, “Il saggiatore/6” [The Taster/6] (1623), last updated
April 17, 2011, https://it.wikisource.org/wiki/Il_Saggiatore/6.
10.  Edward Lorenz, “Deterministic Nonperiodic flow,” Journal of the
Athmospheric Sciences 20 (March 1963): 130–41.
11.  Gleick, Chaos: 135.
12.  Werner Heisenberg, Das naturgesetz und die Struktur der Materie
[Natural law and the structure of matter] (Stuttgart: Belser Verlag,
1967).
13.  Henri Poincaré, Science and method (London: T. Nelson, 1914): https://
archive.org/details/sciencemethod00poinuoft/page/n5.
14.  Gleick, Chaos.

Chapter 10: Matter and Spirit
  1.  Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow, Het grote ontwerp: een
nieuwe verklaring van het Universum [The grand design: A new
statement from the universe] (Amsterdam: Bert Bakker, 2010): 75.
  2.  Hawking and Mlodinow, [The grand design]: 93.
  3.  Niels Bohr, cited in Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway:
Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning
(London: Duke University Press, 2007): 254.
  4.  Werner Heisenberg, Das naturgesetz und die Struktur der Materie
[Natural law and the structure of matter] (Stuttgart: Belser Verlag,
1967).
  5.  Bertrand Russell, The Analysis of Mind (Gutenberg Ebook, 1921): 808.
  6.  Lionel Feuillet, Henry Dufour, and Jean Pelletier, “Brain of a White-
Collar Worker,” The Lancet 370, no. 9583 (July 1, 2007): 262, https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61127-1; Roger Lewin, “Is Your Brain
Really Necessary?” Science 210, no. 4475 (December 12, 1980): 1232–
34, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7434023.
  7.  Lionel Feuillet, “Brain of a White-Collar Worker.”
  8.  Jan Scholz et al., “Training Induces Changes in White-Matter
Architecture,” Nature Neuroscience Online 12, no. 11 (November
2009): 1370–71, https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2412; A. M. Clare Kelly
and Hugh Garavan, “Human Functional Neuroimaging of Brain
Changes Associated with Practice,” Cerebral Cortex 15, no. 8 (August
2005): 1089–102, https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhi005.
  9.  Elisabeth Wieduwild et al., “β2-adrenergic Signals Downregulate the
Innate Immune Response and Reduce Host Resistance to Viral
Infection,” Journal of Experimental Medicine 217, no. 4 (April 6,
2020): https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20190554.
10.  Anders Prior et al., “The Association between Perceived Stress and
Mortality among People with Multimorbidity: A Prospective
Population-Based Cohort Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology
184, no. 3 (August 1, 2016): 199–210, https://doi.org/10.1093/aje
/kwv324.
11.  Naja Rod Nielsen et al., “Perceived Stress and Cause-Specific
Mortality among Men and Women: Results from a Prospective Cohort

Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology 168, no. 5 (September 1,
2008): 481–91, https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwn157.
12.  H. F. Ellenberger, The Discovery of the Unconscious (New York: Basic
Books, 1970).
13.  Christine Watremez and Fabienne Roelants, “Hypnose in de
anesthesie” [Hypnosis in anesthesia], Bloedvaten, Hart, Longen [Blood
Vessels, Heart, Lungs] 15, no. 1 (2010): 30–34.
14.  Arthur Shapiro, The Powerful Placebo (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1997); Bruce E. Wampold, “The Placebo Is Powerful:
Estimating Placebo Effects in Psychotherapy and Medicine from
Randomized Clinical Trials,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 61, no. 7
(July 2005): 835–54, https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.20129.
15.  A. Hróbjartsson and P. C. Gøtzsche, “Is the Placebo Powerless? An
Analysis of Clinical Trials Comparing Placebo with No Treatment,”
New England Journal of Medicine 344, no. 21 (May 24, 2001): 1594–
1602, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200105243442106.
16.  Robert A. Hahn, “The Nocebo Phenomenon: Concept, Evidence, and
Implications for Public Health,” Preventive Medicine 26 (1997): 60711.
17.  L. Harrison Matthews, “Visual Stimulation and Ovulation in Pigeons,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B (Biological Sciences) 126,
no. 845 (February 3, 1939): 557–60.
18.  Rémy Chauvin, “Contribution à l›étude physiologique du criquet
pèlerin et du déterminisme des phénomènes grégaires” [Contribution to
the physiological study of the desert locust and the determinism of
gregarious phenomena], Bulletin de la Société entomologique de
France 85, no. 7–8 (1980): 133–272, https://doi.org/10.3406/bsef.1980
.18263.
19.  Marcel Mauss, Essai sur le don: Forme et raison de l’échange dans les
sociétiés primitives [Essay on the gift: Form and purpose of exchange
in primitive societies], February 2002), https://anthropomada.com
/bibliotheque/Marcel-MAUSS-Essai-sur-le-don.pdf.
20.  Claude Lévi-Strauss, “L’efficacité symbolique” [Symbolic efficiency],
Revue de l’histoire des religions 135, no. 1 (1949): 5–27, https://doi.org
/10.3406/rhr.1949.5632.
21.  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (London: The Harvey
Press, 1986): 318–19.

Chapter 11: Science and Truth
  1.  Bertrand Russell, The Impact of Science on Society (1953; London:
Routledge, 2013).
  2.  Jacob Fox, “Essay: COVID-19, Utopianism, and the Reimagination of
Society,” Collateral Global, October 17, 2021, https://collateralglobal
.org/article/covid-19-utopianism-and-the-reimagination-of-society.
  3.  Georg W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion
[Lectures on the philosophy of religion] (1821; Hamburg: Felix Meiner
Verlag, 1993).
  4.  Niels Bohr, cited in Steve Giles, Theorizing Modernism: Essays in
Critical Theory (1920; London: Routledge, 1993).
  5.  Max Planck, Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers, trans. Frank
Gaynor (New York Philosophical Library: 1949; Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1971): 184.
  6.  Ken Wilber, Quantum Questions: Mystical Writings of the World’s
Greatest Physicist (Boulder: Shambala, 1998): 16.
  7.  René Thom, Predire n’est pas expliquer [To predict is not to explain],
trans. Roy Lisker (Champs Sciences, Editions Eshel, IHES edition,
2010): 92.
  8.  Masaaki Hatsumi, Essence of Ninjutsu: The Nine Traditions (Chicago:
Contemporary Books, 1988).
  9.  Max Jacob, Le cornet a des [Dice box] (Paris: Jourde and Allard,
1917).
10.  Michel Foucault, De moed tot waarheid [The courage of truth]
(Amsterdam: Boom, 1983).
11.  Foucault, [The courage to truth]: 45.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Mattias Desmet is recognized as the world’s leading expert on the theory
of mass formation as it applies to the COVID-19 pandemic. He is a
professor of clinical psychology in the Department of Psychology and
Educational Sciences at Ghent University (Belgium) and a practicing
psychoanalytic psychotherapist. His work has been discussed widely in the
media, including on The Joe Rogan Experience and in Forbes, The New
York Post, Salon.com, and Fox News, among hundreds of other outlets. His
interviews have been viewed by millions of people around the world. His
previous books include The Pursuit of Objectivity in Psychology and
Lacan’s Logic of Subjectivity: A Walk on the Graph of Desire. Desmet is the

author of over one hundred peer-reviewed academic papers. In 2018 he
received the Evidence-Based Psychoanalytic Case Study Prize of the
Association for Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, and in 2019 he received the
Wim Trijsburg Prize of the Dutch Association of Psychotherapy.

