
This page intentionally left blank

The Edge of Infinity
Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe
In the past they were recognized as the most destructive force in nature.
Now, following a cascade of astonishing discoveries, supermassive black
holes have undergone a dramatic shift in paradigm. Astronomers are
finding out that these objects may have been critical to the formation of
structure in the early universe, spawning bursts of star formation,
planets, and even life itself. They may have contributed as much as half
of all the radiation produced after the Big Bang, and as many as 200
million of them may now be lurking through the vast expanses of the
observable cosmos. In this elegant nontechnical account, Melia
conveys the excitement generated by the quest to expose what these
giant distortions in the fabric of space and time have to say about our
origin and ultimate destiny. This fascinating and timely book is suitable
for the general reader wishing to find answers to some of the intriguing
questions now being asked about black holes.
fulvio melia is Professor of Astronomy and Associate Head of
Physics at the University of Arizona. He has held numerous visiting
appointments at universities in Europe and Australia, including posts in
Paris, Heidelberg, Padua, and Melbourne. Melia has won many national
and international distinguished awards for scholarship and teaching. His
research focuses on the characteristics and behavior of black holes and
other compact stars, and he has published over 180 papers in the
primary literature.


The Edge of Infinity
Supermassive Black Holes
in the Universe
fulvio melia
The University of Arizona, Tucson

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-81405-8
ISBN-13
978-0-511-33720-8
© Cambridge University Press 2003
2003
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521814058
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of 
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place 
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
ISBN-10    0-511-33720-5
ISBN-10    0-521-81405-7
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls 
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
eBook (EBL)
eBook (EBL)
hardback

Contents
Preface
page vii
1
The most powerful objects in the universe
1
1.1
Beacons at the edge of reality
3
1.2
The host galaxies of quasars
10
1.3
The active nuclei of “normal” galaxies
14
2
Weighing supermassive objects
17
2.1
Accretion of plasma
20
2.2
Deciphering the signal from the infalling gas
25
2.3
The center of our galaxy
30
3
The black hole spacetime
34
3.1
The inexorable force of gravity
34
3.2
Unseen dimensions
38
3.3
Matter’s futile resistance to total collapse
44
3.4
The black hole spacetime
52
3.5
Rotating black holes
56
4
Formation of supermassive black holes
63
4.1
Primordial seeds
64
4.2
Galaxy types
74
4.3
The supermassive black hole census
77
4.4
Galaxy collisions
82
4.5
Collision of Andromeda with the Milky Way
85
4.6
Middleweight black holes
89

vi the edge of infinity
5
Relativistic ejection of plasma
92
5.1
Imaging supermassive black holes
97
5.2
Jets from supermassive black holes
99
5.3
Faster than light motion
103
6
Supermassive black holes in the universe
111
6.1
The Hubble Deep Field
111
6.2
The Chandra Deep Field
112
6.3
The universe aglow
113
6.4
Future directions
115
6.5
Is the universe itself a big black hole?
119
6.6
Ultimate fate
129
References
134
Index
142

Preface
If you were to imagine a description of nature whose constituents
are so bizarre that even its originator refuses to allow for their actual
manifestation, you would not have to go past the theory of general
relativity. Created almost a century ago, it was perhaps the most
anticipatory advancement in the history of physics. Its development
was so visionary that none of the four significant tests applied to it
since – two of which were adjudged to be of Nobel quality – have
truly exposed the core of this remarkable theory, where the most
abstruse distortions to the fabric of space and time are imprinted.
Einstein suspended his belief at the thought of a universe that
would permit singularities to form, in which matter collapses
inexorably to a point and becomes forever entombed. Yet this was
the boldest consequence of his new description of gravity.
Remarkably, the idea that a gravitational field ought to bend
the path of light so severely that the heaviest stars should then be
dark was actually forged much earlier, in the context of Newtonian
mechanics, toward the end of the eighteenth century. The Reverend
John Michell argued in a paper published by the Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society that, if a star was sufficiently
massive, its escape velocity would have a magnitude exceeding even
the speed of light, which, being comprised of particles, would then
slow down and fall back to the surface. These stars would therefore
be unobservable and he coined the term “dark star” to vividly
portray this peculiar property. (Incidentally, this discussion appears
to have been the first mention of the possible existence of dark
matter in the universe.)
It is indeed a measure of how extraordinary such objects are
that it took almost 200 years before some evidence for the existence

viii the edge of infinity
of “black holes,” as they are now known, started trickling in. These
days, astronomers are riding a cascade of astonishing discoveries,
many of them with space-based facilities such as the Hubble Space
Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory, and are finding
themselves on the other side of a dramatic shift in paradigm.
Twenty years ago, the idea of giant black holes the size of our
solar system seemed more like fodder for science fiction than
something relevant to the real world. Widely recognized as the most
destructive force in the universe, supermassive black holes could not
easily fit into the highly ordered structure that astronomers saw in
galaxies and their clustering. But now we are finding out that these
objects may have contributed as much as half of all the radiation
pervading the intergalactic medium, and that as many as 200 million
of them may be lurking in the vast expanses of the known universe.
Exactly how galaxies were created continues to puzzle
astrophysicists, who grapple with the question of why the
primordial gas collapsed to form the aggregates of matter we see
today. It is starting to look more and more as though supermassive
black holes were critical in this process. Their overwhelming gravity
may have triggered condensations that eventually led to the majestic
cartwheels of spiral galaxies such as the Milky Way. They may have
spawned bursts of star formation, planets, and, yes, even life itself.
So supermassive black holes may have been here at the beginning
and, because they possess a one-way membrane that draws matter
in, but lets nothing back out into the universe as we know it, they
will all be here toward the end.
The exhilarating black-hole discoveries produced by the
astronomical community invigorate the public’s imagination. This
is the element that has motivated the writing of this book. For her
patience and support throughout the course of this project, I am
indebted to Jacqueline Garget, who early on saw the need for such a
treatise. And for generously supporting my research in this area for
over a decade and a half, I gratefully acknowledge the National

preface ix
Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
Finally, I owe a debt of gratitude to the pillars of my life –
Patricia, Marcus, Eliana, and Adrian – and to my parents, whose
guidance has been priceless.


1
The most powerful objects
in the universe
History’s time line swept through 1963 with a breathtaking pace. The
community of nations was about to welcome the birth of its newest
member, Kenya, which that year attained independence from Great
Britain. The Vietnamese military, meanwhile, was in the process of
overthrowing the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem, deepening the US in-
volvement in Southeast Asia and setting the stage for a decade of
discordant relations among the superpowers. Ironically, this was also
the year in which the first test ban agreement between the USA and
the Soviet Union was ratified, concluding a nervous endeavor to ease
growing nuclear tensions. For the individuals in society, the issue of
women’s rights resurfaced, promoted by Betty Friedan’s just-released
book Feminine Mystique. And while readers were being exposed to
the idea of a modern woman discarding her traditional role, humanity
as a whole was gaining some leverage over nature with the discovery
of a vaccine against the measles. Many remember 1963 for the tragic
assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
This tessellation of historical markers stirring the world in 1963
formed quite a backdrop for two minor events that would lead, over
time, to the eventual uncloaking of the most powerful objects in the
universe. At Mount Palomar Observatory, Maarten Schmidt was pon-
dering over the nature of a starlike object with truly anomalous char-
acteristics, while Roy Kerr, at the University of Texas, was making a
breakthrough discovery of a solution to Albert Einstein’s (1879–1955)
general relativistic field equations. Kerr’s work would eventually pro-
duce a description of space and time surrounding a spinning black
hole, which is now thought to power very dense concentrations of
matter like those responsible for producing the mystery on Schmidt’s
desk in 1963. Perhaps the most enigmatic objects in the cosmos, black

2 the edge of infinity
holes enclose regions of space within which gravity is so strong that
not even light can escape – hence their name. Light paths originating
near them are bent by the strong gravitational field and wend their way
inwards toward oblivion, creating a dark depression in an otherwise
bright medium.
The astronomical puzzle on Schmidt’s desk was the star recently
associated with the 273rd entry in the third Cambridge catalog of radio
sources, hence its designation as 3C 273. For centuries, such objects
had gone unnoticed, appearing in the nighttime sky merely as faint
points of light. The development and use of radio telescopes in the
1940s, however, led to the gradual realization that several regions of
the cosmos are very bright emitters of centimeter-wavelength radi-
ation. As 1963 approached, the British astronomer Cyril Hazard de-
vised an ingenious method of pinpointing the exact location of such
a source. Using lunar occultation, he suggested, it should be possi-
ble to note the precise instant that the radio signal stopped and then
re-emerged when the moon passed in front of it. Astronomers could
then determine with which, if any, of the known visible objects in
the firmament the emitter of centimeter-wavelength radiation was
associated.
Hazard arranged to make the measurements at Parkes Radio
Telescope situated several hundred miles from the University of
Sydney in the Australian outback. But the observation that he had
proposed almost did not happen. He took the wrong train that night
and missed the event entirely. Fortunately, the staff at the observatory,
headed by the director John Bolton, proceeded with the plan anyway.
It turned out to be a rather daring feat since the region to be observed
was too close to the horizon, and the telescope could not tip over suf-
ficiently to make the recording. Undaunted, the observatory staff cut
down the intervening trees and removed the telescope’s safety bolts,
allowing the several-thousand-ton facility to swivel sufficiently to
catch the occultation.
Hazard’s experiment worked beautifully, and the radio source
tracked by Parkes that night – 3C 273 – could be identified with a single

the most powerful objects in the universe 3
starlike object in the constellation Virgo. It seemed like a rather docile
object, but its appearance belied the fact that this quasi-stellar radio
source (hence the name “quasar”) is a prodigious emitter of radiation.
The characteristics of its optical light – basically, the colors of its
rainbow – had never been seen before. Schmidt eventually solved the
puzzle by realizing that the pattern of colors before him was really
that produced by hydrogen atoms, only with a wavelength shifted
by about 16 percent from its value produced in the laboratory.1 But
was this simply an indication that the physics in space was unusual
compared to what we see on Earth?
1.1
beacons at the edge of reality
The answer, it turns out, really had to do with the fact that 3C 273
was moving away from us. Just as the pitch of a whistle depends on
how fast the train is receding or approaching, the shift in wavelength
of light is an indicator of the speed with which its source is moving.
The greater is its redshift – as the increase in wavelength is called – the
higher is its speed of recession. (Similarly, a “blueshift” would indicate
that the source was approaching us.) To Schmidt and his colleagues,
the shift in wavelength was quite remarkable, for it had been known
since the time of Edwin Hubble (1889–1953), the great astronomer
for whom the Space Telescope is named, that cosmological distances
scale directly with speed. According to the redshift that Schmidt had
identified, 3C 273 had to be much farther away than had been previ-
ously imagined.
To understand the origin of this interpretation, we must turn the
clock back some 40 years, to a period when the idea of a “universe”
had not yet been fully gestated. Prior to the 1920s, most of Hubble’s
colleagues believed that the Milky Way galaxy, the swirling collection
of stars that fills the night sky in the southern hemisphere, was essen-
tially the entire cosmos. Moving at 250 kilometers per second, it takes
1 Maarten Schmidt reported his discovery in a one-page article published by Nature in
1963.

4 the edge of infinity
our Sun about 220 million years to complete one orbit about the cen-
ter of this structure, which was therefore viewed as being of sufficient
size to satisfy our deep-rooted yearning for the universe to be im-
mense compared to human proportions. But looking into deep space
from the chilly summit of Mount Wilson, in Southern California,
Hubble realized that the Milky Way is instead only one of many galax-
ies fighting the darkness in an incomparably larger cosmos.
Toward the end of the 1920s, as the world inched closer to the
precipice of a great depression, Hubble surprised the scientific com-
munity with yet another remarkable discovery: the galaxy-studded
universe, he claimed, was actually expanding. Like dots on a swelling
balloon, these bright markers were receding from each other with a
speed that increased with distance. Even Albert Einstein (see Fig. 1.1),
who had earlier postulated that the universe was static and eternal,
was caught by surprise and felt compelled in 1929 to acknowledge and
retract what he termed “the greatest blunder of my life.” Hubble’s dis-
covery is now viewed as the first evidence for the Big Bang theory of
creation, in which the known universe not only had an origin in time,
but apparently began its inexorable expansion as a single point in
space, within which all matter and energy were initially compressed.
This revelation turned Hubble into a worldwide celebrity, becoming
a favored guest in Hollywood during the 1930s and 1940s, where he
befriended the likes of Charlie Chaplin, Helen Hayes, and William
Randolph Hearst.
It was already known that the light from certain strange-looking
nebulae (at the time, these had not yet been associated with galaxies,
but were instead believed to be merely glowing balls of gas) was redder
than it should be. And motion away from us seemed to be the most
likely cause for this so-called redshift. Now, with meticulous care,
Hubble was documenting the distance to these receding nebulae and
found what has come to be known as Hubble’s Law: that the farther
away the galaxy is from Earth, the faster it appears to be moving.
For discovering the universe and inventing the field of cosmol-
ogy, Hubble was rightfully the recipient of many awards, but the one

the most powerful objects in the universe 5
figure 1.1 In January 1930, Albert Einstein visited Edwin Hubble on
Mount Wilson, where the discovery of an expanding universe had been
made. In this photograph, Hubble (in the background) looks on as
Einstein peers through the Newtonian focus of the 100-inch telescope.
(From the Edwin Hubble Papers. Reprinted with the kind permission of
the Huntington Library, San Marino, California)
recognition that eluded him to his death was the Nobel Prize. This
was not for lack of effort, however, for in the late 1940s he even hired
an agent to publicize his meritorious work. Unfortunately, by the time
the Nobel committee added the field of astronomy (in which he would
have won the prize) to the eligible branches of physics, it was too late.
He died in 1953. But his name lives on, gracing the sides of the Space

6 the edge of infinity
Telescope which is successfully carrying on the great work that he
started on a cold mountain top in Southern California.
And so, three decades after Hubble’s discovery, Schmidt had no
trouble convincing his colleagues that the 16 percent redshift inferred
from 3C 273’s light implied a speed of recession of almost 30 000
miles per second and, therefore, a distance of three billion light-years
from Earth.2 Astronomers thus concluded that its starlike image must
clearly be concealing its true nature; it had to be among the most
powerful emitters of radiation in the universe in order for it to stand
out so vividly over such a large cosmic expanse.
A recent image of this historic object was made with the
Chandra X-ray telescope (see Fig. 1.2). Formerly known as the Ad-
vanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility, this state-of-the-art detector was
launched in 1999 aboard the Space Shuttle, and was renamed the
Chandra X-ray Observatory in honor of the late Indian-American
Nobel laureate, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. The word Chandra,
which means “moon” or “luminous” in Sanskrit, is a very fitting
name for this mission, recognizing Chandrasekhar’s tireless pursuit
of knowledge and understanding. Much of his work was devoted to
developing a theory of black holes and other phenomena that the
Chandra X-ray Observatory is now studying. He is widely regarded
as one of the foremost astrophysicists of the twentieth century, win-
ning the Nobel Prize in 1983 for his theoretical work on the physi-
cal processes that govern the structure and evolution of stars. With
the ability to resolve features fifty times smaller than previous mis-
sions, Chandra is revolutionizing X-ray astronomy, and at more than
15 meters in length and weighing more than 50 tons, it is one of the
largest objects ever placed in Earth orbit by the Space Shuttle.
The quasar story does not end here, however, for having crow-
ned 3C 273 as one of the most powerful objects in the universe, as-
tronomers were yet to uncover its most surprising characteristic. They
2 A light-year is the distance light travels in one year. By comparison, it takes light a
mere eight minutes to reach us from the Sun.

the most powerful objects in the universe 7
soon realized that variations in the total light output of 3C 273 and
its brethren were occurring over a period of only 10 to 20 months, im-
plying that the size of the region producing the optical light could not
exceed a few light-years – basically the distance between the Sun and
its nearest stellar neighbor. Imagine a crowd of people waiting to see
a famous actor appearing somewhere in a plaza. Suddenly someone at
one end of the enclosure makes the sighting and quickly spreads the
news to the others. By the time everyone in the crowd has been alerted
and has turned to face the celebrity, the number of seconds that will
have passed depends on how quickly it takes the news to pass along
from person to person. The bigger the crowd, the longer it takes for
everyone to reorient their attention toward the actor. In 3C 273, the
fastest conceivable signal travels at the speed of light, so this powerful
source of radiation could not be bigger than the distance over which
light will have traveled during the 10 to 20 months of observation.
For this reason, astronomers infer that the most powerful objects in
the universe are extremely small compared with even just the Sun’s
neighborhood, let alone a structure as big as the Milky Way, which
stretches over a distance 100 000 times bigger.
Space-borne X-ray detectors such as Chandra have reinforced
these conclusions by demonstrating that quasars are more luminous
still in X-rays than they are in optical light. Their total X-ray output
can vary over a period of only hours, corresponding to a source size
smaller than Neptune’s orbit. In fact, quasars are the most powerful
emitters of X-rays yet discovered. Some of them are so bright that they
can be seen at a distance of 12 billion light-years. Each quasar typically
releases far more energy than an entire galaxy, yet the central engine
that drives this powerful activity occupies a region smaller than our
solar system!
Now, four decades after these intriguing objects were first iden-
tified on the basis of their optical light, astronomers are even discov-
ering quasars whose radiative output is for the most part so feeble
that they would not otherwise have been detected, except that these
objects just happen to be the most powerful gamma-ray sources in the

8 the edge of infinity
universe. Gamma rays are the most energetic photons – individual
bundles of energy that together give substance to a beam of light – we
have so far been able to detect with space-based instruments. They
are very difficult to produce in numbers and very few cosmic objects
can radiate at this energy with sufficient strength for us to be able to
sense their presence. Recently, an international team of scientists us-
ing data from NASA’s Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory, launched
in 1991, has uncovered a quasar that blazes the heavens with this type
of radiation from the far reaches of the universe, some 10 to 11 billion
light-years away, though it barely ﬂickers in the visible light range.3
This remarkable feat was accomplished by combining images from
successive scans of a patch of sky in the Ursa Major constellation,
where the quasar is located.
This fantastic idea – that such a small volume could be scream-
ing across the universe with the light of 100 billion Suns – has led
physicists to conclude that quasars must be the radiative manifesta-
tion of supermassive black holes. In the next two chapters, we will
learn about the exquisite detective work that has provided us with
valuable information concerning the mass of a quasar and its incom-
parable power.4
It is natural to wonder whether these objects are “naked” –
deep, dark pits of matter ﬂoating aimlessly across the primeval cosmic
soup – or whether they are attached to more recognizable structures
in the early universe. The answer to this question came when the
strong non-stellar light from the central quasar was eliminated using
mechanical and electronic means. In a few cases, a fuzzy haze was
seen surrounding the bright beacon and, when this light was exam-
ined carefully, it turned out to have the colors and other characteristics
of a normal giant galaxy.
In recent years, the task of source identification has been made
easier using the Hubble Space Telescope (see, for example, Fig. 1.3).
Resolving the mystery concerning the nature of quasars was in fact
3 See Malizia et al. (2001) for a technical account of this very interesting discovery.
4 See, for example, Salpeter (1964), Zel’dovich and Novikov (1967), and Lynden-Bell
(1969).

the most powerful objects in the universe 9
figure 1.3 This Hubble Space Telescope image reveals the faint host
galaxy within which dwells the bright quasar known as QSO
1229 + 204. The details in this picture help solve a three-decade-old
mystery about the true nature of quasars, the most distant and energetic
objects in the universe. The quasar is seen to lie in the core of an
ordinary-looking galaxy with two spiral arms of stars connected by a
bar-like feature. This image shows one of a pair of relatively nearby
quasars that were selected as early targets to test the resolution and
dynamic range of the Hubble’s then newly installed Wide Field and
Planetary Camera, which contained special optics to correct for a ﬂaw in
Hubble’s primary mirror. (Photograph courtesy of J. Hutchings,
Dominion Astrophysical Observatory, and NASA)
a principal motivation for building and deploying this major space-
based facility. Finally, many years later, Hubble did provide the clues
astronomers needed in order to understand where and why these pow-
erful beacons formed. The most widely accepted view now is that

10 the edge of infinity
quasars are found in galaxies with active, supermassive black holes
at their centers. Because of their enormous distance from Earth, the
“host” galaxies appear very small and faint, and are very hard to see
against the much brighter quasar light at their center.
1.2
the host galaxies of quasars
Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope, and more recently
with newer ground-based telescopes that have the light-collecting
ability to see to the edge of the universe, have established the fact
that quasars reside in the nuclei of many different types of galaxy,
from the normal to those highly disturbed by collisions or mergers.
In all cases, however, the sites must provide the fuel to power these
uniquely bright beacons. Later in this book, we will see that a quasar
turns on when the supermassive black hole at the nucleus of one of
these distant galaxies begins to accrete stars and gas from its nearby
environment; the rate at which matter is converted into energy can
be as high as ten Suns each and every year. The intense radiation
field is emitted by the plasma on its final journey toward the event
horizon – the threshold below which nothing can escape back into our
universe. So the character and power of a quasar must depend on how
much matter is available for consumption.
Most astronomers now believe that disturbances induced by
gravitational interactions with neighboring galaxies trigger the infall
of material toward the center of the quasar host galaxy. Large instru-
ments, such as the Very Large Telescope on Paranal, Chile, can probe
the environments of quasars as far away as 10 billion light-years or
so, an example of which is shown in Fig. 1.4. In this case, the quasar
(the bright point-like object at the center of the image) appears to be
embedded within a complex structure consisting of several knots and
arcs. In particular, the object just below the quasar image lies at a
projected distance from the quasar of only 20 000 light-years, about
two-thirds of the distance between the Earth and the center of the
Milky Way galaxy. This object is most likely a companion that is in-
teracting with the quasar host. Clearly, though, the most intriguing

the most powerful objects in the universe 11
aspects of this image are the tails extending away from the quasar
itself. Such tails are well known from nearby galaxy collisions, in
which the gravitational fields of the participating structures tear at
each other’s fringes and produce the arc-like trailing debris. A spec-
tacular example of this type of encounter is shown in Fig. 1.5, captured
brilliantly in the southern constellation Corvus by the Hubble Space
Telescope.
Many quasars, however, reside in apparently undisturbed galax-
ies, and this may be an indication that mechanisms other than a dis-
ruptive collision between such aggregates of matter may also be able
to effectively fuel the supermassive black hole residing at the core.
Prior to seeing the probing images produced by the Hubble Space
Telescope, astronomers had reached the consensus that unless a col-
lision is delivering large quantities of gas to the black hole, galaxies
harboring these cosmic carnivores would supply fuel too slowly to
sustain a full-blown quasar. In other words, whereas all quasars are
supermassive black holes, not all supermassive black holes are vis-
ible as quasars. Instead, the astronomers thought, these gentler giants
might sputter just enough to become the fainter galactic nuclei we see
predominantly in our own galactic neighborhood. (A galaxy with a less
active supermassive black hole than a quasar is called an active galaxy
and its central massive core is known as an active galactic nucleus.
Our Milky Way galaxy and our neighbor, the Andromeda galaxy, are
examples of normal galaxies, where the supermassive black hole has
very little nearby plasma to absorb. And, as we shall see in Chapter 4,
some galaxies apparently do not have a supermassive black hole.) The
question concerning how undisturbed galaxies spawn a quasar is still
not fully answered. Perhaps the Next Generation Space Telescope,
now under development and expected to ﬂy in 2010, will be able to
probe even deeper than the Hubble Space Telescope has done, and
expose the additional clues we need to resolve this puzzle.
Over 15 000 distant quasars have now been found, following
their early misidentification as unusual, nearby stars in the 1960s. We
might wonder then why it is that quasars tend to shine from the edge of

12 the edge of infinity
the visible universe, but seem to be completely absent in our vicinity
where we tend to see predominantly the weaker (though sometimes
active) galactic nuclei.
Because of their intrinsic brightness, the most distant quasars
are seen at a time when the universe was but a fraction of its present
age, roughly one billion years after the Big Bang. The current distance
record is held by an object with the designation SDSS 1044-0125,
which was discovered from data taken with the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey, coordinated by the University of Chicago and the US Depart-
ment of Energy’s Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Conducting
follow-up observations of this object with the unparalleled light-
collecting power of the Keck Telescope in Hawaii to see its rainbow
of colors and determine its redshift, a team led by Marc Davis at the
University of California at Berkeley confirmed that it is indeed a
quasar. They were surprised to learn that it is now the most distant
object ever found in the universe, a beacon that must have been among
the first objects ever to form. The light that we sense from it was emit-
ted when the universe was almost ten times smaller than it is today,
very close to the limit we should be able to see anywhere. This quasar
is so distant that the expansion of the universe has shifted its light,
originally emitted as ultraviolet photons, through the visible portion
of the spectrum and into the infrared.
Astronomers sometimes refer to a telescope as a “time
machine” because light travels at a finite speed, so that distant ob-
jects are seen as they existed in the past when their light was emitted.
When we look at the Sun, we see it as it was eight minutes ago –
the time it takes its radiation to reach us. Looking farther afield, we
see nearby stars as they were several years ago, and when we mar-
vel at the splendor of the Milky Way’s neighboring galaxies, such as
Andromeda, we are looking back in time several million years. Peer-
ing to the edge of the universe, where the first quasars ignited, we are
therefore seeing activity that occurred over 10 billion years ago.
This link between the distance to quasars and the implied look-
back time provides a clue we cannot ignore when we try to understand

the most powerful objects in the universe 13
why these powerful objects appear to be absent in our local environ-
ment. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey has shown that the number of
quasars rose dramatically from a billion years after the Big Bang to a
peak around 2.5 billion years later, falling off sharply at later times
toward the present.5
Quasars turn on when it appears that fresh matter is brought
into their vicinity (see Fig. 1.4), and then fade into a barely perceptible
glimmer not long thereafter. They apparently feed voraciously until
their fuel is gone, so quasars and other types of active galactic nuclei,
not to mention the relatively gentle giant at the heart of the Milky
Way and in the core of Andromeda, are likely manifestations of the
same phenomenon: a supermassive black hole gulping down hot gas
at nearly the speed of light. Whether we see it as a quasar or as an
active galactic nucleus probably has more to do with how much gas
is present in its vicinity than anything else.
However, not all the supermassive black holes in our midst have
necessarily grown through the quasar phase. As we shall soon see,
quasars are objects compressing as many as one billion Suns within
their girth, yet the black hole at the center of our galaxy is a svelte
2.6 million solar masses. Its neighbor in Andromeda is somewhat
heavier, but not much more than about 10 million Suns. In other
words, it does not look as though all the supermassive black holes in
our vicinity are necessarily dormant quasars in the twilight of their
lives. Indeed, we now have some evidence that the Milky Way and
Andromeda are conspiring to create a quasar of their own one day
from the building blocks now residing in their cores (see Chapter 4).
A rather remarkable recent discovery adds some credence to
this story. Back in the late 1700s, the M82 galaxy got its name when
it became the 82nd entry in a systematic catalog of nebulae and star
clusters compiled by the French astronomer Charles Messier (1730–
1817). Now, 220 years later, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory is
5 When its work is completed, the Sloan project will ultimately have surveyed one
quarter of the sky and 200 million objects. About 1 million of these will be quasars,
which should provide a wealth of information for statistical and evolutionary studies.

14 the edge of infinity
zeroing in on what appears to be a mid-sized black hole located about
600 light-years from its center.6 This object packs a mass of 500 Suns
into a region no bigger than the moon. It is conceivable that this ob-
ject might eventually sink to the center of M82, where it could then
grow and eventually become a supermassive black hole in its own
right, without having passed through the voracious eating phase that
accounts for the quasar phenomenon.
These mid-mass black holes, a thousand times more massive
than star-sized ones like Cygnus X-1 (of Walt Disney’s “The Black
Hole” movie fame), are beginning to define a class of their own. Yet
they are still a thousand to a million times smaller than the largest
variety, like the powerhouse in the core of 3C 273. Nonetheless, they
behave very much like scaled-down versions of supermassive objects
found in the nuclei of the most luminous galaxies, and continue to
grow as they consume matter in their vicinity. This new category of
objects suggests to us that not all the supermassive black holes in
our vicinity must necessarily have begun their lives in catastrophic
fashion during the quasar epoch. Some of them may have grown as
malignant tumors on the substrate of existing galaxies.
1.3
the active nuclei of ‘‘normal’’ galaxies
Dazzling everyone with their display of raw power from literally the
edge of the visible universe, quasars rightfully command our atten-
tion at the hierarchical peak of all the objects known to us. At the
other end of the distance scale – within hundreds of thousands of
light-years, as opposed to the 28 billion light-year expanse separat-
ing one edge of the universe from the other – our neighborhood is
replete with giant black holes that may be just as massive as their
quasar brethren, though their frugal eating habits prevent them from
displaying the full range of activity we now recognize in the more dis-
tant objects. It seems that nature may be playing a cruel trick on those
who dare to probe the mystery of supermassive black holes, since
quasars are powerful, but too far away to study with precision (see, for
6 For a detailed account of this discovery, see Matsumoto et al. (2001).

the most powerful objects in the universe 15
example, Fig. 1.2), while nearby, in the nucleus of Andromeda and in
our own galactic center, the ponderous giants are starved and barely
visible.
We shall learn in Chapter 6, however, that according to the lat-
est results from the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray
Telescope, as many as 200 million supermassive black holes may be
lurking in the relative solitude of space. Couched in the nuclei of ac-
tive galaxies, these objects thus occupy a very useful niche between
the two extremes in distance. One of the most famous examples,
Centaurus A, graces the southern constellation of Centaurus as a col-
orfully dramatic archetype of this group, only 11 million light-years
away (see Fig. 1.6). Peering through the dark bands of dust toward
the middle of this galaxy, the Hubble Space Telescope recently un-
covered a disk of glowing, high-speed gas, swirling about a concentra-
tion of matter with the mass of 200 million Suns. It took a combined
international effort, first with the Very Large Telescope at Paranal
Observatory,7 and then with an infrared detector on the Hubble Space
Telescope (see Fig. 1.7), to finally reveal the culprit in a spectacle rem-
iniscent of our discovery of 3C 273 in Fig. 1.2. The scientists who con-
ducted these studies quickly realized that this enormous mass within
the central cavity cannot be due to normal stars, since these objects
would shine brightly, producing an intense optical spike toward the
middle, unlike the rather tempered look of the infrared image shown
here.
Centaurus A is an archetypical active galactic nucleus for an-
other very important reason: it is apparently funneling highly ener-
getic particles into beams perpendicular to the dark strands of dust.
It may therefore have much in common with the X-ray jet-producing
black hole in 3C 273 (see Fig. 1.2) and another well-known active
galactic nucleus, Gygnus A, shown in Fig. 1.8.
7 This observation was carried out by a team of astronomers from Italy, the UK,
and the USA, including E. Schreier (Space Telescope Science Institute), Alessandro
Marconi (Arcetri Observatory), Alessandro Capetti (Turin Observatory), David Axon
(University of Hertfordshire), A. Koekemoer (Space Telescope Science Institute), and
Duccio Macchetto (Space Telescope Science Institute).

16 the edge of infinity
It is generally believed that the intense radiation field from
quasars and active galactic nuclei is produced when the infalling gas is
compressed and heated to temperatures exceeding billions of degrees
(see Chapter 2). Quasars and active galactic nuclei gobble up matter
with such a ferocity that some spillage is unavoidable; radio and X-ray
observations show that the jets of plasma screeching away at nearly
the speed of light from the nucleus in Centaurus A and Cygnus A
are not rare. As we shall see in Chapter 5, they form tightly confined
streams of particles that blast through the galaxy and travel hundreds
of thousands of light-years into intergalactic space.
In the next chapter, we will begin our pursuit of the exquisite
clues astronomers have gathered regarding the most powerful objects
in the universe, and of the comprehensive story they tell. The dis-
covery of supermassive black holes – be they dormant behemoths in
our galactic neighborhood, dark entities lurking in the nuclei of other
more exotic galaxies, or even the powerful beacons at the edge of the
visible universe – has stoked our sense of wonder and perplexed us
with fundamental questions concerning the nature of spacetime and
the origin and evolution of galaxies. How do these objects form and
how does one “weigh” them? Are they really island universes whose
interior is forever shielded from our view? While conducting such a
scientific interrogation, astrophysicists often uncover more questions
than they can answer. So be it. We shall push forward and expose what
these bottomless pits in the fabric of space and time have to say about
our origin and our ultimate destiny.

2
Weighing supermassive objects
Supermassive black holes are certainly the most powerful objects in
the universe, yet even this attribution may not adequately convey the
severity with which they stress their surroundings. Yes, their force
of attraction is inexorable, but more than this, it is – as far as we can
tell – infinitely unassailable once matter approaches so close that even
something moving at the speed of light cannot break free. The radius
at which this happens is known as the black hole’s event horizon, for
nothing within it can communicate with the universe outside. Thus,
we have no way of directly seeing such an object. Instead, its presence
may be deduced on the basis of the shadow it casts before a bright
screen, such as a dense cluster of stars. To have any hope of carry-
ing out such an observation, however, we must be close enough to
the highly concentrated mass to actually resolve the dark depression
among the myriad other details likely to be present in its environment.
We become aware of a supermassive black hole primarily be-
cause of the incomparable cosmic power it exudes. For example, the
image of 3C 273 in Fig. 1.2 attests to its nature as one of the brightest
beacons in the visible universe. Yet it should be black, drawing every-
thing into a catastrophic fall toward oblivion, releasing nothing –
particles or light – to breach its cloak of secrecy.
It turns out that supermassive black holes are luminous pre-
cisely because the material falling into them is squeezed and ca-
joled into producing radiation before disappearing forever below the
horizon. They shine by proxy, inducing the hapless matter, trapped
and moribund, to illuminate the otherwise engulfing darkness in the
nascent universe. Much of what astrophysicists do when they study
black holes is therefore concerned with the issue of what happens to
matter as it descends into the precipice.

18 the edge of infinity
Recently, some very clever detective work by a group of as-
tronomers in Nottingham and Birmingham has produced intriguing
evidence that supermassive black holes have been absorbing mass re-
lentlessly since the dawn of their existence, some 12 billion years ago.
The difficulty they had to overcome in order to demonstrate this ef-
fect is due to the fact that black holes (and their host galaxies) have
been around for a period far longer than one can measure on a human
scale. Thus, the rate at which they acquire mass is imperceptible to
beings with a lifespan 100 million times smaller than the age of the
universe.
Rather than tracking the changes seen over time in a single
object, however, one may instead compare the characteristics of black
holes known to have different ages. Presumably the life history of
each member of a given class follows more or less the same path,
so that the mass difference between two objects with different ages
must correspond to the mass gained by the older member over the
intervening period.
The investigators from Nottingham and Birmingham1 adopted
this approach and assumed, in addition, that the age of a black hole
within its host galaxy scales with the age of the galaxy itself. Galaxies
grow old because the stars within them consume nuclear fuel. As the
ashes sift through their interior, stars change color, so astronomers
can tell how old a galaxy is by looking at its starlight. Thus far, this
technique has produced a catalog of 23 nearby galaxies and their su-
permassive black holes, including well-known objects, such as the
galaxy in Andromeda.
Looking at the trends exhibited by the members of this list,
whose measured lifespan ranges from 4 to 12 billion years, the as-
tronomers carrying out this study have found that the masses of black
holes in young galaxies tend to be quite modest, while their counter-
parts in older galaxies tend to get progressively heavier with age. It
thus appears that a supermassive black hole builds up its mass over
1 See Merrifield, Forbes, and Terlevich (2000).

weighing supermassive objects 19
the entire history of the host galaxy, with no sign that the growth ever
comes to an end. Its relentless weight gain is a consequence of the one-
way ﬂow permitted across the black hole’s event horizon: stars and
gas from the surrounding medium can be drawn in, but nothing can
get out.
This story is interesting, you may say, and it constitutes an
important piece of the puzzle, but it is somewhat premature because
we have not yet explained how the mass of a black hole is actually
determined. After all, that is the central focus of this chapter! The
point of this account is to establish at the outset that a supermassive
black hole is always accreting matter from its environment. We must
also be aware that its feeding habit is the principal reason we know
of its existence. Distant objects, certainly those at the edge of the
visible universe, are too remote for us to study via their inﬂuence on
the motion of stars around them. In many cases, we cannot even see
the host galaxy or, at best, we can just catch its faint glimmer. But we
do see the prodigious outpouring of energy radiated by the black hole
and, like a radio or television signal transmitted through the Earth’s
atmosphere, the light that reaches us from this entity carries with it
clues we can decipher; this light even carries information regarding
the black hole’s size and mass.
In several instances, the Hubble Space Telescope has provided us
with direct visual evidence supporting our suspicion that supermas-
sive black holes absorb matter continuously. A spectacular example is
the dusty disk of material swirling about the nucleus in the elliptical
galaxy NGC 7052 (i.e., the 7052nd entry in the New General Catalog),
located in the constellation of Vulpecula, 191 million light-years from
Earth (see Fig. 2.1). Appearing like a giant hubcap in space, this struc-
ture is possibly a remnant of an ancient galaxy collision, and will
gradually be swallowed up by the black hole over the course of sev-
eral billion years. The disk is redder than the light from the rest of the
galaxy because dust absorbs blue light more effectively than red light,
the same phenomenon that causes the Sun to redden toward sunset
when its light must traverse a longer path through the atmosphere.

20 the edge of infinity
At the center of the disk, the bright spot is the accumulated light
from stars that crowd around the black hole. In fact, this frenzy of
stars locked tightly within the relatively small volume enveloping
the center is itself an indication that a strong source of gravity must
be lurking nearby, for otherwise they would disperse unharnessed and
not produce the concentrated cusp that is so evident in this image.
2.1
accretion of plasma
The dusty disk orbiting the nucleus of NGC 7052 in Fig. 2.1, not to
mention the tight clustering of stars in the very middle, demonstrates
effectively how supermassive objects can easily overwhelm any mat-
ter in their vicinity. It may therefore seem odd to hear that astrophysi-
cists actually have difficulty trying to understand how a black hole
accretes its food. After all, haven’t we just convinced ourselves that
the pull of gravity is inexorable and eventually unassailable?
Matter avoids falling straight into a black hole for the same
reason that the Moon does not fall directly to Earth, that cyclones
form, and that an ice skater spins faster when she draws her arms in
toward her body. It is the same reason why our Sun, thankfully, will
orbit the center of the Milky Way galaxy at a safe distance (of 28 000
light-years) for an eternity – or at least until the Andromeda galaxy
collides with us several billion years hence (see Chapter 4).
The guiding principle behind all of these phenomena is that
sideways motion simply cannot disappear even if the pull directed
toward a point in the middle is very strong. Any change in motion
requires a force in that same direction. As the ice skater draws her
arms in, she exerts a force toward her body, but the sideways motion
of her arms is unaffected, and to compensate for the fact that the extent
of her limbs is decreasing, her body spins faster. The Sun experiences
a constant force of gravity toward the middle of our galaxy, but any
inﬂuence in the direction of its motion along the circumference of
its orbit is negligible. In the seventeenth century, Sir Isaac Newton
(1642–1727) explained the motion of the Moon in this way. Earth’s
biggest satellite, he argued, is indeed falling toward us, but because it

weighing supermassive objects 21
has so much sideways motion, it actually moves forward just as much
as it moves downward. The net result is that it never quite reaches
the surface of our planet, and instead continues to orbit in a circle for
an indefinite period of time.
Similarly, the dusty gas in the disk surrounding NGC 7052 has
so much sideways motion that even the unimaginable power of the
central supermassive black hole in this system cannot immediately
draw the matter inward. Something other than the black hole itself
must first remove the sideways action. When galaxies collide, as we
are currently witnessing with the Antennae in Fig. 1.5, the agitation
caused by the turbulence created in the middle is quite sufficient to
remove the sideways motion of the orbiting gas and thereby causes
it to plummet toward the eagerly awaiting behemoth in the middle.
This is the reason why quasars are believed to be the products of such
galactic encounters and, at the same time, why the fact that some
quasars apparently are not is difficult to understand.
Another recent piece of clever detective work, this time by a
pair of astronomers at Ohio State University,2 seems to have provided
one of the first pieces of direct evidence that a host galaxy does indeed
begin the inward transfer of matter to the central black hole from as
far away as 1000 light-years or more – essentially from the outer edge
of the dusty hubcap in Fig. 2.1.
When we look at the glistening spiral arms of the Milky Way, or
the hauntingly beautiful cartwheel of the nearby Andromeda galaxy
(not to mention the antennas of the colliding galaxies in Fig. 1.5), we
are primarily looking at the patterns associated with starlight. But
stars are difficult to shake from their orbits, particularly when they
are far from the nucleus where the matter feeding the black hole must
begin its inward journey. So knowledge of what the stars are doing
cannot help us understand where the supermassive black hole finds its
fuel. Instead, the most likely candidate is gas or, more accurately, the
admixture of dust and gas that permeates the void between the stars.
2 See Martini and Pogge (1999).

22 the edge of infinity
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, the Ohio State astronomers
created images of the host galaxies in both visible light and near-
infrared wavelengths. What they were looking for was the telltale
signature of the radiation produced by dust rather than stars. Patterns
in the dust would then also reveal the underlying structure of the
gas, and finally answer the question of how the host galaxy feeds its
nuclear master.
Radiation from stars is very easily absorbed and scattered by
dust, but far less at near-infrared wavelengths than in the visible por-
tion of the spectrum. So by combining the two views, the astronomers
at Ohio State University could separate out the effects in their image
due to starlight as opposed to those produced by matter in the in-
terstellar medium. What they found was quite unexpected; they saw
swirling patterns in the majority of galaxies, an example of which is
shown in Fig. 2.2.
To understand the extent of the features evident in this photo-
graph, imagine taking the dusty disk shown in Fig. 2.1 and turning
it over on its side so that we are now looking at it face on. (The di-
mensions are approximately the same in these two views.) Though
photographs such as this are meant to freeze the subject in time, the
content of this particular image jumps to life as we recognize the
whirlpool of dust and gas fueling the black hole in the middle. Un-
like the much larger stellar spirals sweeping around the galaxy, this
mini-spiral – 100 times smaller – appears to be directly connected to
the central source of gravity.
Astronomers are quite animated about this novel result because
it demonstrates in a very visual way how the excitation of spiral waves
can produce an avalanche of material into the center. Like sound
disturbances propagating through the air, these waves can carry, or
take away, energy. And because the dusty gas swirling about the nu-
cleus must pass through them, the interaction between the waves and
the orbiting material can effectively reduce the sideways motion that
would otherwise prevent the latter from falling directly into the black
hole. Galaxies that display this beautiful pattern of dusty spiral waves

weighing supermassive objects 23
are therefore the likely hosts of very active supermassive objects in
their core.
Imagine then that we could take a ride through this cyclone of
dust and gas, approaching close enough to the supermassive black hole
that we could begin to see the effects of strong gravity. Unfortunately,
we cannot yet do this in reality, even by looking through a telescope.
This is because the scale of the image in Fig. 2.2 is thousands of light-
years, whereas we already know from the variability of quasars that
the concentrated mass must be enclosed within a region no bigger
than our solar system, which is over 3 million times smaller than the
central dark spot in this figure! Astrophysicists can simulate such an
adventure computationally, however, and with an appropriate choice
of colors to represent the gas and its temperature, they can thereby
create an image of how such an environment would appear were we
to take this ride.
It turns out that we would need to get to within a distance of
10 to 100 solar-system diameters from the black hole before we could
start to make out the significant compression and heating experienced
by the infalling gas and dust. As we shall see in Chapter 3, on this scale
the black hole itself would appear as a dark circular disk, roughly
100 times smaller. Thus, in the photograph shown in Fig. 2.2, the re-
gion of severe compression is well contained within the central black
spot.
A beautiful example of the simulated image that can be created
in this fashion is shown in Fig. 2.3, which illustrates how the infalling
gas and dust would appear were we to approach the black hole – seen
as a dark central orb – along the plane of the disk in Fig. 2.1. In other
words, this image shows the density profile in a vertical cut through
the “hubcap” in that figure. The color coding in this simulated view,
which spans a region about ten times the size of our solar system, also
demonstrates how quickly the gas is heated as it approaches the event
horizon in the middle. The temperature can reach values as high as a
million – sometimes a billion – degrees, so no solid structure would
be able to survive this trip, turning instead into a hot tenuous plasma.

24 the edge of infinity
Astronomers know that the temperature can get this high be-
cause they sometimes see the effects of the radiation produced by the
glowing matter. Looking at the simulated image in Fig. 2.3, imagine
yourself gazing down at the black hole from above (or for that matter,
gazing up at it from below). You would see most of the gas swirling
about the middle, forming a conical opening in your direction. In con-
trast, the view we have in Fig. 2.3 is that of an observer in the orbital
plane itself, and the conical openings point upward and downward in
this image. The light produced by the hot compressed gas as it swirls
about the black hole has an unobstructed escape route in your direc-
tion, but not so through the billowing matter. This effect reminds us
of how a ﬂashlight produces a directed beam of light, concentrating
its emission in the forward direction, while preventing any leakage
sideways through the opaque enclosure.
A quite remarkable cosmic version of this ﬂashlight was discov-
ered by the Hubble Space Telescope while focusing on the nucleus of
the active galaxy NGC 5728 (see Fig. 2.4). The spectacular bi-conical
beam of light emanating from the core in this object is ionizing the
gas surrounding the center, and the red hues we see within the con-
ical openings are produced by the irradiated plasma. To astronomers
eager to learn about the nature of gas falling into a supermassive black
hole, this discovery provides all the elements needed to confirm the
anticipated existence of a funnel aperture in the central disk. The
hot compressed plasma in this system glows with ultraviolet light,
but a dense ring of gas and dust blocks Hubble’s direct view of the
black hole. Instead, some of this ionizing radiation is beamed into
the open cones, aligned perpendicularly to us, out to several thousand
light-years from the middle. The ring of matter effectively shapes the
escaping ultraviolet light into two lighthouse beacons shining above
and below the disk.
Something even more dramatic happens when the rate at which
gas is spiraling into the black hole is too high to sustain a steady diet.
The supermassive object’s tendency is then to blow the excess matter

weighing supermassive objects 25
and energy outward in the form of billowing bubbles of hot plasma
(see Fig. 2.5). Acting like high-powered garden hoses, these twin ejec-
tions of material crash into a wall of dense gas and set it aglow. In this
particular instance, the bubbles themselves are about 800 light-years
long and 800 light-years wide, fitting easily within the central region
of the dusty disk seen in Figs. 2.1 and 2.2. The bubble on the upper
side of the dark bands in this image appears to be brighter because the
expanding gas on this side is smashing into a denser clump of ambient
matter. These bubbles are expected to expand until they eventually
lose their energy, which should happen on a timescale much shorter
than the age of the galaxy.
The theory of how supermassive black holes gain their mass
is a fascinating subject in itself, and what we have seen here barely
functions as an initial foray into this highly explored landscape. But
let us now divert our attention to the question of how the radiation
beamed in our direction by these imposing objects may be interro-
gated for clues that will ultimately reveal their proportion and mass.
Viewed in retrospect, this achievement will seem quite remarkable,
considering the fact that we are sensing the presence of these powerful
entities from the other end of the universe.
2.2
deciphering the signal from the
infalling gas
The attempt by Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) to move the cen-
ter of the universe from the Earth to the Sun, thereby creating the
heliostatic cosmology, met with significant early resistance from the
vast majority of his contemporaries because no one believed the Earth
should be subjected to the implied distinct motions it must undertake
in concert with the other planets. To a modern day reader, however,
it may seem even more difficult to understand how Johannes Kepler’s
(1571–1630) explanation in support of this system, using the geometry
of polyhedra, could have helped. In accounting for the fact that there
were precisely six planets (the others had not yet been discovered, and

26 the edge of infinity
the Moon had by then already been relegated to “attendant” status,
which literally translated means “satellite”), Kepler suggested that:
If a sphere were drawn to touch the inside of the path of Saturn,
and a cube were inscribed in the sphere, then the sphere inscribed
in that cube would be the sphere circumscribing the path of
Jupiter. If a regular tetrahedron were then to be drawn in the
sphere inscribing the path of Jupiter, the insphere of the
tetrahedron would be the sphere circumscribing the path of Mars,
and so inwards, putting the regular dodecahedron between Mars
and Earth, the regular icosahedron between Earth and Venus, and
the regular octahedron between Venus and Mercury.3
Miraculously, this description could not only account for the
number of planets, but it also gave a convincing fit – within an error
of 10 percent or so – to the sizes of the planetary paths derived by
Copernicus. It all made much better sense when several years later
Newton applied his revolutionary theory of gravitation to the mo-
tion of comets and planets in the solar system, to the Moon’s orbit
about the Earth, and to apples falling in Lincolnshire. Kepler’s endur-
ing legacy is the meticulous care he exercised while establishing the
harmony of the heavens by charting the motion of our planetary neigh-
bors as they wandered around the Sun. But it was Newton who proved
once and for all that the planets must be moving under the inﬂuence
of an inverse-square law force in order to obey all the empirical laws
deduced earlier by Kepler.
Newton’s law of gravitation actually has two principal compo-
nents. In the Principia, he encapsulated these ideas as follows: “. . . all
matter attracts all other matter with a force proportional to the prod-
uct of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them.” Thus, knowledge of the planet’s distance
from the Sun, and the force that must be applied to it in order to
keep its motion harnessed in perpetuity, is sufficient for physicists to
3 For an extensive treatise on Kepler’s contributions to cosmology, see Field (1987).

weighing supermassive objects 27
extract from Newton’s law of gravitation the mass required to exert
this inﬂuence.
Let us now take a significant leap forward, both in space across
the vast intergalactic expanse to the far reaches of the universe, and in
faith. If we assume that the laws of physics are the same “out there”
as they are down here in our solar system – this is where the part
about faith comes in – then Newton would argue that knowledge of
the orbiting gas’s velocity and its distance from the central black hole
ought to be sufficient for us to infer the latter’s mass. Thus, as long as
we can discern these pertinent clues among the many details borne
by the radiation beamed across the universe, we have at our disposal
a cosmic balance with which to “weigh” a supermassive black hole.
Astronomers generally acknowledge that the most spectacu-
lar and compelling application of this technique has been made to
the spiral galaxy known as NGC 4258, in the constellation Canes
Venatici, not too far from the Big Dipper (also known as the Plough in
some countries; see Fig. 2.6). An international team of Japanese and
American astronomers used a continent-wide radio telescope, funded
by the National Science Foundation, to observe a disk of dense molecu-
lar material orbiting within the galaxy’s nucleus at velocities of up to
1050 kilometers per second.4
Drifting majestically some 23 million light-years from Earth,
this spiral galaxy extends 90 000 light-years across, and is easily distin-
guished from the others via the microwave (maser) emission produced
by water vapor in its nucleus. The acronym “maser” (microwave
amplification by the stimulated emission of radiation) was coined by
the Nobel Laureate Charles Townes and his collaborators in the mid
twentieth century, after they successfully demonstrated the principle
of microwave amplification in their laboratory. In this process, light
of a certain frequency is amplified when it passes through a gas whose
molecules are made to vibrate with a higher energy than normal. In
NGC 4258, sufficient radiation is produced in the nucleus to excite
4 See Miyoshi et al. (1995).

28 the edge of infinity
condensations of water molecules orbiting about the center, and this
leads to strong stimulated emission at radio wavelengths. The disk
within which these water molecules are trapped is tiny compared
to the galaxy itself, but it is oriented fortuitously so that pencil-like
beams of microwaves are directed toward us.
The swarm of photons produced in this fashion filter through the
dust and gas enshrouding the central region without any attenuation,
allowing us to probe the motion of matter deep within the core. Even
so, these observations are not easily made. Radio astronomers must
use a technique known as Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI),
which blends together the radio signals gathered simultaneously by
many telescopes, often separated by many miles, or even thousands of
miles. A major component in the arsenal of VLBI work is known as the
Very Large Baseline Array (VLBA), which was commissioned in 1993.
It constitutes a system of ten 82-foot-diameter dish antennas located
across the USA from Hawaii to the Virgin Islands. All ten antennas
work as a single instrument, controlled from an operations center in
Socorro, New Mexico. For the observations of NGC 4258, the VLBA
was joined by the Very Large Array (also used to generate the beautiful
image in Fig. 1.8), a 27-antenna radio telescope in New Mexico.
These measurements of the maser emission from the nucleus
of NGC 4258 tell us that water vapor is swept up by a giant whirlpool
of material orbiting a strong source of gravity. In addition, the maser
clouds appear to trace a very thin disk, with a motion that follows
Johannes Kepler’s orbital laws to within one part in 100, reaching
a velocity of about 1050 kilometers per second at a distance of 0.5
light-years from the center. (The velocity itself is determined from
the apparent wavelength shift of the radiation.) This is all we need
to calculate from Newton’s universal law of gravitation that approx-
imately 35 to 40 million Suns must be concentrated within 0.5 light
years of the center in NGC 4258.
The astronomers who made this groundbreaking discovery
argue that the implied density of matter in this region must there-
fore be at least 100 million Suns per cubic light-year. If this mass were

weighing supermassive objects 29
simply a highly concentrated star cluster, the stars would be separated
by an average distance only somewhat greater than the diameter of the
solar system and, with such proximity, they would not be able to sur-
vive the inevitable catastrophic collisions with each other. Because of
the precision with which we can measure this concentration of dark
mass, we regard the object housed in the nucleus of NGC 4258 as one
of the two most compelling supermassive black holes now known,
the other being the object prowling at the center of our own galaxy,
about which we will have more to say in the following section.
However, the vast majority of quasars and active galaxies host-
ing supermassive black holes in their cores are not quite as compliant
as NGC 4258. Taking into account the various factors that must all
work in our favor, it is easy to understand why galaxies like NGC 4258
are indeed special and, therefore, rare. First, the conditions near the
central object must conspire to maintain an excited population of
water molecules, which facilitates the amplification of microwaves
as they filter through the dusty gas. Second, the disk of infalling ma-
terial must be relatively thin and oriented just right for us to see the
thin beams of maser light skimming along the plane of this disk. And
finally, the host galaxy must be sufficiently close to us that we can
resolve several maser-emitting cloudlets for a proper determination of
the distances involved, as well as the velocities. The number of host
galaxies to which this application may be made is therefore under-
standably small.
Well, astronomers are a clever lot and, though not as accurate
as the maser method, several alternative techniques have been devel-
oped to provide information on the speed of matter and its distance
from the central black hole, whose mass may therefore be extracted
with comparable validity using the Newtonian “balance.” Let us take
another look at Fig. 2.4, and imagine that the cosmic ﬂashlight effect
we are witnessing here is functioning with equal or better efficiency
even closer to the supermassive object in the center of its host galaxy.
That is, we should envisage a situation in which clouds of gas orbit-
ing the nucleus are being irradiated by the central beacon and that, in

30 the edge of infinity
turn, they glow with hues we can recognize and identify in terms of
specific atomic wavelengths.
Then, just as Maarten Schmidt could confidently argue in fa-
vor of 3C 273’s fantastic speed of recession, we would recognize the
shifts in wavelengths produced by these clouds as being indicative of
their velocity. By now, this is no longer viewed as an unusually clever
measurement, but the method used to determine the distance from
the black hole to the glowing gas, known as reverberation, is rather
inventive.
By monitoring the light emitted by the supermassive black hole
and, independently, the glow produced by its halo of irradiated clouds
of gas, astronomers can sense when a variation in the radiative output
has occurred. It so happens that when the quasar varies its brightness,
so does the surrounding matter – but only after a certain time delay.
The lag is clearly due to the time it took the irradiating light from
the center to reach the clouds and, since we know how fast photons
can travel, this delay provides a measure of the distance between the
nucleus and the orbiting plasma. And so, with the speed and distance
known, we again have recourse to Sir Isaac Newton and his law of
universal gravitation to extract the quasar’s mass.
2.3
the center of our galaxy
The supermassive objects we have discussed thus far exhibit black-
hole activity in spectacular ways. Echoing their presence with un-
mitigated power from early in the universe’s expansion, for example,
quasars are difficult to supplant as the most unusual entities in exis-
tence. But size is not everything. Known as Sagittarius A∗, our very
own black hole at the center of the Milky Way may not be the most
massive, nor the most energetic, but it is by the far the closest. And
what a difference a few million light-years can make!
Looking at a photograph of a galaxy such as NGC 4258 (Fig. 2.6),
one could understandably be duped into thinking that this aggregate
of stars is packed together rather tightly. Yet over most of a galaxy’s
extent, stars account for an infinitesimal fraction of its volume. For

weighing supermassive objects 31
example, if we were to think of a star as a cherry, we would need to
commute between the major cities in Europe to simulate a typical
distance (of several light-years) between stellar neighbors in space. At
the center of our galaxy, however, some 10 million stars swarm within
a mere light-year of the nucleus.
The brightest members of this crowded field are captured in
Fig. 2.7, an infrared photograph of unprecedented clarity produced
recently with the 8.2-meter VLT YEPUN telescope at the European
Southern Observatory in Paranal, Chile.5 The image we see here is
sharp because of a technique known as adaptive optics, in which a
mirror in the telescope moves constantly to correct for the effects of
turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere. This motion of the air produces
a twinkle in far-away objects and distorts and blurs their appearance
on photographs such as this. Adaptive optics can in principle create
images with a clarity that is even greater than that of the Hubble Space
Telescope, whose primary mirror has an aperture three times smaller
than that of the VLT YEPUN.
The laws of planetary motion deduced by Kepler and Newton
dictate that objects move faster the closer they orbit about the central
source of gravity. Mercury, for example, the planet closest to the Sun,
completes one orbit every 88 Earth-days, whereas Pluto, meandering
about the farthest reaches of the solar system, takes a full 90 465 Earth-
days to accomplish the same feat. This is understandable, of course,
in terms of how quickly the Sun’s gravitational pull diminishes with
distance – this is the whole point of the Newtonian “balance” we have
been using to weigh supermassive black holes in the nuclei of their
host galaxies.
Sagittarius A∗is so close to us compared to its brethren else-
where in the universe, that on an image like that in Fig. 2.7 we can
identify individual stars orbiting a mere seven to ten light-days from
5 Each of the four telescopes in the Very Large Telescope array has been assigned a
name based on objects known to the Mapuche people, who live in the area south of
the Bio-Bio river, some 500 kilometers from Santiago de Chile. YEPUN, the fourth
telescope in this set, means Venus, or evening star.

32 the edge of infinity
the source of gravity.6 In the nucleus of Andromeda, the nearest major
galaxy to the Milky Way, the best we could currently manage is about
two light-years.
With this proximity to the supermassive black hole, stars orbit
at blistering speeds of up to 5 million kilometers per hour, allowing
us to see their motion in real time – even at the 28 000 light-year dis-
tance to the galactic center. They are zipping along so fast, in fact,
that astronomers can easily detect a shift in their position on photo-
graphic plates taken only several years apart. Their incredible rate of
advance makes it possible now to unambiguously trace their orbits
with startling precision, revealing periods as short as 15 years! Com-
pare this with the 220 million years it takes the Sun to encircle the
galactic center just once.
The most spectacular identification7 to date of a star orbiting
about the black hole was announced in October 2002 by an inter-
national team of astronomers using the unparalleled light-gathering
capability of the VLT YEPUN telescope that produced the stunning
image shown in Fig. 2.7. If one looks closely at the middle of this pho-
tograph, it appears that one of the fainter stars – designated as S2 – lies
right on top of the position where the black hole is inferred to be. S2 is
an otherwise “normal” star, though some 15 times more massive and
seven times larger than the Sun.
That in itself is not very surprising, since a chance coincidence
in the projected position of two objects along the line of sight is not
unusual in a crowded field such as this. What is amazing, however,
is that the star S2 has been tracked now for over ten years and the
loci defining its path trace a perfect ellipse with one focus at the very
6 This effort has benefited from the contributions made by several observatories around
the world. The principal investigators leading the effort to use these techniques
for imaging the galactic center have been Andrea Ghez, Mark Morris, Eric Becklin,
and their collaborators at UCLA, and Reinhard Genzel, Andreas Eckart (now at the
University of K¨oln), and their collaborators at the Max Planck Institut in Garching,
Germany.
7 This discovery was reported in Nature (2002) by a large team of astronomers led by
Sch¨odel, at the Max-Planck-Institut f ¨ur Extraterrestrische Physik.

weighing supermassive objects 33
position of the supermassive black hole. This photograph, taken near
the middle of 2002, just happens to have caught S2 at the point of
closest approach (known as the perenigricon, as opposed to the point
farthest away, known as the aponigricon), making it look as though it
was sitting right on top of the nucleus.
At this position, the star S2 was a mere 17 light-hours away from
the black hole – roughly three times the distance between the Sun
and Pluto, while traveling with a speed in excess of 5000 kilometers
per second, by far the most extreme measurements ever made for
such an orbit and velocity. Indeed, when this photograph was taken,
the astronomers realized that the star S2 had just performed a rapid
swing-by near the center, creating an unprecedented opportunity of
determining not only the precise position of the source of gravity, but
also its strength, and thereby its mass.
Using Newton’s universal law of gravitation, we infer that the
mass required to harness the motion of stars such as S2 seen closest to
Sagittarius A∗at the galactic center is 2.6 million Suns, compressed
into a region no bigger than about seven light-days, and possibly just 17
light-hours given this latest discovery. For this reason, Sagittarius A∗,
and its cousin in the nucleus of NGC 4258, whose maser-emitting disk
betrays its 40 million solar-mass heft, are considered by astronomers
to be the most precisely “weighed” supermassive black holes thus far
discovered.
In the coming chapters, we will probe more deeply into the na-
ture of these objects and why they are increasingly being viewed as
fundamental building blocks of structure in the universe. It appears
that as much as half of all the radiation pervading the void of space
may have been produced by these megalithic entities. Some were here
near the dawn of time, perhaps even before galaxies as we know them
formed, and all will be here toward the end.

3
The black hole spacetime
Settling on the banks of the Tiber river, the Latini would establish
a city in the seventh century BC that later came to dominate much
of the civilized world. They used the word gravis to denote heavy or
serious, and the corresponding noun gravitas for heaviness and weight.
Our modern word gravity, and its more precise derivative gravitation,
trace their roots to this early usage, which itself is linked to a yet older
root that includes the Sanskrit guru (for weighty or venerable), among
others. The ancients were evidently quite aware of this ever-present
property of matter – that it should have an unwavering attraction
toward the Earth – though up to the time of Galileo and Newton,
gravity simply remained a name for the phenomenon, without any
explanation or even an adequate description.
3.1
the inexorable force of gravity
Toward the end of the seventeenth century, attempts to account for
the behavior of objects changing their motion in response to external
inﬂuences were primarily concerned with the nature of forces that
one could easily identify. In the story of Goliath’s slaying, for example,
the stone was dispatched toward his forehead after David released the
sling. Prior to that moment, the diminutive combatant was able to
restrain the motion of the stone with a force applied by his hand me-
diated through the string. Newton argued that the Earth must itself
be exerting an attractive force on matter since everything falls down
in the same direction. This action seemed to be quite unfathomable,
however, since there was no obvious way in which the Earth could
reach out to pull objects toward it. The inﬂuence evidently had to be
produced by some “action at a distance,” in which one object feels
the presence of another just by virtue of its existence at a different
location. Newton understandably viewed gravity as being special,

the black hole spacetime 35
since it appeared to be distinct from other forces, like the hands
that pushed, or the chains that pulled, and he found this to be very
troublesome.
We now know, of course, that this distinction is only an illusion
created by the different scales over which the forces act. The forces
exerted by strings and hands are macroscopic manifestations of a mi-
croscopic equivalent of gravity’s “action at a distance,” except that in
this case the action is due to electromagnetism. The reason this book
does not fall through your hands is that there are repulsive forces be-
tween the charged particles in each of them that prevent the former’s
downward motion. But this electrostatic recoil is mediated across the
space between the constituent particles in much the same way that
gravity acts between the Earth and the Moon – the electrons and other
atomic constituents never really “touch” at all.
Newton’s anxiety about the status of gravity as an action-at-a-
distance inﬂuence was certainly well placed, though not for the rea-
sons he envisaged, because modern physics has adopted a considerably
different view of how forces are exerted on one particle by another.
The illusory distinction between gravitational and electromagnetic
inﬂuences is no longer relevant and, later in this chapter, we will
theorize that gravity and all other forces are in fact merely different
manifestations of a single, unified action.
The classical theory of gravitation, in which one object pulls
on another with a force proportional to their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of their separation, represents one of the
most significant triumphs in science. Its predictions have been con-
firmed by observations with astounding accuracy. John Couch Adams
(1819–92) in England and Jean Joseph Le Verrier (1811–77) in France,
for example, used slight peculiarities in the motion of Uranus to
predict in 1846 the existence of Neptune, one of the first major suc-
cesses of this theory.1
1 The story of Neptune’s prediction and eventual discovery highlights some of the diffi-
culties faced by early researchers dealing with inefficient means of communication,
poor coordination, and modest facilities. This tale is told by Moore (1996), among
others.

36 the edge of infinity
As far as we can tell, Newton’s law of gravitation applies to ob-
jects without any limit on their separation, though physicists do not
know quite yet what to make of new evidence that the universe’s ex-
pansion has been speeding up rather than slowing down. A straightfor-
ward consideration of this physical law would indicate that since all
matter attracts all other matter, the ensuing“inwardly”directed gravi-
tational force should slow the expansion down. Yet looking farther and
farther into the past, by examining the motion of the most distant
objects visible with the largest telescopes, astronomers are finding
that the young universe was expanding at a speed lower than expected.
It is still too early to tell what the eventual outcome of this
discovery will be. Some theorists are proposing that space contains a
hitherto unseen energy field (a “dark” energy) whose pressure counter-
acts the effects of gravity, much as the air pumped into a balloon can
make it expand even if other forces (e.g., the elasticity of its rubber)
conspire to keep it deﬂated. Others believe this accelerated expan-
sion is evidence for an odd form of matter that exhibits gravitational
repulsion, rather than attraction, which would then clearly require a
modification to Newton’s law of gravitation.2 But even such a change,
if needed, would have an inconsequential impact on the description
of gravity on a galactic scale or smaller. So Newton’s simple inverse-
square law appears to be a good starting point for any discussion con-
cerning the nature of supermassive black holes.
Having said this, it is nonetheless true that certain aspects of
gravity are to this day profoundly mysterious on all scales. Wher-
ever we look in the heavens, its inﬂuence is overpowering and inter-
minable. Yet accustomed to the quick fix, fast food, and life in the ex-
press lane, we cannot help but notice the languorous pace with which
the universe succumbs to change. The cosmos projects a majesty de-
rived in part from its lethargic vastness, and it is specifically gravity’s
duplicitous character – always the dominant force, yet weak – that
troubles physicists deeply.
2 Some recent ideas on this topic may be found in Ostriker and Steinhardt (2001).

the black hole spacetime 37
On the surface of the Earth, for example, something may break
free and fall to the ground with quite a thud. But if you were to put
a nail on a tabletop, the introduction of even just a toy magnet into
the system would be sufficient to “rip” it away from Earth’s clutches.
Whereas it takes our whole planet to hold the nail in place, the elec-
tromagnetic force exerted by the comparatively tiny magnet is much,
much stronger.
When scientists shift their attention away from the cosmologi-
cally large to the microscopically small, probing deeply into the struc-
ture of an atom, or its nucleus, the effects of gravity are completely
insignificant compared to the forces that bind the individual parti-
cles together. On this scale, the structure of matter is entirely be-
holden to the inﬂuence of non-gravitational forces, whose incredible
strength produces a compression of the constituents into relatively
small volumes. Thus, it happens that an atom is much smaller than
a galaxy because the electromagnetic force that couples the orbiting
electrons to the central positively charged nucleus is many factors of
ten stronger than the mutual gravitational attraction between stars
swirling within the galactic aggregate.
On large scales, this astounding disparity in strength produces
electrically neutral clumps of matter. Charged plasma simply cannot
remain isolated due to the overwhelming electric forces it experiences
from its surroundings. Thus, gravity is dominant, at least on a plan-
etary or galactic scale, because it happens to be the only remaining
inﬂuence at such distances. This part, at least, is easily comprehen-
sible, but what puzzles physicists is something more subtle than the
variation in size – it has to do with the fact that when size is prescribed
by gravity, it is way off-scale compared to that associated with any of
the other forces. In other words, even though the other forces may
differ in strength relative to each other, gravity is uncommonly weak,
a situation known as the “Hierarchy Problem.”
To put this in more concrete terms, the gravitational attrac-
tion between two electrons is weaker by a factor of 10 followed by
42 zeros when compared with the force of repulsion they experience

38 the edge of infinity
due to their mutual electric force. A pair of electrons would each have
to be ten thousand billion billion times more massive in order for the
electric and gravitational forces between them to be equal. (Inciden-
tally, the resource required to produce such a heavy particle is known
as the Planck energy.)
So why do we need to worry about all this? Well, for one thing,
the behavior of matter probably changes its character considerably
when it executes a transition from a relatively diffuse structure the
size of a galaxy or a star, down toward the apparent singularity of a
black hole. Eventually, astrophysicists will need to understand better
than they do now what in fact happens when matter collapses to such
a degree that the fundamental forces readjust their relative strengths.
For example, suppose that on very small spatial scales some hitherto
unforeseen factor causes gravity to bridge the “hierarchical gap” and
merge with the other forces – perhaps even become unified with them.
Will this then preclude the existence of singularities?
Not surprisingly, some of the most sparkling work in theoretical
physics now is directed toward the problem of how we should include
gravity in a complete description of all the fundamental forces of na-
ture. And one of the most appealing threads in this discourse hinges
on the possible existence of extra spatial dimensions, beyond the three
we encounter in our everyday experience.
3.2
unseen dimensions
In a nutshell, this hypothesis holds that gravity only appears to be
weak because electromagnetism and the other forces are constrained
to function solely within our familiar three-dimensional space (plus
time), whereas gravity is free to inﬂuence activity in all dimensions.
Thus, what we experience in our three-dimensional world is but a
fraction of gravity’s overall strength.
The very mention of extra dimensions is bizarre to physicists
and non-physicists alike, though the historical pedigree for such a
concept continues to mature. The word “dimension” tends to be used
in many contexts, often lacking consistency with its true meaning. A

the black hole spacetime 39
dimension grants us the access to move in a certain direction without
changing our distance from another given straight line drawn in this
space. This may sound very abstract, but in actuality humans con-
struct habitable environments that adhere to this rule – and bring out
the three-dimensional structure of our world – quite explicitly. Let
us imagine entering a room whose shape is typically that of a rect-
angular box, often simply a cube. Now begin at one corner of that
room (say with your right shoulder brushing up against the wall for
definiteness), and slide along that wall toward the neighboring corner.
What you should notice is that as you do this, your distance from the
wall on your left side remains fixed. The distance from your feet to
the ceiling also does not change.
Starting at one corner of the room, you can choose precisely
three different and independent directions in which your motion
will produce this same result. But proceed in any other direction,
say the diagonal, and your distance from the walls will change with
every step. This cubical room therefore encloses a well-defined, three-
dimensional space.
Not all spaces need to have exactly three dimensions, however.
Ants crawling along the surface of a large sphere inhabit a two-
dimensional world, because they can move in precisely two indepen-
dent directions while preserving a constant distance from given axes,
these being embedded in the surface itself. The ants trapped in this en-
vironment do not have the luxury of moving along a radius anchored
to the center of their spherical world, which would have constituted
the third independent direction – essentially the sense of up and down
in our three-dimensional room.
This particular type of space is interesting for several other im-
portant reasons, including the fact that it is infinite, yet bounded, and
multiply connected. An ant crawling along this surface can continue
on its journey forever without reaching an end; it may retrace its path
an infinite number of times by going around the entire circumfer-
ence of the sphere, but there is never an end to its path. Nonethe-
less, mathematicians say it is bounded because the actual amount

40 the edge of infinity
of area covered by the surface is a finite number. This space is also
multiply connected because any given point on the spherical surface
may be reached by taking many – actually an infinite number of –
paths.
Taking this reduction in the number of dimensions one step
further, it is evident that a space comprised solely of a circle represents
a one-dimensional world, since an ant crawling in this environment
has precisely one direction in which it can move. Again this space is
infinite, though bounded (because of the same property we ascribed
to the surface of a sphere), and it is multiply-connected in the sense
that the ant may reach any given point on the circle by moving either
clockwise or counterclockwise in its highly restricted world.
With this background in mind, the question that filters through
the imagination of modern-day physicists and mathematicians is
whether nature “chose” to have us function in a three-dimensional
space because that’s all there is, or whether we might be the three-
dimensional analog of the ants crawling on their two-dimensional
surface. Since we can easily envisage spaces with one and two dimen-
sions, there is no a priori reason to assume that three is the ultimate
number.
The idea that there may exist a four-dimensional hyperspace
(as it is called), and that our three-dimensional space is its surface –
just as the ants’ world is the two-dimensional surface of the three-
dimensional volume enclosed within their sphere – was first described
in Georg Riemann’s (1826–66) doctoral thesis in 1851. But it appears
that such a notion was taken seriously only after a then-unknown
Prussian mathematician, Theodor Kaluza (1885–1954), submitted an
intriguing proposal for a four-dimensional space to Albert Einstein.
By introducing one additional dimension, he argued in a letter writ-
ten in 1919, the gravitational and electromagnetic fields could be
unified into a single entity, which only manifests itself as different
components when we project it back into our space. Struck by its
significant originality, Einstein sponsored Kaluza’s article for publica-
tion in 1921.

the black hole spacetime 41
Shortly thereafter, one of Kaluza’s former students, Oskar Klein
(1894–1977), postulated in 1926 that the fourth spatial dimension
might be curled up so tightly that it would not be detectable in sub-
atomic packets of space. This development has historical significance
because Kaluza-Klein bottles – as this compact extra dimension was
later known – became the foundation for modern-day string theory.3
String theory has now become one of the most active branches
of theoretical physics, claiming perhaps as many as half of all active
researchers whose primary interest lies in the nature of particles and
their interactions. It is a description of reality in which the tiniest
entities are very short strings ﬂoating through spacetime, rather than
the point-like fabrications of the more established (though perhaps
now outdated) scientific disciplines. In this theory, the most likely
number of spatial dimensions is 10, yielding a total of 11 when time
is included. As it turns out, though, an attempt to find an explanation
for gravity’s extreme weakness relative to the other forces does not
necessarily have to be wedded to the notion of strings.
The reason for this is that the existence of extra dimensions,
regardless of whether particles are points or strings, will result in the
rapid dilution of the gravitational force away from the source. A sig-
nificant surge in interest for these ideas followed the publication of a
provocative paper in 1998, in which particle theorists Nima Arkani-
Hamed, Savas Dimopoulos (both then at Stanford university), and Gia
Dvali (then at Trieste), proposed the existence of two or more spatial
dimensions curled up not on a subatomic scale, as mainstream string
theory presumes, but rather up to a scale as large as a few millime-
ters.4 Such enormous hidden dimensions could in principle lead to
detectable departures from Newtonian gravity with a new generation
of more sensitive tabletop experiments.
To understand how the strength of gravity depends on the
number of dimensions, let us consider the following simple analogy.
3 A relatively non-technical description of string theory may be found in Brian Greene
(2000). For an introduction to Kaluza-Klein theories, see also Lee (1984).
4 See Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos, and Dvali (1998).

42 the edge of infinity
Imagine a dozen people huddling together, all facing away from the
group. If the huddle forms a tight circle, each must be gazing in an
outwardly radial direction. They begin to walk, maintaining a circu-
lar shape as they go. Not surprisingly, the separation between each
pair of individuals increases as the circumference of the circle grows.
The point is that whereas the number of people never changes, the
circle’s perimeter gets bigger as they recede from its center.
Not wanting to waste this effort, we ask our experimenters to
sweep the ﬂoor as they go. But we notice that as the circle grows, they
find it more and more difficult to keep up with their chore because
each individual’s region grows in proportion to the distance he covers.
If we could somehow position our sweepers on the surface of
a sphere, and carry out a similar thought experiment for this type of
space, we would now find that the region associated with each of them
grows even faster than it did before, because the area increases as the
square of the distance they cover. By adding one dimension, we have
caused the density of people to dilute even faster as they recede from
the center.
On a three-dimensional surface within a four-dimensional hy-
perspace, each sweeper would need to keep up with a region that
grows in proportion to the cube of the distance he covers. Obviously,
this trend continues indefinitely as we add more and more spatial
dimensions. Gravity’s inﬂuence, represented here metaphorically by
the sweeping potency of our workforce, also ebbs with increasing dis-
tance away from the source. But the critical point is that the surface
“area” of our space scales with a progressively higher power of the dis-
tance as the number of dimensions grows. So the rate of diminishing
inﬂuence is greater, the larger the number of dimensions.
The payoff from this somewhat abstract reasoning comes next
when we try to couch these various ideas into the language of real
numbers and consequences. We are struck first by the fact that the
number of dimensions needed to solve the Hierarchy Problem depends
on how large each of them is. This we know: the Newtonian prescrip-
tion for gravity – that it scales inversely as the square of the distance

the black hole spacetime 43
between two objects – holds true for planets in the solar system, for
stars orbiting about the center of the galaxy, and apparently also for the
expansion of the universe. Thus, on these scales at least, there must
be precisely three spatial dimensions since the power with which the
strength of gravity dilutes – the square of the distance in this case – is
one smaller than this number.
For such huge distances, we also know that the inﬂuence of
gravity is disquietingly small compared to that of the other forces in
nature. Perhaps the reason gravity is so weak on large scales, argue
the proponents of extra dimensions, is that the dilution takes place
much closer to the source. In order for this to work, however, the extra
dimensions must be curled back on themselves with a size no bigger
than current measurements allow. Taking the simplest approach –
adding a single new spatial dimension – is therefore already ruled out,
because its radius would have to be roughly the distance between the
Earth and the Sun in order for gravity’s strength to dilute sufficiently.
Two extra dimensions can solve the Hierarchy Problem if they
are about one millimeter in extent – precisely where our current di-
rect knowledge of gravity ends. At the time of writing, a dozen or
so groups are eagerly looking for departures from Newtonian gravity
(which scales as the inverse square of the distance) at these small, yet
macroscopic, scales. A provisional result was reported recently by one
of these outfits at the Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativ-
ity in Rome. Representing the University of Washington’s Eot-Wash
laboratory, Jens Gundlach revealed that the group’s specially designed
torsion balance has yet to uncover any evidence for extra dimensions
down to a distance as small as 0.2 millimeters.5
The extra dimensions are even smaller if there are more than
two, and if string theory turns out to be the correct description of
nature, its seven additional spatial dimensions (beyond the three we
inhabit) would be no bigger than the size of a uranium nucleus. That’s
why astronomers are not concerned about these fundamental changes
5 See Gundlach and Merkowitz (2000).

44 the edge of infinity
to gravity, since a dramatic increase in its strength at these short dis-
tances would not affect objects held together on planetary, stellar or
galactic scales.
Interestingly, though, even a size as small as a uranium nu-
cleus will become accessible to physicists with the next generation
of particle-collider experiments. By smashing particles together with
a thousand times more energy than is contained within such a nu-
cleus, the Large Hadron Collider at the CERN laboratory in Geneva,
Switzerland, may, by 2010, begin to see evidence for a significant leak-
age of gravitational energy out of our three-dimensional space during
such an encounter. Physicists anticipate this loss if the proponents of
extra spatial dimensions are correct, and gravity’s strength ramps up
dramatically at this predicted distance. A more unsettling hypothesis
holds that gravity’s added inﬂuence on these small scales may in fact
lead to the proliferation of micro black holes which, however, would
be too small to cause us any problems, since they would radiate all of
their energy and evaporate in a time too small to even measure with
current instruments.
How fortunate our descendants will be to know the dimension-
ality of our existence and, by extension, perhaps even to unveil other
universes that may exist in parallel to our own a mere millimeter or
less away! Astrophysicists generally agree that a key ingredient in the
development of this understanding will be our resolution of the su-
permassive black-hole mystery. Given sufficient time, even a weak
gravity will eventually cause matter to collapse to densities at which
the effects described in this section will manifest themselves. Let us
therefore pursue this thought and take guidance from what current
physical laws have to tell us about the ultimate fate of matter tum-
bling into the oblivion of its own event horizon.
3.3
matter’s futile resistance to total collapse
Since gravity is the dominant force acting over large distances, its
inexorable pull should evidently always lead to strong condensations
of matter. Can anything ever stop it?

the black hole spacetime 45
The answer, of course, is yes – albeit temporarily. The Sun, for
example, much heavier than our planet, has managed to sustain itself
against a terminal collapse for over 4 billion years. Aside from the
support provided by sideways motion that we discussed in Chapter 2,
particles cannot slide effortlessly through or past each other, so when
collisions between them become very frequent, any further compres-
sion is halted, or at least postponed.
Think of it this way. People filtering into a large ballroom experi-
ence very little resistance initially because of the large space available
to them. As the density in the crowd increases, however, collisions
between individuals eventually prevents any tighter compression.
Once all the bumping and squeezing forces those present to fill the
entire room, the inﬂux stops, and the final number of guests fitting
into this space depends on how lively they are. A dormant, placid
crowd will be very dense because their motion is suppressed, whereas
an enthusiastic, energetic group of individuals will enliven the space
with activity that spreads the individuals apart. As the evening pro-
gresses, however, the guests start to tire and as the ballroom’s collec-
tive ebullience diminishes, so too does the outward push from all their
collisions and motion. Those waiting outside the doors will eventu-
ally be able to filter in as the crowd condenses farther and farther
toward the middle of the ﬂoor.
Within a clump of matter, the outward support against cata-
strophic gravitational collapse is first provided by the heat generated
by compression (in the same way that a bicycle pump heats up when
we squeeze the air inside it), and then by the burning of nuclear fuel –
a process that converts hydrogen into helium, and then carbon, nitro-
gen, oxygen, and so forth down the chain toward heavier elements.
Even in a giant ball of gas, however, there’s a limit to how much heat
can thus be generated, since eventually all the fuel will have turned
into iron, which will simply not burn in a thermonuclear reaction.
The core accumulates ashes, growing larger and larger with the pas-
sage of time. Matter loses its first major battle with gravity when its
heat is gone, and it collapses to even higher densities. Yet rather than

46 the edge of infinity
ease its hold, gravity continues to push the growing behemoth toward
the precipice of total collapse.
But something quite astonishing happens when the density of
matter becomes so large that the electrons ﬂooding the medium start
to overlap with each other’s positions. The effect has to do with
the marriage of a truly remarkable property of our three-dimensional
space with the tenets of quantum mechanics. The basis for this unex-
pected phenomenon – and the reason why we are even here to consider
it – is the observation that when an object is rotated by 360 degrees,
it returns to a state that looks the same as before geometrically, but
is in fact quite distinct with respect to its surroundings. A second full
rotation (for a total of 720 degrees) is needed to bring the object back
to its original state.
An elegant way to prove this statement is the following. Take a
small cube and paint each of its sides with a different color to distin-
guish it from the others. Then place the cube in the center of a larger
box and use a string to connect each of its eight vertices to the cor-
responding internal corner of the enclosing box. Leave enough slack
so that you can rotate the cube and maneuver it when the strings get
twisted. Now rotate the cube through 360 degrees. The threads be-
come tangled. Nothing you can do will unwind them and you will
find it impossible to arrange every string in such a way that it extends
from vertex to corner along a straight line.
Rotating the cube once more about the same axis by another
360 degrees, you will find that the threads appear to become even
more twisted. But this is only an illusion, for the cube and its entan-
glement with the box are now actually back in a state identical to
that at the beginning of the experiment. Amazingly, it only takes a
little effort moving the strings around, while keeping the cube per-
fectly still, to completely straighten them out. After a rotation by 720
degrees, the threads run as they did in the beginning, forming straight
lines between the vertices of the cube and the corners of the bounding
box.

the black hole spacetime 47
This result may be generalized to other rotations, but only in
multiples of 720 degrees. For example, a total rotation by 1440 or
2160 degrees will also leave the cube unaffected in orientation and
twisting relative to its surroundings. Evidently there is something
about the geometry of orientation in three-dimensional space that is
not fully taken into account when we consider just the cube’s aspect,
since without the strings, the cube appears to be in the same state as
it was in the beginning even after a rotation of only 360 degrees.
Fortunately, there is an even simpler demonstration – known as
the Philippine wine dance – that everyone can use to visualize this
effect if the experiment with the cube is not doable.6 Bend and orient
your right arm so that your elbow points upwards, letting your forearm
and hand dangle to the ground. Then bend your wrist so that the palm
of your right hand is facing up. Place a glass – the dextrous among us
will want to fill it with wine first – on your palm, and slowly rotate
your hand 360 degrees in a plane parallel to the ﬂoor. Your right hand
and the glass should now appear to have the same orientation they
had originally, but your forearm is twisted and your elbow points
to the ground. If you continue to rotate the glass in your hand by
another 360 degrees (completing this Cleopatra-like movement), it
will recover its original aspect and position. Remarkably, instead of
incurring an additional twist, your forearm rediscovers its original
shape and orientation!
This fundamental property of three-dimensional space has quite
a profound inﬂuence on the behavior of matter and our existence in
general. In nature, there are two principal categories of particles –
those for which this effect is irrelevant and others for which the impact
of this phenomenon manifests itself in very visible and important
ways. And the cause of this is the fact that the sideways motion of
matter we talked about in the previous chapter is quantized when
6 For a technical description of this and other demonstrations of the twisting of space,
see Bernstein and Phillips (1981).

48 the edge of infinity
circumstances force it to be confined within atomic-sized regions of
space. For example, if we could take a spinning top and shrink it to
arbitrarily small sizes, nature would only permit it to have certain
discrete rates of spin and nothing in between.7
The factor that distinguishes one category of particles from the
other is whether or not their spinning can be projected to zero when
viewed relative to some pre-selected direction. Particles for which the
answer to this question is yes are known as bosons; the rest are called
fermions – in honor of the two legendary physicists, Bose and Fermi.
A trivial example of the former is a particle that has no spin at all,
for then regardless of our perspective, its projected spinning action is
always zero.8 Some particles, like electrons, protons, and neutrons –
the principal components of an atom – always have spin, and possess
it with certain discrete values that no matter what orientation we
select, the projection of that spin is never zero.9
Thus emerges the nexus that weds the tenets of quantum
mechanics to the remarkable property of orientation in three-
dimensional space. The swirling motion of our diminutive spinning
top and the spin of elementary particles are the “threads” that en-
tangle these objects to their surroundings. Particles whose spin can
be projected to zero are untethered, and a rotation by 360 degrees
restores them to their exact original state. This is the situation we
would have encountered with our multi-colored cube were we to cut
all the strings connecting its vertices to the corresponding corners of
the bounding box. Fermions, however, are always tethered since they
have a spin that can be sensed from any orientation in the surround-
ing space. For these, therefore, a rotation by 360 degrees would leave
7 It’s somewhat dangerous to use this analogy since the spin of an elementary particle
is evidently not associated with the swirling motion of something tangible and ex-
tended. Perhaps that motion is taking place in small, extra dimensions not directly
viewable in our three-dimensional world.
8 We will leave out of this discussion particles – such as photons – that have no mass
and travel at the speed of light. For them, the spin behavior is different yet again.
9 This too arises from the quantization of sideways motion imposed by quantum me-
chanics, since fractional values of the projected spin are not supportable by nature if
they fall within the finite number of allowed discrete values.

the black hole spacetime 49
them in a state that is different and easily identified as separate from
the original!
The second tenet of quantum mechanics bearing on this story
holds that two particles of the same type are completely indistinguish-
able if they have the same energy and other dynamical properties. If
we were to place two electrons adjacent to each other, we could not
under any circumstance label them in such a way that we could then
keep track of which is where. Thus, to describe this situation, we
must allow for all possibilities – that the first electron is in the left
position and the second is on the right, and that the first electron
is on the right, while the second is on the left. And this is precisely
where we run head first into the peculiar problem of orientation in
three-dimensional space.
The reason is the following. Once we know that there are two
electrons occupying adjacent positions, then we also know that each
of these particles may be manifested in either of the two locations
because of their indistinguishability. But a geometry consisting of the
first electron on the left with the second on the right is rotated by ex-
actly 360 degrees relative to one in which the first electron is on the
right and the second on the left. Since the two electrons are discon-
nected, it is not enough to simply rotate one of them by 180 degrees
about the other; the second needs to be independently moved to the
location where the first used to be. So together, these two individual
rotations by 180 degrees produce an overall rotation of 360 degrees
(see Fig. 3.1).
This transformed configuration, however, is not identical to the
original one because of the orientation effect described above. In quan-
tum mechanics, the fact that the same system of two particles must
simultaneously occupy two distinct states therefore results in an ab-
rogation of this configuration as one of the allowed equilibria for the
system!
There’s only one way to fix this – and that is to endow the
electrons with properties that allow them to occupy distinguishable
states. In other words, when particles such as this come sufficiently

50 the edge of infinity
close together that they start overlapping each other’s position, some-
thing about them must be different, otherwise they are simply not
permitted to exist together. That something might be their energy, or
it might be the degree of sideways motion that they have relative to
the nucleus in the atom. For bosons, this is never an issue since a rota-
tion of 360 degrees does not change their state. Thus, nature permits
any number of them to co-exist, whether or not they are distinguish-
able. In recent years, for example, physicists have found ways to create
something called a Bose-Einstein Condensate. In simple terms, this
means that a configuration of particles is established in which a very
large number of bosons all condense down to a very low-energy state –
the same state.
But this is not possible for fermions – the principal constituents
of atoms, molecules, cells, and life. Whenever these gather in num-
bers, they must be distinguishable, and that means they must have
different energies and sideways motion relative to a force center. This
is precisely the reason why the electrons in atoms must occupy strat-
ified levels, and why the various elements therefore occupy differ-
ent positions in the periodic table. Chemistry, biology – indeed, our
very existence – would not otherwise have substance. And all of this
is due to that peculiar property of orientation in three-dimensional
space.
Matter collapsing under its own weight must eventually reach
a density at which this restriction on the co-existence of identical
fermions becomes an issue. This happens when the condensation of
mass loses its heat and electrons begin to occupy neighboring states.
But their density cannot be so high that nature runs out of low-energy
distinguishable slots in which to place them. Any collapsing ball of
gas has a finite amount of energy, and if the density increases indef-
initely, some of the electrons must eventually fill slots that are no
longer accessible. At that point, the implosion stops.
Millions of objects like this, known as white dwarfs, dot the
galaxy. If the Sun were to collapse to such a configuration, it would be
no bigger than the Earth. The Sun is actually close to being the biggest

the black hole spacetime 51
star that can survive catastrophic collapse because of the support pro-
vided by its electrons.
But what happens if there is so much matter around that it con-
tinues to pile up on top of this compact core? There is no evidence at all
that quantum mechanics can break down. In fact, quantum mechan-
ics is one of the most resilient theories in science, perhaps because in
comparison with any of the other attempts at explaining nature, it is
more of a description than a theory. Instead, when an additional half to
two solar masses of material has fallen onto such an object, the elec-
trons and protons are squeezed together and fuse to form a new class
of fermions known as neutrons and, losing its support from free elec-
trons, the star resumes its implosion. The ensuing collapse is halted
once again – apparently the last – when the issue of distinguishability
resurfaces, though this time it is the neutrons that cannot all occupy
the same state. Astronomers call such an object a neutron star. It is
so compact that a Sun’s worth of material is squeezed into a sphere
the size of Chicago, and its density is so off-scale that a single tea-
spoon full of neutron-star matter weighs as much as all of humanity
combined.
As we shall see in the next section, neutron stars hover precari-
ously above the size limit imposed by general relativity. The Sun, for
example, would have to shrink to roughly 3 kilometers in radius in
order to become a black hole. As a neutron star, it would have a radius
no bigger than 10 to 20 kilometers. So what happens next as matter
continues to pile on and gravity maintains its relentless pursuit to-
ward total collapse? After all, these objects are comparable in mass
to the Sun, but the supermassive objects in the nuclei of galaxies and
quasars are millions to billions of times heavier.
The physics of matter under such extreme conditions starts to
get somewhat murky at this point, given that astrophysicists have
very little to guide them. It is known that as the mass of a neutron
star increases, its size diminishes, but the exact rate at which this
happens is still uncertain. By the time its mass has increased to about
three or four Suns, its radius may be as small as 7 or 8 kilometers,

52 the edge of infinity
and the gravitational pull on its surface is so strong that even light
struggles titanically to escape. Indeed, for a three-solar-mass object,
this radius is already below the event horizon, and we would call the
“new” object a black hole.
Anything we would say about the behavior of matter beyond
this state is pure speculation, because we have absolutely no informa-
tion at all about what transpires across the “membrane of no return.”
If quantum mechanics survives intact, the neutrons will never slide
together toward a singularity, though they probably would dissolve
into a plasma comprised of their constituents – quarks. But these too
are fermions, and would presumably therefore still be subjected to
the exclusion principle arising from their indistinguishability at close
range. It may happen that for some reason fermions transform into
bosons under such circumstances. We simply don’t know.10 Quan-
tum mechanics and the classical theory of general relativity diverge
drastically here, because on the one hand, quantum mechanics does
not permit particles to infiltrate into each other’s space, whereas gen-
eral relativity seems to suggest that progress toward a singularity is
unavoidable. What we do know, however, is that in either case the
compressed material is entombed below an event horizon, and we
have no way of communicating with it farther, unless we too take
the irreversible plunge.
3.4
the black hole spacetime
A significant fraction of this theorizing is based on a remarkable in-
sight displayed almost a century ago by a follower of Einstein. In the
December twilight of 1915, Karl Schwarzschild (1873–1916) was sta-
tioned on the Russian front when he received copies of Einstein’s
papers outlining the theory of general relativity. He unfortunately
contracted an illness soon thereafter, and died upon his return to
Potsdam, where he had been a professor before the outbreak of war in
10 Some discussion on this topic, which is still valid today, may be found in the
pioneering papers by Chandrasekhar (1931), Landau (1932), Eddington (1935), and
Oppenheimer and Snyder (1939).

the black hole spacetime 53
1914. Quite remarkably, he was able within that very short window
of opportunity to derive a solution to the equations of general relativ-
ity, describing the behavior of space and time surrounding a spherical
mass. Schwarzschild sent his paper to Einstein, who would transmit
it to the Berlin Academy, and received the following response: “I had
not expected that the exact solution to the problem could be formu-
lated. Your analytical treatment of the problem appears to me splen-
did.” Nonetheless, neither of the two men could yet appreciate how
significant this contribution would be, for it contained a complete
description of the external metric (i.e., a mathematical prescription
for measuring distance and time) of a spherical, electrically neutral,
nonrotating black hole, which today is often called a “Schwarzschild
black hole,” in honor of the volunteer soldier who first found a way
to describe it while fighting the debilitating cold on Europe’s eastern
ﬂank.
Understanding the structure of spacetime really amounts to
knowing how distances and intervals of time are viewed by one in-
dividual relative to another. Everything else – be it the velocity of
a particle falling toward a source of gravity or its acceleration in an
elevator – is derived from these. Nature reveals to us that light pos-
sesses the highest attainable speed (even the effects of gravity cannot
propagate faster) and that the distances and times we measure are
altered between frames in such a way as to preserve this speed every-
where and always. We don’t yet understand why this happens, but
physicists do have the ability to produce a metric to interpret these
measurements.
In special relativity – which does not include any acceleration
and is therefore only an appropriate description of spacetime in the
absence of gravity – the metric is very simple to write down and to
understand. Since light advances at 300 000 kilometers per second, it
will have traveled a distance of 300 000 kilometers times the number
of seconds that have elapsed in a given interval. So regardless of which
person is making the observation, the measured distance for a light
pulse will be d = ct, in which c is the speed of light and t is the

54 the edge of infinity
interval of time in seconds. Since a light pulse can either be moving
toward us or away from us – two cases with opposite signs in d – it is
often more convenient and conventional to write d2 = (ct)2, that is,
the square of the distance traveled by light is the square of its speed
times the square of the elapsed time. This relationship is the metric
of special relativity in the sense that no matter who is making the
measurement, the observer will conclude that their value of d2 for
light is always given by c2 times their value of t2.
In the presence of gravity, however, the very act of letting time
advance produces a transformation into a frame moving even faster
than the one before it. Schwarzschild theorized that we cannot simply
have d2 = (ct)2 since the final measurement for the determination of
d occurs in a different frame than that of the initial measurement.
He recognized that a modification was needed in order to preserve the
constancy of c, and concluded that this must be a factor that depends
on the local value of the gravitational acceleration.
Schwarzschild’s metric for the propagation of light in the case
of a static, spherically symmetric source of gravity is d2/f = (ct)2 f, in
which f is defined to be the factor (1 −2GM/c2r), M is the mass of
the central object, r is the radius from its center, and G is a constant
characterizing the strength of gravity. The proof that this metric actu-
ally satisfies Einstein’s equations requires some mathematical effort.
Understanding its physical meaning, however, is not that difficult.11
One can see right away that the effects due to the gravitational accel-
eration enter in a very simple way. Newton’s monumental effort in
formulating the law of gravity may be recognized (albeit in a modified
form) within the factor f. In fact, the term 2GM/c2r is the ratio of the
Newtonian escape speed (from an object with mass M) to the speed of
light, c, all squared.
11 Note that this form of the metric is correct as long as light is moving along the radius,
meaning that d here is to be viewed as a measure of the change in r only. If the ray
of light is moving in any other direction, the correction due to the acceleration
appearing on the left-hand side is then set equal to one. However, the correction
associated with the passage of time (appearing on the right-hand side) is always
present.

the black hole spacetime 55
Looking at Schwarzschild’s metric, we see that far away from the
object, where the radius is large, the factor f approaches unity, which
recovers the metric of special relativity, d2 = (ct)2. This limiting
behavior is realized because the force of gravity decreases inversely as
the square of the radius, so if the distance is large enough, the inﬂuence
of any object becomes enfeebled. But when we view what happens
to light going the other way, toward the source of gravity, some-
thing very unusual occurs as the magnitude of the escape velocity ap-
proaches the speed of light. The factor f goes to zero, and the radius,
r = 2GM/c2, at which this unfolds is known as the Schwarzschild
radius.
Particles reaching this level or closer can never escape back into
our universe, because they would have to move faster than light to ex-
tricate themselves from the clutches of the central object. The spher-
ical surface at the Schwarzschild radius therefore divides the exterior
universe from the inaccessible, interior region. Someone finding him-
self just outside of this surface can potentially move to larger radii
and escape without having to attain light speed. But below this sur-
face, even light cannot escape. The interior region is consequently
black, and objects that produce a spacetime with a Schwarzschild ra-
dius reachable by infalling matter (or light) are called black holes, and
their “surface” is known as the event horizon.
Thinking back to the previous section, we can now under-
stand why neutron stars are such intriguing objects. Digesting a Sun’s
worth of mass within their 10-kilometer girth, these objects boast a
Schwarzschild radius, 2GM/c2, of about 3 kilometers, and hovering
tantalizingly close to the point of no return, they are primed for any
upheaval associated with the additional collapse of fresh material that
would drive the entire system into oblivion. Astrophysicists believe
that this occurs when two more Sun’s worth of matter have fallen
in. The Schwarzschild radius will by then have grown to 9 kilome-
ters, engulfing the anticipated highly compressed size of the new star.
After an event horizon forms, it hardly matters what else accretes to-
ward the dark object. Scaling as 2GM/c2, its Schwarzschild radius only

56 the edge of infinity
gets bigger as more mass pours in, eventually reaching solar-system
proportions when a billion Suns will have funneled into the pit.
None of the other issues we have explored previously – the exist-
ence of extra dimensions or the indistinguishability of like particles –
can prevent this from happening, though it is an enduring mystery
why all the “physics” associated with the collapse of matter and the
eventual formation of its event horizon takes place before the object
has grown to no more than a handful of solar masses. After all, the
gap in mass between objects of this size, and those throbbing with the
power of a billion Suns at the edge of the visible universe, is quite
enormous. But at least we now recognize why this disparity exists –
it is yet another manifestation of the Hierarchy Problem.
3.5
rotating black holes
Schwarzschild’s remarkable achievement would have retained its piv-
otal significance even to this day, had it not been for another break-
through solution to the equations of general relativity that eventually
eclipsed it. Fifty years after the first formulation of spacetime in a grav-
itational field, Roy Kerr’s impassioned pursuit of a more appropriate
spacetime surrounding a rotating black hole finally paid off.
Most objects in the universe spin at least a little because it is
virtually impossible to assemble an aggregate of matter with compo-
nents that move radially inward. Sideways motion is so prevalent in
nature that it often functions as a powerful diagnostic of the forces
that shape the various concentrations of mass (see Chapter 2). To form
a nonrotating star, all of the sideways motion in the gaseous crucible
where it condenses must somehow be removed. Otherwise, that side-
ways motion would imprint itself on the compressed object, just as a
spinning figure skater speeds up when she pulls in her arms.
This phenomenon can produce furiously spinning entities when
their progenitors collapse into ultracompact volumes. Should our Sun
approach old age as a white dwarf, shrinking by a factor of 100 in
size, its current rotational cycle of 26 days would shorten into a pe-
riod of only 4 minutes. And if it were to condense a thousand times

the black hole spacetime 57
more – cascading into a neutron star – it would then rotate several
hundred times per second.
Black holes are born spinning. They grow with the additional
acquisition of matter throughout their existence, and absorb whatever
sideways motion filters across their event horizon. Astronomers be-
lieve that eventually everything near this surface of no return may be
moving sideways at nearly the speed of light. Even a black hole with
the mass of 100 million Suns and a circumference stretching over
150 million kilometers, could be rotating with a period of only one
hour and three-quarters!
Schwarzschild’s metric cannot handle this because a rotating
black hole impacts the spacetime around it in unexpected and chal-
lenging ways. It is no longer possible to say that d2/f = (ct)2 f, for the
same reason that a mother watching her son jumping onto a merry-go-
round cannot measure the total distance he covers by simply counting
his steps. Though she may still be able to monitor the passage of time t
by tracking the ticks on her watch, the actual distance d that her son
travels is now augmented by the merry-go-round’s sideways motion,
which carries him along for the ride.
Roy Kerr’s solution to the equations of general relativity shows
that the spacetime itself, like water in a whirlpool, swirls around the
black hole with a speed wedded to the latter’s spin, though decreas-
ing with distance from the center. Physicists call this effect “frame
dragging,” meaning that the spacetime itself and all its contents are
forced into co-rotation with the source of gravity, even if objects in
that frame are completely stationary relative to the space itself. This
is quite a bizarre concept, and difficult to accept at face value, for it
seems to imply that even if we could somehow place a particle with
zero sideways motion in the vicinity of a spinning black hole, the
fact that the underlying spacetime is rotating means that the particle
would still appear to be moving sideways from the perspective of a
distant observer.
The phenomenon of a rotating spacetime is very interesting
indeed and may be the cause of several peculiar characteristics of

58 the edge of infinity
supermassive black holes. Evidently, this spinning effect may actually
make it easier for matter to resist the inward pull of gravity, since it
has more sideways motion to lose before succumbing to its inevitable
collapse. In addition, the rotation axis provides a virtually permanent
anchor to which everything else in quasars and active galactic nuclei
may be referenced. Another cursory look at Figs. 1.2 and 1.8 convinces
us that the highly entrained stream of plasma ejected from the center
of each object represents a very stable, long-lived activity. For a su-
permassive black hole, the most secure dynamic in the long run is its
axis of rotation, and these magnificent ultra-thin plumes are nature’s
way of showing us the direction of that spin.
The recent launch of several powerful X-ray satellites is pro-
viding astronomers with additional compelling evidence for the exist-
ence of rotation in black holes. One of these missions, a spaced-based
X-ray telescope with a multiple-mirror design – hence its early des-
ignation as the XMM facility – was launched from French Guiana
by the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA in December 1999.
Carrying three advanced X-ray components with the light-collecting
ability to detect millions of objects, XMM-Newton (as it is now called)
is far more sensitive than any previous X-ray instrument. Already,
it has richly rewarded investigators using it with the discovery of
what appears to be a rapidly spinning, 100-million-solar-mass black
hole in the heart of MCG-6–30–15, a galaxy 130 million light-years
away.
From Earth, MCG-6–30–15 doesn’t look particularly unusual –
it hasn’t even been endowed with a recognizable name, like the Milky
Way, or Andromeda. It is a lenticular, lens-shaped aggregate of stars
lacking the eye-pleasing glistening spiral arms gracing our own galaxy.
But XMM-Newton sees something else; peering into the nucleus of
this structure, it detects the X-rays produced by hot, glowing gas
squeezing into the black hole.12
12 This work was carried out by an international team of astronomers using the
ESA/NASA satellite XMM-Newton (see Wilms et al., 2001).

the black hole spacetime 59
X-rays are much more energetic than visible light, and are often
produced when particles collide or are otherwise heated to very high
temperatures. For example, dentists can create an image of your teeth
using X-rays emerging from a machine that sprays a metal target with
a beam of accelerated particles. The ensuing mel´ee produces a pinball
cascade of electrons trapped inside their atoms as they jump from one
level to the next, shedding radiation with every bounce. The excited –
though trapped – electrons in an iron target sometimes lose a pre-
cise 6.4 kilo-electron volts of energy with their jump. Something very
similar happens with the gas swirling about the black hole, except
that the projectiles are now very energetic photons crashing into free-
ﬂoating iron atoms. The result is the re-emission of X-ray light with
the same precise energy of 6.4 kilo-electron volts, easily detectable
with XMM-Newton.
But astronomers do not see these photons right at 6.4 kilo-
electron volts because the iron atoms in MCG-6–30–15 are moving.
That is actually even better, because the X-rays are Doppler-shifted,
like a radar beam reﬂecting off a speeding car. The radar waves return
to the monitoring device more frequently if the car is moving toward
the policeman; less often if it is receding. The X-radiation arriving
at Earth from MCG-6–30–15 is therefore shifted toward the blue end
of the spectrum (i.e., to higher energies) and intensified on the side
of the accretion disk (see Chapter 2) that is moving toward us; it is
red-shifted toward lower energies on the side that is moving away.
The signal that is reaching us now from MCG-6–30–15 left its
source during Earth’s early Cretaceous Period, some 130 million years
ago. In June 2000, some of it entered the open hatch at one end of
XMM-Newton, glanced off highly polished gold mirrors, and came to
a focus onto a silicon wafer at the other end of the spacecraft, 25 feet
away. These X-ray photons carried with them some very startling
information that was quickly deciphered by the investigators, though
even they could not believe what their early analysis was telling them.
The X-ray glow of those iron atoms, they found, is so intense that
compression by gravity alone could not possibly explain it. Moreover,

60 the edge of infinity
the X-ray photons are Doppler-shifted to such a degree that they must
have originated much closer to the center of the black hole than ex-
pected simply on the basis of the Schwarzschild metric. Only the
additional support from the sideways motion induced by a rotating
spacetime could allow the iron atoms to get so close to the event
horizon without being catastrophically drawn in. The supermassive
black hole in MCG-6–30–15 must evidently be rotating very rapidly.
And if these atoms are radiating with uncommon brightness, some-
thing other than gravity must be heating them.
For several decades now, theorists have been wondering whether
it may be possible to tap into the rotational energy of the swirling
spacetime and convert it into some of the universe’s most spectacular
displays – the enormous outpouring of light seen from quasars (see
Fig. 1.2) and the jets of radiant gas that shoot out of certain active
galaxies at near light speed. The basic principle behind this was actu-
ally discovered in 1831 by the English chemist and physicist Michael
Faraday (1791–1867). Faraday had a broad range of interests, includ-
ing the condensation of gases, metallurgy, optical illusions, acoustics,
and the conservation of energy. Many of his discoveries are consid-
ered to have been of groundbreaking importance: electrostatic induc-
tion (1838), the relationship between electricity and magnetism (1838)
and between electricity and gravity (1851), hydroelectricity (1843), and
atmospheric magnetism (1851).
In 1831, he discovered induced current in his best-known experi-
ment, where a galvanometer showed the existence of current in a coil
wrapped around a current-carrying metal ring. This is the principle
underlying what was later to be known as the transformer. Later that
year, he approached his electric motor from the other direction, hy-
pothesizing that a moving magnet could produce an electric current,
thereby creating the first dynamo (or generator).
The accretion disk surrounding the black hole in MCG-6–30–15
contains charged particles that generate a magnetic field when they
move. In 1977, Roger Blandford and Roman Znajek of the University

the black hole spacetime 61
of Cambridge proposed that the infalling particles and their magnetic
field lines plunge into the black hole together, so these lines protrude
from the event horizon like quills on a porcupine. But this is just like
the setup employed by Faraday in his experiment, albeit on a much
grander scale, with a magnetic field moving through an electrical con-
ductor. The spinning black hole induces a rotation in the surrounding
spacetime and moves the magnetic field lines around it, creating volt-
ages (see Fig. 3.2). Unlike Faraday’s tabletop experiment, however,
these voltages can be prodigiously large – the voltage difference be-
tween the poles of the black hole and its equator may be billions of
trillions of volts.
This looks like a paradox at first because energy seems to be
extracted from the black hole, but the resource tapped by this cosmic
generator was never actually swallowed in the first place. Rather, it
was stored in the spacetime whirlpool outside the event horizon. The
magnetic field lines function as wires in an enormous electric circuit
that thread this rotating region, rendering the black hole itself the gen-
erator. It may be thought of as an enormous ﬂywheel, slowing down
ever so slightly as the magnetic field lines ﬂing electrically charged
particles into distant space. Like rubber bands, they get twisted up and
then snap back, repeating this cycle over and over again, producing a
pulsating ejection of particles and energy.
Some of this pyrotechnic display is probably what ends up as
narrow streams of energized gas that emerges from the cores of certain
galaxies at more than 99 percent the speed of light, penetrating several
million light-years into intergalactic space, and then splattering into
giant luminous lobes (see Fig. 1.8). The rest of the liberated energy
presumably heats up the gas surrounding the black hole, producing
the uncommonly bright iron X-ray emission detected from MCG-6–
30–15 by XMM-Newton.
The curious thing right now is why MCG-6–30–15 itself does
not have any discernible jets. For an active galaxy it is relatively quiet.
It does, however, have an unusually bright ring of X-ray emitting iron

62 the edge of infinity
around its nuclear girth. As we have seen, the most plausible origin
for this light is Faraday’s electromagnetic generator powered by the
spinning black hole. Perhaps there exists a “valve” not yet recognized
that regulates how much of the tapped energy is partitioned into the
outpouring of energized particles and the local heating of orbiting gas.
We will no doubt hear more in the coming years from astrophysicists
working on this fascinating problem.

4
Formation of supermassive
black holes
Though some Hubble images of distant galaxies feature destructive
collisions that could trigger quasar activity, others show that many
normal, undisturbed aggregates of stars are oblivious to the cosmic
thunder within their midst. This is an indication that a variety of
mechanisms – some quite subtle – may be responsible for igniting a
quasar. Whatever the formative process is, however, these supermas-
sive objects seem to have spared their hosts from any obvious damage,
so their prodigious outpouring of matter and radiation may be a short-
lived phenomenon.1 Still, this observation is not sufficient to guide
astronomers toward the identification of a coherent, single pattern of
quasar birth and growth.
For years, astrophysicists concerned with the nature of super-
massive black holes have been asking themselves a cosmological
“chicken and the egg” question: “Which came first, the gargantuan pit
of closed spacetime, or the lively panorama of gilded stars and glowing
gas that we call a galaxy?”
Prior to a remarkable recent discovery that now seems to have
answered this question for the majority of cases, the evidence in favor
of black holes appearing first was anchored by the telling observa-
tion that the number of quasars peaked 10 billion years ago, early in
the universe’s existence. The light from galaxies, on the other hand,
originated much later – after the cosmos had aged another 2 to 4 bil-
lion years. Unfortunately, both measurements are subject to uncer-
tainty, and no one can be sure we are measuring all of the light from
quasars and galaxies, so this argument is not quite compelling. But
1 As we shall see in Chapter 5, supermassive black holes sometimes gulp down matter
at such a high rate that the ensuing compression squirts some of it out before the gas
can all be absorbed through the event horizon.

64 the edge of infinity
astronomers do see quasars as far out as they can look, and the most
distant among them tend to be the most energetic objects in the uni-
verse, so at least some supermassive black holes must have existed at
the very beginning of all things.
Not to be outdone, the proponents for galaxies appearing first
point to images such as Fig. 1.5, which show enormous systems of
stars and gas assembling from the merger of smaller structures – yet
no quasar is visible in its vicinity. Perhaps not every collision feeds a
black hole or, what is more likely, at least some galaxies must have
formed first.
Astrophysicists are now concentrating their attention on three
prominent scenarios for the creation of supermassive black holes in
the universe. In every case, growth occurs when matter plummets
into the bottomless pit of contorted spacetime, either following the
collapse of massive gas clouds, or via the catabolism of smaller black
holes in collisions and mergers.
4.1
primordial seeds
All of the structure in the universe traces its beginnings to a brief era
shortly after the Big Bang. Very few “fossils” that scientists can use to
unravel the mystery of the early universe remain from this period;
one of the most important is the cosmic microwave background
radiation – the afterglow left over from this immeasurably hot, chaotic
genesis. In the theory of the Big Bang, most of the hydrogen was dis-
sociated into freely ﬂoating protons and electrons, forming a hot sea
of charges and currents coupled to electric and magnetic fields. All
particles and radiation were in equilibrium with each other, collid-
ing frequently and exchanging energy liberally; matter and radiation
behaved as a single ﬂuid.
The rapid expansion that ensued lowered the matter density
and temperature, and about one month after the Big Bang, the rate
at which light was created and annihilated could no longer keep up
with the thinning plasma. The radiation and matter began to fall out
of equilibrium with each other, forever imprinting the conditions of

formation of supermassive black holes 65
that era onto the photons that reach us to this day from all directions
in space.2 The very existence of the cosmic microwave background
radiation appears to rule out the steady state model of the universe, for
which changes occur without a gradient in time, so that any one step
in the evolution of the cosmos would look like any other. This picture
is inconsistent with the background radiation since the universe today
does not contain the type of environment required to produce it.
The all-pervasive microwave background radiation was discov-
ered serendipitously in 1965, but its story begins many years earlier.
In 1934, not long after Hubble discovered the expansion of the uni-
verse, Richard Tolman (1881–1948) was a professor of chemistry at
CALTECH, though his interest had already started to drift away from
physical chemistry, toward cosmology. Early in his career, he had
demonstrated that the electron was the charge-carrying particle in
metals and even determined its mass, but he was best known later in
life for the masterful treatise he published that year – Relativity, Ther-
modynamics, and Cosmology – which has since introduced numerous
students to the intricacies of general relativity. The final paragraph of
that formidable work3 is reproduced here, for it illustrates not only
his approach to science and philosophy, but perhaps best encapsulates
the essence of what cosmology is all about:
It is appropriate to approach the problems of cosmology with
feelings of respect for their importance, of awe for their vastness,
and of exultation for the temerity of the human mind in
attempting to solve them. They must be treated, however, by the
detailed, critical, and dispassionate methods of a scientist.
As the universe evolved, Tolman explained, its temperature
would have dropped and its photons would have been redshifted by
the cosmological expansion to longer wavelengths. The first reliable
2 An excellent, though somewhat technical, account of the early history of the universe
may be found in Linde (1990).
3 Richard Tolman’s book has been reissued by Dover Publications and is again finding
a significant readership among those interested in the history of cosmology.

66 the edge of infinity
prediction of the radiation temperature was made years later, by
George Gamow, Ralph Alpher, and Robert Herman,4 who were in-
vestigating the idea that the chemical elements might have been syn-
thesized by thermonuclear reactions in the primeval fireball. By the
present epoch, they estimated, the radiation temperature would have
dropped to very low values, as low as 5 degrees above absolute zero.
Thinking back to the period between 1930 and 1965, during
which Hubble’s cosmology was finding its roots, historians could not
be faulted for viewing this development as the quintessential exam-
ple of how dislocated and serendipitous discoveries congeal into a
scientific discipline only with the unhindered perspective and focus-
ing power of hindsight. The cosmic microwave background radiation,
it turns out, was actually discovered – though not recognized – well
before Gamow, Alpher, and Herman began tinkering with thermonu-
clear reactions in primeval fireballs. It was rediscovered by accident
in 1965, again escaping proper identification, but we will return to
this in a moment.
In 1940, World War II had just begun its rage of excesses in
Europe when Andrew McKellar, a 30-year-old astronomer working
at the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in British Columbia,
Canada, pointed his telescope toward the bright star zeta Ophiuchi.
He was trying to prove a conjecture made earlier by Pol Swings and
L´eon Rosenfeld in Belgium that several unidentified features of the
radiation produced by the interstellar medium were probably due to
simple diatomic molecules. One can think of these particles as tiny
dumb-bells – two side lobes connected with an intermediate spring.
Absorbing light and colliding with other matter, these molecules can
either vibrate back and forth or swivel about an axis of rotation, in
each case giving off the telltale radiative signature of their motion.
Not only did McKellar confirm the existence of these excited
molecules in the medium between the stars, but in the process also
4 These individuals published several papers on this subject, some as co-authors, others
separately. Two key reports were published by Nature in 1948, one by Gamow and
the second by Alpher and Herman.

formation of supermassive black holes 67
made his most important contribution to science – he discovered an
in situ thermometer to measure the temperature of space. Each
diatomic molecule rotates with an energy commensurate with the
radiative heat it absorbs from its environment – the higher the temper-
ature, the faster it spins. By comparing the number of tiny dumb-bells
rotating with a variety of energies, McKellar deduced a “rotational”
temperature of 2.3 Kelvin for the gas in the interstellar medium.5
After a ﬂurry of papers in 1941, McKellar seems to have written
nothing more on this subject, and passed away in May 1960. He un-
fortunately never realized the significance of his work, which would
not find contextual meaning for at least another five years.
The subsequent development of experimental cosmology owes
thanks to the commercialization of space for facilitating the next se-
ries of advances – starting with yet another disconnected discovery.
Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson had been employed by Bell Labs in
Crawford, New Jersey, to use a sensitive microwave horn radiometer
as a link to the early Telstar telecommunications satellite. Bell Labs
eventually decided to abandon this business in 1963, freeing Penzias
and Wilson – radio astronomers by training – to recycle the radiometer
for use in more fundamental scientific investigations. Shortly there-
after, while studying the radio emission from the Cassiopeia A super-
nova remnant, they detected a uniform source of noise that at first
seemed to be produced by the apparatus. It took many months of
checking and rechecking the equipment and its electronics, including
the removal of a bird’s nest from the horn, to convince themselves
that the signal was actually coming from the sky.
Ironically, a group at Princeton University was just about ready
to test its own receivers in a search for the cosmological radiation,
and the frustration felt by Penzias and Wilson was alleviated a few
months later when their discovery was confirmed by the Princeton
researchers. Penzias and Wilson published their result in a very brief
5 This was quite a remarkable achievement, considering that the best value we have
now, six decades later, is 2.73 Kelvin. See McKellar (1941).

68 the edge of infinity
paper6 with the unassuming title “A Measurement of Excess Antenna
Temperature at 4080 Mc/s.” Beautifully complementing this histori-
cal measurement, the Princeton group published a companion paper
explaining its cosmological significance. In 1978, Arno Penzias and
Robert Wilson won the Nobel Prize in physics for their report, be-
lieved to be one of the shortest ever to be so honored.
Cosmology had finally merged into the mainstream of science,
and the cosmic microwave background radiation could now be probed
for the fossilized treasures waiting to be discovered. Astronomers
hoped that they would eventually understand why the universe has
structure, why galaxies formed, and how supermassive black holes
were granted a license to grow. Theorists realized quickly that ﬂuc-
tuations in the temperature of the cosmological radiation would be a
reﬂection of the initial perturbations in density that presumably grew
into the mass condensations seen later in the aging universe. Given
such enthusiasm, it is not surprising now that the initial estimates
of how large these perturbations would be – one part in a hundred –
were greatly exaggerated. This level of sensitivity was attained by the
improving instrumentation after only a few years, and the background
radiation still seemed to be uniform on that scale.
The ensuing quarter of a century saw a rather curious struggle
to pin down the temperature anisotropies, in which theorists con-
tinually revised their estimates downward to keep ahead of the ex-
perimenters’ increasingly stringent upper limits. As far as they could
tell, astronomers still saw what appeared to be a uniform radiation
field. And this caused quite a stir when the limit reached the level
of one part in a thousand. With ﬂuctuations this small, said the the-
orists, density perturbations associated with ordinary matter – the
stuff of which we are made – would not have had sufficient time
to evolve freely into the nonlinear structures we see today. Only a
gravitationally dominant dark-matter component could then account
6 See Penzias and Wilson (1965); the companion paper was published by Dicke et al.
(1965) in the same journal.

formation of supermassive black holes 69
for the strong condensation of mass into galaxies and supermassive
black holes. The thinking behind this was that whereas the cosmic
microwave background radiation interacted with ordinary matter, it
would retain no imprint at all of the dark matter constituents in the
universe. The nonluminous material could therefore be condensed
unevenly (sometimes said to be “clumped”) all the way back to the
Big Bang and we simply wouldn’t know it.
Astrophysicists know of at least three reasons why ﬂuctua-
tions in the density of ordinary matter should produce patches in the
observed intensity (or temperature) of the cosmic microwave back-
ground radiation. The first is simply a change in the intrinsic tempera-
ture of the plasma where the radiation is produced. Gas heats up when
it gets compressed, and the fractional temperature change equals the
fractional density perturbation. Second, clumps of gas that are moving
toward or away from us will Doppler-shift the microwave radiation
they produce, just as the disk in MCG-6–30–15 (see Section 3.5) is
apparently Doppler-shifting the X-rays produced near its event hori-
zon. Third, a clumping of matter in the early universe would have
produced variations in local gravity, so the cosmic radiation passing
through these peaks and valleys would have undergone myriad inten-
sifications and degradations along the way. (Incidentally, this would
apply to dark matter ﬂuctuations as well, but the effect is not as large
as the others.)
So how far down in sensitivity did astronomers have to go before
they could actually see these fossilized patches in the sky? Finally, in
1992, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite detected the
much anticipated ﬂuctuations, bringing some measure of relief to the
rapidly growing number of cosmologists.7 In the all-sky map shown in
Fig. 4.1, the temperature of the background radiation is displayed on
a scale such that red regions are 0.0002 Kelvin hotter than the cold re-
gions, shown in blue. Discounting the red equator in this image, which
represents primarily the microwave radiation produced within our
7 See Smoot and Davidson (1993).

70 the edge of infinity
own galaxy, we are witnessing ﬂuctuations that remarkably trace the
variations in matter density imprinted in the early universe, shortly
after the Big Bang.
Producing this image required a very careful subtraction of other
effects associated with the satellite’s motion through the cosmos. Its
velocity about the Earth, the Earth about the Sun, the Sun about the
galaxy, and the galaxy through the universe, also make the cosmic
microwave background radiation seem more intense (or hotter) – by
about one part in 1000 – in the direction of motion compared to the
reverse. The magnitude of this effect, arising from a Doppler-shift,
gives astronomers the opportunity of determining the velocity of our
local group of galaxies relative to the underlying fabric of space itself.
We are apparently drifting with a speed of 600 kilometers per second
with respect to the general universal expansion in our neighborhood.
The COBE satellite was equipped with instrumentation that
could measure not only the sense of a forward–backward asymmetry,
but could also uncover tiny ﬂuctuations on angular scales in the sky
that correspond to a distance of about 1 billion light-years. This is
still larger than the largest material structures astronomers see in the
cosmos, but is nonetheless adequate for them to confirm the notion
that the early universe was not perfectly homogeneous. The patches
of color we see in Fig. 4.1 represent temperature ﬂuctuations that
amount to no more than one part in 100 000 – hardly greater than
the accuracy of the measurements. However, the angular variations
appear to differ statistically from random noise, and so these represent
the first evidence for a departure from exact isotropy that theoretical
cosmologists have long predicted to be the seeds of structure in the
universe.
On scales much smaller than this, inhomogeneities in the cos-
mic microwave background radiation would have also been produced
by “echoes” of the Big Bang. Matter moving at the speed of sound
had sufficient time, before protons and electrons combined to form
hydrogen and helium, to move the distance spanned by an angle of

formation of supermassive black holes 71
about 1 degree of arc on the sky.8 The ensuing oscillations reverber-
ated across the universe, like the sound waves piercing the air after an
explosion. The temperature variations resulting from this process are
called “acoustic” ﬂuctuations, and the scale associated with how far
a sound wave moves from the beginning of the Big Bang to when hy-
drogen recombines is known as the “sonic” horizon. At the time of
writing, several observational campaigns have reported the prelimi-
nary results of their high-resolution mapping of the cosmic microwave
background radiation and the results are consistent with models of the
early universe.
Incidentally, there is a very important ﬂip side to the fact that
astronomers have had an incredibly difficult time seeing ﬂuctuations
in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The fact that it ex-
hibits such a high degree of isotropy represents both an aesthetic grat-
ification and a difficulty for the simplest theories. Such homogeneity
and isotropy are difficult to explain because of the “light-horizon”
constraint. Look up at the sky and imagine being able to sense the
microwave radiation coming at you from two opposite sides of the
universe. Traveling at the speed of light, the photons are just now
arriving at Earth from the distant hot plasma that spawned them.
Thus, the matter on one side of the sky could not possibly have
had time to communicate with its counterpart on the opposite side –
they are beyond each other’s light horizon. So how is it possible
that all of the hot plasma in the early universe could “know” to
have the same temperature with a precision approaching one part in
100 000?
The answer seems to have been provided by the so-called inﬂa-
tionary model of cosmology, in which the early universe underwent
8 The principal groups that have thus far reported their results are the BOOMERanG
experiment (Balloon Observations Of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and
Geomagnetics), the MAXIMA balloon-borne experiment, and the Mobile Anisotropy
Telescope (MAT) at Cerro Toco, Chile. These discoveries have been reported by Miller
et al. (1999), de Bernardis et al. (2000), and Hanany et al. (2000).

72 the edge of infinity
an exponential growth in size.9 The essential element of this model
is that there exists a particle whose nature changes with temperature.
As the universe expanded and the temperature dropped, the theory
goes, the energy density stored in the vacuum of space did not change
because of the presence of an ever increasing number of these enti-
ties. If correct, the effect of this particle proliferation on the expansion
of the universe was considerable, leading to an exponential growth
in size – in essence, an inﬂation. Eventually, this energy was trans-
formed into the thermal motion of matter, and the universe again
became extremely hot, after which its evolution would be described
by the standard hot universe theory, with the important refinement
that the initial conditions for the subsequent expansion of the hot
universe were determined by processes that occurred earlier, during
the period of inﬂation. The inﬂationary model of cosmology still con-
tains several unresolved issues, and variants are now appearing that
address some of the remaining problems. Nonetheless, the nearly per-
fect isotropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation shows
that the entire observable universe had to be causally connected prior
to the time at which the radiation decoupled from matter, and this is
strong evidence for an earlier period of inﬂation.
The first billion years of evolution following the Big Bang must
have been quite a show, with the various players all jostling for pri-
macy and lasting inﬂuence on the structure we see today. The issue of
how the ﬂuctuations in density, mirrored by the uneven cosmic mi-
crowave background radiation, eventually condensed into supermas-
sive black holes and galaxies is a topic of ongoing research and vigorous
debate. It is one of the most important questions in science, dealing
with the fundamental contents of the universe, and possibly what pro-
duced the Big Bang and what came before it. As we shall see shortly,
the evidence now points to a coeval history for these two dominant
classes of objects – supermassive black holes and galaxies – though
9 The foundations for this theory were provided by individuals such as Starobinsky
(1980) and Guth (1981). See also Linde (1990), who includes a summary of his early
work on this subject in 1979–81.

formation of supermassive black holes 73
as we have already noted, at least some of the former must have ex-
isted well before anything else. So how did they come about?
An interesting idea being pursued by Stuart Shapiro and his col-
laborators at the University of Illinois in Urbana/Champaign10 is that
the first supermassive objects formed from the condensation of dark
matter alone, without the participation of “ordinary” matter; only
later would these seed black holes have imposed their inﬂuence on
the latter. But this dark matter has to be somewhat peculiar, in the
sense that its constituents must be able to exchange heat with each
other. As long as this happens, a fraction of its elements evaporate
away from the condensation, carrying with them the bulk of the en-
ergy, and the rest collapse and create an event horizon. The net result
is that the inner core of such a clump forms a black hole, leaving the
outer region and the extended halo in equilibrium about the central
object. Over time, ordinary matter gathers around it, eventually form-
ing stars, planets, and life – which then begins to make us wonder
about the meaning of it all.
The problem with ordinary matter collapsing to form the first
supermassive black holes on its own is that initially it was simply
not sufficiently clumped, as revealed by the frailty of the ﬂuctuations
appearing in Fig. 4.1. Perhaps this material formed the first stars, and
then more stars, eventually assembling a swarming cluster of collid-
ing timebombs. Over time, the inner core of such an assembly would
have collapsed due to the evaporation of some of its members and
the ensuing loss of energy into the extended halo, just as the dark
matter did.11 It only takes a small black hole to start the process
of coagulation. Estimates show that, once formed, an object such as
this can double its mass every 40 million years so, over the age of
the universe, even a modestly appointed dark pit could have grown
10 Some highly relevant publications dealing with this train of thought include those
by Zel’dovich and Podurets (1965), Shapiro and Teukolsky (1992), and Balberg and
Shapiro (2002). See also Umemura, Loeb, and Turner (1993) and Eisenstein and Loeb
(1995).
11 The earliest proposal for such a process seems to have been made by Lynden-Bell
and Wood (1968). See also Quinlan and Shapiro (1990) and Haehnelt and Rees (1993).

74 the edge of infinity
into a gargantuan billion-solar-mass object patrolling the cosmic
frontier.
Some surprisingly compelling evidence that this scenario must
have operated in the early universe has been uncovered recently by the
Hubble Space Telescope (see Fig. 4.2). Globular clusters contain the
oldest known stars. Assembled over 12 billion years ago, many of
these objects are truly the fossilized record of the earliest era of galaxy
formation. Probing the stellar dynamics of G1, a globular cluster or-
biting the Andromeda galaxy, the Hubble Space Telescope identified a
20 000-solar-mass black hole lurking in its center. This object did not
grow into megalithic proportions due to the paucity of other matter in
its vicinity. Many of its brethren, however, possibly endowed with a
more favorable disposition, could very well have grown exponentially
before the universe thinned out from expansion.12
In either case, the evidence no longer points to these mecha-
nisms as being solely responsible for the creation of the millions of
supermassive black holes sprinkled throughout the universe – indeed,
most of them could not have formed in isolation, but neither could
their host galaxies.
4.2
galaxy types
Galaxies change with time. Some scar with age; others collide, merge,
and recycle into bigger, bolder arrangements. Many of the earliest cru-
cibles of star formation may have looked like the globular cluster G1
in Fig. 4.2. But the sideways motion of gas condensing out of the pri-
mordial ﬂuctuations (see Fig. 4.1) would not have been easily lost,
so rotation was a defining characteristic of many galactic profiles in
the pre-adolescent universe. Probably not recognized at first, the gen-
eral sequence comprising these cosmic communities of huddling stars
constitutes a “timeline” of sorts, whose viability grows as an increas-
ing number of supermassive black holes are linked synergistically to
their hosts.
12 The discovery of an intermediate-size black hole at the center of the globular cluster
known as M15 was reported by van der Marel (1999). The discovery of a black hole
at the nucleus of G1 was announced in 2002 by Karl Gebhardt and his collaborators.

formation of supermassive black holes 75
Since galaxies constitute the bulk of the matter that emits vis-
ible light, their existence was noted long before the advent of powerful
telescopes and photography that would later record and identify them.
Astronomers had observed and cataloged certain nebulous patches and
relatively bright sources of light as far back as the beginning of the
eighteenth century. Indeed, the French comet hunter Charles Messier
carefully described these objects and assembled them in a catalog now
known as the Messier Catalogue, listing over a hundred sources that
we recognize today as galaxies, star clusters, and gaseous nebulae. The
Milky Way’s sister galaxy in Andromeda is the 31st entry on that list,
hence its designation as M31. Since then, several other more com-
prehensive catalogs have been compiled, though as we noted earlier
in this book, it wasn’t until the mid-1920s that Hubble – and sub-
sequently other astronomers – recognized these patches of light as
constituting entirely separate aggregates of stars external to our own
galaxy.
It was Hubble, in fact, who built a classification scheme for
galaxies, arranging them in an orderly progression that we now call
the Hubble sequence. Basing his order on 600 well-defined bright ob-
jects, he organized them starting with essentially spherical and ellip-
tical configurations, through lens-shaped systems to very ﬂat spiral
galaxies. The irregularly shaped ones form a separate class.
Spherical and elliptical galaxies are distinguished from the three
other main classes (lenticular, spiral, and irregular) by their very
smooth and symmetrical texture and no evidence of an internal struc-
ture. They possess a glowing center and their brightness fades towards
the edges. They show no evidence for a disk, or plane, and certainly
no spiral structure like our own galaxy. Centaurus A in Fig. 1.6 is
an almost perfect elliptical structure, though it clearly retains dark
dust lanes presumably left over from an earlier collision and merger
with a smaller spiral galaxy. The constituent stars in these systems
tend to be very old, and very few new stars are currently forming in
them. Astronomers interpret this to mean that, like globular clusters,
elliptical galaxies harbor the first stars to emerge in the nascent uni-
verse. But ellipticals were not born that way; they are by-products of

76 the edge of infinity
hierarchical collisions and mergers of smaller – presumably disklike –
galaxies. As we shall see shortly, the spheroidal stars in the central
bulge of our own galaxy form a collection that is very much like that
of an elliptical galaxy, though significantly smaller in number.
Lenticular and spiral galaxies (two separate classes in Hubble’s
sequence) contain a disk of stars and generally also a central spheroidal
component. Spirals are also distinguished by two or more arms emerg-
ing from opposite sides of a nucleus, winding through the disk and ta-
pering off toward the galaxy’s extremity. Our own galaxy, and that
in Andromeda, are among the most conspicuous members of the
spiral class. Another very beautiful example in this category is the
Sombrero galaxy (M104) in Fig. 4.3, captured recently with the Very
Large Telescope ANTU in Paranal, Chile. It has been determined that
the Sombrero galaxy’s nucleus emits a very potent ﬂux of X-rays, and
coupled with the unusually high stellar velocities measured in its
central region, the X-ray profile leads astronomers to speculate that
a one-billion-solar-mass black hole resides there. This galaxy is also
notable for its dominant nuclear bulge, composed primarily of mature
stars; its nearly edge-on disk is composed of stars, gas, and intricately
structured dust. Quite generally, the youngest, brightest stars in disk
galaxies (either lenticular or spiral) tend to emerge in the planar re-
gion and, if present, primarily within the spiral arms. In contrast,
the central hub resembles elliptical galaxies in content and stellar
demography.
In recent years, astronomers have discovered over 10 000 pe-
culiar galaxies that do not fit into any of Hubble’s classes. Many of
these are obviously undergoing collisions (for example, the Anten-
nae galaxies in Fig. 1.5) or are survivors of recent catastrophic events.
Some are members of bound systems connected to each other by
luminous bridges of stars and glowing interstellar matter. Another
small – though critically essential – subgroup of the peculiar category
are galaxies with unusually active cores, displaying a broad range of
phenomena associated with very violent or energetic events in their
nuclei.

formation of supermassive black holes 77
Functioning more as cosmological fossil hunters than scientists
testing current phenomena, astronomers struggle to piece together the
history of how these classes of galaxies came to be. How are they re-
lated to supermassive black holes? How did they form? And what role
did quasars play in galaxy evolution? A decade ago, any attempt to cor-
ral supermassive black holes into an analogous classification scheme
would have produced a rather simple answer – they’re an oddity, an
exception to an otherwise harmonious, galaxy-dominated universe.
Times have changed, and as a prelude to our discussion of their newly
recognized symbiotic co-evolution with galaxies, we shall next con-
sider how prevalent these objects really are.
4.3
the supermassive black hole census
Each of the supermassive black holes we have looked at in this book is
special for one reason or another, either because it was the first quasar
ever discovered (3C 273; see Fig. 1.2), or because it is the nearest radio
galaxy (Centaurus A; see Fig. 1.6), or because it is the active galactic
nucleus with arguably the most spectacular pair of jets and radio lobes
(Cygnus A; see Fig. 1.8). But there are billions of galaxies extending,
as far as we can tell, to the edge of the visible universe, where the
evidence for the existence of supermassive black holes first appears.
How many of these peculiar objects are there, we wonder?
Many astronomers suspect that almost every large normal
galaxy harbors a supermassive black hole at its center, a hypothe-
sis for which supporting evidence is gradually growing. In a recently
completed survey of 100 nearby galaxies using the Very Large Array
radio telescope in New Mexico,13 followed by closer scrutiny with
the Very Long Baseline Interferometry array, at least 30 percent of
this sample showed tiny, compact central radio sources bearing the
unique signature of the quasar phenomenon. Their faint glimmer ap-
pears to be the relic signature of headier days long past, when some of
13 This work was carried out by A. Wilson from the University of Maryland and his
collaborators.

78 the edge of infinity
these objects may have been the powerful beacons shining from the
universe’s epoch of structure formation.
In another notable development, NASA’s Chandra X-ray tele-
scope appears to have settled a long-standing puzzle, dating back to
the early 1960s. The universe, it turns out, is aglow with the faint
murmur of diffuse X-ray light, which fills the entire sky. Using a deep
exposure of a selected piece of the heavens,14 Chandra was able to
resolve at least 80 percent of the X-ray glow into myriads of individ-
ual point sources, suggesting an extrapolated total number of about
70 million across the entire sky. In follow-up studies of some of these
objects, using telescopes to sense their radiation at other wavelengths,
the researchers who carried out these observations concluded that
some are relatively normal galaxies with dust-veiled X-ray-emitting
nuclei – the signature of a central black hole.
Others are very distant quasars, too faint to shine brightly like
those in Fig. 1.2. And the rest are either unknown or not related to su-
permassive black holes. The picture that emerges from surveys such as
these is that the universe is awash with pockets of isolated spacetime.
A subset of them formed very early, probably even before the primor-
dial age when galaxies were first coagulating from the fragmentary
gas clouds condensing out of the Big Bang. Some of them may be true
fossils from the cosmological “Dark Age,” the period extending over
several hundred million years between the cooling of the Big Bang and
the epoch of star formation. However, all of them now seem to reside
in the nuclei of galaxies – it is telling that no isolated supermassive
black hole has ever been found.
Still, the more conservative among us would argue that these
distant points of light are highly suggestive of the presence of super-
massive black holes, but that this conclusion is only tentative until
we actually see them, or deduce their presence from more compelling
evidence, as we did in Chapter 2 for Sagittarius A∗at the galactic center
and for NGC 4258 with its maser-emitting central disk. Spearheading
14 See Mushotzky et al. (2000).

formation of supermassive black holes 79
this approach, John Kormendy at the University of Texas and Doug
Richstone at the University of Michigan, and their collaborators, have
set about the task of meticulously assembling the clues required to
complete the detective work for as many of these objects as is cur-
rently feasible. At the time of writing, direct measurements of super-
massive black holes have been made in over 38 galaxies, based on the
large rotation and random velocities of stars and gas near their centers.
These objects are all relatively nearby because these direct methods
do not work unless we can see the individual stars in motion about
the central source of gravity.
And now the first curious piece of the puzzle emerges – none of
the supermassive black holes have been found in galaxies that lack a
central bulge (see Fig. 4.4). As we have seen, galaxies come in two basic
types (excluding irregulars for now) – those that contain ﬂat, spin-
ning disks, and others that have more nearly spherical bulges that ro-
tate only a little and are comprised mostly of randomly-moving, older
stars. Many galaxies, such as the Milky Way and Andromeda, consist
of a disk and a bulge in the middle. So far, astronomers have found
a supermassive black hole in every galaxy observed that contains a
bulge component, but none in those that only possess a disk and no
central hub. The former may have undergone one or more mergers in
their past, whereas the latter are presumably pristine condensations
of swirling matter untouched since primeval times. Thus, the first
clue we gather from these surveys is that a collision, like that seen
in Fig. 1.5, may have been required to create a central supermassive
object, a process in which the highly-ordered cartwheel structure of
the “bulgeless” galaxies is at least partially disrupted.
Uncovered only recently,15 a second clue now appears to have
clinched the case for a coeval growth of most galaxies with their su-
permassive black holes. Rather than being a destructive inﬂuence
on the universe, the latter appear to have been essential to the very
15 These results were produced by two groups working independently, and reported by
Ferrarese and Merritt (2000), Merritt and Ferrarese (2001), and Gebhardt et al. (2000).

80 the edge of infinity
creation of the structure within which they live. Researchers at the
Rutgers State University of New Jersey and at the University of Texas
in Austin have shown quite convincingly that the mass of the cen-
tral black hole can be predicted with remarkable accuracy simply by
knowing the velocity of stars orbiting within the spheroidal compo-
nent of the host galaxy. Pinpointing the trajectory of a single object
in that maelstrom of light and motion is difficult and impracticable.
Instead, astronomers can measure the accumulated light from a lim-
ited region of the galaxy’s central hub and extract, from the collective
Doppler shift they infer, an average speed of the stars as a group. What
they have found is that the ratio of the black hole’s mass to this average
speed is constant across the whole sample of galaxies they surveyed.
This finding is one of the most surprising and remarkable cor-
relations ever discovered in the study of how the universe acquired
its structure. Taken at face value, one would think there ought not
to be a link between the supermassive black hole and the motion
of stars in the outer reaches of the host galaxy’s bulge, where the
gravitational inﬂuence due to the former is completely nonexistent.
Supermassive black holes, it seems, “know” about the motion of stars
that are too distant to feel their gravity directly. Obviating the simple
naive picture of a ponderous dark pit rampaging aimlessly through
the primeval soup, this tight connection instead compels us to pos-
tulate an entangled history between a central black hole and the bee-
hive stellar activity in its halo. Although they may not be causally
bonded today, they must have had an overlapping genesis in the
past.
It turns out that about 0.1 percent of a galaxy’s luminous mass is
associated with its central black hole. Viewed as an ensemble, these
objects have a density comparable to that expected on the basis of
the observed number of quasars, whose terminal endpoints are now
viewed as being the relatively dormant behemoths lurking in the nu-
clei of otherwise “normal” galaxies. With these facts in hand, and
satisfied that most supermassive black holes and their host galaxies

formation of supermassive black holes 81
grew symbiotically, astrophysicists hypothesize that, once created, a
primordial condensation of matter continues to grow with a direct
feedback on its surroundings. This may happen either because the
quasar heats up its environment and controls the rate at which addi-
tional matter can fall in from its cosmic neighborhood,16 or because
mergers between galaxies affect the growth of colliding black holes
in the same way that they determine the energy (and therefore the
average speed) of the surrounding stellar distribution.
Many astronomers now believe that in the majority of cases, the
merger of galaxies – past or present – were ultimately behind the hier-
archical construction of elaborate galaxies with elliptical, or disk-plus-
bulge, profiles.17 In this paradigm, the small density inhomogeneities
that formed in the dark matter shortly after the Big Bang grew as
the universe expanded, eventually collapsing into relatively small ob-
jects like the G1 globular cluster now in orbit around Andromeda
(Fig. 4.2). Larger galaxies grew with wave upon wave of collisions and
mergers, a process contributing significantly to the variety of shapes
encompassed by the Hubble sequence. As we shall see shortly, de-
tailed numerical simulations of the merger of two spiral galaxies of
about equal mass produce remnant galaxies structurally very similar
to galactic bulges. Meanwhile, the twisting of gravity at the heart of
this encounter drives most of the gas into the middle, where it can
form new stars and feed a central black hole, or a pair of black holes.
The tight correlation between the black-hole mass and the average
speed of the stars in its halo appears to be a direct consequence of this
cosmic cascade.
16 In support of the idea that massive black holes may have formed prior to the epoch
of galaxy definition, Silk and Rees (1998) suggest further that protogalactic star for-
mation would have been inﬂuenced significantly by the quasar’s extensive energy
outﬂows. The ensuing feedback on the galaxy’s spheroidal component could be the
reason we now see such a tight correlation between the mass of the central object
and the stellar velocities much farther out.
17 The consensus among modelers of galaxy formation seems to be that most large
galaxies have experienced at least one major merger during their lifetime. See “How
are Galaxies Made?” Physics World, May 1999, 25–30.

82 the edge of infinity
4.4
galaxy collisions
The quasar QSO 1229 + 204 is a good fraction of the way across the
observable universe, yet it is so bright that only the high resolving
power of the Hubble Space Telescope could separate out its powerful
radiation from the much fainter glow of the host galaxy (see Fig. 1.3).
Remarkably, QSO 1229 + 204 is not only at the core of an unusual
spiral galaxy with a bar across its middle, but it is actually in the pro-
cess of colliding with another, smaller, galaxy. Almost certainly, gas
churned by this collision is being funneled into the active, turbulent
core, where it fuels a supermassive black hole, causing it to shine so
brightly.
We ourselves are active participants in the galaxy collision
game, as we shall soon learn when we next consider the future con-
sequences of Andromeda’s aggressive acceleration toward the Milky
Way. Until very recently, however, the end product of such a galac-
tic catastrophe was still uncertain, given that astronomers had yet
to identify a merger remnant whose origin was clearly two collid-
ing nuclei. That changed abruptly at the end of 2002, when for the
first time, scientists obtained proof that two supermassive black holes
exist together in the same galaxy. Focusing on the core of NGC 6240,
a butterﬂy-shaped galaxy believed to be the product of a collision
between two smaller galaxies some 30 million years ago, NASA’s
Chandra X-ray Observatory produced an image of these two objects
orbiting each other with a separation of only 3000 light-years (see
Fig. 4.5). Several hundred million years from now, their orbit will have
decayed to create an even larger black hole in a spectacular cosmic
ﬂash that will unleash an intense burst of radiation and gravitational
waves.
This breakthrough resulted from Chandra’s ability to clearly dis-
tinguish closely separated objects at great distances, and to therefore
measure the details of the X-radiation from each nucleus. The black-
hole nature of both sources was revealed by the excess number of
high-energy photons each of them produces within the surrounding
hot swirling gas, and by the radiation emitted by free-ﬂoating iron

formation of supermassive black holes 83
atoms, as was the case in the spinning black hole MCG-6–30–15 (see
Chapter 3).
Like the host of the quasar QSO 1229 + 204, NGC 6240 is a
massive galaxy undergoing star formation in its nucleus at an excep-
tionally rapid rate due to the recent collision. The large quantity of
dust and gas driven into the middle during the encounter makes it
difficult to peer deeply into its central region with optical telescopes,
but the X-rays can easily penetrate through the obscuring shroud, pro-
ducing this magnificent view of one of the most dramatic phenomena
in the post-Big-Bang universe. Massive black holes evidently can grow
through the merger of smaller collapsed objects, perhaps even produc-
ing a burst of gravitational waves detectable with future space-borne
instruments.18
Led by their director, Bernard Schutz, scientists from the Max
Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (also known as the Albert
Einstein Institute) in Golm near Potsdam have been simulating graz-
ing collisions of two massive black holes on supercomputers, hoping
to identify the cosmic fingerprint carried by the gravitational waves
emitted during such an encounter. In a galactic merger, the supermas-
sive objects sink rapidly to the center of the fused system because of
the “friction” they experience moving through the surrounding clus-
ter of stars. Losing energy along its trajectory, each black hole drifts
closer and closer to its partner, eventually forming a very tight binary
in the middle.
Looking past the current generation of instruments designed to
detect primarily the radiation produced by these sources, the most
exciting technological frontier to be assailed next is the detection of
gravity waves. Just as two buoys rotating about each other on placid
water produce outwardly seeking undulations, the two orbiting black
18 The discovery of the twin supermassive black holes in the nucleus of NGC 6240 was
based on observations carried out with the Advanced CCD Imaging Spectrometer on
the Chandra satellite by Susan Komossa, Gunter Hasinger, V. Burwitz, and P. Predehl
at the Max-Planck-Institut f ¨ur Extraterrestrische Physik in Germany, J. Kaastra at
the Space Research Organization in the Netherlands, and Y. Ikebe at the University
of Maryland in Baltimore.

84 the edge of infinity
holes distort the surrounding spacetime by periodically raising and
lowering the intensity of gravity. These disturbances probe away from
the system at light speed, spreading throughout the universe and pro-
ducing ripples in the fabric of space. Locally, these would appear as
minute changes in the distance between any two points.
The simulations carried out by the physicists at the Albert
Einstein Institute, and their colleagues at Washington University in
St Louis and the Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum in Berlin, show that during
the last few moments the black holes spiral inward, emitting weak
periodic gravitational signals. The event horizons of the two objects
stretch and, in a matter of milliseconds, coalesce like raindrops. The
strength of the signal, and its frequency, increase rapidly, before dis-
appearing as the oscillations of the unified event horizon damp down
and the final black hole becomes quiet.
These calculations reveal that as much as 1 percent of the total
energy available during the encounter can be converted into gravi-
tational waves. This is thousands of times more than the entire en-
ergy liberated by our Sun during the past 5 billion years. But many of
the biggest crashes in the universe occur so far away that the signals
reaching Earth are extremely weak. The effect here would be to in-
duce oscillations that would jerk masses spaced 1.1 kilometers apart
by one thousandth of the diameter of a proton.
Gravitational waves have never been detected directly, though
the idea that the effect of gravity itself should travel at the speed of
light gained considerable experimental verification in the latter part
of the twentieth century. The binary pulsar PSR 1913 + 16 was seen
to have a decaying orbit, attributed to the loss of energy carried off by
the escaping gravitational waves. The rate at which this energy is lost
depends on the finite speed of propagation, and the orbital changes can
therefore equivalently be viewed as a measure of this velocity. The fact
that this damping occurs at all is a strong indication that something
(i.e., a gravitational wave train) is leaving the system and that it must
be doing so with a finite speed – otherwise, the whole collapse would
occur instantaneously. The actual measurement confirms that the

formation of supermassive black holes 85
speed of gravity is equal to the speed of light to within an accuracy of
1 percent.19
An actual detection of gravitational waves, when compared with
the predictions physicists are now making, would provide direct in-
formation on the masses of the coalescing black holes, their spins,
orientations, and perhaps even their separation. The prospect for mak-
ing such fundamental measurements is one of the primary motiva-
tions behind the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA), a space-
based gravitational-wave telescope currently under development for a
launch after 2010. Ground-based gravitational-wave detectors already
exist, but they are not large enough to detect the long-wavelength grav-
itational undulations produced by binary supermassive black holes.
Consisting of three spacecraft ﬂying in a triangular formation
5 million kilometers apart, LISA would detect a passing gravitational
wave by sensing the stretching and squeezing of the space between
each pair of components. These shifts are very tiny indeed – no more
than a fraction of an atom across – but should be detectable with laser
interferometers. LISA’s sensitivity will be sufficient to detect binary
black hole mergers all the way to the edge of the visible universe. So,
knowing how frequently galaxies collide and merge throughout the
cosmos, astronomers estimate that these spectacular events should
make the instrument ﬂutter about once every couple of years.
4.5
collision of andromeda with the milky way
Assuming our species survives over the next 5 billion years, our de-
scendants should be able to witness one of these cacophonous cata-
strophes firsthand, as the Milky Way collides and then merges with the
galaxy in Andromeda, the Milky Way’s closest major galactic neighbor
(see Fig. 4.6). The remnant, bigger than either of the two participants,
will look nothing like them. Instead, our descendants are likely to
live within an elliptical structure, comprised of elderly stars that will
have survived the transition and a changing of neighborhoods. But
19 For a technical reference on this subject, see Damour (1987).

86 the edge of infinity
this will not be the first such encounter that these two galaxies will
have experienced. In 1991, as the Planetary Camera then on board
the Hubble Space Telescope focused on the nucleus of Andromeda,
astronomers were presented with an unexpected sight – the appear-
ance of not one, but two spots, separated by a mere 30 light-years. A
ﬂurry of subsequent activity with ground-based telescopes confirmed
that two nuclei do indeed exist in this spiral galaxy, and that they are
orbiting each other. Speculation has it that one nucleus is a supermas-
sive black hole, whereas the second is the remnant of a smaller galaxy
disrupted and eaten long ago by Andromeda.
The Milky Way and Andromeda are approaching each other with
a speed of about 480 000 kilometers per hour. Whether we are in
store for a head-on collision, or more of a side swipe that will pro-
long the agonizing encounter prior to the final merger, will depend
on Andromeda’s precise tangential motion across the sky, which as-
tronomers continue to determine ever more precisely as better, more
powerful telescopes are built. The collision itself will take several
billion years to fully run its course, so it would be difficult for any in-
dividual civilization at that time to fully appreciate the grand scale –
in time and space – of the encounter.
Computer simulations, however, do provide a tantalizing view
into how the two galaxies will unravel and ultimately form a giant,
spheroidal aggregate of stars – resembling an elliptical galaxy in the
Hubble sequence. At the present moment, the Andromeda galaxy ap-
pears simply as a spindle-shaped smudge of light in the northern au-
tumn sky. At a distance of 2.2 million light-years – roughly 20 times
the diameter of our Milky Way galaxy – it is four times the width of
the full moon. As the two galaxies approach each other, our descend-
ants will see Andromeda growing ever larger, casting an eerie slither
of glowing light across the heavens.
By the time the two galaxies intersect, the familiar Milky Way
arch across the sky will be joined by a second arch, and this crossing
pattern should last about 100 million years before the two galaxies
engage in their initial retreat. During this time, large clumps of cold

formation of supermassive black holes 87
molecular gas, each measuring hundreds of light-years across, will get
compressed and a burst of new lights will illuminate previously dark-
ened patches of the cosmos. The sky will grow increasingly jumbled
with tattered lanes of dust and gas interspersed among the millions of
brilliant young stars and clusters. The beautiful spiral disks that for
billions of years will have defined the lanes of our galaxy and those of
Andromeda will begin to disintegrate under their mutual gravitational
inﬂuence.
About 40 million years into the collision, a distant observer in
some far-off galaxy will see the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies
very much as we now view NGC 2207 and IC 2163 (see Fig. 4.7). These
two bodies are well into their encounter, as evidenced by the latter’s
tidal tails sweeping stars and gas out 100 000 light-years toward the
right-hand side. Computer simulations of this encounter, carried out
by a team led by Bruce Elmegreen at the IBM Research Division and
Debra Elmegreen at Vassar College, indicate that IC 2163 is swinging
past NGC 2207 in a counterclockwise direction. Like the future colli-
sion between our galaxy and Andromeda, however, the interaction is
not yet over at this stage of the proceedings, for IC 2163 does not have
sufficient energy to escape from the gravitational clutches of its part-
ner, and is destined to be pulled back toward the larger galaxy again
in the future. Trapped in their mutual dance, these two galaxies will
continue to distort and disrupt each other until, billions of years from
now, they will merge into a single, more massive structure.
As they swing past each other, the Milky Way and Andromeda
will survive their initial collision (see Fig. 4.8), though an inexorable
sequence of distortions to their shape will already have begun. After
grazing by our galaxy, Andromeda will take perhaps another 100 mil-
lion years to execute a slow graceful U-turn, before plunging nearly
head-on back into the heart of the Milky Way. Newly created sweep-
ing spiral arms will ﬂing stars and gas into the intergalactic medium,
preserving only the galactic cores for a future round of convulsions (see
Figs. 4.9 and 4.10). With each bounce, an even more spectacular burst
of star formation will then occur, while the efﬂux from supernova

88 the edge of infinity
explosions will drive much of the remaining gas and dust out of the
remnant. Eventually, after 1 to 2 billion years of this drama, the stars
from the two galaxies will intermingle to form a single elliptical
galaxy (see Fig. 4.11).
Any hint of the Milky Way and Andromeda as majestic spiral
galaxies will be gone, and the view our descendants will have should
depend on how the Sun fares. There are two possible fates for our solar
system, depending on where it is located along its galactic orbital tra-
jectory at the time of the collision. In the first case, the Sun may be
caught on a tidal tail and surf its way into the darkness of intergalac-
tic space along with millions of other unfortunate stars. Should this
occur, our solar system would eventually find itself very isolated, sur-
rounded by few stellar neighbors, and the night sky would be very
dark, sprinkled only with fading embers.
In the second case, the Sun instead finds itself catapulted into
the center of the merging traffic, where a great burst of new star for-
mation will be underway. The rate of supernova explosions in this
milieu will be very high at first, perhaps as many as a few per year. So
the nighttime sky should be aglow with the faint light of fading super-
nova shells. Conventional ground-based astronomy would be difficult
under such circumstances, but one doubts that this archaic pursuit
will be necessary by that point! Still, future astronomers would gaze
out onto a starry vault and peer all the way into the core of the newly
minted elliptical galaxy. There would be no indication that once there
were two separate spiral structures threatening to dance the night
away, one called the Milky Way and the other Andromeda by a long
forgotten civilization.
Who knows? By that time astronomers may not have to look
out to the edge of the universe anymore to see quasars in full ﬂight.
The black hole at the center of our Galaxy has a mass of about 3 mil-
lion Suns; its partner in the nucleus of Andromeda is ten times bigger.
Their coalescence and subsequent gleeful accretion of the turbulent
gas churning in the middle of the merger remnant will likely produce
a gargantuan object with the mass of 100 million Suns. And so the

formation of supermassive black holes 89
story of evolution in the universe will continue. Galaxies merge, su-
permassive black holes grow in their crucible of dazzle and panic, and
this one – the one yet to be created in our midst – will ignite with the
power of its brethren now illuminating the universe from the begin-
ning of time. In 5 billion years from now, our descendants may have
to look no farther than the center of the new galaxy, perhaps only
50 000 light-years away, to see a quasar resplendent in its youthful
exuberance.
4.6
middleweight black holes
We will end this chapter on a somewhat speculative note, bearing
on the very latest investigations now being carried out by serious
black-hole hunters. Though the shift in paradigm concerning the ex-
istence of supermassive objects has been overwhelming and virtually
complete, astronomers have always felt uncomfortable with the idea
that black holes seemingly come in only two distinct and unrelated
categories – those produced in supernova explosions, weighing a
mere 10 to 20 solar masses, and the million- to billion-solar-mass
behemoths we have been considering in this book. General relativ-
ity places no limit on the mass of these objects, so where are the
intermediate-size black holes?
Well, scientists are now realizing that middleweights may have
already been found years ago, though lacking proper identification;
their existence is still unconfirmed and hotly debated. When first
discovered, the so-called ultraluminous X-ray sources elicited only
mild interest and interpretative analysis. In the context of stellar-size
objects, however, their brightness is peculiar because 10-solar-mass
black holes pumping out too much radiation prevent the surrounding
matter from accreting onto them – a cosmic version of “biting the hand
that feeds you.” But this problem can easily be alleviated if the under-
lying objects are bigger, since strong gravity can overwhelm the ex-
pulsive power of radiation. If correct, this interpretation suggests that
ultraluminous X-ray sources are intermediate-size black holes with
a mass of 100 to 1000 Suns. Countering this argument, astronomers

90 the edge of infinity
such as Andreas Zezas of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for As-
trophysics, suggest that these may be small objects after all, simply
pumping all their X-rays out into narrow cones, making them look
brighter than they really are.
Understandably, this debate is more than an idle exercise, since
middleweights could in principle merge and grow to become super-
massive black holes in their own right. In a recent survey conducted
with the German-led ROSAT X-ray satellite program, Andrew Ptak
of Carnegie Mellon University and Edward Colbert of Johns Hopkins
looked for these sources in 750 galaxies within 200 million light-years
of Earth and found that roughly one in 35 of them possesses objects as
massive as 100 Suns, some higher.20 But they are typically found away
from the core of the parent galaxy, whereas heavyweights always lurk
right in the middle.
NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory has taken up the challenge
of better defining these peculiar objects, and in the past several years
has uncovered another interesting property. It seems that “starburst”
galaxies have a proportionally higher number of intermediate-size
black holes than do other galaxies. As their name suggests, starburst
galaxies are characterized by an unusually high rate of star formation,
endowing them with an uncommon brightness caused by a high con-
centration of young, massive stars and supernova explosions. Under
such ideal conditions, astronomers believe, numerous 10- to 20-solar-
mass-size black holes should emerge – and ultimately merge – to ac-
count for the higher incidence of middleweights in these systems.
More exciting still was the discovery that in at least one such
galaxy (see Figs. 4.12 and 4.13), several mid-size black holes appear
to be sinking toward the nucleus. The galaxy NGC 253, a relatively
nearby classical starburst galaxy about 10 million light-years from
Earth, gave no prior indication of black-hole activity in its central re-
gion. When Chandra focused on its nucleus, however, it uncovered
20 The comprehensive list of intermediate-size black holes surveyed by ROSAT appears
in Colbert and Ptak (2002).

formation of supermassive black holes 91
10 ultraluminous point sources, three of which are located within
3000 light-years of the middle (see Fig. 4.13). To have three of these
objects confined to such a relatively small volume is very unusual,
suggesting that they may have migrated there from creation sites far-
ther out.21
Thrashing to the center of NGC 253, these three middleweights
may someday coalesce with the central black hole inveigling them to
join in, and then continue to grow even more by accreting matter from
the surrounding medium. In other words, this starburst galaxy may
be transforming itself into a quasar-like object right before our eyes.
But we will have to wait for farther developments to be certain that
ultraluminous X-ray sources are indeed intermediate-size black holes.
21 This work was carried out by Kimberly Weaver of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight
Center, and David Strickland and Timothy Heckman of Johns Hopkins University.
The team observed NGC 253 for 3.5 hours using Chandra’s Advanced CCD Imaging
Spectrometer.

5
Relativistic ejection of plasma
Other than the spectacle of an obscured event horizon quivering be-
fore a bright sheet of background light, the most spectacular black-
hole phenomenon astronomers can witness from the remoteness of
Earth is a relativistic jet of plasma piercing the darkness of inter-
galactic space. Among the most dizzying cosmic displays in nature,
these funnels of energetic particles probe the medium surrounding
roughly one in 20 known supermassive black holes. A prominent jet
was evident on the very first quasar photograph (of 3C 273), and glows
even more brilliantly as a high-energy ray of light in modern Chandra
images (see Fig. 1.2). For the most part, however, black-hole jets mani-
fest themselves in a “parallel” universe – indeed, their ghostly appari-
tions pre-empted the discovery of supermassive black holes by several
decades, though without any portent of what they would later reveal.
And once again, astronomers can thank the telephone company for
facilitating one of the most amazing advances in the history of sci-
ence, on a par with the discovery – six decades later – of the cosmic
microwave background radiation through the commercialization of
space.
Not long after a demonstration that the substance of light be-
haves like a series of waves undulating through time and space,
Guglielmo Marconi (1874–1937) successfully initiated transatlantic
communications in 1901 using wireless radio. The commercial use
of this new technology ﬂourished; radio equipment was installed
on ships – including the RMS Titanic, whose tragedy would have
been greater had not wireless communication with nearby vessels
effected the rescue of 705 passengers – and large telegraph-like com-
panies were created to dispatch a burgeoning torrent of information
from continent to continent. The telephone company realized that

relativistic ejection of plasma 93
shortwave links, operating in the wavelength range of 10 to 100
meters, could be used to carry intercontinental phone calls with-
out the associated expense of laying cable across the ocean ﬂoor.
But as any ham or shortwave listener knows only too well, short-
wave communication is annoyingly hampered by too much static and
noise.
At AT&T’s Bell Labs in New Jersey, the young radio engineer
Karl Guthe Jansky (1905–50) was assigned the task of identifying the
sources of shortwave noise that might interfere with radio voice trans-
missions (see Fig. 5.1). So in 1931 he built a highly directional an-
tenna to receive signals with a wavelength of about 14.5 meters, and
mounted it on a turntable (known whimsically as “Jansky’s merry-go-
round”) that could point in any direction (see Fig. 5.2). After months
of systematic observations, he identified three types of static: nearby
thunderstorms, distant thunderstorms, and a faint steady hiss of un-
known origin.
He spent over a year trying to figure out the nature of the third
type, which rose and fell once a day. Jansky thought for a while that
he was seeing radiation from the Sun but, after a few months, he
could see that the brightest point in his signal kept moving. There was
also that curious and nagging cycle of repetition – the signal rose not
every 24 hours, but every 23 hours and 56 minutes. As most amateur
astronomers know, this is a clue that the source of the radiation is
fixed to the stars rather than the Sun, because Earth’s advance along
its orbit causes points in the firmament to cross the meridian earlier
by 4 minutes every day.
As it turns out, Jansky had discovered radiation concentrated
in the constellation of Sagittarius, along the Milky Way. The origin
of this peculiar radio noise apparently had something to do with the
galactic center, which was already known by then to reside in this
portion of the sky, and his surprising announcement was reported on
the front page of the New York Times on May 5, 1933. Yearning for
a deeper understanding of this mysterious radio glow, Jansky implored
Bell Labs to build a 30-meter dish antenna, but his company had the

94 the edge of infinity
figure 5.1 Karl Jansky, a radio engineer at Bell Telephone Laboratories
in Holmdel, New Jersey, built the first “radio telescope” (see Fig. 5.2) to
search for sources of interference that would impact the burgeoning
field of wireless communications. In the process, he discovered radio
waves arriving from outside Earth’s atmosphere, with the strongest
concentration at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, in the
constellation of Sagittarius. (Image courtesy of NRAO, AUI, and NSF)

relativistic ejection of plasma 95
figure 5.2 Assigned the task of evaluating short waves for use in
transatlantic radio telephone communications, Karl Jansky built this
antenna to receive radio waves with a wavelength of about 14.5 meters.
By mounting it on a turntable, he was able to determine the direction to
any signal. In this way, he discovered that the center of our galaxy, in
the constellation of Sagittarius, produced the strongest concentration of
radio waves, and thereby created the field of radio astronomy. (Image
courtesy of NRAO, AUI, and NSF)
answer they needed about the background static, and their young
engineer was assigned to another project. The world’s first radio as-
tronomer thus ended his scientific career after his very first discovery –
but what an achievement that was!
Though most scientists did not at first appreciate the signif-
icance of Jansky’s demonstration, news finally reached Wheaton,
Illinois, where it inspired Grote Reber, another radio engineer, to study
cosmic radio waves. In the 1930s, Reber applied for jobs with Jansky
at Bell Labs and with assorted astronomical observatories around
the world, but the Great Depression was in full swing, and none of

96 the edge of infinity
them were hiring at the time. So the world’s second radio astronomer
built his own 32-foot-diameter parabolic dish antenna in his backyard,
while working full time for a radio company in Chicago.
Reber found that sparks in automobile engines created too much
interference during the daytime; he therefore spent long hours scan-
ning the heavens at night, and finally produced the first survey of the
sky at radio wavelengths in 1941. The great advances in microwave
technology that had produced radar during the war became available
to astronomers soon after that, and the exploration of the radio uni-
verse – that hidden reality existing in parallel to the one that connects
to our senses – blossomed thereafter.
Showcasing his data as contour maps delineating regions of vary-
ing intensity, Reber not only confirmed Jansky’s discovery that the
brightest part of the radio sky lies toward the center of the Milky Way
in the southern hemisphere, but he also uncovered equally astounding
bright radio sources in other constellations, including one in Cygnus.
We know it today – with immeasurably higher resolution – as the
finest manifestation of relativistic plasma ejection by a supermassive
black hole (see Fig. 1.8).
This discovery of a “parallel” universe was the ´elan vital for the
young field of radio astronomy, whose rapid growth could be mea-
sured by the increasing number of catalogs bursting with ever-fainter
radio sources that could be observed with improving instruments and
sensitivity (see Fig. 5.3). Not all the objects we see in the night sky
emit radio light, nor have all the radio sources detected over the years
been confirmed on optical images. But though the overlap between
the two cosmic maps is incomplete, cross-registration of objects in
several categories is now possible. One of the more significant suc-
cesses in this collation also happens to have been one of the very
first – Cygnus A was identified with what were initially thought to
be two colliding galaxies in 1952, providing not only evidence that
this source was extragalactic, but also that some nonstellar mecha-
nism must be responsible for the prodigious outpouring of radio waves

relativistic ejection of plasma 97
emanating from the middle of this fracas.1 Since then, numerous sim-
ilar jet sources have been uncovered and, in this chapter, we shall
focus on the peculiar physical principles they embody.
5.1
imaging supermassive black holes
The luminous extensions in Fig. 1.8 project out from the nucleus of
Cygnus A an incredible distance three times the size of the Milky Way.
Yet located 600 million light-years from Earth, they cast an aspect only
one-tenth the diameter of the full moon. The challenge for radio as-
tronomers, therefore, is to create the eye-pleasing resolution evident
in this photograph, given the additional complication that radio wave-
lengths are almost a million times longer than those of visible light.
A telescope’s ability to see fine detail in the target depends primarily
on how many wavelengths it can squeeze into its aperture. So a radio
dish with even modest capability must be extremely large to achieve
the same angular resolution as a small optical telescope – essentially
thousands of kilometers. Mechanically, however, such a large struc-
ture cannot be engineered. How, then, do radio astronomers get around
this problem and expose the invisible radio universe? A clever solu-
tion was found with the development of radio “interferometry.”
Rather than imaging a celestial object with a single giant tele-
scope, the technique of Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) uti-
lizes an array of smaller radio dishes dispersed over a very large area.
The radiation from the source is detected at slightly different times in
each receiver, according to its position on the Earth or in space. But
the signals can be combined with a powerful central computer, per-
mitting the network to function as just one instrument with an equiv-
alent size the distance between the various components participating
1 After the Cambridge astronomer F. Graham Smith managed to position Cygnus A
accurately, Walter Baade identified it with a faint optical source that he interpreted
as being two colliding galaxies. A more recent interpretation holds that it is a giant
elliptical galaxy whose body is bifurcated by a dust lane left over from a spiral galaxy
that it recently swallowed. See Osterbrock (2001).

98 the edge of infinity
in the observation. The collected information is recorded on magnetic
tape and shipped to the control center for processing at a later date. It
is therefore critical for this system to be driven by the most accurate
timing device possible, since the different signals must be synthe-
sized with precise knowledge of the radiation’s arrival time at each
location. That function is now assigned to a highly stable hydrogen
maser clock.
In the late 1970s, the Very Large Array (VLA), the workhorse
of high precision radio astronomy over the past several decades, was
built near Socorro, New Mexico. Its Y-shape consists of 27 individual
antennas (see Fig. 5.4), and the data from all its components can be
combined to accomplish the resolving power of a single dish 36 kilo-
meters in diameter!
Increasing the baseline (i.e., the effective “aperture” of the net-
work) was the main motivation behind the construction 15 years later
of the next system – the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) – by the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory and Massachusetts Institute
of Technology’s Haystack Observatory. This facility consists of ten
radio telescopes spread over 8000 kilometers across the surface of the
Earth, from Mauna Kea in Hawaii to St Croix in the Virgin Islands
(see Fig. 5.5). With the power to simulate a single antenna the size of
our planet, this technological wonder has the power to see features
as small as the Earth’s orbit at the galactic center, some 28 000 light-
years away, and an object as small as our solar system in Andromeda,
a hundred times more distant.
The astounding capability of the VLBA was illustrated by its ob-
servation of the galaxy NGC 4258 (see Fig. 2.6), some 23 million light-
years away, which produced the most elegant and compelling evidence
so far for the existence of extragalactic supermassive black holes.
Using this instrument to measure the velocity of water molecules at
the nucleus of NGC 4258, astronomers have determined that 40 mil-
lion Suns’ worth of material is concentrated within a radius of less
than half a light-year, currently the highest confirmed large-scale den-
sity of matter in the universe.

relativistic ejection of plasma 99
Today, the joint efforts and signals of the VLA and VLBA can
be combined with those of the orbiting Japanese satellite HALCA
(the Highly Advanced Laboratory for Advanced Communications and
Astronomy) to triple the resolving power previously available with
only ground-based telescopes. The resulting Space VLBI satellite sys-
tem is 100 times more powerful than the Hubble Space Telescope. In
fact, its resolving power is equivalent to being able to see a grain of
rice in Tokyo from a perch in Los Angeles.
But many objects in space require still higher resolution than
this and the field of radio astronomy has been mobilized to provide
greater capability in the near future. Researchers at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in California are planning a project known as the Advanced
Radio Interferometry between Space and Earth (ARISE), with a pos-
sible launch date of 2008. The mission calls for the launch of two
25-meter telescopes in very elliptical orbits – to maximize the cover-
age over a broad range of baselines – simulating a telescope four times
bigger than our planet. Its resolving power will permit astronomers to
see objects only ten times bigger than the Earth’s orbit in Andromeda.
But most spectacular of all will be its capability to “see” the structure
of an accretion disk wrapped around the supermassive black hole at
the galactic center. Indeed, with this type of resolution, ARISE may
be able to image the black hole itself, whose event horizon is three
times bigger than the smallest region viewable with this facility of
the future.2
5.2
jets from supermassive black holes
The very idea of supermassive black holes launching plasma into in-
tergalactic space seems antithetical to our perception that their power
of attraction is overwhelming and inexorable. A single particle, after
all, would always lose its duel with the ponderous object and succumb
to its entombment below the latter’s event horizon. Yet when mat-
ter falls toward the black hole in concentration, astronomers often
2 For a comprehensive discussion of this exciting, future development, see Melia (2003).

100 the edge of infinity
see an ensuing fusillade of scorching gas cavitating long narrow fun-
nels in the medium surrounding the host galaxy. Furthermore, these
energetic streams appear to be a dynamically significant inﬂuence –
they’re not merely harmless apparitions pointing their accusatory fin-
gers back to where the launch took place. In Cygnus A, for example,
the radio specter of this commanding source (see Fig. 1.8) is eclipsed
by an even more dramatic image in X-rays, showing the jets’ dele-
terious impact on an otherwise quiescent primordial substrate (see
Fig. 5.6). The phenomenon of black-hole gas expulsion generates con-
siderable excitement among the astrophysics community because it
produces the fastest moving plasma in the universe. The challenge is
to understand why this relativistic acceleration even occurs.
When, in addition, scientists view the enormous cavity carved
out of the universe by the energetic expulsions in Cygnus A, they are
compelled to acknowledge the sobering fact that this structure has
been maintained for at least as long as it takes the streaming parti-
cles to journey from the center of the galaxy to the extremities of the
giant lobes. In other words, these pencil-thin jets of relativistic plasma
have retained their pristine configuration for over one million years!
It is not surprising, therefore, that the most conservative view now
maintained by physicists is that a spinning black hole is lurking at
the nucleus. The axis of its spin functions like a steady rudder, an im-
movable gyroscope, whose direction pre-determines the orientation
of the jets. No one has produced an alternative physical description
of how such a large, steady structure could otherwise be maintained.
Although the definitive mechanism for how the ejection takes place
is still to be worked out in detail, we shall see below that mounting
evidence now points to the twisting motion of magnetized plasma
near the black hole’s event horizon as the cause of the expulsion. The
Kerr spacetime, which describes the dragging of inertial frames about
the black hole’s spin axis, provides a natural setting for establishing
the preferred direction for this ejective process.
Much closer to home, Centaurus A (11 million light-years dis-
tant versus 600 million light-years for Cygnus A) is not quite as

relativistic ejection of plasma 101
powerful as Cygnus A, but the two are similar in other ways, for ex-
ample in producing twin jets of material moving close to the speed
of light over unimaginably great distances. Centaurus A (see Fig. 1.6)
is too far away for us to discern yet what fraction of dark matter in
its nucleus is due to dead stars as opposed to a single object, but the
indications are that a supermassive black hole, with a mass possibly
100 times larger than that of Sagittarius A∗at the galactic center, is
responsible for all the nonstellar activity (see Fig. 1.7). Aside from the
compelling arguments we considered in Chapter 1, the existence of
jets emanating from the nucleus of this galaxy – like those produced by
Cygnus A – would otherwise be very difficult to explain (see Fig. 5.7).
The radio power of a galaxy such as Cygnus A is 10 to 100 times
greater than the combined light of the hundreds of billions of stars
within its girth! When giant lobes are evident, they account for most
of this output, though often the trails of high-velocity particles and
their associated fields that energize these cosmic “puffs” of glowing
gas are also visible on radio maps. It was recognized early on3 that
the radio waves seen at the Earth are undoubtedly synchrotron radi-
ation, produced when highly energetic electrons (those traveling at
nearly the speed of light) emit light as they gyrate wildly in magnetic
fields. The radiation is essentially “torn” away from these particles as
they accelerate back and forth, much as you would lose your hat and
scarf and other loosely attached items of clothing if you were whipped
around on a merry-go-round spinning faster and faster.
But from the very beginning there was something very peculiar
about the core in certain radio images. It turns out that this cen-
tral spot, coincident with the supermassive black hole, is sometimes
too small to possibly radiate all the radio waves detected from it by
astronomers. Although the radiation could in principle be produced
within such a tiny region, it would then not be able to escape through
the highly condensed particles. The resolution to this problem
3 Some of the pioneering efforts in this regard were due to Fred Hoyle, Geoffrey R.
Burbidge, and their collaborators, whose papers appeared in Nature and the Astro-
physical Journal toward the end of the 1960s and in the early 1970s.

102 the edge of infinity
eventually produced one of the earliest breakthroughs in our un-
derstanding of jets and their behavior. Suppose the hot, magnetized
plasma was actually moving at a very high speed toward Earth,
suggested Roger Blandford and Martin Rees in 1978. Then beaming
effects, due in part to strong Doppler boosting, would produce a sig-
nificantly higher radiation intensity for any observer happening to lie
within the cone of the jet than for one located outside.
This interpretation has become the paradigm for how tiny cores
can appear to be so bright across such vast expanses of the universe.
Quasars and the brightest nuclei of galaxies hosting supermassive
black holes are precisely those jet sources whose searchlight beams
of energy and light are directed right toward us. The success of this
explanation in resolving the mystery of overly bright, tiny cores also
constitutes the first piece of evidence that the plasma within the jet is
moving very rapidly – typically at 99.99 percent of the speed of light!
Once the Very Large Array began its systematic study of radio
jets, the ﬂoodgates of new and comparative information opened wide.
This telescope array has the sensitivity to detect even weak jets very
quickly. It also has the dynamic range to do so in the presence of bright
unresolved background light, and is big enough to separate out the
many components often seen inside the streams of plasma. Examples
of jets in all types of radio-emitting active galactic nuclei began to
surface, and the identification of the pathways along which energy
was transported to the outer, bright lobes gave credence to the picture
painted by physicists trying to explain the jet phenomenon.4
Today, astrophysicists studying jets concern themselves with
two principal issues – how is the plasma expelled by the black hole
(addressed in the next section) and how do they acquire their inter-
nal structure? Radio images of the brightest, well-resolved funnels
4 This theoretical interpretation had its roots in early papers by Morrison (1969), who
attempted to explain jets as relativistic beams of particles and energy, and by Rees
(1971), who suggested that the radio-emitting expulsions were powered by low-
frequency electromagnetic beams. Somewhat later, Longair et al. (1973) proposed
an energy transport time scale “comparable with the age of the source,” and Scheuer
(1974) undertook a dynamical study of radio sources powered by relativistic beams.

relativistic ejection of plasma 103
reveal a rich variety of internal knots, rings, loops, filaments, and some
helix-like “threads.” X-ray images of these extensions only complicate
matters even more. For example, a recent Chandra observation of the
jet in Centaurus A (see Fig. 5.8) has produced quite a few surprises.
The X-ray and radio structures of the plasma funnels are significantly
different, and the X-ray jet is much more uneven than originally be-
lieved. These results have cast some doubt on the simplest picture
of how the energetic particles expelled from the active nucleus travel
along the jet. Almost certainly, some measure of instability must be
the cause, since nature tends not to maintain “perfect” conditions for
very long.
At any rate, our chief concern in this book is what these jets have
to say about the nature of supermassive black holes. Astronomers now
realize that the plasma is expelled at nearly the speed of light. Not too
long ago, they acquired some evidence that the composition of this
screeching gas may be a mixture of matter and antimatter – basically
electrons and positrons, each the other’s antiparticle – rather than or-
dinary matter composed of dissociated hydrogen.5 Radio waves behave
differently when they propagate through the former compared with
their passage through the latter. In at least one case – the quasar known
as 3C 279 – this difference is measurable, and matter–antimatter has
won the verdict. Scientists also know that jets are sustained over mil-
lions of years, so explosive events are ruled out as the cause of their
expulsion. And finally, in at least 30 known cases, some features in
the jets are moving across the sky faster than the speed of light. Let
us see now how all of these clues appear to have ultimately melded
into a coherent explanation.
5.3
faster than light motion
In the so-called superluminal sources,6 the streams of particles move
at relativistic speeds away from the center of some galaxies and
5 This inference was based on the observed polarization properties of the quasar known
as 3C 279 by Wardle et al. (1998) at Brandeis University.
6 See Zensus and Pearson (1987) for a comprehensive compilation.

104 the edge of infinity
produce features that drift across the heavens with velocities signifi-
cantly greater than that of light – a phenomenon that caused an un-
derstandable stir when it first became known. The public reaction
to the discovery of this apparent motion was generally one of skep-
ticism, inducing some to refute special relativity and/or the concept
of cosmological redshifts.7 To understand what is happening, and to
uncover what the latest observations are now telling us about the ac-
celeration of jets, let us consider one of the most spectacular members
of this class of objects – the enormous elliptical galaxy known as M87
(see Fig. 5.9).
The Milky Way, together with Andromeda and their entourage
of smaller bystanders, orbit on the outskirts of the Virgo cluster, a
truly gigantic assemblage of thousands of galaxies, of which M87 is
the largest. Discovered by the French astronomer Charles Messier in
1781, M87’s optical jet was first seen in 1918 by Heber Curtis8 (1872–
1942) of the Lick Observatory, who described it as “a curious straight
ray.” M87 is in fact the first extragalactic object for which the term
“jet” was invoked. In 1954, Baade and Minkowski described this opti-
cal feature as “a unique peculiarity known for a long time . . . a straight
jet extending from the nucleus in p.a. 290◦, bluer than the nebula
itself . . . several strong condensations.” Nine years later, Schmidt’s
(1963) identification of “a star of about thirteenth magnitude and a
faint wisp or jet” near the accurate positions of the radio components
of 3C 273 provided the first indication that “jets” also produce radio
waves.
7 For an example of the discussion during this debate, see Stubbs (1971).
8 As an interesting historical aside, Curtis was one participant in the now-famous
Shapley–Curtis debate in which the featured topic was the question of whether the
universe consisted of just a single giant galaxy (Shapley’s position) or whether the
Sun was situated near the middle of the Milky Way, a relatively small galaxy among
many. As we saw earlier in this book, a partial resolution to the debate came in the
1920s, when astronomer Edwin Hubble successfully showed that Andromeda was
much further away than the size even Shapley had attributed to the universe. Of
course, the galaxy turned out to be much bigger than Curtis had allowed, and the
Sun orbits well away from its center, but he was correct in his early assessment of
the multi-galactic structure of the universe.

relativistic ejection of plasma 105
figure 5.9 The giant elliptical galaxy M87 is the dominant “gorilla” at
the center of the Virgo cluster, to which the Milky Way is loosely
attached. M87 has a diameter of half a million light-years which, at a
distance of 60 million light-years from Earth, subtends an angle of over
half a degree – more than the diameter of the full moon. Its outer layers
appear noticeably distorted, probably because of their gravitational
interaction with other Virgo cluster members, and because they contain
remnant material from disrupted galaxies that have merged with M87
during close encounters in the past. To the bottom right of the galaxy,
we can just barely make out a jet of material discovered in 1918 by H. D.
Curtis of the Lick Observatory. Seen much more prominently at other
wavelengths (see Fig. 5.10), this pencil-thin beam of relativistic particles
displays apparent superluminal motion, which is best understood in
terms of rapid advancement in a direction close to the line of sight.
(Image courtesy of NOAO/AURA/NSF)

106 the edge of infinity
On very deep photographic plates, M87 extends out over half a
degree – more than the diameter of the full moon and, at a distance
of 60 million light-years, this corresponds to a linear extension of
about half a million light-years. It appears noticeably distorted on the
fringes, indicating a significant gravitational interaction with other
galaxies in the Virgo cluster, and possibly the result of recent merg-
ers with smaller aggregates of stars. Filling a much larger volume of
space than the Milky Way, it contains many more stars (and a much
greater mass) than our galaxy, certainly numbering in the several tril-
lion. Following convention, in which Centaurus A and Cygnus A were
named as such because they are the brightest radio sources in their
respective constellations, M87 is also known to radio astronomers as
Virgo A.
M87 has become one of the most readily chosen objects for study
because it is one of the nearest jet-producing galaxies and its strong
radio emission makes it an excellent target for radio telescopes. It is
also very alluring because of what lurks in its interior. Repeating the
work carried out for Centaurus A – in which the Hubble Space Tele-
scope identified in spectacular fashion not only the point source asso-
ciated with the supermassive black hole in its nucleus (see Fig. 1.7),
but also its mass – for the nucleus of M87, astronomers have now
shown that a dark mass of 3 billion Suns (about 1000 times bigger than
Sagittarius A∗at the galactic center) is concentrated into a volume
no larger than our solar system. And focusing in on this exotic site,
astronomers can now conduct the most up-to-date high-resolution
radio measurements, revealing what is happening a mere one tenth of a
light-year from the nucleus – a size no bigger than 50 times the diame-
ter of the supermassive black hole (see Fig. 5.10). They are literally wit-
nessing how these splendid jets form within sight of the event horizon
itself.
One of the more breathtaking results of this groundbreaking
work is evident in the lower panel of Fig. 5.10, produced with the Very
Large Baseline Array by a group of astronomers at the Space Telescope

relativistic ejection of plasma 107
Science Institute and the University of New Mexico.9 The sheer size
of this supermassive black hole, and its relative proximity to Earth
compared to quasars and many other active galaxies, is giving scien-
tists an unparalleled view of the mysterious region where the powerful
stream of subatomic particles is accelerated to near lightspeed. These
astronomers had speculated that the jet ought to be launched near
the black hole and that one should see some evidence of the active
mechanism at work, but as they looked closer and closer to the cen-
ter, reaching a distance of less than 50 times the diameter of the event
horizon, they kept seeing an already-formed beam.
According to the highly detailed VLBA image shown in Fig. 5.10,
M87’s jet adopts its narrow elongated shape within a mere fraction
of a light-year from its point of launch. At the very base, sampling
regions within only a few hundredths of a light-year of the black hole,
the investigators were able to ascertain that the inner portion of the
outﬂow is instead very broad. Its opening angle of about 60 degrees is
much wider than anyone had anticipated. In other words, contrary to
everyone’s expectation that the jet should begin its outward excursion
as a relatively narrow funnel centered on the black hole, it instead ap-
pears to be bubbling upwards from a much wider region – undoubtedly
from the accretion disk wrapped around the center. Clearly, the black
hole is not acting alone.
Astrophysicists now believe that many aspects of quasar jets
may be understood in the context of relativistic ﬂows launched by
what they call the “B++” mechanism – a black hole plus a rotating
accretion disk plus a magnetic field that is anchored in this disk and
wound up by its rotation. Think of the magnetic field as wires thread-
ing the plasma, both descending deeper and deeper into the gravita-
tional well of the black hole. The infalling gas is not only compressed –
which at the same time increases the density of wires – but it also
9 The investigators in this project were John Biretta and Mario Livio of the Space Tele-
scope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, and William Junor of the University
of New Mexico, in Albuquerque. Their findings were published in 1999 by Nature.

108 the edge of infinity
rotates around the central object faster and faster as it gets closer.
The wires get braided and twisted, and some break. The electrically
charged particles can ﬂow like beads along the wires, but not across
them. What we are seeing in the bottom panel of Fig. 5.10 is this pro-
fuse efﬂux of charged particles abandoning the disk as the twirling
wires ﬂing them outwards and upwards. This partially explains why
the jet appears to be “already formed” all the way down to the small-
est distances sampled by the VLBA observations, because the plasma
is presumably expelled from throughout the disk, not just the black
hole itself.
In retrospect, a disk origin for quasar jets is perhaps the main
reason why one often sees evidence of precession over their million-
light-year excursion into the relative void of intergalactic space. Un-
less the black hole is in a binary (like Fig. 4.5), it ought to be very
stable. Its disk, however, much lighter and subject to the vagaries of
plasma ploughing into it from outside, could very well be wobbling
over time. But since the braided field lines are more or less perpendicu-
lar to its surface, the direction into which the jet is launched may itself
precess, producing a corkscrew pattern lasting eons (see Fig. 5.11).
The possibility of probing so deeply into the inner workings of
M87’s core is one of the reasons why astronomers consider this in-
vestigation to have been a spectacular success. But perhaps the best
reason to marvel at this unusual galaxy is that the motion of material
near the base of its jets has been measured independently with radio
telescopes (principally the VLBA) and the Hubble Space Telescope,
and they all reveal that the ejected plasma is receding from the su-
permassive black hole at six times the speed of light. It was in fact
this type of situation with quasars back in the 1960s and 1970s that
motivated the need for much higher resolution in the observations to
see what was happening near the central object. The desire to over-
come the observational shortcomings at that time brought together
groups from Canada, the USA, the UK, and the Soviet Union, with
the goal of developing Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), in
which a global network of independent radio telescopes could merge

relativistic ejection of plasma 109
their detected signals to provide exquisitely finer detail in the source
than any of them could produce individually.
The phenomenon of superluminal motion is intriguing, but it
does not really have to do with the actual propagation of matter at
these velocities. It is an artifact of the finite and constant speed of
light. Back in 1966, Martin Rees proposed that these effects might
be associated with relativistically expanding shells of matter. In later
refinements of this basic picture, it became clear that the underlying
sources for the observed radiation were quasar jets consisting of beams
of relativistically moving particles.10 The superluminal effect, it turns
out, can be understood comfortably within the confines of special
relativity.
It has to do with the fact that when a source of light is moving
toward us it catches up with the radiation it is emitting, so that
changes we see in its complexion appear to be happening over a smaller
interval of time. Since it then appears that the distance was covered
over a shortened duration, we infer a greater velocity than the ob-
ject actually possessed. Astronomers now understand that the jet in
Fig. 5.10, and all those like it that exhibit superluminal motion, must
be pointed directly at us. When we look at the VLBA image of M87,
we are evidently seeing the much longer jet projected onto the plane
of the sky – an interestingly complementary perspective on the “tiny
but overly bright core” problem we broached earlier, whose resolution
has us watching the glowing gas perched squarely inside its jet.
Consider the following analogy. Suppose Sam and Eva are play-
ing catch across a tall hedge. Sam can see the ball thrown over it,
but he cannot see Eva. Eva tells Sam that she will throw two balls, in
quick succession, and that based on the interval of time between them
arriving in his hands, he should calculate how fast she was moving
when she threw them. Sam knows that she is going to run 10 meters
between the two throws, but what he doesn’t realize is that she has
chosen to run straight toward him. Eva begins her run, throws the
10 See Blandford, McKee, and Rees (1977).

110 the edge of infinity
first ball, and waits until she has covered 10 meters before throwing
the second. Since she has moved in the same direction as the first
ball, and partially caught up with it, the time between the arrival of
the second ball in Sam’s hands and that of the first is shorter than the
time she actually waited between the two throws.
The velocity Sam infers for her is therefore greater than what
she can muster because he thinks she covered the 10 meters in less
time than it actually took her to do so. Of course, this only works
because Eva moved toward him. If she had instead been running par-
allel to the hedge, Sam’s measured interval of time would have been
the same as hers and they would then have agreed on her velocity. By
extension, astronomers infer that the jets of quasars and active galac-
tic nuclei displaying superluminal motion must be directed straight
toward us. Alien eyes viewing these beams of plasma from a different
angle, however, do not see features in these jets moving superlumi-
nally and, from their perspective, the jets extend much farther out
than is evident to us back here on Earth.
Alluring and extraordinarily large, jets have understandably
served as a principal method of discovery and identification for su-
permassive black holes since the early 1970s. No one has successfully
explained how relativistic beams of plasma could be created and main-
tained over millions – perhaps billions – of years without the under-
lying inﬂuence of a ponderous, stable body at the nucleus of the host
galaxy. As such, the appearance of a jet is at least prima facie evidence
that a behemoth lurks nearby. More direct and compelling means of
identification, some of which were described in Chapter 2, are now
surfacing, and we may even be on the verge of actually “seeing” an
event horizon at the center of the Milky Way. Science marches for-
ward on all fronts, and our exploration of the universe at wavelengths
other than radio is beginning to produce exhilarating discoveries of its
own. We shall examine some of these findings in the next chapter.

6
Supermassive black holes
in the universe
Our view of the night sky is a panoply of stars choreographed to the
galaxy’s spiral melody. A deep exploration of the universe beyond
our immediate neighborhood would therefore not be possible were
it not for the occasional chance alignment of interstices among these
swarming points of light. For ten consecutive days in December of
1995, the Hubble Space Telescope peered through just such a clear-
ing, and produced our deepest ever view of the universe, graced with
thousands of galaxies bursting into life at the dawn of time.
6.1
the hubble deep field
Called the “Hubble Deep Field” (see Fig. 6.1), this image contains
not only classical spiral and elliptical galaxies, but also boasts a rich
variety of other galaxy shapes and colors that hint at the inﬂuences
governing the evolution of the early universe. Some of these objects
may have condensed within 1 billion years of the Big Bang.
Covering a speck of sky only one-thirtieth the diameter of the
full moon, the view of the Hubble Deep Field (one quarter of which is
shown here) is so narrow that just a few foreground stars in our galaxy
are visible. Most of the objects contained within it are instead so dis-
tant that our eyes would have to be four billion times more sensitive
in order for us to see them without the aid of a telescope. But even
though this field is only a small sample of the entire sky, astronomers
consider it to be representative of typical galaxy distributions, under
the assumption that the universe looks the same in all directions.
What is not yet apparent from this beautiful and haunting image
is that, secreted among the many luminiferous islands of stars, are
millions of young, vibrant, supermassive black holes exploding into
our awareness in other portions of the spectrum. The opening of this

112 the edge of infinity
keyhole across the heavens provided an unprecedented opportunity
for ground-based radio astronomers to point their array of radio dishes
toward a portion of the sky unhindered by the contamination of nearby
objects. Unlike Hubble’s optical view, radio telescopes can peer be-
yond the obscuring dust clouds and into the hearts of galaxies in the
field. By combining the signals received with nine European telescopes
forming part of what is now called the European VLBI Network (EVN),
scientists at the Joint Institute for Very Long Based Interferometry in
Dwingeloo, the Netherlands, and their colleagues around the world,
produced radio images of the Hubble Deep Field that are three times
sharper than those even from the Hubble Space Telescope itself.1
The high-resolution images show that many of the galaxies in
the Hubble Deep Field harbor central massive objects. The researchers
were surprised by the diversity of hosts for the radio sources, which
included elliptical, spiral, and very distant, dust-obscured starburst
galaxies. Even more exciting was the realization that many of the radio
sources are quite small – less than 600 light-years wide. This clearly
shows that the radio emission is generated by processes associated
with supermassive black holes, and therefore supports the theory that
black holes are linked with the formation of structure in the early
universe.
6.2
the chandra deep field
Even these significant results, however, have since been overshad-
owed by dramatic discoveries made more recently by combining
the power of the Hubble and Chandra observatories and several
1 Michael Garrett of the Joint Institute for Very Long Based Interferometry in
Dwingeloo, the Netherlands, and his colleagues combined the radio signals from
the 100-meter telescope in Effelsberg, Germany, the 76-meter Lovell Telescope in
the UK, the 70-meter NASA/Deep Space Network antenna near Madrid in Spain,
and six other large radio telescopes located across Europe. Data for these images
were archived on high-speed magnetic tape recorders, and later processed by a super-
computer operated by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New
Mexico. This combined system is equivalent to a supersensitive, giant telescope of
continental dimensions. The technical aspects of this observation are discussed in
Garrett et al. (2001).

supermassive black holes in the universe 113
ground-based optical and infrared facilities. The deepest multiwave-
length look ever made of the distant cosmos has shown that black
holes of all sizes ruled the early universe, and that they behaved in
more varied ways than researchers had expected. Chandra’s X-ray ver-
sion of the Hubble Deep Field is shown in Fig. 6.2. The image in Fig. 6.1
corresponds to the lower-left-hand quarter of the full field sampled by
both of these satellite observatories.
One of the groups conducting this investigation, led by Riccardo
Giacconi, co-winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics, reported that
some 350 supermassive black holes appeared in the patch of the cos-
mos they surveyed. Extrapolated to the whole sky, this would amount
to 200 million supermassive black holes spread throughout the early
universe! These objects were evidently much more active in the past
than they are in the present.
Other groups of astronomers have taken a different, comple-
mentary approach to this search, by focusing not so much on all the
distant X-ray sources they can find in one patch, but rather by study-
ing the high-energy characteristics of active galactic nuclei identified
at longer wavelengths using a variety of techniques. One of these cam-
paigns, carried out by William Brandt at Pennsylvania State University
and his collaborators seeks to study suspected supermassive black
holes uncovered by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, using the high X-ray
sensitivity of Chandra. Thus far, they have determined the X-ray prop-
erties of nearly 60 such objects in locations where structure first ap-
peared in the universe. One of their most important early conclusions
is that, according to the new data, the early supermassive black holes
fed and grew in much the same way as those now active closer to
Earth.
6.3
the universe aglow
And yet, these barely audible X-ray murmurs speak only of those
particular supermassive black holes whose orientation facilitates the
transmission of their high-energy radiation toward our detectors.
Their actual number must be higher than even precision instruments

114 the edge of infinity
such as the Hubble and Chandra observatories can reveal. Indeed,
there is now growing evidence that many – perhaps the majority –
of the supermassive black holes in the universe are obscured from
view.
Astronomers have puzzled for years over the possible origin of
the faint X-ray background pervading the intergalactic medium. Un-
like the cosmic microwave background radiation left over from the
Big Bang, the photons in the X-ray haze are too energetic to have
been produced near the beginning of time. Instead, this radiation field
suggests a more recent provenance associated with a population of
sources whose overall radiative output may actually dominate over
everything else in the cosmos. Stars and ordinary galaxies simply do
not radiate profusely at such high energy, and therefore cannot fit the
suggested profile.
Quasars would do nicely, but a simple census shows that, in
order to produce such an X-ray glow, for every known quasar there
ought to be ten more obscured ones. This would also mean that the
growth of most supermassive black holes by accretion is hidden from
the view of optical, ultraviolet, and near infrared telescopes.
Attempts at uncovering these reticent giants are therefore bank-
ing on the possibility that some of their X-ray photons can elude the
surrounding muck and escape in numbers sufficient for our new sen-
sitive instruments to detect them. Whereas optical and ultraviolet
radiation from the plasma falling into the black hole is absorbed by
nearby gas and dust, the higher energy X-rays are only partially at-
tenuated, offering some hope that the hot obscured cauldron at the
center of its host galaxy may be seen ﬂickering after all.
Finally, the search has paid off. Investigators from the University
of Cambridge, the University of Durham, University College London,
and l’Observatoire Midi-Pyr´en´ees in Toulouse have reported the dis-
covery of an object they call a Type-2 quasar. Invisible to optical
light telescopes, the nucleus of this otherwise normal looking galaxy
betrayed its supermassive guest with a glimmer of X-rays delivered

supermassive black holes in the universe 115
across a 6 billion-light-year chasm to Earth.2 These scientists suggest
that many more quasars, and their supermassive black-hole power
sources, may be hidden in otherwise innocuous-looking galaxies. But
sensitive X-ray detectors, like those installed on the Chandra obser-
vatory, can sense their faint X-ray gleam and expose them for what
they really are – typical quasars seen at an inopportune angle.
In an elegant confirmation of this result, investigators from the
Harvard-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the Ohio State
University used Chandra to peer through the enshrouding clouds of
ten other obscured suspected quasars to reveal the same black-hole
signature – hot plasma glowing in X-rays.3 Quasars, and the blanketed
nuclei of many galaxies, are evidently the same phenomenon, only
viewed from different angles. The supermassive black holes uncovered
thus far must be merely the tip of the proverbial iceberg.
And so, the all-pervasive X-ray haze, in combination with the
discovery of gas-obscured quasars, now point to supermassive black
holes as the agents behind perhaps half of all the universe’s radia-
tion produced after the Big Bang. Ordinary stars no longer monopolize
the power as they had for decades prior to the advent of space-borne
astronomy.
6.4
future directions
Looking farther afield, the prospects for learning more about the na-
ture of supermassive black holes look very promising indeed – in both
the near and distant future. Several major undertakings will improve
our imaging and spectroscopic capabilities in both the radio and X-ray
portions of the spectrum, and LISA (the Laser Interferometer Space
Antenna) will open up a whole new window of opportunity for study-
ing the distortions induced on the fabric of spacetime by violent grav-
itational interactions. As we have already seen (see Chapter 4), LISA’s
2 See Fabian et al. (2000).
3 See Green, Aldcroft, Mathur, et al. (2001).

116 the edge of infinity
expected launch in 2010 will herald a bright new age of space explo-
ration, stretching our frontier well beyond what radiation can let us
see. By detecting gravitational waves undulating from distant black-
hole sources, astronomers will be able to sense the behavior of massive
objects in the presence of unimaginably strong fields, testing general
relativity, and possibly even uncovering ﬂaws that hint at new, more
comprehensive descriptions and theories of nature.
The windows to be opened by ARISE (Advanced Radio Interfer-
ometry between Space and Earth; see Chapter 5) and more elaborate
ground-based millimeter arrays will be equally fascinating and con-
ducive to profound change in our communion with nature. Both of
these developments – one stretching the baseline of radio interferom-
etry into space, the other creating a worldwide baseline for interferom-
etry at millimeter wavelengths – are geared toward greatly enhancing
the resolving power of instruments designed to probe deeper and
deeper into the bottomless well of gravity in supermassive objects.
Many astrophysicists suspect that an image of the event horizon in a
nearby black hole will be feasible within a matter of only years.4
Their impressive stature notwithstanding, existing radio tele-
scopes (see Figs. 5.4 and 5.5) are not all usable at the shorter wave-
lengths because they cannot maintain sufficient structural integrity to
provide a pure millimeter or submillimeter signal. So a major problem
with conducting worldwide coordinated observations at these wave-
lengths is simply the paucity of appropriate sites.
The idea for developing a global network of millimeter tele-
scopes, which has come to be known as CMVA – an acronym de-
rived from Coordinated Millimeter VLBI Array – actually goes back
to the mid 1990s, when members of the Haystack Observatory in
Massachusetts developed plans to create the network for initial ob-
servations at 3 millimeters and additional experimental observations
at 1.3 millimeters. Since then, the goal of the CMVA has been to
4 See, for example, Falcke, Melia, and Agol (2000), Bromley, Melia, and Liu (2001), and
Melia (2003).

supermassive black holes in the universe 117
continually break new technological ground for later exploitation at
progressively shorter wavelengths. Thus far, up to 12 stations around
the world have been able to participate in global VLBI sessions at
3 millimeters, organized twice a year through the CMVA. Although
unfavorable weather conditions and technical problems at some sites
sometimes affect them, these campaigns are generally successful and
provide good observations of compact emitting regions, including the
galactic center.
At 1 and 2 millimeters, however, the number of telescopes is
much smaller than at 3 millimeters, which greatly reduces the cov-
erage. Thankfully, this situation is rapidly changing. For example,
the new Heinrich-Hertz telescope on Mount Graham near Tucson
recently participated in a VLBI experiment at 1 millimeter for the
first time. Even more exciting is the proposed development of the
giant radio telescope known as ALMA, which conveys better than any
other project the growing enthusiasm from the world’s astronomical
community. The Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array is
conceived as a radio telescope composed of 64 transportable 12-meter-
diameter antennas distributed over an area 14 kilometers in extent. In
the early part of 2001, representatives from Europe, Japan, and North
America met in Tokyo to sign a resolution affirming their mutual
intent to construct and operate this facility in cooperation with the
Republic of Chile, where the telescope is to be located. ALMA will
be built on the Andean plateau at 5000 meters altitude near the
Atacama Desert, and is considered to be the first truly global project
in the history of fundamental science. The telescope is scheduled to
be fully operational in 2010.
X-ray astronomy, on the other hand, must be conducted entirely
above Earth’s soupy atmosphere. The Chandra satellite – the latest
NASA innovation – has merely given astronomers a taste of what
X-ray images with exceptional spatial resolution can reveal. Scien-
tists and engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland,
at Columbia University in New York, and at CALTECH in Pasadena,
among others, are conjuring up one of the most ambitious advances in

118 the edge of infinity
the history of high-energy astronomy. Taking as their cue the lessons
learned from the evolution of ground-based optical telescopes, in
which many smaller units working in unison are in the end more pow-
erful and easier to build than one single cumbersome device, these
investigators are designing and building the Constellation-X Observa-
tory (see Fig. 6.3). Four individual X-ray telescopes working together
will have a combined sensitivity 100 times greater than any past or
present X-ray mission.
More imaginative still is a NASA mission now under plan-
ning that purports to achieve nothing short of actually photograph-
ing the event horizon of several nearby supermassive black holes in
X-ray light. A duo of powerful new NASA telescopes, with costs es-
timated in the billions of dollars, are being developed collaboratively
by NASA and the University of Colorado at Boulder, and are proposed
for ﬂight before 2020. These telescopes are part of the Microarcsecond
X-ray Imaging Mission, or MAXIM for short. The main mission would
consist of a ﬂeet of 33 spacecraft, each containing a relatively small
telescope. But by combining the data gathered by so many separate in-
struments distributed over an extraordinarily large baseline in space,
one may achieve a resolution of the sky about one million times bet-
ter than what is currently attainable. A ground-based optical telescope
with this same capability would enable us to read a newspaper on the
lunar surface!
To put this achievement in context, note that at a distance of
60 million light-years, the event horizon of the 3-billion-solar-mass
black hole in the nucleus of M87 (see Figs. 5.9 and 5.10) projects a
diameter of 5 microarcseconds. MAXIM’s intended resolution – the
angular separation of features that it can identify – is about one
microarcsecond, so future X-ray astronomers will be able to see the
dark depression shimmering at the center of this giant elliptical
galaxy. But with a projected width of over 30 microarcseconds, the
easiest dark pit of all to photograph with MAXIM will be that
projected by Sagittarius A∗at the heart of the Milky Way.

supermassive black holes in the universe 119
This technology has its own problems to contend with.5 The
wavelength of an X-ray is about 1000 times smaller than that of vis-
ible light, making X-ray telescopes very difficult to build. Surface ir-
regularities that are too small to affect visible light can easily scatter
X-rays. In addition, to obtain a true focus, X-ray photons must reﬂect
twice from very carefully figured hyperbolic and parabolic surfaces,
nested concentrically in very precise formation. Instead, MAXIM will
utilize a method similar to VLBI, in which two or more telescopes are
coupled in order to synthetically build an aperture equal to the sep-
aration of the individual instruments. Instead of precisely focusing
X-rays with expensive mirrors onto a detector, the MAXIM team will
use readily made ﬂat mirrors to mix the photons, producing an even
sharper image, similar to the way sound waves can be combined to
either cancel each other out (resulting in silence) or amplify the sound
when one crest adds to the other.
The concept calls for the ﬂeet of smaller telescopes to be spaced
evenly in orbit around the perimeter of a circle, the diameter of which
will vary from 1 to 10 kilometers, and for the whole assembly to be
orbiting about the Sun. From there they would collect X-ray beams
and funnel them to a larger telescope stationed at the hub, which
could then relay the accumulated data back to Earth, several million
miles away.
6.5
is the universe itself a big black hole?
The field of black-hole research is clearly in a period of renaissance,
with wave upon wave of breathtaking discoveries creating headlines
on a regular basis, it seems, and with future missions promising to
take us to the edge of validity of current physical laws. Supermassive
black holes are no longer the oddity of decades past, but rather a ne-
cessity in any comprehensive description of structure in the universe.
5 This work has been spearheaded by Webster Cash and his group at the University of
Colorado, in collaboration with NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville,
Alabama. They announced their design in the 14 September 2000 issue of Nature.

120 the edge of infinity
Some astronomers are taking this essential role to a rather daring con-
clusion, wondering, in fact, if we ourselves may be living inside the
biggest black hole of all – the universe itself. Well, this question is
not really well posed, as we shall soon see, but it does make for some
intriguing reﬂection on cause and effect, and on the origin of all things.
A black hole is a parcel of closed spacetime embedded within a
larger space (and time) that may contain matter, radiation, and prob-
ably other black holes as well. On the other hand, the universe as we
know it is all encompassing, so for us to view it as a black hole, it
would be necessary to hypothesize the existence of an undetected –
and probably forever undetectable – hyperspace within which it is
ensconced.
The major difficulty in maintaining a scientific posture with
this discourse is that physicists do not yet have a complete theory
unifying all the fundamental forces of nature at the instant of the Big
Bang. They can say with some precision what transpired 10−43 second
later, and any time thereafter, but that first ﬂeeting moment borders
on philosophy and aesthetics, not the rigor of verifiable hardcore sci-
ence. For example, there is no possibility of linking current theories to
experimentation with the early universe – that is, we cannot simply
“build” another cosmos – so our theorizing must be accepted or re-
jected primarily on the basis of pure reasoning, and perhaps the power
of prediction at later times.
The most unsettling, yet the most engaging, aspect of the Big
Bang is the problem of beginning – the apparent singularity from which
expansion started. An initial state of arbitrarily high density seems to
be inescapable, just as catastrophic gravitational collapse evidently
squeezes to zero volume matter falling into a bottomless well of grav-
ity. In principle, understanding the process of gravitational contrac-
tion may resolve the mystery of our distant past, perhaps revealing
new laws of physics along the way.
Still, certain issues pertaining to the question of the universe as
a black hole may already be addressable within the current framework.
Questions such as “Does the universe lie within its own gravitational

supermassive black holes in the universe 121
radius, i.e., within its own event horizon?” and “What happens toward
zero time in the current universe should we reverse the clock?” can
at least be broached with the language of scientific principles already
recognized and tested.
It may seem surprising to hear that the average density of matter
within a black hole need not be extraordinarily large. Its value depends
critically on how big the object is. The problem is simply to get enough
material within a given radius to produce an event horizon at that
radius. From Chapter 3, we recall that the Schwarzschild radius is
2GM/c2, so in effect the black hole’s size scales directly with its total
mass M. But for a given value of M, its density drops off inversely as
the enclosed volume, which is proportional to the radius cubed. Thus,
ponderous black holes actually have a significantly lower density than
their lighter brethren. For example, if a 100-kilogram person were to
suddenly shrink to black hole proportions, he would need to have a
radius no bigger than about 10−23 centimeter, but his density would
then rise to the extraordinary value of 1073 grams per cubic centimeter.
The Sun, squeezed into a black hole, would have a 3-kilometer radius,
but its density would be only 1016 grams per cubic centimeter.
Now consider what happens as we increase the mass further,
to a value not unlike that of a typical supermassive black hole in
the nucleus of an active galaxy. For a 100-million-solar-mass object,
its Schwarzschild radius grows to 2.4 hundred million kilometers –
roughly the size of Mars’s orbit about the Sun. But its average density
is incredibly only about 1 gram per cubic centimeter – the density of
water!
An extremely large region of space, such as the universe, does
not have to be very densely filled with matter in order to create curved
light paths or even to entomb spacetime itself by forming an event
horizon. Given that we see the universe from “inside,” how does one
then go about determining whether it is above its black-hole density
or not? Part of the answer actually goes back to the work of Sir Isaac
Newton who, in order to describe the moon’s motion around the Earth,
used the newly invented calculus to prove a very important theorem

122 the edge of infinity
for his universal law of gravitation. He showed that the gravitational
field outside a spherically symmetric body behaves as if the whole
mass were concentrated at its center. In other words, the moon feels
exactly the same gravitational inﬂuence from the Earth as it would
from an object with the same mass, though only the size of an apple
situated at the center of where Earth now stands.
In 1923, not long after general relativity was established, George
Birkhoff (1884–1944) made the surprising discovery that Newton’s
theorem was valid even for this more comprehensive description of
gravity, though with some appropriate corrections. He demonstrated
that even if a spherically symmetric body were collapsing or expand-
ing radially, the Schwarzschild metric describing its gravitational field
in empty space would not change in time. In other words, the effect of
gravity outside a spherically symmetric body does not depend on how
big that object is – it is based solely on how much mass is enclosed
within its surface.
The Birkhoff theorem seemed peculiar because in general rela-
tivity a nonstatic body generally radiates gravitational waves. We now
know that in fact no gravitational radiation can escape into empty
space from an object that looks the same from all directions, unlike
the pair of black holes orbiting about each other in Fig. 4.5. His result
may be applied with equal validity inside an empty spherical cavity at
the center of a spherically symmetric (though not necessarily static)
body. Here, however, there is no enclosed mass at any point within
the cavity so, according to his theorem, there is no gravitational field
anywhere inside it.
The value in Birkhoff’s work is that, under the assumption of
uniformity, we can calculate the gravitational field anywhere in the
universe relative to another point a distance d away, by simply esti-
mating how much mass is enclosed within a spherically symmetric
volume of radius d centered on that other point. For the sake of speci-
ficity, let us just put ourselves in the middle and see how far out we
need to go before we hit the universe’s event horizon.

supermassive black holes in the universe 123
According to Hubble’s discovery of an expanding universe back
in the 1920s and 1930s, distant objects are receding from us with a
velocity proportional to their distance. It turns out that this rate of
recession approaches the speed of light for matter 12 billion light-years
away, and this must therefore be the radius of that part of the universe
with which we have interacted via inﬂuences that travel at the speed
of light. (Two specific examples are electromagnetic and gravitational
waves.) It is what astronomers call the size of the visible universe.
Birkhoff’s theorem tells us that the average internal density re-
quired to produce an event horizon at 12 billion light-years is about
5 × 10−30 grams per cubic centimeter – an incredibly small number,
the equivalent of only six hydrogen atoms per cubic meter. Even so, it
exceeds the best current estimates astronomers have made by a factor
of roughly three to five, depending on which newspaper vendor you
talk to. Could the dark energy invoked to explain the universe’s accel-
eration make up the difference (see Chapter 3)? Without it, the visible
universe could not be a black hole in the strictest sense of the term,
though it would come alarmingly close. Let us think about this for a
moment. Of all the possible average densities that the universe could
have had, why is it that the one with which it is apparently endowed
is so strikingly close to the value needed to create an event horizon at
the edge of what is visible?
Perhaps the answer lies in another important consideration we
have so far ignored in this discussion. According to current cosmo-
logical models, the expansion of the universe is driven not by matter
moving through space, but rather by the stretching of space itself.
This is more than just an idle concept since the very idea of inﬂation
depends critically on the validity of an expanding space, and with-
out inﬂation (see Chapter 3), many problems with the basic Big Bang
model would go unsolved. The expansion of space, however, can pro-
ceed faster than the speed of light. The postulates of special relativity
do not apply to this phenomenon, since they only specify what the
maximum speed of transmission through the space can be, and that

124 the edge of infinity
is the speed of light. So although we may not be able to see the “rest”
of the cosmos beyond the visible limit at 12 billion light-years, it may
nonetheless be there and expanding in concert with our own visible
universe.
Can we therefore extend the radius of our Birkhoff sphere and
intersect an event horizon by going beyond the “visible” limit? Well,
no. For one thing, if this region is beyond the visible edge of the uni-
verse, then it is forever inaccessible to us, and we to it. The inﬂuence
of gravity cannot travel faster than light either, so whatever mass is
present there would never have communicated with the universe we
can see, and they could never conspire to pool their inﬂuence and
produce a common event horizon.
Nonetheless, the answer to the question “Is the universe itself
a big black hole?” is a qualified “yes” because of several truly amaz-
ing observations completed by an international team of astronomers
using the BOOMERanG experiment in 2000. We already touched on
the significance of their findings in Chapter 4, but let us now revisit
this discovery in the context of the present topic.
Designed to study the cosmic microwave background radiation
with unprecedented accuracy, BOOMERanG surveyed 2.5 percent of
the sky with an angular resolution of 0.25 degrees during a ten-day
balloon ﬂight over Antarctica. This microwave telescope was built to
measure ﬂuctuations in the background radiation (see Fig. 4.1) driven
by pressure variations propagating throughout the nascent universe.
A peak in the frequency of these variations was expected to occur
300 000 years after the Big Bang, when the matter and radiation ceased
to interact via photon scattering. Earlier calculations had shown that
a universe with a current average density of 5 × 10−30 grams per cubic
centimeter would have produced ﬂuctuations with a characteristic
angular separation of about 0.75 degrees, well within BOOMERanG’s
resolving capability.
The team of astronomers who conducted this investigation,
led by Paolo de Bernardis of the University of Rome and Andrew
Lange of CALTECH, reported that BOOMERanG not only confirmed

supermassive black holes in the universe 125
a primordial origin for the ﬂuctuations, but also clearly identified
a peak precisely where these predictions had placed it. The loca-
tion of the peak means that the density of matter in the universe is
within a statistically determined error of only 10 percent of its critical
value.
Physicists already know that the combined density of visible
and dark matter, and radiation, amounts to only about one-third of the
required 5 × 10−30 grams per cubic centimeter. So the rest of it must
be the “dark energy” inferred from the accelerated expansion of the
universe. Although the evidence for this phenomenon is still rather
tentative,6 cosmologists find it very gratifying that together with the
completely independent determination rendered by BOOMERanG,
they now paint a self-consistent picture. The cosmos is evidently dom-
inated by dark energy, but in such a way that its overall equivalent
mass density is precisely 5 × 10−30 grams per cubic centimeter. The
universe, it seems, has an event horizon with a radius of 12 billion
light-years, right at the edge of what we can see before the velocity of
expansion exceeds the speed of light.
This universe, however, has no apparent singularity right now –
its mass is spread out everywhere. Could it be that the Big Bang was
nothing more than the initial collapse of the universe to something
approaching a point, followed by a bounce? Yes, it’s possible, but we
may never know for sure because the first 10−43 second of the expan-
sion is completely unresolvable with current scientific methods. Let
us reverse the clock, and see how far back our present knowledge can
take us toward the beginning, and why this interval of 10−43 second,
known as the Planck time, appears to be impenetrable.
The shortest interval of time that can be probed with current
physical laws pushes their applicability to the limits set by three so-
called fundamental constants of nature. These are the measured val-
ues of quantities that characterize the strength of gravity, the speed
of light, and the fuzziness of quantum mechanics. Physicists assume
6 See Brian P. Schmidt et al. (1998) and Saul Perlmutter et al. (1999).

126 the edge of infinity
that these quantities are constants in time, in the absence of any evi-
dence to the contrary.
Quantum mechanics argues that we can never be entirely sure of
a particle’s position or its energy, because in order for us to even know
of its existence we must disturb it to sense its presence. Thus, there
should always be some positional uncertainty, or an imprecision in
energy and time, and any description of the particle’s physical behav-
ior must therefore acquire some minimal level of “fuzziness.” In our
everyday lives, we develop the illusion of precision only because the
fuzziness induced by these uncertainties is very small, and our mind
clings to the apparent clarity of the outside world as a convenient sim-
plification of the way things really are. Certainly, on a macroscopic
scale, this fuzziness does not manifest itself readily, and our descrip-
tion of nature using exact positions and times is quite adequate for
our need to interpret much of the activity in our environment. But
on a microscopic scale, this fuzziness is paramount, and nothing can
happen without the consequences of the implied imprecision.
The uncertainty in the particle’s position is characterized by
Planck’s constant, h. The Planck length – the shortest distance we
can probe – depends on how strong the effect of gravity is on such
scales. This in turn is specified by the gravitational constant, G, in
Newton’s universal law of gravitation. The bigger this coupling con-
stant is, the stronger is the attraction between two given masses. The
Planck time is then the interval of time required to communicate
information across this distance, given that the apparent maximum
rate of transmission is the speed of light, c. Together, these constants
yield the shortest physical time, (Gh/c5)
1
2 (which is approximately
10−43 second), that anyone (or anything) can sample.
However, cosmologists do have some confidence in beginning to
describe the expansion of the universe from 10−43 second onwards.
This is where our quantum physics has meaning, because on this level
the Schwarzschild radius from general relativity first becomes equal
to the smallest scale permitted by the quantum fuzziness, roughly

supermassive black holes in the universe 127
10−33 centimeter, which is still much smaller than the nucleus of an
atom. But there is still some remaining uncertainty because physicists
diverge in their views of how one should best describe the universe
at this point. They still do not know if extra dimensions exist (see
Chapter 3), or if string theory is correct. One view has it that during
the Planck era (when the universe was about 10−43 second old), the
cosmos should best be described as a quantum “foam” of ten spatial
dimensions containing Planck-length-size black holes, continuously
being created and annihilated, with no cause or effect. The reason
for the latter is that, on quantum scales, particles can be created with-
out the conservation of energy, as long as they exist only ﬂeetingly so
that the violation falls within the uncertainty prescribed by Planck’s
constant.
One of the reasons our physics is incomplete near the Planck era
is related to the hierarchy problem we discussed in Chapter 3. Science
does not yet provide a description of how the forces of nature unify
during this time. At the excruciatingly high energies and temperatures
prevalent then, the forces of nature would have become symmetric,
meaning that they would have resembled each other and would have
acquired a similar strength – they would have unified into a single
entity. Physicists are actively pursuing the grail of grand unification
of all four forces, and have already achieved some notable success in
this pursuit. Toward the end of the twentieth century, the interactions
due to the weak and electromagnetic forces were framed into a single
phenomenon known as the electroweak force by Sheldon Glashow,
Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam, who were awarded the Nobel
Prize in Physics for this effort in 1979.
The weak force, which is mediated by very heavy particles
known as W and Z, is responsible for the transformation of a neutron
into a proton within the nucleus of an atom, whereas the electromag-
netic force provides an interaction between charged particles, such as
the electron and a proton. At the time of their discovery in 1983, the
W and Z particles were the most massive known – each weighing in

128 the edge of infinity
at almost 90 times the mass of the proton – whereas the photon, the
carrier of the electromagnetic force, is massless. The unification of
these two forces occurs when the energy available for the process is
so high that even this enormous mass difference between the two sets
of carriers becomes inconsequential. In the early universe, this would
have been the situation until the ambient temperature dropped below
about 1015 Kelvin, after which the mass difference would have split
the rates at which these particles could interact, thereby creating the
appearance of two independent forces.
Attempts are now underway to unify the strong and electroweak
forces, a process known as Grand Unification, but this is proving to
be much more challenging, in part because what is required is the
conversion of certain particles, such as electrons, into completely dif-
ferent types of entities, known as quarks. This unification, if possible,
would result in a split of the rates of interaction when the temperature
in the early universe dropped below about 1027 Kelvin, much closer
to the Planck era.
The final unification, between the electroweak, strong and grav-
itational forces, is well beyond the realm of study with earthbound
experiments, because the energies and temperatures required to ap-
proach the necessary scale of interaction are simply unreachable. It
may seem peculiar, but learning more about the early universe may ac-
tually be necessary for this branch of particle physics to make progress
of its own toward a “complete” understanding of what governs the
substance and behavior of particles.
These unknowns impact the cosmologists’ view progressively
more and more, as they labor closer and closer to the Planck scale.
The exploration terminates – indefinitely it would seem – at 10−43
second. Only the development of a completely new, overarching de-
scription of nature that obviates the fuzziness of quantum mechanics
could change this situation. Still, physicists are a clever lot, so there
is always hope. Is the Universe itself a big black hole? It now seems
that the answer is yes, but how and why it got that way persist as the
most profound mysteries in nature.

supermassive black holes in the universe 129
6.6
ultimate fate
Counterposing the uncertainty of what transpired at the very begin-
ning of the Big Bang, the question of how the universe will play itself
out may be easier to address, though, as always, the story unfolds
through the prism of human perception and interpretation. It would
be utterly presumptuous and self-debilitating for us to view this prog-
nostication as absolute and fully written. On the contrary, it is an
evolving narrative, likely to be swayed by many future developments
and discoveries in particle physics and astronomy.
For now, the three leading characters in this play are the total
mass enclosed within the visible universe, the Grand Unified Theory
(GUT) that will ultimately account for the unification of all known
forces, and Hawking radiation. Up until the era when the reservoir of
primordial matter – primarily hydrogen and other light elements – is
fully exhausted, stars will continue to form and galaxies will collide
and grow. Looking into the future, however, matter will ultimately
partition itself into several quasi-terminal states, among them dying
stellar embers, white dwarfs and neutron stars, asteroids and planets,
and tenuous gas dispersed throughout the cosmos. But regardless of
what the eventual configuration will be, life as we know it will not be
viable forever. Without the energy released from nuclear burning, life-
sustaining environments will become untenable. In the meantime,
supermassive black holes will continue to grow as clump after clump
of gas succumbs to the inexorable inward pull of gravity, adding to the
total mass entombed below the growing number of event horizons.
Life will undoubtedly evolve considerably and survive much
longer than we could now imagine. In the absence of nucleosynthe-
sis, our descendants may even find a way of using energy liberated by
accretion onto black holes in order to power their survival. But certain
processes predicted by the GUT will change the universe dramatically
and irreparably, making any such attempts futile in the long run. In
these theories, all sorts of particles can (and must) mutate into other
entities, a process that may be induced by either collisions or spon-
taneous self-decay. A proton, for example, will eventually split into a

130 the edge of infinity
positron (the electron’s antiparticle) and a pion, the particle that helps
to mediate the nuclear force. Neutrons are already known to be unsta-
ble; in a matter of only minutes, they decay into protons (this process
is induced by the weak force), so they too must eventually split into
sub-components. By permitting this conversion – nay, requiring it –
the GUT will guarantee that the two most significant constituents
of atomic nuclei will be removed permanently from the composition
table. Diamonds are not forever!
Physicists still do not know the mass of several particles that
mediate the unified force, so the time required for protons and neu-
trons to decay is uncertain. The best current estimates endow the
proton with an expected lifetime somewhere between 1032 and 1041
years.7
By this time, galaxy collisions (see Chapter 4) will have been
relegated to ancient history by the expansion of the universe, which
would have continued to drive the participants apart. Supermassive
black holes will therefore stop growing some day because they will
have absorbed all the limited supply of matter in their environment.
Estimates place the terminal mass of these objects somewhere be-
tween 1 billion and 10 billion Suns.
The universe in this era will be completely unrecognizable to
sentient beings living now, since it would have mutated to the point
where life itself would be impossible. As best as physicists can tell,
the cosmos will be an extremely thin dark veil of fundamental par-
ticles, such as electrons, positrons, neutrinos, and highly redshifted
photons. Very few atoms will be left, and these too will eventu-
ally vanish as their constituent protons and neutrons disintegrate.
And ﬂoating aimlessly through this enormous sea of virtually noth-
ing will be the ensemble of billion-solar-mass black holes roaming
freely for a near eternity, sucking up whatever scant morsels they
encounter.
7 A full discussion of the relevant parameters and other considerations may be found
in Adams and Laughlin (1997).

supermassive black holes in the universe 131
Evidently, supermassive black holes appeared early in the his-
tory of the universe and will stay late – very late. After 1032 to 1041
years, they will be the only structures of any significance left in the
cosmos. But in what appears to be the final act of fair play, even they
will not exist forever. Once black holes stop growing, they slowly
begin to shrivel via a loophole created by the application of quantum
mechanics, a theory that is known to be correct, if not complete. Gen-
eral relativity is a classical theory, operating on the basis of precise
measurements of physical quantities, such as distance and time. The
very notion of defining an event horizon makes sense as long as we
can precisely place this surface and particles around it at perfectly
known locations. But quantum mechanical fuzziness requires some
positional uncertainty, or an imprecision in energy and time. Physi-
cists are therefore uncomfortable with the idea of a perfectly localized
and sealed event horizon, since these notions completely ignore the
quantum mechanical uncertainty on the smallest scales.
A phenomenon discovered in 1974 by Stephen Hawking may be
the first step in the eventual resolution of this problem.8 The name
itself, quantum mechanics, reveals the essence of the physical descrip-
tion on a microscopic scale. It tells us that at this level all measurable
entities are to be thought of as comprising tiny bundles (or quanta)
of “something,” which in the case of light are known as photons.
In the appropriate terminology, one says that ﬂuctuations in a field,
say the gravitational field, are associated with the manifestation of
these quanta, which can appear or vanish as the ﬂuctuations grow or
subside. The connection between these bundles and the fuzziness is
that their size, energy, and lifetime are directly related to the scale of
the imprecision, that is, how fuzzy the measurements of position or
energy turn out to be.
Quanta such as photons bubble up spontaneously out of vacuum
if an adequate source of energy lies nearby. But a crucial fact that we
8 Readers who would like to learn more about the technical aspects of this phe-
nomenon, and the evaporation of black holes in general, will find the discussion
in Thorne, Price, and Macdonald (1986) very helpful. See also Wald (1984).

132 the edge of infinity
have gathered from the observed behavior of these fields is that when
the bundles materialize spontaneously, they always do so in pairs,
as if something must be split in order to create the ﬂuctuation. So a
quantum, or particle, with negative charge can only materialize if at
the same time its counterpart, with positive charge, also comes into
being. Given that every characteristic we can assign to this bundle
must be matched by the opposite attributes of its partner particle, it
makes sense then to talk of these as particles and antiparticles, or
matter and antimatter.
The phenomenon discovered by Hawking9 is directly associated
with this creation of quantum particles in vacuum due to ﬂuctua-
tions in the gravitational field of the black hole. Particles created in
this way live ﬂeetingly and then annihilate with each other’s coun-
terpart to re-establish the vacuum after the ﬂuctuation has subsided.
We note, however, that ﬂuctuations in the gravitational field of the
black hole have a wavelength commensurate with its size. So when
these ﬂuctuations manifest themselves as photons, or any other type
of particle whose rest mass is small compared to the amplitude of the
ﬂuctuation, their wavelength, too, corresponds to the size of the black
hole. The ﬂeeting quanta produced beyond the event horizon of very
massive black holes are therefore much redder, and hence of lower
energy, than those associated with their smaller brethren.
The paired quanta produced in this fashion annihilate outside
the event horizon very quickly (in about one-millionth of a millionth
of a millionth of 1 second). But some pairs, argued Hawking, will have
a member that dips below the membrane of no return, abandoning its
partner to the whim of the outside universe. Without a partner to
annihilate, the detached particle ﬂees the black hole’s sphere of inﬂu-
ence and merges into the ﬂux of escaping radiation headed for infinity.
To an observer on Earth, this looks like the black hole is actually ra-
diating, though the mechanism is clearly indirect. Nevertheless, the
9 Some of Hawking’s early discussion on this topic appeared in a paper published by
Nature in 1974.

supermassive black holes in the universe 133
source of energy for these ﬂeeing particles is ultimately the black hole
itself, and although we cannot claim that the radiation originated from
within the event horizon, its energy surely did, and the dark object
pays the price with a consequent decrease in its mass. If this simple
application of quantum mechanics survives the test of time, it appears
that all black holes must evaporate eventually.
The Hawking radiation from a black hole with barely the mass
of 30 Suns has such a long wavelength, and is therefore so feeble, that it
would take such an object 1061 times the current age of the universe to
evaporate completely. But after 1098 years, even the 100-billion-solar-
mass behemoths will be gone, completely and forever – the final act
of fair play. And thus will end the saga of the most powerful objects
in the universe, facing eternity as ghosts in a lifeless darkness.

References
Adams, F. C., and G. Laughlin (1997), “A Dying Universe: The Long Term Fate and
Evolution of Astrophysical Objects,” Reviews of Modern Physics 69, 337–372.
Allen, C. W. (1991), Astrophysical Quantities, Athlone Press.
Alpher, R., and R. Herman (1948), “Evolution of the Universe,” Nature 162, 774–
775.
Anderson, J. L. (1967), Principles of Relativity Physics, Academic Press.
Arkani-Hamed, N., S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali (1998), “The Hierarchy Problem
and New Dimensions at a Millimeter,” Physics Letters B 429, 263–272.
Baade, W., and R. Minkowski (1954), “On the Identification of Radio Sources,”
Astrophysical Journal 119, 215.
Backer, D. C., and R. A. Sramek (1999), “Proper Motion of the Compact, Non-
thermal Radio Source in the Galactic Center, Sagittarius A∗,” Astrophysical
Journal 524, 805–815.
Balberg, S., and S. L. Shapiro (2002), “Gravothermal Collapse of Self-Interacting
Dark Matter Halos and the Origin of Massive Black Holes,” Physical Review
Letters 88, 101301.1–101301.4.
Balick, B., and R. L. Brown (1974), “Intense Sub-arcsecond Structure in the Galactic
Center,” Astrophysical Journal 194, 265–270.
Bernstein, H. J., and A. V. Pillips (1981), “Fiber Bundles and Quantum Theory,”
Scientific American 245, 123–137.
Binney, J., and S. Tremaine (1987), Galactic Dynamics, Princeton University Press.
Birkhoff, G. (1923), Relativity and Modern Physics, Harvard University Press.
Blandford, R. D., C. F. McKee, and M. J. Rees (1977), “Superluminal Expansion in
Extragalactic Radio Sources,” Nature 267, 211–216.
Blandford, R. D., and M. J. Rees (1978), “Extended and Compact Extragalactic Radio
Sources. Interpretation and Theory,” Physica Scripta 17, 265–274.
Blandford, R. D., and R. L. Znajek (1977), “Electromagnetic Extraction of Energy
from Kerr Black Holes,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
179, 433–456.
Bondi, H. (1980), Relativity and Common Sense, Dover.
Bower, G. A., D. O. Richstone, G. D. Bothun, and T. M. Heckman (1993), “A Search
for Dead Quasars Among Nearby Luminous Galaxies. I. The Stellar Kinematics

references 135
in the Nuclei NGC 2613, NGC 4699, NGC 5746, and NGC 7331,” Astrophys-
ical Journal 402, 76–94.
Bromley, B., F. Melia, and S. Liu (2001), “Polarimetric Imaging of the Massive Black
Hole at the Galactic Center,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 555, L83–L87.
Burbidge, G. R., T. W. Jones, and S. L. Odell (1974), “Physics of Compact Nonther-
mal Sources III. Energetic Considerations,” Astrophysical Journal 193, 43–54.
Carilli, C. L., and P. D. Barthel (1966), “Cygnus A,” The Astronomy and Astro-
physics Review 7, 1–54.
Chandrasekhar, S. (1931), “The Maximum Mass of Ideal White Dwarfs,” Astro-
physical Journal 74, 81–82.
Colbert, E. J. M., and A. F. Ptak (2002), “A Catalog of Candidate Intermediate-
Luminosity X-Ray Objects,” Astrophysical Journal Supplements 143, 25–45.
Cunningham, C. T., and J. M. Bardeen (1973), “The Optical Appearance of a Star
Orbiting an Extreme Kerr Black Hole,” Astrophysical Journal 183, 237–264.
Damour, T., in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, S. W. Hawking and W. Israel
(eds.) (1987), Cambridge University Press, 128–198.
Davydov, A. S. (1976), Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press.
de Bernardis, P., P. A. R. Ade, J. J. Bock, et al. (2000), “A Flat Universe from High-
Resolution Maps of the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation,” Nature
404, 955–959.
Dicke, R. H., P. J. E. Peebles, P. G. Roll, and D. T. Wilkinson (1965), “Cosmic
Black-Body Radiation,” Astrophysical Journal 142, 414–419.
Drake, S. (1981), Cause, Experiment, and Science, Chicago University Press.
Duschl, W. J., and H. Lesch (1994), “The Spectrum of Sagittarius A∗and its Vari-
ability,” Astronomy and Astrophysics 286, 431–436.
Eddington, A. S. (1935), “Minutes of a Meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society,”
Observatory 58, 37.
Eisenstein, D. J., and A. Loeb (1995), “Origin of Quasar Progenitors from the Col-
lapse of Low-spin Cosmological Perturbations,” Astrophysical Journal 443, 11–
17.
Fabian, A. C., I. Smail, K. Iwasawa, et al. (2000), “Testing the Connection Between
the X-ray and Submillimeter Source Populations Using Chandra,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 315, L8–L12.
Falcke, H., F. Melia, and E. Agol (2000), “Viewing the Shadow of the Black Hole at
the Galactic Center,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 528, L13–L17.
Fermi, E. (1956), Thermodynamics, Dover.
Ferrarese, L., and D. Merritt (2000), “A Fundamental Relation Between Supermas-
sive Black Holes and Their Host Galaxies,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 539,
L9–L12.

136 the edge of infinity
Feynman, R. P., and S. Weinberg (1989), Elementary Particles and the Laws of
Physics, Cambridge University Press.
Field, J. V. (1987), Kepler’s Geometrical Cosmology, University of Chicago Press.
Fromerth, M. J., and F. Melia (2001), “The Formation of Broad-Line Clouds in the
Accretion Shocks of Active Galactic Nuclei,” The Astrophysical Journal 549,
205–214.
(2000), “Determining the Central Mass in Active Galactic Nuclei Using Cross-
Correlation Lags and Velocity Dispersions,” The Astrophysical Journal 533,
172–175.
Gamow, G. (1948), “Evolution of the Universe,” Nature 162, 680–682.
Garrett, M., T. W. B. Muxlow, S. T. Garrington, et al. (2001), “AGN and Starbursts at
High Redshift: High-Resolution EVN Radio Observations of the Hubble Deep
Field,” Astronomy and Astrophysics 366, L5–L8.
Gebhardt, K., J. Kormendy, L. C. Ho, et al. (2000), “A Relationship Between
Nuclear Black Hole Mass and Galaxy Velocity Dispersion,” Astrophysical
Journal Letters 539, L13–L16.
Gebhardt, K., R. M. Rich, and L. C. Ho (2002), “A 20,000 Solar Mass Black Hole in
the Stellar Cluster G1,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 578, L41–L45.
Giacconi, R., A. Zirm, J.-X. Wangs, et al. (2002), “Chandra Deep Field South: The 1
Ms Catalog,” The Astrophysical Journal Supplements 139, 369–410.
Gillispie, C. C. (1997), Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: A Life in Exact Science,
Princeton University Press.
Green, P. J., T. L. Aldcroft, S. Mathur, B. J. Wilkes, and M. Elvis (2001), “A Chandra
Survey of Broad Absorption Line Quasars,” The Astrophysical Journal 558,
109–118.
Greene, B. (2000), The Elegant Universe, Vintage Books.
Gundlach, J. H., and S. M. Merkowitz (2000), “Measurement of Newton’s Con-
stant Using a Torsion Balance with Angular Acceleration Feedback,” Physical
Review Letters 85, 2869–2872.
Guth, A. (1981), “Inﬂationary Universe: A Possible Solution to the Horizon and
Flatness Problems,” Physical Review D 23, 347–358.
Guthrie, W. K. C. (1962), A History of Greek Philosophy, Volume I: The Earlier
PreSocratics and the Pythagoreans, Cambridge University Press.
Gwinn, C. R., R. M. Danen, T. Kh. Tran, J. Middleditch, and L. M. Ozernoy (1991),
“The Galactic Center Radio Source Shines Below the Compton Limit,” Astro-
physical Journal Letters 381, L43–L46.
Haehnelt, M. G., and M. J. Rees (1993), “The Formation of Nuclei in Newly Formed
Galaxies and the Evolution of the Quasar Population,” Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society 263, 168–178.

references 137
Hanany, S., P. Ade, A. Balbi, et al. (2000), “MAXIMA-1: A Measurement of the
Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropy on Small Angular Scales,” Astro-
physical Journal Letters 545, L5–L8.
Hawking, S. W. (1974), “Black Hole Explosions?” Nature 248, 30.
Hollywood, J. M., and F. Melia (1995), “The Effects of Redshifts and Focusing on the
Spectrum of an Accretion Disk in the Galactic Center Black Hole Candidate
Sgr A∗,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 443, L17–L21.
(1997), “General Relativistic Effects on the Infrared Spectrum of Thin Accre-
tion Disks in AGNs; Application to Sgr A∗,” Astrophysical Journal Supple-
ments 112, 423–455.
Hollywood, J. M., F. Melia, L. M. Close, D. W. McCarthy, Jr., and T. A. Dekeyser
(1995), “General Relativistic Flux Modulations in the Galactic Center Black
Hole Candidate Sgr A∗,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 448, L21–L25.
Hoyle, F., and G. R. Burbidge (1966), “On the Nature of the Quasi-Stellar Objects,”
Astrophysical Journal 144, 534.
Junor, W., J. A. Biretta, and M. Livio (1999), “Formation of the Radio Jet in
M87 at 100 Schwarzschild Radii from the Central Black Hole,” Nature 401,
891–892.
Kerr, R. P. (1963), “Gravitational Field of a Spinning Mass as an Example of Alge-
braically Special Metrics,” Physical Review Letters 11, 237–238.
Khokhlov, A., and F. Melia (1996), “Powerful Ejection of Matter from Tidally Dis-
rupted Stars Near Massive Black Holes and a Possible Application to Sgr A
East,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 457, L61–L64.
Kormendy, J., and D. Richstone (1995), “Inward Bound – The Search for Super-
massive Black Holes in Galactic Nuclei,” Annual Reviews of Astronomy and
Astrophysics 33, 581–624.
Landau, L. D. (1932), “On the Theory of Stars,” Physikalische Zeitschrift der Sow-
jetunion 1, 285–288.
Lee, H. C. (1984), An Introduction to Kaluza-Klein Theories, World Scientific.
Linde, A. (1990), Particle Physics and Inflationary Cosmology, Harwood Academic
Publishers.
Liu, S., and F. Melia (2001), “New Constraints on the Nature of Radio Emission in
Sagittarius A∗,” The Astrophysical Journal Letters 561, L77–L80.
(2002), “An Accretion Induced X-Ray Flare in Sagittarius A∗,” The Astrophys-
ical Journal Letters 566, L77–L80.
Longair, M. S., M. Ryle, and P. A. G. Scheuer (1973), “Models of Extended Radio
Sources,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 164, 243.
Lynden-Bell, D. (1969), “Galactic Nuclei as Collapsed Old Quasars,” Nature 223,
690.

138 the edge of infinity
Lynden-Bell, D., and M. J. Rees (1971), “On Quasars, Dust and the Galactic Centre,”
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 152, 461.
Lynden-Bell, D., and R. Wood (1968), “The Gravothermal Catastrophe in Isothermal
Spheres and the Onset of Red-giant Structure for Stellar Systems,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 138, 495.
Mach, E. (1893), The Science of Mechanics, trans. by T. J. McCormack, 2nd edn,
Open Court Publishing Co.
Malizia, A., L. Bassani, A. J. Dean, et al. (2001), “Hard X-Ray Detection of the High-
Redshift Quasar 4C 71.07,” The Astrophysical Journal 531, 642–646.
Martini, P., and R. W. Pogge (1999), “Hubble Space Telescope Observations of the
CFA Seyfert 2 Galaxies: The Fueling of Active Galactic Nuclei,” Astronomical
Journal 118, 2646–2657.
Matsumoto, H., et al. (2001), “Discovery of a Luminous, Variable, Off-Center
Source in the Nucleus of M82 with the Chandra High-Resolution Camera,”
Astrophysical Journal Letters 547, L25–L28.
Maxwell, J. C. (1954), Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Vol. II, Dover Publi-
cations.
McKellar, A. (1941), “The Problems of Possible Molecular Identification for In-
terstellar Lines,” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 53,
233–235.
Melia, F. (1992), “An Accreting Black Hole Model for Sagittarius A∗,” The Astro-
physical Journal Letters 387, L25–L29.
(2001), Electrodynamics, The University of Chicago Press.
(2001), “X-ray from the Edge of Infinity,” Nature 413, 25–26.
(2003), The Black Hole at the Center of our Galaxy, Princeton University Press.
Melia, F., B. C. Bromley, S. Liu, and C. K. Walker (2001), “Measuring the Black Hole
Spin in Sagittarius A∗,” The Astrophysical Journal Letters 554, L37–L40.
Melia, F., and H. Falcke (2001), “The Supermassive Black Hole at the Galactic
Center,” Annual Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics 39, 309–352.
Merrifield, M. R., D. A. Forbes, and A. I. Terlevich (2000), “The Black Hole Mass-
galaxy Age Relation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 313,
L29–L32.
Merritt, D., and L. Ferrarese (2001), “Black Hole Demographics from the M-Sigma
Relation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 320, L30–L34.
Michelson, A. A., and E. W. Morley (1887), “On the Relative Motion of the Earth
and the Luminiferous Ether,” American Journal of Science 34, 333–345.
Mihalas, D., and B. Weibel-Mihalas (1984), Foundations of Radiation Hydrody-
namics, Oxford University Press.

references 139
Miller, A. D., et al. (1999), “A Measurement of the Angular Power Spectrum of the
CMB from l = 100 to 400,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 524, L1–L4.
Misner, C. W., K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler (1973), Gravitation, W. H. Freeman
and Co.
Miyoshi, M., J. Moran, J. Herrnstein, et al. (1995), “Evidence for a Black Hole from
High Rotation Velocities in a Sub-Parsec Region of NGC 4258,” Nature 373,
127.
Moore, P. (1996), The Planet Neptune, An Historical Survey Before Voyager,
Praxis-Wiley.
Morrison, P. “Are Quasi-Stellar Radio Sources Giant Pulsars?” Astrophysical
Journal 157, L73.
Mushotzky, R. F., L. L. Cowie, A. J. Barger, and K. A. Arnaud (2000), “Resolving the
Extragalactic Hard X-ray Background,” Nature 404, 459–464.
Newton, I. (1966), Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, trans. by
Andrew Motte, revised and annotated by F. Cajori, University of California
Press.
Oppenheimer, J. R., and H. Snyder (1939), “On Continued Gravitational Contrac-
tion,” Physical Review 56, 455–459.
Osterbrock, D. E. (2001), Walter Baade: A Life in Astrophysics, Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Ostriker, J. P., and P. J. Steinhardt (2001), “Brave New Cosmos: The Quintessential
Universe,” Scientific American 284, 47–53.
Parker, E. N. (1979), Cosmical Magnetic Fields, Oxford University Press.
Penrose, R. (1969), “Gravitational Collapse, the Role of General Relativity,” Rivista
Nuovo Cimento 1 Numero Speciale, 252.
Penzias, A. A., and R. W. Wilson (1965), “A Measurement of Excess Antenna
Temperature at 4080 Mc/s,” Astrophysical Journal 142, 419–421.
Perlmutter, S., G. Aldering, G. Goldhaber, et al. (1999), “Measurements of Omega
and Lambda from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae,” The Astrophysical Journal
517, 565–586.
Pound, R. V., and G. A. Rebka (1960), “The Apparent Weight of Photons,” Physical
Review Letters 4, 337–341.
Quinlan, G. D., and S. L. Shapiro (1990), “The Dynamical Evolution of Dense Star
Clusters in Galactic Nuclei,” Astrophysical Journal 356, 483–500.
Rees, M. J. (1966), “Appearance of Relativistically Expanding Radio Sources,”
Nature 211, 468–470.
(1971), “New Interpretation of Extragalactic Radio Sources,” Nature 229, 312
and 510.

140 the edge of infinity
(1988), “Tidal Disruption of Stars by Black Holes of 106 to 108 Solar Masses in
Nearby Galaxies,” Nature 333, 523–528.
Reid, M. J., A. C. S. Readhead, R. C. Vermeulen, and R. N. Treuhaft (1999), “The
Proper Motion of Sagittarius A∗. I. First VLBA Results,” Astro-physical Journal
524, 816–823.
Rybicki, G. B., and A. P. Lightman (1979), Radiative Processes in Astrophysics,
John Wiley and Sons.
Sakurai, J. J. (1964), Invariance Principles and Elementary Particles, Princeton
University Press.
Salpeter, E. E. (1964), “Accretion of Interstellar Matter by Massive Objects,”
Astrophysical Journal 140, 796–800.
Scheuer, P. A. G. (1974), “Models of Extragalactic Radio Sources with a Contin-
uous Energy Supply from a Central Object,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 166, 513–528.
Schmidt, B. P., N. B. Suntzeff, M. M. Phillips, et al. (1998), “The High-Z Supernova
Search: Measuring Cosmic Deceleration and Global Curvature of the Universe
Using Type IA Supernovae,” The Astrophysical Journal 507, 46–63.
Schmidt, M. (1963), “3C 273: A Star-like Object with Large Red-shift,” Nature 197,
1040.
Sch¨odel, R., T. Ott, R. Genzel, et al. (2002), “A Star in a 15.2-year Orbit Around
the Supermassive Black Hole at the Centre of the Milky Way,” Nature 419,
694–696.
Shai, A., M. Livio, and T. Piran (2000), “Tidal Disruption of a Solar-Type Star by a
Supermassive Black Hole,” Astrophysical Journal 545, 772–780.
Shapiro, S. L., and S. A. Teukolsky (1992), “Black Holes, Star Clusters, and
Naked Singularities: Numerical Solution of Einstein’s Equations,” Philosoph-
ical Transactions: Physical Sciences and Engineering 340, 365–390.
Silk, J., and M. J. Rees (1998), “Quasars and Galaxy Formation,” Astronomy and
Astrophysics 331, L1–L4.
Smoot, G. F., and K. Davidson (1993), Wrinkles in Time, William Morrow.
Starobinsky, A. A. (1980), “A New Type of Isotropic Cosmological Models without
Singularity,” Physics Letters B 91B, 99–104.
Steinberg, J. L., and J. Lequeux (1963), Radio Astronomy, McGraw-Hill.
Strohmayer, T. E. (2001), “Discovery of a 450 Hz QPO from the Microquasar GRO
J1655-40 with RXTE,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 552, 49–53.
Stubbs, P. (1971), “Red Shift Without Reason,” New Scientist 50, 254–255.
Thorne, K. S. (1995), Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy,
Norton and Co.

references 141
Thorne, K. S., R. H. Price, and D. A. Macdonald (1986), Black Holes: The Membrane
Paradigm, Yale University Press.
Tolman, R. C. (1987), Relativity, Thermodynamics, and Cosmology, Dover Publi-
cations.
Umemura, M., A. Loeb, and E. L. Turner (1993), “Early Cosmic Formation of
Massive Black Holes,” Astrophysical Journal 419, 459.
van der Marel, R. P., “Structure of the Globular Cluster M15 and Constraints on a
Massive Central Black Hole,” in Black Holes in Binaries and Galactic Nuclei,
L. Kaper, E. P. J. van den Heuvel, and P. A. Woudt (eds.) (1999), 246, Springer.
Wald, R. (1984), General Relativity, University of Chicago Press.
Wardle, J. F. C., D. C. Homan, R. Ojha, and D. H. Roberts (1998), “Electron-Positron
Jets Associated with the Quasar 3C 279,” Nature 395, 457–461.
Weber, J. (1969), “Evidence for Discovery of Gravitational Radiation,” Physical
Review Letters 22, 1320–1324.
Weinberg, S. (1972), Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of
the General Theory of Relativity, John Wiley and Sons.
(1977), The First Three Minutes, Basic Books.
Westfall, R. (1981), Never at Rest, Cambridge University Press.
Wheeler, J. A. (1999), Journey into Gravity and Spacetime, Freeman and Co.
Williams, R. E., B. Blacker, M. Dickinson, et al. (1996), “The Hubble Deep Field:
Observations, Data Reduction, and Galaxy Photometry,” Astronomical Journal
112, 1335.
Wilms, J., C. S. Reynolds, M. C. Begelman, et al. (2001), “XMM-EPIC Observation
of MCG-6-30-15: Direct Evidence for the Extraction of Energy from a Spinning
Black Hole?” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 328, L27–
L31.
Zel’dovich, Ya. B., and I. D. Novikov (1967), “The Hypothesis of Cores Retarded
During Expansion and the Hot Cosmological Model,” Soviet Astronomy 10,
602.
Zel’dovich, Ya. B., and M. A. Podurets (1965), “The Evolution of a System of Gravi-
tationally Interacting Point Masses,” Astronomicheskii Zhurnal 42, 963.
Zensus, J. A., and T. J. Pearson (1987), Superluminal Radio Sources, Cambridge
University Press.

Index
3C 273, 2, 3, 6, 7, 17, 30, 77, 92
3C 279, 103, 104
absolute zero temperature, 66
accelerating universe, 36
accretion disks, 25
accretion disk simulation, 23
accretion of plasma, 20
acoustic ﬂuctuations, 71
action at a distance, 34
active galactic nuclei, 11, 13–14, 29
Adams, Fred C., 130
Adams, John Couch, 35
adaptive optics, 31
Advanced X-ray Astrophysics
Facility, 6
Agol, Eric, 116
Albert Einstein Institute, 83, 84
ALMA, 117
Alpher, Ralph, 66
Andromeda, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21, 32,
74, 79, 85, 98, 104
angular resolution, 118
Antennae galaxies, 21, 76
antimatter, 103, 132
ANTU, 76
apertures, 98
aponigricon, 33
ARISE, 99, 116
Arkani-Hamed, Nima, 41
asteroids, 129
Atacama desert, 117
ATT, 92–93, 94
automobile sparks, 96
Axon, David, 15
B++ mechanism, 107
Baade, Walter, 97, 104
balloon ﬂights, 124
Becklin, Eric, 32
beginning, 120
Bell Labs, 67, 92–93, 94
Berkeley, 12
Berlin, 84
Berlin Academy, 53
Bernstein, Herbert J., 47
Big Bang, 4, 12–13, 64, 70, 72, 78, 111,
114–15, 124, 129
Bio-Bio river, 31
Biretta, John, 107
Birkhoff’s theorem, 122–24
Birkhoff, George, 122
black holes, 1, 11, 13, 17, 20, 27, 52, 133
binary, 83
evaporation, 133
formation, 63
mass, 19
spacetime, 34
spin, 100
voltage, 61
Blandford, Roger, 60, 102, 109
blueshift, 3
Bolton, John, 2
BOOMERanG experiment, 71, 124–25
Bose-Einstein Condensation, 50
bosons, 48
bounded space, 39
Brandt, William N., 113
Burbidge, Geoffrey R., 101
CALTECH, 65, 117, 125
Canada, 108
Canes Venatici, 27
Capetti, Alessandro, 15
carbon, 45
Carnegie Mellon University, 90
Cash, Webster, 119
cause and effect, 127
CDF, 112
Centaurus, 15
Centaurus A, 15–16, 77, 100, 106
CERN, 44

index 143
Chandra Deep Field, 112
Chandra telescope, 6, 13, 15, 78, 82,
90, 113, 115, 117
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan, 6
charges, 132
Chicago, 51
clusters, 17
CMVA, 116
coalescing black holes, 84
COBE, 69–70
Colbert, Edward, 90
compression, 23, 24, 45
Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory, 8
computer simulations, 86
constellations, 3, 8, 11, 15, 19, 27, 93,
94, 95, 96, 106
Constellation-X, 118
contour maps, 96
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 25
correlator, 97
Corvus, 11
cosmic ﬂashlight, 24
cosmic microwave background radiation,
64–65, 67, 68, 124
cosmological ﬂuctuations, 68–70, 72
cosmology, 26, 68, 123
creation of particles, 132
cross-registration, 96
Curtis, Heber, 104, 105
cyclones, 20, 23
Cygnus, 96
Cygnus A, 15, 16, 77, 96–97, 101, 106
Cygnus X-1, 14
Damour, Thibault, 85
dark age, 78
dark energy, 36
dark mass, 106
dark matter, 73
Davidson, Kris, 69
Davis, Marc, 12
de Bernardis, Paolo, 124
Deep Space Network, 112
density of matter, 125
detectors, 119
diamonds, 130
diatomic molecules, 66
Dicke, Robert H., 68
dilution of gravity, 42
dimension deﬁned, 39
Dimopoulos, Savas, 41
disk simulations, 23
Dominion Astrophysical Observatory, 66
Doppler shift, 59, 70
Dvali, Gia, 41
Dwingeloo, 112
dying universe, 130
dynamos, 60
early universe, 71, 120
Earth atmosphere, 19, 117
echoes of the Big Bang, 70
Eckart, Andreas, 32
edge of the universe, 3, 10, 12
Effelsberg, 112
Einstein, Albert, 1, 4–5, 40
electricity, 60
electromagnetic force, 35
electron degeneracy, 50
electrons, 127
electrostatic induction, 60
electroweak force, 127, 128
elliptical galaxies, 75
energy, 126, 131–33
Eot-Wash laboratory, 43
European Southern Observatory, 31
European Space Agency, 58
European VLBI, 112
event horizons, 10, 17, 55, 92, 99, 106,
131–32
EVN, 112
expanding universe, 123
expansion of space, 123
extra dimensions, 38, 41, 43–44, 127
Fabian, Andrew C., 115
Falcke, Heino, 116
Faraday, Michael, 60–61
Fermi National Accelerator, 12
fermions, 48
Ferrarese, Laura, 79
ﬁreballs, 66
ﬂuctuations, 132
ﬂywheels, 61
Forbes, Duncan A., 18
forces, 35
four-dimensional space, 40
Friedan, Betty, 1
fundamental constants, 125
fundamental particles, 130

144 the edge of infinity
future directions, 115
fuzziness, 125–26, 128, 131
G1 globular cluster, 74
galactic bulges, 79
galactic center, 30, 32, 93, 98, 101, 117
galaxies
collisions, 11, 82, 85, 86
formation, 63, 81
mergers, 74, 76
types, 74
Galilei, Galileo, 34
galvanometers, 60
gamma rays, 8
Gamow, George, 66
Garrett, Michael, 112
Gebhardt, Karl, 74, 80
general relativity, 1, 122, 131
generators, 60
Genzel, Reinhard, 32
Ghez, Andrea, 32
Giacconi, Riccardo, 113
Glashow, Sheldon, 127
globular clusters, 74, 75
Grand Uniﬁed Theory, 127–28, 129
gravis, 34
gravitas, 34
gravitation, 26
gravitational acceleration, 54
gravitational collapse, 45
gravitational force, 36
gravitational waves, 82–83, 84–85, 115,
122–23
gravity, 34, 36, 60
Great Britain, 1
Great Depression, 95
Green, Paul J., 115
Greene, Brian, 41
Gundlach, Jens, 43
GUT see Grand Uniﬁed Theory
Guth, Alan, 72
HALCA, 99
Harvard-Smithsonian Center, 90
Hawaii, 28, 98
Hawking radiation, 132
Hayes, Helen, 4
Haystack Observatory, 98, 116
Hazard, Cyril, 2
HDF, 111, 112
Hearst, William Randolph, 4
Heinrich-Hertz telescope, 117
heliostatic cosmology, 25
helium, 45
Herman, Robert, 66
Hierarchy Problem, 37, 42–43, 56
high temperatures, 127
Hollywood, 4
Hoyle, Fred, 101
Hubble Deep Field, 111–12
Hubble sequence, 75
Hubble Space Telescope, 3, 6, 9, 10, 15, 22,
31, 63, 108
Hubble, Edwin, 3, 4, 5, 104
human perception, 129
Huntington Library, 5
Hutchings, John, 9
hydroelectricity, 60
hydrogen, 3
hydrogen maser clock, 98
hyperspace, 42, 120
IC 2163, 87
indistinguishability of particles, 49
infalling gas, 16, 25
inﬁnite space, 39
inﬂationary cosmology, 71
interferometry, 28, 77, 97, 112
inverse-square law, 27
iron, 45
irregular galaxies, 75
Jansky, Karl, 93, 94
Jansky’s merry-go-round, 93
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 99
jets, 15, 16, 58, 99, 102–03, 104, 105, 107–10
formation, 101
Johns Hopkins University, 90
Junor, William, 107
Jupiter, 26
Kaluza, Theodor, 40
Kaluza-Klein bottle, 41
Keck telescope, 12, 32
Kennedy, John F., 1
Kenya, 1
Kepler, Johannes, 25, 26, 28, 31
Kerr, Roy, 1, 56–57
Klein, Oskar, 41
Kormendy, John, 79

index 145
Lange, Andrew, 125
laser interferometers, 85
Latini, 34
Laughlin, Gregory, 130
Le Verrier, Jean Joseph, 35
lenticular galaxies, 75
Lick Observatory, 104–05
life, 129
light bending, 2
light-horizon constraint, 71
light-year, 6
Lincolnshire, 26
Linde, Andrei, 65, 72
LISA, 85, 115
Liu, Siming, 116
Livio, Mario, 107
Los Angeles, 99
Lovell Telescope, 112
lunar orbit, 20
Lynden-Bell, Donald, 8, 73
M104, 76
M15 globular cluster, 74
M82, 13
M87, 104–06, 108–09
Macchetto, Duccio, 15
Macdonald, Douglas A., 131
magnetic ﬁeld, 101, 107
magnetism, 60
magnets, 37
Malizia, Angela, 8
Mapuche people, 31
Marcel Grossmann Meeting, 43
Marconi, Alessandro, 15
Marconi, Guglielmo, 92
Mars, 26, 121
Martini, Paul, 21
masers, 27, 29
MAT, 71
Matsumoto, Hironori, 14
Mauna Kea, 98
MAXIM, 118, 119
MAXIMA, 71
MCG-6–30–15, 58–61, 69, 83
McKee, Chris, 109
McKellar, Andrew, 66–67
Melia, Fulvio, 99, 116
Mercury, 26, 31
meridian, 93
Merkowitz, Stephen, 43
Merriﬁeld, Michael R., 18
Merritt, David, 79
Messier Catalogue, 75
Messier, Charles, 13, 75, 104
metrics, 53
middleweight black holes, 89
Milky Way, 10, 13, 20–21, 32, 58, 79, 85, 93,
104–05
millimeter VLBI, 116
mini-spirals, 22
Minkowski, Rudolph, 104
molecular rotation, 66
molecular vibration, 66
Moon, 2, 6, 111
Morris, Mark, 32
Morrison, Philip, 102
Mount Graham, 117
Mount Wilson, 4
multiply connected space, 39
Mushotzky, Richard, 78
naked singularity, 8
NASA, 9, 13, 58, 119
National Science Foundation, 27
Neptune, 7, 35
neutrons, 48, 51, 127, 130
neutron stars, 57, 129
New General Catalog, 27
New York Times, 93
Newton, Sir Isaac, 20, 30, 31
NGC 2207, 87
NGC 253, 90, 91
NGC 4258, 27–28, 30, 33, 98
NGC 5728, 24
NGC 6240, 82–83
NGC 7052, 19–21
NICMOS, 15
nitrogen, 45
Nobel Prize, 5–6, 27, 68, 113, 127
Novikov, Igor D., 8
NRAO, 94, 105, 112
nuclear burning, 129
nuclei, 14
Ohio State University, 22, 115
one-dimensional space, 40
optical telescopes, 118
orientation effect in 3D, 46, 49
Ostriker, Jeremiah P., 36
oxygen, 45

146 the edge of infinity
parallel universes, 92, 96
Paranal Observatory, 10, 15, 76
Parkes telescope, 2
particles
creation, 132
physics, 129
spin, 48
Pearson, Timothy, 103
Penzias, Arno, 67
perenigricon, 33
Perlmutter, Saul, 125
Philippine wine dance, 47
Phillips, Anthony V., 47
photon, 12, 127, 131–32
pion, 130
Planck
constant, 126–27
energy, 38
era, 127, 128
length, 126
time, 121, 125–26, 131
planets, 25–26, 37, 129
Pluto, 31, 33
Pogge, Richard, 21
polyhedra, 25
positrons, 130
Potsdam, 83
Price, Richard H., 131
primordial matter, 129
primordial seeds, 64
primordial temperature, 128
Princeton University, 67
protons, 127
proton decay, 130
PSR 1913 + 16, 84
Ptak, Andrew, 90
pulsar, 84
QSO 1229 + 204, 9, 82–83
quanta, 131–32
quantized spin, 48
quantum ﬂuctuation, 132
quantum mechanics, 48–49, 125,
128, 131
quantum scale, 127
quarks, 52, 128
quasars, 3, 6, 8, 9, 12, 16, 89, 108,
114–15
age, 18
birth, 63
environment, 10
host galaxies, 10, 18, 29, 63
radar, 59, 96
radiation, 132–33
radio
astronomer, 96
catalogues, 96
cores, 101
dishes, 116–17, 119
interferometry, 116
power, 101
telescopes, 2, 27, 109, 116, 119
universe, 97
voice transmission, 93
waves, 97
Reber, Grote, 95
redshift, 3, 4, 104
Rees, Martin, 73, 81, 102, 109
relativistic plasma, 100
ejection, 92, 96
Richstone, Doug, 79
Riemann, Georg, 40
ROSAT, 90
Rosenfeld, L´eon, 66
Rutgers University, 79
S2, 32, 33
Sagittarius, 93
Sagittarius A*, 30, 31, 33, 78
Salam, Abdus, 127
Salpeter, Edwin, 8
Sanskrit, 34
satellites, 26, 58
Schmidt, Brian P., 125
Schmidt, Maarten, 1, 3, 30
Schreier, Ethan, 15
Schutz, Bernard, 83
Schwarzschild, Karl, 52
Schwarzschild metric, 54, 57, 60, 122
Schwarzschild radius, 55, 106, 121
Schwarzschild spacetime, 53–54
Shapiro, Stuart L., 73
Shapley, Harlow, 104
Shapley–Curtis debate, 104
shortwave links, 93
sidereal time, 93
Silk, Joseph, 81
singularities, 38
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, 12–13, 113

index 147
Smith, F. Graham, 97
Smoot, George F., 69
Socorro, 28, 98
solar system, 7, 106
sonic horizon, 71
sound waves, 23
Soviet Union, 1, 108
Space Shuttle, 6
Space Telescope Science Institute, 107
Space VLBI, 99
spacetime, 53, 61
special relativity, 53, 104, 109
speeding car, 59
spheroidal distribution, 81
spin temperature, 67
spinning black holes, 1, 56, 57
spinning tops, 48
spiral galaxies, 75
St Croix, 98
star S2, 32, 33
Starobinsky, Alexey A., 72
static, 93
steady state universe, 65
Steinhardt, Paul J., 36
string theory, 41
strong force, 128
structure formation, 78
Sun, 4, 45, 104, 119, 121
superluminal motion, 103, 109–10
superluminal sources, 103
supermassive black holes, 8, 13, 17, 19, 21,
22, 27, 32, 57, 72, 96, 102, 130
density, 113
supernova, 89
Swings, Pol, 66
synchrotron radiation, 101
telephone company, 92
telescopes, 117
Telstar satellite, 67
Terlevich, Alejandro I., 18
thermodynamics, 65
thermometers, 67
Thorne, Kip S., 131
three-dimensional space, 39, 44, 49
Tiber river, 34
time machines, 12
Titanic, 92
Tokyo, 99
Tolman, Richard, 65
topology of 3-space, 46
torsion balances, 43
total collapse, 44–46
Townes, Charles, 27
twinkle, 31
two-dimensional space, 39
Type-2 quasar, 114
UK, 108
ultimate fate, 129
ultraluminous X-ray source, 89, 91
uncertainty principle, 126
universal expansion, 12, 36, 64
universal glow, 113
University College London, 114
University of Cambridge , 61, 114
University of Chicago, 12
University of Colorado, 118, 119
University of Durham, 114
University of Michigan, 79
University of New Mexico, 107
University of Rome, 124
University of Texas, 79
unseen dimensions, 38
uranium nucleus, 44
Uranus, 35
Ursa Major, 8
USA, 108
van der Marel, Roeland P., 74
Very Large Array, 77, 98, 99, 102
Very Large Baseline Array (VLBA), 28, 98, 99,
106, 107, 109
Very Large Telescope, 10, 15, 31–32
Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI),
28, 97, 108, 116, 117, 119
Virgin Islands, 28, 98
Virgo, 3
Virgo A, 105, 106
Virgo cluster, 104–06
visible universe, 12, 123–24
VLA see Very Large Array
voltage, 61
Vulpecula, 19
W particles, 127
Wald, Robert, 131
Walt Disney, 14
Washington University, 84
wavelengths, 132

148 the edge of infinity
weak force, 130
Weinberg, Steven, 127
whirlpools, 28, 57
white dwarfs, 129
Wide Field and Planetary
Camera, 9
Wilms, Joern, 58
Wilson, Robert, 67
wireless communication, 94
wireless radio, 92
X-rays, 6–7, 13, 58, 113,
118, 119
background, 114–15
mirrors, 59
sources, 113
telescopes, 119
XMM-Newton, 58–59, 61
YEPUN telescope, 31–32
Z particles, 127
Zel’dovich, Yakov B., 8, 73
Zensus, Anton, 103
zero spin, 48
zero time, 120
Zezas, Andreas, 89
Znajek, Roman, 60

