
The Earthquake Observers


The Earthquake Observers
Disaster Science from Lisbon to Richter
D e b ora h  R .  C o e n
The University of Chicago Press
Chicago and London

Deborah R. Coen is assistant professor of history at Barnard College, Colum-
bia University. She is the author of Vienna in the Age of Uncertainty: Science, 
Liberalism, and Private Life, also published by the University of Chicago Press.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2013 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 2013.
Printed in the United States of America
22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13    1 2 3 4 5
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-11181-0 (cloth)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-11183-4 (e-book)
ISBN-10: 0-226-11181-4 (cloth)
ISBN-10: 0-226-11183-0 (e-book)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Coen, Deborah R.
  The earthquake observers : disaster science from Lisbon to Richter /  
Deborah R. Coen.  pages ; cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN-13: 978-0-226-11181-0 (cloth: alkaline paper)
  ISBN-10: 0-226-11181-4 (cloth: alkaline paper)
  ISBN-13: 978-0-226-11183-4 (e-book)
  ISBN-10: 0-226-11183-0 (e-book)  
1. Seismology—History.  2. Earthquakes—Observations—History—19th century.   
I. Title. 
  QE539.C64 2013
  551.209'034—dc23
                                              2012015828
a This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992  
(Permanence of Paper).

For Paul


Con ten ts
Introduction / 1
O N E /  The Human Seismograph / 15
T WO /  The Planet in the Village: Comrie, Scotland, 1788–1897 / 25
T HR E E  /  News of the Apocalypse / 45
F OU R  /  The Tongues of Seismology: Switzerland, 1855–1912 / 69
F I V E  /  Geographies of Hazard / 103
S I X  /  The Moment of Danger / 125
S E VE N  /  Fault Lines and Borderlands: Imperial Austria, 1880–1914 / 141
E I G HT  /  What Is the Earth? / 163
N IN E  /  The Youngest Land: California, 1853–1906 / 187
TE N /  A True Measure of Violence: California, 1906–1935 / 215
Conclusion / 267
Acknowledgments / 279
Notes / 281
Bibliography / 315
Index / 345


Introduction
No tremor is felt, no liquid is spilled, without the direction in which it occurred 
being reported to the paper the next morning. . . . Day in, day out, today, tomor-
row, eternally. Until the world truly comes crashing down.
—Karl Kraus, “The Earthquake” (1908)1
I should admit from the outset that I have never felt an earthquake. What’s 
more, unlike many of the nineteenth-century witnesses that people the fol-
lowing pages, I have no longing to experience one. Nor was I fascinated by 
seismology when I began to investigate its history; that came later. Instead, 
this book began with a metaphor: an earthquake of the mind.2
Nietzsche used the metaphor of the intellectual earthquake to describe 
the consequences of the ruthless empiricism of the nineteenth century. “As 
cities collapse and grow desolate when there is an earthquake, and man 
erects his house on volcanic land only in fear and trembling and only 
briefly, so life itself caves in and grows weak and fearful when the concept-
quake [Begriffsbeben] caused by science [Wissenschaft] robs man of the foun-
dation of all his rest and security, his belief in the enduring and eternal.”3 
The nineteenth century’s relentless scientific spirit had shaken traditional 
beliefs like an earthquake. The result was a sense of radical contingency and 
disorientation. Nietzsche may have judged this condition a “sickness,” but 
not all his contemporaries agreed. The version of the metaphor that first 
piqued my curiosity appeared in a didactic allegory by the Austrian physi-
cist Franz Serafin Exner. A young man sets out to explore the world and 
encounters novelties that contradict the wisdom inherited from his elders: 
“As in an earthquake, what begins to shake is just what we have since child-
hood grown used to regarding as the one solid thing in the world, and 

 / Introduction
so in an instant our previous faith proves to be false and one-sided.”4 For 
Exner, I found, this crisis was a requisite step on the way to intellectual ma-
turity: acquiring a scientific mindset meant embracing the predicament of 
contingency­ with the help of probabilistic reasoning. So why, I wondered, 
did he resort to what appeared to be a symbol of nihilism? Similarly, in the 
1930s, when Kurt Gödel demonstrated that the dream of a complete logical 
system could never be achieved, two of his most eminent central European 
colleagues likened the impact to an earthquake. “The work on formally un-
decidable propositions was received like an earthquake” wrote Karl Popper, 
while Karl Menger reflected that the “various edifices [of mathematics] are 
not secure against the earthquake of a contradiction.”5 As one commentator 
has suggested, the earthquake metaphor implies that the theorem caused 
“widespread confusion and despair.”6 By all accounts, however, philoso-
phers like Popper and Menger readily embraced Gödel’s idea and its radical 
implications. Why then the violent metaphor?
With further research, I began to suspect that the metaphor was more 
than metaphorical. There was a concrete sense in which earthquakes were 
losing the apocalyptic associations of an earlier age. Nineteenth-century sci-
entists were enlisting ordinary people to record seismic events, from barely 
perceptible tremors to catastrophic shocks. Popular writers were discussing 
earthquakes as elements of a natural landscape with which people had to 
learn to live—much as Exner, Popper, and Menger believed that philosophy 
had to adapt to the instability of the modern intellectual landscape. And the 
notion of an “intellectual earthquake” was becoming vivid, as the human 
sciences probed the psychic effects of seismic events. Earthquake observers, 
in short, were confronting head-on the crisis Nietzsche identified: the men-
tal plunge into the uncertain universe of modern science.
What I learned, in short, is that the world became shakier in the nine-
teenth century. By that I do not mean simply that political revolutions and 
industrialization were perceived in terms of precipitous, dizzying change. I 
mean that the earth was caught trembling more often than before. Reports 
of jerks, bumps, rumbles, and thuds proliferated. They passed from hand to 
hand in newspapers, letters, scientific transactions, and medical case stud-
ies. Certain countries and even towns acquired reputations for impressive 
instability. Travelers looked forward to the thrill of a first earthquake. Peo-
ple learned to suspect that the sound of a distant wagon rolling over cob-
blestones was the trembling of the earth itself—and they could check the 
morning papers to confirm it. “One could read ten times in a row that Herr 
Jonas Blau, Frau Isole Klümpel, Herr Isidor Käsler, Herr Wotan Kohn and 

Introduction / 
Herr Leo Kohn or Fräulein Sprinzel-Kohary were just sitting down to dessert 
when the glasses started to clatter.”7
And then, sometime around the Great War, the trembling apparently sub-
sided. The newspapers turned to larger cataclysms and more “worldly” mat-
ters. The din of Herr Blau and Frau Klümpel’s glasses faded into silenc­e.
Disaster Science
Disaster is, by definition, that which “cannot be comprehended exactly.”8 
It is a hopelessly hybrid entity: inextricably entangling the natural and the 
social, freighting objectivity with subjectivity, and binding global science to 
local contingencies. This book shows how the earthquake as disaster—as an 
interface between nature and society—was made and unmade as a scientific 
object. Earthquakes furnished ideal conditions for geophysical research: 
they gave access to the planet’s hidden structure and to the forces that had 
shaped the earth throughout its history. The problem, in an age before reli-
able seismographs, was how to turn an instant of panic and confusion into 
a field for the production of scientific evidence. This was the achievement 
of the permanent networks of seismic observers organized in the late nine-
teenth century. The result was a natural experiment at the nexus of human 
behavior and planetary physics.
In the nineteenth century, a scientific description of an earthquake was 
built of stories—stories from as many people, in as many places, in as many 
different situations as possible. “It will be obvious,” wrote one nineteenth-
century geologist, “that no single person can, from his own observations, 
estimate the area agitated by an earthquake, though much may be accom-
plished by the combined observations of many.”9 “Likely in no other field,” 
admitted another, “is the researcher so completely dependent on the help 
of the non-geologist, and nowhere is the observation of each individual of 
such high value as with earthquakes.”10 In the chapters that follow, we will 
encounter the nineteenth century’s most eloquent seismic commentators, 
including Alexander von Humboldt, Charles Darwin, Mark Twain, Charles 
Dickens, Ernst Mach, John Muir, Gertrude Atherton, and William James. 
We will also meet countless others whose names are long forgotten: citizen-
observers, many of whom were women. Sometimes their stories told of 
fear and devastation, sometimes of excitement and curiosity, sometimes of 
wonder, incomprehension, disbelief, or uncertainty. As an observer in New 
Jersey put it when reporting a possible tremor to a local scientist, “You are 
interested in manifestations, which, otherwise unexplainable, are referred 

 / Introduction
to earthquakes.” In this case, the observer had been reading peacefully when 
he was suddenly disturbed by a shaking, which “seemed to result from 
some giant having braced his feet well apart on the room overhead and then 
made an effort to sway the building.” Others in the house had also noticed 
something odd; one assumed that a Mr. W. was chasing his wife through 
the house, or perhaps she was chasing him. “Had I known what was coming 
I should have been prepared for some careful observations as to time. . . . 
As I had never had a similar experience I did not realize what I was missing 
until too late.”11 Observers had to learn how to report such ambiguities, and 
seismologists had to learn how to work with them. Many of these earth-
quake reports have been preserved in archives, and they are a window onto 
an unusual dialogue. “Observe conscientiously,” instructed an 1879 guide 
to earthquake observing, “but have no fearfulness with respect to us in the 
transmission of observations. All that is genuinely observed is welcome, 
even what is perceived in uncertainty, as long as it is marked as such.”12
These were stories, above all, about individuals and communities and 
their relationships to the land they lived on. As a late nineteenth-century an-
tiquarian from the Swiss village of Fleurier noted of the earthquake reports 
of a generation past, “These notes . . . do not have the dryness and banality 
of a newspaper report; they [stand out] for their candidness, originality, and 
local flavor, and it is not the least of their merits that they transport us to 
the simple and rustic Fleurier of old.”13 Quaint as they may at first appear, 
earthquake reports based on human observations (“felt reports”) hold a 
rich ore of information. As we will see, it was on the basis of felt reports 
that earthquakes came to be understood as the result of horizontal move-
ments of the earth’s crust. It was also on this basis that scientists learned 
that earthquakes can be triggered by human activities (a phenomenon now 
known as induced seismicity). Felt reports profit from the familiarity of lo-
cal observers with the normal state of their surroundings: locals are in the 
best position to recognize anomalies such as variations of groundwater lev-
els, unusual weather, remarkable animal behavior, or changes in the sur-
face of the land.14 Their observations bear clues to the spatial variability of 
the impacts of earthquakes, which is a complex function of factors such as 
tectonic structure, soil type, and building style. Maps based on felt reports 
(“macroseismic intensity maps”) shed light on the geography of seismic 
risk; they can help locate faults and guide reconstruction in order to miti-
gate future damage. What’s more, such sources reveal how earthquakes have 
been perceived and interpreted in different times and places. Like recent sur-
veys that have attempted to assess, for instance, whether earthquake victims 
in California and in Japan display different degrees of fatalism, nineteenth-

Introduction / 
century felt reports open windows onto the cultural determinants of risk 
perception.15 As the Swiss Earthquake Service put it in 1910, “To study the 
relationship of man to earthquakes was from the start a special goal of Swiss 
earthquake research.”16 In short, the information gleaned encompassed a 
disaster’s physical impacts, human responses, and the conditions under 
which knowledge of either was possible. In today’s terms, the perspective 
of nineteenth-century seismology would be described as “integrated.” It ad-
dressed both the physical and human factors that define today’s notion of 
“vulnerability”—including regional seismicity, building standards, and the 
social conditions that affect a society’s ability to cope with disasters. In other 
words, this nineteenth-century research made apparent one of the core les-
sons of recent environmental history and disaster studies: that “natural di­
sasters” as such do not exist, that catastrophic consequences are always the 
outcome of an unfortunate conjunction of geophysical circumstances and 
human choices.17
Today, seismologists are increasingly aware of the uncertainty of seis-
mic risk assessments. The potential violence of even weak earthquakes has 
been magnified in an age of gravity-defying engineering and nuclear power. 
Assessing local risk means analyzing seismic processes over the course of 
centuries. Scientists therefore need to dig beyond the last few decades of 
seismographic records, deep into the human records of the past. The obser-
vations of ordinary nineteenth-century people have been dug out of news-
papers and archives and mined once again for clues to long-term patterns of 
seismicity. Even today, the most sophisticated seismographs alone cannot 
reveal how the impacts of earthquakes vary at a local level; and there are 
many effects to which seismographs are blind, such as building damage 
and topographical changes. Moreover, it has become clear that earthquakes 
pose a threat in continental interiors, far from the edges of tectonic plates. 
The causes of such “intraplate” earthquakes remain a mystery: the experts 
themselves insist that there are no experts on this subject. As we will see, 
seismologists are once again enlisting the public as earthquake observers.18
Until recently, disasters have been conspicuously absent from historians’ 
accounts of modern science. The current field of disaster studies typically 
locates its origins in the 1970s, with the rise of the risk-management para-
digm. Before that, the assumption goes, disasters were regarded as “purely 
physical occurrences, requiring largely technological solutions.”19 This lim-
ited vision has been matched by a studied disregard for disasters within 
the field of history of science. In laying out the mission of the discipline in 
the 1920s, George Sarton demoted wars, pestilence, earthquakes, and the 
like from world-historical events to superficial contingencies. For Sarton­, 

 / Introduction
disasters­ were merely accidents that obscured the fundamental source of 
human progress: the work of science. Scientists “go on pursuing their life’s 
work without seeming to be in the least concerned with the gigantic ac-
tivities that surround them. Mere earthquakes or wars do not interrupt 
their work.”20 By contrast, recent research suggests that disasters have de-
cisively shaped the historical trajectories of the modern sciences, creating a 
stage for the entrance of new classes of technical experts and new forms of 
expertise­.21
Sarton represented one of two competing modernist tendencies, which 
have alternately pushed disasters toward visibility and invisibility. On one 
hand, the effort to orchestrate networks of citizen-observers to watch for 
earthquakes was a modernist project par excellence. It served the cause of 
popular enlightenment and informed plans for large-scale engineering. 
Still, the aim was not to offer false security. Scientists claimed to know little 
more about earthquakes than citizens themselves. They aimed not to sup-
press fear but to instrumentalize it. The goal was no less than to realign hu-
manity’s sense of its place in the cosmos. In the often quoted words of the 
geologist Eduard Suess, “the planet may well be measured by man, but not 
according to man.”22 Through their collaboration with the public, Suess and 
his colleagues intended, in short, to calibrate the human seismograph. This 
required nimble adjustments between geophysical gauges and lived experi-
ence. Only a science at once physical and human could ascertain how much 
fear a given shock induced and how much it actually warranted. What could 
be more characteristic of modernism’s ambition of reconstructing society 
from the ground up than the impulse to rationalize fear itself?
Nonetheless, the hybrid science produced by this impulse offended 
modernist sensibilities. It undermined what Bruno Latour calls the mod-
ernist process of “purification,” the separation of the analysis of nature from 
the analysis of society.23 Making a science of disaster means constructing a 
basis for comparison, both geographic (how hard your town was hit versus 
mine) and historical (how much worse this one was than the one in your 
grandmother’s stories). To this end, a science of disaster must constantly 
move back and forth between the natural and the social, the objective and 
the subjective, the global and the local. It must correlate geological forma-
tions and the built environment, instrumental data and human responses, 
planetary waves and local damage. Each informs the analysis of the other. 
Circa 1900, however, many scientists dreamed of a “modern” seismology, 
a “pure” science: one in which the objective, instrumental, mathematical, 
and global would no longer depend on the subjective, human, discursive, 

Introduction / 
and local. For this reason, some of the same innovations that made possible 
a science of disaster—the seismograph, the observatory, the mathematical 
physics of seismic waves—simultaneously threatened to spawn a science 
that had next to nothing to do with earthquakes as disasters. In this sense, 
the history of the making of disaster as a scientific object has always also 
been the history of its unmaking.
Imagining Lisbon
Immanuel Kant was a thirty-one-year-old philosophy student, still a year 
shy of his doctorate, when Europe was rocked by the Lisbon earthquake of 
1755. Three thousand kilometers away in Königsberg, Kant would not have 
read the first news reports of the disaster for several weeks. Then, for months 
on end, the German papers were packed with stories of tragedy, chaos, and 
ruin.24 Attempts at natural scientific explanations vied for space with reflec-
tions on God’s vengeance. Eyewitness reports abounded, and Kant collected 
them eagerly. With uncharacteristic impatience, he penned three essays for 
his local paper. He was taking on “the useful role of a scientific publicist,” 
attempting to turn discussion from theological interpretation to naturalis-
tic explanation.25 His account was to be “not a history of the misfortunes 
that people suffered, not a catalog of the devastated cities and the residents 
buried under their rubble. . . . I will describe here only the work of nature, 
the remarkable natural conditions that accompanied the dreadful event and 
their causes.”26 What followed was a compilation of terrestrial and atmo­
spheric phenomena observed across Europe in the days before and after the 
great earthquake. In this way, in the judgment of later commentators, Kant 
produced the first work of modern seismology. In the assessment of Georg 
Gerland, the founder of the International Seismological Association in 
1901, the value of Kant’s essay lay precisely in its exclusion of the plight of 
the victims: “in this omission of the doubtless exciting, but seismologically 
irrelevant trappings: in this broad view . . . he gives the first truly scientific 
treatment of an earthquake. . . . Kant was the first to give a scientific analysis 
that intends to depict only ‘the work of nature’ and the causes of the events, 
one that was exemplary well beyond his own day.”27 Likewise, for the histo-
rian of philosophy Kuno Fischer, the significance of Kant’s essay lay in hav-
ing “focused squarely on the lawful necessity of nature.” The literary critic 
Walter Benjamin, not otherwise known as a connoisseur of natural science, 
judged that Kant’s essay “probably represents the beginnings of scientific 
geography in German. And certainly the beginnings of seismology.”28 These 

 / Introduction
verdicts have become part of the grand narrative of the Lisbon earthquake as 
a pivot of modern history. It figures as the origin of a secular, rational, statist 
modernity and a scientific approach to natural hazards. The conclusion ap-
pears inescapable: Kant brought Europe into the age of modern science by 
producing an account of disaster in which the human victims fell silent.
Hence the paradox that lurks within the history of the environmental 
sciences: Kant—the progenitor of a modern view of the knowing subject—
founded a modern science of the earth precisely by eliminating the human 
subject from it. Kant’s research on the Lisbon earthquake became part of 
the lectures that defined the field of “physical geography,” to which the 
modern environmental sciences often trace their origin. Physical geography 
formed part of Kant’s program of “pragmatic cosmopolitan knowledge,” in 
which the human being figured strictly as “an object of experience in the 
world, and not as a speculative subject.”29 This demarcation kept natural 
knowledge at a safe remove from the implications of Kant’s later critical 
philosophy, his inquiry into the conditions of mind and world that make 
human knowledge possible. As pragmatic rather than critical philosophy, 
Kant’s physical geography treated nature—both the external world and hu-
man physiology—as passive raw material for human ambitions. “[Geog-
raphy] teaches us to recognize the workshops of nature in which we find 
ourselves—nature’s first laboratory and its tools and experiments.”30 The 
subsequent history of environmental thought is shot through with the ten-
sion between technical mastery and critical reflection that emerged with 
Kant’s geography.31
Nonetheless, Kant’s status as the founder of seismology is delectably 
ironic. For seismology soon departed radically from the course Kant had 
set. The human perspective, it turned out, could not be eliminated. The very 
empiricism that Kant urged in the study of earthquakes drove scientists of 
the late eighteenth to early twentieth centuries to collect the accounts of 
any and all witnesses. “Only through the cooperation of all,” explained one 
researcher, “can a satisfying result by delivered.”32 In order to continue to 
work with eyewitness evidence, researchers had to investigate the capacities 
and limitations of their witnesses—as registers of seismic impact and as 
observers of nature in their own right. The eminently pragmatic science of 
earthquakes simultaneously cultivated the critical side of Kant’s project: the 
investigation of the conditions of human knowledge.
Yet Kant implied that disaster itself could not be an object of scientific 
inquiry. To treat earthquakes as disasters, rather than as a strictly geophysi-
cal phenomenon, was to fall into what modern science characterized as the 

Introduction / 
deceptions of anthropomorphism: “the fatal intellectual fallacy . . . precisely 
the antithesis and the nullification of science.”33 Gerland defined modern 
seismology as a Kantian quest for pure knowledge, dignified by “the gran-
deur and the novelty of the task, the vast insight.”34 This sublime perspective 
on earthquakes was supposedly the exclusive achievement of the modern 
scientist. Only the uninitiated would perceive earthquakes as disasters.35
Since 1935, scientists have described earthquakes in the briefest of terms: 
an epicenter and a Richter magnitude, a neat, quotable number that can be 
calculated from the readings of just three measuring instruments. Charles 
Richter developed his magnitude scale in Southern California in the 1930s, 
where he and his colleagues had been trying to enlist the local population 
as earthquake observers. By inventing a purely instrumental definition of 
earthquake strength, Richter hoped to be “freed from the uncertainties of 
personal estimates or the accidental circumstances of reported effects.”36 His 
idea caught on fast, and for much of the remainder of the twentieth century 
it seemed that Richter had indeed, once and for all, eliminated the need for 
human observers and the uncertainties they introduced. With the onset of 
the Cold War, seismology’s status swelled, fed by defense funding for the 
detection of nuclear tests.37 There was no time to think about the science 
that was being swept away: a field of knowledge that depended on the self-
reported observations of ordinary people in extraordinary situations.
The Observers
Who were the earthquake observers? When the earth trembled, all had 
equal claim to this title. Nonexperts were often in a position to make the 
best observations. Scientists were often reduced to the status of experimen-
tal subjects, reporting on the states of their own bodies and minds. The line 
between expert and amateur was remarkably fluid in nineteenth-century 
seismology. Motivations were similarly varied. Some earthquake observers 
were romantics, zealously exposing themselves to extreme conditions in a 
quest to reach the nexus of mind and nature within their own bodies. Some 
saw themselves as heroic explorers on the model of Alexander von Hum-
boldt, who judged his own body his most valuable instrument.38 Some were 
simply eager to be of use to science. All were participating in a culture of 
scientific observation and self-observation that crossed the divide between 
expert and lay.39
This culture was rooted in the new public spaces of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries and the questions they raised about bodily discipline. 

10 / Introduction
In gardens and spas, instruments were often on hand to test one’s sensitiv-
ity to sunlight, local winds, and barometric pressure. The Wettersäule, for 
instance—an elaborate tower displaying temperature and air pressure—be-
came a fixture of European urban parks and spa towns. Readers of a popular 
science magazine in 1912 were urged to seek for themselves “the ‘geopsychic’ 
rule governing their individual psychic lives” and to devise their own rem-
edies.40 As historians have argued, this culture of self-monitoring reflected 
anxieties about the transition to urban modernity and about European 
colonization in the tropics.41 But it was also a source of new knowledge. 
In the age before high-precision portable instruments, satellites, and an ex-
tensive network of observatories, the geosciences learned a great deal from 
monitoring physiological responses to environmental conditions. The idea 
was to begin with one’s own reactions to telluric forces, and work outward 
toward an understanding of the operations of the cosmos. In the words of 
Walt Whitman, a Humboldtian was someone “who, out of the theory of 
the earth and of his or her body understands by subtle analogies all other 
theories.”42 In these ways, seismology participated in certain nineteenth-
century efforts to expand natural knowledge by moving beyond a mind-
body dualism, such as romanticism, Naturphilosophie, sensory physiology, 
and Darwinian ecology. To be sure, viewing human sensibilities as a regis-
ter of nature’s operations ran the risk of anthropocentrism. Yet Humbold-
tians never suggested that environmental phenomena could be measured 
solely in terms of their effects on man. What’s more, these habits of self- 
observation had the potential to foster a new sensitivity to environmen-
tal change. As the political theorist Jane Bennett observes, anthropomor-
phic analogies can remind us of “the outside-that-is-inside-too”; “a chord 
is struck between person and thing, and I am no longer above or outside a 
nonhuman ‘environment.’­”43
Observing the mutual effects of mind, body, and nature was also a way 
to come to terms with the expanding horizons of the nineteenth century. 
By tracking weather patterns, seasonal changes, or seismic waves, a curi-
ous individual could situate herself with respect to continents and oceans. 
Registering the personal effects of geophysical processes opened the imag­
ination to unfamiliar geographic scales. Still, how could one be sure that 
certain bumps and jerks were signs of planetary convulsions and not lo-
cal (or psychic­) artifacts? How could one judge whether one seismic event 
was causally linked to another, distant one? Nineteenth-century seismology 
tracks an emerging curiosity about interactions between local and global 
scales.44

Introduction / 11
Just as local stories shed light on the making of a global science, the 
lives of individuals can illuminate the organization of a collective effort like 
earthquake observing. Here too I am following the lead of the historical ac-
tors. As we will see, it was often unclear whether the object of investigation 
in earthquake research was geophysical or human. The results frequently 
said as much about the social psychology of the community of observers 
as about local geology. Moreover, macroseismological networks were ex-
periments not only in the scientific observation of unanticipated, fleeting 
events; they were equally experiments in human relations. In explicit oppo-
sition to the modern trend of bureaucratization, the charisma of individual 
scientists mattered greatly to their success.45
In these ways, nineteenth-century seismology looks unabashedly an-
thropocentric: it studied earthquakes by means of their human impacts and 
with human interests at heart. In fact, its primary variable, seismic intensity, 
could not be determined at all in uninhabited areas. Intensity is a measure 
of shaking in terms of its effects on buildings and people. Yet seismology 
did not stop at the human perspective. Instead, it was a project of transla-
tion: among scientists, citizens, and instruments. It successfully mediated 
between the technicalities of physical science and the everyday experiences 
of people living with environmental risk. To twenty-first-century sensibili-
ties, the discourse of nineteenth-century seismology is a paradox: a language 
simultaneously scientific and vernacular.
Scientists today often despair of communicating effectively with the 
public about environmental risks. How, for instance, should seismologists 
explain that—according to the latest research on intraplate earthquakes—
the absence of nearby faults is no sure sign of seismic safety? Where might 
scientists and citizens begin a conversation about the risk of induced seis-
micity from hydraulic fracturing? As one seismologist recently put it, “How 
do we convey the results of our research when our most recent results tell us 
that we know less than we used to think we knew?”46 This book investigates 
the historical conditions of possibility for such a dialogue.
It is customary today to think of science as “technical” knowledge. In 
Thomas Kuhn’s words, science requires “translation for the layman.” Kuhn 
even claimed in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions that scientists owe their 
efficiency as problem solvers to the “unparalleled insulation of mature sci-
entific communities from the demands of the laity and of everyday life.”47 
But scientists have not always been content to express themselves in jargon­. 
A vernacular language for science was the goal of the eighteenth-century­ 
Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus, who designed his taxonomic system in 

12 / Introduction
order to “make botany easy for people without schooling or wealth.”48 
Nineteenth-century medical experts often eschewed Latinisms for the terms 
their patients used to describe their own experiences of illness. Nineteenth-
century­ meteorologists formulated wind scales and cloud taxonomies  
on the basis of the lingoes of sailors and farmers. The brief heyday of  
earthquake-observing­ networks merits attention as a path not taken—as 
what Ted Porter has called a “living alternative” to the increasingly technical  
science of the twentieth century.49
Knowledge and Fear
To a world still reeling from the devastation and uncertainty unleashed by 
the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan, “disaster science” may sound 
like a willful delusion. Indeed, the very idea is politically suspect. In the 
wake of natural catastrophes, rationalizing reforms have often been a mere 
pretext for the centralization of power.50 In other cases, technical responses 
to catastrophe have provided false security, as in the tragic failure of Japan’s 
sea walls to defend against the recent tsunami. In this context, disaster sci-
ence seems like little more than a tool for the manipulation of popular fear. 
Jean Baudrillard has argued in this vein that any state capable of predicting 
and controlling natural catastrophes would be so coercive that its citizens 
would prefer a catastrophe.51 Yet these twentieth-century perspectives on 
the relationship between science and catastrophe have obscured the history 
of quite a different and distinctively nineteenth-century project of disaster 
science­.
As Lorraine Daston has pointed out, the makers of science policy today 
tend to frame their goal as the elimination of fear. Far better, she argues, to 
confront fear directly in a rational manner. Daston thus calls for a “debate 
about the philosophy of fear, traditionally the most unphilosophical of the 
passions.”52 The topic of fear is not new to political philosophers, who have 
long debated whether fear is more likely to cause action or paralysis, to 
inspire the excesses of revolution or the stranglehold of reaction.53 Perhaps 
it is time for historians and philosophers of science to enter this discussion. 
The history of seismology suggests that fear plays a dual role in the sciences. 
It can motivate research that may ultimately provide a measure of control 
over the source of fear—in the form, for instance, of storm warnings, vac-
cines, or antidepressants. Even in the absence of practical interventions, 
however, scientific knowledge can respond productively to fear by helping 
us recognize, and come to terms with, the limits of our control.54

Introduction / 13
“Fear is implanted in us as a preservative from evil,” wrote Samuel John-
son in 1751; “its duty, like that of the other passions, is not to overbear 
reason, but to assist it.”55 Similarly, David Hume posited that the mind 
produced hope and fear together in proportion to the probabilities of fu-
ture joy or grief, like a prism decomposing a beam of light into two colors. 
In this sense, fear was itself a form of knowledge about the future. It was, 
moreover, a sentiment appropriate to the enlightened mind. One Hume 
scholar has described fear as “circumspect and open-minded. . . . It is the 
very opposite of that complacent reliance on acquired powers, on past pres-
tige, on previous success, which is so detrimental to further advance and 
to open-minded recognition of new issues as they arise.”56 Hume noted, 
however, that fear was not always proportional to the objective likelihood 
of a grievous event; sometimes it reflected a subjective degree of uncertainty 
about the nature and existence of an evil.57 Fear could thus signify a well-
founded expectation of misfortune or a lack of information. In this way, the 
age of reason recognized that fear has epistemic value.
Like these eighteenth-century philosophers, those engaged in environ-
mental politics today are often called on to evaluate the rationality of fear. 
Environmental conflicts often turn on the alleged tendencies of the public 
to over- or underestimate environmental risk: the problems of “anxiety,” on 
one hand, and “apathy,” on the other.58 Experts frequently dismiss popular 
environmental concerns in gendered terms by contrasting their own cool-
headedness with the public’s “hysteria.”59 Unfortunately, we seem to have 
no language to describe a scale of more or less realistic forebodings. The 
Freudian notion of “anxiety” differs from “fear” in that it has no fixed object; 
it appears to be a state of mind incompatible with the exercise of rationality. 
Yet, as Iain Wilkinson notes, anxiety is not antagonistic to reason. Rather, 
“it is by so traumatising us with the knowledge of our own ignorance, that 
anxiety functions to alert us to, and prepare us for, the threat of danger.”60 
Anxiety can be a spur to scientific inquiry. Nonetheless, the effect of greater 
knowledge is not necessarily a stronger sense of security. Despite the op-
timism of the Cold War sociology of disaster, one does not always gain 
comfort from “the healthy exercise of rationality involved in submitting the 
inconceivably terrible to scientific scrutiny.”61 On the contrary, sciences of 
natural disaster have taught us a great deal about the scope of our ignorance. 
In this vein, science can generate anxiety that successfully provokes public 
debate and political reform.62 This book takes up the history of seismol-
ogy with these concerns in mind. Following historians of the emotions, it 
considers how earthquake fears have been constructed and suppressed in 

14 / Introduction
differen­t places at different times.63 It recovers a science that had no inten-
tion of suppressing fear, but sought instead to learn from it.
Organization
In order to capture both the local and global dimensions of earthquake 
science, the chapters that follow alternate in scale. Half of them treat local 
experiments in planetary science. These four cases—Scotland, Switzerland, 
imperial Austria, and California—were, to my knowledge, the only places 
where networks of ordinary citizens contributed decisively to the emergence 
of modern seismology.64 The scale of these public efforts was remarkable: 
the Swiss Earthquake Commission gathered approximately seven thousand 
reports between 1878 and 1910, while the Austrians had over 1,700 ob-
servers reporting from all sixteen crown lands.65 Elsewhere, as in Japan and 
Italy, seismological observations were made primarily by men of science; 
occasionally by civil servants like stationmasters, telegraph operators, or 
postmasters; or primarily by instruments.66 These four episodes span the 
“long nineteenth century,” from the first glimpse of a technocratic regime in 
the Napoleonic Era through the triumph of technocracy in the wake of the 
First World War.67 Alternating with these local experiments are chapters that 
follow the international circulation of the stories of earthquake witnesses 
as they were reconstituted as evidence for a global science of disaster. One 
might object that an earthquake in Japan is hardly the same scientific object 
as an earthquake in Switzerland: a potential catastrophe in one case, often 
a mere curiosity in the other. Yet the very possibility of such comparisons 
is a consequence of nineteenth-century seismology’s expansive framework. 
To the extent that catastrophes are experienced as exceptions to a normal 
course of events, they resist comparison. Other catastrophes pass virtually 
unnoticed: they are experienced as “normal” hazards, as part of the “ac-
ceptable” risk of modern industrial life.68 Nineteenth-century seismology 
resisted these extremes. By charting an entire spectrum of experiences of 
hazard, from the mundane to the overpowering, it cleared a space for sus-
tainable adaptations.

one
The Human Seismograph
The word “seismology” was coined in the 1850s, not long after the word 
“scientist”—both harbingers of a new age of technical expertise.1 Earth-
quakes, however, did not fit easily into the emerging rubric of professional 
science, not least because they forced scholars to rely on the testimony of 
common folk. Already in the sixteenth century, when stories of the New 
World were first circulating in Europe, Michel de Montaigne remarked that 
earthquakes compelled Europeans to trust the word of “barbarians.” In a 
crucial twist, however, Montaigne suggested that the barbarian might prove 
the more able witness: “a simple, crude fellow—a character fit to bear true 
witness; for clever people observe more things and more curiously, but they 
interpret them; and to lend weight and conviction to their interpretation, 
they cannot help altering history a little.”2 Echoes of Montaigne’s charitable 
perspective could be found in subsequent European studies of earthquakes, 
in the virtues sometimes attributed to untutored observers. Well after Mon-
taigne’s death, earthquakes were still widely discussed across divides of birth 
and education. Eighteenth-century sermons and news articles engaged the 
public in scientific and theological debates about earthquakes.3 Accounts of 
the New Madrid earthquakes of 1811–12 became “a form of conversation,” 
in which settlers modeled their descriptions of tremors on narratives of sick-
ness and health.4 In the early nineteenth century, however, this inclusive 
conversation was breaking down. Earthquakes figured counterintuitively in 
new geophysical theories as the effects of elusive electrical forces.5 Seismol-
ogy seemed ready to become the esoteric subject of expert knowledge.
The history of seismology since 1755 is traditionally seen as a progressive 
liberation of natural knowledge from the subjective impressions of earth-
quake victims. After the Staffordshire quake of 1777, for instance, Samuel 
Johnson warned that the event would “be much exaggerated in popular 

16 / Chapter One
talk: for, in the first place, the common people do not accurately adapt 
their thoughts to the objects; nor, secondly, do they accurately adapt their 
words to their thoughts: they do not mean to lie; but, taking no pains to 
be exact, they give you very false accounts. A great part of their language is 
proverbial. If any thing rocks at all, they say it rocks like a cradle; and in 
this way they go on.”6 In this vein, the Calabrian earthquakes of 1783–84 
typically figure as the first to have been described scientifically. Their impor-
tance—according to the most illustrious of nineteenth-century geologists, 
Charles Lyell—“arises from the circumstance, that Calabria is the only spot 
hitherto visited, both during and after the convulsions, by men possessing 
sufficient leisure, zeal, and scientific information, to enable them to collect 
and describe with accuracy the physical facts which throw light on geologi-
cal questions.”7 Lyell made it seem self-evident that scientific descriptions 
of earthquakes could come only from men of science.
What Girls Will Tell
Others hoped to dispense with human witnesses entirely. Robert Mallet’s 
study of the Neapolitan temblor of 1857, subtitled First Principles of Obser-
vational Seismology, is often cited as the founding work of empirical macro-
seismology.8 Mallet, a British civil engineer, showed how cracks in masonry 
and overturned objects could be used to infer the direction from which 
seismic waves had propagated. He based his research almost exclusively on 
architectural damage, and found little use for eyewitness testimony. Indeed, 
Mallet complained to Lyell of the lazy Neapolitan savants; he saw no reason 
to believe their reports of nightly aftershocks, since he himself had slept just 
fine.9 In Mallet’s judgment, lay observers lacked the “observational tact and 
largeness [sic] of a disciplined imagination and eye that are amongst the 
accomplishments of the physical field-geologist.”10 He repeatedly insisted 
that the untrained eye simply failed to see. In the past, earthquakes had 
been studied in the absence of “any guiding hypothesis, of any distinct idea 
of what an earthquake really is, of any notion of what facts might have been 
of scientific importance to observe, and what were merely highly striking or 
alarming . . . —in the want of all these, as well as of any calmness or unexag-
gerative [sic] observation during such alarming visitations, few facts of the 
character and precision requisite to render them of value to science can be 
collected with certainty. The true observation of earthquake phenomena is 
yet to be commenced. . . . The staple of earthquake stories, in fact, consists 
of gossip made up of the most unusual, violent or odd accidents that befell 
men, animals, or structures, rather than of the phenomenon itself.”11

The Human Seismograph / 17
Mallet’s disdain for the “gossip” of human observers was echoed by 
many British, Italian, and Japanese contributors to seismology in the sec-
ond half of the nineteenth century. When the Italian Earthquake Commis-
sion was established in 1883, it focused on constructing seismographic 
observatories, not a permanent network of observers.12 This was in keep-
ing with the move to exclude amateur observers from Italian astronomy in 
the aftermath of national unification.13 The private network developed by  
Count Michele Stefano de Rossi in the 1870s consisted entirely of fellow 
gentlemen-naturalists, nearly half of whom owned seismoscopes or seis-
mographs.14 In Japan, where John Milne and Fusakichi Omori pioneered 
instrumental seismology in the 1880s and 1890s, lay observers played little 
role in earthquake investigations. Milne seems to have given up on the col-
lection of felt reports after his investigation of the Yokohama earthquake of 
1880, for which he sent out five hundred questionnaires and received only 
twenty-six responses.15 A leading British seismologist speculated that such 
outreach efforts failed in Japan in part because Japanese earthquakes were 
so frequent. “The detailed inquiries which are possible in Great Britain can 
hardly be made in a country in which the recollection of one shock is soon 
after dimmed or erased by the occurrence of another or many more in rapid 
succession.”16 As Milne put it, the Japanese chatted about earthquakes the 
way the English chatted about the weather.17 In any case, he had little pa-
tience for the analysis of felt reports: “Attempts to find out what sensations 
were experienced by the people at the time of the shock are unsatisfactory. 
People questioned will tell trivial circumstances—how they tumbled from 
the top to the bottom of the stairs whilst hurrying to get out of doors—
girls tell how they began to cry, etc.”18 Likewise, many of Japan’s historical 
sources on earthquakes were judged by Westerners to be “of a trivial charac-
ter”—illustrated, for instance, by a 1707 account of a young man drinking 
with friends in a teahouse when an earthquake knocked him down a ladder 
into a barrel of pickled radishes.19
It was, therefore, against his better judgment that Mallet began to collect 
witnesses’ descriptions of the sounds accompanying the Italian tremors. He 
warned his reader that reports of sounds, unlike the hard evidence of archi-
tectural damage, were compromised by numerous distortions: “Echoes, the 
disturbance of local noises at the moment, the uncertainty with which the 
ear judges of direction and sound, the evanescence of the phenomenon, 
and the difficulties inseparable from trusting to merely collected informa-
tion of often incompetent observers, or unfaithful narrators, who observed 
under alarm, must ever deprive sound phenomena (except when heard by 
the physicist himself ) of the unerring certainty of deduction, that belongs 

18 / Chapter One
to the mechanical problems, presented by the phenomena left after the 
shock.” With his insistence on the “unerring certainty of deduction” and 
the superior observational skill of “the physicist himself,” Mallet verged on 
a caricature of the Victorian expert—the Sherlock Holmes of earthquakes.
And yet, to his own surprise, Mallet found that reports of sounds, despite 
their ambiguities, “are not without their seismic significance.” Suddenly the 
voices of the earthquake victims themselves intruded into his treatise. On 
the periphery of the area in which sounds were audible, observers described 
a “low, grating, heavy, sighing rush,” while those in the center reported 
a rumbling or (here Mallet felt compelled to quote the original Italian), 
“rombo, rumore di carozzo . . . fischio, sospiramente. . . . These descrip-
tions, aided by the expressive gesticulation and imitative powers of the nar-
rators, conveyed a far more exact notion of the sounds heard, and of the 
relative times in which they were heard, than I can hope to transmit in writ-
ing. . . . They were collected in my progress . . . without much idea of their 
leading to any very distinct or valuable conclusion. The result however now 
appears to support the conclusions arrived at, from the rigid methods of 
tracing the origin out from the wave-paths.”20 These rushes and rumblings, 
then, only found a place in Mallet’s treatise because they corroborated his 
theory. Despite his “physicist’s” instincts, Mallet reluctantly acknowledged 
the force of the testimony of earthquake witnesses, full of meanings that 
escaped translation.
A “Damned” Science
Despite the confidence of these new experts, the barriers to establishing seis-
mology as a professional science remained steep throughout the nineteenth 
century. One problem was that there were no limits to the kinds of observa-
tions that might be relevant to earthquake research. According to theories 
widely accepted in the nineteenth century, earthquakes might be triggered 
by volcanoes, barometric fluctuations, atmospheric electricity, geomagnet-
ism, humidity, or the positions of celestial bodies. Analysis of the course 
and impact of earthquakes required an even wider variety of data, from 
the geological to the zoological and psychological. Geographically as well, 
earthquakes presented no clear limits. Speculation was rife over the appar-
ent coincidence of earthquakes across vast distances, and the subterranean 
channels that might account for such teleconnections. This uncertainty 
about what constituted seismology’s evidence brought the field into precari-
ous contact with such “pseudosciences” as astrology and spiritualism.

The Human Seismograph / 19
Earthquakes figured prominently, for example, in the manifestos of 
Charles Fort, one of the most celebrated skeptics of twentieth-century sci-
ence. His followers in the International Fortean Organization continue to 
this day to hold annual conferences devoted to “anomalous phenomena.” 
Fort’s first major publication, The Book of the Damned (1919), was “a proces-
sion of data that Science has excluded.” “Damned,” in Fort’s vocabulary, 
meant rejected by “Dogmatic Science.” Fort wrote in an absurdist style that 
lurched between bombastic pronouncements and nuggets of humble com-
mon sense. Among the “damned” were correlations he uncovered between 
earthquakes and astronomical phenomena. To collect these “lost souls,” 
he mined the reams of earthquake catalogs and observational reports 
published in scientific journals since the late eighteenth century. He was 
also a zealous collector of newspaper clippings—but then, so was any self- 
respecting seismologist circa 1900. The research process he described would 
have been familiar to any of them: “I have gone into the outer darkness of 
scientific transactions and proceedings, ultra-respectable, but covered with 
the dust of disregard. I have descended into journalism. I have come back 
with the quasi-souls of lost data.”21 Earthquakes suited Fort’s hunt for “the 
damned” precisely because of the minor explosion of seismological obser-
vations in the nineteenth century.
The First Seismographs
Seismology’s credibility hinged on the design of instruments to measure 
physical phenomena independently of their human impacts—to comple-
ment, not replace, the observations of human witnesses. While seismo-
scopes had been used since ancient times in China, modern European efforts 
to build them began in earnest in Italy in the late eighteenth century.22 An 
eighteenth-century seismoscope consisted of a hanging pendulum attached 
to a stylus that made a mark when set in oscillation. Not until the 1840s were 
seismoscopes capable, in principle, of measuring the displacement of the 
ground during a tremor. In practice, they often did not work. The inverted- 
pendulum seismoscopes installed during an earthquake swarm in Comrie, 
Scotland, in the 1840s were state of the art. Yet residents of Comrie counted 
sixty shocks in one year, while the seismoscopes only recorded three. More 
useful instruments were developed by British engineers in Japan in the 
1880s. These “seismographs” were able to trace the development of earth-
quake waves over time. They recorded pendulum movements on a revolving 
drum attached to a clockwork mechanism, producing a curve from which 

20 / Chapter One
the waves’ period and amplitude could be measured. Such traces became 
all the more interesting in 1889, when a German astronomer discovered 
by accident that his instruments in Potsdam had inadvertently recorded a 
strong earthquake near Tokyo: they had detected waves from a spot 5,500 
miles away on the earth’s surface. The realization that earthquakes could be 
mechanically recorded at such a distance inspired many new seismographic 
inventions at the end of the nineteenth century.
But were these ingenious mechanisms any more reliable than human  
witnesses? The first generation of seismographs was subject to small “self-
oscillations” due to lack of damping, making it hard to record long-period 
motions. Few were able to record vertical motion. With further improve-
ments, seismographs became more trustworthy; but humans did not 
necessarily become less so. At the turn of the twentieth century, scien-
tists studying seismographic curves discovered two kinds of seismic wave 
traveling through the earth’s core: a shorter period “primary” (compression) 
wave and a longer period “secondary” (transverse) wave. Later research also 
found several varieties of surface wave, which pass only through the crust. 
It soon became clear that many apparent contradictions in the felt reports 
of years past—conflicting accounts of jolts and rolling motion, “horizon-
tal” and “vertical” shocks—were resolved if one admitted that people, too, 
could feel the differences between these types of wave.23 Moreover, recent 
evidence has suggested that humans may be more acute observers than even 
the latest computerized seismographs. A 2008 study concludes that “events 
with a magnitude smaller than 1, and even negative magnitudes [meaning, 
on the logarithmic scale, fractions of a unit shock], can be felt, thus mak-
ing the human being an instrument eventually much more sensitive than 
monitoring networks.”24
Nonetheless, by the early twentieth century, the availability of seismo-
graphs allowed many earth scientists to dream of turning their discipline 
into a quantitative, objective science, modeled on physics. They trans-
formed what counted as evidence of the earth’s history. Out went data 
filtered by human bodies; in came the “hard” evidence of seismographs 
and accelerometers. This was the moment when scientists began to distin-
guish the “new seismology” from the “old.” Among the achievements of 
the new seismology was the ability to use instrumental traces of the passage 
of seismic waves as clues to the internal structure of the earth. The seismo-
graph became a telescope trained on the earth’s hidden depths, where it 
revealed a core of iron buried under a mantle of rock.25 The next “revolu-
tion” came with the acceptance of plate tectonic theory, the “new geology,” 
in the 1960s.26 Plate tectonics overthrew the belief that the positions of 

The Human Seismograph / 21
the continents and oceans were permanently fixed. Earthquakes took on  
new significance as evidence that the movement of the continental plates 
was still in progress. In principle, macroseismic observations should also 
have acquired new value as clues to the detailed distribution of faults and 
thus the contours of the plates.27 On the global scale of the new plate tec-
tonics, however, details of local seismicity tended to fade from scientists’ 
attention. They took little interest in intraplate earthquakes, which remain 
poorly understood—though potentially destructive. At the same time, the 
globalization of news in the early twentieth century made reports of local 
tremors ever less likely to find their way into print. Working knowledge of 
the geography of seismic hazard was fast disappearing.
Local Earthquakes and Global Tectonics
Such knowledge had been built, inch by inch and tremor by tremor, by 
countless unrecognized observers. But the method behind it was associated 
above all with one man, the Austrian geologist Eduard Suess.28 A veteran 
of the 1848 revolutions, Suess firmly believed that scientists had a duty 
to serve society. Geologists were responsible for keeping their communi-
ties safe and healthy from the ground up. He encapsulated his sense of the 
interdependence of environmental and social conditions in the subtitle of 
his 1867 study, The Ground of the City of Vienna: According to Its Manner of 
Formation, Composition, and Its Relationship to Civic Life. Suess turned projects 
of urban improvement into opportunities for geological research, and his 
conclusions bore directly on the lives of the city’s residents. He was the 
first to discover, for instance, that a portion of the drinking-water supply in 
several neighborhoods came from the drainage of cemeteries.29 Likewise, 
Suess’s engagement with the regulation of the Danube stemmed from his 
experience of the flood of 1862, when he saw the poorest residents of his  
neighborhood fleeing their ground-floor apartments and witnessed the 
drowning of an entire herd of oxen.30 As he argued in The Ground of the City 
of Vienna, engineering a healthy city was a municipal responsibility, not a 
private one. Even today, Suess’s achievements are recalled in references to 
Vienna’s “Sueß-Wasser” (freshwater). In 1873 Suess was elected as a liberal 
representative to the Austrian parliament.
Three days into that new year, just before seven in the evening, Suess was 
seated at his writing desk in Vienna when he felt a sudden jerk. Two hundred 
and eighty-three years earlier, an earthquake had famously damaged Saint 
Stephen’s cathedral, in the center of Vienna. As Suess would soon learn, the 
heaviest damages in both cases occurred in precisely the same place. It could 

22 / Chapter One
hardly be a coincidence.31 First thing the next morning, Suess was on the 
road, stopping to make inquiries in villages across Lower Austria. “Along 
the entire line of this journey I received reports of the phenomenon.”32 
Further reports arrived in response to a request he printed in the major 
Viennese papers, amounting to observations from a total of 203 localities. 
Suess also drew on meticulous firsthand observation of the geology of the 
region, gleaned from months of hiking and sketching (see figure 1.1), and 
he combed provincial archives for accounts of past quakes. Suess soon came 
to be seen as among the founders of a new school of seismological research, 
based on what was termed the “monographic method”: “this investigates 
an earthquake in and for itself and is concerned to study its unique aspect 
and thence to draw conclusions about the various factors involved in this 
quake.”33 This style of research blended expert and popular knowledge: as 
the author of a study of the 1858 earthquake in Žilina (Slovakia; German: 
Sillein) had argued, in the study of earthquakes it was “very difficult . . . to 
specify the limit where someone starts or stops being an expert.”34
Suess’s contemporaries studied earthquakes as symptoms of volcanic 
forces, mine explosions, meteor strikes, the sinking deltas of lakes, or the 
collapse of subterranean hollow strata; they also probed the possibility 
of atmospheric or astronomical influences. For Suess, the significance of 
earthquakes was altogether different: he sought “the relationship between 
the structure of the earth’s crust in a specific region and the direction and 
nature of the shocks.”35 The earthquake of 1873 would become an early 
and particularly convincing piece of evidence for Suess’s epochal theory of 
global “tectonics”—the study of horizontal stresses in the earth’s crust and 
the mountains and basins they produce.
As Suess saw it, the major stumbling block of nineteenth-century geol-
ogy was the question of mountain formation. Charles Lyell believed he had 
rid geology once and for all of the biblical deluge and with it anything that 
smelled of “catastrophism.” The new orthodoxy was that the earth’s surface 
had been shaped over a previously inconceivable length of time by the slow, 
steady processes of sedimentation and erosion. The gradual rise and fall of 
the continents produced climatic changes, which in turn explained the ap-
pearance and disappearance of new species in the layers of the geological 
record. This vision formed the backdrop to Darwin’s theory of evolution, 
and to most leading geologists it seemed impregnable. Yet Suess saw a con-
tradiction. Geologists were equally convinced that the earth as a whole was 
contracting, as it cooled from an early molten state. On this view, moun-
tains formed as the planet’s crust wrinkled like the skin of desiccating apple. 

Fig. 1.1.  Suess’s seismic map of Lower Austria. Eduard Suess, Die Erdbeben Nieder- 
Österreichs (Vienna: k. k. Hof- und Staatsdruckerei, 1873), plate 1.

24 / Chapter One
Mountains were thus the result of the tangential stresses of contraction, not 
sedimentation.36
Suess’s study of Alpine earthquakes added another wrinkle to this situa-
tion. As he combined his data on the tremor of 1873 with historical records 
of the region’s past earthquakes, Suess determined that seismic events in 
Lower Austria could be mapped along a single line. He concluded that these 
movements resulted not from forces of uplift but from “fractures or faults 
or some other discontinuity in the earth’s crust.”37 Earthquakes in the Alps 
propagated perpendicularly to the chain of the mountains and were felt fur-
ther away to the north than to the south. Other European mountain chains 
showed similar traits. Here was evidence that the Alps arose not simply 
through local compression but as the result of thrusting, as the entire Eu-
ropean continent moved northward. According to his colleagues, however, 
continents did not move; they only rose and fell at a snail’s pace. Viewed 
over the course of millennia, earthquakes could be but small fluctuations 
within this stable cycle. It would take another century for geologists to give 
up their belief in the fixity of the continents.38 In the meantime, Suess ad-
vanced his notion of mobile continents as part of a bid to overcome, in his 
words, the “quietism” of the geology of his day, which lavished attention 
on “the little polyp building up the coral reef, and the raindrop hollowing 
out the stone.” Suess thus accused his colleagues of confining their thinking 
to the puny human scale. Against this fondness for what Lyell called “tri-
fling means,” Suess mustered evidence for the formative role of catastrophic 
events in the earth’s history. Much of this evidence, like the observations he 
gathered in 1873, consisted of the accounts of eyewitnesses, often written 
for purposes remote from natural science.39 As a colleague put it in 1913, 
“since 1880 the predominant influence of M. Suess has again made the 
word ‘cataclysm’ acceptable in scientific circles.”40
Suess’s investigation of earthquakes in Lower Austria thus provided cru-
cial early support for his tectonic theory, which continued to face resistance 
into the twentieth century. It also suggested a research program. In order 
to demonstrate that most earthquakes were likewise tectonic in origin, and 
to identify their associated faults, it was necessary to multiply such studies. 
Geologists would need to correlate the location and direction of as many 
earthquakes in as many regions as possible with features of local geology. 
Such observations held out the promise of identifying regions of elevated 
seismic hazard. Basic geology would go hand in hand with disaster mitiga-
tion. The tectonic hypothesis thus sprang from and supported a reliance on 
the earthquake observations of ordinary locals. Would the public comply?

two
The Planet in the Village:  
Comrie, Scotland, 1788–1897
The village of Comrie lies just south of the Scottish Highlands, where three 
rivers meet in a green and gentle valley; the name Comrie supposedly 
derives from the Gaelic for “confluence.” Its population peaked at three 
thousand in the 1790s. By then, according to contemporaries, the locals’ 
“attachment to the soil” was already wearing thin: “the people are pouring 
down in numbers every season to the adjacent villages and towns in quest 
of labour and of bread.”1 The consolidation of small farms and the absence 
of a “staple trade” discouraged the young from staying; a nearby woolen 
mill, a prime employer, closed in 1866. By 1831 the population had fallen 
to 2,622, and by 1881 it was a mere 1,871. In these conditions, the locals 
had high hopes for tourism. The nearby spring had long drawn crowds for 
its healing powers, having been blessed by Saint Fillan in the ninth century. 
Sufferers of rheumatism were instructed to climb a hill and sit on a rock 
known as “the saint’s chair,” after which they were to be pulled down the 
hill by their legs. Now, in the nineteenth century, locals praised Comrie’s 
scenery as “sublime,” as a Scottish Switzerland. By the 1880s, there were two 
coach connections daily to the train station at Crieff, and a rail line finally 
reached Comrie in 1893.2
Comrie was, nonetheless, as quiet a village as one could find in central 
Scotland in the nineteenth century. Its tranquility seemed guaranteed when 
it became a center of the temperance movement. As one Temperance League 
lecturer noted in the 1880s, “No better spot could be selected for earnest 
thought and consecration . . . it sleeps quietly amongst an amphitheatre of 
hills. No railway train or noisy factory disturbs the stillness. Everything sug-
gests peace and repose.” A native son of the nineteenth century imagined 
the village back in the 1790s as “a most primitive place . . . unprofaned not 

26 / Chapter Two
only by railways but by stage-coaches; where the appearance of a gig or post-
chaise must have been an event signalizing a whole week; where two-thirds 
of the people could speak no English; and which has not as yet been tossed 
into importance by a single shock of an earthquake.”3
The earthquake records begin in 1788. Initially, the tremors caused 
“great alarm, especially one which occurred on a Sabbath while the congre-
gation was assembled.”4 Later researchers note two oddities of the Comrie 
earthquakes: the sheer number of slight tremors (an estimated eight to nine 
hundred within six months) and the small area in which they were sensible 
(no more than three miles away).5 For the next thirteen years, these shocks 
were patiently recorded by two local clergymen, one of whom earned the 
moniker “Secretary to the Earthquakes.” But they attracted little interest be-
yond the village. Then, for the first four decades of the nineteenth century, 
the earth lay quietly beneath Comrie. At last, on 23 October 1839, Comrie 
was the center of an earthquake felt across much of Scotland. “The conster-
nation was such that the people ran out of their houses, and, late as was the 
hour, many assembled for prayer in the Secession Meeting-house, where re-
ligious exercises were continued until three in the morning”—during which 
two further shocks were felt. Robert Chambers’s Edinburgh Journal reported 
that the shaking even burst a dam supplying water to factories in the neigh-
boring county of Stirlingshire.6 This event finally stirred Comrie to action. 
Two locals began independently to collect observations: Peter Macfarlane, 
the town’s postmaster, and James Drummond, a cobbler. Macfarlane, also 
known as a temperance leader, drew up a crude yet innovative scale to 
weigh the strength of the shocks, setting the 23 October quake as a 10 and 
rating subsequent ones relative to it.7 It is estimated that he recorded three 
hundred earthquakes in his thirty-six years as an observer.8 Drummond, as 
we’ll see, was by far the more ambitious of the two men. He was described 
by a neighbor after his death as a man with “much interest in antiquarian 
lore,” whose “racy conversation” ranged across “Comrie earthquakes, Ro-
man invasions, and opinions of political men and measures.”9
Meanwhile, the Comrie earthquake of 1839 drew distinguished men of 
science to the humble village. The British Association for the Advancement 
of Science initiated its own investigation, beginning with the formation of 
an Earthquake Committee. In those years, the BAAS was still finding its 
feet. Founded in a reformist, public-minded spirit in 1831, the association 
was growing increasingly elitist. Its leaders were now at pains to police the 
boundary between expert and popular knowledge.10 Yet the chair of the 
BAAS committee, David Milne (no relation to the later seismologist John 
Milne) was not a professional man of science; he was an advocate at the 

The Planet in the Village / 27
Scottish bar.11 Still, Milne’s geological research had won him membership 
in the Geological Society of London and the esteem of the major British 
geologists of his generation, as his exchanges with the likes of Lyell and 
Darwin attest. And his wealth gave him the freedom to indulge his curiosity 
about Scottish earthquakes to his heart’s content.
Milne was delighted at news of the 1839 shock. It was, he insisted, a 
“matter of regret and reproach” that British men of science had not inves-
tigated “volcanic action” on their home turf in the past. They were wrong 
to be deterred by the absence of volcanoes: “It is in foreign countries, that 
the British geologist has hitherto been in the practice of searching for and 
observing the indicia of volcanic action;—for it seems to have been thought 
that the phenomena were unsatisfactory or unworthy of attention, unless 
accompanied with eruption. But if, as is now generally admitted, active vol-
canoes serve the purpose of safety-valves, to give ready vent to the subter-
ranean forces, the effect of these forces on the earth’s surface ought to be 
greater where no volcanoes exist.”12 British colleagues concurred that the 
earthquake was a stroke of good fortune. Upon learning of Milne’s growing 
collection of observations of Scottish earthquakes, Charles Darwin declared 
himself “astonished at their frequency in that quiet country, as anyone 
would have called it.” The geologist Charles Daubeny was pleased to hear 
that “jets of smoke or steam” had been observed in connection with certain 
of these events: “I consider it a fortunate circumstance that a case of the kind 
should have occurred so near home; for the localities in which the evolution 
of flame from the earth is stated to occur”—such as the mountains of Alba-
nia and the Caspian Sea—“are for the most part inconveniently situated for 
exact experiments.”13
Milne, the geologist-attorney, once described his investigative method 
to Darwin as “precognition”—the Scottish legal term for the collection of 
witness testimony in advance of a trial.14 But there is little evidence of his 
activity in this respect. His lasting achievement was to publish for poster-
ity the results obtained by Macfarlane and Drummond. These he saw fit 
to edit considerably, since “it has not been thought necessary to include 
a description of all the effects related of such shocks.” Common observa-
tions such as damage to chimneys would merely “swell the register.” “The 
object has been, rather to select and exhibit effects which seem calculated to 
throw light on the nature and causes of earthquake-shocks.”15 In this way, 
details crucial to the determination of intensity—and thus the mapping of 
hazard—were discarded, in favor of evidence that was clearly relevant to 
available theories. Yet the phenomena Milne chose to preserve may sur-
prise modern readers: sounds (of two types, an explosion and a rushing or  

28 / Chapter Two
whizzing), unusual weather, seasickness, and frequent reports of two dis-
tinct sensations: the first tremulous, the second concussive (what “the coun-
try people” called “the ‘thud’”).
Meanwhile, the BAAS’s Earthquake Committee busied itself with prepar-
ing an alternative to human reports. J. D. Forbes, professor of natural philos-
ophy at Aberdeen, designed an instrument that would record earthquakes by 
means of an inverted pendulum; David Milne named it a “seismometer.”16 
By 1841 the committee had supplied Comrie with ten such instruments, 
but it soon became clear that the machines were less sensitive than Comrie’s 
residents themselves. In the first half of 1841, for instance, the seismometers 
registered only two tremors, while their human keepers felt twenty-seven.17 
Metropolitan science had yet to prove its value in Comrie.
Equally unclear was the significance of Comrie’s earthquakes to the  
global science of geology. At the outset, Milne was eager to test his hypoth-
esis that these tremors were a direct result of volcanic eruptions in Italy, 
via some subterranean connection. It was commonly assumed that earth-
quakes in Britain must be of foreign origin; newspapers reported them thus 
as early as 1824 and as late as 1957.18 Fortunately, Milne soon had the 
benefit of Charles Darwin’s experiences abroad: “There are many regions 
in which earthquakes take place every three & four days,” Darwin wrote 
him,“& after the severer shocks, the ground trembles almost half-hourly 
for months.—If therefore you had a list of the earthquakes of two or three 
of these districts, it is almost certain some of them would coincide with 
those in Scotland, without any other connection than mere chance.” Milne 
replied: “I am much obliged to you for warning me against too ready a 
belief in the connection between earthquakes felt on opposite sides of the 
equator . . . I am beginning to be sceptical as to any connection between our 
Scotch earthquakes and those in Italy.”19 On the other hand, Darwin lent 
support to Milne’s suspicion that earthquakes bore some relationship to 
weather. The veteran of the Beagle voyage cited South American natives on 
this point. “Under the very peculiar climate of Northern Chile, the belief of 
the inhabitants in such connections can hardly, in my opinion, be founded 
in error.”20 Meanwhile, Milne was on to a new theory: that the earthquakes 
were caused by the conversion of underground water into steam, which 
might also generate electrical activity. In short, the proper geographic scale 
on which to study earthquakes was wholly undecided.
In fact, there was nothing resembling an expert consensus on what 
constituted the pertinent “details” of earthquake observations. Weather, 
sounds, the behavior of wells and springs, atmospheric electricity, steam 

The Planet in the Village / 29
and smoke, even seasickness—any of these and more were potentially evi-
dence. And so the question arose: on what criteria did Milne continue to 
prune Macfarlane’s and Drummond’s observations in order to illuminate 
the quakes’ “causes”?
Therein lay the seeds of controversy. Drummond seems to have been a 
pugnacious type, suspicious of the London experts and jealous of his lo-
cal status as a scientific authority. He recognized that the BAAS committee  
had left itself open to a charge of bias in their selection of earthquake 
accounts for publication. He accused the experts of being wedded to a 
Pluto­nist conception of earthquakes as the expression of mountain up­
lift, “Ob­serving that those who were taking scientific notes of the pheno­
menon ignored all facts which did not agree with their preconceived 
opinions on the subject, I resolved to discard all fancies and theories, and 
to try to ascertain from facts alone where the disturbance originated.” Thus 
did Drummond make a virtue of his amateur status, casting himself as a 
plain-talking, unbiased observer. For his own theory of the earthquakes’ 
origin, however, he offered little empirical evidence: “Suffice it to say, that 
no preconceptions of my own led me to that conclusion.” Apparently, 
Drummond had initially decided to give his earthquake reports to a proper 
“man of science” and await the expert’s conclusion. However, to his shock 
and dismay, the expert to whom he was referred “coolly offered me a bribe 
to let him have the credit of my labours. This I indignantly rejected.” At 
that point, Drummond decided to publicize his own conclusions in a local 
newspaper, identifying the seat of the earthquakes and theorizing that they 
were galvanic in origin (he later specified that they were due to atmospheric 
electricity). “The offer of a bribe forced me to publish prematurely, and also 
to attempt to solve the problem of earthquakes myself.” Drummond then 
tried to make a formal accusation of bribery against the unnamed BAAS 
expert, in the presence of David Milne. Before he could do so, both men 
walked out on him. The BAAS had likewise turned a blind eye to his obser-
vations and conclusions. “Considering the position in society Mr. Milne oc-
cupies, and his reputation as a scientific man, it was not likely that he would 
readily acknowledge himself outrun in a scientific race by one in the hum-
ble station of life in which I am placed. . . . Can it be wondered at, then, that 
the Committee paid no regard to my opinion,—indeed, completely ignored 
me.”21 Drummond did not stop at the charge of attempted bribery. He also 
claimed that the BAAS was neglecting to observe atmospheric phenomena 
in conjunction with the tremors. As “Plutonians,” they “ignored all phases 
[of earthquakes] that are irreconcilable with their ideas.”22

30 / Chapter Two
Having cast himself as a champion of common sense, honest empiri-
cism, and local knowledge, Drummond turned to his neighbors to furnish 
evidence in support of his theory. In an article for the Philosophical Magazine 
published in 1842, he appealed to the superiority of local observers, who, 
“from greater habitude . . . are better able to distinguish the shocks.”23 He 
called on Comrie’s residents to “pay particular attention” to the winds ac-
companying shocks and challenged them to produce a single observation 
that contradicted his theory: “As this was an indispensable condition of my 
theory, to guide the people of Comrie in their observations, I stated that if 
a great shock occurred when the lower regions of the air were clear, so as to 
permit distant objects to be clearly seen, then I would give up my theory as 
untenable. That was in 1842, and no year has passed, and no earthquake 
has taken place, without my reminding some one of the challenge. It is 
now more than thirty years since I gave the challenge, and during that long 
period my theory has triumphantly stood the test.”24 Drummond even ex-
tended this populist appeal to readers around the world. “I bid the reader 
pay no attention to any theory whatever, but simply observe facts for him-
self. . . . All I ask from the people of earthquake countries is justice. I bid him 
regard no theories, but simply observe facts for themselves.” Drummond 
was willing to admit his amateur status, but he refused to defer to the “man 
of science.” Instead he called on the expertise of the “practical electrician”: 
“I have no doubt, when a practical electrician takes up the subject, he will 
give far more information than I am able to give.”25 This appeal was well 
calculated: electrical engineers at the time cast themselves as the protectors 
of British empiricism, against the “wild hypotheses” of mathematical physi-
cists.26 Ambitious engineers like Cromwell Varley were trying to parlay their 
knowledge of telegraph cables into expertise about geomagnetic, meteoro-
logical, and seismological phenomena.27 Drummond likewise stressed the 
practical benefits his explanation offered. While it might not permit the pre-
diction of earthquakes, proper observation of the atmosphere could make 
known “positively when all danger is past.” Again, Drummond contrasted 
his “practical” motivation with the theoretical contortions of the scientific 
elite: “It was only a very strong sense of the great practical importance of 
the facts to be gathered from a careful study of the varied phenomena of 
earthquakes, that induced me to continue my labours in the midst of so 
much opposition.”28
After 1844, the BAAS ignored earthquakes altogether. Comrie was undis-
turbed by seismic phenomena for many years, and its villagers fell back into 
their quiet way of life. In 1869, it looked as if a new swarm might be arriv-
ing. The BAAS revived the Earthquake Committee and began construction 

The Planet in the Village / 31
of what appears to have been the first purpose-built seismic observatory, 
completed in Comrie in 1874 (figure 2.1). Yet the expected earthquakes 
never came. In 1882, the local amateur historian Samuel Carment con-
cluded that Comrie’s earthquakes had been consigned to history: “they are 
now grown rather stiff in their joints by reason of age, and can only sit in 
their subterranean caverns and grin at the passers-by, and bite their long 
nails in impotent rage.”29 Aside from light shakings in 1894, 1895, and 
1898, Comrie kept its peace.30 Meanwhile, the seismic threat began to an-
nounce itself closer to the heart of the British Empire.
“British Earthquakes”
Comrie’s quick shot to fame as an “earthquake center” was a function in 
part of the exotic quality of earthquakes in the British Isles. Where tremors 
were so rare, even weak ones drew numerous and elaborate reports. One 
witness even erected a stone monument to mark an 1840 earthquake, of 
Fig. 2.1.  “Earthquake House,” Comrie, 1874: “the first ever purpose-built seismic  
observatory” (http://www.panoramio.com/photo/40904671). It fell out of use  
between approximately 1900 and 1988, when it was restored and furnished  
with an up-to-date seismograph. Today, it’s a tourist draw.

32 / Chapter Two
which he had heard some rumblings but felt not even a bump.31 To the Brit-
ish, the very word “earthquake” conjured a scent of Mediterranean dust and 
an echo of Catholic supplications: they appeared to be a scourge reserved 
for “tropical” lands. In the 1850s, the popular historian Henry Thomas  
Buckle argued that earthquake-prone lands were doomed to mental back-
wardness, for “there grow up among the people those feelings of awe, and of 
helplessness, on which all superstition is based.”32 Buckle’s purpose was to 
prove that no earthly environment was more conducive to human progress 
than England’s.
Certain of the terra firma of their island home, the British felt safe to 
indulge in seismic fantasies. In 1848, as revolutions erupted across the Eu-
ropean continent, Londoners—spared the political turmoil—entertained 
themselves instead with a seismic upheaval. The Cyclorama staged a spec-
tacular panorama of the great Lisbon earthquake of 1755, replete with mov-
ing scenery, atmospheric effects, and offstage screams. Such an amusement 
was amusing because the threat it represented seemed so foreign.
From time to time, however, the British were reminded that the stability 
of their isles was not guaranteed. No less an authority than Charles Dickens 
warned the public in 1860 that “we enjoy no immunity from the most sud-
den, the most irresistible, the most destructive of nature’s powers. Another 
such shock as the Lisbon earthquake may happen this or next year. It may 
not happen in this country, but it may originate beneath our own metropo-
lis.” Still, the British remained confident in their belief that “earthquakes are 
meant for other countries.” As the London Times put it in 1863, “Here, in 
these cooler climes, with more reasonable temperaments, and under a purer 
faith, it is hoped that we do not need this awful language. The almighty 
footfall is soft here, even in the earthquake and the storm.”33 This time, 
however, these articles of faith were being repeated for ironic effect. As this 
editorial was printed, reports were pouring into the press office of a tremor 
felt across eighty-five thousand square miles of England.34
The Times printed a request for observations of the 1863 earthquake 
from the meteorologist E. J. Lowe, and two hundred and fifty-one indi-
viduals replied. Their observations formed the basis for a table Lowe pub-
lished the following year: heavily discursive and laden with footnotes, it 
ran to thirty-four pages. Three months later, Lowe lectured on the history of 
“British earthquakes” at the Mansfield Mechanics Institute, where he urged 
his working-class audience to recognize the true instability of the ground 
beneath them. “No doubt more earthquakes occur than we are aware of, 
as unless the shocks happen to be tolerably severe, no notice is taken of 

The Planet in the Village / 33
them. . . . Over all Western Europe earthquakes are incessantly at work, the 
average in the zone being thirty-three shocks a year, or one in every eleven 
days” (a statistic he likely drew from the seismic cataloger Alexis Perrey). 
Lowe himself had conducted “experiments” that showed that faint sounds 
were more audible in the dark, and weak movements of the ground more 
sensible when lying down.35
Among the Englishmen eager to share their seismic observations in 
1863 was Charles Dickens. Dickens had evidently conducted a fair share 
of research, for he was able to cite a report in the Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society from 1683 on the behavior of a barometer during an 
earthquake. He cast his own observations with appropriate precision: “I was 
awakened by a violent swaying of my bedstead from side to side, accom-
panied by a singular heaving motion. It was exactly as if some great beast 
had been crouching asleep under the bedstead and were now shaking itself 
and trying to rise. The time by my watch was twenty minutes past three, and 
I suppose the shock to have lasted nearly a minute. The bedstead, a large 
iron one, standing nearly north and south, appeared to me to be the only 
piece of furniture in the room that was heavily shaken. Neither the doors 
nor the windows rattled, though they rattle enough in windy weather, this 
house standing alone, on high ground, in the neighbourhood of two great 
rivers. There was no noise. The air was very still, and much warmer than it 
had been in the earlier part of the night. Although the previous afternoon 
had been wet, the glass had not fallen.”36 Dickens’s interest in earthquakes 
may seem surprising. His long ruminations on earthquake statistics in All 
the Year Round, in particular, seem out of keeping with his famous cynicism 
about statistical knowledge in Hard Times. What intrigued him about seis-
mology was the suggestion of hidden connections between earthquakes and 
all sorts of other phenomena—electrical, galvanic, atmospheric, and astro-
nomical. He was also drawn by the absence, as yet, of a satisfying scientific 
explanation. Dickens arrayed earthquakes alongside a host of newly dis-
covered effects—geomagnetism, electromagnetism, photochemistry—that 
Victorian physicists hoped to unite in a single theory: “But even Newton’s 
marvelous generalisations do but serve as the basis of still higher generalisa-
tions, arising from the rapid increase since his time in the number of facts 
accurately observed. Newton’s so-called laws, once looked on as universal, 
are now becoming recognised as only subordinate to some other laws yet 
to be made out. All the recent facts about earth-magnetism are new; all 
the workings out of electricity in every department, are new; all we hear 
about certain rays of the sun not communicating light or heat, but having  

34 / Chapter Two
chemical effects, illustrated in what we call photography, is new; and what 
little is known about the interior of the earth has been learnt since New-
ton lived.”37 Dickens dreamed that Victorian science might ascend from the 
study of earthquakes to an all-encompassing cosmology.
Other Englishmen read more worldly lessons into the earthquake of 
1863. The Times observed that “there are means, utterly beyond our ken 
and our computation, far below our feet, by which cities may be subverted, 
populations suddenly cut off, and empires ruined.” Reflecting on the fate 
of the Ottomans, the editor noted, “We see, afar off, a great Empire, that 
had threatened to predominate over all mankind, suddenly broken up by 
moral agencies and shattered into no one knows how many fragments. We 
are safe from that fate, at least so we deem ourselves, for never were we so 
united. But there are other weapons of destruction in the arsenal of the  
omnipotent. Who can say what strange trial of shaking, or upheaving, 
sinking, dividing, or drying-up, may await us? We know by science these 
isles have gone through many a strange metamorphosis, and science can-
not assure us that there are none more to come.”38 It was a remarkably 
quick leap from recognizing that England was not immune to earthquakes 
to sensing the fragility of the British Empire.
Nonetheless, after 1863 earthquakes once again vanished from the pages 
of British newspapers and the worries of the public. Until, that is, the morn-
ing of 22 April 1884, when the town of Colchester in Essex—never before 
the site of seismic activity—was hit by the most destructive earthquake ever 
recorded in Britain. The damage was significant enough, if geographically 
limited, that a national collection was undertaken. On the other hand, there 
were no fatalities, apart from one woman who was so disturbed by the event 
that she drowned herself.39 As usual, the papers had to remind the Brit-
ish public that “such disturbances were by no means unknown in former 
times.”40 In the view of the seismologist Charles Davison, the 1884 quake 
was “the chief means of converting it [the present generation] from the be-
lief in the absence or comparative harmlessness of British earthquakes.”41
There was one crucial difference between 1863 and 1884, and that was 
the state of seismological science. In the intervening years, John Milne and 
Patrick Ewing had introduced seismometry in Japan and had begun to 
establish earthquakes as a proper object of quantitative physical science. 
Milne promoted his own work in the London Times in 1881, and that 
paper followed two years later with an article entitled “The Vigour of the 
Earth.” It stressed the sophistication of Milne’s new instruments: “A delicate 
seismometer is agitated when to human sensation not the smallest sign 

The Planet in the Village / 35
of earthquake is evident.”42 The following year, the Colchester quake of-
fered Milne a prime opportunity to convince the British public of the value 
of his work. From Tokyo, Milne sent off a letter to the Times in which he 
offered a “few facts . . . based upon the observation of many hundreds of 
earthquakes with every variety of seismograph and seismoscope with which 
I am acquainted. My object in recording them is to give those who experi-
enced the earthquake some idea as to the true nature of the phenomenon, 
the knowledge of which is unattainable without the use of instruments.”43 
Milne’s insistence on the inadequacy of human observations was repeated 
in subsequent reports on the temblor of 1884.
The 1884 earthquake also arrived at a moment when relations between 
metropolitan and provincial science were in flux. In 1883 the British Asso-
ciation had attempted to smooth its interactions with the many provincial 
scientific societies with which it cooperated. A committee chaired by the 
distinguished Francis Galton would “draw up suggestions upon methods of 
more systematic observation and plans of operation for Local Societies.” The 
committee envisioned that the BAAS would become “an organizing centre 
of local scientific work,” promoting “systematic local investigation.”44 The 
most thorough investigation of the Colchester earthquake was conducted 
by Raphael Meldola and William White, members of the Essex Field Club 
(founded in 1880), who framed their work as emblematic of this new era in 
the relationship between metropolitan and provincial science in Britain.45 In 
the introduction to their report, Meldola and White presented their detailed 
empirical report as a model of “local investigation” in the BAAS’s sense. 
“We are of opinion that such investigations should deal as exhaustively as 
possible with the facts relating to any particular subject.” They expressed 
due deference to the experts of the BAAS, wishing “that this task had been 
taken up by some more qualified specialists.” As locals, they did their best 
to “interpret the observations by the light of the results which have been 
achieved in Japan” by Milne and Ewing. Finally, they warned emphatically 
of the shortcomings of their data: “One point in connection with the report 
which will doubtless strike our readers is the general untrustworthiness of 
what may be called commonplace observations in any attempt to submit 
an earthquake to exact mathematical treatment. If our labours serve only to 
emphasize this inadequacy of non-instrumental methods of observation, 
we feel that our efforts will not have been altogether exerted in vain.”46 The 
new era in the centralization of British science thus coincided with a new era 
in seismology. The authority of metropolitan expertise over provincial expe-
rience rose along with the authority of instruments over human senses.

36 / Chapter Two
A Birmingham Schoolmaster
Comrie was a less-than-ideal site for earthquake research, too thinly popu-
lated and too close to mountains and sea. From a scientific perspective, the 
Colchester earthquake was an improvement, but still not as propitious as 
the earthquake of 1896. That year, a week before Christmas, a wide patch 
of England between Cardiff and Birmingham awoke to an early morning 
temblor centered in Hereford. This was a densely populated, urban region 
“containing numerous capable and intelligent observers.” While this shock 
“was strong enough to be interesting, it was not too severe for accurate 
study. Those who felt the shock were able to bestow their full attention 
upon it.”47
These were the judgments of Charles Davison, mathematics master at 
King Edward’s School in Birmingham. When he felt his bed tremble on the 
morning of 17 December, Davison got to work. He had acquired an interest 
in earthquakes by way of geology and the contraction theory of the earth’s 
development. As a graduate of the elite mathematics tripos at Cambridge 
(thirteenth wrangler), Davison was interested in part in sophisticated analy-
ses of the frequencies of earthquakes. Since 1889, however, he had grown 
increasingly enthusiastic about the prospect of studying “British earth-
quakes” by surveying witnesses.48 Like his Swiss and Austrian colleagues, 
he was interested in mapping the areas affected by ground movement in 
order to locate tectonic faults. Unlike many of the seismological pioneers 
of the nineteenth century, Davison was not blessed with personal wealth 
and leisure time. He wrote his numerous treatises on seismology, as well as 
several mathematics textbooks, in his classroom during the lunch break.49 
In the collection and analysis of evidence, he was equally indefatigable. For 
the 1896 earthquake alone he processed 2,902 questionnaires and a stash of 
newspaper reports, which, “if continuously extended, would form a column 
200 yards in length.”50 By the 1920s, Davison’s work had become definitive 
of “British earthquakes,” as it would remain until the 1980s.51
Davison was interested, in part, in what could be learned about the phys-
ical nature of earthquakes from human perceptions. But he was also keenly 
interested in the human impact of earthquakes in its own right. Characteristic 
was a letter he wrote to the Times on that classic tale of man’s battle with na-
ture, Robinson Crusoe. Davison wanted to draw attention to the verisimilitude 
of Defoe’s account of the earthquake that occurs six months after Crusoe’s 
shipwreck. In particular, he noted that Crusoe was not atypical to feel sick 
to his stomach, “like one that was tossed at sea.” He complained, however, 
that Crusoe should have felt more terrified in the aftermath: “For hours after 

The Planet in the Village / 37
a great earthquake like this the ground would not have ceased from trem-
bling, slight as a rule, but broken every now and then by violent shocks that 
should have filled Robinson Crusoe with fresh terror. He certainly should 
not have felt composed for several days.”52 In “The Effects of Earthquakes 
on Human Beings” (1900), Davison reversed seismology’s usual order of 
reasoning: rather than using human data to analyze physical phenomena, 
he used physical data to analyze human phenomena. He took the behavior-
ist position that self-descriptions of mental states during earthquakes were 
unreliable, and that “the resulting actions are less liable to error or exag-
geration.” He grouped these actions into four “rough” categories: “A) No  
persons leave their rooms. B) Some persons leave their houses. C) Most 
persons run into the streets, which are full of excited people. D) People rush 
wildly for open spaces, and remain all night out of doors.” Mapping these 
reactions for the Charleston earthquake of 1886 generated a first insight. 
Initially, he had listed the “hasty dispersal of meetings” under category C, 
but his map indicated that this reaction was typical of weaker earthquakes: 
“A crowd in one room is more liable to excitement and fear than are persons 
in separate houses.” Other conclusions followed from plotting the regions 
ABCD on a map of structural damage. “If the shock was strong enough to 
throw down chimneys or make cracks in the walls of buildings, then people 
thought it wiser to camp out for the night.. . . People rushed precipitately 
into the streets if the movement made chandeliers, pictures, etc. swing.” 
More surprisingly, “If the shock was not even strong enough to cause doors 
and windows to rattle, some persons were so alarmed that they left their 
houses, and public meetings were dispersed. Whether these effects were due 
to the rarity of the phenomenon or to the highly-strung nerves of the Ameri-
can people, it may, I think, be inferred that in no other civilized country 
would such alarm be shown at a sudden and unexpected occurrence.” Davi-
son had turned the earthquake into an experiment in social psychology.
Leaving aside the question of the fairness of the national stereotype invoked 
here, we can appreciate the significance of his conclusion that “the hu- 
man effects of earthquakes” were culturally specific. Compare the perspec-
tive of his contemporary, the Hungarian seismologist R. de Kövesligethy. 
Kövesligethy hoped to measure human responses to earthquakes on a  
scale as simple and universal as the astronomer’s new formula for defining 
the magnitude of a star in relation to its luminosity. From Davison’s point 
of view, such a psychophysical law would be a hopeless simplification.53
Davison’s work represents a lost opportunity. Late in life, he met and 
advised the young geologist A. T. J. Dollar. Dollar went on to found the Brit-
ish Earthquake Enquiry and, from 1935 to 1967, he continued Davison’s  

38 / Chapter Two
surveys on a smaller scale, drawing on a network of approximately two hun-
dred volunteer observers. This research received little support from the di-
rector of the Geological Survey at the time, Patrick Willmore, a seismometer 
designer who “had little time for Dollar.” In 1974, Chris Browitt reinstated 
macroseismic surveys at the Geological Survey, “in the teeth of objections” 
from Willmore.54
Willmore reflected the direction seismology was taking in the twentieth 
century, in Britain and beyond. Davison’s colleague John Milne returned 
to Britain in 1895, after two decades in Japan. Milne immediately began to 
campaign for government support for his project of a worldwide seismo-
graphic network. Milne promoted seismology as a science appropriate to 
the British Empire in the new century. For instance, he repeatedly stressed 
the need to safeguard Britain’s global web of telegraph cables by monitor-
ing submarine seisms. In the wake of the Hereford quake, Milne seized the 
opportunity to argue for the necessity of seismometric studies even for local 
research. As he put it in a letter to the Times, “At this particular time many 
may well ask whether in the Severn valley or in any other part of Britain, 
shiverings to which we are insensible are now in progress, whilst the thou-
sands who are awakened every night may desire to know whether the causes 
have been fanciful or real. Until we establish seismographs, especially in 
suspected districts, the answers to these and other questions are in abey-
ance.”55 Next to Milne’s high-tech planetary science, Davison’s provincial 
inquiries appeared downright quaint.
The Seismic Goose and the Psychic Gander
In the last years of the nineteenth century, the human observation of earth-
quakes lost whatever dignity it had retained in Britain up to 1884. Seis-
mology became known to the British public as a professional science that 
measured far-off vibrations with exquisitely sensitive instruments. “British 
earthquakes,” meanwhile, became little more than a punch line. The village 
of Comrie was the butt of most of the jokes. An 1886 article in a Scottish 
paper reminded readers of the “extinct volcanoes that thirty years ago used 
to flourish in the Perthshire village of Comrie. The story went that they were 
got up by the local correspondent. As long as he was in settled employment, 
Comrie was quiet; but the moment the necessities of his life perceived shin-
ing merits in penny-a-lining, at once the earthquake appeared. It thus fell 
out that the newspaper reader was getting his shocks three or four times in 
the year in obedience to the fanciful wit and the domestic exigencies of the 
local correspondent. The story may itself have been fanciful; but the fact 

The Planet in the Village / 39
remains that there is not in Comrie one earthquake for ten that there used 
to be. In that scene the seismic forces have shaken themselves down into 
perfect accord.”56 In this way, the press poked fun at its own fondness for 
natural disasters. Such exposés undermined any credibility that observers in 
Comrie might still have been able to muster. In 1894 the same paper noted 
that a report of an earthquake at Comrie arrived “as usual, at the height of 
the season, just in time to attract the tourist who is fond of a little adven-
ture without unnecessary danger. On one occasion some ill-conditioned 
person ventured to deny the annual summer earthquake in the interest, 
as he thought, of the prudent villagers, but what was his surprise when he 
found that a torrent of local contradiction was the result, backed up by a 
large display of cracked soup plates. It is dangerous, therefore, to interfere 
with the Comrie earthquakes. If not, strictly speaking, a source of danger in 
themselves, their denial is a source of danger to the scoffer.”57 
An 1898 report on a slight tremor at Comrie bore the subtitle “The Repu-
tation of the Village at Stake.” In the absence of earthquakes, the paper 
noted, “Comrie has been drifting in to the position of a mere common-
place summer resort.” The recent disturbance had thus come “as a veritable 
godsend.”58 But what exactly had been observed? In the absence of instru-
mental evidence, the claims of the villagers no longer stood the test: “Sad to 
relate, despite the emphatic declarations of the villagers, there are sceptics 
who doubt whether there really has been an earthquake. A number of per-
sons—visitors to Comrie—declare that at the time when the earthquake is 
said to have taken place nothing unusual occurred. There is a seismometer 
at Comrie, but owing to the earthquakes having failed to put in an appear-
ance for several years, it has been neglected, and is not in a fit state either to 
support or contradict the statements as to the alleged ‘disturbances;’ so that, 
un­fortunately, there is nothing beyond the bare assertion of the earthquake 
experts of Comrie with which to confound the sceptics, and the latter refuse 
to accept these assertions. Nay, more, some of them are unkind enough to 
recall the fact that the reputation of Comrie for earthquakes rests almost 
entirely on the assertions of its inhabitants. The seismometer house was 
erected over thirty years ago by the BAAS, but for years nobody has taken 
any interest in it. ‘Cos why? ‘It never recorded anything.’ Scottish intense 
practicability again, you see.”59 Against the new authority of the seismom-
eter, Comrie’s inhabitants found it ever harder to establish themselves as 
“earthquake experts.” It thus became a matter of course to attribute Com-
rie’s former earthquakes to a certain “ingenious reporter who made the 
reputation of Comrie as a seismic centre.”60
The last strike at the credibility of Comrie’s seismic observers came in 

40 / Chapter Two
1896, when the estate of Ballechin, about twenty miles away, became the site 
of an experiment by the London Society for Psychical Research. The society 
had been founded in 1882 to pursue studies of “mesmeric, psychical and 
‘spiritualistic’” phenomena “in the same spirit of exact and un­impassioned 
enquiry which has enabled Science to solve so many problems.”61 In 1896, 
several members of the SPR—including the physicist Oliver Lodge, Fel-
low of the Royal Society—occupied Ballechin for three months to test the 
claim that the house was haunted. A debate soon exploded in the letters 
column of the Times, in which the experiment was condemned by some 
of the very people who had participated in it. The initial attack, signed “A 
Late Guest at Ballechin,” charged that “a so-called experiment had been 
carried on there for nearly three months at the time of my visit by the Psy-
chical Research Society, without any attempt at either experimentation or 
research. Unscreened evidence of improbable phenomena had been col-
lected in heaps, but the simplest and most obvious tests had not been ap-
plied. The residents and visitors, it seemed to me, had been sitting there 
all the time, agape for wonders, straining on the limits of audition, and 
fomenting one another’s superstitions without taking any precautions  
to prevent deception or employing reagents to clear up turbid observa­
tions. . . . Practical joking, hallucination, and fraud will account for the bulk 
of the occult phenomena recorded at Ballechin during its occupation by the 
Psychical Research Society. What remains—if anything—may be explained 
by earth tremors (Ballechin is only 20 miles from Comrie, the chief centre 
of seismic disturbance in Scotland), by the creaking and reverberations of 
an old and somewhat curiously-constructed house, or by some other sim-
ple natural cause.”62 Thus were Comrie’s extinct earthquakes revived at this 
late date. They had acquired plausibility only relative to the paranormal 
alternative. Apparently, no one bothered to consult Charles Davison, who 
had documented an “exceedingly slight” earthquake at Comrie in 1895, but 
none at all in 1896.63
Still, Comrie’s earthquakes proved only marginally more robust than 
ghosts. The debate in the Times over the Ballechin experiment ran on for five 
months. It underlined the uncomfortable proximity of observational seis-
mology to the “pseudoscience” of psychical research. Skeptics discredited 
the observations of the SPR researchers at Ballechin in much the same terms 
as the press mocked earthquake observations from Comrie. In seismology 
as in psychic research, the construction of evidence depended on coopera-
tion between metropolitan experts and local residents. It hinged further 
on the trustworthiness of witnesses who testified to phenomena that were 
inherently “transient and elusive.”64 The same solution was urged in both 

The Planet in the Village / 41
cases. No less an authority than John Milne suggested installing a seismom-
eter at Ballechin, in the interest of determining the origin of the sounds 
and serving “seismic research.” He also made the potent point that the 
former proprietor of Ballechin, Lady Moncrieff, had been cited as an earth-
quake witness by David Milne himself.65 An earlier generation of psychic 
researchers—including Cromwell Varley, the telegraphist and proponent 
of an electrical theory of earthquakes—had applied telegraphic apparatus 
to the detection of spirits.66 Now, one defender of the SPR objected that it 
would be “pedantic” to apply “elaborate tests,” such as those for “seismic 
disturbance,” to the phenomena at Ballechin. On the other hand, the au-
thor of the 1897 Book of Dreams and Ghosts asked his reader to consider the 
case of a house “where noises are actually caused by young earthquakes. 
Would anybody say: ‘There are no seismic disturbances near Blunderstone 
House, for I passed a night there, and none occurred’? Why should a noisy 
ghost (if there is such a thing) or a hallucinatory sound (if there is such a 
thing), be expected to be more punctual and pertinacious than a seismic 
disturbance?”67 The same author suggested in the Times that the sounds at 
Ballechin might be explained as “collective hallucinations.”68 The consen-
sus, then, was that the same standards of evidence should be applied to 
earthquakes as to ghosts.
Seismic testimony typically came from common folk who were, in the 
eyes of the scientific elite, effectively anonymous. Spirit testimony often 
came from witnesses who remained anonymous for other reasons. “It would 
be hard to afford a more ludicrous example of the methods of the SPR than 
is given by X. in her own letter. . . . Can anything be more useless or more 
absurd than inquiry in which names of persons and places are omitted from 
the depositions? What value can be assigned to evidence when the names of 
the witnesses are kept secret? Such proceedings are the caricature of a legal 
inquiry and the parody of a scientific investigation. The SPR cannot have 
the remotest idea of the legal or scientific meaning and value of evidence.” 
Yet the authority of this anonymous witness, like that of seismic observers, 
rested not on personal circumstances but on the local knowledge derived 
from long-term residence.
In the end, the last word went to an anonymous reader who suggested 
that the seismic and psychic explanations of the “disturbances” were equally 
tenuous:
I learn with pleasure that the latest tenant of Ballechin has been absolutely 
undisturbed by any unexplained noises. But what is the correct philosophical 
inference? The noises of which earlier tenants complained were accounted 

42 / Chapter Two
for, in a learned way, as the result of “seismic disturbances.” Does the absence 
of annoyance in the late tenant’s experience demonstrate that there are no 
such things as seismic disturbances, or, at all events, none in Athol? And, if 
this be not quite a logical inference, is it more logical to infer that the recent 
tenant’s immunity from noises proves that there are no such things as bogies, 
in Athol at any rate? Or would it not be fair to say that what is sauce for the 
seismic goose is sauce for the psychic gander?
Obediently yours, An Earnest Inquirer69
In other words, the evidence for earthquakes and for ghosts would rise and 
fall together. Seismic and psychic research unfolded according to the same 
rules. Each depended on the negotiation of authority between metropolitan 
experts and provincial residents. Comrie’s status as a center of either para­
normal or seismic activity hinged on its ability to draw London’s experts to 
the scene. Those experts expected to be able to issue the final interpretation 
of local shudders and creaks. However, from James Drummond to the pro-
prietors of Ballechin, Comrie maintained a tradition of refusing to submit 
to metropolitan scientific authority.
“Who Killed the British Earthquake?”
In 1972 Queen Elizabeth II presided over the festive opening of a new ex-
hibit hall at the London Geological Museum. It bore the romantic title “The 
Story of the Earth,” inspired by Mahler’s “Das Lied von der Erde.”70 Ac-
cording to the curator, Frederick Dunning, the hall was “designed expressly  
for people with no knowledge of geology whatever, but nevertheless with 
above-average intelligence: the level of IQ we had in mind was around 
115.” From the start, Dunning’s vision for the exhibit had included a ma-
chine that would simulate the experience of an earthquake: “a mechanically 
vibrated platform on which a visitor can stand and at the press of a but-
ton experience a simulated earthquake shock accompanied by the familiar  
‘express-train’ sounds.”71 The popularity of this “earthquake machine” re-
called the Lisbon panorama to which Londoners flocked in 1848. Over a 
century later, the entertainment value of a simulated temblor was still a 
function of the exoticism of earthquakes to British sensibilities.
By 1972, however, the British could no longer afford to be so compla-
cent. As the scale of human construction grew in the twentieth century, 
so did the vulnerability of edifices to weak seismicity. With the advent of 
nuclear power, even a small tremor could unleash catastrophe. As the Ed-

The Planet in the Village / 43
inburgh seismologist Roger Musson recalls, “The first NPPs [nuclear power 
plants] were built in the 1960s and had no antiseismic design whatever. It 
was only in the late 1970s that it was realised that this was an oversight, and 
retrospective safety assessments were called for.”72 Scientists at the British 
Geological Survey in Edinburgh and at Imperial College London responded 
by reopening the question of “British earthquakes.” They unearthed evi-
dence collected by David Milne and Charles Davison and began to re- 
analyze it. They also prepared to monitor earthquakes as they occurred. For 
this research they had no trouble finding financial support from the nuclear 
industry and its government regulators.73 What they needed, however, were 
earthquake observers. “In the UK, there are no suitable local government 
officials who can be charged with the task of reporting on local earthquake 
effects; therefore it is necessary to address questionnaires to the general 
public.”74 Following Davison, the BGS scientists took advantage of newspa-
pers to circulate their questionnaires. Their early questionnaires, however, 
failed to describe common earthquake effects. In an attempt to extract de-
scriptions of the shocks, the scientists asked, “What did you feel?” Many re-
sponded, “Alarmed!”75 With time, British seismologists began to recognize 
that “questionnaire design is somewhat of an art.”76
To the public, meanwhile, the very idea of British earthquakes remained 
comical. This was clear to Robert Muir-Wood, one of the first scientists to 
raise public alarm about the seismic risk to nuclear facilities in Britain. At 
the August 1983 meeting of the BAAS, Muir-Wood called for a national seis-
mic monitoring network and decried the public’s willful ignorance about 
the earthquake hazard. The British, he charged, “still believe earthquakes 
are about as English as pizza.” The popular magazine New Scientist followed 
with a series of articles on the neglect of British earthquakes, including a 
cover showing a cup of tea thrown from its saucer and the title “Is Britain 
Prepared for Earthquakes?” Once again, it wasn’t clear whether the topic of 
British earthquakes had earned attention as an acknowledged hazard or a 
gag. Under the headline “Shaken to the Core,” the London Times editorial-
ized: “A claim that parts of Kent and Canvey Island, with its vulnerable con-
centration of oil and gas installations, could be hit by a ‘large earthquake’ 
invites scepticism, like a report that the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse 
had asked for clearance to land at Heathrow. There is something millenar-
ian, almost Monty Pythonesque about it.” In the end, the paper’s attitude 
was dismissive: “But at least until really shaken, Dr. Wood’s fellow-citizens 
will not be easily persuaded that they ought to be worrying about the move-
ment of tectonic plates beneath the British crust. They have other things on 
their mind.”77

44 / Chapter Two
Attempting to shake some sense into the public and fellow scientists, 
the British macroseismologists of the nuclear era seized on the example of 
Comrie. The Scottish village served, first, as evidence that earthquakes were 
not so exotic after all. Muir-Wood and a colleague opened a 1983 article in 
the popular magazine New Scientist with an account of a rural community 
terrorized by a shock that had thrown down paintings and cracked walls. 
“Italy, Greece, some Pacific state of South America?” they asked their read-
ers. “No, just Britain in the 19th century.”78 Comrie recalled a time when, as 
the authors put it, “news that Britain had earthquakes was no news.” In the 
nineteenth century, they argued, the public was well informed about past 
shocks, thanks to the local press and to oral tradition. Then the interna-
tional media intervened: “Journalists had successfully convinced even rural 
communities that real history poured out of the radio and the television. 
The folk memory faded into collective amnesia.” Finally, the new macro-
seismologists marshaled the case of Comrie against mainstream seismolo-
gists, who could not imagine the value of human earthquake observers in 
late twentieth-century Britain. Comrie demonstrated that noninstrumental 
research could generate fundamental scientific knowledge. As Musson ar-
gued in a 1993 article on Comrie’s “place in the history of seismology,” the 
Scottish village “indicates the usefulness of earthquake swarms as a testing 
ground for seismological investigation.”79
Indeed, Comrie’s tremors had prompted the development of one of the 
earliest scales of seismic intensity as well as the most sophisticated seis-
mometer of the mid-nineteenth century; they had also inspired some of 
Davison’s seminal contributions to the methods of macroseismic survey. 
The organization of Comrie’s residents into a quake-observing network was 
a successful geophysical experiment; less obvious is its status as a human ex-
periment. Comrie served as a laboratory for the study of the social relations 
of British science: for the apportioning of authority between local common 
sense and metropolitan expertise. For the British press, however, Comrie 
lives on principally as a punch line. In March of 2008 the Times reported 
that the Earthquake House had failed to record the strongest earthquake to 
hit Britain in twenty years, “because it had run out of paper.”80

three
News of the Apocalypse
Anyone who studied earthquakes in the nineteenth century was used to 
having their fingertips covered in newsprint. The circulation of earthquake 
stories in the daily press was the lifeblood of nineteenth-century seismol-
ogy. Scientific researchers culled the testimony of earthquake witnesses 
from local papers, posted advertisements to solicit observations, and used 
the major dailies as a forum for communicating their research to the public. 
Newspaper culture in turn shaped the ways in which seismologists linked 
local stories into planetary ones.
The term “journalism” was introduced into English from French in 
1833, the same year that the word “scientist” was coined.1 At a moment 
of fitful democratization in Britain, each of these neologisms labeled an 
unprecedented form of authority over the public, a new class of guard­ians 
of information. Newspapermen saw themselves as fulfilling a modern 
responsibility for the rapid and transparent exchange of information. By 
mid-century, this aspiration was realized via the telegraph: Reuter’s sent its 
first commercial newswires in 1851, its first foreign dispatches in 1858.2 By 
1834, it was “a matter of universal observation” in Britain that “the great 
changes of recent times have been mainly owing to the influence of the 
press.”3 But what was the nature of its influence? In step with the expansion 
of the franchise throughout western and central Europe, concerns grew over 
the power of the press to sway public opinion. A French physician lamented 
in 1895 that the papers were no longer a voice of reason. Readers grew skep-
tical of “sensationalism,” even as circulations rose. The papers themselves 
remarked frequently on the machinations of their competitors. According 
to historians, a widespread sense emerged that “truth” had to be defended 
against the distortions of wily publishers.4

46 / Chapter Three
No modern science was as intimately involved with these developments 
as seismology. To be sure, meteorologists contended in print with compet-
ing authorities, including farmers’ almanacs and astrological predictions.5 
Unlike meteorologists, however, seismologists often drew their data directly 
from newspapers: they assigned values of intensity to newspaper accounts 
of ground movements. No meteorologist ever tried to take the temperature 
of newsprint. Indeed, nineteenth-century seismology was uniquely depen­
dent on the proliferation of newspapers and the expansion of the reading 
public. As one seismologist put it, local papers published “numerous indi-
vidual observations, general commentaries, and calls for participation in 
the observation of earthquakes.” They were an “essential support of earth-
quake study.”6
Still, like much of the reading public, seismological researchers often 
groaned about the shortcomings of newspapers as a source of information. 
Unlike accounts obtained directly from witnesses, newspaper reports often 
“prove to be . . . highly exaggerated or even pulled entirely out of thin air.”7 
“Since the newspapers mainly cite the most striking events,” complained 
one seismologist, “one can in general far sooner rely on reports that one 
draws from trustworthy individuals by means of questionnaires for a nor-
mal picture.”8 The press itself recognized this problem. In the wake of the 
devastating earthquake and tsunami at Messina in 1908, for example, the 
satirical German weekly Simplicissimus found comic relief in the behavior 
of journalists: “In the vicinity of Messina was overheard the conversation 
of two foreign special correspondents: ‘You write of two hundred thousand 
dead, my dear colleague?’—‘Why not!’ answered the one addressed. ‘I am 
paid by the corpse.’”9 In the historical relationship between seismology and 
the press lie clues to the mutual constitution of two emerging forms of pub-
lic authority—scientific expertise and mass journalism.
We can watch the emergence of a public dialogue about earthquakes 
in the late nineteenth century in Eduard Suess’s hometown of Vienna. The 
1873 temblor that launched Suess on his tectonic theory (estimated today 
as magnitude 4.4) at first went unreported in the major liberal daily, the 
Neue Freie Presse. Four days later, a few reports filled only seventeen lines. 
Subsequently, even minor seismic events triggered small landslides of tele­
grams to the Neue Freie Presse. In 1876, when a temblor was felt strongly in 
Vienna, the paper cited dozens of eyewitness reports; there was “not enough 
space for the innumerable smaller incidents.” But even a less dramatic event 
like a magnitude 4.4 in Lower Austria in September 1885 drew numerous 
telegrams and received fifty-nine lines in the evening edition, with more 
observations reported the following day. Finally, in 1908, a magnitude 4.8 

News of the Apocalypse / 47
quake in Lower Austria took up two full pages for each of the next two days. 
Witness after witness was quoted as to the precise time of the tremor, its 
duration, direction of propagation, damage, weather conditions, and effects 
on humans and animals. The editors received too many reports to print 
them all, and those trying to reach the paper by phone were told all lines 
were occupied, “due to the earthquake.”10 For a brief moment, reporting on 
earthquakes approximated the ideal of “participatory journalism.”11
With the decline of local interest reporting in the years leading up to 
World War One, citizens and scientists alike lost a key repository of knowl-
edge about seismic hazard. As the California seismologist Harry Wood ob-
served in the 1930s, “as country cross-roads in this western region have 
grown at an amazing pace into sizable cities, while villages have spread and 
coalesced to form great metropolitan communities, reports of small local 
earthquakes have been crowded out of the published news of the day (the 
smaller the shock the less its importance as an item of news) along with 
accounts of small fires, minor accidents and the like—matters which often 
find room in the local press of small places.”12
“A Brief Sensation”
Let us begin with a single seismic event refracted by multiple passages 
through the press: a rare case of a widely felt earthquake in the eastern 
United States. It is a story that illustrates the role of the press in soliciting 
earthquake observations, communicating scientific conclusions to the pub-
lic, and suggesting global connections. “On the night of Thursday, the 10th 
of December, 1874, there occurred, in and around the city of New York, a 
slight but very distinct earthquake shock, which caused considerable excite-
ment at the time, and furnished material for a brief sensation in the papers 
of the metropolis.” The New York Lyceum of Natural History (now the New 
York Academy of Sciences) formed an investigative committee chaired by 
the geologist Daniel S. Martin of Rutgers Female College, an active mem-
ber of that society. Martin prepared a questionnaire, to be printed “in the 
principal daily papers of the city, with an added request that it be copied 
by local journals throughout the region affected.” One thousand copies 
were sent out. “About a hundred responses were received, varying of course 
greatly in their character: in the main, however, they furnished useful and 
excellent data, which were afterward carefully tabulated. Though almost all 
written by unscientific observers, yet the incidents and impressions were 
related in most cases with a care and clearness beyond what was anticipated, 
while many of the letters were exceedingly vivid and detailed.”13 Martin 

48 / Chapter Three
used these reports to prepare a map on which each observation was marked 
by a red circle, with an arrow indicating the direction of motion, a system 
he compared to that of weather maps.14 As Martin revealed to the Princeton 
geologist Charles Rockwood, “The labor involved in these preparations was, 
as may readily be seen, very great; and it was quite out of proportion to 
the results. No seismic center or central line could be detected.” A majority 
reported that the shock traveled from southwest to northeast, and Martin 
decided “on other grounds that such was the true course,—upward along 
the line of strike of all the rocks of this region. The cracks produced in the 
ground at Closter, New Jersey had a course transverse to this, and confirmed 
my impression.” Martin shared these conclusions with “a very intelligent 
and somewhat scientific reporter” at the New York Tribune, but the paper 
“mixed up my remarks as to the crystalline rocks greatly.”15 No wonder Mar-
tin’s efforts proved frustrating: scientists have since found that earthquakes 
in the northeastern United States do not tend to occur along known faults. 
The geologic structure responsible for earthquakes in this region remains 
an “enigma.”16
While Martin worked up these results, information reached him from 
farther afield. He received “two remarkable letters . . . detailing a marked 
disturbance of very similar character in eastern Massachusetts, on the same 
afternoon between 5:30 and 6.” He also read a report in Nature of an earth-
quake atop the Pic du Midi in the Pyrenees at 4:45 a.m. on 11 Decem-
ber—nearly coinciding with the temblor in New York. According to Nature, 
the original source of that information was apparently a small-town French 
weekly with the romantic title L’Echo des Vallées. Then Martin read of vol-
canic eruptions in Iceland, beginning in December and continuing through 
January. The famed British explorer Richard Burton drew his account of the 
eruptions primarily from critical readings of Icelandic newspapers: “The lo-
cal papers . . . give ample accounts of the late movements. . . . Much of the 
matter has been translated and published by our home press, but there are 
interesting details which have not been noticed. Generally—allow me to 
remark—the accounts, though utterly unscientific, bear an aspect of sobriety 
and truthfulness wholly wanting in the older Icelandic descriptions . . . , and 
they show that the spirit of enterprise has not wholly died out in Iceland.”17 
Faced with these new clues, Martin wrote to Rockwood in mid-June that he 
would have to postpone further publication: “But now, we have these re-
markable accounts of outbreaks, and disturbances in Iceland during the past 
winter; and the question at once occurs to me, when did these begin? . . .  
My impression from all our accounts, is very strong, that the shock in our 
region was deep and wide-spread. The two (distinct) afternoon shakings, 

News of the Apocalypse / 49
in North Andover and in Salem, Mass., and more curious still, the simulta­
neous shock on the Pic du Midi (Pyrenees), that was reported in ‘Nature,’ 
point to some wide and deep movement, but lightly felt hereabouts at the 
surface, and yet very likely to be stronger near some of the earth’s great 
safety-valves, like Iceland.”18 Did Rockwood know, Martin wondered, 
whether any shaking had been felt at intermediary points like the Azores 
and Newfoundland? Rockwood did not, but that did not stop Martin from 
printing his transcontinental speculations in Science. As John Milne noted, 
“The probability, however, is that these coincidences are accidental.”19
The Earthquake Collectors
Few young followers of the trans-Atlantic stamp-collecting craze of the 
1870s were as fortunate as the sons of the mathematicians Alexis Perrey and 
Charles Rockwood, of Brittany and New Jersey, respectively. As the fathers 
amassed reports on earthquakes from newspapers and independent observ-
ers around the world, the sons reaped the philatelic benefits of their cor-
respondence.20 Perhaps the fathers shared something of the sons’ Victorian 
passion for collecting, and something of their thrill at epistolary contact 
with distant lands.
Charles Greene Rockwood came from a prominent New Jersey banking 
family that had been in the United States since 1636. From 1877 to 1905 
he was professor of mathematics at Princeton.21 Rockwood bequeathed the 
Princeton archives three fat volumes of newspaper clippings on earthquakes. 
These had formed the basis for his catalog of “American Earthquakes,” 
which covered North and South America and was published periodically in 
the American Journal of Science from 1872 to 1886. When Rockwood took 
up this work, there was no central source for data on earthquakes occur-
ring in the United States. The Heidelberg geologist Carl Fuchs, who began 
publishing annual earthquake lists for Europe in 1865, complained about 
this lacuna in an 1880 letter to James Dana at Yale. “In my annual reports 
the very small number of earthquakes in America is particularly striking. It is to 
be presumed that this is the result of lack of information on earthquakes 
and not of an extraordinary scarcity of such events in your country. . . . I am 
unfortunately ignorant as to whether any one in America is engaged in col-
lecting earthquake statistics nor do I know what are the sources from which 
information can be obtained.”22 Dana forwarded the letter to Rockwood, 
who sent copies of his “Notes” to Fuchs and brought Fuchs’s publications 
to the attention of American readers. Fuchs reciprocated with his list for 
1877–78, but he noted its imperfections: “These can only rise to a degree 

50 / Chapter Three
of completeness with respect to Europe. From Austria, Hungary, and a por-
tion of Germany I receive reports from the meteorological stations. In other 
countries I have correspondents, who collect the earthquakes occurring in 
their countries.”23 Beyond Europe, then, most of the information Fuchs re-
ceived came from newspapers.
Rockwood too drew heavily on the American press, and local editors 
were among his valued correspondents. A query to the Boston Post, for in-
stance, received the reply that the tremor in question was not felt in Boston, 
but that Rockwood was “mistaken in supposing the center of New England 
is always undisturbed. We had a nice little earthquake here about six years 
ago, it seemed so pleasant that we have been longing for a repetition ever 
since.”24 A Connecticut newspaperman apologized to Rockwood for being 
unable to find an article he had written on an 1875 earthquake. “All I can 
say today is that it was about two o’clock in the morning. Were I really a 
scientific personage, I should have had the matter recorded. At the time, peo-
ple here did not consider it an earthquake but merely the cracking of the 
ground or ice, as it was very cold then. . . . I am quite sorry I can give you 
no more information!”25 Not all journalists proved reliable, however. Rock-
wood was dismayed to discover that an evocative article on an earthquake 
in Caracas, published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1883, could not be corrobo-
rated. A local naturalist replied to his inquiry: “The article in the Monthly 
Atlantic for Mar[ch] [18]83 must be altogether a forgery, for there was never 
in the month of September an earthquake of such an energy in Caracas. . . . I 
am really curious to see this piece of fiction, and will certainly do something 
to warn people against that HD Warner whoever he may be. . . . The thing 
is undoubtedly not pleasant for you; however it has some good: you shall 
have henceforward [illegible] scientific notes on our earthquakes, small or 
great, as I have established a Mallet seismometer which works allright. I 
never sent anything to Perry [sic], nor to Fuchs, but I published a note on the 
earthquake at Chio (1877) in Nature.”26 By then, Rockwood had decided 
that newspaper reports of earthquakes required corroboration. From 1878 
he marked “uncertain” those events “based upon single newspaper reports 
and which could not be otherwise verified.”27
How Rockwood organized these slips of newsprint was decisive. His 
system was chronological rather than geographical. Clippings about earth-
quakes in Japan, Syria, Australia, England, Oregon, Hawaii, and Nebraska 
wound up side by side, all pasted to a single page. Such juxtapositions were 
grist for speculation. What hidden mechanisms might link these far-flung 
tremors? Journalists asked themselves the same question. The London Times 
suggested in 1824 that an earthquake in Comrie, Scotland, was linked to 

News of the Apocalypse / 51
one abroad, just as the 1812 earthquake in Caracas had reportedly been felt 
in a village near Comrie.28 On the occasion of a stronger shock in Comrie in 
1839, the Times noted a coincidence with earthquakes in Calabria and Savoy 
and concluded that the events must share an origin deep within the earth.29 
In the wake of the Messina disaster of 1908, one Swiss editor wondered, 
“Will the countries situated to the north of Italy also be threatened? We 
know that a strong shock of earthquake was felt on the 18th of December in 
Coutances. A few days later another was reported at Angers. Monday, one 
was indicated in the valleys of the district of Oloron. The seismograph of 
the faculty of sciences at Grenoble recorded a seismic shock Monday at four 
thirty-three in the morning. These two last phenomena coincided with the 
shocks felt in Malta at the same hour. Finally they are being reported in the 
United States as well; a telegram from Virginia City, in Montana, announces 
that violent seismic shocks were felt Monday in that city.”30 The papers also 
invited reports of seismic coincidences by printing earthquake forecasts that 
covered as wide an area as “Persia, Asia Minor, Greece, Northern Italy, or 
Carniola” and soliciting confirmations from around the world.31
In this apparent chaos, seismologists sought patterns. Perrey was the 
first to remark on the near simultaneity of earthquakes at distances as great 
as those between “Holland and Spain, Lisbon and Saxony, Calabria and 
Maurienne, Savoy and Scotland.”32 In 1911 John Milne pointed to seis-
mographic evidence that one earthquake could trigger another remotely. 
He theorized that long-period waves from large earthquakes could “travel 
round the world, causing the crust of the same to rise and fall like a raft on 
an ocean swell.”33 Seismologists recognized the fascination of this small-
world vision for newspaper readers. Albin Belar described planetary-scale 
standing waves in a Viennese paper in 1907: “After great catastrophes, the 
diametrically opposed points of the earth, in particular—that is, the antipo-
dal points—are sympathetically affected, so that it is quite possible that one 
earthquake can trigger or at least prepare another. . . . One could say that the 
entire crust resounds, and where the frightful fundamental tone is struck, 
there death and desolation reign.”34 Belar asked his readers to imagine the 
entire earth ringing like a bell with a “world-shaking music,” recorded by a 
world-spanning network of geophysical observatories pressed like gigantic 
ears to the ground (see figure 3.1). The British seismologist Charles Davi-
son, whose first concern was always the human impact of earthquakes, once 
remarked somewhat bitterly that “it is the registration of a distant earth-
quake, not the havoc wrought by it, that appeals to the public with an un-
failing interest.”35
Rockwood’s massive scrapbooks are an early case of a broader trend. 

Fig. 3.1.  “ Then it will be possible to determine precisely the nodal points, antinodes, and  
superimpositions of the planetary and surface waves that shake the earth like a squall.”  
In this image for the Vienna newspaper Die Zeit, Albin Belar illustrated the propagation  
of seismic waves through the earth from Kingston, Jamaica, to Ljubljana. Albin Belar,  
“Stürme und Erdbeben,” Die Erdbebenwarte 8 (1909): 5–11, figure on 9, quotation on 10,  
originally published in Die Zeit.

News of the Apocalypse / 53
By the early twentieth century, elaborate systems had emerged to gather, 
transmit, and archive newspaper clippings, driven by what one historian 
describes as a modernist “euphoria” for “completeness.”36 The Caltech Seis-
mological Laboratory, for instance, maintained its subscription to the Allen 
Press Clipping Bureau into the 1930s.37 Collectors of clippings “could not 
escape the medium” of newspapers, as Anke te Heesen points out. Try as 
they might, collectors never arrived at pure information. “Unintended and 
unavoidable juxtapositions generated their own meanings and fantasies, 
as a result of the cutting practices, rather than those intended by the collec-
tor.”38 Practices of newspaper reading, reporting, and collecting thus shaped 
seismology’s epistemic ideal of completeness and its global vision. Rock-
wood’s volumes of clippings juxtaposed distant seismic events, implicitly 
arguing for hidden global connections. At the same time, these collections 
literally severed tremors from their local context as indicators of seismic 
hazard.
The Earthquake Prophet
human seismograph foretells disaster
—New York Times headline, 4 May 1909
Seismology’s reliance on the press left it vulnerable to public challenges 
to its authority. Newspapers offered a platform to self-proclaimed earth-
quake prophets like Rudolf Falb, a former Catholic theologian from Styria 
who retooled as an astronomer and meteorologist. It was claimed that Falb 
had studied natural science in Prague and Vienna, but he held no scientific 
degree.39 In fact, his outsider status was part of his persona as a genius un-
recognized by the scientific establishment. In 1868 he founded the popular 
astronomical magazine Sirius, where he promulgated his theory that earth-
quakes were triggered by lunar and solar tidal pulls on the earth’s fluid inte-
rior. (In France, Alexis Perrey advanced a similar theory at this time, but was 
not in the business of issuing predictions.) On this basis, Falb claimed to be 
able to calculate “critical days,” on which the alignment of earth, moon, and 
sun would give rise to massive floods or earthquakes. In 1873, to widespread 
acclaim, Falb claimed to have predicted the earthquake that struck Belluno, 
Italy, and in 1880 he began publishing calendars of critical days.40 Falb’s 
theories and predictions were read and debated throughout Europe and 
North America in newspapers and scientific journals. The Neue Freie Presse 
attested that he had predicted a major subterranean explosion at a mine in 

54 / Chapter Three
Moravia in 1885;41 the New York Times reported on his apparent successes 
in 1887.42 Scientists accused the press of feeding the frenzies surrounding 
his forecasts. Hoernes lambasted the Neue Freie Presse for sending Falb off 
to investigate the eruption of Mount Etna in 1874 with all the fanfare of 
another Stanley in search of Livingstone.43 To be fair, the Neue Freie Presse 
also expressed skepticism. In 1887 it quoted the quip that, when it came to 
Falb’s predictions, “a year has 365 ‘critical days’ and a leap year 366.”44
Clearly, Falb had struck a chord. This was an era when many newspa-
per readers were relinquishing religious interpretations of catastrophes and 
looking to science as an alternative source of certainty. In 1885, in Falb’s 
home province of Styria, one village “spent a full night outdoors out of 
fear of a prophesied earthquake.”45 Meanwhile, the initial response to Falb 
from trained natural scientists was critical but not dismissive. The ques-
tions they raised concerned both theory and method. Falb attributed all 
earthquakes to volcanism, while central European geologists increasingly 
followed Suess in classifying most as tectonic.46 Methodologically, Falb’s 
predictions seemed so vague as to be unfalsifiable. Based on their own sta-
tistical investigations, other scholars acknowledged that a slight influence 
of celestial bodies on weather catastrophes and earthquakes had not been 
ruled out. However, they insisted that Falb was doing more harm than good 
with his predictions. The scientific questions required calm deliberation: 
one must do “one’s statistics properly and not allow memory and judgment 
to be clouded by the sensational impression of isolated conspicuous coin-
cidences, which it is well known is one of the most fundamental and most 
dangerous weaknesses of human judgment.”47
The tone of Falb’s critics grew more shrill in the wake of his claim to have 
predicted the severe earthquake on 9 November 1880 in Zagreb (German: 
Agram; chapter 7). It came several months after Falb’s return from a research 
trip to South America, where a bout of rheumatism had left him with poor vi-
sion and swollen ankles. “Only with the Agram earthquake on Novem­ber 9, 
1880 did the old energy and motivation return fully,” he later recalled. He 
hurried to the scene of the disaster and “had the satisfaction of seeing posi-
tively confirmed the secondary recurrence of the impact predicted according 
to the tide theory for the 16th of December.”48 Falb’s claim to have pre-
dicted this catastrophe—and his prophecies of more to come—transformed 
the wary skepticism of some professional scientists into bitter opposition. 
But men of science learned a nuanced lesson from Falb. His demagoguery 
prodded them to cultivate their own mode of public outreach.
Rudolf Hoernes, one of the pioneers of the monographic method in 
Austria, was the first to draw this conclusion. “The popular form in which 

News of the Apocalypse / 55
Falb represented his theory in many writings, and perhaps even more the 
journalistic and oratorical activity with which he supported his work, are to 
thank for the wide recognition that his ‘earthquake theory’ found—if only, 
however, in circles that were not at first able to make a competent judgment 
on the question. The Falb theory was all the more able to succeed because 
opposing popular accounts were not available.” Hoernes responded with a 
“popular account” of his own—a witty and accessible essay, which proved a 
source of “amusement” to him to compose.49 Falb’s true sin, as Hoernes saw 
it, lay in publicizing his speculative forecasts. Hoernes blamed the press for 
helping Falb do so. An anonymous writer in the popular scientific journal 
Aus der Natur likewise attacked the press for allowing Falb to terrorize vul-
nerable populations: “Via the ignorant daily press this putatively new per-
spective has been spread to wider circles, so that even in earthquake-prone 
regions it has found a fateful reception, especially for the reason that the 
author is a Catholic cleric. A panicked terror seized the inhabitants of the 
West Coast of South America, as Falb prophesied a repetition of the frightful 
earthquake of the previous year; everyone evacuated, and the prophecy was 
not fulfilled.”50 The Falb debacle made scientists worry “that public papers, 
especially those with a political leaning, are not the forum in which to air 
scientific questions.”51
Scientists became anxious to gain some control over reports of earth-
quakes in the popular press. This question was on the agenda of a 1905 
conference of central European seismic observatory directors. The partici-
pants were concerned that the reputation of the “young science” of seis-
mology might suffer if observatories reported distant seisms and no one 
came forward to confirm a corresponding earthquake. More disturbingly, 
newspaper readers might misconstrue reports of distant seisms as earth-
quake predictions. In one case, the Neue Freie Presse had presented reports of 
an earthquake from abroad as a “remarkable confirmation” of a teleseismic 
observation from Belar’s observatory.52 Belar’s point was that this confirma-
tion was not remarkable in the least. One simply had to understand how 
seismographs picked up waves from afar. Belar and his colleagues voted 
against the obligatory reporting of seismographically recorded earthquakes 
to the newspapers. They decided that it was best, in some cases, to withhold 
information. As we will see, this was a dangerous precedent.
The Inverted Sublime
From the perspective of the nineteenth-century press, earthquakes were good 
for business. They could be exploited not only for pathos and melodrama, 

56 / Chapter Three
but also for their vast comic potential. Indeed, the nineteenth century saw 
the rise of a veritable genre of seismic humor. This is not as incongruous as 
it might sound. The romantic writer Jean Paul theorized that humor is an 
inversion of the Kantian sublime. Like the sublime, its effect derives from 
the tension between the finite and the infinite. The sublime comes from the 
attempt to grasp, via reason, something that exceeds the reach of imagina-
tion. Humor instead leads from awe of the infinite to a contrasting sense 
of the puniness of the finite; it “fastens us tightly to the sensuous detail.”53 
Earthquake humor released the tension latent in the juxtaposition of the 
scales of seismic force and human life.
The jokes typically came at the expense of some blustering fellow who 
was reduced to whimpers, fled outside in his underwear, was somehow 
knocked by the shock into a compromising position, or hadn’t got word 
that what had transpired was in fact an earthquake. In the last instance, the 
lesson was that those who failed to read the morning paper might become 
laughingstocks themselves. Predictably, racial minorities were often targeted 
for ridicule. After a shock in Brooklyn, the New York Herald described the 
“ludicrous sights” on the Lower East Side, where Jewish immigrants were 
throwing their belongings from tenement windows into the streets below.54 
Outside of big cities, the jokes strained with the desperation of small-town 
editors hungry for news. After a tremor in the Pacific Northwest in 1872, 
one paper promised “a great many serio-comic incidents, bordering on the 
ludicrous.” A headline in an Olympia paper ran, “A Lively Shaking Up—
Fright of Women and Children—Universal Consternation—Laughable and 
Other Incidents.” Typical of these incidents was the plight of an initiate at 
a Masonic lodge, who mistook the earthquake for part of the rites, while 
the Masons fled. Newspapermen who delighted at the prospect of reporting 
quakes were another butt of seismic humor. “More earthquake,” read one 
headline: “Several clocks were stopped . . . restless people waked up, timid 
people kept awake, everybody set to talking, some to trembling, others to 
laughing and editors to writing.”55 The jokes rose to about the same level 
in central Europe (see figure 3.2). Anecdotes of the Zagreb quake of 1880 
described a young officer falling into the arms of a businessman’s wife, a 
master cobbler grabbing his apprentice’s hair to steady himself, and apart-
ment dwellers running upstairs to demand that their neighbors quit moving 
the furniture around.56 In one satirical sketch, a tremor makes a henpecked 
husband stumble, and his wife—oblivious to the earthquake—accuses him 
of being drunk. After seeing the news reports, she does her best to make it 
up to him: “Wife (crooning even more): ‘[Calls him by his nickname] Come 
on, be nice. I’ll never do it again. As far as I’m concerned, every day now an 

News of the Apocalypse / 57
earthquake can knock the washbasin out of your hand, and you can stum-
ble as much as you like.’”57
The first master of earthquake humor was unquestionably Mark Twain. 
He honed his style writing short sketches for the California papers in the 
1860s, before either the press or men of science took the earthquake threat 
seriously. His reporting on the severe shock of 8 October 1865 earned him 
a reputation as “that funny cuss, Mark Twain, who, when his last hour shall 
arrive, will probably laugh grim Death out of countenance.”58 As Twain later 
wrote, “The ‘curiosities’ of the earthquake were simply endless.”59 Certainly, 
he mined them endlessly. In his most extensive account of the earthquake, 
Twain parodied the style of a naturalist, an earthquake connoisseur: “I have 
tried a good many of them here, and of several varieties . . .” With scientific 
precision, he described a “specimen belong[ing] to a new, and, I hope, a 
very rare, breed of earthquakes.” In what reads as a canny parody of later 
psychiatric studies of earthquake victims, Twain gave a second-by-second 
account of his thought process during the quake: “I will set it down here as 
a maxim that the operations of the human intellect are much accelerated 
by an earthquake. Usually I do not think rapidly—but I did upon this oc-
casion. I thought rapidly, vividly, and distinctly. With the first shock of the 
five, I thought—‘I recognize that motion—this is an earthquake.’ With the 
second, I thought, ‘What a luxury this will be for the morning papers.’ With 
Fig. 3.2.  “Who Did Not Feel the Earthquake?,” Die Bombe, 23 July 1876. One figure is a  
young woman engrossed in a romantic novel; the others are a kissing couple lost in  
“seventh heaven.” Seismic humor in the nineteenth-century press cemented the  
earthquake’s status as a journalistic “sensation.”

58 / Chapter Three
the third shock, I thought, ‘Well, my boy, you had better be getting out of 
this.’ Each of these thoughts was only the hundredth part of a second in 
passing through my mind. There is no incentive to rapid reasoning like an 
earthquake.”60 Twain even parodied the bombastic earthquake forecasting 
that infuriated nineteenth-century scientists:
Oct. 22—Light winds, perhaps. If they blow, it will be from the “east’ard, 
or the west’ard, or the suth’ard,” or from some general direction approxi-
mating more or less to these points of the compass or otherwise. Winds are 
uncertain—more especially when they blow from whence they cometh and 
whither they listeth. N.B.—Such is the nature of winds.
Oct. 23.—Mild, balmy earthquakes.
Oct. 24.—Shaky.
Oct. 25.—Occasional shakes, followed by light showers of bricks and 
plastering. N.B.—Stand from under.
Oct. 26.—Considerable phenomenal atmospheric foolishness. About 
this time expect more earthquakes, but do not look out for them, on ac-
count of the bricks.
Oct. 27.—Universal despondency, indicative of approaching disaster. 
Abstain from smiling, or indulgence in humorous conversation, or exasper-
ating jokes.61
Twain captured the pseudo-expert’s blend of scientistic jargon, portentous 
prophecy, willful vagueness, and useless advice. His was perhaps the first 
satire of the mutual dependence of seismology and the press.
This comic genre largely died out circa World War One, as the weaker 
tremors that were its best source no longer found column space. A late in-
stance from 1926 is telling for the sharper tone of its satire. The Munich 
observatory had registered a light tremor and printed a request in the pa-
pers for observations from the public. The German weekly Simplicissimus 
reported, “Incidentally, the entire yield of this appeal of science was a single 
report. It came from the foot surgeon Xaver Dorninger from the Au and said 
that the reporter was thrown from bed at about half past eight in the morn-
ing by the force of the earthquake and had received a painful bruise on the 
back of the head as well as several scratches. This bed-fall produced by the 
forces of nature of Xaver Dorninger was, for the material-poor newspapers 
of these sad sour-pickle times, a highly welcome sensation. The editors in-
dulged in reflections of multiple columns garnished with cosmic prattle 
[kosmischen Schmuss], and demonstrated as clear as daylight why the shocks 
must have been felt most strongly precisely in the Au and nowhere else, and 

News of the Apocalypse / 59
that the magnetic influence of the various machine factories in the Au evi-
dently played a decisive role.—The Sunday columnist illuminated the topic 
exhaustively from the humorous side; and the professional meteorologists 
for their part happily took the opportunity to unload some of their excess 
expert knowledge into journalistic channels.”62 A week later, however, Mu-
nich’s Central Institute for Meteorology apparently received the following 
letter, with spelling mimicking a thick local accent: “Dear sirs, it is not true 
that my husband Xaver was thrown from bed by an earthquake; it was by 
me because he was still lying around in bed at half past eight, the lazy good-
for-nothing. Yours respectfully, Josepha Dorninger.”
On one hand, this story contained familiar seeds—an earthquake sud-
denly turns a domestic spat into a public spectacle and exposes a browbeaten 
husband to ridicule. But the real butt of the satire was not the unfortunate 
couple, but rather scientists and journalists: namely, Munich’s newspaper 
editors, with their “cosmic prattle” of pseudo-scientific explanations; the 
journalists who wrung humor from the situation; and the scientists who 
forced their expertise on the public. In this case, the light humor of earlier 
earthquake journalism had morphed into trenchant social critique. Very 
likely, Simplicissimus modeled this story on the satiric genius of one of its 
most controversial contributors, Karl Kraus.
“We Fled to Science”
The earth can take no more. It was only a nervous twitch,—and the chatter is end-
less. What then when it really loses its patience?
—Karl Kraus63
Karl Kraus has been called an “anti-journalist,” a writer whose purpose was 
to expose the ways in which modernity disfigured language itself.64 He at-
tacked the sensationalistic, self-obsessed journalism of his day as a reflec-
tion of the hypocrisy, arrogance, and complacency of bourgeois culture. 
Walter Benjamin aptly likened Kraus to a premodern prophet of doom: “In 
old engravings, there is a messenger who rushes toward us crying aloud, 
his hair on end, brandishing a sheet of paper in his hands.” Not by co-
incidence, some of Kraus’s most acid critiques of fin-de-siècle journalism 
before 1914 were those dealing with the reporting of earthquakes and vol-
canic eruptions. Benjamin was one of the few critics who recognized that 
Kraus’s vision centered on the revenge of the nonhuman world. Kraus was, 
in Benjamin’s words, “Cosmic Man,” who made the “insolently secularized 

60 / Chapter Three
thunder and lightning, storms, surf, and earthquakes” his “world-historical 
answer to the criminal existence of men.”65 Historians have noted the shift 
in Kraus’s tone between roughly 1908 and 1911, from irony to “invective.” 
But little attention has been paid to the rhetorical role of seismic disasters 
in this transition.66
The hubris of modern science and technology was a consistent theme in 
Kraus’s early writings. A better known example of Kraus as scientific watch-
dog is his 1909 essay on the “discovery—or, as it has also been called, the 
conquest” of the North Pole. Kraus saw this as a feat of political chauvinism 
and technological arrogance. The dispute over the priority for the discovery 
was, to Kraus, a typical case of the machinations of science and the press. 
Each prolonged the dispute in order to bolster its own authority; each, while 
claiming to speak for “truth,” ran roughshod over it. Science and the press 
seemed equally to blame for feeding the modern race to conquer nature. 
Nature, however, would have the last laugh:
If nature knew that the news about the reaching of the North Pole has “height-
ened a feeling of superiority over nature” in all errand boys, it would split its 
sides laughing, and cities and states and department stores would then be 
thrown somewhat out of kilter. As it is, nature twitches a bit more frequently 
than is good for the superiority of its inhabitants. In a matter of weeks the el-
emental forces have so clearly evinced their readiness to meld into a realm of 
reason that even the masses must understand. They did so by destroying hun-
dreds of thousands of lives and untold millions in property in America, Asia, 
and Australia by means of earthquakes, flash floods, typhoons, and torrential 
rains, leaving only European newspaper editors with the hope that “the hu-
man will” will shortly “move all levers of nature.” Every parasite of the age is 
left with the pride of being a contemporary. They print the newspaper column 
“Conquest of the Air” and ignore the adjoining heading “Earthquakes”; and 
in the year of Messina and daily tremors of the earth man proved his superior-
ity over nature and flew to Berlin.67
In this collage of headlines, Kraus set natural disasters as the counterpoint 
to technological “progress.” Like recent theorists of the “risk society,” Kraus 
warned against responding to the failures of modernization with redoubled 
modernization.68
Kraus’s “apocalyptic satire” first exploded in a little-known essay entitled 
“The Earthquake,” published in February 1908—a full ten months before 
the disaster in Messina and eight months before the Bosnian crisis that fore-
shadowed the Great War. The occasion was a minor earthquake centered 

News of the Apocalypse / 61
in Lower Austria. Its timing—during the carnival season, in the year of the 
sixtieth jubilee of the reign of Emperor Franz Josef—was perfect for Kraus’s 
purposes. The jubilee was, in his eyes, a shameful parade of hypocrisy, given 
the fractiousness of imperial politics. With such a rude interruption to their 
festivities, would the Viennese finally feel chastened? No, they seemed de-
lighted with the earthquake. Suess’s efforts at public outreach had paid off. 
Suddenly, all of Vienna seemed to be racing to report their experiences of 
the earthquake:
Now, I thought to myself, at last there will be peace for a spell. We have been 
admonished. Our brains have been joggled into confusion; the Viennese will 
see that the patience of the earth cannot be counted on; he will learn humility 
and will be prepared to perish without causing a sensation. . . . Not a trace of 
it! Now all hell breaks loose for real. The oafs stumble into the street, snatch 
up “observations” where they can get hold of them, and run into the editorial 
offices to announce that they have felt a jerk. That they were there, too! Poles 
fall, windows clang, children prattle, mothers misspeak, and fathers write let-
ters to the Neue Freie Presse.69
In this passage, Kraus presented typical earthquake observations as ready-
made comedy. He went on to speculate that “the geologists of the Neue 
Freie Presse” were charging the public to print their observations as if they 
were advertisements. He even suggested that businesses were sending in 
earthquake reports as a form of publicity. What Kraus scoffed at was not 
simply the public’s infantile need to be quoted about such banalities. More 
contemptible was their obsession with the least consequential effects of 
the earthquake, while its existential significance escaped them completely. 
“The Viennese greet the apocalypse with a Hallo! Hallo! . . . No, that was 
certainly not telluric, that was a cosmic earthquake. . . . And it was a test of 
how the Viennese will behave at the apocalypse, which will certainly take 
place this year.”70 These lines foreshadow Kraus’s reaction six years later to 
the war fever of 1914.
Then Kraus had a flash of inspiration. He penned his own earthquake 
report for the Neue Freie Presse, signed by one “Civil Engineer J. Berdach” in 
Leopoldstadt, a heavily Jewish neighborhood:
Just as I was reading your highly esteemed paper I felt a shaking in my 
hand. Since this phenomenon was only too familiar to me from my many 
years of residence in Bolivia, the well-known seismic center, I rushed right 
to the compass that I have in my house since those days. My intuition was  

62 / Chapter Three
confirmed, but in a manner that diverged fundamentally from my obser-
vations of seismic data in Bolivia. Specifically, while in other cases I could 
perceive a deviation of the needle towards west-southwest, in this case an un-
ambiguous tendency towards south-southeast was detectable. By all appear-
ances this is a case of a so-called telluric earthquake (in the narrower sense), 
which is essentially different from the cosmic earthquake (in the wider sense). 
The difference expresses itself even in the density of impressions. With this 
form of earthquake it happens that someone in the adjoining room notices 
nothing of what is revealed to us unmistakably. My children, who at that time 
were not yet asleep, did not notice a thing, while my wife affirms that she felt 
three shocks.
Respectfully,
Civil Engineer J. Berdach
Vienna, 2nd district, Glockengasse 1771
Needless to say, anyone versed in the seismology of the day would have 
found elements of this letter sufficiently ridiculous to doubt its authenticity: 
namely, the writer’s distinction between telluric and cosmic earthquakes, 
his report of a deviation of his compass, and his attribution of high seismic-
ity to Bolivia. Nonetheless, Kraus was confident that the Neue Freie Presse 
“will be pleased at last to allow an expert to speak in the midst of so many 
laymen.”72 He was sure, too, that the editors would not cast doubt on a 
correspondent who was so obviously Jewish.73 He predicted rightly that the 
letter would be printed. For ten years, he noted with satisfaction, the paper 
had ignored his writing; now at last they had recognized him—but as an 
engineer.74
The liberal press needed scientists, Kraus argued. How else could it sus-
tain the “sensation” of a natural disaster without shaking faith in scientific 
progress? To be sure, the papers craved catastrophe. As Kraus remarked after 
a volcanic eruption on Martinique in 1902, the volcanoes “vomit and they 
continue to vomit [speien], since our papers’ insatiable greed for news is 
busy churning up the catastrophe with hitherto unseen hideousness.”75 But 
editors could not simply let the victims speak. As the seismologist Albin Be-
lar explained, providing “reassurance and enlightenment to the frightened 
inhabitants of the stricken region” was among the “practical” tasks of mod-
ern earthquake science.76 In Kraus’s words, each paper “managed to grub 
for itself a man of science.” Not that scientists had anything of substance 
to add to eyewitness testimony in the immediate wake of disaster. Eduard 
Suess could do no more than repeat “what could be gathered from previous 

Fig. 3.3.  “Messina”: “Everything was so beautifully prepared for a war. Then that meathead 
comes and makes an earthquake! The whole human race is fraternizing again,  
and we’ve lost our chance.” Simplicissimus 13 (1909): cover.

64 / Chapter Three
reports.” Kraus scorned scientists like Suess who made themselves “subser-
vient to the press” (Pressgehorsam).77 In the wake of the Messina earthquake, 
Kraus noted that the liberal papers barely disguised their contempt for the 
faithful, even as they clung to their own dogma—their unshakeable faith 
in science.78
“We fled to science,” Kraus remarked after Messina (see figure 3.3). He 
quoted the Neue Freie Presse on the marvels of instruments capable of re-
cording earthquakes thousands of miles away. “The greater the distance, 
the more reliably the instruments function. Only when they are at the site 
of the earthquake is there a danger that they will break.” Technically, he 
was right, since strong motion seismographs had yet to be perfected. More 
profoundly, he was arguing that science refused to admit when it had been 
bested by nature. Kraus quoted further from the Neue Freie Presse as it in-
voked the authority of a famous representative of both science and liberal-
ism: “What Eduard Suess, with such wit, has called the pulse of the planet, 
will be determined with scientific precision.” Kraus immediately one-upped 
this bit of scientific poetizing: “That, however, will do nothing to slow the 
earth’s pulse. And its bon mots are more astonishing.”79 As in his “North 
Pole,” Kraus imagined that nature “spoke” in the language of disaster. He 
framed the earthquake as a witty retort to the inflated rhetoric of science and 
journalism. The Neue Freie Presse relied on Suess to prop up its liberal opti-
mism at a moment when it should, by all rights, have acknowledged defeat: 
“The Sicilians will indeed allow themselves for once to be enlightened on 
the count that priests cannot protect them from earthquakes. The devout 
editors of the Neue Freie Presse will never renounce the belief that geologists 
are capable of it.” The faith of the press in technical experts was matched, 
Kraus implied, by the experts’ need for legitimation from the press. The real 
danger, in Kraus’s view, was that science and the press were conspiring to 
lull the public into a false sense of security: “there comes science with its 
words of truth and comfort and bestows its benevolent solace on the fright-
ened ones.”80 Kraus refused to let scientific rhetoric twist natural disasters 
into signs of progress.
The Grubenhund
Kraus attributed the power of modern science to the performative quality of 
its jargon, its rhetorical voice or “intonation” (Tonfall): “With the right in-
tonation one can conquer the whole world,” he remarked in 1910. “Scream 
murder and a murder is committed; whisper abracadabra and it is religion; 
write dynamo exhaust pipes and it is science.”81 The occasion for this reflec-

News of the Apocalypse / 65
tion was once again an earthquake and the prank it inspired. Over lunch the 
day after the tremor, a group of engineers fell into conversation about “the 
unprecedented idiocy [Schmockerei] of the newspaper earthquake reports 
in general and those of the Neue Freie Presse in particular.” Suddenly seized 
by “a wild desire,” an engineer by the name of Arthur Schütz left the table; 
when he returned he read his friends the earthquake report of one “Herr Dr. 
Ing. Erich R. v. Winkler, Assistant at the Central Laboratory of the Ostrau-
Karwin coal mines.” This individual had supposedly observed the earth-
quake’s effects on a train’s compressor—in excruciating detail and in the 
name of the “ceaseless efforts of our mining authorities for the protection of 
the lives of the miners.” What would live in infamy, though, was the follow-
ing sentence: “A wholly inexplicable occurrence is, however, that already 
half an hour before the start of the quake, my mining-dog [Grubenhund], 
asleep in my laboratory, gave conspicuous signs of the greatest disquiet.” 
It helps to know that, to a mining engineer, a Grubenhund is a cart for car-
rying coal (see figure 3.4). The letter reduced Schütz’s friends to hysterics, 
but they refused to believe that a newspaper would print it. Schütz bet that 
the content of the report was irrelevant; only the tone mattered. Indeed, the 
letter appeared the following morning in the Neue Freie Presse. Kraus was 
naturally the prime suspect.
The incident gave birth to a new sociological concept. Schütz defined a 
Grubenhund as a false report that sneaks by editors but can be clearly recog-
nized by readers. Thanks to his many imitators, the term came to be used more 
broadly to identify a tactic against the obfuscating jargon of technical experts. 
Schütz himself later cast his prank as an apolitical act of enlightenment:  
Fig. 3.4.  Grubenhund caricature (1911). Arthur Schütz, Der Grubenhund: Experimente  
mit der Wahrheit (Munich: R. Fischer, 1996), 106

66 / Chapter Three
“The Grubenhund is the symbol of the spoofing of pretended universal 
knowledge, the protest against the assumed authority of the printer’s ink 
in everything, but especially in technical matters.”82 Kraus credited the Gru-
benhund with having “unmasked the scientific intonation [Tonfall].” It had 
exposed the complicity of science with the press: “For science is by nature 
so constructed that surprises are not excluded, and its credit rests on mis-
appraisal. In duping journalism, it proved their equivalence and bedded 
down with it.”83 The laughter that greeted the Grubenhund had, according to 
Kraus, “a tragic feature: it comes from the heartlessness of a belief that has 
been disappointed.”84 In Kraus’s view, the prank had accomplished what 
the earthquake itself could not: it had finally shaken the public’s faith in 
scientific progress.
Conclusion
Before the advent of lay observing networks, the science of earthquakes re-
lied heavily on the press for its data. This was a compromising position, as 
scientists well knew. Editors were in the business of selling papers, and a 
gripping account was far more valuable to them than one that was scien-
tifically observed. Likewise, the prophecies of a Rudolf Falb might boost 
sales better than the more sober theories of a professional. Nonetheless, the 
liberal press also needed science. As Kraus demonstrated with his usual wit, 
disaster stories required the counterpoint of a few confident words from a 
scientific expert. Nature could not be given the last word. Hence the uneasy 
partnership that developed between seismology and journalism. It is easy 
to see why some seismologists would have been tempted to skirt the media-
tion of newspapers altogether—to build, in other words, their own direct 
avenue of communication with the public.
Kraus spied a profound irony in the fin-de-siècle culture of earthquake 
observing. It might seem that the public was more attentive than ever to 
nature’s violence. In reality, though, the alliance of science and the press 
shrouded natural disasters in a veil of false certainty. Kraus charged that 
earthquake observations had become a genre unto themselves, a mere liter-
ary convention. By recasting seismological evidence as a modern style, a 
Tonfall, Kraus contributed to modernism’s deconstruction of disasters as 
scientific objects.
Nonetheless, Kraus did not deny what was at stake in the practice of 
earthquake reporting. He agreed with scientists like Hoernes and Belar that 
cultivating the right attitude toward natural disasters was a matter of popu-
lar enlightenment. Kraus insisted, though, that enlightenment could not 

News of the Apocalypse / 67
come from the mere posture of scientific observation. It could come only 
from a critique of that posture, an exposure of the limits of scientific author-
ity. Yet Kraus’s personal disdain for the masses often made his own notion 
of enlightenment seem chimerical. He sneered at the narrow-mindedness 
and self-regard of those who cared to report on the behavior of their pets or 
the state of their broken vases: “The idiocy that would never have thought 
of emerging from its life in private has discovered an opportunity for im-
mortality; banality has been lured out of its hiding place; average humanity 
has been hauled out in triumph. A consuming greed to be named has taken 
hold of the Mr. Nobodies. Thousands besiege the press office, raise their 
hands to the miracle of the local department and call: Me too! Me too!”85 
Ultimately, Kraus was as uncertain as any scientist about what could be 
expected of the public. The difference was that seismologists were prepared 
to find out.


four
The Tongues of Seismology:  
Switzerland, 1855–1912
The public is learning to observe earthquakes.1
Between 1878 and 1880, Switzerland, Italy, and Japan initiated the first na-
tional earthquake commissions, but only the Swiss made ordinary citizens 
a vital part of this undertaking. The nation was divided into seven regions, 
in each of which one scientist was responsible for soliciting and redacting 
observations of ground motion and related phenomena, to be penned by 
volunteers on questionnaires or postcards and mailed free of charge. It was 
a system that would be imitated around the world, echoed even today in the 
US Geological Survey’s website Did You Feel It? The immediate aims of the 
Swiss observing network were to locate epicenters by mapping the felt in-
tensity of tremors, determine their depth, and distinguish among different 
types of earthquake according to felt motion. Implicit was the goal of pro-
viding information on seismic hazards for the grand engineering projects 
for which Switzerland became famous in the nineteenth century—from 
mines to Alpine trains and tunnels to dams and canals along the Rhine and 
its subsidiaries.2 Among the fruits of the Swiss Earthquake Commission’s 
first two decades of work was the conclusion that tectonic quakes occurred 
principally in three “habitual regions of shock”—in the Rhine valley near 
Saint Gallen, in the corner between the Alps and the Jura near Lake Geneva, 
and around the three lakes of the Jura.3 At the same time, geologists began 
to interpret tectonic earthquakes as symptoms of mountain formation. As 
Albert Heim, one of the commission’s founders, explained to potential ob-
servers: “Most earthquakes are the expressions of the ongoing formation of 
mountains beneath our feet.”4
Still, one might wonder, earthquakes? In Switzerland?

70 / Chapter Four
Geologists today view earthquakes on Swiss territory as the continuing 
effect of the collision between the European and African plates that began 
the formation of the Alps approximately 80–90 million years ago. Strong 
earthquakes occur infrequently, but small tremors are common and often 
accompanied by distinctive sounds. In the Alps, earthquakes can trigger 
rock slides or avalanches or make rivers impassable. Today earthquakes are 
estimated to represent one-third of Switzerland’s total disaster risk.5
According to the calculations of the Swiss Earthquake Commission, be-
tween 1880 and 1904 there was an average of six to seven “Swiss” earth-
quakes per year—meaning seismic events separated in time, observed by 
at least two people, and with epicenters inside the Swiss borders.6 (See fig-
ure 4.1.) Before the commission began its work, earthquakes in Switzerland 
were often not recognized as such. Many residents mistook them for strong 
winds or thunder. It was not uncommon for people to accuse their upstairs 
neighbors of making noise that was actually seismic in origin. In some cases 
witnesses were aware only that the horse pulling their carriage had stopped 
dead in its tracks.7 Some residents attributed the vibrations to an “invasion 
of a legion of cats, mice, or rats in the garrets.”8 These tremors rarely caused 
much damage: “In general buildings have very infrequently been damaged, 
thanks to their solid construction, in particular of the wooden buildings of 
the mountain region. In many cases cracks in walls and in the ground, ava-
Fig. 4.1.  Earthquake map of Switzerland, based on the first thirty years of the  
Earthquake Commission’s activities, during which it collected seven thousand  
felt reports. Johannes Früh, “Ueber die 30-jährige Tätigkeit der Schweizerischen  
Erdbebenkommission,” in 94. Jahresversammlung der Schweizerischen Naturforschenden  
Gesellschaft, vol. 1, Vorträge und Sitzungsprotokolle (1911).

The Tongues of Seismology / 71
lanches, and rock slides have been reported, as well as the ringing of church 
bells and general panic of the inhabitants. Springs have been clouded, run 
dry, or appeared in new places. The local formation of waves on lakes in the 
absence of wind has repeatedly been observed.”9 In an age before reliable 
seismographs, such frequent sensible but not destructive seismic activity 
furnished ideal specimens for naked-eye research.10
1855: Volger’s Democratic Example
On a wet and foggy day in late July 1855, the strongest Swiss earthquake of 
the past three hundred years struck the Visp Valley in the canton of Valais 
(Wallis). It was accompanied by “thunderous rumbling, stormy booming, 
heaving whooshing, cracking, crashing, crackling, braying, whistling and 
clanging . . . the mountains rocked up and down, countless rocks from all the 
peaks and cliffs slipped and rolled, the walls of the houses tilted and fell over 
in a heap of rubble, balconies broke, roofs slipped or collapsed.”11 The shock 
was felt through most of Switzerland and into neighboring parts of Ger-
many, France, and Italy, and aftershocks were reported into November.12
At the time of the Visp earthquake, Otto Volger was a Privatdozent (un-
salaried lecturer) in geology at the University of Zurich, having fled his na-
tive Saxony after participating in the failed revolution of 1848.13 Apparently 
unaware of the magnitude of the project he was undertaking, Volger began 
collecting eyewitness reports of damage from the earthquake. In order to as-
sess the quake’s more remote effects, he put in place the first nodes of what 
grew into an extensive network of correspondents. Volger’s evidence came 
from “people with a great variety of educational backgrounds” [Personen von 
verschiedensten Bildung].14
During the three years he spent writing his monograph on the 1855 
earthquake, Volger held a part-time teaching position at a natural scien-
tific society in Frankfurt. It was in Frankfurt that Volger became, according 
to Andreas Daum, one of the German-speaking world’s first semiprofes-
sional popularizers of science. Volger sought to popularize a stridently secu-
lar, cyclical view of geohistory, a challenge to biblical catastrophism. His 
earthquake research came to serve this goal. As he explained, “The rocking  
of the earth’s surface does not announce the decline of the world, but rather 
the rule of the eternal order of nature, which in transformation furnishes 
the certain guarantee of its everlasting constancy.”15 Volger also became ac-
tive as an organizer, working to counteract the growing specialization of the 
sciences. In 1859 he founded the Free German Foundation for Science, Art, 
and Public Education (Freie Deutsche Hochstift für Wissenschaften, Künste und 

72 / Chapter Four
allgemeine Bildung), a feat of networking among existing institutions. Ac-
cording to Daum, Volger was “driven by a democratic impulse. Through the 
FDH, [Volger] promised not only an improved exchange of information, 
but also the opening of research and teaching institutes to the public.”16 
In keeping with his goal of making science accessible to the public, Volger 
studiously avoided foreign terms in his publications. Nonetheless, he styled 
himself as a researcher and scorned writers who viewed the world merely 
as “material for penny-a-line articles.”17 Indeed, in his own estimation, his 
monograph on the Visp earthquake offered no reward to its publisher be-
yond the satisfaction of seeing his name on the title page. (In the event, 
the publisher died before enjoying even that compensation.) While the 
book itself was no mere popularization, its methods and rhetoric conveyed 
Volger’s democratic vision for the sciences.
Volger thought he knew what caused earthquakes, and his theory was 
not unrelated to his politics of knowledge. Earthquakes were caused by the 
collapse of underground caves due to the inflow of water. He branded those 
who insisted on volcanic causes with the eighteenth-century label “Pluto­
nist.” Referring to a “Plutonic hierarchy,” Volger repeatedly characterized 
Plutonism as a kind of elitist superstition. For instance, correlations between 
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions amounted to “downright mischief 
with the temporal relations . . . to make ‘the earthquake’ look like a certain 
ghostly something which has its seat beneath the earth’s surface and capri-
ciously materializes first here, then there, in a way all too redolent of table-
turning and spirit-rapping.” He thus cast Plutonism as a highborn fallacy, 
and this rhetorical strategy shaped the way he reported eyewitness observa-
tions. For instance, he discounted reports that the quake had opened cracks 
in the earth or released thermal springs (potentially evidence for a Plutonist 
account of lava surging from below), by attacking the character of the re-
porters. These were either “superstitious” and “pseudo-scientific” “travel-
ers” or sensationalistic journalists: “If the reports of travelers that have been 
spread in the newspapers spoke of ruptures in the mountains, of cracks in 
the ground, of the opening of the earth, of rivers of mud spewed from the 
earth, and similar scenes of horror, then what this depiction revealed was 
only the entirely amateur [laienhafte] viewpoint, defined by superstitious, 
pseudoscientific prejudices.” Thus Volger embraced the testimony of eye-
witnesses whose ability to “appreciate these phenomena” may have derived 
simply from their experience as locals, at the expense of the descriptions of 
“travelers” who refused to admit their “lay” status. By stigmatizing travel­
ers’ reports as both “superstitious” and “pseudo-scientific,” both preten-

The Tongues of Seismology / 73
tious and “lay,” Volger was challenging a class-based claim to adjudicate  
“science.”18
At the same time, Volger’s trust in the testimony of local residents suited 
his explanation of seismic activity. If water seepage could induce tremors 
by causing the collapse of subterranean caves, then rainfall and humidity 
were a proximate cause of earthquakes. Volger therefore needed reports on 
meteorological conditions not merely at the time of the quake, but also 
in the preceding weeks. He needed to trust the local residents, and he did. 
He spiritedly defended the experiential knowledge of locals against the ex-
aggerations of well-to-do travelers. For instance, he rejected a “traveler’s” 
account of a sulfurous smell (associated with “Plutonistic” explanations) 
on the ground that the witness lacked the experience to recognize the “half-
musty, half-smoky scent of freshly overturned earth.”19
Remarkably, what might appear to be the work of a pugnacious upstart 
turned out to be a pioneering contribution to seismology. Volger’s research 
was original both in its conclusions and methods. His critique of Plutonism 
was apt, in so far as it cast earthquakes not as the product of eruptive forces 
but as a result of preexisting ground conditions, exacerbated by fleeting ex-
ternal factors.20 Volger himself drew an analogy to the breakup of a layer 
of ice on a lake. His point of view stimulated further studies of the local 
geology of earthquake zones. It also inspired the compilation of historical 
earthquake catalogs on the model of Volger’s own Chronik der Erdbeben in 
der Schweiz, the first volume of his publication on the Visp quake. Last but 
not least, Volger succeeded in developing one of the first quantitative scales 
for measuring an earthquake’s intensity, as well as one of the first maps 
of the geographic distribution of intensity. His map introduced a stan­
dard convention of macroseismology today: isoseismals, or lines of equal 
seismic intensity. The final version used seven colors to plot the variation 
of intensity for the main shock; it also showed the limits of perception for 
three aftershocks. The map summarized Volger’s research in a manner well 
suited to a popular audience. It displayed information about the distribu-
tion of seismic hazard at a glance and without technicalities. Indeed, the 
conventions of seismic intensity maps constitute a visual scientific vernacu-
lar, much like the weather maps that were becoming popular in the nine-
teenth century.21
There is little sign, however, that these innovations were appreciated by 
Volger’s contemporaries. The immediate significance of Volger’s study was 
instead its demonstration that a thorough survey of eyewitnesses and of 
historical sources could produce valuable evidence for the scientific analysis 

74 / Chapter Four
of an earthquake.22 Equally influential was Volger’s populist spirit: as one 
director of the Swiss Earthquake Commission later noted with approval, 
Volger “seemed not to have found the required tone of subservience toward 
the official custodians of scientific knowledge of the earth, but rather dared 
to forge his own paths.”23
Earthquakes, Experts, and the Nation
Volger’s study of the Visp earthquake was quickly overshadowed by the in-
troduction of “objective” methods of earthquake research. In 1856 Luigi 
Palmieri put an influential new form of seismoscope to work on Mount Ve-
suvius, and in 1857 Robert Mallet conducted his widely imitated architec-
tural survey of the Naples earthquake. As we have seen, Mallet and many of 
his colleagues in Britain, Italy, and Japan considered eyewitness testimony 
to be a poor substitute for architectural or instrumental evidence. Why then 
did the Swiss place so much trust in the observational abilities of ordinary 
people?
One answer is that the Swiss did not trust instruments, and with good 
reason. The pendulum seismometers of the 1870s were plagued by prob-
lems of self-resonance that were not addressed until the late 1890s. For 
assessing local earthquakes, the Swiss Earthquake Commission judged 
human observers more reliable than instruments: “the number of cases 
in which people took due note of tremors, while instruments in the same 
region remained indifferent, is in all countries too high. The horizontal 
pendulum and related complicated and expensive instruments adequately 
register distant earthquakes, elastically propagated through the earth, but 
not generally local earthquakes. . . . We still [1905] lack a simple instrument 
with which, as with meteorological instruments, any non-physicist can suc-
cessfully make observations.”24 Observers thus recorded local earthquakes 
more reliably and less expensively than instruments.25 (However, a full tally 
of the expense of using human observers would have to include the consid-
erable cost of printing and mailing questionnaires and the time required for 
experts to evaluate them.) As Heim advised the Princeton mathematician 
and seismologist Charles Rockwood around 1885, “The simple reports of 
observers without instruments have consistently been more valuable to us 
than instruments. Even if they contain many errors, nonetheless one finds 
that if a really large number of reports are available from the same place, 
it is always easy enough to distinguish what is generally objective from an 
accidental error of a subjective kind [das allgemeine objective von zufälliger 
Täuschung subjectiver Art zu unterscheiden].”26

The Tongues of Seismology / 75
This judgment reflects the specific goals of the Swiss Earthquake Com-
mission. While seismologists in Germany poured their resources into the 
study of distant earthquakes with the latest seismographs, the Swiss wanted 
to know about Swiss earthquakes and the seismic hazards of their own ter-
ritory. But suppose that the Swiss could have found an inexpensive instru-
ment that could reliably register local quakes? Would they have eliminated 
lay volunteers from their program? Note that the commission stipulated 
that such an instrument would need to be easy for the “nonphysicist” to 
use. The conclusion seems inescapable: Swiss scientists fully intended to 
remain dependent on nonexpert observers.
It is tempting to attribute this eagerness for popular participation to the 
Swiss political tradition, but this claim needs to be carefully qualified. An il-
luminating comparison can be made to the system of meteorological obser-
vation likewise set up by the Swiss Natural Scientific Society (Schweizerische 
Naturforschende Gesellschaft, or SNG) in the 1860s. The comparison is a 
natural one, since key members of the Swiss Earthquake Commission were 
meteorologists, and it was common at the time for seismic phenomena to 
be noted by weather observers. A national network of volunteer weather ob-
servers was inaugurated in Switzerland in 1864, less than two decades after 
Switzerland had become a federation with four official languages, signifi-
cant cantonal autonomy, and direct democracy through referenda. Albert 
Mousson, an engineer-naturalist and the son of a chancellor of the Swiss 
Confederation of the Napoleonic Era, presented the establishment of this 
volunteer network as evidence of the success of Swiss federalism and liberal-
ism: “Without enjoying the advantages of a strong centralized administra-
tion, as its strong monarchical neighbors are able to provide, Switzerland 
has in this respect, thanks to its freedom of movement and advanced learn-
ing, not entirely fallen behind; namely the Natural Scientific Society can 
pride itself on having inspired, initiated, and completed much on its own 
initiative, which elsewhere is achieved only on the basis of official organiza-
tion, through learned academies and through numerous paid employees.”27 
Switzerland thus managed to keep pace with the scientific progress of its 
monarchical neighbors “on its own initiative [aus freien Stücken],” thanks 
to liberal policies (freie Bewegung) and an educated public. Still, there was a 
high bar to becoming a meteorological observer. It required familiarity with 
instruments (if not their purchase, since instruments were supplied by the 
SNG), enough leisure time for regular daily observations, and a background 
in mathematics to perform data reduction. Indeed, more than half of the 
original weather observers belonged to the learned professions. In moun-
tainous areas, the society was forced to rely on innkeepers, and this made 

76 / Chapter Four
Mousson nervous: “there remains the question of whether it was appropri-
ate to entrust such fine instruments to the hands of non-physicists. . . . The 
three-year experiment will at best teach us which observers can definitely 
be counted on and which would better be abandoned.”28 Looking back on 
the network’s first year of operation, the best Mousson could say was that 
no instruments had been broken. Democratic rhetoric alone did not ensure 
that all citizens would participate in Swiss science on equal terms.
Earthquake observing proved a more genuinely populist enterprise than 
meteorology. This was evident in the Earthquake Commission’s instruc-
tions to observers, which were distributed to “all telegraphic and meteoro-
logical stations, all natural scientific societies, to physicians, pastors and 
many teachers.”29 They were written explicitly “in order to stimulate interest 
and understanding for the observations in wider circles. . . . For the investi-
gation of every earthquake numerous observations from as many different 
locations as possible are necessary. The scientist [Naturforscher] is depen­
dent here on the help of numerous friends of science. He turns not only to 
his colleagues, but to everyone who takes an interest in the observation of 
nature.” The author, Albert Heim, suggested that laypeople could contribute 
to scientific research in many ways. The questionnaires guided the observer 
through a set of questions that requested certain standardized responses, 
but also prompted attention to multiple “associated phenomena” and left 
ample blank space for elaboration. Moreover, observers were explicitly free 
to choose to dispense with the questionnaires and write free-form letters in-
stead. Indeed, Heim instructed observers to report anything and everything: 
“The observations should not be limited by our questionnaires; rather every 
further observation, beyond those to which we have drawn attention, can 
be valuable.”30 This openness derived in part from the lingering uncertainty 
about what constituted seismology’s data, which might range from the as-
tronomical and meteorological to the electrical, magnetic, and zoological. 
As Heim put it, “Nature is far more complicated in its phenomena than we 
could guess.”31 In this sense, keeping an open mind was a sensible research 
strategy for seismology.
Heim made clear that the call for volunteer observers was motivated by 
more than a need for data. It was meant to condition a new set of responses 
to the earth’s volatility. Citing Buckle, Heim acknowledged that the experi-
ence of an earthquake could impair reason, if unaided by scientific prepa-
ration: “When the most solid thing that we can perceive with our senses 
wavers, and we do not know whereby and how far, then the imagination is 
easily excited to a fever-pitch and clouds rational observation.” Science had 
the potential to fortify human reason in the face of natural hazards: “Every 

The Tongues of Seismology / 77
new discovery about the relationship between cause and effect in nature has 
a great value for humanity, for it helps free the human spirit from the chains 
in which it was once imprisoned by the base fear of what is not understood 
and, therefore, seems arbitrary [vor dem nicht zu Begreifenden und deshalb  
vielleicht Willkürlichen].”32 Heim echoed an ancient philosophical tradition, 
in which the highest aim of natural knowledge was to release man from 
fear. Consider, for instance, the famous response of the poet Seneca to an 
earthquake that struck the region of Campania in 62 CE. “What consola-
tion—I do not say help—can you have when fear has lost its way of escape?” 
For the stoic, the proper response to such boundless terror was rational ex-
planation. Seneca therefore invoked Greek theories of underground water 
and trapped air, ultimately explaining earthquakes as the result of strain on 
one part of the “body” of the cosmos.33 In this vein, Heim suggested that 
seismology could serve a therapeutic purpose, consoling and fortifying the 
mind in the face of terror. Yet Heim’s aspiration was unique to the nine-
teenth century in two respects. First, he reconceived seismology as a popu-
lar, empirical practice, and thus as a means of mass enlightenment. Second, 
the source of spiritual comfort for Heim did not lie in an all-encompassing 
explanation, which was forever beyond the reach of empirical science, but 
rather in the empirical attitude itself. A parallel was evident in Heim’s re-
sponse to the 1881 rock slide in Elm, in the Glarus Alps, which killed over 
a hundred people. He called for public participation in recognizing and 
reporting the warning signs of disaster: “Even with respect to rock slides, we 
want to enter the enlightened age [Zeitalter der Erkenntnis].”34
Scientific earthquake observation was thus fundamentally different from 
weather observation, and the difference derived not just from the absence 
of instruments. More fundamental was the human threat that earthquakes 
posed. Historians have argued that the Swiss nation was forged to a signifi-
cant degree through common measures to protect against natural disasters. 
As Daniel Speich shows, Hans Conrad Escher’s canalization of the Linth 
River at the turn of the nineteenth century aimed to improve not just the 
land but the moral fabric of the nation. Nature, Escher wrote, “forces us into 
a social condition, as we have to act united, if one man alone is without 
help.” The swamplike conditions in the valley were considered morally de-
bilitating to the local peasantry, whom Escher recruited to build the canal. 
To reverse these effects, Escher provided the workers with special schooling. 
Speich points out that such a combination of environmental engineering 
and public education was unlikely after the early nineteenth century, due 
to growing technical specialization.35 In this light, the Swiss Earthquake 
Service is all the more surprising. It was a combination of environmental 

78 / Chapter Four
defense and popular enlightenment in the mold of Escher’s canal. And it 
was an undertaking that was perhaps more urgent in Switzerland in the late 
nineteenth century than ever before, as the rise of ethnic nationalism in the 
rest of Europe threatened the civic nationalism of the federation. The Swiss 
cultivated an ethic of “civic exceptionalism,” a “voluntary commitment to 
a set of values and institutions, which in turn secured Switzerland’s exis­
tence as a polyethnic state.” Swiss nationalism increasingly emphasized the 
role of the Alpine landscape in forging a supra-linguistic unity. In 1891, for 
instance, at a festival celebrating six hundred years of Swiss history, the char-
acter Helvetia, the embodiment of the Swiss nation, was said to be “shaped 
by mountain peaks and valleys alike.”36 The physical barrier of the Alps was 
likewise central to the emerging Swiss ethos of isolationism. In this context, 
earthquake observing was part of a lesson on civic identity. Not for nothing 
did the Swiss Alpine Club, promoter of the nation’s identification with its 
landscape, contribute the cost of printing 1,450 German and 850 French 
copies of the commission’s instructions to observers.37 The Swiss were being 
taught to feel the forces exerted by the mountains that united them.
Switzerland’s network of volunteer earthquake observers self-consciously 
harked back to a pretechnical era, in which science stood for enlightenment 
and civic conscience. It also looked ahead, to an age of rapid communica-
tion and precision timekeeping. It is a case that justifies Ted Porter’s asser-
tion that “the Enlightenment—if this term may be taken to designate a faith 
in progress through the popular diffusion of knowledge—took place in the 
nineteenth century.”38 What’s more, enlightenment in this case was poten-
tially a more radical project than the mere diffusion of knowledge. It aimed 
to enlist the public in the coproduction of knowledge.39
Albert Heim, Nature’s Physician
We can better grasp the ambitions of the Earthquake Commission by con-
sidering the public personae of its directors. Many of its members were af-
filiated with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), founded in 
1855 to serve the practical needs of a modernizing nation. Many also served 
as geological consultants on state-sponsored engineering projects. One such 
project was the Simplon Tunnel, a landmark feat that bored a road beneath 
a five-thousand-foot peak. Most of Switzerland’s top geologists advised on 
the Simplon at some stage in its design and construction, which stretched 
from the 1870s into the 1920s. Earthquakes were not prominent among the 
hazards that imperiled its construction (though a quake did cause a fissure 

The Tongues of Seismology / 79
in the first section of the tunnel). The real dangers would turn out to come 
from flooding and unexpectedly high temperatures. Scientists faced accusa-
tions that they should have warned of the risks involved. Albert Heim, who 
consulted on the tunnel from the 1880s, gave a revealing response to these 
charges. Rather than shifting the blame, Heim retorted that a geologist’s 
knowledge was inherently uncertain.40 As he later put it, “It is self-evident 
that the viewpoint emerging from the geological investigation cannot alone 
be decisive. What strikes us though, is the uncertainty in the assessment of 
many natural circumstances.”41 Heim had cast his original assessment of 
the tunnel project in similar terms. It was, he wrote, “impossible for me to 
foresee” the subterranean dimensions of decomposing gneiss. Likewise, he 
and his colleagues could not say for sure how high the temperatures might 
climb during construction; they could only judge which of the proposed 
routes would be safest in this respect.42 Repeatedly in his role as scientific 
consultant, Heim stressed the limits of his ability to predict the environ-
mental consequences of engineering projects. In this way, Heim circum-
scribed his own authority as an adviser on matters of public interest. “How 
it would have pleased me to have been able to present a clear and com-
pletely satisfying solution to the question,” he wrote in an expert report on 
the provision of drinking water to an alpine town. “Nature, however, which 
has so unequally distributed its gifts, cannot be made other than it is—we 
can only observe how it is, and use it according to its possibilities. Much of 
the how is hidden and only within certain limits to be discovered, so that 
much uncertainty still attends our judgment and our foresight.”43 With his 
unusual insistence that nature be used only “according to its possibilities” 
and with due regard to the scope of scientific uncertainty, Heim erected a 
wise counterweight to the ambitions of nineteenth-century engineering.44
In keeping with Heim’s sense of caution, the Earthquake Commission 
helped remind the Swiss of the principle of unintended consequences. A 
remarkable example occurred in 1913, when moderate earthquakes shook 
the vicinity of Grenchen near Solothurn. Never before in the history of the 
commission had earthquakes originating in this region been reported. Two 
years earlier, construction had begun on a tunnel through the Grenchen 
Mountain. In early 1913, the engineers struck the local spring, flooding the 
tunnel and cutting off the village’s water supply—the first of several such 
mishaps. Four months later the tremors began. The press began to raise 
questions. The director of the Earthquake Commission, Alfred de Quervain, 
studied the reports of earthquake observers alongside the engineering of the 
tunnel. This, he concluded, was the first clear evidence that the boring of 

80 / Chapter Four
tunnels could trigger earthquakes.45 “Induced seismicity,” as this hazard is 
known today, has recently been recognized as a major problem for twenty-
first-century schemes of energy production and waste disposal.
Swiss seismology thus proceeded according to the principle that nature 
should be used only “according to its possibilities.” This was the principle 
behind Switzerland’s burgeoning nature protection movement, in which 
Heim and other members of the Earthquake Commission took leading 
roles.46 The nature protection movement had its immediate origins in 
the effort to preserve a mammoth rock, fondly known as the “Pierre de 
Marmettes,” from the hands of a granite speculator. This two-thousand-
cubic-meter landmark was an “erratic block,” one of the massive boulders 
poised at precarious angles on the outskirts of the Jura Mountains. These im-
posing objects had long been treasured as curiosities. In the late nineteenth 
century, they came to be recognized as relics of the last ice age, transported 
by glaciers to their unlikely perches. In 1906, an alliance of Swiss scientific 
societies paid over thirty thousand francs to rescue the Pierre de Marmettes. 
Thus was a movement born that stressed the aesthetic, scientific, and his-
toric value of natural monuments, against their mere economic worth.47
The Pierre de Marmettes came to symbolize nature’s need for protec-
tion against human self-interest. Tellingly, Heim likened himself to nature’s 
physician. Writing of rock slides, he described the geologist as providing 
“diagnosis,” “prognosis,” and “therapy.” Implicit was an analogy to the 
work of Heim’s wife, Marie, Switzerland’s first female doctor. Marie Heim 
herself saw the similarity: “My husband’s occupation and mine are actually 
very alike and therefore make equal demands on us. As I get called to suf-
fering people, he is suddenly called to avalanches, failures of tunnels and  
dams, and potential rock slides. Like the physician, the geologist is also very 
often exposed to dangers. Just as the physician first observes and judges and 
then must prescribe and treat, the main activity of the practical geologist is 
likewise observation, thorough investigation, and considered judgment.”48 
Indeed, Albert Heim seems to have worked according to a kind of geological 
Hippocratic oath—a recognition of his limitations as planetary healer and 
a promise, at worst, to do no harm.
For Heim, enlisting lay observers was not a last resort but an end in 
itself. Heim went so far as to suggest that nonexpert observers might have 
an advantage over scientists themselves. In an essay on “Seeing and Draw-
ing,” Heim argued that modernity had dulled man’s alertness to nature. 
Pointing to the verisimilitude of prehistoric cave drawings, Heim noted, 
“The savage sees much more consciously than civilized man; he devotes 
himself to sensory impressions with his full interest, without allowing his 

The Tongues of Seismology / 81
attention to be disturbed by other series of thoughts.” From this perspec-
tive, the “technical exercises” of modern scientific drawing could do little to 
improve one’s ability to represent nature. Improvement could come only 
from “intimacy with the things represented.” Scientific travelers were often 
surprised to find that “savages” (Wilde) were often the better draftsmen. 
Heim suggested that man’s observational capacity had been corroded by 
religion, which had “overstimulated the imagination.”49 In his instructions 
to earthquake observers, Heim urged an attentiveness that steered clear of 
the modern extreme of nervous sensibility: “The sense organs should be 
kept alert in the correct state of tension, without exciting them to a state 
that would exaggerate sensations.”50 Heim was hardly the first European to 
have credited “primitives” with exceptional observational powers. Charles 
Darwin had commented famously on the Tierra del Fuegians’ “more prac-
ticed habits of perception and keener senses, common to all men in a savage 
state, as compared with those long civilized.”51 Darwin saw no reason to 
assume that a British scientist was a better observer of nature than a “sav-
age”—nor even, he might have added, than an insect or reptile endowed 
with the capacity for mimicry. As we will see in the next chapter, this anthro-
pological perspective informed nineteenth-century debates about the ob-
servation of earthquakes. Observers were often compared by race and even 
species—snakes and catfish were considered particularly keen.52 If scientists 
might turn to “savages” for scientific drawings, why shouldn’t geologists 
turn to Swiss citizens for earthquake reports?
Heim maintained this capacious idea of seismological observation even 
as other seismologists increasingly restricted their data to instrumental 
traces. He had little faith in the objectivity of self-registering instruments.53 
As he argued to the International Seismological Association in 1909, “Above 
all, a more precise observation of all earthquake phenomena is necessary, 
in order to learn to understand them. One cannot say from the start, how 
they are to be observed. One must experiment, experience; and theoretical 
perspectives and hypotheses can and will enrich observation.”54
F. A. Forel: Earthquakes and Ecology
Heim was not the only scientist whose personality and politics shaped the 
Earthquake Commission’s outreach efforts. The Neuchâtel-based naturalist 
F. A. Forel is better known today as a founder of an early strain of ecology: 
limnology, the study of the physical and organic conditions of mountain 
lakes. Limnology stood as a critique of the modern splintering of scien-
tific expertise and the estrangement of scientists from those with practical  

82 / Chapter Four
interests in the natural world. As Forel wrote in his seminal treatise on Lac 
Léman, the study of limnology forced the scholar “to transform himself suc-
cessively into a physicist, chemist, zoologist, botanist, archeologist, histo-
rian, economist.”55 On their own, none of these disciplines could come to 
know a lake in the holistic manner of limnology. Forel echoed the com-
prehensive vision of Alexander von Humboldt: “Geography has, in effect, 
a noble ambition and a magnificent program: propelled by its definition, it 
aspires to embrace in a vast generalization the ensemble of the sciences that 
deal with the earth and its inhabitants, that is, all the human sciences. . . . 
The description of the earth is not the enumeration and individual descrip-
tion of each of the categories of creatures and things that encounter each 
other on our planet; it is rather the picture of the whole furnished by the 
union of these diverse categories, by their relationships to each other, by 
the reactions that they have to the environment in which they are immersed 
and which they produce on this environment.”56 In its ambition to grasp a 
holistic vision of living things in relation to each other and to their physical 
environment, Forel’s limnology can rightly be termed ecological.
Limnology was also a practical endeavor, and Forel addressed his study 
in part to a lay audience, a “diversity of readers,” from ship captains and 
fishermen to those who made their homes on the lake. All such individu-
als would profit from knowledge of the lake’s life cycles and the conditions 
that made it livable.57 Forel wrote for “general readers,” for whose sake he 
eschewed jargon: “Rarely can an idea or act not be expressed in familiar 
language. . . . If our beautiful science is not to become repulsive, we must 
avoid deforming it with too many foreign words. We must beware of mak-
ing limnology incomprehensible to the many readers with an interest in 
limnology by the use of foreign words.”58 By the time he penned these lines, 
the ideal of communicating science in “familiar language” had also become 
central to Forel’s work for the Earthquake Commission.
“Familiar Language”
Like Heim, Forel presented the commission’s work as an opportunity to 
train citizens in a scientific mode of observation. Reflecting on the obser-
vations collected in the network’s first year, Forel expressed guarded opti-
mism: “The value of these documents is very unequal, as one would expect; 
some of them have all the characteristics of excellent scientific observations. 
But if there are some that are less precise and exact, there are very few from 
which there is absolutely nothing to be drawn. The general impression that 
results from the study I have made is that the method adopted by our com-

The Tongues of Seismology / 83
mission, consisting of calling on the observations of the public, can, as it 
develops, give excellent results.” More specifically, he deemed the majority 
of reports “very authentic,” while only twelve were “imprecise, rather doubt-
ful,” marked by a lack of coincidence in the reported times. One of the 
“best” observations was that of a Monsieur Clement, a butcher in Yverdon. 
Indeed, as Forel’s report for the following year would point out, observa-
tions came from “all the classes of society.” To his satisfaction, moreover, 
the public was making progress: “A particularly interesting fact is that the 
relative value of these observations has notably risen, and that, after two 
years of collecting these documents, we recognize a very evident superiority 
in those that were sent to us most recently: the public is learning to observe 
earthquakes.” Still, Forel urged a critical attitude: “Let us not however go too 
far, and let us not overestimate the precision of our documents.”59
Forel did not place the burden of improvement solely on the public: 
scientists themselves needed to learn to interpret the observations of lay-
people. Thus Forel judged “there are very few of them, even among the most 
simple and modest, from which an intelligent comparison and critique can 
not draw something useful.” Not only would the public need to learn how 
to report to scientists; scientists would have to learn how to listen to the 
public. In this vein, Forel began, “I have, first of all, some definitions to 
make, which will spare us fruitless repetition and simplify description.”60 
These definitions would lay the foundation for a dialogue between scien-
tists and lay observers.
On one hand, Forel picked up on phrases that observers themselves were 
using. “The tremor [secousse] can be composed of several distinct move-
ments that I will call, according to circumstances: oscillations, when there is 
a predominance of swaying movement; vibrations, when the movement has 
the character of a vibration; shocks, when there is a violent, brief, sudden 
impulse, etc.” On the other hand, he offered new terms that members of 
the commission could use to compare the reports of different observers. For 
instance, descriptions of an event as “violent,” “brief,” or “sudden” could 
now be classed together and labeled as a single “shock.” With the exception 
of the term sismique, which Forel derived from the Greek for earthquake, all 
the terms he used were drawn from “familiar language.”61
Forel did not deny that the reports were colored by the subjectivity of the 
observers. For instance, reports of the wavelike movement of fixed objects 
were likely a “subjective illusion.” Yet such reports were not insignificant. 
They could not be dismissed as the bias of observers familiar with theories 
of seismic waves. More likely, the slight movement of the observer’s body 
during the earthquake produced the apparent wavelike motion of other 

84 / Chapter Four
objects. Subjective here implied a physiological rather than psychological 
bias. Forel further distinguished between “objective observations, based on 
the direction of swaying of a hanging object, or on the displaced of mobile 
objects, and subjective observations, based on the simple appreciation of the 
sensations of the observer.” Here, “subjective” did not imply unreliable. 
It meant simply that the object under observation was the observer’s own 
body.62
Critics of the use of lay observers often pointed to the difficulty of ex-
tracting precise reports of the time of an earthquake. The factor of time was 
of the essence, necessary for determining whether separate reports related 
to the same shock, calculating the velocity of the wave as it moved through 
the earth’s crust, and localizing the epicenter. In the moment of alarm, how-
ever, people rarely bothered to look at a clock. And if they did, it was all too 
likely that the clock was wrong. With standardized time still a novelty, few 
people could be relied on to calibrate their house clock or pocket watch to 
the “telegraph” clock at the local railway station. At the start, Forel was dis-
appointed to find that Switzerland’s famed culture of precision timekeeping 
fell short of scientific standards: “the setting of the clocks of towns, railways, 
and telegraph stations leaves much to desire from the perspective of preci-
sion.”63 Even thirty years later, in the case of the strong 1910 tremor in the 
Berner Jura, Quervain was aghast to find that “among the many men of 
science who encountered the earthquake fully awake, none saw fit to look 
at his second hand and verify the setting of his watch.”64 Again, the commis-
sion saw an opportunity for public enlightenment. They “aspired to educate 
the public to be able to tell time with real precision.” In 1907 Quervain 
published five hundred copies in German and French of an “Introduction 
to Precise Timekeeping for Observers.”65 The point is that in Switzerland it 
was not out of place for a scientist to berate the public to “to recognize the 
moral duty, during an earthquake, first thing to look at the second hand.”66 
Already in 1881, “in the successive observations that are sent to us,” Forel 
observed “a progress and an improvement in the determination of time, 
apparently the result of habituation and attention to the art of observing.”67 
In 1910 the commission remarked, “Often it is complete amateurs who 
distinguish themselves by a pleasing sense for precision.”68
In addition to codifying a language of observation and developing meth-
ods for interpreting observation reports, Forel presented a scheme for mov-
ing from discursive to quantitative description: a scale of seismic intensity, 
measured according to “the simple observation of the effects produced 
on man and his dwellings.”69 The ten degrees of Forel’s scale ranged from 
barely perceptible to disastrous, making it far more widely applicable than 

The Tongues of Seismology / 85
the seven-degree scale that Volger had used to classify damage from the 
1855 earthquake. Forel only intended his scale to be used “while awaiting 
more precise observation by standardized recorders,” but it would form the 
basis of scales used in Switzerland and elsewhere into the 1960s.70 Modified 
in collaboration with an Italian colleague, the “Rossi-Forel” scale was by 
far the most widely used circa 1900.71 As part of a carefully constructed sci-
entific vernacular, the Rossi-Forel scale bears comparison to the scales and 
idioms that emerged in the nineteenth century for the observation of winds 
and clouds.72 Cloud taxonomies and the Beaufort wind scale were scientific 
tools based on the experiences of laypeople—artists, farmers, fishermen, 
and sailors. Unlike seismological intensity scales, however, they were not 
designed to register the subjective effects of geophysical phenomena on hu-
mans. This peculiarity of earthquake science was decisive.
“The Relationship of Man to Earthquakes”
The Rossi-Forel scale committed seismology to a culture-bound perspective 
on earthquakes. Intensity measures the felt effects of shaking and is assessed 
primarily with respect to humans and their habitations. It can be used both 
to compare seismic events and to identify regions of seismic hazard, but 
it is not possible to measure intensity in uninhabited areas.73 Forel’s scale 
confirmed seismology’s dependence on lay participation. In fact, the scale 
operated in part by calibrating the reactions of the general public. For in-
stance, degree 6, “Some frightened people leave their dwellings,” versus de-
gree 7, “general panic.” In the Italian version of the scale, degree 3 tremors 
were “felt by people who are not concerned with seismology.” By contrast, 
a degree 1 quake would be noted only by a “practiced observer” [exercé, 
geubten]. Word choice was telling: the relevant criterion for such sensitivity 
was not expertise but practice. The commission found that weak tremors 
were more frequently reported in the wake of a widely felt one, an effect that 
seemed too robust to attribute to suggestion. Indeed, the public could learn 
to observe earthquakes. And scientists could learn to work with their obser-
vations. Hence Forel’s comment that “this scale will be able to be corrected 
once we have more experience in this line of research.”74
Forel’s scale reflected the ambiguous status of eyewitness reporters: they 
were both scientific observers and objects of observation. Certain construc-
tions suggested that the witness’s role was passive. Thus, for instance, the 
parallel constructions of “shocks registered by different seismographs” and 
“shocks reported by persons at rest” or “by active persons.” Other phrases 
attributed a degree of discernment to the witness. Only a shock of degree 

86 / Chapter Four
3, for instance, was “strong enough that the duration or direction could be 
appreciated.” Only a shock of degree 6 would produce an “apparent shaking 
of trees and bushes.” These phrases hinted at the mindfulness expected of 
witnesses. Inherent in the scale itself was thus the dual status of earthquake 
observers as experimental subjects and amateur naturalists.
Geography, according to Forel, was interested in “the reactions they 
[people] have to the environment in which they are immersed and which 
they produce on this environment.” The same could be said for seismology. 
Details and idiosyncrasies of ordinary people’s responses were recorded, 
remarked on, and preserved. An analogous approach could be found in the 
field of “cosmic physics” in late nineteenth-century central Europe. Phe-
nomena like atmospheric electricity and the mountain wind called föhn 
were analyzed according to new theories of microphysics or hydrodynamics 
but also, in an ecological vein, as phenomena that shaped and were shaped 
by particular places. In all these cases, human reactions were part of a ho-
listic understanding of the physical process. Thus föhn could trigger heart 
failure or even criminal behavior; atmospheric electricity could aggravate 
epidemics of cholera and influenza. A similar perspective underwrote the 
commission’s commitment to using human observers alongside improved 
seismographs. As the commission’s director put it in 1910, “To study the 
relationship of man to earthquakes was from the start a special goal of Swiss 
earthquake research.”75
“Real Seismoscopes”
As the Swiss public was learning to observe earthquakes, an unusual picture 
was emerging of the scientific observer. By the late nineteenth century, sci-
entific observation was typically associated with a self-effacing, sober, emo-
tionally disengaged expert, by default male.76 Some earthquake observers 
fit this description. For instance, a professor of physics in Mélan described 
how he had observed a tremor: “I was in the garden occupied with ther-
mometric observations; I was watching a hair-hygrometer, and I saw with 
astonishment that its needle had convulsive movements, which I had never 
noticed to the same degree. Suddenly I heard an underground thunder, then 
I felt myself falter a little.”77 Certainly, there were observers who regularly 
engaged in other forms of scientific observation and happened to have a 
sensitive instrument at hand when an earthquake struck. In general, though, 
successful earthquake observers were a motley group. Interestingly, women 
were thought to excel. As the Italian seismologist Mercalli remarked when 
proposing his revisions to the Rossi-Forel scale in 1902, “very sensitive and 

The Tongues of Seismology / 87
nervous people, especially women, feel earthquakes much better than I 
do.”78 His degree 2 therefore specified “felt by many sensitive and ner­
vous people.” Looking back on thirty years of the Earthquake Commission’s 
activity, one director noted, “Very interesting is the physiological fact that 
certain individuals of both sexes have an almost astonishing sensitivity for 
ground movements—[they] represent real seismoscopes.”79 A quiet, house-
bound lifestyle and close attention to the arrangement of domestic objects 
put many bourgeois women in an excellent position to detect tremors.
Already in the first years of the commission’s work, it was becoming 
clear that the typical conditions of scholarly production were not the most 
favorable to earthquake observing. Attentive watching and listening seemed 
of secondary importance. More earthquakes tended to be reported at night 
than during the day.80 Though some events were certainly missed by those 
asleep, people at rest—even if half-conscious—were more likely to feel the 
earth move than people in motion. Scholars who spent most of their days 
indoors were more likely to notice a slight tremor by means of an object’s 
shift in position; but those who worked outdoors could more reliably report 
the direction of shaking, being free of the distorting effects of human con-
structions. In one vivid example of these paradoxes, a young mother sent 
in a report with observations made by herself and her two sons. It was the 
younger boy, playing on the floor with his toy soldiers when the earthquake 
struck, who “saw his little cardboard soldiers fall before him while saluting 
the Duke of Brunswick!” As a statue of the duke of Brunswick stood just to 
the south of the family’s home in Geneva, the local commission member 
commented that the “fall of the little soldiers . . . seems to demonstrate this 
direction.”81 With no hint of amusement, the commission deemed the little 
boy’s observation the best of the lot.
Building an Archive
Historians of science have just begun to explore historical developments in 
the methods of recording and storing information about natural environ-
ments in flux. This is, in part, a history of genres, including local natural 
histories and commonplace books in the seventeenth century; personal 
weather diaries in the eighteenth; the catalogs of botanical gardens, zoo-
logical museums, and synchronized global observing networks in the nine-
teenth; and the emergence of computerized databases in the late twentieth.82 
Switzerland’s macroseismological network straddled two stages of this his-
tory, helping to transform methods of individual, local observation into 
geographically widespread, collective practices. Conscious of the challenge 

88 / Chapter Four
of organizing information on a new scale, the commission decided to main-
tain two record books, one in which each “Swiss” earthquake would be 
entered and numbered in order of occurrence, with a reference to the fold-
ers where the relevant observations were stored, and one in which records 
of past earthquakes would be collected “from the literature.”83 These books 
and folders would constitute the commission’s archive, to be stored at the 
Bern observatory. “All these documents are preserved in the archives of the 
Commission,” wrote Forel, “to be successively studied and compared.”84 In 
this way, the data would remain open to reprocessing and reinterpretation. 
Forel demonstrated this principle by publishing his own analysis of the 
1879 earthquake, the first recorded by the commission, while Heim was still 
at work on his version. From the start, the commission recognized the need 
to preserve and periodically reexamine the original observations, a guiding 
principle of macroseismology today.
Somewhere along the way, however, the commission must have lost 
sight of this intention, for its archive is nowhere to be found. All that re-
mains are two small sets of documents preserved in the personal papers of 
two commission members. From these incomplete sources, we can none-
theless reconstruct something of the texture of communication between 
scientists and lay observers. How did the network operate in practice? How 
were volunteers recruited and their observations systematized?
We can begin to answer these questions on the basis of the notes of one 
Christian Brügger of Chur (canton Graubünden), member of the commis-
sion since 1880. Brügger drew praise from the director Früh as “an avid col-
lector of earthquake reports.”85 He was also one of the most active members 
of his cantonal natural scientific society, where he lectured on earthquakes 
among a host of other topics. According to his eulogist, Brügger was an 
old-fashioned naturalist, “who with wide-open eyes liked best to ramble in 
the open air and showed a lively interest for all the diverse manifestations 
of the natural and of the human world.” He combed the hills and valleys 
of Graubünden for studies of zoology and meteorology alongside his spe-
cialty, botany. He also mined libraries to compose histories of spas, forestry, 
fishery, and dairying, and dug into local archives for a chronicle of natural 
events that reached back to the year 1043. He was, in short, a local notable 
and a fount of local knowledge—“the best connoisseur of our beautiful 
Graubünden.”86 His work for the commission was motivated not by an in-
terest in seismology per se but by a commitment to local natural history.
Brügger was trained in plant geography, an important source of mod-
ern ecological thought. He was scathingly critical of the Stubenbotaniker, the 
armchair botanist, and of the futile quest to classify plants on the basis of 

The Tongues of Seismology / 89
dead specimens. “The plant species, like every organic creature, wants to be 
conceived and understood in its total appearance in the magnificent thou-
sandfold interconnected organism of nature, in its total belonging to the 
infinitely diverse conditions that influence it powerfully and to the thereby 
determined relations to the external world, in short in its total living phe-
nomenon as a living, dependent microcosm in the living kingdom of nature, 
in order to be judged rightly.”87 Brügger’s view of nature evidently owed 
much to romantic Naturphilosophie, but it also resonated with Forel’s more 
pragmatic search for an integrated view of life and its physical conditions.
As these lines also hint, Brügger was not an easygoing man. He was ap-
parently fanatical about his ideas and work and intimidating to students. 
Nonetheless, he was a highly effective organizer. In the 1850s he orga­nized 
a private network of meteorological observing stations, ninety in total, 
which became a crucial part of the Swiss national meteorological network 
in 1863. In conjunction with the network, he also published instructions 
for phenological observations. His seismological network presumably de-
pended on the same circle of acquaintances.
Brügger’s notes from the early 1880s shed light on the evolution of a 
system for processing seismological observations. For each seismic event, 
Brügger listed every locale to which he mailed a questionnaire and the per-
son or institution to whom he addressed it (such as an observatory or clois-
ter). With the exception of the first event (7 January 1880), he numbered 
these locations. He seems to have used the following annotations: “Ret” or a 
strike-through to indicate a response received; “not observed” for a negative 
response; in some cases, he also noted the direction of shaking. For instance, 
on 4 July 1880 an earthquake was felt throughout much of Switzerland, 
and on 6 July Brügger sent out forty-eight questionnaires (out of the two 
hundred given to each commission member). He seems to have received 
twenty-one responses, at least five of them negative. Some of his notes on  
this event are illegible, but they seem to include dates of subsequent com-
munications with the observers, perhaps indicating that he followed up with 
questions about certain reports. Subsequently, his notation process became 
more streamlined, resulting in a single observer list for each event. In 1881, 
perhaps due to Forel’s exhortations about precise timekeeping, Brügger be-
gan noting the reported time of observation to the minute. And in 1883 he 
began assigning intensities, in keeping with the commission’s introduction 
that year of the Rossi-Forel scale. In 1883 he tallied how many locations 
experienced shaking of degree 3, 4, or 5. He then abandoned this practice, 
perhaps realizing that this information revealed little in the absence of a 
map. In later years, perhaps in growing recognition of the ambiguities of 

90 / Chapter Four
assigning intensity, he often assigned a range (e.g., 2–3) rather than a single 
degree. His final step at the end of each year appears to have been to review 
the list of events and number them. In this way he identified each separate 
and genuine “earthquake,” according to Forel’s definition. In June 1891, 
for instance, eight reports over a two-day period received one number (a 
single earthquake), while two reports from July of that year received no 
number—perhaps because they were not confirmed by other observers, or 
because they seemed to originate outside Graubünden and were therefore 
the responsibility of another commission member.88 Here, then, is part of 
the process by which the observations of ordinary citizens were reinscribed 
as scientific evidence.
Coming to the Aid of Science
The most consistent and prolific lay earthquake observers in nineteenth- 
century central Europe tended to be individuals who were otherwise in-
volved with Landeskunde, the term for regional history, both natural and 
human. As Lynn Nyhart argues, the suffix kunde in the nineteenth-century 
German-speaking world indicated a form of knowledge marked by three 
characteristics: it was comprehensive even at the expense of intellectual 
coherence; it derived from personal, sensory experience; and it was open 
to popular participation.89 Likewise the adjective lokalkundig designated in-
dividuals endowed with scientifically relevant local knowledge, as in the 
geologist Melchior Neumayr’s conviction that “a sharp and localkundiger 
observer who knows a volcano near his home in detail, will often foresee 
its eruption.”90 For proponents of the monographic method, the depth of 
their local knowledge was one marker of the distance between their Erdbe­
benkunde and the mere “theories” of upstarts like Rudolf Falb (chapter 3).
Habitual earthquake observers tended to be active in their local scientific 
society, in a mountaineering club like the Swiss Alpine Club, or, by the end 
of the century, in the emerging nature protection movement. For instance, 
the feat of observing over three hundred seismic shocks in the year 1885 
was achieved by secondary school teacher David Gempeler in Zweisimmen 
(canton Bern), who won praise from the commission for his “conscientious, 
persistent observation and numerous, clear and precise reports.” Gempeler 
was a member of the Alpine Club, a contributor to a regional botanical 
catalog, and the author of a Heimatkunde and a collection of local folklore, 
including tales reproduced in the local dialect. In 1885, the second most 
valued observer was a pastor in Mett (Bern) by the name of Ischer, brother 
of the geologist Gottfried Ischer. Pfarrer Ischer was a member of the Alpine 

The Tongues of Seismology / 91
Club and the Bern Naturforschende Gesellschaft and a collector of miner­
alogical specimens. His report on the events of 1885 was remarkable for 
its detailed exposition of the geography of the affected region. As the com-
mission director Forster noted, “Herr Pfarrer Ischer was all the more suited 
to deliver a competent judgment on this situation, as he brings together 
precise knowledge of general geology with a special local knowledge [Lokal­
kenntniss] of the Obersimmenthal, where for years he had a parish.”91
Still, devoted naturalists like Gempeler and Ischer could have contrib-
uted only a small fraction of the thousands of observations collected by 
the commission. The experiences of a wider assortment of observers can be 
glimpsed from the surviving original correspondence, which comes from 
the Jura region, with its capital in Neuchâtel. The city of Neuchâtel sits be-
tween the Neuchâtel lake and the Jura Mountains, and was home to a famed 
watchmaking microindustry in the nineteenth century (see figure 4.2). So-
cially, it was marked by a pronounced division between the hills and valley, 
between the “montagnons” peasants—celebrated by Rousseau as survivors 
Fig. 4.2.  The center of the town of Neuchâtel, circa 1871, not long after the start of major 
hydrological work in the Jura region to prevent flooding and improve irrigation. The  
view of the Alps at the top was added to the photograph in a nod to the local tradition of 
landscape painting. Source: Musée d’art et d’histoire, Neuchâtel (Switzerland).

92 / Chapter Four
of a golden age—and the patrician and bourgeois residents of the town 
below. Neuchâtel prided itself on several institutions of learning—it was an 
academic town, a ville-école. It was also home to a thriving community of 
naturalists, which included Louis Agassiz before his departure for Harvard. 
One might well expect the Neuchâtelois to go about observing earthquakes 
much as they collected minerals or mollusks. Indeed, many of those active 
in the Earthquake Commission also contributed as amateur naturalists to 
local scientific societies. In the eyes of one unforgiving observer, “In Neu-
chatel everyone is a boarding-house owner, the town being characterized 
by Protestant honesty, pedagogical pedantry, Prussian haughtiness, Dutch 
cleanliness, catacomb-like tranquility, and pastoral stupidity.”92
Materials from the Earthquake Commission are preserved in the papers 
of the reporter for the region, the geologist Hans Schardt, and date from 
1898 and 1907–10. Schardt was a specialist on the tectonics of the Alps and, 
like Heim, a frequent consultant on engineering projects like the Simplon. 
He was also active in local scientific societies, became president of the Neu-
châtel branch of the Swiss League for the Protection of Nature in 1910, and 
compiled a glossary of the dialect of the Valais region.93 His geology courses 
at the University of Neuchâtel “were attended not only by students, but also 
by adults eager to cultivate their minds, and by colleagues.”94
In February 1909, Schardt received a nine-page letter from a boarding-
house dweller on the outskirts of Neuchâtel, in which was described, among 
other things, sounds heard by one neighbor at half past two in the morning, 
another neighbor’s nightmare of crossing a collapsing bridge, and a distant 
memory of a sudden storm of such violence that the writer had been thrown 
from her bed, only to be mocked the next morning when she recounted the 
experience to fellow lodgers. Two weeks later, the same writer reported to 
Schardt further shocks that admittedly might have been “an effect of the 
imagination.”95 Schardt might have been forgiven for dismissing these let-
ters as the ranting of a lonely lunatic. Instead, he published them. In the 
report of the Swiss Earthquake Commission for the year 1909, much of the 
testimony of this lodger appears word for word, preserving even her meta-
phors and analogies.96 What does this correspondence tell us about science 
circa 1900? 
One common feature of the reports Schardt received was the desire for 
corroboration of an experience that many feared was a mere figment of 
the imagination. In several cases, observers had not mentioned their sen-
sations to anyone until they saw Schardt’s notice in the local paper. They 
“feared having perhaps had a bad dream”; “I don’t know if other people will 
have noticed something.” “I am sure that I then rose to go put on my hat 

The Tongues of Seismology / 93
and go outside, telling myself: One would say a light quake. But I changed 
my mind and sat down, thinking I was mistaken.” “Even during the day I 
seemed to feel small tremors, but I didn’t note them, fearing that they were 
an effect of the imagination”; “People made fun of my idea.”97 In an era 
when an individual known for his or her “sensitivity” might be diagnosed 
with neurasthenia or hysteria, earthquake observing offered affirmation to 
“sensitive,” “nervous” individuals, especially women. “Being a person who 
is very sensitive to these phenomena, I have often felt them in this area 
without daring to speak of them.”98
Schardt’s correspondents also shared a respect for “science” and, more 
particularly, for Schardt as its representative. Most wrote of their hope that 
their reports would be of use to Schardt. Some expressed concern that their 
observations were not “scientific” enough. A witness identifying himself 
only as “un honnête citoyen” wished “to come to the aid of science, of 
which you are one of the representatives”; he closed: “hoping that my infor-
mation will help you in your research.”99 Another observer begged Schardt 
three times to forgive him for information that was “imprecise.”100 On the 
other hand, the correspondents’ respect for Schardt made them reluctant to 
send reports if they had not witnessed an earthquake. Scientists actively so-
licited negative reports, which were important for mapping the geographi-
cal limits of an earthquake’s impact. Yet they were hard to come by. As one 
observer in Graubünden wrote to the canton’s reporter Christian Brügger, 
“The earthquake was hardly felt here in Sils, it was so brief and weak; for 
that reason people naturally balk at being given such a long questionnaire, 
which they can fill out so very incompletely.”101
Members of the Earthquake Commission “took pains to maintain and 
stimulate the interest of the public for our work, in part by communications 
in the press, in part by public lectures on the present state of the earth-
quake question.”102 Personal contact between scientists and volunteers had 
likewise been a cornerstone of the Swiss meteorological network since the 
1860s. Members of the Meteorological Commission visited each station in 
their region regularly, not only to inspect instruments and practices but also 
because “personal acquaintance with the observers brought transparency 
and trust in the mutual relations and secured to no small degree the fur-
ther course of the enterprise.”103 In the nineteenth-century American West, 
it was likewise personal contact that maintained local networks of scientific 
observation.104 Still, Swiss seismology drew more specifically on the central 
European tradition of regional natural history societies, where bonds be-
tween scientists and amateurs were often forged through research outings 
to noteworthy local sites.105

94 / Chapter Four
Earthquake observing was also a social opportunity, particularly for those 
living in solitude. In the novels of Balzac and his contemporaries, boarding 
houses were a nineteenth-century symbol of the atomization of modern so-
ciety. The injunction to collect testimony from other eyewitnesses offered a 
welcome excuse to penetrate the social walls that separated neighbors from 
each other. Observers reported conversations that transpired as individu-
als sought confirmation of their own experiences. They found themselves 
discussing their intimate moments alone in bed at night, even their dreams. 
“It is only in chatting with other people that I realized that it was indeed an 
earthquake.”106
In one case, a Madame Bel-Perrin in Colombier responded to one of 
Schardt’s requests for observations with a report that offered little in the way 
of seismology per se, but was highly suggestive in other ways. Bel-Perrin’s 
letter is worth quoting in full. It offers a glimpse of the reverberations of the 
Messina disaster in the imagination of an individual with no scientific train-
ing, but with a thirst for scientific understanding.
Colombier, le 20 février 1909
Monsieur le Dr. Schaudt
Veytaux
Monsieur,
Last night I dreamed very clearly of an earthquake strong enough to set in mo-
tion the objects hanging on the walls of the room where I was staying. In my 
dream I immediately took note of all the particularities of the shock in order 
to communicate them to you. Unfortunately, it was only a dream, but it at 
least has the advantage of reminding me of the letter that I promised you and 
that I have long wanted to write you in order to excuse the slightly mischie-
vous card that I wrote you in response to yours. [The card] contained a secret 
irritation at not having attended more precisely to the shocks that I certainly 
felt on one or another of the indicated dates. I have not yet forgiven myself 
this inattention. But between a dying father and a very ill sister, it was more or 
less possible, in the bustle of the year’s end, to allow oneself to be distracted 
from the problems of science. Lowly and small-minded creatures that we are, 
it makes us uncomfortable to detach ourselves from our surroundings and 
to raise ourselves to those mysterious heights where one forgets everything 
that is not a mystery upon scrutiny. But there you have it, this has made me 
put my finger once again on my sordid ignorance, since, as I believe I have 
already told you, it may be that my sensibility is simply altogether bestial; I 

The Tongues of Seismology / 95
feel myself entirely ignorant of these great mysteries that govern worlds or 
disrupt them! I would like to know more about them. Is there any particular 
book from which I can extract some science? M. de Quervain recently sent 
me a report, I am very grateful to him, since I read it avidly. Would it interest 
you to read a letter related to the catastrophe of Messina and Reggio? It has 
nothing of a scientific or seismological point of view, but is simply an echo 
of the misery and human suffering. It was written in the first days, as 60,000 
wounded were set ashore at Naples and cared for by the entire population. 
My sister who lives in Naples (an interesting region for the members of the 
seismological commission!) aided with these arrivals and still visits all the 
wretched and helpless. She gave a thrilling account, unfortunately all too true. 
It would be kind of you, Monsieur, after having read it, to return the letter to 
me (without haste). I would have liked to send it to you earlier; it has been 
passed around a large circle of acquaintances, and an indiscreet few kept it too 
long. Hence the long delay.
Present events will, I hope, no longer escape my seismological sixth sense; 
and, in order to be of service to you, I do not want my seventh like last night, 
but reality in full, without catastrophes and human sacrifices . . . even so! I 
have let you glimpse in these words a cruelty that I certainly do not encourage 
in myself. Rest assured. But I find that an earthquake should let no one escape 
when it begins its destruction. I pity those who survive, [whether] unharmed 
or maimed, since all have lost, a little or a lot. And would it not therefore 
be better that all perish without exception at the same moment? It is an end 
like another, perhaps even better than many others. I have heard—you too, I 
think—some very strange opinions raised by this recent catastrophe, I would 
even call them auguries! One must always know where they come from in 
order to understand and pardon them. The “good Christians” imagine that 
God permits and “wants” these things! They are to be pitied for having such a 
conception of their God. Above all that, there exists something, as beautiful as 
anything in our country, the absolute freedom to think whatever one wants.
Was there anything authentic in these reports issued from the seismo-
logical observatory in Berlin concerning a violent earthquake perceived by 
instruments thousands of kilometers away? Do these observations support 
those of the recent catastrophes in Persia? As I know that there are no “liars” 
worse than journalists, even with quite precise information, I always remain 
skeptical about news they send from afar.
Monsieur, I am imposing on your time, which is precious and which 
deserves a more noble purpose than that of my lines. Perhaps you will say 
that a chatterbox of my stamp deserves to live in Messina or Reggio and be  

96 / Chapter Four
swallowed up there! And then, I do not know you and I find it very indiscreet 
of myself to act as if I have known you for a long time! But above the earth 
that trembles and thanks to it, there are affinities. . . . Perhaps it is in this zone, 
elevated and profound, that the gods decreed for us to meet by post.
With all my respect and my best wishes,
Marie Bel Perrin107
Over the following months, Bel-Perrin continued to supply Schardt with 
her observations and speculations. “If all the thoughts I have had for you 
were ‘seismic sensations,’” she wrote, “I assure you that you would be sat-
isfied and that science would perhaps benefit. One must believe that our 
thoughts encountered each other just the same, without, however, producing 
the expected tremor. Pardon my irreverence.”108 The following fall she was 
able to mail Schardt a completed questionnaire on a weak tremor. Charac-
teristically, she managed to answer the most seemingly mundane questions 
with an air of cosmic mystery. Asked about sounds accompanying the shak-
ing, she noted, “I felt more than heard the rumbling, however I discerned 
quite well the underground rumbling and the wind blowing outdoors.” 
Asked for “external observations,” she reported, “Every perception of shock 
produces inevitably (in me at least) a strange and real impression. It is an 
agitation that suspends all functions of the body, even respiration. It’s very 
brief, but very clear. One remains breathless.”109 Would the breathless Ma­
dame Bel-Perrin have been pleased or disappointed to learn that her letters 
to Schardt were filed as research, rather than as personal correspondence?
Bel-Perrin’s letters to Schardt illustrate how earthquake reporting could 
evolve into an intimate discourse of “sensations” and private thoughts. For 
the “sake of science,” a presumably respectable woman could adopt a remark-
ably confidential tone with a distinguished man of science, to whom she 
was a complete stranger. This correspondence also shows how easily expert- 
lay communication about earthquakes could shift between a scientific and 
a moral register. Ultimately, Bel-Perrin subverted the Kantian opposition 
between the “scientific” and the “human” perspectives on earthquakes. She 
sought spiritual elevation in the union of science and humanitarianism. To-
gether, naturalism and sympathy promised to lift Madame Bel-Perrin above 
the “lowly,” “bestial” outlook of personal interest.
In these aspirations, Bel-Perrin was seeking a common point of view 
between her “ignorant” self and Schardt, the man of science. With her off-
handed contempt for “good Christians” (presumably Catholics) and her 

The Tongues of Seismology / 97
complacence about Swiss liberty, she alluded to the cultural homogene-
ity that favored the spontaneous intimacy of her letters to Schardt. That 
homogeneity was undoubtedly a significant factor in the flourishing of an 
enterprise like the Earthquake Commission—even if Bel-Perrin preferred to 
imagine that she was linked to Schardt by cosmic “affinities.”
Scientific Charisma
Even setting aside the case of Madame Bel-Perrin, it is clear that Schardt’s 
correspondents were motivated not only by respect for “science” but, more 
particularly, for Schardt as its embodiment. They were “coming to the aid of 
science, of which you are one of the representatives.” “Since I know that you 
like to be informed on the subject of earthquakes,” one letter opened, as if 
the writer were doing Schardt a personal favor.110 Some used their devotion 
to science to differentiate themselves from members of lower classes. Thus 
one writer noted that neighboring buildings were inhabited “by a popula-
tion of workers who without doubt will not themselves relate observations 
of this sort.” Most striking is their common desire to be of assistance to 
Schardt himself. It meant something to these writers to address a man of 
science, perhaps one they knew from his contributions to the local scientific 
society.
As macroseismological networks expanded toward the end of the nine-
teenth century, they became increasingly bureaucratic. Observers lost some 
of the motivation of personal contact with charismatic personalities like 
Heim, Forel, Brügger, and Schardt. In Austria, for instance, when the state 
Earthquake Service outgrew the oversight of the Vienna Academy of Sciences 
and was transferred to the Central Institute for Meteorology and Geophys-
ics (ZAMG), scientists worried that the network would suffer. The ZAMG’s 
director expressed his concern to the ministry of culture: “People always see 
a state institute only as a bureaucratic institution and regard the directorate 
as functionaries [Beamten]. Particularly for those circles that have enjoyed 
higher education, this is enough to make them stand aside or even to be-
have decidedly hostilely, because they are willing to subordinate themselves 
to the scientific authority of the imperial academy, but not to a functionary. 
This trait is certainly not justified, however it exists and must be reckoned 
with.”111 “In our experience,” he added, “the best observers are those ideal-
ists, who make observations entirely voluntarily, out of the purest objective 
interest, and certainly for that reason demand a purely individual, personal, 
non-bureaucratic treatment.”112

98 / Chapter Four
Telling Global Stories
How did scientists weave the idiosyncratic content of such correspondence 
into a publishable account of a geophysical phenomenon? In part, the chal-
lenge was to tell a convincing story: to stitch the partial reports of individual 
observers into a narrative of the earthquake. One approach was to reinter-
pret personal experiences as communal. Thus, Schardt once recounted that 
sleepers were jerked awake with the “impression of being instantaneously 
suspended before coming back into contact with the mattress. . . . There 
were many who went to find the cause in one or another floor of their 
house, entirely surprised to find there tenants busy with the same investiga-
tion.”113 Another tactic was to transfer the quality of seismic “sensitivity” 
from individuals to places. The church tower of Morges, for instance, was a 
“seismophone of the first rank; its bells ring every time that a seismic wave 
passes underneath.” Various lakes and springs had also become known as 
natural earthquake detectors. One area of the Neuchâtel Lake was consid-
ered an “entirely peculiar point of pulsation” after school children spotted 
waves of fifty to sixty centimeters during the earthquake of 1898.114 Forel 
explained this effect by analogy to the Chladni figures formed by vibrating 
membranes, thus certifying the lake’s status as seismically sensitive.115
Attributing experiences to communities and places rather than individu-
als was one way to move between felt reports and earth physics. Another was 
to embed local phenomena in larger-scale narratives. As the commission ex-
plained in 1888, “The longer the observations persist, the more clearly cer-
tain lines of dislocation in Switzerland become noticeable, along which the 
tremors are far more numerous than in other places.”116 Three years before 
the founding of the Earthquake Commission, in 1876, a weak earthquake 
had piqued the interest of the Neuchâtelois. At the local scientific society, 
the event was described as an Einsturzbeben, caused by the collapse of un-
derground caves as water seeped into them. A local geologist had deemed it 
an “essentially Jurassic phenomenon.”117 After three decades of nationwide 
earthquake observation, however, scientists recognized Neuchâtel to be part 
of a tectonically active area.118 They reinterpreted “Jurassic” quakes as tec-
tonic in origin, the consequence of a planetary process of contraction.
As they developed a picture of global tectonics, commission members 
looked to correlate Swiss earthquakes with reports from abroad. The push 
for global narratives was evident in the Swiss response to the Messina earth-
quake of 1908—the most deadly in European history, claiming over sixty 
thousand lives. Across central Europe, the disaster drew sympathy and aid; 

The Tongues of Seismology / 99
it seemed that nature had undermined Europe’s warmongers. Sensational-
istic reports appeared in Swiss newspapers, describing crowds gone mad in 
southern Italy.119 In the Jura, meanwhile, many observers reported tremors 
coinciding with the Italian catastrophe. Schardt framed these reports as evi-
dence of “closely related movements” across the planet. “We are struck by 
the impression that we are in the presence of closely related movements, of 
which some are, by a kind of triggering effect, the consequences of others; 
as a strong barometric low can be followed by a light shaking of the ground. 
This is how we must consider the barely perceptible seismic phenomena 
that were observed in our region, while neighboring countries and those be-
tween us and the great center of the quake were not perceptibly affected.”120 
Nonetheless, the observers themselves seemed unsure about the bearing of 
these observations on events in Italy. None but Madame Bel-Perrin men-
tioned the victims. One recalled thinking, “If Switzerland were in Italy, one 
would say that this is an earthquake.”121
Even when scientists’ narratives diverged from the perspectives of lay 
observers, they carried crucial traces of this dialogue. Consider the case 
of the 1885 earthquake in Bern, meticulously observed by the volunteers 
Gempeler and Ischer. Gempeler’s experience of the shaking convinced him 
that this was an Einsturzbeben: “for the impression of this writer was none 
other than that under his feet a rockslide must be taking place.” At first, 
commission director Forster agreed that this was indeed an Einsturzbeben. 
Then, like a detective inspecting his clues, he arranged and rearranged the 
felt reports. Epiphany struck in the “moment, in which the compilation of 
the times of impact . . . lay before me.” It appeared that the earthquake had 
been felt nearly simultaneously throughout the affected region, with reports 
clustering along a long axis—a line that corresponded to the area struck by 
another quake four years earlier. Before drawing a conclusion, however, 
Forster introduced a skeptical interlocutor: “But the enormously strong ef-
fects in Zweisimmen? and the hundreds of shocks that followed there daily 
for months on the smallest area? was this then not an Einsturzbeben?” This 
voice breaking into his train of thought was apparently none other than that 
of Gempeler and his neighbors, insisting, in Forster’s imagination, on the 
legitimacy of their observations and even of their interpretations. Forster 
continued: “Certainly! but . . ..” With that “but” he went on to reconcile the 
lay and expert points of view. Namely, a tectonic earthquake could have 
produced, as a secondary effect, an Einsturzbeben in the Bernese village of 
Zweisimmen. The horizon of the narrative had expanded, but the local story 
survived.122

100 / Chapter Four
Conclusion
By the second decade of the twentieth century, international seismologists 
were announcing the arrival of the “new” seismology, ushered in by the 
latest seismographs. The Swiss, by contrast, insisted that instruments could 
never furnish complete knowledge of an earthquake. As the director of the 
Swiss earthquake service argued in 1914, “In and of themselves instruments 
do not give the complete picture of earthquakes as a natural phenomenon.” 
By then, the observational network, human and instrumental, had out-
grown the capacities of the Swiss Natural Scientific Society. Between 1912 
and 1914, it was transferred to the federal meteorological institute in Zurich, 
but every effort was made to maintain continuity—to ensure, in particular, 
“that also in the future full attention will be paid to the macroseismic data, 
for which the original instructions and questionnaires of the Earthquake 
Commission today still contain all essential points of view and guidelines.” 
Scientists would still need to recognize and accommodate the uncertainty 
and cultural specificity of human observations: “It must be remembered 
that the earthquake map, which must be constructed essentially according 
to individual perceptions, will display an anthropogenic character—that is, 
it is in many respects a representation of the population density and of the 
culture of the inhabitants. . . . Therefore it is best in the descriptions to re-
place certainty and confidence with possibility and probability.”123 A decade 
later, the next director of the earthquake service was still arguing the same 
point: “One must still begin with the careful collection and analysis of the 
observations that have been made directly by man. . . . They will need to be 
tended to in the future as well.”124
Far from disqualifying human observations, the development of seis-
mography revealed new layers of meaning. It allowed Swiss researchers to 
trace “parallels between the results of the instruments and those of the ob-
servers,” above all in the telltale sequence of longitudinal and transverse 
waves. Close comparison of observers’ descriptions and seismographic 
curves showed “that in the subjective observations these facts have always 
found expression. It seems that relatively close to the area of greatest shak-
ing in our land both waves are often felt as temporally separated and dis-
tinct shocks.” If, as experience suggested, observers could indeed count the 
seconds between the arrival of the “vertical” and the “horizontal” shocks, 
this figure could be used to calculate the depth of the focus. “As evidence for 
the manner in which the different types of wave in the epicentral region are 
actually perceived by observers at rest, I quote deliberately a very old obser-
vation, that of Pastor Studer during the great Visp earthquake: he writes: ‘I 

The Tongues of Seismology / 101
was clearly able to perceive that the first shocks were vertical, then however 
with an indescribable movement they became horizontal.’”125
The Swiss Commission thus set itself the task of bringing “the existing 
macroseismic and the new microseismic observations into the closest pos-
sible relationship, to exploit them as reciprocally as possible.” Using a meta-
phor of “interpreting” or “translating” between instruments and humans, 
Swiss scientists pursued the question of “how in general objective and sub-
jective conclusions can be translated [umgedeutet] into one another.” The 
metaphor of translation is revealing for what it did not imply: it was not a 
matter of repackaging scientific conclusions for public consumption. In-
stead, in this nineteenth-century central European context, translation could 
refer to a writer’s capacity to mediate the relationship of man to nature in 
an urbanizing world. As literary scholars note, this was the goal of the Hei­
matkünstler, the “homeland artist”: to make a “native literature” accessible to 
a population removed from the land. As a form of Landeskunde, nineteenth- 
century seismology likewise confronted this need for mediation.126 Earth-
quake observing provided one key for translating between urban experi-
ences of the built environment and perceptions of elemental nature. What 
might sound like furniture being rearranged in an upstairs apartment could 
be recognized as a seismic tremor; a heavy wagon on pavement became 
seismic thunder. As Schardt’s correspondence confirms, this particular skill 
of translation was highly valued by the late nineteenth-century inhabitants 
of a small European city like Neuchâtel. It offered them a sense of connec-
tion: to the surrounding countryside, to the earth and its raw elements, to 
the cosmos, and even to each other.


five
Geographies of Hazard
Among the first desires which seize a visitor in an earthquake country, is to experi-
ence a shaking.
—John Milne1
Nineteenth-century Europeans had a tendency to think of earthquakes as a 
“tropical” phenomenon, characteristic of savage realms, where nature was 
said to operate on a grander scale.2 When the “scientific” historian Henry 
Thomas Buckle set out to explain England’s rise to the pinnacle of civiliza-
tion, he divided the influences of nature into two classes: those conditions 
that appealed to rational understanding, and those that instead provoked 
the “imagination.” Foremost among the latter were earthquakes and volca-
noes, which thwarted every impulse to deduce the laws of nature:
Of those physical events which increase the insecurity of Man, earthquakes 
are certainly among the most striking, in regard to the loss of life which they 
cause, as also in regard to their sudden and unexpected occurrence. . . . The 
terror which they inspire, excites the imagination even to a painful extent, 
and, overbalancing the judgment, predisposes men to superstitious fancies. 
And what is highly curious, is, that repetition, so far from blunting such feelings, 
strengthens them. . . . The mind is thus constantly thrown into a timid and 
anxious state; and men witnessing the most serious dangers, which they can 
neither avoid nor understand, become impressed with a conviction of their 
own inability, and of the poverty of their own resources. In exactly the same 
proportion, the imagination is aroused, and a belief in supernatural interfer-
ence actively encouraged. Human power failing, superhuman power is called 

104 / Chapter Five
in; the mysterious and the invisible are believed to be present; and there grow 
up among the people those feelings of awe, and of helplessness, on which all 
superstition is based, and without which no superstition can exist.3
Many of Buckle’s contemporaries agreed that the longer one lived in a seis-
mic zone, “the less one can withstand the agitation that takes hold of men 
and animals in an earthquake.”4 Buckle’s theory divided the earth into na-
tions destined for science and prosperity, and nations vulnerable to envi-
ronmental hazard—a dichotomy still visible in the interventionist ethos 
of twentieth-century scientific internationalism.5 By combining the stan­
dardized measurement of hazard with the comparative analysis of disaster 
response, nineteenth-century seismology had an unusual potential to com-
plicate this deterministic geography of security and risk.
Seismic Tourism
In the course of the nineteenth century, a peculiar desire spread among 
Europeans: the wish to feel an earthquake. It was not unusual for a natural-
ist to refer to “a good, hearty shock of earthquake” or “a beautiful earth-
quake.”6 According to the American geologist Grove Karl Gilbert, “It is the 
natural and legitimate ambition of a properly constituted geologist to see 
a glacier, witness an eruption and feel an earthquake. The glacier is always 
ready, awaiting his visit; the eruption has a course to run, and alacrity only is 
needed to catch its more important phases; but the earthquake, unheralded 
and brief, may elude him through his entire lifetime.”7 The British naturalist 
Alfred Russell Wallace recalled his delight at first feeling an earthquake on 
Ternate: awakening in a shaking bed, “I said to myself, ‘Why, it’s an earth-
quake,’ and lay still in the pleasing expectation of another shock.”8 And 
when William James left Boston for Stanford in 1905, a friend bade him 
farewell with the wish that he might experience “a touch of earthquake.”9
Such seismic tourism was arguably part of what Aaron Sachs describes 
as a nineteenth-century quest for “extreme environments,” from the Arctic 
to the Rockies, which attracted “travelers who embraced disorientation.” 
Clarence King, torn between the life of a professional geologist and that of 
a romantic mountaineer, fell in love with the “unstable” landscape of the 
Sierra Nevada, “in every state of uncertain equilibrium.” For King, vertigo 
was a state to be savored: “I found it extremest pleasure to lie there alone 
on the dizzy brink.”10 For those who dreamed of a life like King’s, the New 
York Times reported in 1881 on the cost of a trip from San Francisco to the 
“Doomed town of Hilo, Hawaii,” or “What it costs to see a volcano.”11 No 

Geographies of Hazard / 105
traveler could have relished an earthquake more than John Muir, whose  
admiration for “wild” nature led him to found the Sierra Club in 1892. 
Muir’s day came in the Yosemite Valley in 1872: “The shocks were so violent 
and varied, and succeeded one another so closely, one had to balance in 
walking as if on the deck of a ship among the waves, and it seemed impos-
sible the high cliffs should escape being shattered.” In the moment after the 
first tremor Muir’s senses were preternaturally alert. He heard a “stupendous 
roaring rock-storm” followed by the “chafing, grating against one another, 
groaning, and whispering” of the settling rocks. He smelled “the odor of 
crushed Douglas Spruces, from a grove that had been mowed down and 
mashed like weeds.” And he rode out the aftershocks, which “made the 
cliffs and domes tremble like jelly.” When the ground stilled, Muir observed 
the reactions of the valley’s inhabitants: “I found the Indians in the mid-
dle of the valley, terribly frightened, of course, fearing the angry spirits of 
the rocks were trying to kill them. The few whites wintering in the valley 
were assembled in front of the old Hutchings Hotel comparing notes and 
meditating flight to steadier ground, seemingly as sorely frightened as the 
Indians. It is always interesting to see people in dead earnest, from whatever 
cause, and earthquakes make everybody earnest.” Muir observed the terror 
of his neighbors with detachment. He tried and failed to console two of his 
companions, who “fled to the lowlands.” To Muir, they seemed to fail to 
grasp the true meaning of the experience: “Storms of every sort, torrents, 
earthquakes, cataclysms, ‘convulsions of nature,’ etc., however mysterious 
and lawless at first sight they may seem, are only harmonious notes in the 
song of creation, varied expressions of God’s love.”12
It was not only men who were drawn to seismic adventure. A New York 
Times headline of 1872 announced “A Lady’s Earthquake Experience.” What 
followed was a letter from an American woman traveling in Peru, whose 
brush with an earthquake had left her with “cold, clammy hands” and re-
ligious doubts; her husband “did not comprehend it.” “I wish Mrs. L could 
experience one,” the writer commented, “as she is so anxious to do so. I 
think one experience would satisfy her.”13 The novelist Gertrude Atherton 
offered similar advice in the wake of the San Francisco earthquake of 1906: 
“I can suggest no better ‘cure’ for those that live where nature has practically 
forgotten them and civilization has become as great a vice as too much vir-
tue, in whom a narrow and prosperous life has bred pessimism and other 
forms of degeneracy, stunting the intelligence as well as atrophying the 
emotions, than to spend part of every year in earthquake country.”14 Antici-
pation ran so high that some travelers could not hide their disappointment 
when confronted with the real thing. Mrs. Campbell Dauncey, the wife of 

106 / Chapter Five
a British diplomat in the Philippines, felt her first “slight earthquake” in 
Manila in 1905: “It was my first experience of that form of excitement, and I 
am sure that I don’t want another. . . . I don’t think I like earthquakes.” Still, 
she was “sorry now that I did not go on to the balcony” when her husband 
“invited” her to “see the street moving.”15
Nineteenth-century travelers reported on earthquakes in all their facets. 
They interviewed native witnesses, described geological, atmospheric, archi-
tectural, and social conditions, and collected archival documents and oral 
traditions. To guide them, scientists furnished travelers with instructions for 
the observation of earthquakes. The first edition of the British Admiralty’s 
Manual of Scientific Enquiry (1851) included an extensive chapter by Rob-
ert Mallet, still several years from his architectural method of earthquake 
survey. The manual was addressed to an educated elite, an audience that 
might be expected to follow Mallet’s instructions for watching a second 
hand during an upheaval or building a seismoscope out of a barometer. 
Mallet instructed travelers to seek out and question local residents: “The 
opinions of old observers as to changes of climate or season; the occur-
rence of pestilences, failure of crops, &c., in relation to earthquakes, while 
they must be received with caution, should not be disregarded.” Attention 
should likewise be paid to local “records or trustworthy traditions in vol-
canic countries or those neighbouring to them, as to the state of activity or 
repose of those vents for a long period prior to and during the quake.”16 
A German counterpart to the Admiralty’s manual was published in 1875 
under the title Introduction to Scientific Observation for Travelers. The chapter 
on earthquakes was authored by Karl von Seebach, a Göttingen geologist 
who had studied the volcanoes of the Greek isles and Central America. Like 
Mallet, Seebach encouraged travelers to collect information on a wide vari-
ety of phenomena possibly associated with earthquakes, including weather 
events, geological changes, and animal behavior. He urged them to dig up 
records of past temblors in local archives, municipal and parish registers, 
and family chronicles.17 In these ways, between the 1850s and 1880s, Euro-
peans were charting worldwide seismic hazard as a Humboldtian project: 
eclectic, holistic, and cooperative.18
Humboldt at Cumana
The Victorian fascination with earthquakes reflected in part the place of 
the Lisbon tragedy of 1755 in nineteenth-century accounts of European in-
tellectual history. Like many children of the Enlightenment, the poet and 

Geographies of Hazard / 107
naturalist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe credited the Lisbon disaster with 
his boyhood loss of faith. Doubts about the veracity of Goethe’s account do 
not detract from its influence.19 In the nineteenth century, the Lisbon earth-
quake became a cultural shorthand for initiation into a skeptical, rational, 
and self-consciously modern search for natural causes. In an age fond of 
likening human history to a progression from infancy to maturity, Lisbon 
figured as the coming of age of the European mind.20
If earthquakes became virtually a rite of passage for Victorian naturalists, 
it was thanks largely to the seismic reflections of Alexander von Humboldt. 
Humboldt was born in 1769 in Berlin, the cosmopolitan capital of the rap-
idly expanding kingdom of Prussia. Humboldt matured in an age intent on 
exploiting the natural and human “resources” of the New World. Though he 
served European empires, he managed to retain a critical distance from their 
goals. Humboldt became the nineteenth century’s most celebrated model 
of the scientific traveler. He embodied the romance, heroism, and freedom 
from social convention that seemed to await explorers in the name of sci-
ence. He traveled in search of a “general physics of the earth.” This meant 
tracing the most varied phenomena across the planet’s surface—the charac-
teristics of the atmosphere, the elevations of mountains, the distribution of 
plant species—in search of patterns and interconnections. Humboldt dem-
onstrated how physical and organic nature could be studied together, region 
by region, landscape by landscape—comparing, say, deserts and grasslands, 
alpine lakes and tropical lakes. Against the nineteenth-century trend toward 
scientific specialization, this was an approach that united meteorological, 
geological, botanical, zoological, and even anthropological perspectives. 
Natural conditions posed the constraints within which cultures developed; 
cultural tendencies in turn shaped the uses and perceptions of nature.21
Humboldt felt his first earthquake in Cumana, Venezuela, in Novem-
ber 1799, two years after an earthquake there had killed approximately six-
teen thousand people. His account appeared in his Personal Narrative of the 
South American voyage, which was required reading for aspiring nineteenth- 
century naturalists. (Charles Darwin, for instance, copied out long passages 
from it to carry with him on the Beagle.) It begins with Humboldt and his 
companion Aimé Bonpland crossing a desolate beach one evening, when 
out of nowhere appeared “a tall man, the colour of a mulatto, and naked to 
the waist,” brandishing a large stick. Humboldt ducked his blow, but Bon-
pland was struck on the head, hard enough to leave him with a fever and 
dizzy spells. The man then pulled a knife, and the travelers “would surely 
have been wounded if some Basque merchants taking the fresh air on the 

108 / Chapter Five
beach had not come to our aid.” Despite their “accident,” Humboldt rose at 
five the next morning to observe a partial solar eclipse, congratulating him-
self on the clear skies. In the days before and after the eclipse, Humboldt 
noted “strange atmospheric phenomena.” The night sky was thickly veiled in 
a “reddish mist,” “at night the heat was stifling yet the thermometer did not 
rise beyond 26°C.” “The air was sweltering hot, and the dusty, dry ground 
started cracking everywhere.” Then, one week after the eclipse, “around two 
in the afternoon, extraordinarily thick black clouds covered the tall Brigan-
tin and Tataraual mountains, and then reached the zenith. At about four it 
began to thunder way above us without rumbling, making a cracking noise, 
which often suddenly stopped. At the moment that the greatest electrical 
discharge was produced, twelve minutes past four, we felt two successive 
seismic shocks, fifteen seconds from each other. Everybody ran out into the 
street screaming.” Humboldt’s account is cool and precise. “Bonpland, who 
was examining some plants, leaning over a table, was almost thrown to the 
floor, and I felt the shock very clearly in spite of being in my hammock. The 
direction of the earthquake was from north to south, rare in Cumana.” He 
must have gathered reports from the locals, for he added that “some slaves 
drawing water from a well, some 18 to 20 feet deep next to the Manzanares 
river, heard a noise comparable to artillery fire, which seemed to rise up out 
of the well.” He continued with a vivid description of the sunset following 
the quake, the sun’s disk looking “incredibly swollen,” spreading “clusters 
of rays coloured like the rainbow.”22
Then Humboldt’s register shifted, as he looked inward to assess the psy-
chological impact of the Cumana earthquake. It “made a great impression 
on me,” he explained: “It is not so much a fear of danger as of the novelty 
of the sensation that strikes one so vividly when an earthquake is felt for 
the first time. When shocks from an earthquake are felt, and the earth we 
think of as so stable shakes on its foundations, one second is long enough 
to destroy long-held illusions. It is like waking painfully from a dream. We 
think we have been tricked by nature’s seeming stability; we listen out for 
the smallest noise; for the first time we mistrust the very ground we walk 
on.”23 These often quoted lines seem to allude to the place of the Lisbon 
earthquake in European intellectual history. If earthquakes have the power 
to destroy “long-held illusions,” Humboldt suggests, this is in part because 
they produce a visceral transformation. It is not merely religion that comes 
to seem suspect in their wake, but “the very ground we walk on.” The imme-
diate result is a heightened attention to the natural world, to the “smallest 
noise.” This scientific mindset is not a consequence of deliberate reflection 
on the catastrophe; it is an immediate reorientation of the body’s relation-

Geographies of Hazard / 109
ship to its environment. In this new state of alertness, Humboldt and his 
companions observed a meteor shower the following night, a phenomenon 
that he and the inhabitants of Cumana speculated might be related to the 
temblor. The earthquake thus primed Humboldt for empirical science—
not through conscious reflection on its causes and effects, but by plung-
ing him quite literally into a world in which nothing could be taken for  
granted.
The allegorical quality of Humboldt’s account further depended on latent 
metaphors. Believing that earthquakes were the effect of subterranean uplift, 
Humboldt worked with an implicit analogy between the earthquake as a 
force of planetary formation (Erdbildung) and as a force shaping the human 
mind (the humanist concept of Bildung). In this respect, Humboldt’s earth-
quake narrative reimagined a lesson of classical philosophy. Plato had con-
ceived of vertigo as a formative experience for philosophers. In the “dizzy” 
confusion over the significance of perceptual judgments lay the state of mind 
that was “the beginning of philosophy.” As recent scholars have noted, echoes  
of this position can be found from Descartes to the romantics.24 In the nine-
teenth century, though, the earthquake became more than a metaphor for 
knowledge making; it became a natural laboratory.
Humboldt’s note therefore came with an important coda: “if these shocks 
are repeated frequently over successive days, then fear quickly disappears. 
On the Peruvian coasts we got as used to the earth tremors as sailors do to 
rough waves.”25 Humboldt made this point twice for emphasis: “I would 
never have thought then that, after a long stay in Quito and on the Peruvian 
coast, I would get as used to these often violent ground movements as in 
Europe we get used to thunder. . . . The casualness of the inhabitants, who 
know that their city has not been destroyed in three centuries, easily com-
municates itself to the most frightened traveler.”26 In other words, earth-
quake fears were by no means crippling. Like the natives, a visitor could 
adjust to the unstable terrain. In this sense, Humboldt’s story of the Cu-
mana earthquake and its aftermath encapsulated his larger ambitions for 
his scientific voyage to the New World. As Michael Dettelbach has argued, 
Humboldt styled himself as a radical empiricist. He cast himself as an exqui-
sitely sensitive measuring instrument for the registration of a dynamic in-
terplay of natural forces. Politically as well as philosophically, Humboldt’s 
empiricism had radical implications. He aimed at the “cultivation of free 
individuals, a Reason free from the prejudices of theory, theology, or self- 
interest.”27 Since 1789, earthquakes and other natural cataclysms had be-
come common metaphors for political revolutions, and natural cataclysms 
were increasingly perceived as threats to public order. Humboldt’s tribute 

110 / Chapter Five
to the earthquake of 1799 thus had revolutionary potential. No single mo-
ment of his controversial South American journey better expressed his  
liberatory vision than his embrace—in mind and body—of the shaking 
ground of Cumana.28
Humboldt would return to this theme late in life in his magnum opus, 
Cosmos. In keeping with what one commentator calls his “subversive vision 
of science for the people,” Cosmos was meant for the widest possible audi-
ence.29 Humboldt urged his readers to recognize that their own existence 
was implicated in the forces shaping the earth, to “perceive that the destiny 
of mankind is in part dependent on the formation of the external surface 
of the earth.” This was not only a work of popular enlightenment, but also 
an invitation. Humboldt sought contributors to his physical geography far 
beyond Europe’s cultured urban centers. Cosmos was a bid (if perhaps a 
misdirected one) to enlist the “men who live in the fields, the forests and 
the mountains” in his globe-spanning program of precision measurement. 
“The great problem of life is to produce a lot in a little time, and it is certain 
that if methods of measuring with very simple instruments were more wide-
spread among the public, if the attention of men who live in the fields, the 
forests and the mountains were directed more towards the magnitude and 
distances of objects, after so many voyages and investigations pursued in 
the two hemispheres, our geological ideas (the most beautiful, most inter-
esting part of human knowledge) would be advanced threefold.”30 In Hum-
boldt’s vision, natives of every continent would become scientific observers 
and contribute to a truly global science.
In Cosmos Humboldt offered his most extensive and dramatic discussion 
of the mental effects of earthquakes, of “the deep and peculiar impression 
left on the mind by the first earthquake which we experience, even where it 
is not attended by any subterranean noise.” Here he raised the vexed ques-
tion of whether earthquakes affected Europeans differently than inhabitants 
of the New World. He cited the observations of the younger Swiss naturalist 
Johann Jakob Tschudi:
The inhabitant of Lima, who from childhood has frequently witnessed these 
convulsions of nature, is roused from his sleep by the shock, and rushes from 
his apartment with the cry of “Misericordia!” The foreigner from the north 
of Europe, who knows nothing of earthquakes but by description, waits with 
impatience to feel the movement of the earth, and longs to hear with his own 
ear the subterranean sounds which he has hitherto considered fabulous. With 
levity he treats the apprehension of a coming convulsion, and laughs at the 

Geographies of Hazard / 111
fears of the natives: but, as soon as his wish is gratified, he is terror-stricken, 
and is involuntarily prompted to seek safety in flight.
Tschudi’s description exposed European hubris in a manner perhaps inspired 
by Humboldt himself. But Humboldt could not agree with it completely:
This impression is not, in my opinion, the result of a recollection of those 
fearful pictures of devastation presented to our imaginations by the historical 
narratives of the past, but is rather due to the sudden revelation of the delusive 
nature of the inherent faith by which we had clung to a belief in the immobility of 
the solid parts of the earth. We are accustomed from early childhood to draw 
a contrast between the mobility of water and the immobility of the soil on 
which we tread; and this feeling is confirmed by the evidence of our senses. 
When, therefore, we suddenly feel the ground move beneath us, a mysterious 
and natural force, with which we are previously unacquainted, is revealed to 
us as an active disturbance of stability. A moment destroys the illusion of a 
whole life; our deceptive faith in the repose of nature vanishes, and we feel 
transported, as it were, into a realm of unknown destructive forces. Every 
sound—the faintest motion in the air—arrests our attention, and we no 
longer trust the ground on which we stand. Animals, especially dogs and 
swine, participate in the same anxious disquietude; and even the crocodiles of 
the Orinoco, which are at other times as dumb as our little lizards, leave the 
trembling bed of the river, and run with loud cries into the adjacent forests.
To man the earthquake conveys an idea of some universal and unlimited 
danger. We may flee from the crater of a volcano in active eruption, or from 
the dwelling whose destruction is threatened by the approach of the lava 
stream; but in an earthquake, direct our flight whithersoever we will, we still 
feel as if we trod upon the very focus of destruction. This condition of the 
mind is not of long duration, although it takes its origin in the deepest re-
cesses of our nature; and when a series of faint shocks succeed one another, 
the inhabitants of the country soon lose every trace of fear.31
Humboldt himself had experienced this transformation, becoming, by the 
end of his five-year journey through the Americas, a veritable earthquake afi-
cionado. With greater familiarity came greater admiration for the resilience 
of the native South Americans in the face of the “incredible instability of 
nature.”32 In his Personal Narrative, he recalled being awed by the “extraor-
dinary” “presence of mind” of a native woman during an earthquake. When 
asked how she remained so calm, she “answered with great simplicity”: “I 

112 / Chapter Five
had been told in my infancy, if the earthquake surprise you in a house, 
place yourself under a doorway that communicates from one apartment to 
another; if you be in the open air, and feel the ground opening beneath you, 
extend both your arms, and try to support yourself on the edge of the crev-
ice.” Humboldt reflected: “Thus in savage regions, or in countries exposed 
to frequent convulsions, man is prepared to struggle with the beasts of the 
forest, to deliver himself from the jaws of the crocodile, and to escape from 
the conflict of the elements.”33 Here was evidence of a vast human capacity 
for environmental adaptation rather than control. As George Eliot’s narrator 
puts it in Middlemarch, inhabitants of earthquake countries seem to possess 
the wisdom that comes of long experience of crisis: “We are told that the 
oldest inhabitants in Peru do not cease to be agitated by the earthquakes, 
but they probably see beyond each shock, and reflect that there are plenty 
more to come.”34
Humboldt’s Reverberations
Humboldt helped establish earthquakes as a phenomenon inviting a syn-
thetic study of the physical, zoological, and human aspects of a region. As 
one anthropologist would remark in 1909, earthquakes could demonstrate 
“how closely related geography, ethnography, and linguistics are.”35 Twenty 
years later, a geographer would lament the more recent tendency to consider 
the physical and human aspects of earthquakes separately. He reminded his 
readers that earthquakes could start avalanches and forest fires, create the 
conditions for epidemics, and influence every aspect of a society from its 
religious views to its economy.36 Humboldt also called attention to the dig-
nity and humility with which some non-Europeans faced seismic disasters. 
In this spirit, Edward Tylor—perhaps the most influential British anthropol-
ogist of the nineteenth century—wrote admiringly of the earthquake myths 
of “primitive” peoples. Indeed, Tylor’s belief in an evolutionary hierarchy 
of cultures precluded any clear divide between scientific and mythical ex-
planations. In his view, anthropomorphic myths were a form of poetry that 
served to explain the natural world to those who could not understand the 
“technical language” of science. He lamented that “the growth of myth has 
been checked by science, it is dying of weights and measures, of proportions 
and specimens.” It was the poet’s task to relate “the being and movement 
of the world to such personal life as his hearers feel within themselves.”37 
Inspired by Tylor’s work, the Austrian anthropologist Richard Lasch took 
up a comparative study of practices meant to ward off seismic disturbances. 

Geographies of Hazard / 113
Many cultures, it seems, responded to earthquakes by crying out a variant 
of “We’re still here!” They intended to “alert the beings who have produced 
the earthquake . . . and who are not by nature hostile to men, that men are 
still on the earth, so that they will put an end to their earth-shaking move-
ments.” They were calling out not in anger, but as a plea for mercy. Like  
Tylor, Lasch observed that earthquake myths were a form of causal reason-
ing that could not be neatly distinguished from science. In the Niassa prov-
ince of southeastern Africa, for instance, “wise men” attributed earthquakes 
to the reverberations caused by a star crashing into the ocean. Friedrich 
Ratzel had deemed this a sign of “remarkable progress towards a rational 
perspective.”38 As Lasch put it, earthquakes made it difficult for anthropolo-
gists to “differentiate between scientific theory and myth.”39
Humboldt thus provided a template for the earthquake narratives of 
later scientific travelers. When Charles Darwin felt his first temblor at Con-
cepción, Chile, in 1835, he had been primed by his readings of Humboldt 
and Tschudi. Paul White has shown that Darwin successively revised his 
impressions of the earthquake in order to transform the emotion of fear 
into an acceptable and productive scientific attitude. By viewing the earth-
quake through the romantic lens of the sublime, he could transform terror 
and sympathy into intellectual pleasure and detached scientific interest.40 
Darwin’s published account of his experience at Concepción echoed Hum-
boldt: “A bad earthquake at once destroys the oldest associations: the world, 
the very emblem of all that is solid, has moved beneath our feet like a crust 
over a fluid; one second of time has conveyed to the mind a strange idea 
of insecurity, which hours of reflection would never have created.”41 Like 
Humboldt, Darwin framed the earthquake survivor’s doubts as a visceral re-
action, rather than the result of intellectual “reflection.” Humboldt’s model 
would also have led Darwin to expect a heightening of perception in the 
earthquake’s aftermath—and that is indeed what he experienced. Surveying 
the Chilean coast, Darwin noted that the shaking had apparently produced 
a permanent elevation of the land. Here was evidence that, in his own day, 
the earth’s surface was subject to lasting changes, not just temporary fluc-
tuations. Those dry inches of coastline became another piece in the great 
puzzle of evolution.42
Humboldt’s earthquake narrative was philosophically and politically 
subversive. By contrasting the undue panic of Europeans with the sobriety 
of New World natives, it inverted the hierarchies of colonizer and colo-
nized, scientific observer and savage. It further celebrated nature’s own  
“revolutionary” force, prescribing a dose of earthquake to free Europeans 

114 / Chapter Five
from the dead weight of tradition and initiate them into the radical empiri-
cism of the Humboldtian traveler. 
The Uneasy Earth
Until the Victorian Era, earthquakes had only been cataloged on a regional 
basis. These were nonetheless painstaking feats, and one cataloger even 
went blind in the process.43 The work of soliciting observations required 
the leisure to maintain a wide correspondence network and tended to be a 
gentleman’s pursuit. The first global catalog of earthquakes was assembled 
by Karl von Hoff, a high-ranking official of the Duchy of Gotha in the Na-
poleonic Era, and published in 1840, three years after his death. It included 
2,225 earthquakes, from 1606 BCE (the eruption of Mount Sinai) to 1805.44 
Yet the most famous earthquake catalog of the nineteenth century was the 
work of the French mathematician Alexis Perrey, who was denied the ad-
vantages of wealth and birth that would have eased his labors. The son of 
a forest ranger, Perrey gave up plans for the priesthood in favor of a series 
of modest academic posts, but he maintained monastic work habits. He 
began to compile annual lists of global earthquakes in 1843; by 1850 he 
was recording more than five hundred events per year. As Charles Davison 
noted in his 1927 history of seismology, “Perrey’s devotion to science was 
so intense that his health began to suffer from the strain.”45 Perrey retired 
to Brittany in 1867 in order to recover, but he maintained his network and 
continued to publish his lists each year.
Dismissing these earlier efforts, the British engineer Robert Mallet 
claimed for himself the distinction of having made “the first attempt to 
complete a catalogue that shall embrace all recorded earthquakes.” Not-
ing the sharp increase in the number of earthquakes recorded since 1700, 
Mallet commended “the advance of human enterprise, travel, and obser-
vation.”46 Indeed, Mallet was quick to assume that his work represented 
another victory in the British Empire’s scientific conquest of the globe—“of 
the rise, progress, and extension of human knowledge and observational 
energy, and also of the multiplication and migrations of the human fam-
ily and its progress in maritime power.”47 What was indeed unprecedented 
was the scale of his research into original historical sources. In all, he listed 
6,831 earthquakes between 1606 BCE and 1842 (up to the beginning of 
Perrey’s annual lists). His 1858 seismic map of the world was “more than 
a picture”; it was a faithful depiction of the “most formidable” seismic re-
gions of the earth.48 Mallet began by grouping all known earthquakes into 
three classes, “great,” “mean,” or “minor,” which he matched to three dif-

Geographies of Hazard / 115
ferent shades of watercolor. In principle, regions would vary in shade ac-
cording to both the relative frequency and intensity of past earthquakes. In 
very few cases was Mallet able to determine the area of shaking according 
to historical accounts; otherwise, he made his best guess, based on “the 
physical, geological or other conditions of each area, known to modify the 
distant propagation of shock.”49 Sparsely populated areas, even regions of 
Europe like the Carpathian Mountains, were likely to be more seismically 
active than the map could indicate. As Josiah Whitney soon pointed out, 
Mallet improbably depicted the eastern half of the United States as more 
seismically active than its western half! Mallet’s confidence reflected the dis-
tortions of an imperial lens, but his catalog served seismology well. Mallet 
judged that he had completed once and for all the task of a global historical 
earthquake catalog, and in 1927 Charles Davison agreed with him: “Mallet 
may have erred in regarding his catalogue as having no forerunners. There 
can be little doubt, however, that it is the last that will ever be published 
on so extensive a scale.”50 In fact, the catalogs of Mallet and Perrey remain a 
standard reference for historical seismologists today.
Mapping the Primitive Mind
Who knows how much that is strange and bizarre in Japanese art and life may be 
due to the constant appalling effect on the mind of these mysterious phenomena 
of nature?51
—Times (London), 1885
Victorian assumptions about the environmental determinants of civiliza-
tion and barbarism sat uncomfortably with scientists’ experiences on the 
ground in the colonial world. Seismology’s engagement with native testi-
mony and folklore in Asia and Latin America raised provocative questions 
about the relationship between science and myth. Among the products of 
the long seismological career of Count Fernand Jean Baptiste Marie Bernard 
de Montessus de Ballore (1851–1923) was the posthumously published 
Seismic and Volcanic Ethnography. Montessus was a captain in the French 
army, trained at the elite École Polytechnique, and a member of the mis-
sionary Society of Saint Vincent de Paul. In 1881 he led a mission to El Sal-
vador, which looked to France as a model for its military. Montessus was to 
provide artillery training to native troops; he played an active role four years 
later in El Salvador’s war with Guatemala. In the meantime, he developed 
a fascination with the country’s violent earthquakes and volcanoes, which 

116 / Chapter Five
he pursued both in libraries and across the Central American landscape 
from Tehuantepec to Panama.52 In the course of his research in Latin Amer-
ica and his correspondence with naturalists around the world, Montessus  
gathered a vast collection of popular ideas about earthquakes—the basis of 
the ethnography published, with his brother’s oversight, after his death. At 
face value, Montessus’s collection of seismic myths was an attempt to dis-
credit the sciences travesties (pseudosciences) and thus “extirpate” the residue 
of the savage mind from modern science. Theories linking earthquakes to 
weather, for example, were said to be the result of “folklore indefinitely sur-
viving in science.” “There exists in seismology a series of opinions, or even 
of theories, that the efforts of the modern science of earthquakes has not yet 
succeeded in extirpating from the preoccupations of scholars. . . . Here we 
collide with the extreme difficulty of logically classifying this crowd of inco-
herent beliefs that originate in the depths of the thought of primitive man 
or of the savage, and which, for more highly evolved man, emerge from the 
mythology and religion of each people.”53 Indeed, the value of his anthol-
ogy was said to lie in its demonstration of the enduring “unity of the hu-
man mind.” Moreover, Montessus refused to include one source of legends 
in his ethnography: the Bible. He insisted that its stories did not admit of 
naturalistic explanation. To interpret biblical stories alongside pagan myths 
(as Eduard Suess did in The Face of the Earth) was to fall into an error that de-
rived “either from the non-observance of [science’s] own rules, or from the 
hubris of man to want to explain what is not capable of being explained.”54 
Despite himself, Montessus blurred the lines between European science and 
religion, on one hand, and “savage” views of earthquakes, on the other.
Meanwhile, in Japan, the seismologist John Milne was “compelled to 
wade [through]” traditional Japanese writings on earthquakes (in transla-
tion), as he searched for “facts of scientific importance.”55 Milne, a mining 
engineer, arrived at the Imperial College of Engineering in Tokyo in 1876 
and took up research on earthquakes soon after. He expected to return home  
to Scotland before long, assuming that the Japanese would take over his 
research and seismology’s “foreign element” would “die out.”56 Like many 
Europeans, Milne was uncertain about Japan’s status as a “civilized” nation. 
As Gregory Clancey has shown, seismology and antiseismic engineering of-
fered the Japanese opportunities to surpass European science, and to do 
so on their own terms. Many of the characteristics of nineteenth-century 
seismology—its emphasis on empirical research over theorizing, its reliance 
on untrained observers, its lack of professionalization—made it accessible 
to East Asians at a time when Asia was still perceived as backward in West-
ern eyes.57 Seismology’s ill-defined boundaries allowed both Japanese and 

Geographies of Hazard / 117
Chinese scientists an unusual latitude to define for themselves the mean-
ings and values attached to “traditional” and “modern,” “indigenous” and  
“foreign.”58 In both countries, seismologists melded aspects of folk knowl-
edge (such as the predictive use of animals) with approaches legitimated by 
the international scientific community.
In one of Milne’s earliest studies of stone-age tools, he proposed an un-
usual marker of civilization: “It would seem that the number of relics of 
a barbarous age in any civilized country, will, amongst other conditions, 
very largely depend upon the number of years which separate that age from 
its present civilized condition.”59 Anthropology was thus the counterpoint 
to Milne’s seismology: it allowed him to measure Japan’s proximity to the 
“barbarous,” even as he used seismology to secure the nation’s status as 
“civilized.” Milne began to speculate on the cultural effects of earthquakes 
in 1879, in an anonymous article for the English-language Japan Gazette: 
“Why should we not study the connection between earthquakes and the  
human species? Why do earthquakes produce feelings of nausea and sick­
ness. . . . Is it an effect upon the nerves or what is it,—nature? Further, 
might we not enter upon a broader question and consider what general 
effects have been produced upon the inhabitants of an earthquake country. 
What was the action of the last earthquake upon us? . . . Living under such 
conditions we might perhaps grow reckless; and drinking, gambling and 
other vices might consequently be a characteristic of the residents in Japan. 
Perhaps imbecility might become prevalent.” At this time, the only author-
ity to cite on this topic was Buckle. Yet Milne’s anonymous speculations 
differed from Buckle’s in one key way: he used the collective first person. It 
was unclear whether his “we” was limited to the English-speaking readers of 
the Gazette, or whether it included the native Japanese.60
Many of the anecdotes Milne gathered from Japanese historical sources 
found their way into his 1887 address to the Seismological Society of Japan 
on “Earthquake Effects, Emotional and Moral.” Like Buckle, Milne argued 
that capitalism required a natural environment predictable enough to make 
investment in the future a rational act. Seismicity instead raised the specter 
of a “continually approaching and receding death.” In earthquake-prone 
countries, people became “careless of the morrow,” “passions have been 
unbridled and refuge has been sought in mirth and gaiety”; in the place of 
commerce and science, people turned to gambling and to “arts conducive 
to pleasure.” Milne expressed confidence that “the successful or serious na-
tions of the present day, characterized by their enterprise and commerce, 
are not those whose misfortune it has been to fight against unintelligible 
terrorisms of nature. Not only may seismic forces have stimulated the  

118 / Chapter Five
imagi­nation to the detriment of reason, but amongst the weaker members 
of a community, by the creation of feelings of timidity resulting perhaps in 
mental aberrations like madness and imbecility, the seeds have been sown 
for a process of selection, by which the weaker members in the ordinary 
course of racial competition must succumb.”61 Milne went so far as to invert 
Humboldt’s scheme, claiming that “the oftener you feel earthquakes the 
less they are to be disregarded” and the stronger the feeling of “timidity” 
they produce. This “complete demoralization” affected even the victims’ 
descendants. “For years after such a catastrophe every tremble in the earth 
will produce a panic. The experience and fears of fathers are handed down 
to their children and before these terrors have become things of the past, 
a fresh disaster adds fuel to the fire consuming the moral constitution.” As 
evidence of this lasting “demoralization,” Milne cited superstitions and re-
ligious interpretations of disaster, Catholic devotions, and commemorative 
feasts. Like Buckle, Milne made little effort to hide his contempt for Catholi-
cism. Predictably, he closed by citing Darwin on the fate of England were it 
suddenly to fall prey to earthquakes, thus attaching Darwin’s authority to a 
notion of environmental determinism that Darwin never espoused.
Milne’s paper was the launching pad for a wide-ranging discussion at the 
turn of the century on the human effects of earthquakes, as we will see in 
chapter 6. Lost in the subsequent debate, however, was the objection raised 
by a Japanese seismologist in the audience, Seikei Sekiya. Sekiya had just 
taken up a post as the first professor of seismology at the Imperial University 
in Tokyo. The Seismological Society’s journal (edited by Milne) reproduced 
Sekiya’s comment as follows:
Prof. Sekiya said that Prof. Milne had at one time written monographs on 
special earthquakes, next he wrote up on experiments he had made upon arti-
ficial disturbances, then he described instruments for measuring earthquakes, 
and now he takes up the literary portion of the subject; in short he threatens 
to exhaust all that there is for workers in seismology to investigate. Whenever 
large earthquakes have occurred in Japan the mental excitement has been 
great. Relating to the Ansei earthquake of 1855 there are 80 different works, 
some giving observations of scientific value, while others only tell us about 
the terror and misery of the people. One work called Ansei Kenbun Roku 
tells us that at the time of great calamities like the earthquake it describes, the 
hearts of mankind are shown in their true light. It substantiates this by de-
scribing the vices and crimes which were committed at the time of the Ansei 
earthquake as well as the acts of charity and assistance which were offered to 
the sufferers.62

Geographies of Hazard / 119
On the surface, Sekiya seemed to be praising the breadth of Milne’s research, 
and he seemed to agree that earthquakes produced mental “excitement” in 
Japan. Between the lines, however, Sekiya was challenging Milne’s imperi-
alizing approach to both the study of seismology and the Japanese people. 
Sekiya nimbly expanded the meaning of “mental excitement” to include 
“observations of scientific value.” Moreover, he cast Japanese reactions to 
the earthquake in universalist terms—they revealed not Japanese hearts but 
the hearts of mankind. Finally, Sekiya’s conclusion was refreshingly nuanced 
compared to Milne’s: disaster did not produce an inevitable “demoraliza-
tion” and social breakdown, but rather a variety of individual responses.63 
In reply to Sekiya, Milne grew more equivocal: “All great calamities pro-
duced mental effects, and with savage nations these were more permanent 
than with civilized nations. With civilized nations the effect of natural ter-
rorisms die out more rapidly than they do among the uncivilized. Many of 
our present mental peculiarities are undoubtedly the result of a complexity 
of causes, and with the exception of those countries where large earthquakes 
are frequent it is difficult to indicate the results due to earthquakes as dis-
tinguished from those due to other phenomena.” Milne’s own research into 
Japanese vernacular sources had opened a door to Sekiya’s skepticism about 
the typology of “civilized” and “savage.”
The Decline of Seismic Tourism
European men of science of the mid-nineteenth century attempted to 
channel the earthquake enthusiasm of European travelers into a global 
Humboldtian science of disasters. By the 1880s, many spied an alternative 
approach to the globalization of seismology. Already in his 1851 guide to 
seismological observation for travelers, Mallet cautioned against relying on 
human observations. Evidence should, “as far as possible, be circumstan-
tial. Nature rightly questioned never lies; men are prone to exaggerate, at the 
least, where novel and startling events are in question.”64 Mallet’s agenda 
was already clear: he believed that architectural evidence would bear out his 
hypothesis that earthquakes consisted of elastic compression waves.
By the time of the Manual’s fourth edition in 1871, Mallet was prepared 
to dismiss all observations other than those made explicitly in light of his 
theory and on the basis of architectural damage. “Observations undertaken 
without such preliminary knowledge will for the most part be valueless, and 
uninteresting even to the observer.”65 Similarly, the German Instructions for 
Scientific Travelers of 1875 cautioned: “It lies in the nature of the matter that 
the observations of such an unexpectedly occurring phenomenon cannot 

120 / Chapter Five
all be of equal value and equal credibility, since illusions and preconceived 
ideas enter very easily, apart from unintentional inaccuracies, which likewise 
slip in and the source of which can sometimes lie in careless observation 
and sometimes in inadequate description.”66 The traveler should therefore 
assume that earthquake observers would offer “frivolous opinions” and 
“incomplete descriptions.” The residents of earthquake-prone lands were 
especially suspect, since (contra Humboldt) “fear of earthquakes tends to 
grow with the number of shocks experienced.” When the second edition of 
the German handbook appeared a decade later, the situation of seismology 
and of German travelers abroad had changed again. The 1875 edition of the 
German manual had been inspired by the far-flung expeditions to observe 
the transit of Venus of 1874. The edition of 1888 was devoted instead to 
the “colonizing ambitions of Germany.” In the interim, seismology had 
become—according to the editor—an autonomous discipline, relying heav­
ily on instruments and on expert knowledge of local geology. The trav­
eler could contribute little to such studies. Only in “populous and civilized 
lands” could seismological research be undertaken. The editor judged that 
in the first edition, the chapter on earthquakes had “far exceeded the limits 
of an ‘introduction for travelers,’” and in the new version earthquakes were 
relegated to a small section of the chapter on geology.67 Similarly, the 1886 
edition of Richthofen’s Guide for Scientific Travelers dispensed entirely with 
instructions for earthquake observation.68 If, by the turn of the century, sci-
entists were no longer recruiting European travelers abroad as seismological 
researchers, this was in part because they believed they had found a replace-
ment: the instrumental registration of distant tremors.
Earthquake-Watching on Samoa
Samoan legends collected by Europeans in the nineteenth century told of 
Mafuïé, the god of volcanoes and earthquakes. Mafuïé had broken an arm 
in a fight with a young warrior, leaving him only one arm with which to 
shake the earth. A British missionary recounted this story at the second 
meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science in 
1890 and drew a geohistorical lesson: “The testimony of the old natives is 
that the shocks of earthquakes were much more severe in olden times.”69 
Other Samoan myths invoked the god Tangaloa, who cast his fishing line 
into the sea and pulled up an island. In fact, it is not implausible that strong 
earthquakes produced uplift of this sort.70 Many such legends were collected 
during the last two decades of the nineteenth century, as British and Ger-
man colonists began to settle on Samoa. The testimony of Samoans helped 

Geographies of Hazard / 121
Europeans understand the past and present geology of the islands.71 Then, 
in the new century, researchers began to arrive on Samoa in greater num-
bers. They no longer expressed interest in Mafuïé or Tangaloa. Instead, they 
spent most of their time in a coconut grove along the water, where native 
workers were building a set of huts, at great cost and with copious amounts 
of cement. The Europeans expected the Samoans to help operate the deli-
cate instruments arriving by ship. Neither the Samoans nor the scientists 
associated this work with earlier European studies of the islands. In the 
minds of the Europeans, the Samoan geophysical observatory, founded by 
the Göttingen Academy of Sciences, was an institution of “pure learning.” 
It was to be a window onto global physics, one that just happened to lie on 
a tropical island. The Samoans probably saw it as a profitable coconut farm 
(see figure 5.1).72
German geoscientists came to Samoa in search of “world quakes,” 
Weltbeben. They reckoned that the little island would offer a prime view 
of the strong seismic waves arising in the Pacific region. By means of such  
Fig. 5.1.  The seismic hut of the Samoa Observatory, under construction. Inside is a state- 
of-the-art inverted pendulum seismograph, designed by Emil Wiechert. Ergebnisse der  
Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften  
zu Göttingen, vol. 1 (Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1908) (Abhandlungen  
der könglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Mathematisch- 
Physikalische Klasse, Neue Folge 7), plate 5, figure 1.

122 / Chapter Five
world-shaking events, registered in a span of minutes by observatories 
around the world, they hoped to bring into focus a picture of the internal 
structure of the earth. For a landlocked young nation like Germany, a perch 
in the middle of the south Pacific looked like “a pre-arranged experiment” 
for determining “the manner in which the propagation of seismic waves 
is influenced by continents and oceans.”73 What the Germans hadn’t reck-
oned with were all the quakes that were disappointingly unworldly: weak, 
nearby temblors, which might hold clues to local geology but would never 
be registered anywhere else. The seismic records of the Samoa observatory 
are littered with events marked “insignificant nearby quake [unbedeutendes 
Nahbeben].” This was one of the “shortcomings of Samoa from a seismic 
perspective—the abundant, mostly uninteresting nearby quakes.”74 The 
seismographic records required careful pruning to reveal the specimens of 
“world” quakes amid the overgrowth of “nearby” ones. Moreover, a few 
times each year, stronger nearby quakes fully disabled the seismograph, re-
quiring up to two weeks to readjust it.
Not that the scientists ignored these events. They weren’t allowed to ig-
nore them: from the perspective of the colonial government, it was the sci-
entists’ duty to “reassure” the local population about volcanic and seismic 
activity. In the wake of an eruption on a neighboring island, the observatory 
director “now needed to place my quite modest knowledge in the field of 
vulcanology at the service of the official politics of reassurance.”75 Politics 
mitigated against either too much or too little attention to local nature. In 
1906 the observatory’s director claimed to have been “attacked from, to be 
sure, a biased party,” because he had successfully predicted an eruption in 
the Samoan newspaper. He defended his conduct: “At first, as the residents 
of the adjacent villages, blind with fear, wanted to leave their dwellings and 
ceased work on their plantations, and even a few white settlers lost their 
heads, I tried to point out that the volcano was harmless for the moment; 
later, however, as concern and fear diminished with time, and a certain party 
proclaimed the imminent extinction of the volcano, I firmly drew attention 
to the latent danger, and—as the frightful eruption in July 1906 showed—
quite justifiably so.”76 The same director established a service in 1905 to 
collect observations of local seismic events. At one point, the colonial gov-
ernor was enlisted to cull reports from natives as well as Europeans, but 
the effort “remained entirely without results.” A compilation of the reports 
was published every two to four weeks. “What was important to the public 
was the evidence that nearly all sensible earthquakes had their origin far out-
side the Samoan islands.” On German Samoa, colonial scientists attended 
to nearby quakes only in order to mute the “blind fear” of the natives.77

Geographies of Hazard / 123
How did the nineteenth-century quest for a global seismology lead to 
Samoa? What significance did this Pacific island hold for geophysics? Repre-
sentatives of German science on Samoa must have asked themselves similar 
questions every morning when they awoke in a thatch hut, fifteen thou-
sand kilometers from home. There was no ready answer. As one analyst of 
the Samoan seismic records warned, it was all too easy to mistake a local 
phenomenon for a global one, to misattribute a seismograph’s jitter to a 
reported distant quake.78 When a volcano erupted soon after the arrival of 
the observatory’s first director, he simply assumed it was of global import: 
“For in 1902 the vulcanism of the earth had reached previously unknown 
dimensions and now let its fires smoulder on Samoa as well.”79 Geophysical 
observations on Samoa gained global significance by the same process that 
rendered the island’s nearby earthquakes “insignificant.” As we will see, this 
was a move to “purify” seismology by severing it from human bias—and 
human needs.


six
The Moment of Danger
In 1917 an American seismologist casually remarked that the psychological 
effects of earthquakes would form “an interesting thesis subject for some 
graduate student of psychology.”1 In fact, at a time when scientists were de-
vising new means of measuring human emotions in the laboratory,2 earth-
quakes had already drawn the science of fear into the field. The emerging 
disciplines of trauma psychiatry and criminology mined the testimony of 
earthquake victims for clues to managing the human aftermath of disas-
ter. These episodes have been overshadowed in the history of the human 
sciences by military and industrial catastrophes. But natural disasters also 
played a role in shaping a modern understanding of the psyche and its de-
fenses. The industrialized mind still recognized its own vulnerability to the 
natural world.
From Vertigo to Shock
In the late eighteenth century, witnesses to earthquakes were often diag-
nosed with vertigo, a condition of particular interest to eighteenth-century 
physicians and philosophers. As a disorder that did not belong exclusively 
to the mind or body, vertigo spoke to the Enlightenment fascination with 
the relationship between reason and sensibility.3 Vertigo continued to fas-
cinate the romantics because it blurred the distinction between the passive 
and active mind, between sensation and imagination.4 When earthquake 
investigators reported cases of vertigo in this period, they were making a 
diagnosis at once physical and psychological. They did not fret over the 
relative contribution of reality and imagination, as later researchers would. 
They simply accepted that vertigo (and associated symptoms like nausea) 
were typical reactions to tremors, particularly where shaking was too weak 

126 / Chapter Six
to cause visible damage. In the wake of the Calabrian earthquakes of 1783, 
for instance, an Italian physician cited “squeamishness” and “vertigo” as 
among the symptoms of a seismic “influence on the animal economy,” the 
result of an imbalance of electrical fluids and an excited imagination.5 Self-
reports of dizziness and nausea thus became trusted indicators of ground 
motion. Human fear likewise figured in scales of seismic intensity as a crite-
rion of earthquake strength. (This is true of nineteenth-century scales as well 
as those in use today, including the Rossi-Forel [1883], Mercalli [1902], Sie-
berg [1912], Mercalli-Cancani-Sieberg [1932], and European Macroseismic 
Scale [1998].) The psyche, in this sense, was an essential component of the 
human seismograph.
Moreover, the frequency and intensity of earthquakes in a given region 
were understood as important factors in the physical and mental well-being 
of the inhabitants. It was not just that repeated catastrophes might induce 
barbarism, as Buckle suggested. People worried that even mild tremors, if 
common, might be insalubrious. In this respect, they were following the 
ancient belief that health is a property jointly of the body and of the land-
scape it dwells in.6 For instance, after the 1855 earthquake in Visp, Swit-
zerland (see chapter 4), the Zurich physician Conrad Meyer-Ahrens noted 
the variety of symptoms that ground movement could cause. In addition 
to the numbness, nausea, and vertigo reported by witnesses to the Visp  
tremors, he mentioned the “convulsive movements in the muscles, unusual 
movements of fetuses, shivering, heart palpitations, claustrophobia, [and] 
headaches” reported after the Calabrian earthquakes of the 1780s. “Natu-
rally,” he commented, “a portion of these phenomena, like the [miscar-
riages] and suppression of menstruation reported by Mignani as effects of 
this earthquake, were the result of terror and fear.” A portion, but not all; 
some must have been due to the release of toxic subterranean gases, “which 
can be detected by a smell similar to that of wet clothes or rotting hay.” For 
Meyer-Ahrens, the point was that earthquakes produced both direct and 
indirect effects on human health, physical and mental. Some of these ef-
fects could be long lasting, if they arose through “the transformation of the 
earth’s surface, the destruction of vegetation serving animals as food, floods, 
changes in the weather, etc.”7 Earthquakes could thus harm people even in 
the absence of physical injury, by disrupting the complex dependence of 
human health on the environment.
It was only at the close of the nineteenth century that experts began to 
dissociate the mental effects of an earthquake from its environmental and 
physiological impacts. They began to describe the mental condition of earth-
quake survivors in terms of a new concept: traumatic “shock.” The notion of 

The Moment of Danger / 127
shock has become fundamental to a modern understanding of the psyche, 
its defenses and its vulnerabilities. Historians have constructed a history of 
shock centered on industrial and military contexts, tracing the diagnosis 
back to the early days of the railway. Railway travel was typically the middle 
class’s first encounter with industrial technology. Accidents occurred rela-
tively frequently; when they did, some victims complained of ills that were 
similar to hysteria and could not be associated with any visible injury. These 
patients were diagnosed with “railway spine.” At first, this was assumed to 
be a form of fatigue due to the mechanical jolts and tremors that the railway 
carriage inflicted on passengers. By the 1880s, though, this condition was 
increasingly understood as psychic in origin, a form of “traumatic shock.”8 
In the First World War, shock became the principal framework for under-
standing the psychic effects of mechanized violence. Historians have thus 
understood the concept of shock as a product of the military and techno-
logical contexts of industrialization.
Originally, however, shock also described a reaction to nature’s violence. 
Several exemplary early cases were connected to natural disasters. Near-miss 
lightning strikes, for instance, were to blame for several cases of male hyste-
ria treated by the famed Paris psychiatrist Jean-Martin Charcot. Similarly, an 
earthquake that produced moderate tremors in Nice in 1887 was the cause 
of “nervous-pathological disorders.” Charcot treated a witness to this event 
who “was preoccupied by the memory of the earthquake; at home, she was 
haunted by this obsessive idea that nothing is solid and that perhaps the 
ceiling is going to fall on her head.”9 Charcot was quick to associate these 
cases with other instances of “traumatic hysteria.” Crucial in this respect 
was his observation that the hysterical condition could be triggered by a 
wide variety of natural and man-made events. “Whether it is a matter of a 
railway collision, of a nervous shock of any kind with or without trauma, 
earthquake, carriage accident, or on the contrary of an intellectual or genital 
overstimulation; of alcoholism, of saturnism; no matter, the nervous effect 
always remains essentially the same.”10 Charcot was led in this way to his 
fateful conclusion: nervous illness could arise in the absence of a physical 
or even neural injury, from a purely psychic wound.11
Among cases of traumatic shock, earthquakes seemed to produce par-
ticularly intense emotions. An article in a journal cofounded by Charcot 
observed: “There are no accidents that are accompanied by stronger emo-
tions, by more intense fright than those that are due to these great telluric 
disturbances. Even if people have received no wound, not even a knock, 
they seem no less absolutely unbalanced. One would say that the earth-
quake has produced in their brains a disorder analogous to the disorder it 

128 / Chapter Six
produced in their homes.”12 As one of Charcot’s associates noted, hysteria 
sometimes afflicted even those who escaped physically untouched. Even a 
weak tremor could turn normal people into hysterics and “liars.” These con-
clusions were echoed by a Russian psychiatrist’s report on the mental effects 
of an earthquake in a Polish-speaking town, namely, a “weakening of the 
cortical centers of inhibition and a significant elevation of nervous excitabil-
ity. . . . The people gave the impression of automata, which fell into tonic-
clonic convulsions as a consequence of the smallest noise.”13 Similarly, a 
Dr. Schwarz reported on the effects of the 1880 earthquake on the island of 
Chios: “With regret I must report that the majority of the young women fell 
sick after the beginning of the earthquakes, specifically some of epilepsy, 
some of spasmodic attacks. If a keen observer of human nature were to be-
hold these suffering faces, tinged more blue than pink, he would certainly 
be astounded that fear and horror can cause such a transformation.”14
Psychiatrists considered the possibility that psychic “shock” could be 
a direct result of the seismic “shock,” rather than of the fear it induced. 
Eduard Phleps, an assistant at the psychiatric and neurological clinic in 
the Austrian city of Graz, admitted the difficulty of this question in a 1903 
article entitled “Psychosis after Earthquakes.” It was eight years after the 
Austrian Earthquake Commission had begun collecting and publishing the 
reports of lay observers (chapter 7), and Phleps noted that “in all lay ob-
servations [Laienbeobachtungen] illnesses are reported that, according to the 
form of the phenomenon, may very well be connected in part to the pow-
erful natural disaster.” The self-reports of survivors were essential, Phleps 
argued, since neither the scientific literature nor newspaper reports could be 
trusted: “There are always elaborate descriptions of general panic, the manic  
racing-around of those in despair, mortal fear, and the like.”15 Phleps drew 
his evidence primarily from the cases documented by the investigation of 
the 1895 earthquake in Ljubljana, less than two hundred kilometers from 
Graz. Phleps concluded that earthquakes did seem to correspond to a “well-
defined clinical picture,” distinguished by “headaches, dizziness, and nau-
sea.”16 He was inclined to believe that the ills of earthquake victims had a 
unique etiology, one explained by the significance of gravity for the human 
psyche. He cited Humboldt: “‘A bad earthquake destroys at once our oldest 
associations’; we could add our most solid associations, since the constant 
influence of gravity presents not only a constant stimulus for the molecular 
constitution of all organic and inorganic bodies, but may also be a constant 
and important factor for the formation of the totality of our purely psychic 
capacities, perhaps the most fundamental and important, the significance of 
which in psychology and physiology, it seems to me, has received too little 

The Moment of Danger / 129
attention.”17 The psychic effect of earthquakes could thus be reduced to that 
of “the sudden, completely unmediated onset of the stimulus, which pro-
duces a strong fright and as such represents the immediate cause of the ill-
ness.”18 In the end, Phleps never clearly drew the line between the physical 
and psychic impacts of earthquakes. But this did not detract from the power 
of his conclusion: “As far as the development of psychoses after earthquakes 
is concerned, it is probably sufficient to point to the uniquely powerful 
natural disaster, which unsettles every party more or less profoundly.”19 In an 
earthquake’s wake, no one, male or female, was immune to hysteria.
Not everyone, however, was convinced by the diagnosis of traumatic 
shock. The anti-Nazi criminologist Hans von Hentig, for one, believed that 
the ills of earthquake victims had a far more complex etiology. Hentig,  
who had studied with the renowned psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin before the 
war, suspected that the pathways by which earthquakes affected human 
health were both environmental and psychic. He thus fused the nineteenth- 
century tradition of medical geography with the new psychiatric findings. 
He felt that the environmental dimensions of human health had been ob-
scured by the successes of modern bacteriology. The human effects of earth-
quakes allowed one “to glimpse an intermediate level between the bodily 
and the mental.”20 They therefore could not be deduced from even the most 
sophisticated mechanical devices: “The cause must be a different form of en-
ergy than the ‘shock.’ The experiences of seismo-pathology permit no other 
interpretation. While the most sensitive horizontal pendulums have always 
lured us farther into a one-sided analysis of the mechanical components of 
the phenomenon, the reagent of the living organism, above all of the ner­
vous system, opens surprising perspectives for the earthquake researcher as 
well as for the psychiatrist.”21 In an age when seismology was increasingly 
confined to geophysical observatories, Hentig recalled how much could still 
be learned from the human seismograph.
Earthquakes thus deserve a place in the history of trauma psychiatry. 
They were, in fact, an ideal site for investigations of shock. When technolo-
gies went awry, it was always possible that people would claim injury in 
order to win insurance compensation. Earthquakes, on the other hand, 
were legally “acts of God.” Victims had no financial incentive to simulate a 
malady, and the symptoms of shock were therefore all the more irrefutable. 
In fact, earthquakes often provided a point of reference for early industrial 
accidents. In her study of literary prefigurations of the concept of shock, Jill 
Matus notes, “Shock in the texts I have been quoting is likened to tremor 
and earthquake, a violent disruption, a clash, or physical upheaval.”22 One 
of the earliest instances Matus cites is a railway crash in Charles Dickens’s 

130 / Chapter Six
1846 novel Dombey and Son, in which the disaster site is compared to an 
earthquake zone. Comparing a technological catastrophe to a natural di­
saster hints at the Victorians’ sense of the uncomfortable proximity between 
industrial progress and ruin. Henry Adams drew a similar comparison in 
1904, “Every day Nature violently revolted, causing so-called accidents with 
enormous destruction of property and life, while plainly laughing at man, 
who helplessly groaned and shrieked and shuddered, but never for a single 
instant could stop. The railways alone approached the carnage of war; auto-
mobiles and fire-arms ravaged society, until an earthquake became almost 
a nervous relaxation.”23 It seems, then, that the emergence of the concept 
of traumatic shock depended on comparisons between the psychic effects 
of natural disasters and of military and industrial violence. The spread of 
industrial technologies did not eclipse Europeans’ sense of vulnerability to 
elemental nature. On the contrary, Victorians’ anxiety about the psychic ef-
fects of industrialization reflected in part their understanding of the psychic 
effects of natural forces.
Criminology and Cosmic Crisis
According to Freud’s Civilization and Its Discontents, the Great War dem-
onstrated that civilization’s enemy was no longer external nature, but the 
unmasterable forces of man’s inner nature. And yet the question of the geo-
physical determinants of civilization versus barbarism still loomed large 
in the interwar era.24 Even after 1918, social scientists continued to study 
geophysical conditions as determinants of social breakdown.
Studies of the social effects of earthquakes had helped shape the emerg-
ing field of criminology in pre-1914 Europe. Lombroso’s Crime, Its Causes 
and Remedies of 1899 had opened with two chapters on meteorological, 
climatic, and geological factors in the “etiology” of crime.25 In the aftermath 
of the Messina earthquake of 1908, as the state struggled to impose order, 
Italian jurists had theorized a relationship between sovereignty and emer-
gency that anticipated a pivotal concept of twentieth-century legal theory.26 
The Swiss psychiatrist Eduard Stierlin found the Messina disaster “of the 
greatest interest” as an opportunity “to compare how the frightful event af-
fected survivors of such different races and social classes.”27 Two opposing 
tendencies were identified in the social response to earthquakes. As Cesare 
Lombroso wrote of the situation in Messina in his Archivio di Antropologia 
Criminale: “As for the effect on the moral sense, one may say that in this 
terrible catastrophe it was exaggerated in one direction or the other, as if 

The Moment of Danger / 131
human nature had wanted to show all that it could of the most sublime and 
the most savage.” The catastrophe awakened what Lombroso termed “all 
the primitive and atavistic sentiments,” religious and otherwise.28 The Archiv 
für Kriminologie published a similar report on the San Francisco earthquake 
of 1906: “the bête humaine naturally held its orgies and there were plenty of 
looting mobs [Schlachthyänen]. On the other hand there were also traces of 
homo nobilis, and not just isolated cases, which should please the humanist. 
. . . It almost makes one think of an unconscious imitation, of a ‘psychic in-
fection’ by example, which suddenly made heroes of average men . . . since 
indeed even in the worst something human slumbers.”29
After 1918, criminologists were not satisfied with a simple analogy be-
tween the social effects of earthquakes and of wars; instead, they probed 
possible interconnections between war, revolution, and the social effects of 
“atmospheric and telluric disturbances.” Thus, what observers described as 
widespread hysteria following the Tokyo earthquake of 1923 was attributed 
in part to the lingering effect of a world war that acted like a petri dish for 
mass panic.30 Similarly, the 1928 earthquake in the Crimea was found to 
awaken “the whole already extinguished image of the war neurosis (at the 
moment of the catastrophe the image of the battle appeared; the sound 
of heavily loaded automobiles called for two series of associations—con-
nected to the war and to the earthquake in the Crimea).”31 In 1920, follow-
ing Germany’s November Revolution, Hans von Hentig published On the 
Relatedness of Cosmic, Biological, and Social Crises.32 Hentig was interested 
in what happens when “an atmospheric or telluric infection [Schädlichkeit] 
reaches the light and porous substrate of moral feeling.” Hentig concluded 
that modern states must recall what the ancients well knew: that even the 
slightest earth tremors could open the door to revolution. The authorities 
of ancient Athens would never have permitted crowds to gather on the 
day after a widely felt tremor—as occurred in Munich on the afternoon of  
7 November 1918, when socialists staged a peaceful coup against the Ba-
varian monarchy. For information on the tremor of 6 November, Hentig 
was indebted to the Bavarian macroseismic service, founded in 1905. What 
clinched his argument, he believed, was that “one of the most excitable 
and most eloquent heroes” of the November Revolution—the anarchist and 
writer Erich Mühsam—was “by nature highly sensitive to earthquakes.” He 
had in hand a letter from Mühsam, which he had received from the direc-
tor of the Munich observatory. Though written over three years before the 
revolution, it was evidence of Mühsam’s “earthquake-sensitivity”—a trait 
Hentig linked, predictably, to his Jewish origin:

132 / Chapter Six
Since about 2 o’clock I was unable to sleep and felt a strong nervous tension 
(as I almost always feel a very strong sensation of tension before storms). The 
nervousness, the cause of which I could not explain to myself, increased so 
much that I turned on the light. . . . I was then sitting upright in bed, when I 
suddenly had a sensation as if someone had grabbed the bedframe from be-
neath and were shaking it back and forth. . . . I understood immediately that 
it was an earthquake. . . . I note further that after the event my nerves became 
entirely calm again and I soon slept excellently, from which I conclude that 
the earthquake announced itself to my nerves ever more strongly for about 
1½ hours before its start.33
Hentig believed that his discovery of the geo-psychic determinants of revo-
lution would allow governments to extract revolution’s “poison fang in due 
time.”34
The Wisdom of the Body
Hentig’s term “seismopathology” highlighted the difficulty of identifying 
a “normal” psychic reaction to earthquakes. Ideal conditions in which to 
study this question were created by the Crimean earthquake of 1927, at the 
height of the tourist season. Seismologists collected “normal” reactions from 
educated tourists, while doctors examined patients at the local sanatorium 
for “pathological” reactions. The analysis by Soviet physicians was keyed in 
subtle ways to the values of the state. Thus a Moscow psychiatrist paid par-
ticular attention to the drastic fall in the “work capacity” [Arbeitsfähigkeit] of 
the affected population; he noted too that the ability to withstand psychic 
trauma was supported by the “feeling of responsibility” proper to directors 
of institutes or state servants.35 In all, this physician was able to define nine 
symptoms of “earthquake syndrome”: “acceleration of the pulse, paleness, 
the sensation of ground oscillations, dizziness, nausea, general fatigue, rest-
lessness (anticipation neurosis), insomnia, decreased productivity.” A final 
symptom was a new perception of the immediate natural environment. 
As one survivor testified, “Nature has acquired greater significance, has let 
her power be felt; the horizon is significantly widened.”36 For many survi-
vors, “The picturesque paths of the Crimea with the mountains looming 
overhead no longer offered any pleasure. . . . This blooming and vibrantly 
colored Crimea, bright of complexion and rich in the wondrous creations 
of nature, this dream of the ill and of those in need of rest, has in an instant 
become unpleasant, forbidding, malicious and menacing.”37 This “Crimo-
phobia” struck even natives, many of whom moved permanently north. 

The Moment of Danger / 133
These symptoms, then, constituted “normal” effects of the earthquake over 
the following days, weeks, or even months. But what of immediate reac-
tions? What was the “normal” state of mind when the earth shook?
An assistant at the Moscow psychiatric clinic concluded that the earth-
quake cast doubt on the conventional wisdom that the human being is 
a “remarkably resilient creature.” One fifty-one-year-old local physician, 
“strong and healthy,” declared that his experience on the night of the 
Crimean earthquake “could not be described.” In the moment of crisis, he 
“lost all courage, no longer even thought of my loved ones,” and it took 
six to eight minutes before he “came to himself.” The eighteen seconds of 
ground movement itself “meant a panicked terror, they were more horri-
ble than death. The tongue did not obey, the body shuddered, only with 
difficulty could one use one’s arms and legs. Not a single thought in the 
head. Paralysis.”38 Such an account could be explained neurologically: “The 
earthquake shock inhibited the influence of the cortex and thereby height-
ened the effect of the unconscious sphere of the instincts.”39 However, an-
other commentator complicated this picture. “Normal” reactions to fear, 
he argued, were of two types, active and passive, though occasionally both 
reactions were combined in a single person. Active personalities, including 
those who had rescued or calmed others, “did not remain passive in the face 
of the disaster and displayed a reaction corresponding to their active, deci-
sive character; they set their own wills to survival against the will of the ele-
ments.” Passive characters, on the other hand, responded with fatalism and 
a sense of helplessness. As one survivor described it, at the moment of crisis 
“man has no will to battle with the elements, he is their slave.” The passive 
reaction could even express itself as an “unconscious death instinct [unbe-
wußte Todesdrang].” In general, “normal” reactions did not lead to “nonsen-
sical, purposeless acts.” To the contrary, “Terror in this way lent an unusual 
concentration of psychic energy, awakened acuity and clarity of thought. . . .  
The capacity to preserve the necessary concentration of attention for calm 
judgment is a property of a well-organized psyche, which does not permit 
sudden, reflexive, often purposeless reactions ( jumping from the second or 
third floor).” Still other “normal” witnesses reported “a feeling of enchant-
ment and wonder at the power of the elements that was close to ecstasy.” 
During the weaker shocks, three even reported “erotic excitement.”40
A most remarkable perspective was emerging from studies of “normal” 
reactions to earthquakes. Many survivors reported that, in the midst of catas-
trophe, their response was not panic but something like the opposite. Per-
haps the most famous earthquake account of this genre was that of  William 
James. As a young man, James had trained in the tradition of Humboldt and 

134 / Chapter Six
Darwin as a naturalist on Louis Agassiz’s Brazil expedition. He was undoubt-
edly familiar with their stories of their own first earthquakes. Indeed, he had 
been disappointed that his voyage to Brazil did not bring much in the way 
of adventure.41 Moreover, James was a psychologist fascinated by the study 
of the human mind under the extreme conditions that could be generated 
in the laboratory; yet he had an abiding aversion to laboratory work. So 
perhaps we should not be surprised that James’s reaction, as his bedroom at 
Stanford began to shake on 18 April 1906, was “delight.” Beyond his sense 
of good fortune, James’s account departed from the traditional form of sci-
entific earthquake observations. He did not describe the duration, intensity, 
and direction of the quake, nor a scene of pandemonium in its aftermath. 
“Little thought, and no reflection or volition were possible” as the ground 
shook. Although he felt no fear, James had the sense that the quake was a 
“demonic power,” “an individualized being,” a “living agent,” which he 
likened to “earlier mythologic versions of such catastrophes.” James’s nar-
rative then turned to his observations in San Francisco later that day and in 
the weeks that followed. Where others told tales of crowds gone “mad with 
terror” and of “bacchanalian orgies,”42 James stressed the remarkably sober, 
cooperative behavior of the urban populace. James insisted that this ability 
to organize in an emergency was not merely “American” and “Californian” 
but also deeply “human.” Cooperation was a firmly rooted feature of the 
human response to catastrophe: “one’s private miseries were merged in the 
vast general sum of privation and in the all-absorbing practical problem of 
general recuperation.” James’s account was characteristic of his efforts to 
bridge materialism and idealism. It suggested at once the fundamental un-
predictability of the universe and the harmonies between world and mind. 
The experience proved “how artificial and against the grain of our spontane-
ous perceiving are the later habits into which science educates us.” At the 
moment of crisis, James claimed, the keenest observations were the product 
of instinct, not scientific training.43
James’s account bears comparison to that of the German physician Er-
win Baelz, who lived in Japan in the late nineteenth century. In 1901 Baelz 
described his state of mind during an earthquake as “emotional paralysis”:
Suddenly, really absolutely suddenly, a complete transformation occurred 
within me. All the higher emotional activity was extinguished, all compas-
sion for others, all sympathy for possible calamities, even concern for one’s 
endangered relatives and for one’s own life had vanished and left the mind 
completely clear; indeed it seemed to me as if I was thinking more easily and 
freely and faster than ever. It was as if a prior inhibition had suddenly been 

The Moment of Danger / 135
removed; I felt like a Nietzschean master, not answerable to anyone, beyond 
good and evil. I stood there and observed all the terrible events around me 
with the same cool attentiveness with which one follows a fascinating physics experi-
ment. . . . Then, equally suddenly, this abnormal state disappeared and made 
way for my prior self.44
Baelz reminds us of one filter through which Europeans experienced earth-
quakes in these years: a Nietzschean naturalism, according to which disas-
ters would suspend everyday ethics and confer survival on the fittest. Baelz’s 
“Nietzschean master” was clear-thinking and devoid of human sympathy. It 
was a new twist on the seismological fantasy of Immanuel Kant: the earth-
quake emptied of human content and reduced to a “fascinating physics 
experiment.” Oddly, though, Baelz suggested that this attitude was not a 
scientific ideal but a spontaneous reflex.
Baelz’s state of mind during the earthquake was diagnosed by one psy-
chiatrist as “manic”: “the different valuation of the associations under nor-
mal conditions is overridden by the excitement; the sanguine emotional 
state and the acceleration of thought, the elevated sense of self corresponded 
to the manic symptom complex.”45 Another psychiatrist, Eduard Stierlin, 
who had studied psychic reactions to earthquakes and mining accidents, 
considered Baelz’s experience to be common: namely, “a total elimina-
tion of all sense of value” in the face of catastrophe. Stierlin speculated 
that the emotional response was “only ‘repressed’”—and likely to return 
in nightmares or neurotic symptoms. From this perspective, Baelz was not 
so different from those earthquake survivors who succumbed to traumatic 
hysteria. Stierlin quoted Hippolyte Bernheim’s opinion that everyone is, to 
a degree, hysterical. Indeed, hysterics had often been known to display a 
certain stoicism in the face of crises—their “emotivity was weakened rather 
than strengthened.”46 What emerged from this analysis was the unexpected 
difficulty of distinguishing between an attitude of scientific objectivity and 
the symptoms of traumatic hysteria.47
By the 1920s, the American physiologist Walter Cannon was studying fear 
as a reaction of the sympathetic nervous system: a physiological response 
to a hostile environment that produced, along with a faster metabolic rate, 
heightened mental acuity.48 Among physiologists and psychiatrists studying 
humans under such extreme conditions, one story in particular came to be 
cited frequently. It was not an account of earthquake, for its author never ex-
perienced a major temblor—though he dedicated much of his life to study-
ing them. It was, rather, the tale of an 1871 mountaineering fall that nearly 
cost Albert Heim his life. In a lecture to the Swiss Alpine Club in 1892 

136 / Chapter Six
entitled “Death by Falling,” Heim compared his memory of the accident to 
other accounts of near-death experiences. In all these cases, the senses were 
unusually acute; thinking was intense and accelerated; judgment was “ob-
jective.” This response had nothing to do with “personal qualities,” Heim 
argued. It was universal at such moments. Yet it could not be a “reflex,” for 
it was fully conscious: “on the basis and in consequence of a complicated 
series of thoughts—clear in all its parts, although very rapid, but entirely 
consciously conducted. . . . A reflection such as appears on its own with ab-
solute necessity when the human mind is maximally excited by terror, at the 
moment of the most extreme stimulation.” Heim’s state of mind while in 
free fall confirmed this seeming paradox: “Objective observation, thought, 
and subjective feeling took place simultaneously.”49 The fall occurred seven 
years before Heim penned his instructions to Swiss citizens for the observa-
tion of earthquakes.
At stake in representations of the mental effects of earthquakes was the 
basic question of the “reliability of witnessing.”50 These scientifically trained 
observers denied that their own capacity for clearheaded observation in the 
midst of catastrophe was the result of training and habit. They experienced 
it, rather, as a primal instinct—in Cannon’s terms, as the “wisdom of the 
body.” Erwin Baelz even went on to speculate that his “emotional paralysis” 
during the earthquake represented a form of “possession,” and he called for 
“psychic research” to clarify the phenomenon.51 James, Baelz, and Heim 
each framed the perception of disaster in terms of a preconscious synchro-
nization of body, mind, and cosmos.52
Sensitive Instruments
Such cold-blooded representations of disaster have come to exemplify a 
modernist aesthetic ideal. Even as human observers were dropping out of 
seismology, literary writers began to claim that they were nothing more nor 
less than seismographs:
Like a seismograph his sensitive nerves had already registered the underground 
shocks, while others were still entirely deaf to them.53
—Carl Georg Heise on Aby Warburg (1947)
Both are very sensitive seismographs, who quake in their foundations when they 
receive waves and must transmit them.54
—Warburg on Burckhardt and Nietzsche (1927)

The Moment of Danger / 137
One holds the pen ready like a needle in a seismic observatory, and in reality it is 
not we who write; rather we are written.55
—Max Frisch (1950)
After the earthquake one lashes out at the seismograph. Yet one cannot blame the 
barometer for the typhoon, unless one wants to be classed a savage.56
—Ernst Jünger (1949)
The ‘Storm of Steel” [by Ernst Jünger] demonstrates the course of events most pow-
erfully, with the full force of the years on the front; without any pathos it depicts 
the dogged heroism of the soldier, recorded by a man who, like a seismograph, 
detects all the oscillations of the battle.57
—Erich Maria Remarque (1928)
The pen is only a seismographic pencil for the heart. It will register earthquakes, 
but can’t predict them.58
—Franz Kafka (1920–23)
I . . . think of the publisher—how shall I put it—somewhat like a seismograph, 
who should aim to register earthquakes objectively. I want to record statements of 
the day that I hear, and, as far as they seem to me valuable to be heard, set them 
before the public for discussion. ( To be a seismograph not a seismologist.)59
—Kurt Wolff to Karl Kraus (1913)
[The poet] is like the seismograph, which each quake, even thousands of miles 
away, sets vibrating. It is not that he thinks constantly of all the affairs of the world. 
Rather, they think of him. They rule him to such an extent that they are in him. 
Even his dull hours, his depressions, his confusions are impersonal states, they are 
like the twitches of the seismograph, and a gaze that reached deep enough could 
read something more mysterious in them than in his poems.60
—Hugo von Hofmannsthal (1906)
The poet appears as an indicator, as a seismograph, from which the moral state 
[Gewissenszustand] of his surroundings can be read off.61
—Hermann Hesse (1937)
Perhaps the emblematic literary seismograph was Ernst Jünger. A storm 
trooper in the First World War, Jünger famously portrayed a cyborg-like  

138 / Chapter Six
fusion of soldiers and their weapons. Such images have exemplified the 
contested aesthetic category of “reactionary modernism.”62 Yet like James, 
Baelz, and Heim, Jünger was also a naturalist: the son of a well-off phar-
macist, he studied geology, zoology, and botany at university in the early 
1920s. Indeed, Andreas Huyssen describes Jünger’s writerly gaze as “ento-
mological” in its sober attention to the smallest natural details in the midst 
of human catastrophe. Wounded by a bullet, Jünger’s vision recalls the 
power of observation that Baelz had discovered through an earthquake:
I throw away my rifle and jump with one leap down into the middle of the 
road. And though everything has gone well with me so far, not even the great-
est of luck, which I have come to take for granted, will now keep me out of 
harm’s way. While my knees are still bent from the impact of the jump, I re-
ceive a hard blow against my chest, which in a second makes me sober. In the 
midst of the tumult, between both raging parties, I stop and recollect myself. 
It was the left side, just on the heart, not much one can do about that. In a 
moment I shall fall full length as I have seen so many fall. Now it’s all over. 
Curious, this: while I stare at the ground I see the stones on the yellowish soil of the 
path, black chips of flint and white, polished pebbles. In this terrible confusion I see 
each one of them sharply, separately, and the pattern they make is imprinted in my 
mind as if this were now the most important thing of all.63
At the moment of crisis, Jünger became what Huyssen calls an “armored 
eye.” Or, perhaps, a mortal microscope, since the war, for Jünger, was equally 
about the mechanization of men and the enchantment of machines. It was 
a “storm of steel,” a catastrophe both cosmic and man-made. And the writer 
fit to record it was, of course, a seismograph, writing “in agitated phrases, 
illegible, like the wavelines of a seismograph recording an earthquake, with 
the ends of the words whipped out into long strokes by the rapidity of the 
writing.”64 
The motif of the writer as seismograph reflected in part the modernist 
fascination with graphology and automatic writing, understood as tech-
niques for the “objective study of human subjectivity.”65 But it was also a 
response to the question of the writer’s responsibilities in the face of the 
human catastrophes of the first half of the twentieth century. The seismo-
graphic trope claimed for the writer an exceptional sensitivity to foreshocks 
and a cold-blooded acuity at the moment of crisis, even as it had the poten-
tial to divest him of moral responsibility for the ideas he expressed. At the 
same time, it severed the notion of the human seismograph from its origins 
in nineteenth-century natural scientific practice. Seismic observation had 

The Moment of Danger / 139
once been a widespread, acquired habit of empirical observation, often as-
sociated with women and with feminine nervous sensibility. The modernist 
writer as human seismograph laid claim instead to an innate and distinctly 
masculine artistic genius, a poetry of “iron nerves.”
Conclusion
If one were only an Indian, instantly alert, and on a racing horse leaning against 
the wind, kept on quivering jerkily over the quivering ground, until one shed one’s 
spurs, for there needed no spurs, threw away the reins, for there needed no reins, 
and could barely see the land unfurl.
—Franz Kafka66
With Jünger we arrive at the heart of modernism’s fascination with earth-
quakes. The earthquake’s invisible human effects—whether described as 
vertigo or as psychic trauma—mimicked the perceived effects of moder-
nity itself. Nineteenth-century observers experienced the transformations 
due to modern science and technology as a “vertiginous violence” (Henry 
Adams); they induced “dizziness” (Mary Shelley) and “moral seasickness” 
(Max Nordau).67 In the psychoanalytic language emerging at the fin de siè-
cle, the earthquake pierced the modern psychic shield. Its effects were thus 
akin to the symptoms of neurasthenia and traumatic shock. Yet many of 
the earthquake narratives of this period described fascinatingly ambivalent 
reactions. Beside the tales of horror were others that insisted on a thrilling 
sense of liberation, a glorious dizziness. The earthquake gave modern men 
and women a tantalizing brush with a force they had trouble naming, some-
thing vast and primal. What their earthquake fevers shared was the fantasy 
of relinquishing a defining ambition of the modern age: the quest to master 
nature. The joy of the earthquake was the thrill of giving oneself up to a raw 
natural power. It was a fantasy, in Kafka’s terms, of dropping the “reins” of 
progress. As Scott Spector points out, Kafka harbored an “explosive revolu-
tionary element,” the target of which was the materialism of his father’s gen-
eration. That hostility expressed itself violently in his texts as a “contempt 
for the earth” itself, a “struggle to release the dormant spirit from within the 
comfortable but constrictive confines of the body.”68 In his fantasy of riding 
like “an Indian,” the motion of the subject is transposed to the ground, such 
that the land itself “quivers” and “unfurls.” Like an earthquake, Kafka’s race-
horse tears him free of the confines of gravity. Shedding his spurs, dropping 
the reins, he has shaken off modernity’s claims on him. He gives himself up 
to what Michael Taussig calls “the wild abandon of sympathetic absorption 

140 / Chapter Six
into wildness itself.”69 The writer becomes, or longs to become, a body that 
speaks in the convulsive language of the earth itself: a seismograph.
At the same time, Kafka’s fantasy of vertigo encompasses another fan-
tasy: the discovery within the self of a hidden, inner equilibrium. In the 
moment that he releases control, the rider is “instantly alert.” In this sense, 
Kafka writes in the tradition of Humboldt and Darwin, parallel to Baelz’s 
“cool attention,” James’s “spontaneous perceiving,” and Jünger’s “entomo-
logical gaze.” The earthquake, literal or figurative, was experienced simulta-
neously as an instant of wild abandon and of acute perception. Surely, this 
keenness of perception was a habit acquired through training, a product of 
these men’s scientific backgrounds and of the nineteenth-century culture of 
popular science. Yet these trained observers insisted otherwise. They attrib-
uted their own acuity to a mysterious cosmic affinity.
By the 1930s, the human seismograph was no longer a geoscientific tool. 
The acuity of earthquake witnesses had been reinterpreted as a symptom of 
hysteria. The realism of felt reports came to be read as a mere literary exer-
cise. This transformation was evident in the 1931 volume Der Gefährliche 
Augenblick (The Moment of Danger). This specimen of Weimar modernism 
was a collection of photographs and first-person accounts of various crises: 
a plane crash, the sinking of the Titanic, the assassination of Archduke Franz 
Ferdinand, battles of the Great War. The editor explained that the intention 
was to display instances in which “a highly primitive experience intersects 
with a very complicated one in a few seconds of decision.”70 First, as if set-
ting a template for what followed, came natural disasters: photographs and 
narratives of earthquakes and volcanoes, from Vesuvius, Etna, and Mount 
Pelée, to San Francisco and Tokyo. Like the earthquake stories we have been 
examining, these narratives had eclectic origins: accounts of the eruption of 
Mount Pelée, on Martinique, for instance, came from a scientist, an impris-
oned “Negro,” a shoemaker, and a journalist. In the volume’s introduction, 
Ernst Jünger described such cold-blooded visions of catastrophe as the “new 
style of language” of the modern age.71 Readers have puzzled over these 
“moments of danger,” which seem to be oddly detached and impersonal 
by the standards of bourgeois memoirs.72 They seem incongruous only be-
cause they have been torn out of the context of nineteenth-century disaster 
science. As iconic of modernism as these accounts may now appear, they 
conformed to the scientific norms of an earlier modernity.

seven
Fault Lines and Borderlands:  
Imperial Austria, 1880–1914
Our knowledge of a natural phenomenon, say of an earthquake, is as complete as 
possible when our thoughts so marshal before the eye of the mind all the relevant 
sense-given facts of the case that they may be regarded almost as a substitute for 
the latter, and the facts appear to us as old familiar figures, having no power to 
occasion surprise.
—Ernst Mach, The Analysis of Sensations, 18861
How did the self-reports of ordinary people inform planetary physics? The 
Habsburg monarchy is an excellent field on which to track exchanges be-
tween local knowledge and international science. The circulation of knowl-
edge could not be taken for granted in a state that included eleven major 
linguistic groups and encompassed the plains of Bukovina, the Adriatic 
coast, the Alps, and the Carpathians. Charged with understanding the mon-
archy’s celebrated unity amid diversity, Habsburg scientists sought an inte-
grated approach to the study of natural and human conditions.2
Austria-Hungary contained regions of moderate to high seismicity in the 
Alps and along the Adriatic. There is even evidence that seismicity in these 
regions was on the rise in the monarchy’s final decades.3 Particularly in the 
Balkans, earthquakes called into question the political framework that tied 
the monarchy’s fringes to its two capitals: which level of the state’s intricate 
web of governance would respond? Newspapers in Vienna, Prague, and Bu-
dapest printed wary reports of the camps pitched by earthquake victims 
to their south (see figure 7.1). The specter of homelessness raised fears of 
irredentist nationalism. Yet earthquakes also inspired humanitarianism. 
In 1895, when national disputes seemed to be crippling Austrian politics, 
a catastrophic earthquake struck the city of Ljubljana (German: Laibach), 

142 / Chapter Seven
capital of the crown land of Carniola. In Vienna, hundreds of writers and 
artists joined forces to produce a volume of engravings and verse to benefit 
the stricken city. In the accompanying poems, the contributors conjured 
up the monarchy as a “brotherhood” and Vienna as its “golden heart” (see 
figure 7.2).4 The liberal press took a similar line:
Where were Slovenes, where were Germans,
Where were language strife and power thirst?
Only humans, pale and fearful,
Only humans, trembling, terrified,
Only brothers, equal one and all—
Whom now misfortune—unified.5
After the Ljubljana disaster of 1895, the renowned physicist-philosopher  
Ernst Mach presided (as secretary of the Vienna Academy of Sciences) over 
the formation of the Austrian Earthquake Commission. At its height this 
network encompassed over 1,700 observers reporting from all sixteen 
crown lands. The system’s success reflected a culture of earthquake observ-
ing that took root in Austria in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. 
Habsburg scientists insisted that knowledge of a seismic event was possible 
only by combining the observations of numerous individuals, few of whom 
Fig. 7.1.  Camping in Jelacˇic´ Square after the Zagreb earthquake of 1880, creator un­
known. Source: Jan Kozák Earthquake Image Collection.

Fig. 7.2.  The iconography of imperial humanitarianism in the wake of a seismic disaster. 
Cover illustration by Alfred Roller for Für Laibach: Zum besten der durch die Erdbeben- 
Katastrophe im Frühjahre 1895 schwer betroffenen Einwohner von Laibach und  
Umgebung, ed. Genossenschaft der bildenden Künstler Wiens, 1895.

144 / Chapter Seven
were likely to have any scientific training: “Probably in no other field is 
the researcher so completely dependent on the help of the non-geologist, 
and nowhere is the observation of each individual of such high value as 
with earthquakes. . . . Even when all conditions are favorable, one can do 
no more than ascertain the time as precisely as possible and observe the 
phenomena in the immediate vicinity. But thereby only one reliable report 
is produced, while for a correct judgment one needs a great many. Only 
through the cooperation of all can a satisfying result be delivered.”6
A Perfect Earthquake
On the evening of 9 November 1880, readers of the Neue Freie Presse learned 
that, between 8:30 and 9:00 that morning, an earthquake had shaken much 
of the Balkan peninsula. Tremors were reported from as far away as western 
Hungary, Carinthia, and Lower Austria, and even from Vienna itself. The 
quake had killed at least two residents of Zagreb, wounded thirty others, 
and damaged more than three thousand houses.7
This was, in short, the perfect object of study for the seismology of its 
day. It was a “moderate” earthquake, neither so weak as to go unnoticed 
nor so strong as to leave observers in what was typically described as a state 
of “senseless panic or utter despair.”8 In addition, its impact was geographi-
cally extensive, meaning that observations could be collected throughout 
central Austria-Hungary.
The scientific response to the Zagreb quake embodied the dualist (poten-
tially trialist) nature of power in the monarchy after 1867. Separate investi-
gations were launched in the imperial capitals of Vienna and Budapest, as 
well as in the South Slav center of Zagreb. The imperial Geological Institute 
in Vienna solicited reports from eyewitnesses, while the imperial Academy 
of Sciences sent geologist Franz Wähner to Croatia to speak with witnesses 
and collect evidence of the damage to buildings. Independently, the director 
of the Geological Institute in Budapest was sent by the Hungarian Ministry 
of Agriculture, Industry, and Trade to inspect the area, but his inquiries were 
almost entirely restricted to assessments of damage to buildings.9 Mean-
while, the South Slavic Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb commis-
sioned two researchers to report on the quake.10 From mid-November to 
late December, the scholars from the Vienna and Zagreb academies covered 
approximately ninety square miles, interviewing witnesses and inspecting 
damage to buildings. The scale of the investigation dwarfed that of any pre-
vious earthquake in Austria-Hungary.

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 145
The Vienna geologist Melchior Neumayr conveyed the magnitude of 
Wähner’s effort:
To get an idea of the quantity of observations that are necessary for a correct 
assessment of an earthquake, we may consider the materials on the basis of 
which a recently published work by Wähner on the Agram earthquake has 
been composed. The author himself spent five weeks on location, occupied 
exclusively with this matter; several other geologists from Vienna, Pest, and 
Agram were similarly occupied, and it was possible to use their observations 
as well. Through the intervention of a few railway authorities, the reports of 
well over a hundred railway stations were furnished, the maritime authorities 
transmitted [reports] from all the port captains and lighthouse keepers of the 
entire stretch from Cattaro to the Italian border; in addition a great many pri-
vate communications and newspaper reports arrived, such that observations 
were brought forth from approximately 750 different locales. Certainly there 
were still many holes, but overall on this basis an accurate insight into the 
nature of this earthquake was possible through the united effort of more than 
1000 different observers, whose results were united in one hand.11
No doubt Wähner had achieved an impressive feat of public outreach, but 
the question remained: having collected over a thousand reports, what was 
a scientist to do with them? “The analysis of the collected reports, the as-
sessment of their reliability, the separation of the worthwhile from the un-
usable, finally the synthesis and application of the information obtained, 
demanded a significant investment of time and effort.”12 It would ultimately 
take Franz Wähner three years to accomplish.
“To Discern the Phenomenon in Its Physical Elements”
Wähner insisted on reproducing observers’ reports as completely and ac-
curately as possible:
Despite my attempt at brevity . . . I may indeed have reproduced the [wit-
nesses’] reports in too much detail. But I believed I should not go too far 
with the abridgements, if I wanted to maintain complete objectivity and also 
make it possible for others to draw an independent conclusion from the re-
ports. This cautiousness was particularly necessary, because in the course of 
my work I arrived at a judgment that diverges from the views that have pre-
vailed until now.13

146 / Chapter Seven
To be sure, Wähner’s ideal of objectivity did not exclude being an active and 
critical editor of the testimony he collected. One witness reported: “A fear-
ful earthquake. A few houses have partially collapsed.” Wähner cautioned: 
“This is exaggerated.” He omitted reports of churches being locked because 
“people seem to be quick to lock churches in the interest of safety.” When 
another witness claimed that a church steeple had been damaged, Wähner 
cautioned, “No mention of this in the following report, thus to be consid-
ered incorrect.” In another case he inserted, “The remaining comments not 
reprinted here prove to be somewhat exaggerated in view of the previous 
account.”14 In all these cases Wähner engaged with witness testimony in an 
intimate and critical manner more typical of the human sciences than the 
earth sciences.
As a native of northern Bohemia, Wähner depended on the Croatian col-
leagues with whom he traveled for translations. Yet he took pains to analyze 
the word choices of his witnesses. For instance, when discussing reports of 
earthquake sounds, he inserted the original Croatian next to German trans-
lations. He thus alerted his readers that the German Getöse corresponded 
to Croatian tutnjava.15 In one case, he quoted an observer’s seemingly awk-
ward description, “The dreadful Getöse [tutnjava] began to shake stronger 
and stronger with the earth and the houses.” He commented, “Despite the 
unusual manner of expression, very indicative of the character of the ground 
motion.”16
Wähner’s conclusions reflected this attention to the observers’ own de-
scriptive terms. In all the reports from the area of greatest destruction, he 
noted, “we look . . . in vain for the mention of an instantaneous strong 
movement such as would be termed, in everyday life as well as by a physi-
cist, an ‘impact.’ The ground motion was, to the contrary, generally perceived 
as a long-lasting, continuous movement. . . . It seems to have been slower, 
gentler movements, though movements of great intensity, than would have 
resulted from a brief to-and-fro movement of the individual soil particles in 
a horizontal or diagonal direction.”17 Thus, in his final assessment of the na-
ture of the Zagreb earthquake, Wähner concluded that it took the form of a 
transverse wave that shook the particles of the earth’s crust nearly vertically, 
and which spread out not from a central point but rather from an extended 
area. In this way, by means of the language of “everyday life,” Wähner lent 
support to Suess’s tectonic theory and discredited Mallet’s claim that earth-
quakes are longitudinal waves that propagate radially.
Wähner’s respect for vernacular language was not uncommon among 
scientists in the Habsburg world. In contrast to Britain and Germany, where 
a distinct class of scientific “popularizers” arose in the late nineteenth cen-

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 147
tury, recent research suggests that Austrian scientists took it upon them-
selves to communicate with the general public. Wähner, for instance, was 
praised for having “cultivated a popular writing style in the best sense.”18 
Rather than seeing this peculiarity as a mark of delayed modernization in 
central Europe, we might view it as a conscious attempt to bridge scientific 
and vernacular discourses.19
The ultimate goal of Wähner’s investigation was “to unite the individual 
observations, made and collected with the greatest objectivity, into a total 
picture and to seek to discover the law that lies therein.”20 As he wrote in the 
introduction, “In my view, given the current state of the discipline, it cannot 
be the task of a monograph on a large earthquake to investigate the final 
telluric or even cosmic causes of [the event]. It will be necessary above all to 
discern the phenomenon itself in its physical elements [Elementen], before 
it can be permitted to discuss causes hidden from observation, and I have 
convinced myself, that in this first area we still have a great deal to learn.”21 
Wähner’s sense of his task thus rested on an implicit phenomenalism: to 
identify the “physical elements” and unite them into a “total picture.”
Wähner’s study of the Zagreb quake became a model of the monographic 
method of earthquake investigation. But it also indicated the difficulty of 
translating this method from its original, landeskundlich context, to a cultur-
ally diverse territory. As he acknowledged of his Croatian collaborators, “I 
was greatly aided by their knowledge of the land and people.”22
Nations and Regions
At first, Austrian seismology made little effort to overcome these barriers. 
Instead, it developed as a patchwork of independent provincial networks. In 
the early 1880s, geologists Rudolf Hoernes and Richard Canaval organized 
lay seismic observers in the Austrian crown lands of Styria and Carinthia, 
respectively. They also began research on historical earthquake catalogs for 
the two provinces. In these undertakings, both men were supported by local 
institutions dedicated to Landeskunde.23 Hoernes anticipated objections to 
conducting seismology as a form of Landeskunde: “One might criticize me 
for undertaking first a discussion of a large area with political, that is more 
or less artificial, borders, instead of beginning by publishing a catalog of 
the earthquakes of the eastern Alps and then on the basis of the latter to 
consider the seismically active areas and fault lines of the entire region.” 
This was a typical quandary for the earth sciences in the Habsburg world: 
whether to define the region of study according to physical or linguistic 
borders. In response to his hypothetical critic, Hoernes noted that he had, in 

148 / Chapter Seven
fact, been collecting seismic observations from the entire eastern Alps; but 
the “critical inspection” of this material had “for many reasons” to be con-
ducted piecemeal, “not according to period but according to place.” Thus 
the evidence itself called for a landeskundlich approach: “The largest portion 
of the sources to be used for the critical annotation of the earthquake re-
ports bear the character of contributions to the Landeskunde of the affected 
province.”24
While Hoernes and Canaval were enlisting observers in the Alps, the 
South Slavic Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb formed its own seis-
mological committee. The Zagreb academy was a product of the movement 
for South Slavic unity at a time when the notion of a South Slavic identity 
was widely disputed. Under the direction of Michael Kispatic, the first PhD 
in the natural sciences at the University of Zagreb, the seismological com-
mittee collected observations of earthquakes in Croatia, Slavonia, Dalmatia, 
and Istria (in both Austrian and Hungarian halves of the monarchy) and in 
occupied Bosnia. Kispatic, the author of popular works on the geology and 
“natural-cultural” history of the South Slavic lands, also compiled a histori-
cal catalog of earthquakes in the region. To this end, he acquired medieval 
and modern documents from a circle of prominent intellectuals in Zagreb, 
who were in the midst of penning the first contributions to a Croatian na-
tional history.25 His seismological committee gained significantly in prestige 
in 1893 when it was joined by Andrija Mohorovicˇic´. Mohorovicˇic´, already 
successful as a meteorologist, went on to discover the boundary between 
the earth’s crust and mantle that now bears his name. According to Kispatic, 
Mohorovicˇic´ “found quite a number of patriots in Croatia and Slavonia who 
send in, on an almost daily basis,” reports of seismological as well as mete-
orological phenomena.26 The South Slavic seismological network, like those 
in Styria and Carinthia, pursued seismology as a patriotic form of regional 
natural history, as well as a means of geophysical analysis. It thus helped 
construct the South Slavic lands as an ostensibly natural region.
Elements of Observation
In Austria, as in Switzerland, nonexperts often proved to be excellent ob-
servers. Canaval adopted the questionnaires of the Swiss Earthquake Com-
mission, and Hoernes adapted their observing instructions.27 Hoernes 
suggested that earthquake observing was more a function of character than 
expertise: “People who have the sangfroid when an earthquake strikes to 
make useful observations on the nature of the motion will be able to ascer-
tain this feature just as well as seismographs, even if they depend only on 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 149
the perceptions of their senses. However only very few are able, with the 
approach of such an unusual and terrifying natural phenomenon, to di-
rect their attention to the movements themselves.”28 Alongside the teachers, 
physicians, pharmacists, and civil servants who made up the Styrian observ-
ing network were occasional participants without titles. These observers in 
turn drew on observations from a far broader segment of the local popula-
tion. In one case, Hoernes received a letter written by an untitled resident 
of Kappel, in the mountains of present-day Slovenia, which contained (in 
Hoernes’s judgment) “very interesting data on the perception of the earth-
quake of November ninth in the Sulzbacher Alps.”29 The writer had heard 
of a tremor from two peasants, though they were unsure of its direction. He 
continued: “I sent my boy to Sulzbach in order to conduct a survey, since I 
had no success in writing. He made inquiries of several peasants, who had 
felt the quake in Sulzbach strongly—in two impacts. A time and direction 
of the impacts could not be determined, since the parish priest in Sulzbach, 
from whom I hoped for accurate data, had not felt the quake at all.” De-
spite expectations, then, the priest proved a less valuable informant than the 
peasants, even if their reports were insufficiently “precise.” In other words, 
seismological research was being conducted by a juvenile and peasants, at 
three removes from a scientific expert.
Earthquake researchers also collected oral testimony from witnesses as 
they made their way through an affected region.30 The Carinthian geologist 
Richard Canaval gave a vivid picture of his own tactics in a report on his 
investigation of the Gmünd earthquake of November 1881. His interac-
tions with eyewitnesses were far more intimate and reciprocal than written 
correspondence allowed: “I asked the observers with whom I was able to 
speak to lead me to the place where they had felt the earthquake, to place 
themselves in the position they had been in when it had occurred, and to 
show me the direction in which they had perceived the impact. With the 
help of a good compass the direction was then determined. It was possible 
in this way, with the aid of suitably applied questions (for example which 
wall appeared to be shaken earlier) and other data (direction in which ob-
jects swung, rolled away, or fell over, etc.) to correct many erroneous state-
ments.”31 The British seismologist Charles Davison later pursued a similar 
strategy of reenactment: “Estimates of the duration of an unexpected and 
unusual phenomenon are, as is well known, almost always in excess of their 
true value. I endeavoured to check this tendency to exaggeration by suggest-
ing in my circular-letter that the shock should be mentally repeated, the 
beginning and end being marked, and the interval timed by an assistant. My 
suggestion was carried out in some cases.”32 In cases like this, observers were 

150 / Chapter Seven
taught to disaggregate their experience of an earthquake into basic factual 
statements of time, direction, and other physical “elements.” Seismologists 
were then in a position to put these pieces together into an approximately 
complete picture of the physical phenomenon. It was only by combining 
the partial perspectives of individual observers that such a picture could 
emerge.
“Reassurance and Enlightenment”
Rather than drawing a dichotomy between “professional” and “popular” 
science, the practitioners of Erdbebenkunde contrasted two ways of bringing 
science to the people. The sensationalistic predictions of Rudolf Falb (chap-
ter 3) represented the wrong way, stimulating panic rather than rational 
reflection. The alternative was to enlist members of the public as scientific 
observers, training them in the methods of modern science and teach-
ing them to view earthquakes as a vital and natural part of the earth’s life  
cycle.
Few were surprised when Falb rushed to the scene of the Zagreb earth-
quake and claimed to have predicted it. As he began to issue prophecies of 
catastrophes to come, professional scientists abandoned the wary skepti-
cism with which they had initially responded to him. Now they were angry. 
None responded more aggressively than Rudolf Hoernes, a fellow Styrian. 
Hoernes denounced Falb’s theory as “scientific humbug” and cast Falb as a 
charlatan and demagogue. He contrasted Falb’s theory—speculative, dog-
matic, and hubristic—with the modesty and empiricism of the Swiss Earth-
quake Commission. Falb had claimed that there “no longer remains in the 
whole, seemingly so inextricable earthquake question a single enigmatic 
point.” The Swiss instead acknowledged that the causes of earthquakes were 
still uncertain and “multiple.” Clarification could only come from “these 
precise studies of earthquake phenomena, founded on comprehensive ob-
servations.”33
Meanwhile, back in the imperial capital, in the last weeks of November 
1880, the private Scientific Club organized a pair of lectures by prominent 
geologists with the aim of raising money for the earthquake’s victims. But 
the lectures had another explicit goal: “to bring reassurance and enlighten-
ment from the standpoint of science in the face of the alarming theories of 
unauthorized people [Unberufener].” The first was delivered by the Vienna 
geologist and ethnologist Ferdinand von Hochstetter.34 He lamented the 
fear caused by “false prophets” and denounced a certain theorist’s reliance 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 151
on “unproven hypotheses” as a distortion of the “scientific path to truth.” At 
last, it had been possible “to make space for a calmer mood.”35
The second speaker was Eduard Suess, who was then at a pivotal mo-
ment in his career. Five years earlier he had published The Origin of the Alps, 
in which earthquakes figured as evidence for a tectonic theory of orogenesis. 
Already, he had begun the work that would absorb him for the next thirty 
years—his great global synthesis, The Face of the Earth, with its integrated 
vision of earth, water, atmosphere, and life (the source of the term “bio-
sphere”). Simultaneously, he was deeply engaged in civic projects like water 
provision and canalization. Like the Swiss seismic researchers Heim and 
Schardt, Suess was convinced that the geologist had a key role to play in the 
improvement of society. As a tribute to his renown as scientist and states-
man, the audience for his lecture in 1880 included members of the imperial 
family, the minister of war, and other dignitaries.
Toward the end of his address, Suess urged his audience to take up the 
cause of scientific earthquake observation. He admitted that a scientific at-
titude was probably not compatible with mortal fear: “at the sites of pri-
mary impact themselves reliable observations are normally not obtainable, 
because this phenomenon occurs so suddenly and spreads such panic that 
few persons can be found, who in mortal danger have the sangfroid to record 
any observations of a reliable sort.” But Suess did not conclude, as Mallet 
had, that eyewitnesses were unable to provide scientific testimony. To the 
contrary, he called for the “active participation of the entire educated popu-
lation, without which a determination of the affected area [Schütterkreis] is 
not possible.” Indeed, Suess was responsible for the collection of many of 
the observer reports used by researchers studying the Zagreb earthquake.36 
He also considered how “such earthquakes normally present themselves to 
the eye of the observer.” At a distance from the epicenter, multiple seismic 
waves were superimposed, such that the strike might seem to come from 
any of several directions.
Enlisting the public as scientific observers was a means of transforming 
irrational fear, with its potential for social chaos, into scientific curiosity. 
Suess hinted that the damage from the Zagreb earthquake had been social as 
well as material. He described how “ the individual, who is bound to hearth 
and family by a thousand threads, suddenly . . . sees these threads broken, 
like a plant torn up by its roots.” Tellingly, however, Suess resisted the facile 
imagery of patriotism.37 Where Hochstetter had used the language of Hei-
mat and brotherhood, Suess couched the disaster in democratic and nonna-
tional terms: “As in an instant all social borders, all differences of class fall 

152 / Chapter Seven
away and all are equal, equal in their degree of helplessness and of misery.” 
Suess stressed that social elites were as vulnerable as anyone else to both 
the physical and psychological effects of earthquakes. “The dreadfulness  
of the phenomenon lies in the suddenness of its occurrence and in that even 
the educated person is likely to see in it something entirely unintelligible, 
something entirely incomprehensible. Thus our response to the event must 
be: sympathy for the victims and the conscientious advancement of our 
studies.” Unlike Kant in 1755, Suess portrayed the scientific and humanitar-
ian perspectives on the earthquake as compatible, even interdependent. The 
scientist needed to know how earthquakes “usually present themselves to 
the observer,” while the work of reconstruction required scientific knowl-
edge of the distribution of seismic risk throughout the monarchy.
The Living Earth
If you want to discover the world, you need to pierce the eggshell.38
—Eduard Suess, 1888
In the tradition of Seneca, Suess set earthquakes in the context of “the all.” 
The loss of solid foundations could seem uncanny, even unnatural. By 
bringing the earth as a whole into focus, as Suess did with his contraction 
theory, geologists could instead show earthquakes to be a natural part of the 
planet’s life cycle. Suess set out to readjust humanity’s sense of scale, both 
spatial and temporal, by showing earthquakes to be the result of tectonic 
shifts over the course of geohistory. Shortly after an 1898 earthquake in 
Croatia, Rudolf Hoernes wrote in the Neue Freie Presse that Suess’s plan-
etary perspective “may comfort us when we recognize the essence of the 
uncanny [unheimlich] seismic forces that are active on the Adriatic coast.”39 
The Ljubljana seismologist Albin Belar offered a similar image in the same 
newspaper in the wake of the Messina earthquake of 1908: “The earth lives 
and quakes—and a standstill means planetary death. We will no longer 
shudder in fear at the word earthquake when we consider that it is merely 
a balancing out of forces and tensions, similarly as in a thunderstorm.”40 
Indeed, Suess’s view of earthquakes as symptoms of planetary evolution was 
widely echoed into the early twentieth century. As a writer in the Edinburgh 
Review put it in 1905, “Earthquakes are a sign of planetary vitality”; neither 
“effete globes like the moon” nor “inchoate worlds, such as Jupiter or Sat-
urn” could be expected to suffer seismic waves, being too inelastic in the 
first case and too “pasty” in the second. “Our globe is, by its elasticity, kept 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 153
habitable. . . . Just by these sensitive reactions the planet shows itself to be 
alive, and seismic thrillings are the breaths it draws.”41
For Suess, the liberal statesman, the global perspective also stood for 
the interests of humanity as a whole, over and above those of individual 
nations or classes. In 1888, for instance, during a crest of anti-Semitism 
and nationalist conflict in the imperial capital, Suess called for broad mind-
edness: “Prejudices and egoism, above all the pettiness of the things with 
which we are accustomed to dealing with, have placed barriers around each 
of us which constrict our view. If they are removed, if we resolve to leave be-
hind the narrow conceptions of space and time which bourgeois life offers 
us, and no longer to view the world from the base, self-centered perspective, 
which sees advantages here, disadvantages there for us or our species, but 
rather to admit the facts in their naked truth, then the cosmos reveals to us 
an image of unspeakable grandeur.”42 Suess associated the global perspec-
tive with modernization and ethical progress, but also with the bold em-
piricism of modern geology that grasped “facts in their naked truth.”43 He 
suggested that the mere recognition of the relative scale of the human and 
the cosmic could ground ethics in a secular, globalizing age: “There is noth-
ing that raises the individual more completely and higher out of the narrow 
circle of egoism, as the thought of the infinite majesty of the universe and 
of its eternal laws.”44 Suess’s global vision was not, however, a bid for tran-
scendence. He never allowed the extraterrestrial perspective to become an 
end in itself. The human impact of an earthquake remained at the center of 
research—as a source of evidence and as a motivation for knowledge.
Seismology Comes to Ljubljana
The Zagreb earthquake of 1880 triggered the organization of earthquake-
observing networks at the provincial level, but it took another fifteen years 
for scientists to begin to coordinate seismic observation across the Austrian 
half of the monarchy. Political resistance to scientific centralization was just 
one of the reasons for this delay. Another involved disciplinary dynamics: 
in 1880, the landeskundlich approach seemed perfectly suited to answering 
questions of crustal tectonics and orogenesis. It was not until the develop-
ment of more sensitive seismographs over the following two decades that 
earthquake research would be reoriented around questions of the earth’s 
internal structure, requiring larger-scale coordination of instrumental ob-
servations. Furthermore, the infrastructure that would make it possible to 
standardize observations on that scale was still under construction in 1880. 
Railroad time had not yet been coordinated, and many parts of the empire 

154 / Chapter Seven
did not yet receive telegraphic time signals. As Hoernes found to his shock 
in 1880, even clocks at neighboring rail stations sometimes differed by sev-
eral minutes.45
The event that raised the call for action in Vienna occurred at the end of 
Easter Sunday 1895 (see figures 7.3 and 7.4). In Ljubljana, the capital of the 
crown land of Carniola, most residents were snug in bed when an unusual 
“buzzing” disturbed their rest. This was fast followed by “powerful droning, 
rattling, thundering, and rumbling.” Chimneys crashed to the ground, and 
church towers wavered. Over the course of the night, between thirty and 
forty further shocks ensued. The population fled the city and did not return 
until morning, when they found the city in ruins. Barely an exterior wall had 
survived without cracks, and interiors were littered with debris. Only two 
deaths were attributed directly to the earthquake, but 10 percent of the city’s 
buildings were condemned to demolition.46
Because of the holiday, most of the monarchy only learned of Ljublja-
na’s misfortune from Tuesday’s newspapers. The Neue Freie Presse reported 
“panic” as far from the epicenter as Trieste, Fiume, and Abbazia. Eduard 
Suess’s son, Franz Eduard, was commissioned by the education ministry to 
Fig. 7.3.  Ljubljana earthquake damage. In Für Laibach.

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 155
investigate, and set off on Tuesday evening. Meanwhile, Eduard von Moj-
sisovics, the vice-director of the Geological Institute in Vienna, circulated 
questionnaires and enlisted newspapers to print requests for information. 
In all, the Geological Institute would collect more than 1,300 felt reports 
from more than nine hundred locations, plus over two hundred negative 
reports. Franz Eduard Suess’s final analysis would mine all this testimony 
alongside over five hundred published sources. Remarkably, the younger 
Suess printed all these sources as an appendix to his final monograph on the 
earthquake, which appeared in 1897 and ran to 590 pages. Two hundred 
pages alone were devoted to the observer reports received by the Geological 
Institute, which were necessarily “mostly reduced to keywords; only particu-
larly elaborate and typical descriptions are reproduced word-for-word.”47
Fig. 7.4.  The Ljubljana earthquake of 1895, caricatured by a Viennese artist as a gro­
tesque giant stomping across the Balkan peninsula. Note the prominence of the Sava  
River, the tributary of the Danube that flows through the South Slav lands—symbolic of  
the natural foundations of Habsburg unity. In Für Laibach.

156 / Chapter Seven
For the city of Ljubljana, the earthquake was an occasion to modernize. 
The reconstruction effort laid bare a conflict between local and imperial 
direction, as Andrew Herscher has shown.48 A similar tension was manifest 
in the scientific response to the earthquake. With the city still reeling from 
aftershocks, the Carniolan provincial government expressed interest in in-
stalling a seismograph at the imperial high school in the capital. There was, 
however, no one willing to supervise its operation until 1896, when the 
school hired Albin Belar, then an assistant at the Imperial Marine Academy 
in Fiume. Belar had studied with Eduard Suess in Vienna. He spoke Ger-
man at home but also knew Slovenian, Croatian, and Italian.49 In 1897 
Belar drew up a petition to found Austria’s first seismological observatory 
in Ljubljana. He later claimed to have coined the German word for such 
an institution, Erdbebenwarte. It would seem to be a miraculous stroke of 
fortune by which Belar’s petition found its way to the direction of the Car-
niola Savings Bank, which promised the necessary financial support. But 
luck had less to do with it than connections. The bank’s director was Joseph 
Supan (or Suppan), a member of the imperial court of justice and one of the 
foremost German nationalists in Carniola.50 Indeed, the bank itself would 
become the target of Slovenian nationalist fury over the following years, 
with Supan even facing accusations of embezzlement. Supan’s brother  
Alexander, meanwhile, was one of Austria’s leading physical geographers 
and the editor of the influential journal Petermanns Mittheilungen, where 
he had discussed seismological questions.51 Apparently, an intervention 
from Alexander Supan had something to do with the continuing support 
of the Carniola Savings Bank for Belar’s observatory.52 Conspicuously, the 
observatory also received the personal support of several Habsburg arch-
dukes.53 From the start, then, the Ljubljana observatory was implicated in 
the debates over imperial authority in the South Slavic lands.54
Belar’s interest in seismology lay in instrumental design and the inter-
pretation of seismographic records—in his terms, “the technical aspects of 
the science.”55 Yet much of his work after 1897 involved comparing the in-
strumental records of his observatory with human reports.56 “It has become 
an urgent necessity to bridge the large gap that unfortunately still exists 
today between the earthquake observer with the help of instruments and 
the observer who relies exclusively on human perceptions, his own or those 
of others.” Belar introduced a linguistic metaphor to describe this effort: it 
was necessary to correlate the characteristic curves of the seismograph with 
terms in common use for the sensations of ground movement: earth shock, 
ground vibration, ground shaking, earth movement, and so on. (“Erdstoß, 
Erzittern des Bodens, Bodenerschütterung oder Erdbewegung”).57 “Bridging 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 157
the gap” between instrumental and human observations would depend on 
smooth communication between seismologists and the public. To this end, 
in 1901 Belar founded the monthly journal Die Erdbebenwarte, a unique  
forum that addressed both expert and popular audiences. It covered the lat-
est research in seismological geophysics and geology as well as issues of seis-
mic safety. Belar also lectured frequently to popular audiences in Ljubljana 
and elsewhere in the monarchy, and he served as a correspondent for news-
papers in Vienna, Berlin, London, and New York.58 He thus helped forge a 
seismological language that linked scientists, citizens, and instruments.
Imperial Science
Just ten days after the Ljubljana earthquake, the Academy of Sciences in 
Vienna ruled to establish a special commission for the “more intensive 
study of seismic phenomena in the Austrian lands.” The initial form of the 
Earthquake Commission remained significantly decentralized: each crown 
land had one reporter responsible for recruiting observers; mailing, collect-
ing, and compiling questionnaires; and investigating significant seismic 
events within his province. There was thus no direct contact between the 
commissioners in Vienna and the volunteer observers.59 In practice, this 
scheme was further decentralized by the provision of one reporter each for 
the German- and Czech-speaking regions of Bohemia and the German- and 
Italian-speaking regions of Tyrol. According to Habsburg logic, these were 
geographical rather than social divisions, meaning that each reporter was 
still required to be bilingual. The commission’s second task, that of collect-
ing historical information on past quakes, was to be organized according to 
“appropriate regional sections, so for example the Alps, the Sudetenland, 
and the Karst region.”60 This too proved tricky to implement. The problem 
was, at core, the familiar conflict between territorial and linguistic divisions 
of the monarchy. Earthquake observing was uniquely susceptible to this 
tension, dealing as it did directly with both the land and with people’s per-
ceptions of the land.
For instance, the Czech-Polish physicist Václac/Waclaw/Wenzel Láska 
found that the preparation of a treatise on “The Earthquakes of Poland” was 
problematic. “I have called my project ‘The Earthquakes of Poland,’ but more 
accurate would be ‘The Earthquakes in the Polish Historical Sources,’ because 
in this I did not by any means think of political, but rather of historical bor-
ders, and those not so much of the land as of the sources.” Poland, of course, 
was not a political entity at this time, having been swallowed by neighboring 
states over the previous century and a half. Although the Austrian kaiser was 

158 / Chapter Seven
far more tolerant of publications in Polish than the Russian tsar, and while 
Láska benefited from the collection of the Lemberg (L’viv) Ossolineum, his 
task proved frustrating: “The acquisition of the necessary literature created 
great difficulties for me, because so many fundamental texts could not be 
found in the Austrian libraries. It seems superfluous to add another request 
for the kind loan of documents necessary to me, which in the present paper 
are marked as inaccessible to me.”61
The commission’s directors in Vienna devoted careful thought to the 
challenges of public outreach. They deliberated, for instance, about how to 
recruit observers at no pay. As compensation, they offered each observer a 
copy of the volume in which his or her observations were printed. In 1899 
they resolved to send each regular observer in addition an annual note of 
thanks. They also struggled with the problem of turnover among the re-
porters for individual crown lands. At one point, for instance, there were 
complaints that the reporter for Carinthia took no interest in the job and 
failed to report on earthquakes that were clearly felt in neighboring Styria. 
Another reporter resigned, confessing that he was not really interested in 
seismology. On the other hand, six dedicated men served as reporters con-
tinuously from 1895 to 1919. Five years into the commission’s work, the 
director Mojsisovics summed up the lessons learned:
The collection of observational data from the observers scattered across the 
province is far more difficult than it might appear to those farther removed 
from the situation. It requires the unlimited attention and the constantly re-
newed initiative of the reporters, to ensure that the individual observers send 
in their observations. More than any other branch of natural science, we re-
quire the participation and cooperation of a broad class of the population. 
We must therefore make an effort to cultivate the awakening interest of the 
public; thus we make clear, by publishing the essential contents of the obser-
vations received and by listing the names of our collaborators, how valuable 
and important the prompt cooperation of the public is to the fulfillment of 
our task. As soon as the institution of earthquake-reporting has become more 
habitual [mehr eingelebt haben wird], all participants will be eager to serve the 
cause of our efforts, conscious of supporting a purely scientific enterprise and 
making contributions to its progressive development.62
The commission also faced a linguistic challenge. Originally, the ques-
tionnaires and instructions were printed only in German. In 1898, they were 
translated into Czech, Slovenian, Croatian, and Italian (though not Polish 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 159
or Ruthenian, because of the low seismicity of Galicia and Bukovina). In 
1901 Belar requested that the portion of the annual chronicle concerning 
Dalmatia also be printed in Croatian. According to his own reports to the 
commission, 382 of his observers wrote in Croatian, only twenty-six in Ger-
man, and fifteen in Italian.63 The commission responded that it would be 
impossible to translate this section of the chronicle: to do so would draw 
analogous demands from the other nationalities, and the cost of satisfying 
them all would be prohibitive. The commission recommended that Belar 
have the chronicle printed instead in a local newspaper.64 A month later 
Belar complained to the commission that his efforts to recruit observers 
by means of articles in Croatian and Italian newspapers had so far been  
fruitless.65
The fate of the imperial Earthquake Commission would play out, like 
imperial politics overall, as a struggle to strike a balance between centraliza-
tion and decentralization.66 Seismology demanded centralization in order 
to synthesize data on midsize earthquakes, to respond concertedly to seis-
mic disasters, and to facilitate communication among the new generation of 
seismic observatories. Yet earthquakes also required study region by region, 
by scientists fluent in the local language, versed in local history, and familiar 
to the local community of observers. After 1904, Vienna’s Central Institute 
for Meteorology and Geophysics provided the necessary degree of central 
organization, while managing to preserve the lively intercourse between 
provincial scientists and the interested public. Its success can be measured, 
for instance, by the over two thousand reports collected in the course of 
two large swarms in Bohemia in 1900 and 1903.67 Indeed, in the Habsburg 
world, “local knowledge” was often produced as “imperial science.” Re-
search conducted in the service of nationalism—even the “national schools 
of thought” celebrated by post-Habsburg historians—was often sponsored 
by the Habsburg state and articulated, in German, by Habsburg-loyal schol-
ars as contributions to the ideology of unity in diversity.68
Conclusion
For Albin Belar, the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918 meant the loss 
of his Erdbebenwarte, the perch from which, for twenty years, he had re-
ported on each spasm of the planet. The new Yugoslav government, sus-
pecting him of German nationalism, seized the contents of his observatory, 
dispossessed him of his apartment, and sent most of his instruments to Bel-
grade. While his children emigrated to the United States, Belar moved what 

160 / Chapter Seven
remained of his instruments to the Triglav valley in the Julian Alps, where 
he owned a villa designed by his friend Max Fabiani, the architect of Ljublja-
na’s post-1895 modernization. The Triglav valley was one of the “natural 
monuments” for which Belar had first sought state protection in 1903, one 
of the earliest proposals for a nature preserve in European history.69 A con-
servation area was established in the valley in 1924, and a national park 
created in 1961, with no acknowledgment of Belar’s contribution. On the 
door to Belar’s villa hung a sign in Slovenian: “Silence, silence, for here 
resides a solitary man who uses his instruments to listen to the sound of 
earthquakes being born in the heart of the Earth.”70 This lonely enterprise 
bore no resemblance to Austrian seismology before 1918.
In Contributions to the Analysis of Sensations (1886), Ernst Mach famously 
argued that the goal of physics is to build up a description of the world 
out of the most basic components of human experience. To illustrate the 
goal of complete knowledge of a physical phenomenon, Mach provided 
two examples. One was straightforward, culled from the standard repertoire 
of laboratory physics: the analysis of white light by means of a prism. The 
other was more elaborate:
Our knowledge of a natural phenomenon, say of an earthquake, is as 
complete as possible when our thoughts so marshal before the eye of the 
mind all the relevant sense-given facts of the case that they may be regarded 
almost as a substitute for the latter, and the facts appear to us as old familiar 
figures, having no power to occasion surprise. When, in imagination, we hear 
the subterranean thunders, feel the oscillation of the earth, figure to ourselves 
the sensation produced by the rising and sinking of the ground, the rocking 
of the walls, the falling of the plaster, the movement of the furniture and the 
pictures, the stopping of the clocks, the rattling and smashing of windows, 
the wrenching of the door-posts, the jamming of the doors; when we see in 
mind the oncoming undulation passing over a forest as lightly as a gust of 
wind over a field of grain, breaking the branches of the trees; when we see the 
town enveloped in a cloud of dust, hear the bells begin to ring in the towers; 
further, when the subterranean processes, which are at present unknown to 
us, shall stand out in full sensuous reality before our eyes, so that we shall see 
the earthquake advancing as we see a wagon approaching in the distance till 
finally we feel the earth shaking beneath our feet,—then more insight than 
this we cannot have, and more we do not require.71
The scientific observation of an earthquake involved all the forms of sensa-
tion explored earlier in Mach’s treatise: movement, sight, time, even tone. In 

Fault Lines and Borderlands / 161
this way, seismology could serve as a test of the capacity of Mach’s psycho-
physical program to produce practical knowledge in real environments, be-
yond the laboratory, as his evolutionary epistemology demanded. In other 
respects, however, Mach’s choice of example is confounding. Having spent 
most of his life in Bohemia, he was unlikely to have experienced a major 
earthquake firsthand. Moreover, how could he expect anyone, in the midst 
of catastrophe, to record all these details—and manage to survive?
Mach’s choice of example seems to have reflected the ambitions of 
earthquake research in imperial Austria. As early as 1869, Mach likely heard 
Rudolf Falb discuss earthquake prediction at the Lotos natural-historical 
society in Prague.72 As Mach would have known—whether from the Lo-
tos society, Austrian scientific journals, or even the popular press—the 
monographic method of earthquake study was being held up as a model of 
empiricism and an antidote to popular unreason. Moreover, this method 
embodied Mach’s principle of analyzing experience into its most basic ele-
ments. Only by combining the limited perspectives of individual observers 
could a total picture of the phenomenon emerge. Tellingly, the subject of 
Mach’s passage on the earthquake is not the generic Man (“one”) but the 
first-person plural Wir. Such a panoramic view of a seismic event could not 
be the property of a single psyche. Seismology was therefore a perfect in-
stantiation of Mach’s principle that physics would do well to abandon the 
fiction of the ego. For Mach, “The primary fact is not the I, the ego, but the 
elements (sensations).”73
Mach’s denunciation of “self-centered views” in Analysis of Sensations was 
as much a political critique as an epistemological objection. He likened the 
metaphysical notion of the bounded self to the social phenomena of “class 
bias” and “national pride,” and called on the “broad-minded inquirer” to 
renounce them. Behind this appeal lay bitter personal experience. Just as 
Suess resigned a university rectorship in 1889, so had Mach in 1883, both 
apparently worn down by the politics of nationalism. Both longed to escape 
the “egoism” of modern politics for a collaborative, supranational science.74 
To Mach’s Austrian colleagues, his seismic example of complete knowledge 
in the Analysis would have evoked a thriving culture of earthquake observa-
tion—a culture that managed to fuse the provincial practices of Landeskunde 
with the transnational organization of a continental empire.
Both Mach’s epistemology and the practices of macroseismic survey 
reflected a peculiarity of Habsburg science: the function of translation. 
Implicit in the work of the Earthquake Commission was a philosophical 
resistance to reduction. No single perspective on the event was privileged. 
Instead, the full array of impressions—visual, aural, tactile, instrumental— 

162 / Chapter Seven
were taken as irreducible elements of knowledge of the whole. The epis-
temic model was one of translation. The goal was emphatically not to 
reduce the observational reports to a single “language of nature,” as the 
curves of self-registering instruments were often described in the nineteenth 
century.75 To a North American seismologist of this period it seemed self-
evident that “reliable seismograms furnish us the data for all our computa-
tions about an earthquake . . . in short, the seismograms give the story of 
the earthquake, just as the spectrogram gives the story of the distant stars.”76 
For Mach, Suess, and their colleagues, however, no seismogram could ever 
tell the story of an earthquake—most basically, because the earth was not a 
distant star. The goal was not to explain the earthquake in terms of a single 
physical cause nor to reduce its description to a single variable. Instead, all 
possible perspectives on an earthquake, like the multiple languages of the 
empire, were in principle granted equal status. “Complete knowledge” of 
an earthquake corresponded not to a mathematical law nor an instrumental 
trace, but rather to a multilingual archive.77
Yet Mach’s epistemological fantasy hid the immense work of construct-
ing such an archive. The history of the imperial Earthquake Commission 
demonstrates, to the contrary, that translation was labor—and it was labor 
that the Earthquake Commission was at times unwilling to fund. Viennese 
seismologists were not even aware of the extent of the effort involved, since 
linguistic equivalences were constructed primarily through discussions be-
tween the provincial reporters and local observers. For instance, the Ger-
man, Croatian, and Czech words Getöse, tutnjava, and rachot became the 
standard descriptions for the rumbling noises accompanying earthquakes, 
rather than other possibilities in each language.78 Even less visible was the 
subsequent work of translating the official results of the commission from 
German into languages in which they were more likely to be read by po-
tential observers. Arguably, the invisibility of such labor is endemic in the 
history of science.79 By eliding the labor and politics of translation, Mach 
contributed to the discipline’s enduring tendency to view translation merely 
as an epistemological metaphor.80

eight
What Is the Earth?
The establishment of the International Seismological Association (ISA) 
in Strasbourg in 1901 was, in the words of its founder, Georg Gerland, a 
case of “nations uniting for collaborative, idealistic work.”1 Gerland even 
suggested that the ISA’s members could “call themselves apostles of world 
peace.”2 As a Humboldtian quest to integrate local geology, global physics, 
and the anthropology of disaster, seismology would seem ideally suited 
to internationalism.3 Yet the ISA represents a contentious episode in the 
unmaking of disaster as a scientific object. Gerland’s version of scientific in-
ternationalism pried the earthquake apart into (1) a geophysical cause, ac-
cessible only to instrumental analysis, and (2) a human impact, the object 
exclusively of an “anthropomorphic” gaze. The story of the ISA manifests 
incongruities between the global visions of scientific modernizers and the 
local realities of communities at risk. Such tensions are part of what Jeremy 
Vetter has recently described as a persistent conflict between “the globalizing 
and universalizing ambitions of modern knowledge-making and the practi-
cal needs of a world of tremendously complex and variable environments 
whose knowing matters so much for human survival and sustainability.”4
The ISA was founded at a pivotal moment in the history of what his-
torians have recently labeled “the observatory sciences.” Taking both the 
heavens and the earth as their subjects, these fields shared a Humboldtian 
focus on precision measurement, numerical data processing, and the repre-
sentation of scientific information on a global or cosmic scale. At the turn 
of the twentieth century, the observatory sciences were uncertainly poised 
between a nineteenth-century dream of popular enlightenment and the im-
peratives of scientific professionalization and military-industrial develop-
ment.5 What form seismology would take as an international, observatory 

164 / Chapter Eight
science was open to debate. What would a global seismology be a science 
of? Or, as Gerland put it, “What is the earth after all?”6
Matter
One way to answer Gerland’s question was bottom-up. From this perspec-
tive, the globalization of seismology would entail the multiplication of re-
gional studies on the model of Suess’s monographic method. This would 
be a collaborative process, recalling Humboldt’s vision of a “general physics 
of the earth.” As one of Gerland’s Strasbourg collaborators explained in 
1908, studies of individual earthquakes are “building stones for the con-
struction of a large edifice, the theory of the seismicity of the entire earth. 
He who wants to be active in this field must follow seismic activity through 
time and space, to a lesser degree as a historian, principally however as 
a geographer.”7 Such studies were in demand both to map seismic haz-
ard and to corroborate Suess’s tectonic theory, which was still contested 
at the turn of the twentieth century. Not all geologists accepted that the 
majority of earthquakes were tectonic in origin, resulting from movement 
along fractures in the earth’s crust and often related to mountain building.8 
Gerland, for one, took pains to point out that the tectonic explanation of 
earthquakes remained very much a hypothesis—“always only theoretically 
assumed, nowhere really proven.” (He could not imagine how this theory 
could explain earthquakes at sea, where there were no mountains. This was 
a curious opinion, since submarine extensions of mountain chains had 
been suspected to exist since ancient times, and nineteenth-century coastal 
soundings had already revealed submerged ridges and hollows.) Evidence 
for the tectonic theory would come from correlating the location and di-
rection of individual earthquakes with features of local geology. Gerland 
termed this approach derisively “local observation.”9 It led, nonetheless, to 
one version of a global seismology. This was the path marked out by Mon-
tessus de Ballore, the French pioneer of a worldwide “seismic geography.” 
For Montessus, the problem of globalizing seismology came down to the 
question: “How then to succeed in the observation of macroseisms [that is, 
earthquakes], small and large, across the entire surface of the globe?”10
Montessus initially hoped his seismic geography would generate a uni-
versal law relating seismicity to topography. The closest he came was the 
hypothesis that the highest seismicity was associated with geosynclines, 
the regions where uplift and folding produced the world’s great mountain 
chains. But he also came to appreciate the limits of any such global gener-

What Is the Earth? / 165
alization, based merely on statistical distributions and not on field studies. 
Such laws were “only valid for one and the same region, where they deter-
mine the direction of the largest ground tremors; they become incorrect 
however if they are carried over from one region to another. This is because 
earthquakes, apart from the geological aspects, also derive in part as causa 
efficiens from the mutual adjustment of matter on the surface. These laws 
thus have a far more narrow range than those that result from geological-
seismic studies, which are undertaken on the whole surface of the planet 
and extended across it.”11 Without local field studies, seismology would be 
blind to the ways in which local conditions determined the development 
and impact of earthquakes.
Analogously, Montessus’s investigations of earthquake-resistant con-
struction methods showed him that there could be no universal rules of 
seismic safety. “No one knows how to establish general rules. Sometimes 
hard soils are to be preferred, sometimes soft soils. Here the heights are less 
vulnerable than the lowlands, elsewhere it’s the opposite.” Indeed, Montes-
sus advocated the complete cessation of construction in certain areas, such 
as Ischia after its disastrous quake of 1883. “The point,” he explained, “is 
that the entanglement of the conditions of location and composition ex-
cludes any general solution to the problem.”12 Like recent scholars, Montes-
sus recognized that the study of earthquakes as disasters—as conjunctions 
of geological, geophysical, and human factors—often required a regional 
rather than global lens.13
Gerland’s Observatory
Gerland envisioned an altogether different path to a global seismology. In 
his opinion, the methods of local observation were already being rendered 
obsolete by the progress of globalization in its widest sense: “Today, how-
ever, the earth is freely accessible, humanity rises and unites ever more to a 
common enterprise; and thus earthquake research has also reached a new 
level. What formerly a single country was for its inhabitants, such is the 
earth as a whole for us today.”14 But what indeed was the earth?
Gerland’s answer was that the earth was nothing but a “gigantic totality 
of cosmic material.” Such was the definition he had offered a decade earlier 
in a bid to redefine “geography” (Geographie or Erdkunde, terms he used 
synonymously) as the study of this totality—minus its human inhabitants. 
This was an astonishing move from a man best known to this point for his 
contributions to anthropology. Gerland’s immediate goal was to establish  

166 / Chapter Eight
Erdkunde as an autonomous scientific discipline, unified by its own meth-
ods and laws. “For only through such a conception will Erdkunde stop being 
a vague field of miscellaneous knowledge, whose details, certainly valuable 
in themselves, in this association all too easily—indeed almost of neces-
sity—lack a strictly scientific foundation; only through this conception, as 
a dynamics of the earth as a whole, will Erdkunde become a strictly meth-
odologically unified science.”15 Gerland’s rhetoric, with its stress on scien-
tific foundations, universality, dynamics, and methodological unity, was 
intended to mark him as the long-awaited modernizer of geography.
In 1887, in the founding issue of his seminal journal Beiträge zur Geo-
physik (Contributions to Geophysics), Gerland firmly excluded human-
ity from the domain of geography. Geography was strictly the science of 
“the continuous mutual action between the interior and the surface of the 
earth.”16 Gerland rejected both crass environmental determinism and an-
thropogeography’s more sophisticated models of nature-culture interac-
tions. He argued, emphatically and controversially, that there was no way 
to bridge the study of man as a product of external physical forces, on one 
hand, and as an autonomous, conscious agent, on the other. Explanation 
could never run from human geography to physical geography; human ac-
tivity could modify the environment in limited ways but could never alter 
the laws of nature. Since “inferences from the nature of the men to the na-
ture of the land are impossible,” a science of the human (if such could exist) 
had nothing to teach the science of the earth.17
In Gerland’s globalizing enterprise, the phenomenon of seismicity took 
on “a remarkable position.” Seismicity seemed to him quite different from 
planetary properties such as heat, elasticity, or magnetism, which could be 
studied as independent subfields. Seismicity instead depended on the “mix-
ture, the aggregate conditions, the chemical-physical process in the earth’s 
interior”—of which, Gerland noted, “we know almost nothing.” Volcanism, 
to be sure, was also a composite phenomenon, but it was also “always a lo-
cal phenomenon.” Seismicity was a truly global property, “spread over and 
through the entire earth, at least in the movements called forth by it.”18 Seis-
mology’s goal was nothing other than “the discovery of the fundamental 
character and constitution of the earth” (die Erkenntniss der Naturbeschaffen-
heit der Erde).19 And the study of the planetary interior was, in Gerland’s es-
timation, the geographer’s raison d’être, the path to “a causal—not a merely 
descriptive—earth science.”20
The key to modern Erdkunde, in Gerland’s view, was the seismograph. 
It was the telescope of the earth scientist, zooming in on the planet’s  

What Is the Earth? / 167
hidden depths.21 For Gerland, making seismology “modern” meant mak-
ing it into an “observatory science.” Yet observatories themselves were  
in flux circa 1900. Would observatories continue to anchor networks of 
lay observers or rely only on experts? Would they maintain the lively ex-
change with field-based research that Humboldt had inspired? Would 
they endure as public spaces as well as scientific workplaces? As historians 
have recently noted, the Observatoire de Paris and the Berliner Sternwarte 
invited the nineteenth-century public to train telescopes on the heavens, 
but their open-door policies were short-lived. Scientific observatories were 
increasingly divided from public ones and tied to military and industrial 
ambitions.22
Gerland’s aspirations were embodied in Strasbourg’s Imperial Central 
Station for Seismology. Unlike the stately facades of earlier observatories 
that announced their public function, the Imperial Central Station pre-
sented a squat, plain face of homely brick. Behind it was a state-of-the-art, 
triple-walled design of iron-reinforced concrete. The three types of seismom-
eter—soon supplemented by five others—were steadied against nearby vi-
brations by pillars 2.3 meters deep and detached from the building itself.23 
In a self-conscious contrast with the older seismic observatories of Italy or 
Japan, Gerland intended that in Strasbourg “local research would recede 
before the great questions of the seismicity of the entire earth.”24
Gerland’s version of seismology was only incidentally concerned with 
the cataclysms that had been the science’s subject matter since ancient times. 
The threat that earthquakes posed to human communities was at most 
marginal to his global seismology. Addressing a popular audience in 1898, 
Gerland insisted that seismology’s goal must be pure rather than practical 
knowledge: “Seismic research thus has no practical benefit. All prophecies, 
even if now and then they seem to come true, are entirely groundless. All 
that one can say for now is that some regions and eras are more given to 
earthquakes, some soil types are more dangerous; and that certainly has no 
practical use.”25 Here Gerland went well beyond disputing the evidence for 
the tectonic hypothesis. He dismissed outright all the work his colleagues 
were doing to avert future disasters—the mapping of seismic intensity, the 
location of fault lines, the study of architectural damage. To the German 
public, Gerland flatly denied that seismology was of any practical value at 
all. Its goal was purely intellectual: to fathom the physical world. It was, 
he argued, an endeavor wholly in the tradition of Kant, who was drawn to 
earth physics because of “the majesty and novelty of the task, the immensity 
of the vision.”26 Ensconced in his windowless, climate-controlled fortress, 

168 / Chapter Eight
hundreds of kilometers from the nearest active fault, Gerland promoted a 
vision of seismology in which the earth figured more as a distant planet 
than as the home of intelligent life.
Across the Surface of the Globe
The most notable absence at the ISA’s 1901 meeting, next to Milne’s, was 
that of Montessus de Ballore. It was Montessus who later pinpointed what 
was so controversial about the fledgling ISA: “If the seismographs register 
every slightly intense earthquake, wherever it is produced, there follows the 
unexpected consequence that, at least theoretically, a single seismological 
observatory would suffice to observe them all from a single point on the 
earth’s surface. That is perhaps what the countries that abstained from the 
Strasbourg conference said to themselves.”27 The fear was not just that Ger-
many’s rivals would be cut out of seismological research, but that seismology 
itself would be transformed: that its diverse modes of investigation—geo-
logical, statistical, historical, and geophysical—would be reduced solely to 
the instrumental registration of remote events. Montessus appreciated the 
potential of seismographic research, but he feared an overreliance on it. 
To cast doubt on Gerland’s project, he drew freely on geology’s romantic, 
heroic image of empirical field research.28 There was a risk of overdrawing 
this caricature. As Stephen Jay Gould once noted, geologists have tended 
to paint the history of their field in black and white. Hutton figures as the 
honest empiricist, Werner as the proto-lab scientist. Yet Gerland’s critics 
took a more nuanced stance, acknowledging the complementarity of new 
instrumental techniques and field-based experience.
Montessus also pointed out the artificiality of Gerland’s contrast be-
tween the “new” seismology and the “old.” Gerland implied that these 
fields could be distinguished in part by their objects of study: “microseisms” 
versus “macroseisms.” Microseisms were, by definition, imperceptible to 
humans and of uncertain origin, but they could hold clues to the nature of 
the planetary mass through which they traveled. Montessus objected: “The 
distinction between macroseisms and microseisms is artificial in the sense 
that it depends on the individual acuity of the senses of the different observ-
ers.” Moreover, microseisms might be due to any of a potentially infinite 
array of causes. As Montessus attempted to enumerate them, these included 
“winds, tides, solar heat, barometric pressure, ocean currents, snow accu-
mulation, avalanches, rockslides, movements of railway cars, explosions of 
mines, volcanic phenomena, etc., etc.”29 The category of microseism also in-
cluded waves from strong earthquakes, which would register with small am-

What Is the Earth? / 169
plitudes and long periods after traveling great distances. “Hence,” quipped 
John Milne, “the largest earthquakes have been called small.”30 Milne him-
self preferred the term “unfelt earthquake” to microseism. The distinction 
between micro- and macroseisms—one that has shaped the discipline’s de-
velopment ever since—was thus a clumsy attempt to naturalize the growing 
fissure between field-based and observatory-based methods.
In 1903 Montessus appeared at the second meeting of the ISA with a 
warning: “The study of seismological waves originating at a distance has 
the attendant drawback, that the earthquake phenomena lose their char-
acteristic features on the long path through the earth. It is to be feared that 
their nature is veiled to us; the geological causes, the discovery of which is 
the ultimate goal of our work, are in danger of escaping us.”31 He made the 
point more baldly the following year, noting that “by an unfortunate conse-
quence of this brilliant research, above all physical and mechanical, we have 
increasingly neglected the geological point of view, the only one by which 
it is possible to attack head-on the origins of the seismic phenomenon, and 
we have delayed studying in itself a movement that, as interesting as it may 
be, is not any less a merely secondary effect of earthquakes, such that these 
studies remain incapable of reaching them [earthquakes] in their genesis. 
Nonetheless a few brief considerations of the geology of the shaken regions, 
including the descriptions of the most important seisms, would have suf-
ficed to remind the physicist-seismologists that they were directing their ef-
forts at a truly ancillary problem, despite the interest—entirely indisputable, 
for that matter—of the results that they obtained.” To attack the earthquake 
problem at its core, Montessus continued, seismologists had to get to the 
scene of the action. Those who sat tight in their observatories were like 
meteorologists who hoped to understand the trajectories of cyclones based 
only the “mechanical laws of the movement of fluids,” “without attending 
to the atmospheric phenomena preceding and accompanying their forma-
tion at the very heart of the country where they are born.”32 Seismology 
could not be confined to the observatory, for its evidence was written in part 
on the face of the earth.
Montessus’s point concerned not only the methods of seismology but 
also the identity of the seismologist. He should be “geographer and geolo-
gist” in addition to “physicist and engineer [mécanicien].” Most importantly, 
the seismologist must remember his primary responsibility: “Science must 
not only shut itself up in the ivory tower of its observations and specula-
tions. Whenever it can, and it is certainly the case here, it must think of 
the well-being of humanity and of the relief of its sufferings.” To Montes-
sus, the purpose of the ISA was “not to predict earthquakes, but simply to 

170 / Chapter Eight
mitigate the disastrous effects by a more profound knowledge of the seis-
mic phenomenon, just as hydraulic services and foresters diminish those 
of floods.”33 Like Albert Heim, Montessus prioritized the geologist’s duty to 
mitigate hazards. Implicitly, he questioned the moral consequences of an 
earth science defined, à la Gerland, to the exclusion of humanity.
While Montessus was piecing together a global seismic geography, the 
Austrian geologist Eduard Suess was pursuing an even more ambitious syn-
thesis: The Face of the Earth, his sprawling three-volume survey of global 
tectonics, published over the course of three decades. No individual at the 
turn of the twentieth century had a clearer vision of geology as a global sci-
ence, and earthquakes played a special role in it. They were movements of 
the earth’s crust that made visible the activity of mountain building—the 
vital process of a planet dissipating its ancient heat and gradually collapsing 
in on itself.34 Yet it was not as a progenitor of a global tectonics that Suess 
confronted Gerland. It was, fortuitously, in his capacity as president of the 
Austrian Academy of Sciences (an office he held from 1898 to 1911). In 
that role, Suess was consulted by imperial ministers when the Austrians 
were formally invited to join the ISA in 1903. Suess was then in the midst 
of arranging the transfer of the Austrian Earthquake Service from the private 
hands of the Academy of Sciences to the state-run Central Institute for Mete-
orology and Geomagnetism. As we have seen (chapter 7), Austrian scientists 
recognized the need to balance the centralization of seismic research and 
response against the decentralization demanded by Austria’s linguistic and 
environmental diversity.
Writing in a confidential report to the education ministry in Vienna, 
Suess argued that “northern” Europeans (read: the Germans) were inter-
ested exclusively in the propagation of waves from distant earthquakes, 
which was “only a special question within the great task.” Moreover, the 
instruments for registering such waves were still imperfect, as the Viennese 
physicist Franz Exner had concluded after inspecting several European seis-
mological observatories. Exner also noted that the study of nearby earth-
quakes required different instruments than the study of distant ones (the 
Ehlert as opposed to the Vincentini seismograph). As Suess pointed out, 
the lands of the southern Alps and Mediterranean had “a far greater interest 
[than northerners] in studies of this [local] kind and also a more intensive 
knowledge of their nature.” Suess also stressed the practical advantages of 
relying on domestic rather than foreign institutions: “the individual investi-
gations, such as the earthquakes of Laibach [Ljubljana] and Agram [Zagreb], 
are carried out much better and with an incomparably greater measure of 
local knowledge and local interest by the individual states than by a central 

What Is the Earth? / 171
office.” As a “practical example” Suess pointed to a seismic observatory in 
Bohemia that was run by the Academy of Sciences “at no small cost.” This 
observatory depended on the cooperation of the imperial finance ministry, 
the railway ministry, the mining administration, and the Vienna Physical 
Institute. “I doubt that such an enterprise could be better carried out from 
Strassburg, and that it would be possible at all without the many domestic 
connections and sponsorships.”35
Suess’s critique of the ISA echoed in part the political discourse of decen-
tralization in the waning years of the Habsburg monarchy. It also reflected 
the years he had spent scaling icy peaks and scouring provincial archives in 
search of clues to the seismic history of the eastern Alps. As he put it else-
where, macroseismology “demands very precise tectonic local knowledge, 
does not permit of centralization, and seeks the causes of tectonic earth-
quakes on the dislocations themselves.” For microseismology, earthquakes 
were merely “the incidental trigger of secondary phenomena, which are 
soon diffused among other questions of geophysics.”36 Characteristically, 
Suess refused to sever the micro from the macro. He recommended against 
Austria’s joining the ISA.
Montessus and Suess were defending a Humboldtian approach to sci-
entific internationalism against Gerland’s purifying impulse. In addition to 
international cooperation, they argued for the value of local knowledge. 
In addition to building observatories, they urged seismologists to strap on 
their hiking boots and return to the field. And in addition to probing the 
inorganic stuff of Gerland’s “earth science,” they called on seismology to 
serve human welfare.
Man
Gerland’s elimination of humanity from the purview of geography has long 
been misunderstood as an expression of positivism. He was accused by the 
geographer Hermann Wagner of being the kind of person who “despises all 
anthropogeographic problems, because they are not capable of precise solu-
tion.”37 In truth, Gerland’s motivations were more complex. Paradoxical as 
it may seem, he was attempting to reinvent humanism for a scientific age.
Gerland was, after all, a human scientist before he was a physical scien-
tist. Well before he took up the cause of seismology, he had won respect 
for his anthropological scholarship on the relationship between Kultur-
völker and Naturvölker (civilized and primitive nations). In Über das Ausster-
ben der Naturvölker (On the Extinction of the Primitive Races) he argued 
that colonized populations were not in fact doomed to extinction, and he  

172 / Chapter Eight
condemned Europeans for their brutal treatment of natives. His insights 
were well noted by theorists like Darwin38 and Boas.39
Yet Gerland’s conclusions were ambivalent. On one hand, he recognized 
that Europeans’ barbaric treatment of natives cast doubt on the very notion 
of “civilized peoples.” Not only were colonialists at risk of becoming bar-
barians themselves. Even in the metropoles Europeans were threatened by 
symptoms of what would soon be termed degeneration: “We have grown 
pampered in our bodily existence, accustomed to a host of comforts that we 
can not do without; we are mentally far more sensitive, and a downfall of 
that which is holy to us crushes us as well.” It was, he judged, time to “stop 
speaking of a particular incapacity for life of the Naturvölker, since we would 
succumb far faster than they to the disaster they have suffered.” The Extinc-
tion of the Primitive Races was thus, in part, an allegory of modernization 
and its discontents. Gerland’s ambivalence was underscored by repeated 
comparisons between colonial subjects and the Germanic tribes in the face 
of Roman culture. He could not help but agree with J. G. Seume’s aphorism 
that “we savages are better men.”40
On the other hand, Gerland did not doubt that the “struggle for exis­
tence” would end with the triumph of the colonial order. Naturvölker were 
vulnerable because of their exquisite adaptation (in a Darwinian sense) to a 
particular natural environment. By definition, these were populations who 
adapted to nature instead of controlling it; hence their catastrophic confron-
tations with modernity. At the end of his analysis, the fundamental distinc-
tion between Kulturvölker and Naturvölker remained intact: the former were 
able to transcend the conditions imposed by nature, while the latter were 
bound by them.
The New Humanism
What then did colonial anthropology have to do with geophysics? Gerland’s 
reinvention of geography, Erdkunde, as a strictly physicalist, instrument- 
based, and highly mathematical discipline might seem typical of what 
Andrew Zimmermann has described as the antihumanist turn in German 
anthropology in the late nineteenth century. Like Zimmermann’s antihu-
manists, Gerland replaced “hermeneutic notions of understanding and in-
terpretive empathy with models of objective observations borrowed from 
the natural sciences.” According to Zimmermann, this move “devalued the 
human both as an inquirer and as a subject of inquiry.”41 For Gerland, how-
ever, the abandonment of hermeneutic inquiry—the turn to a dehuman-
ized geography—was meant to ensure that the human would not be thus 

What Is the Earth? / 173
devalued. Humanity must not figure in a true science of the earth, Gerland 
argued, precisely because (European) humans were not passively subject to 
natural conditions.
Gerland broke with anthropologists like Tylor, Ratzel, and Lasch, who 
were struck by the parallels between mythical and scientific explanations 
of earthquakes. Gerland argued instead that the history of geographical 
thought illustrated clear disjunctures in human intellectual evolution. He 
insisted on the distance between primitive anthropomorphism and modern 
science, with its capacity to transform “the entire range of telluric influences 
into psychic force.” Gerland made this point in 1901, just as the ISA was 
taking shape, in a series of lectures at the University of Strasbourg on Kant’s 
physical geography and anthropology.42 It was there that he identified Kant 
as the first modern seismologist. Why, at the dawn of the twentieth century, 
would a geophysicist have taken up Kantian philosophy?
Gerland sought to prove that Kant’s “pragmatic” geography had never 
been merely pragmatic. In a convoluted and often implausible argument, 
Gerland argued that Kant’s geography and anthropology were merely “pro-
paedeutic” to his critical philosophy. Apparently, the inventor of modern 
seismology never intended it to serve practical ends. Hence Gerland’s in-
sistence that seismology was not a practical but a “pure” science, and that 
earthquakes were not “disasters” but “microseisms.” Gerland went so far 
as to attribute an “anthropomorphic” perspective, from which earthquakes 
did appear as disasters, to a stage of barbarism. To speak of geophysical 
cataclysms in human terms was to regress to a pre-enlightened age: the age 
before Kant.
Gerland stood in a tradition of central Europeans, including Gustav The-
odor Fechner and Ernst Haeckel, who yearned to reconcile materialism and 
evolutionary theory with the romantic need to find meaning and purpose 
in nature. “The atomic-mechanistic point of view is not only not hostile to a 
religious and aesthetic conception of life and of cosmic evolution,” Gerland 
insisted. “To the contrary, it leads to it, and only through it becomes com-
plete, vital, indeed becomes capable of life—and reciprocally, this second 
conception of life is nothing without the first.”43 Gerland could not accept 
the pragmatic views of scientific knowledge that were gaining ground at 
this time, and which proved so fruitful to seismology. Indeed, what united 
various contributions to seismology as a science of disaster—from Eduard 
Suess to Harry Wood—was a certain suspicion of claims to absolute truth. 
For these seismologists, the primary criterion for valid knowledge was its 
utility for human welfare. 
For Gerland, the resolution of the tension between materialism and  

174 / Chapter Eight
humanism lay in the expectation that evolution would gradually loosen 
natural constraints on human freedom. “But the higher man climbs, the 
more he makes himself free of the coercive influence of the earth . . . thus 
this ever growing freedom and independence is an invigorating and uplift-
ing outlook for the future that we are building for ourselves . . . and life does 
not end with life on earth, for ‘All that is transitory is but a metaphor.’”44 
Darwinian anthropology had spelled the end of the old humanism by cast-
ing man’s intellectual efforts as no more than a struggle for existence. Ger-
land was therefore on a quest for a new humanism, one in which even the 
most earthly knowledge would serve a purpose higher than mere survival. 
But his new humanism also introduced a radical elitism. By stigmatizing a 
human perspective on nature as primitive, Gerland’s humanism abandoned 
the hope of a convergence between expert and lay perceptions of nature. In 
the words of George Sarton, founder of the history of science, only common 
folk paid any attention to “mere earthquakes.”45
History
In Gerland’s Beiträge zur Geophysik in 1900, Montessus de Ballore pressed 
for “the most complete seismic description of the universe as possible.”46 
Montessus had already laid the foundations, having built a correspondence 
network that furnished him with felt reports and instrumental data on tens 
of thousands of seismic events. His library of seismic data eventually num-
bered approximately 170,000 events. At this scale, systematic organization 
was of the essence. Seismology’s age of newspaper clippings was over.
Montessus’s solution embraced a technoscientific trend of the fin de siè-
cle: the système de fiches or card catalog, which, as he noted, “does such great 
service in bibliography.” In preparing his global seismic geography, Montes-
sus divided the earth’s surface into fifty major geographic regions and 451 
seismic subregions. For each of the latter, he arranged index cards chro­
nologically with “all the necessary indications of time, place, sources, etc., 
the detailed history of every observed fact, which thus acquires a kind of 
individuality.”47 The discrete “fact” represented on each card often masked 
the difficulty of deciding whether separate reports pointed to the same seis-
mic event. By 1907, these “facts” took up almost twenty-six meters of shelf 
space. (Their subsequent history is fascinating in its own right. Montessus 
left the cards with the Geographic Society in Paris upon his departure for 
Chile in 1907. During the German occupation of Paris in World War Two, 
they were safely hidden in the vaults of the National Library. There they 
were forgotten until the 1970s, when the fiftieth anniversary of Montessus’s 

What Is the Earth? / 175
death inspired the director of the Strasbourg geophysical institute to inquire 
into their whereabouts. It took seven years for the Paris librarians to find the 
catalog, still in the basement where it had been placed in 1942. An inven-
tory was finally published in 1984.48)
As historians of information science note, it is difficult to appreciate in 
the Internet age the enthusiasm with which the concept of the card catalog 
was greeted circa 1900. Advocates of the card catalog saw it as the means 
of liberating information from its confines in books and organizing it for 
scholarly and public use. “Cards of a uniform size, on which standardized 
data were transcribed, housed physically in card drawers and related fur-
niture, and organized conceptually by classification schemes of various 
kinds, in effect epitomized a new ‘modernist’ technology.”49 In seismology, 
the card catalog promised a new path to the nineteenth-century ideal of 
complete knowledge, guided by the internationalist values of efficiency and 
commensurability. It was the quintessential modernist solution to the glob­
alization of knowledge.
The State of the Planet
Montessus and Forel urged the ISA not to neglect its responsibility for “uni-
versal” seismic description. Back in 1899, Gerland had assured his audience 
at the International Geographical Congress that the ISA would pursue “the 
publication of a chronicle, which would extend over a certain period [and 
include] a bibliography.”50 A catalog had also been discussed at the Stras-
bourg conference of 1901. Yet “inexplicably, it is never mentioned anywhere 
in a precise manner,” as Forel pointed out at the 1907 meeting of the ISA.51 
In 1905, Gerland’s Central Bureau of the ISA in Strasbourg had published 
the first volume of a putatively global catalog, two years after the events it 
chronicled. Forel evidently hoped to give the ISA a degree of control over fu-
ture volumes. He was soon appointed to a commission to oversee their pro-
duction. The ISA’s catalog would be “more complete” than those of Fuchs, 
Perrey, and Mallet, and based on “more extensive information”; they would 
“be perfected from year to year, [and] become the fundamental repertory of 
the entire seismological science of the future.”52 The catalog, in short, was 
to be a distinctly modern object.
Forel sought a wide audience for the catalog, as for his limnological stud-
ies. This included geographers who wished to compare regions of stronger 
or weaker seismicity, or to trace the rise and fall of seismicity in a region 
over time; geologists interested in “the points and the lines of greatest fragil-
ity on the globe”; physicists and astronomers studying the nature of seismic 

176 / Chapter Eight
waves or the constitution of the earth; seismologists tracing the periodicity 
of earthquakes; architects and engineers seeking “the rules to make human 
constructions safe from seismic devastation”; and “many others still.” “Let 
us not forget,” Forel cautioned his colleagues, “that the Catalog must be 
able to be consulted by people who are not seismologists.” The bibliograph-
ical references would need to be complete enough to serve nonspecialists, 
and a summary table would “certainly be greatly appreciated by the general 
public.”53
The inaugural 1903 catalog proved a disappointment, however. Some 
critics complained of the two-year delay in publication. Others, like the 
Italian seismologists Agamennone and Palazzo, charged that the catalog 
had been produced too quickly, without enough time for full studies of 
individual earthquakes. The key question was how to balance discursive 
detail with analytical convenience. Should the catalog be a chronicle or an 
overview? August Sieberg, responsible for analyzing foreign macroseismo-
logical reports at the Strasbourg observatory, saw both sides of the issue: “In 
order to allow others to verify the conclusions arrived at, it is indispensable 
to publish the observational material in extenso, but not, as used to be 
common, in long-winded descriptions, but rather in the concise and clearly 
organized [leicht übersichtlich] form of tabular compilations.”54 Following 
Forel, Montessus advised that the catalog should not be a “dry enumeration 
of observations,” but rather a “readable description.”55 Not everyone at the 
ISA saw the trade-offs so clearly. Palazzo recommended that future catalogs 
restrict themselves to “the most interesting reports.” “In this way one could 
immediately record the earthquake activity of the entire planet for a given 
moment and the distribution of earthquakes in the various regions.” The 
result would be a catalog “at a glance.”56
However, the variability of earthquake reports undermined the ISA’s 
goal of producing a global seismic overview. Among the noninstrumental 
reports arriving at Strasbourg, five different intensity scales were in use. In 
some countries, no scale at all was employed, and “the observers instead at-
tempt to express themselves in quite general phrases, for which a standard 
of comparison is lacking. In the reproduction of intensity determinations 
of this last kind, we have adhered strictly to the descriptions of the sources, 
even when these proved to be improbable or even incorrect. In order to 
make it possible above all for the user of the catalog to form an indepen­
dent judgment of the degree of intensity of an earthquake, we have added 
any comments on the effects of an earthquake according to the sources in 
column 11 [of the table].”57 The observers would still have their say.
In fact, Montessus anticipated that the progress of seismology would 

What Is the Earth? / 177
make a global catalog impossible. For example, the ISA’s catalogs for 1903 
and 1904 reported only a few dozen Chilean seisms. Meanwhile, improve-
ments in the Chilean service meant that the catalogs for 1906 to 1908 would 
need to list 1,888 separate events for this country alone. “I am firmly con-
vinced precisely by the experience I have acquired in this genre of research,” 
Montessus attested. A global catalog would soon be a hopeless task: “Once 
the efforts of the International Seismological Association have produced 
their effect, that is to say that macroseismic and microseismic observations 
have developed on the surface of the globe with the necessary fullness of 
detail and generality, the work of the annual global catalog will become 
completely unrealizable; the central office will be literally overwhelmed and 
the ISA will no longer be able to meet the expenses. . . . So it will be abso-
lutely necessary to renounce this publication. Moreover, and to use what 
seems to me an entirely natural analogy, can one imagine the International 
Meteorological Association publishing an annual catalog of rainfall on the 
surface of the globe?”58 Montessus concluded that seismicity, like rainfall, 
was a phenomenon for which annual variations were meaningful only at 
the regional scale. By 1909 Montessus seemed resigned to the failure of his 
universal seismic description.
Standardizing Disaster
Internationalization requires agreement on standards of measurement, and 
establishing these was one of the broad achievements of nineteenth-century 
science. Standardizing the measurement of disaster, however, was nothing 
like standardizing mass, length, or electrical resistance. Unlike the wind-
speed scale used to assess hurricanes, seismic intensity scales involve many 
parameters of many kinds. When introducing the Rossi-Forel scale in 1883, 
the Swiss Commission expressed the hope that it had “thereby created an 
international intensity scale.”59 In a literal sense, this was true: the scale 
was published in German, French, and Italian and immediately put to use 
in Switzerland and Italy. But were these really the same scale? In places, 
the Italian one hewed closer to De Rossi’s original criteria than to Forel’s 
French amalgam of the two.60 There were significant differences among all 
three in the criteria of human response. Degree 1 required that the shock be 
“determined by a seismologist” in Italian, but “determined by a practiced 
[exercé, geubte] observer” in French and German. Degree 2 specified that the 
shock be felt by “few people at rest” in French, but there was no comparable 
criterion in Italian. Degree 3 required that the shock be reported in news-
papers and perceived “by people who are not concerned with seismology”  

178 / Chapter Eight
in Italian but not in French. Degree 6 specified in French that “a few fearful 
people leave their houses”; in Italian that people exited “due to fear or pru-
dence”; the Italian alone further specified that in describing the shock people 
would mention “that fortunately there were no damages.” Not surprisingly, 
the French version was the one most often cited as “the Rossi-Forel scale,” 
thanks to the language’s cosmopolitan status. Charles Davison judged it 
superior to the Italian scale, but that was probably beside the point. In 1903 
the ISA resolved to develop an international scale of seismic intensity, but 
candidates emerged slowly.61
Few members had acquired as much expertise with the international 
measurement of intensity as August Sieberg, secretary of Gerland’s Stras-
bourg observatory. By virtue of “processing a vast amount of macroseismic 
observations, collected from people of the most varied education levels 
throughout the world,” combined with on-site inspections of earthquake 
damage in Italy, Sieberg felt ready to propose a new scale for international 
use in 1912. One drawback of earlier scales, in his view, was the brevity 
of their descriptions of observable effects. “I cannot fathom the considera-
tions behind this terseness; in any case it has proved in practice to be the 
greatest obstacle to an effective use of intensity scales.”62 He also called for 
more detail in the questions posed to observers. The questionnaire should 
suggest typical, recognizable earthquake effects; otherwise novice observers 
answered the bare question “Effects?” with “None.”
Sieberg cautioned against including human injuries or emotional ef-
fects as criteria, but he could not dispense with them. Indeed, his scale is 
remarkable for the care with which it describes psychological and socio-
logical phenomena. For example, degree 1 stipulates a shock not felt by 
people, “however once the registration becomes known, individual people 
report that they purportedly felt the quake.” Degree 2 notes, in keeping 
with Davison’s research on “the effects of observers’ conditions”: “Only a 
few people finding themselves completely at rest, specifically those with 
sensitive nerves, noticeably feel the quake in the higher stories of houses, 
while on the ground barely anyone is conscious of it. The quiet of the night 
is also more favorable to perceptibility, if the observer is awake.” Degree 3 
specifies: “many only recognize afterwards, through the mutual exchange of 
ideas, that they were dealing with an earthquake.” And degrees 4 through 6 
distinguish among different levels of panic:
4:	 “This movement almost never induces terror, only if the residents have al­
ready been made nervous and fearful by other earthquakes.”
5:	 “In isolated cases the inhabitants flee their dwellings.”

What Is the Earth? / 179
6:	 “The earthquake is felt by everyone with terror, so that very many flee their 
dwellings; many feel like they will fall over.”63
In these ways, Sieberg’s scale exploited much of what nineteenth-century 
seismology had learned about human responses to earthquakes.
By 1939 there were thirty-nine versions of the Rossi-Forel scale in use. 
Some revisions expanded descriptive language, while others pruned it. In 
Wood and Neumann’s 1931 revision to the Sieberg scale, for instance, the 
line “Plants, the branches and weaker boughs and trees sway visibly, as they 
do with a moderate wind” became “Trees, bushes, shaken slightly.” A recent 
critic judges that the earlier version was “more vivid and clearer.”64 Indeed, 
devising intensity scales posed a rare challenge to scientists’ communicative 
skills. Composing a scale was no less than a poet’s quest for the evocative 
image, the telling detail.
Moreover, the descriptive criteria used to classify shocks were highly 
dependent on local cultures. It mattered how easily the masonry cracked, 
whether the houses had chimneys, how much of the population worked 
indoors, how given they were to panic. In Santiago, Montessus de Ballore 
found counterintuitively that “the observation ‘felt by persons walking’ cor-
responds to a greater intensity than the record ‘felt by everyone.’ This seems 
to be due to the more or less coherent nature of the subsoil at Santiago.”65 
In the United States, Charles Rockwood noted that the report of “heavy” 
damage by an earthquake in the eastern United States was equivalent to 
“light” in reports from Peru.66 When Edward Holden adapted the Rossi-
Forel scale for use in California, he appended each degree with a word or 
phrase typically used by local witnesses, such as “slight” or “violent.” Yet 
his assignments of intensity were unreliable because he was, inexplicably, 
“partial to intensity V.”67
How then could earthquakes be compared internationally? Montessus 
again drew a comparison to meteorology, specifically to the Humboldtian 
methods of global physical geography: “When meteorologists draw their 
isobars or isothermic curves, they begin by reducing the temperatures or 
the atmospheric pressures to sea level by means of appropriate formulae. In 
other words, they calculate these elements according to what they should 
have measured in places equally distant from the earth’s center. But as re-
gards the earthquake observations of intensity, we cannot conceive of any 
method or formula which would enable us to reduce all estimates to uni-
form exterior circumstances, that is to say, to uniformity of subsoil, rigid-
ity of buildings, temperament of the observers, etc. The mere enumeration 
of these requirements shows clearly the illusiveness of such an attempt.” 

180 / Chapter Eight
Montessus added with a touch of sarcasm that an acceptable international 
intensity scale would have only two degrees: felt or not felt.68
In 1900 Charles Davison succeeded in devising a rough conversion 
scheme for eleven different scales, including corresponding values of maxi-
mum ground acceleration.69 In 1933, he expanded this to include thirty-nine 
scales. By then, however, he had grown pessimistic about the possibility of 
settling on a single international scale. As he reflected in 1921, “After an 
experience of thirty years in constructing isoseismal lines, I venture there-
fore to suggest that an arbitrary scale of seismic intensity may be of very 
considerable service in the study of earthquakes, provided that each degree 
of the scale is restricted to one test only, and that personal impressions, 
such as those depending on the degree of alarm excited, are excluded. I feel 
doubtful, however, whether it would be wise to attempt agreement in the 
adoption of one uniform scale in all civilized countries.”70
Indeed, a scale with criteria like “chandeliers swing” or “chimneys 
thrown down” will not help a seismologist evaluating damage to thatched 
huts on Samoa. In Japan, intensity is measured by damage to features of 
traditional architecture like stone lanterns and paper-covered sliding doors. 
The European Macroseismic Intensity Scale of 1998 assumes that for any de-
gree of shaking, the damage will follow a normal distribution: the number 
of structures with greater-than-average damage will be roughly the same as 
the number that fall at the low end. Such a scale won’t work in places where 
typical structures (say, California’s wooden bungalows) either survive un-
damaged or are wrecked beyond repair. By the same token, in countries 
where quakes are typically stronger, scales must be extended at the high 
end; in regions of low seismicity, scales must be more finely graded at the 
low end. As Davison concluded, “Conditions vary from one country to an-
other, and, so long as those conditions are known and so long as the scale 
is expressed in definite terms, it seems to me probable that the gain will 
be greater if each seismologist is left free to adopt that scale which is best 
adapted to the conditions under which he happens to work.”71
Documenting the Earth
With its information overload, seismology circa 1900 looked poised to be-
come a poster child for the benefits of the “documentation” movement. 
In 1895 Paul Otlet founded the International Institute of Bibliography in 
Brussels for the purpose of “unifying the bibliographic notices relating to 
writings of every nature, dealing with all matters, published in every era and 
in every country.”72 Otlet’s institute was supported by international confer-

What Is the Earth? / 181
ences and an annual Bulletin. By 1930, it had amassed a catalog of 16 mil-
lion entries. At the 1907 meeting of the ISA, Georges Lecointe—the director 
of the Brussels observatory and an associate of Otlet—called for an interna-
tional seismological bibliography. The idea received unanimous support, 
but debate quickly turned to the pros and cons of competing bibliographi-
cal systems. Some urged linking the association’s work to the compilations 
undertaken by the British Royal Society, while Lecointe spoke in favor of 
Otlet’s institute. The question was submitted to an expert commission—to 
which Otlet himself was appointed. It was decided that the bibliography 
would be cast as a standardized card catalog, to be integrated into Otlet’s 
“universal bibliography.”73
Yet macroseismology did not fit neatly into Otlet’s scheme. Otlet aspired 
to release information from its linguistic trappings, to solve the problem 
of Babel. Not only were he and his followers warm supporters of the Espe-
ranto and Edo movements. He also advocated “vocabulary control,” such 
as restrictions on the words that could be used as subject headings. Otlet 
likened his system to the work of a knowledge factory, running documents 
through a giant grinder in order to extract “the purest matter useful for civi-
lization.”74 The factory metaphor underlined the difference between Otlet’s 
encyclopedism and that of the Enlightenment philosophes. Otlet sought to 
decontextualize information: to abstract it from its context of production, 
decompose it into standard units, and set it into circulation as a form of 
knowledge capital.75 His attempts to obviate human language were, how-
ever, at cross-purposes with seismology’s monographic method. Macro-
seismic information was inextricably language bound. It lodged in archival 
documents, newspaper reports, and the stories of earthquake survivors. It 
mattered whether an impact was described as a tremor or a jolt, whether a 
house was described as cracked or split. And the researcher had to develop 
an ear for such local turns of phrase.
Nor were macroseismology’s goals well served by Otlet’s ultimate aim: 
the “Universal Book.” It was a telling irony that Otlet envisioned his final 
product as a bound volume: “It will constitute a systematic, complete, cur-
rent registration of all the facts relating to a particular branch of knowledge. 
It will be formed by linking together materials and elements scattered in 
all relevant publications. . . . By gathering these leaves together, and clas-
sifying and organizing them according to the headings of a reliable and 
detailed classification, we will create ‘the Universal Book of Knowledge.”76 
How could one hope to enclose the young field of seismology—with its 
intuition of the infinite and evolving interconnections among terrestrial 
phenomena—within such a static, closed system?

182 / Chapter Eight
The conflict between the ideals of the documentation movement and 
the methods of macroseismology was clear in their very different uses of the 
term “monographic.” The monographic method in seismology, as we know, 
entailed a comprehensive narrative of a given earthquake, incorporating 
geological, sociological, and historical research. The documentation move-
ment, on the other hand, adopted from Wilhelm Ostwald its own “mono-
graphic principle,” denoting the “division, dissection and redistribution of 
items of information.”77 In the first instance, seismology’s monographic 
method embedded physical facts in historical narratives and descriptions 
of the physical and human environment. Documentation’s monographic 
principle, by contrast, sought to cut information free from narrative, from 
context, even from language itself.
This effect was vividly illustrated by the scheme for a seismological bib-
liography proposed by the ISA commission. It consisted of no fewer than  
165 categories of phenomena. The primary division was based on the 
method of registration, whether human senses or instruments, that is, 
“macroseism” versus “microseism.” Thus “earthquakes per se” were classed 
apart from the “microseisms” that corresponded to “distant” quakes.78 Cata-
strophic effects and geophysical parameters were strenuously pried apart. 
Such a bibliography represented nothing less than the systematic dis-
mantling of disasters as scientific objects. As one commentator remarked 
at the time, the bibliographic problem in seismology was a “very com-
plex question in the present case, a veritable spider’s web, in view of the 
multiplicity of topics which seismology touches on and the perspectives 
from which they may be considered.”79 Applying the monographic princi-
ple of documentation to nineteenth-century seismology was like snipping 
the threads of the “spider’s web” that represented its holistic approach to  
disaster.
The ISA had been created by an internationalist movement preoccupied 
with the present—most urgently with averting the threat of war. In the sci-
ences, internationalists focused on cataloging the present state of knowledge. 
In seismology, they aimed to standardize data and organize it efficiently, in 
order to survey the present seismicity and physical constitution of the globe. 
To that end, the ISA came up with various schemes to purge felt reports of 
their discursive character. They seem not to have realized, however, that 
there is a trade-off between making data commensurable across space and 
across time.
The sciences responsible for helping humanity plan wisely for the future 
have the tasks of reconstructing the earth’s past on the basis of existing data, 
producing “complete” data on the here and now, and archiving that data 

What Is the Earth? / 183
for future generations. As Geoff Bowker argues, the problem with comput­
erized data in the environmental sciences is often that it includes too little 
of the context in which it was produced.80 Without information about the 
physical, scientific, and social milieus in which it was generated, data loses 
much of its value to future researchers. Lack of context is evident in many 
ways. Sometimes it’s a matter of language, as when a climate model exists 
only in an outdated code, or when weather has been described in the lost 
vocabulary of seafaring (how did a “moderate gale” differ from a wind that 
“blows hard”?). In this vein, seismologists have developed “lexicons” of 
the words typically used in other eras to describe earthquakes and tsuna-
mis.81 Sometimes, the problem is an incompletely recorded measurement 
process—likely something so basic to the scientist’s training and everyday 
work that she would never think to write it down. Sometimes it’s a result of 
theory change: seemingly unrelated phenomena might one day be judged 
essential to the process she is recording. Indeed, the relevant information 
goes beyond facts and protocols to include values, or what historian Chris-
tian Rohr calls “mentalities.” In order to date floods of the Danube in the 
sixteenth century, Rohr argues, one needs to know that most floods were 
not perceived as disasters at all. They were normal, seasonal events, which 
were manageable within a system of warning and prevention. For that rea-
son, they do not appear where a climatologist would look for them today, 
namely, in historical annals. Rohr underscores that environmental data 
is deeply embedded in historical cultures of perceiving, interpreting, and 
managing nature.82
Geoscientists look to the past and to the future. In order to interpret 
records of the earth’s history, they need knowledge of the human past. In or-
der to serve future generations, they need to index their data with elements 
of the present—the world they take for granted. These tasks require a sense 
for historical otherness. Like nineteenth-century seismology, they require a 
feeling for history, both human and natural.
Conclusion
The ISA collapsed during the Great War, and with it the hope of constructing 
an integrated international approach to seismic risk. Until the late 1960s, 
the human dimensions of earthquakes were studied, if at all, within the 
national frameworks of hazards geography and Cold War disaster sociol-
ogy. International seismology endured as an observatory science, a science 
of insensible vibrations. Under the International Union for Geodesy and 
Geophysics (founded in 1919, the year of Gerland’s death), the Strasbourg 

184 / Chapter Eight
observatory continued to function as the central node of an international 
network of observatories. In 1922, the International Union created the In-
ternational Seismological Summary, a continuation of Milne’s microseis-
mic catalog. Since then, international catalogs have been almost exclusively 
microseismic. When Beno Gutenberg and Charles Richter compiled the first 
edition of their landmark Seismicity of the Earth (1942), the ISA’s catalogs 
for the years 1903–6 and 1908 were their only sources of macroseismic 
(sensible) data.
Over the first decade of the twentieth century, Gerland increasingly faced 
criticism for his neglect of the study of the destructive impacts of earth-
quakes. Though Forel supported the ISA’s founding, he was, from the start, 
“somewhat skeptical about such resolutions; I wonder if we are not already 
going a little too far with internationalism.”83 Such concern was not out of 
character for a naturalist who helped develop the small-scale field methods 
of modern ecology. Over the next few years, as Gerland’s intentions became 
clearer, Forel’s hesitation grew into serious concern. The ISA seemed to be 
pursuing instrumental observation to the exclusion of the geological inves-
tigation of earthquakes and studies of their periodicity. Forel argued that 
seismology could not rely on seismographic data alone, not now nor in the 
future. There would always be a need for eyewitness reports and geological 
surveys. “The details of direct observation will always remain useful for the 
study of the phenomenon in itself: direction of the plane of oscillation, 
study of the focus in the depths of the earth’s crust, plotting of isoseismic 
curves, determination of the lines of fracture, for all the tasks of geological 
seismology, etc.”84 Forel’s point was that seismology must not be confined 
exclusively to the observatory.
It was Montessus who most clearly tied this methodological critique to a 
moral injunction. Beyond the pursuit of scientific theory, he urged his col-
leagues to “give some thought to the well-being of their fellow creatures.”85 
Indeed, Montessus pressed the ISA to redefine its purpose. Against Gerland’s 
plans, Montessus reconceived global seismology as a humanitarian enter-
prise. The emergence of humanitarianism as an international movement in 
the nineteenth century was predicated on the belief that science could be 
used to rationalize the provision of relief and make human existence more 
predictable.86 In this spirit, Montessus believed it was the ISA’s duty to guide 
“unstable” countries that had not yet taken responsibility for monitoring 
their own seismicity. “They will need to press, for instance, countries like 
France or Germany to publish the tremors in Madagascar or in German 
New Guinea.”87 Montessus thus insisted on global responsibility for local 
seismic risk.

What Is the Earth? / 185
In 1901 the eminent Göttingen geophysicist Emil Wiechert—“a most 
complicated scientific imperialist”88—appeared at the founding meeting of 
the ISA to discuss “Seismological Observations in the German Colonies.” 
“For a long, long time,” he reminded his putatively international audience, 
“we Germans have sat in our narrow Fatherland and regarded what lay out-
side its borders as a foreign world. Today that has changed; we feel ourselves 
to be inhabitants of the earth and send out our ideas and plans with the 
ships that sail the world. . . . Not only politically and economically, but also 
scientifically we will need to look for points of leverage in our colonies.”89 
Wiechert was right: imperialism motivated and structured international-
ism in seismology. Most seismic observatories founded beyond continental 
Europe and North America in this period—aside from the ISA’s stations 
in Iceland and Lebanon—were colonial outposts. The Germans, for in-
stance, sponsored observatories in Jiaozhou, China; Apia, Samoa; and Dar 
es Salaam, Tanzania.90 Of these, only the Samoa observatory survived until 
World War Two (under New Zealand’s sponsorship), and only as the ill-
equipped and poorly staffed shell of the former institution.91 Subsequently, 
plans for a dense and truly global network of seismometers have failed in 
the face of objections that such surveillance would compromise national se-
curity.92 As Helen Tilley has recently argued of the human and environmen-
tal sciences in British colonial Africa, nineteenth-century seismology had a 
surprising potential to generate friction with the very project of empire. The 
give-and-take between observatory and field studies tended to alert scien-
tists to the value of vernacular knowledge and the complexity and specificity 
of human-environmental interactions. When confined to the observatory, 
though, seismology became all too easy to assimilate to the simplifications 
of an imperialist worldview.93


nine
The Youngest Land:  
California, 1853–1906
Among the visitors to the beautiful coast the Earthquake is one of the oldest and 
most influential. . . . Had he, the architect of the mountains, not been active, there 
would have been no Santa Barbara, no California, indeed.1
In 1857 the English historian Henry Thomas Buckle described California 
as a desert land, “scorched into sterility” and unfit for civilization.2 Had he 
been aware of the region’s earthquakes—few were at the time, for reasons 
we shall soon see—his judgment would surely have been still worse. For, 
as we know, Buckle believed that earthquake-prone lands could support 
only barbarians, mystics, and gamblers. Americans, however, were intent 
on proving him wrong. California gleamed in the eyes of late nineteenth-
century Americans as “the heritage of the future.”3 The Harvard geographer 
Nathaniel Shaler called the influx of migrants into California “the most 
rapid movement of population ever known.” “Everyone who feels an intel-
ligent interest in the future of our race must be concerned for the prospects 
of this region.” “Soil, climate, mineral resources, relation to other great cen-
tres of population”—all promised ideal conditions for “the type of civiliza-
tion” that the “Anglo-Saxon race” was developing. Yet California was also 
rumored to be prone to drought, fires, flash floods—and earthquakes. The 
question loomed: “whether society can there find a stable footing on a firm-
set earth.”4 Shaler acknowledged, as Buckle had, that frequent earthquakes 
could destroy the possibility of cultural progress:
There can be no question that where a people is exposed to recurrent and 
overwhelming danger, such as menace the inhabitants of Peru, Venezuela, 
or Calabria, a danger which as yet is not foretold by science or effectively 

188 / Chapter Nine
guarded against by art, the conditions will tell upon its character. “To the firm 
ground of nature trusts the hand that builds for aye,” is true in a real as well 
as in a metaphoric sense. This trust in a stable earth is a necessary element in 
much that is noblest and most aspiring in the life of men. Expose a people 
to constant devastations from an overwhelming force, whether it be in the 
form of an human enemy or a natural agent, and their state of mind becomes 
unfavorable for the maintenance of a high civilization. The best conditions 
of the state can only be secured when the laborer toils with the assurance that 
his work will endure long after his own brief life is over.
Shaler, however, was no prophet of doom. He was a devout man with a 
providential view of the American continent, a view he expounded in a 
schoolbook that defined “the fitness of a country for civilized man” in 
terms of natural conditions conducive to production and trade.5 He firmly 
believed in a human racial hierarchy determined by environmental con-
ditions. The young continent of North America was not destined to be a 
“cradle of civilization,” as he saw demonstrated by the backwardness of the 
native Indians. For the right settlers, however, Shaler was sure that Califor-
nia would indeed be a golden land. He set out to convince the American 
public that earthquakes would not stand in their way.
In a series of popular articles, Shaler reassured his readers that earth-
quakes were but a magnified form of normal geological activity. “The no-
tion that the ground is naturally steadfast is an error—an error which arises 
from the incapacity of our senses to appreciate any but the most palpable 
and, at the same time, most exceptional of its movements.” Recognizing the 
inherent instability of the earth’s crust required, in his analogy, a minor Co-
pernican revolution for geology—a shift of perspective akin to the discovery 
of the heliocentric system. Ground movement was not only common, he ar-
gued, it was a necessary condition for organic life: “Were it not that the con-
tinents grow upward, from age to age, at a rate which compensates for their 
erosion, there would be no lands fit for a theatre of life.” Shaler dispelled 
the occult qualities of earthquakes by means of mechanical metaphors: 
earthquakes were to be studied in terms of “the machinery which produces 
them”; faults were “earthquake factories”; lava was driven “perhaps with a 
greater impulse than that which propels the ball from a canon.”6 There fol-
lowed the lesson that the proper response to earthquakes was not fear but 
scientific study and solid engineering. “And when experience has taught 
them the simple lessons which it is necessary to practise in order to obviate 
a large portion of the dangers occurring from these convulsions, there is 
no reason why this region, despite the frequent light shocks to which it is 

The Youngest Land / 189
subject, may not enjoy as happy immunity from their worst effects as any 
portion of the continent now occupied by our people.” European scientists 
were making the same point at the same time, but Shaler spun it into a 
racialized vision of environmental destiny. California was exceptional, in 
Shaler’s view. Looking north, he judged it “probably a fortunate thing that 
the inhospitable and unproductive character of the Alaskan region will pre-
vent any extensive settlements of civilized man in the midst of the terrible 
convulsions which are there so frequently occurring.” Alaska’s destiny was 
wilderness, while California’s was “Anglo-Saxon” civilization. Shaler thus 
placed his faith in the ability of his “race” to engineer a more stable founda-
tion for prosperity in California.7
California earthquakes were an abstract threat to East Coast naturalists 
like Shaler. As Sheila Hones has shown, Shaler’s popular writings on earth-
quakes were part of a wider conversation in the Atlantic Monthly in the 1880s 
about the threat of natural disasters to the nation. The authors focused on 
the need to respond to disasters with centralized, expert-led interventions. 
Hones suggests that this discourse reflected the perceived fragility of Ameri-
ca’s democratic experiment. Earthquakes figured in social Darwinian terms 
as trials of national fitness, as moments that would define the nation’s in-
defatigable spirit.8
At closer range, this myth was harder to sustain. Praise for California’s 
“ideal conditions” from East Coast writers could not put locals’ worries to 
rest. Earthquakes understandably made real-estate investors and insurance 
companies nervous. Settlers themselves worried that the cumulative physi-
ological effects of mild tremors might be harmful to their health.9 The his-
tory of California seismology in the nineteenth century is a story of how 
citizens were taught to distrust their own senses.10 In the spirit of the state’s 
“boosters,” the California press persistently understated the threat from 
earthquakes.11 One San Francisco paper claimed in 1868 that “earthquakes 
are trifles as compared with runaway horses, apothecaries’ mistakes, acci-
dents with firearms, and a hundred other little contingencies, which we 
all face without fear.”12 With equal confidence, the Annals of San Francisco 
announced in 1855 that earthquakes were “the greatest, if not the only pos-
sible obstacle of consequence to the growing prosperity of the city, though 
even such a lamentable event as the total destruction of half the place, like 
another Quito or Caracas, would speedily be remedied by the indomitable 
energy and persevering industry of the American character.”13
In this vision of California’s destiny, science and engineering held a 
privileged place. In the late nineteenth century, geology became “a tool to 
recast the West into a region of economic opportunity.”14 California also 

190 / Chapter Nine
presented geology with a rare opportunity. The first directors of the state’s 
Geological Survey, John Wesley Powell and Clarence King, found in Cali-
fornia a dramatic landscape of cliffs and canyons that set each man imagin-
ing quite different causes. Powell, following Lyell, emphasized the roles of 
erosion and sedimentation, while King focused on uplift and subsidence, 
in keeping with the contraction hypothesis.15 Both men, however, knew 
from long experience in the field that this land would not easily be tamed 
for “civilization.”
King helped Americans recognize the role that catastrophic land move-
ments had played in the formation of California’s high mountains. His 
celebrated Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada described a terrain that was 
profoundly unstable, a “dizzy” landscape. Staring into a chasm at Yosemite, 
he described the “titanic power, the awful stress, which has rent this solid 
table-land of granite in twain.” Yet in his next breath he assured the reader 
of “the magical faculty displayed by vegetation in redeeming the aspect of 
wreck and masking a vast geological tragedy behind draperies of fresh and 
living green.” He raised this relationship between catastrophe and renewal 
to a general principle: “Movements of great catastrophe, thus translated 
into the language of life, become moments of creation, when out of plastic 
organisms something newer and nobler is called into being.” King’s mes-
sage was ambiguous. The vertiginous, precarious landscapes he described 
seemed to urge modesty on scientists bent on transforming nature to their 
specifications. And yet catastrophe appeared in these landscapes primarily 
as an actor already vanished from the scene, having set the stage for the 
vitality of California in King’s own day.16
Powell’s efforts were more explicitly political. He saw from his fieldwork 
in this arid state that agricultural development would be perilous without 
a rational irrigation system. He railed against the conceit that “rain follows 
the plow,” that the very act of agricultural settlement would improve the 
climate. He even tried to convince the public that much of the country’s 
western lands should be protected from settlement. But even Powell said 
next to nothing about California’s earthquakes.
From time to time, lone voices disturbed this canyon of silence. In 1868, 
at the end of his work on the California Geological Survey, the East Coast 
geologist Josiah Whitney faced the problem squarely: “The prevailing tone 
in that region, at present, is that of assumed indifference to the dangers 
of earthquake calamities, the author of a voluminous work on California, 
recently published in San Francisco, even going so far as to speak of earth-
quakes as ‘harmless disturbances.’ But earthquakes are not to be bluffed off. 
They will come, and will do a great deal of damage. The question is, How 

The Youngest Land / 191
far can science mitigate the attendant evils, and thus do something toward 
giving that feeling of security which is necessary for the full development 
of that part of the country?”17 Again, after the Owen’s Valley earthquake of 
1872, Whitney argued for the need to adopt new construction practices, 
such as using wood rather than brick and abandoning heavy cornices and 
chimneys. He also stressed “the desirability of a scientific record and exami-
nation of the earthquakes occurring on this coast.”18 Whitney found a sym-
pathetic ear at one San Francisco paper, which complained that “everybody 
has become indifferent to earthquakes.” The editor rejoiced that “Professor 
Whitney and his party are among us at last. They will try to probe this earth-
quake business to the bottom, and I doubt not will arraign Mother Earth at 
the bar of Science to give an account of herself and explain the wherefore of 
her fatally playful ebullitions.”19 Whitney’s warnings echoed like a pebble 
tossed into a chasm of willful ignorance.
“A Very Needless Source of Alarm”
Even the first attempt to catalog California’s earthquakes did little to dispel 
the state’s Edenic image. It was undertaken by an unlikely investigator: John 
Boardman Trask, a Yale-educated physician who set out for California in 
1850 as part of the “California company” of John Woodhouse Audubon, 
the younger son of the famous ornithologist. The expedition came in search 
of gold, of course. But its members were naturalists, keen to explore the or-
ganic life and humbler minerals of the West. Lest one think Trask an oppor-
tunist, an obituary made a point of describing him, in his medical practice, 
as “quite free of the acquisitive instinct.”20 In California, Trask discovered 
that his amateur mineralogical skills were in great demand. In 1853 he re-
ceived the first of a series of commissions from the state senate to report 
on the geology of California. He touted his research as “an exhibition of 
the capabilities of some of our soils for the production of the necessaries 
of life, unexcelled in the history of the world.” California’s scenery, on the 
other hand, was not yet a selling point. Despite the “repulsive aspect” of 
the coastal mountain range, with its “naked and barren appearance,” Trask 
argued, these hills were “covered with a luxuriant growth . . . affording ex-
tensive pasturage for flocks and herds.”21 The boosters in the state assembly 
could not have been disappointed with his results.
In 1853, Trask took part in another tribute to California’s natural riches: 
the founding of the California Academy of Natural Sciences. It was in the 
Proceedings of the new San Francisco–based academy that Trask began to 
publish on earthquakes. Through “careful inquiry of the older residents,” 

192 / Chapter Nine
he gathered information on seismic events in living memory. His findings 
sufficed, he believed, “to correct some of the misapprehensions and state-
ments which have appeared from time to time relating to the severity of 
earthquake shocks in this country during the earlier periods of its history.” 
Indeed, he learned of “but one shock that has proved in the slightest de-
gree serious,” and that was the Southern California earthquake of Septem-
ber 1812, which was reported to have killed between thirty and forty-five 
people.22 Trask went on to publish annual lists of earthquakes observed 
throughout the state and a catalog of tremors in California since 1800. Al-
though he rarely cited sources, he was reported to have interviewed “old in-
habitants and foreign traders.” What his “statistics” showed, Trask claimed, 
was that “even in the mountain districts, where during the day there is much 
less of turmoil and noise arising from business than in the populous city, of 
all these noticed, none have been of sufficient intensity to attract the atten-
tion of the inhabitants during the hours of daylight. These facts, though few 
in themselves, are of importance, to disabuse the public mind in relation 
to the danger to be apprehended from the occurrence of these phenomena. 
The reputation which we sustain both at home and abroad, of being in 
constant danger of being swallowed up by these occurences [sic], and the 
idea that our country is but a bed of latent volcanoes, ready to burst forth at 
any moment, spreading devastation over the land, is a very needless source 
of alarm.”23
Trask never paused to consider that perhaps his data were incomplete.24 
By his reckoning, if California’s earthquakes “possess[ed] that severity so of-
ten attributed to them, the attention of the people would much more often 
be directed to them. Yet we find that their first knowledge of such an occur-
rence is usually its announcement by the daily press.” Trask thus preferred 
to interpret his empty mailbox as a sign of the insignificance of California’s 
earthquakes—not of the shortcomings of his network.
After a decade of this work, Trask abruptly turned his back on the acad-
emy and returned to full-time medical practice. Without him, research on 
California’s earthquakes languished for two decades. This was not for a lack 
of shakers, to be sure. In 1865 San Francisco newspapers reported the most 
violent quake since the city’s founding. “Every door, of every house, as far 
as the eye could reach, was vomiting a stream of human beings,” wrote the 
young journalist Mark Twain. “Thousands of people were made so sea-sick 
by the rolling and pitching of floors and streets that they were weak and 
bed-ridden for hours, and some few for even days afterward.—Hardly an 
individual escaped nausea entirely.”25 Just three years later, on 21 October 
1868, San Francisco was hit by an even stronger upheaval, which tore apart 

The Youngest Land / 193
buildings on the “made ground” of embankments and landfills. The 1868 
earthquake killed thirty people, the first deaths by earthquake the young city 
had known.26 The 1868 disaster would rival 1906 for sheer violence in the 
memories of older residents, though no fires ensued to complete the work 
of destruction. Even in 1868, though, the dominant tone of the city’s press 
remained vigorous optimism: “There was nothing of despair, discourage-
ment, or even doubt of the future to be seen on the countenances of our 
citizens, but everywhere a fixed determination to repair losses and do bet-
ter work than before.” The paper reported that only buildings on “made 
ground” were damaged, “and nine-tenths of it was to old structures.” The 
report concluded that “this earthquake demonstrates the proposition that, 
with proper care in the construction of our buildings, San Francisco is as 
safe a place to live as any on the Continent.”27
Not everyone who lived through the San Francisco earthquake of 1868 
was reassured by such reports. One of the city’s more prominent business-
men called for an investigation. The committee he appointed has since be-
come famous for its failure to reach conclusions of any kind. It has even 
been accused of sabotage. More plausible is that the committee refused to 
be shaken in its opinion that the earthquake risk in San Francisco was mini-
mal. Most of the members had arrived in California well after the start of 
the gold rush. None but Trask had previously studied earthquakes, and only 
the mining engineer Thomas Rowlandson could claim so elevated a cre-
dential as fellowship of the Geological Society of London. Rowlandson was 
dropped from the committee as a result of a dispute with the chairman, but 
he went on to publish a Treatise on Earthquake Dangers, Causes and Palliatives. 
This treatise is one of the few sources to shed light on seismological thought 
in California at the time.
Since Rowlandson had been denied access to the observations collected 
by the committee, he was free to rely completely on his own memories 
of the quake. He recounted his experience in excruciating detail. “Owing 
to indisposition,” he was in bed at his home north of the Pajaro River, 
“a position better calculated to remark the course of the two chief shocks 
than the bulk of people at midday.” Moreover, his wife was “reclining on 
the bed in an opposite direction . . . her head pointing near due east, mine 
nearly due west,” thus perfectly situated as a source of “corroboration.” 
While their bodies served to measure the direction of the waves, their con-
versation—“which was not hurried” and which Rowlandson paraphrased 
with particularly unhurried pedantry—served to measure the duration. 
This scene perfectly served Rowlandson’s purpose of “domesticating” the 
earthquake threat. Where one might expect to find death and destruction, 

194 / Chapter Nine
he offered only this image of lazy domesticity.28 For Rowlandson intended 
to go one better than the boosters. Instead of denying that California was 
seismically active, he would prove the beneficence of earthquakes. First, he 
argued that the seismic threat in San Francisco was mitigated, “if not wholly 
obviate[d],” by the city’s geography, with a shallow bay to protect against 
landslips and a coast set back far enough to protect against tsunamis. Next, 
he furnished a scientific account of earthquakes, in the hope that the phe-
nomenon would “cease to trouble timid minds. Timidity has certainly been 
carried to excess by those who have left or expressed a purpose of leav-
ing this State on account of earthquakes.”29 But Rowlandson did not stop 
at demystification. Here, in the heart of the book, his argument became 
quite literally nebulous. Starting from the Laplacean principle “that univer-
sal matter . . . was originally in a gaseous condition,” Rowlandson argued 
that earthquakes somehow brought precious metals trapped in the earth’s 
“molten center” to the surface. “I have long held and still adhere to the 
opinion, that human access to these valuable metaliferous [sic] accessories 
to the luxuries, comforts, and necessaries of human life has resulted from 
earthquake influences. The earthquake, in fact, being one of the cosmical 
agents employed by the great designer of all, for contribution to his final 
aims.” Evidence for this startling claim came from the stratigraphical loca-
tion of precious metals, which pointed to their having reached the earth’s 
surface no earlier than the appearance of man. “They were not required by 
the wants of the then animal creation, and they were not needed until man 
made his appearance on the surface of the earth, endowed with faculties to 
extract, reduce and utilize them.”30 Rowlandson had found an ingenious 
way to reconcile California’s earthquakes with the myth that America was 
destined by providence to bear wealth for white settlers: earthquakes were 
California’s secret source of gold.
Remote Sensing
While Trask and Rowlandson were sweeping California’s seismic rubble 
under a carpet of gold, interest in seismology was growing in more qui-
escent parts of the country. Local volunteer observing networks for both 
weather and earthquakes flourished in many states in the 1870s. These ef-
forts demonstrated what scientists and citizens could accomplish when not 
encumbered by the denial of seismic hazard. The emergence of earthquakes 
as scientific objects elsewhere in the United States underscores the work 
necessary to produce seismic ignorance in California. It also points to the 
tensions between local and federal initiatives that would plague American 

The Youngest Land / 195
seismology into the twentieth century. In imperial Austria, the arguments 
for and against the centralization of the earth sciences resulted in an effec-
tive compromise, a system balanced between the intimacy of local natural 
history and the efficiency of a central bureaucracy. In the United States, the 
result of analogous tensions was a shiftless path from one form of organiza-
tion to another. More than elsewhere, the initiative to record earthquakes 
came from individual scientists, and the quirks of personality set the limits 
of communication between scientists and citizens.
Before the Civil War, a successful network of weather observers had 
threaded across the United States from Massachusetts to Missouri. It had 
been built in the 1850s by Joseph Henry at the Smithsonian Institution 
and had depended to a large degree on amateur “cooperative observers.” 
As Jim Fleming has documented, the composition of this corps shifted in 
the 1850s and 1860s to include fewer professors and more farmworkers.31 
Weather observing was on its way to becoming a grassroots enterprise. 
However, the Civil War unraveled much of this network. Telegraphic con-
nections were broken or overloaded with military messages, and observers 
were drafted into the army. The reconstruction of the observing system be-
gan in 1870, when Congress passed a bill establishing telegraphic weather 
forecasting under the auspices of the Army Signal Service. The lawmakers 
were convinced that military discipline was essential to a proper routine of 
meteorological observation. So too, however, was civilian expertise, and the 
new weather service was fortunate to recruit Cleveland Abbe, an astrono-
mer who had established a regional telegraphic observing network out of 
Cincinnati in 1869.
Abbe later claimed that he had hoped from the start to include the re-
porting of earthquakes in the weather service’s agenda. That plan was ap-
parently foiled by political resistance to the further expansion of the Signal 
Service.32 As the acting chief of the Signal Service explained in 1887, “the 
data received at this office is so voluminous and recent regulations of the 
War Department relative to printing so restrictive, that the late Chief Sig-
nal Officer [Albert Meyer, d. 1880] ordered no further publication by this 
bureau of earthquake information, as it was thought that such publication 
might give ground for the charge that it was interfering in work not legally 
within its proper sphere.” The acting chief did “not deem himself autho­
rized to make any definite change at present.”33 In the absence of federal 
support, the compilation of data on American earthquakes was undertaken 
at the private initiative of Charles Rockwood of Princeton (chapter 3).
When a temblor took the Eastern Seaboard by surprise on 10 August 
1884, Rockwood was able to collect observations from eleven states. Recent  

196 / Chapter Nine
studies locate the epicenter in Brooklyn, New York, and judge it the stron­
gest earthquake on record for the New York region.34 Along with information 
from the Weather Bureau’s observers and newspapers, Rockwood amassed 
about 150 reports from private citizens.35 By the end of the month, he 
was able to furnish a preliminary report in the American Journal of Science,  
describing an affected area with boundaries “along the coast states from 
Washington, District of Columbia, and Baltimore, Maryland, to Portland, 
Maine, and Burlington, Vermont; and on the west . . . a nearly straight line 
from Burlington to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.”36 However, the initial report-
ing on the earthquake of 1884 put American science to shame.
The most extensive coverage appeared in the New York Herald, including 
a two-page spread on 12 August featuring interviews with most of the lead-
ing East Coast scientists.37 They contradicted each other at every turn. John 
Wesley Powell, for instance, claimed that “earthquakes are probably inde-
pendent of meteoric and to a large extent of astronomic conditions.” Yet ac-
cording to Simon Newcomb of the Naval Observatory, it was “impossible to 
say” “whether or not earthquakes are influenced by cosmic causes.” Powell 
also claimed that the interior of the earth was undoubtedly molten, while 
William Harkness at the Naval Observatory said the latest evidence pointed 
to a completely solid earth. None of the scientists evinced any knowledge 
of the tectonic theory. One reporter offered the deadpan understatement: 
“Geologists do not agree as to the cause of earthquakes.” The headline 
“Harvard’s Wisdom” was an ironic introduction to a statement from the 
astronomer Edward Pickering, who admitted that he had no information 
to offer. According to Pickering, there was no system for observing earth-
quakes in the Northeast because they were so rare. James Dwight Dana, 
Silliman’s successor at Yale, apparently responded to a question about the 
earthquake by saying that he “saw no occasion for it.”38 The Herald added to 
the impression of confusion with headlines and pull quotes such as “Noth-
ing Known—Everything Known”; “No Little Indignation among Professors 
at the Unexplained Phenomena,” “The Science Only Beginning”; “As igno-
rant of the cause as of any subject about which we know nothing.”39 The 
Columbia geologist John Strong Newberry joked to a reporter, “I want to 
show you my credentials.” Out came an old sheaf of paper addressed to 
the “Professor of Earthquakes, Columbia College, New York.” Newberry ex-
plained that it came from a witness to the Bay Area quake of 1865 “who had 
a theory concerning earthquakes that he wanted to ventilate.”40 The joke, of 
course, was the absurdity of the academic title, “Professor of Earthquakes.” 
Readers would have come away with the impression that seismology hardly 
deserved to be called a science.

The Youngest Land / 197
What must Rockwood have felt as he filed this publicity away in his 
scrapbook? No doubt it disturbed his colleagues too. A letter from Cleve-
land Abbe arrived on the nineteenth, containing two letters and two clip-
pings. Abbe hoped to receive information from Rockwood, but he had 
heard that Rockwood was himself looking for reports. Something had to be 
done, Abbe decided. “I have always hoped that our office [the Army Signal 
Office] would pay more attention to Seismology but the present feeling is 
that it is too far outside of our legal business. So probably it will be left to 
the Geological Survey. However if as a private person I can help you to or-
ganize a general Seismological Association I shall be glad to do so. I will set 
up a lot of pillars and balls in one corner of my cellar to begin with.” Abbe 
mentioned two colleagues who had lived in Japan and were “interested ob-
servers” and another who had set up a rough seismometer at Harvard. “I 
really think we can organize systematic records and observers in every Astro-
nomical observatory east of the Mississippi. Possibly the Appalachian Club 
would undertake and study Appalachian Seismology.”41
In mid-November, Powell, director of the Geological Survey, invited 
Rockwood, Davis, Abbe, Paul, and Dutton to a meeting in Washington, all 
expenses paid. “After looking over the ground pretty fully,” Powell thought 
it would “be possible to inaugurate systematic observations, and it seems 
that we ought first to give attention to the character of the observations most 
desirable, the instruments to be used, etc.”42 A press release announced 
plans for a national seismic survey, to include a “large corps of observers” 
reporting to local directors.43 A report on the meeting in the New York Herald 
hoped that “the observers will not have a chance to make a single observa-
tion for half a century at least.”44
Only one participant in the November 1884 meeting seems to have 
taken any notice of the example of the Swiss Earthquake Commission. In 
Science the following spring, Harvard’s William Morris Davis judged the 
Swiss far ahead of Americans in the study of earthquakes. Davis described 
the commission’s publications as “entertaining” and “attractive” and noted 
with disappointment that they were not available in any American librar-
ies. He discussed the Rossi-Forel scale, the significance of the commission’s 
work for the tectonic theory of earthquakes, and its potential to clarify the 
geological interpretation of the Alps.45 Perhaps it was Davis who brought 
Swiss seismology to Rockwood’s attention. By January, Rockwood was in 
correspondence with Albert Heim, who offered details on the Swiss system 
and assured Rockwood that human observers had proved far more valu-
able than instruments.46 But how could the United States adopt a research 
method designed for a nation smaller in area than West Virginia?

198 / Chapter Nine
“Cooperatives”
What American seismology needed was a widely distributed corps of dedi-
cated, attentive, and accurate observers: precisely what the US Weather Bu-
reau could offer. The population of lay weather observers in the United 
States was more heterogeneous than in Switzerland and Austria. Its ranks 
included physicians, teachers, and clergymen, but also a significant propor-
tion of storekeepers and farmers.47 Many were women who took over the 
work of observing from their fathers or husbands, either temporarily during 
an absence or permanently following a death. Indeed, the task was more 
often assumed by daughters than by sons.48 As in Europe, the cooperative 
observers were unpaid,49 and their lack of compensation was taken as a guar-
antee of their trustworthiness. The bureau’s weather records were accepted 
as evidence in law courts and were often used to plan major engineering 
projects. This meant that a great burden of trust rested on the shoulders of 
the volunteer observers. The bureau’s meteorologist in Salt Lake City argued 
that the system was self-correcting. Only an observer who took pleasure in 
the work would stick with it, and “we cannot conceive of anyone finding a 
pleasure in a service that is carelessly done.” “Unreliable” observers, he con-
cluded, “find the work too objectionable to be continued long.” Moreover, 
if the saying was true that “a bad workman quarrels with his tools,” then the 
preservation of delicate measuring instruments was evidence of the qual-
ity of the observers.50 Instruments, however, were not necessarily essential. 
It was not always the case that the bureau used instruments to inculcate 
bureaucratic discipline.51 “Non-instrumental observations form the ground 
work” in meteorology, according to Gustavus Hinrichs, director of the Iowa 
Weather Service. “Hence we would also urge all those who take notice of 
special phenomena to report the same to us, as casual correspondents, de-
scribing the phenomena seen and stating time and place of the observa-
tion.”52 Seismic tremors were among the phenomena that observers were 
encouraged to register with their bare senses.
Based on a case study of the bureau’s observers in Kansas at the turn 
of the twentieth century, Jeremy Vetter has recently come to the intriguing 
conclusion that the bureau succeeded only to the extent that it imposed 
a “rigorously bureaucratic form of top-down control over knowledge pro-
duction.”53 By contrast, Jamie Pietruska argues in a forthcoming book that  
scientific and vernacular methods of prediction were mutually constitutive 
in the work of the Weather Bureau, producing a science that acknowledged 
the limits to its own certainty.54 Consistent with Pietruska’s conclusion 
about the mutual construction of scientific and vernacular knowledge, I have 

The Youngest Land / 199
found evidence that the relations between observers and bureau officials 
were often flexible and personalized. Local officials of the bureau kept in 
close contact with the cooperatives. They gave careful thought to questions 
such as how to deal with a suspected error in a volunteer’s observations. A 
South Carolina official stressed that the volunteers were as dedicated to sci-
entific accuracy as the bureau itself: “The voluntary observers are, as a class, 
men [sic] who take up the work in a spirit of scientific investigation after 
truth, and in that spirit are as desirous as the Bureau possibly can be to have 
their observations and reports as nearly absolutely correct as painstaking 
care and thorough examination can make them.” Therefore bureau officials 
should not “assume the role of censor,” but “should frankly and courte-
ously inform” the observer when an error has been discovered. Since this 
address was delivered to an audience of bureau officials, there is no reason 
to suspect that it was meant to flatter the cooperatives. Even if the intention 
was to reprimand more authoritarian types, one can only conclude that 
communication between scientists and cooperatives was often respectful 
and lively. As another bureau official described, the relationship between 
a section director and his volunteers was “of a dual nature, namely, official 
and personal, perhaps better expressed as friendly or social. The two are not 
inconsistent. The first, although always pleasant, is usually formal, the latter 
sometimes very cordial. The section director regards the voluntary observer 
as an indispensable aid in his work, to whom all encouragement should be 
given and every courtesy extended, and who is worthy and deserving of all 
that can be done for him, either officially or in any other manner in which 
the director can show his appreciation.”55
The director of the Iowa Weather Service, Gustavus Hinrichs, had gone 
so far as to erect Iowa’s central observatory in his own home.56 He spoke 
fondly of his cooperatives. One, whom Hinrichs called “my friend,” had 
taken up observing a full thirteen years earlier, when “his home was happy 
and wife and daughter aided him.” This observer had since lost both family 
members, but his reports continued to arrive, now in a “masculine hand-
writing” that reminded Hinrichs of his loss. “Is it not worthy of special 
praise to keep up such public work under so depressing circumstances?”57 
Nipher, the director of the Missouri Weather Service, vouched for the ac-
curacy of one of his observers, who set his clock to the telegraphic signal 
and was “a faithful observer.” “I wish you would be kind enough to send 
them copy of any publication in which their names may appear,” he added 
to Charles Rockwood. “It is well enough to encourage such men—they are 
scarce in this part of the moral vinyard [sic].”58
The bureau also valued cooperative observers for their ability to serve 

200 / Chapter Nine
as intermediaries between scientists and local communities. As one bureau 
official wrote of an observer: “The citizens of his community rely implicitly 
on him for weather information, and through his careful educating of them 
in actual weather conditions for two decades they have largely abandoned 
their interest in weather folklore and general signs and now look to him for 
facts.”59 One cooperative observer in Memphis, a dealer “in all kinds of pro-
duce, flour, pork . . . lime, cement, etc.,” informed Rockwood that “it would 
be an impossibility for [an earthquake] to be felt by any number of persons 
without my knowing something of it.” He went on to explain how he had 
come to collect seismic observations and why he was to be trusted:
I have taken more or less interest in the subject since 1855, which year I spent 
in New Madrid—the acknowledged great centre of internal disturbances in 
this region. I fully anticipated the shock of July 13th because the maximum 
average interval had passed between shocks—especially since the severe  
shock which occurred on the 6th of June 1862 at 10 a.m. the day Federal 
forces took possession of this city. I know of no way to forecast the future 
except from the experience of the past and if that is any criterion the time 
is only now at hand when we may begin to expect another shock. When we 
consider what occurred at New Madrid before this country was settled and 
what the consequences would be, were those scenes to be repeated, now, or 
in the future, when this country shall have become even more densely set-
tled—and many costly habitation of man erected, and the consequent loss 
of human life, and destruction of property which would ensue, we can attain 
some idea of the importance of obtaining all the information, with a view of 
locating the great centre of these internal disturbances. You and I may not 
live to experience such a shock as would cause a loss of life or property, but 
the information now gained will survive us—and should such an event occur 
its importance will then be appreciated—for as I said before what has once 
occurred may as surely occur again. . . . [I] always carry with me as nearly 
absolutely correct time as it is possible to attain. And when the next shock 
occurs, I will send you as correct an account of it as it will be possible for hu-
man powers to obtain.60
This Memphis trader recognized that modernization was making Americans 
increasingly vulnerable to earthquakes. His efforts to observe tremors and 
collect reports from neighbors were a way to serve science and his commu-
nity. “Correct” observation was the key to avoiding future disasters; it was 
a citizen’s duty.

The Youngest Land / 201
By the 1880s, then, the bureau’s volunteer network was buzzing with 
activity. It was supported, however, almost exclusively by local officials. 
After the army’s takeover of the weather service in 1870, the cooperatives 
were neglected at the federal level.61 Moreover, the absence of consistent 
time zones before 1883 meant that comparing reported times of shocks 
across state lines was still a Herculean task. Indeed, little progress toward 
a national earthquake service was made in the two years after American 
scientists met in Washington in 1884. Systematic earthquake reporting in 
the Reconstruction Era would therefore be a strictly local enterprise, where 
it was attempted at all.62
Southern Discomfort
Consequently, not a single seismograph was in operation on the East Coast 
when disaster struck Charleston on 31 August 1886. The shock killed an 
estimated eighty people in the Charleston area. It was felt clear across the 
eastern half of the country, from the Gulf of Mexico to northern Michigan, 
and from Arkansas in the west to around five hundred miles beyond the 
Atlantic coast. The disturbed area measured 774,000 square miles, on par 
with that of the Lisbon earthquake of 1755.63 The city of Charleston lost  
25 percent of the total value of its buildings.64
Yet not even this disaster could convince Washington to organize a seis-
mological network. The Geological Survey furnished Charleston residents 
with crude seismoscopes, but locals stopped paying them any attention 
within a few months. Although an estimated three hundred aftershocks oc-
curred in the thirty-five years after 1886, a scientist searching for press reports 
of them in 1914 complained that seismic disturbances had lost their “value 
as news items as far as South Carolina newspapers were concerned.”65
Several East Coast scientists descended on the stricken region to inves-
tigate. Some found the event well suited to Mallet’s architectural methods 
of investigation, since it had thrown down walls, gables, and chimneys of 
many of the graceful wooden houses in Charleston and neighboring Sum-
merville.66 But the chief investigator, Clarence Dutton of the Geological 
Survey, considered Mallet’s methods to belong to “the outermost pale of 
scientific philosophy.”67 Dutton was on his way to becoming the foremost 
proponent of instrumental seismology at the survey. However, of necessity 
and nearly despite himself, he founded his investigation of 1886 on a novel 
use of noninstrumental reports.
It was the first time that American scientists were pursuing the style of 

202 / Chapter Nine
seismological field research pioneered by the Swiss and Austrians, and the 
investigation brought out some of the features that would set American seis-
mology apart in years to come. With Rockwood’s help, Dutton circulated 
a questionnaire and ultimately collected about four thousand observations 
from 1,600 localities. The journal Science judged of the Charleston catas-
trophe that “no earthquake of ancient or modern times has been observed 
with such care and fullness of detail. Besides the observations made by Pro-
fessors in several Colleges, by hundreds of railway officials, and at signal 
stations, a large number of intelligent private citizens have given an account 
of their own experiences.”68 Dutton acknowledged the European precedent 
for this approach, but he perceived a difference in the United States: the 
questionnaires “were much fewer and more simple than those employed 
in Europe, because European investigators depend almost wholly upon the 
educated classes to answer them, while in this country the uneducated but 
intelligent and practical classes of the people must be the main reliance.” 
Dutton’s doubts about lay observation alert us to an important perception 
of cultural difference. Even as Dutton invoked the myth of American equal-
ity and meritocracy, he betrayed a hesitation about the consequences of 
democracy for intellectual culture. Dutton may not have appreciated that 
the “practical classes” in the United States were proving to be reliable ob-
servers in various fields of natural history, as well as in meteorology. More 
to the point, his pessimism about human observers was tied to his vision 
for seismology. For Dutton, seismology was a branch of physical science; its 
object was the precise measurement of physical forces and the elucidation 
of universal causes. He was far less interested in seismology as it was widely 
pursued by lay observers in Europe—as part of geohistory, local history, and 
the assessment of environmental risk.
Dutton was therefore skeptical of the felt reports from the Charleston 
quake. He treated them as a meager substitute for instrumental data. He was 
particularly dissatisfied when it came to measuring what was commonly 
called “intensity.” The new Rossi-Forel scale was still relatively unknown 
in the United States. In 1884 Rockwood had been content with a rough 
qualitative scale running from “very light (noticed by a few persons but 
not generally felt)” to “destructive (causing general destruction of build-
ings, etc.).”69 Dutton employed the Rossi-Forel scale, but worried that it 
was nothing short of “crude and barbarous.” As such language suggests, 
Dutton recoiled from macroseismological methods without attempting to 
understand them on their own terms. What Dutton sought was an absolute 
measure of the “real energy” of the seismic wave at its origin below the sur-
face. As he explained,

The Youngest Land / 203
What is really desired is some reliable indication which shall serve as a meas-
ure of the amount of energy in any given portion of the wave of disturbance 
as it passes each locality. The means of reaching even a provisional judgment 
are very indirect, and qualified by a considerable amount of uncertainty. . . . 
In view of the precise methods which modern science brings to bear upon other lines 
of physical research, all this seems crude and barbarous to the last degree. But we 
have no other resource. Even if it were possible to obtain strictly comparative 
results from such facts, and decide with confidence the relative measure of 
intensity which should be assigned to each locality, we should have gained 
measures only of a series of local surface intensities, and not of the real en-
ergy of the deeply seated wave which is the proximate cause of the surface 
phenomena. Notwithstanding the indirect bearing of the facts upon the real 
quantities we seek to ascertain, and their apparently confused and distantly 
related character, they give better results than might have been supposed. 
When taken in large groups, they give some broad indications of a highly 
suggestive character.70
Dutton believed he had found a way to use isoseismals to calculate the 
depth of the shock’s origin. He defined intensity as the energy of the seismic 
wave per unit area of the wave front; from this definition it followed that 
intensity varies inversely with the square of the distance from the origin. 
This method was as ingenious as it was unreliable. Dutton had confused 
intensity, the destructiveness of the earthquake shock as measured by the 
Rossi-Forel scale, with the energy contained in the seismic wave. As the Brit-
ish geologist Richard Dixon Oldham explained, Dutton’s formula for the 
depth of the origin was virtually meaningless:
One of the most important problems of seismology is the determination of 
the depth at which earthquakes originate. One method after another has been 
proposed, only to be abandoned as its failure to give a true answer became ap-
parent, and Major Dutton has himself invented a method which he believes 
to be sound, and which would be sound if its application were not vitiated 
by a logical fallacy. In the formula he uses the term “intensity” in the sense of 
energy per unit of wave-front, but in the application in the sense of a degree 
of the Rossi-Forel scale, which, like every other scale proposed in place of it, 
is miscalled a scale of intensity, being in fact a scale of acceleration, or, more 
simply, violence of shock. The two are very different, and differ in their rate of 
variation with distance from the origin, so that we are still left with no certain 
and trustworthy method of determining the depth at which earthquakes orig-
inate, but have, on the other hand, a lesson in the danger of misusing words.71

204 / Chapter Nine
Dutton had stumbled into a hole that would ensnare many more Amer-
ican seismologists in the future. He had failed to appreciate that felt re-
ports contain more than just geophysical information; they are not mere 
substitutes for instrumental observations. Oldham was right to fault Dut-
ton for “misusing words.” Exploiting felt reports required attention to the 
observers’ own language. It depended on the consistent use of a scientific  
vernacular.
“The Trouble with Holden”
Among the small number of scientists who shaped the development of seis-
mology in California, astronomers were remarkably well represented. They 
brought with them an expertise with measuring instruments, a distrust of 
naked-eye observation, and a disinclination for field research. These individ-
uals included George Davidson, W. W. Campbell, Charles Burckhalter, and 
A. O. Leuschner and, last but not least, Edward Singleton Holden. Holden 
was a Saint Louis–born astronomer with no background at all in geology. In 
1885, at the age of thirty-nine, he moved to California to become president 
of the University of California, and in 1888 he became the first director of 
the Lick Observatory, near San Jose. It was astronomy that piqued Holden’s 
interest in earthquakes because of their tendency to disturb his telescopes. 
(In much the same way, astronomers were led to study meteorology in or-
der to foretell favorable observing conditions.) At the Lick, Holden decided 
that it was essential “to keep a register of all earthquake shocks in order to 
be able to control the positions of the astronomical instruments.”72 To do 
so, he furnished the Lick and several other locations in the San Francisco 
area with Ewing duplex seismometers—an apparatus held stationary by two 
coupled pendulums, relative to which horizontal ground motion was au-
tomatically recorded on a smoked glass plate. He also began to compile 
a list of California earthquakes reaching back to the eighteenth century. 
He drew not only on newspapers and published catalogs (including those 
of Rockwood and Trask), but also on informers like the California state 
mineralogist H. G. Hanks, the San Francisco instrument maker Thomas 
Tennent, and the historian H. H. Bancroft, and on “verbal accounts from 
various gentlemen.”73 Like several of these predecessors, Holden seems to 
have embarked on his research already convinced that California’s earth-
quakes were nothing to be feared. “When we take into account the whole 
damage to life and property produced by all the California earthquakes, it is 
clear that the earthquakes of California have been less destructive than the 
tornadoes or the floods of a single year in less favored regions.”74 Holden, 

The Youngest Land / 205
however, conceived of a new way to bolster this conclusion: an “absolute” 
measure of earthquake intensity.
Holden’s contributions to American seismology were shaped by a para-
dox: he craved public attention but had no talent for making friends. His 
long list of popular writings show him to be a prolific and “facile” writer.75 
Alongside scientific popularizations, he translated poetry and penned mag-
azine articles under a pseudonym. He was better known as the founder of 
the country’s “only truly successful” association for astronomy in this pe-
riod, the Astronomical Society of the Pacific.76 Holden wanted the society to 
be “popular in the best sense of the word.”77 He saw the ASP and its journal 
as a forum for communication between professionals and amateurs, to the 
benefit of both. “The few professional astronomers in our midst will here 
lose that sense of intellectual and professional isolation which is a draw-
back and a danger. . . . The opportunity to communicate the results of one’s 
work readily and quickly is of the highest value; and ‘the end of all observa-
tion is communication.’”78 Like astronomy, seismology struck Holden as a 
field peculiarly suited to amateur participation. As he became interested in 
earthquakes as geophysical phenomena (and not just as a disturbing fac-
tor), he recognized a new opportunity for popular science. In an 1889 ar-
ticle for Century magazine on “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them,” 
he appealed to “occasional observers, whose records may be of the greatest 
value.” Rather than soliciting felt reports, however, Holden recommended 
the purchase of a duplex seismometer. “The instrument is extraordinarily 
simple and inexpensive, and requires next to no attention. It will give me 
pleasure to advise with any one [sic] who may feel willing to undertake ob-
servations of this kind.”79
On the surface, then, Holden’s efforts on behalf of seismology resembled 
those of the Swiss Earthquake Commission. He reached out to the public, 
even to “occasional observers,” and sought to educate them about the na-
ture of earthquakes. Like the Swiss, he saw this as a bottom-up project: “If 
results can be attained at all, we must begin by studying the statistics of 
small regions.”80 Unlike the Swiss, however, Holden defined his goal for 
seismology narrowly: a “mechanical” account of the propagation of shock 
waves. Holden tried to distinguish further between the “geologist’s” interest 
in the cause of seismic shocks and the “mechanician’s or physicist’s” interest 
in how shock waves propagate. He struggled to relate this distinction to a 
presumed contrast between “popular” and “scientific” language:
There is little or no confusion of meaning produced by the use of the term 
earthquake in ordinary speaking and writing, but the moment an accurate  

206 / Chapter Nine
scientific definition is attempted the term comes to include much more 
than is ordinarily meant. Any mechanical disturbance whatever, either on 
or within the surface of the earth, sets up a state of elastic vibration which is 
propagated to all adjacent parts of the crust by elastic waves which may or 
may not be evident to human senses. This motion constitutes an earthquake. 
Scientifically, therefore, an earthquake is the result of any elastic vibrations 
in the earth’s crust, whether they are produced by volcanic eruptions, by the 
sliding of great strata . . . or even by the tread of a foot. In popular language, 
however, we are in the habit of restricting the use of the word earthquake to 
comparatively violent motions of short vibration-period which extend over a 
considerable area, and especially to such motions as are produced by some-
what obscure causes. It is necessary to our popular use of the term earthquake 
that the cause, while natural, should be somewhat obscure.81
Holden’s contrast between “scientific” and “popular” language remained 
elusive. Apparently, the term “earthquake” was “popular” because it re-
ferred to “obscure” causes. In what sense, though, were these causes ob-
scure? Holden did not explain. Likely, he would not have been able to. He 
was searching the seismology of his day for a clear line between a “scien-
tific” and a “popular” perspective; but that division simply did not exist.
From Holden’s “mechanical” perspective, eyewitness reports of earth-
quakes were at best a supplement to the spotty coverage of seismographs—
at worst, a source of exaggerations and distortions. Holden, a humanist and 
language lover, did not fail to appreciate earthquake narratives as a literary 
genre. But he drew a firm divide between earthquake “narratives in which 
the human element enters,” proper to the domain of poetry, and earthquake 
“statistics,” containing information of use to science.82 Holden would rely 
on human observations only if they could be reduced to their instrumental 
equivalents. “In the investigation of the effects of any particular earthquake 
it is of prime importance to escape as soon as possible from the exaggerated 
accounts of special correspondents or of the inhabitants who wish to mag-
nify the importance of their neighborhood or of themselves, and to obtain 
a numerical and quantitative basis for such comparison.”83 Like generations 
of astronomers before him, Holden hoped to replace unreliable observers 
with self-registering instruments. To do so, he intended to deduce mechani-
cal equivalents for each Rossi-Forel degree of intensity. He began by defin-
ing intensity as the maximum acceleration of the seismic wave.84 (This was 
a correction to his earlier statement that intensity could be measured by the 
length of the line traced by the duplex seismometer, i.e., the maximum dis-

The Youngest Land / 207
placement.)85 If defined as the maximum acceleration of the ground wave, 
intensity could be calculated from the maximum period and displacement 
of the largest wave, quantities that could be directly recorded by existing 
instruments. But Holden never paused to justify his claim that the maximum 
acceleration really expressed the intensity of a shock.86 Seismological practice 
suggested otherwise. Mallet, for instance, had assumed that intensity could 
be measured by the distance an object was thrown by a shock: that was pro-
portional to the maximum velocity of the ground.87
Seismology’s challenge, as the American engineer T. C. Mendenhall soon 
pointed out, was to clarify the term “intensity.” Mendenhall observed that 
his colleagues tended to confuse two fundamentally different meanings of 
the term. One was the “destructiveness” or “destructivity” of the seismic 
wave: this measured the earthquake’s “power to destroy” and was appro-
priately associated with the maximum acceleration of the ground, as in 
Holden’s definition of intensity. The other meaning was Dutton’s: “the mag-
nitude of the [earthquake’s] subterranean cause,” or “the energy involved 
in an earthquake.” If the seismic wave was assumed to be approximately 
harmonic, like a vibrating string, one could apply to it the mathematics of 
nineteenth-century acoustics. True, the amplitude and period of the seis-
mic wave at the surface varied greatly from one point to another, but this 
was likely the result of variations of the elasticity of the ground, not of the 
subterranean wave. On this acoustic model, seismic intensity would be de-
fined in terms of the time-averaged rate at which the wave transfers energy 
through a region of space. This, in Mendenhall’s judgment, was “the most 
important sense” of intensity in seismology, and a meaning far removed 
from the “destructivity” of an earthquake. Mendenhall went on to apply 
his insight to a dizzying series of calculations. Using data from Tokyo seis-
mographs on the Japanese earthquake of 1887, he determined—though 
admittedly only to within an order of magnitude—the “mechanical value of 
a cubic mile of earthquake.” This, he showed, was equivalent to the free fall 
of “a cube of rock one thousand feet on each edge, the mass of which would 
be 75,000,000 tons, through a vertical distance of about 166 feet.” He even 
took the time to translate that figure into horsepower.88 As his delight in 
these numbers makes clear, Mendenhall’s definition of seismic intensity 
as “the energy involved in an earthquake” was part of a nineteenth-century 
obsession with measuring, harnessing, and exploiting natural sources of en-
ergy. But the significance of his calculations for the history of seismology is 
more specific. What Mendenhall, Holden, Dutton, and their colleagues had 
begun to do, in the guise of forging an objective language for seismology,  

208 / Chapter Nine
was to drive a wedge between two perspectives that had previously been 
fused: the geophysical question of the origins of an earthquake and the 
practical question of the earthquake’s effects.
Holden would not be the one to carry this research program forward. 
In the late 1880s and early 1890s, just as he was getting his seismological 
project off the ground, he found himself presiding over a fast-growing com-
munity at the Lick. Scientists brought wives, children, and pets, and with 
them new challenges for Holden as director. In the close quarters on the 
mountain, Holden’s strident manner became a tragic flaw. Even an admiring 
colleague observed in a biographical note that Holden “never seemed able 
to make an intimate and lasting friendship.”89 In one case, an astronomer’s 
son developed malaria, which the father blamed on poisoned well water 
at Mount Hamilton; Holden refused to have the well cleaned, even after 
testing determined that it was contaminated. Among the colleagues Holden 
managed to turn against him was George Davidson, another astronomer 
with an interest in earthquakes who might otherwise have been an effective 
collaborator. Most significantly, the fights that erupted on the mountain 
could not be contained there. Holden was attacked in the California press 
in ways that could not have helped his efforts to cultivate relations with 
amateurs. He became known, for instance, as “The Emperor of Mt. Hamil-
ton” for restricting public access to the observatory, which the papers duly 
noted was supported by taxpayers’ money.90 Another sympathetic colleague 
explained: “The trouble with Holden was that his personal traits offended 
and antagonized everyone that he had to deal with intimately. They had 
always done so.”91 Holden was forced to resign from the Lick in 1897 and 
never obtained another scientific position. He managed to support himself 
with his pen until his death in 1914, but his seismographic network col-
lapsed along with his scientific career.
Into the Wild
By the time of the founding of the International Seismological Association 
in Strasbourg in 1901, it was clear that the United States was trailing far 
behind other countries in seismology. Harry Reid, a professor of geology at 
Johns Hopkins, attended the ISA’s meetings as the American representative. 
In 1903, he began keeping a record of earthquakes in the United States, 
drawing primarily on newspaper reports and any instrumental data he 
could get his hands on. Apparently at Reid’s request, the Weather Bureau 
urged its observers to send more detailed reports on felt motion directly 
to the director of the US Geological Survey. As of 1905 the only regularly  

The Youngest Land / 209
operating seismographic stations in the continental United States were 
those maintained by Johns Hopkins in Maryland, the Lick Observatory in 
California, and the Weather Bureau in Washington.92
Meanwhile, a truly remarkable seismic event escaped scientific notice 
entirely. In 1905 Ralph Tarr and his young colleague Lawrence Martin ar-
rived in Alaska to conduct a general geographical survey of Yakutat Bay. The 
bay lay beneath steep white mountains, on the border between Canada and 
Alaska, where glaciers stretched from some of the highest peaks down nearly 
twenty thousand feet to the sea.93 “Before going to Alaska in 1905 we had 
seen one account of an earthquake in Yakutat Bay, in 1899, but many of the 
alleged facts were grotesque and failed even to encourage us to expect earth-
quake phenomena in the region. It was a thorough surprise to us, therefore, 
when, early in our work, we came upon clear evidence of recent uplift, in 
barnacles attached to ledges high above the reach of the present tide and 
among land shrubs.” Suddenly, Tarr and Martin began to look at the beach 
from a new perspective. Those blue flowers they had earlier seen on rocks 
high above the water? Only now did they see that these were mussel shells. 
Now they could make sense of the extensive “benches” that provided them 
with convenient rocky surfaces for walking beyond the reach of the tides. 
They continued to collect evidence of recent uplift “until practically every 
foot of a shore line 150 miles in length had been examined.” Several years 
of subsequent field studies showed how profoundly the earthquake had 
transformed the face of the land, even prompting the recession of nearby 
glaciers in the absence of climatic change.94 It was an investigation driven 
by the enduring question of the American West, the question of the physical 
determinants of wilderness versus civilization.
However dramatic the physical evidence, it was their conversations with 
native canoemen that convinced Tarr and Martin that the 1899 earthquake 
was responsible for a dramatic transformation of this landscape. Their in-
vestigation is a story of scientific forensics and of a slow but sure appre-
ciation of the value of eyewitness testimony. The scientific expeditions to 
the region in 1895 and early 1899 provided only “strong presumptive evi-
dence” that the changes were of a more recent date. But the natives “state[d] 
definitely that the uplifts took place in connection with the earthquakes of 
the fall of 1899 and that there were no similar recent movements before or 
since.” “Natives,” wrote Martin in a preliminary report, “notoriously tell 
you whatever you want them to, especially if they can not speak your lan-
guage well.”95 There were, however, “several reasons for considering [the 
natives’ testimony] trustworthy. Our questions put to the natives were never 
in a form to suggest the answer desired. One of our canoemen in 1905,  

210 / Chapter Nine
J. P. Henry, a Sitka native long resident at Yakutat, was able to speak, read, 
and write English well and understood thoroughly the necessity of accurate 
information. After he knew of our interest in these phenomena he repeat-
edly indicated to us, before reaching certain places, that uplift had occurred 
there, and we never found such statements of his as we could verify to be 
untrue or exaggerated; moreover, he and other natives know the shores of 
the inlet intimately, for they canoe there every spring in search of seal and 
would certainly know when such striking changes occurred.” Tarr and Mar-
tin therefore accepted the natives’ statements without further reserve: “Even 
if other lines of evidence did not so convincingly point to the same conclu-
sion, we feel that there should be no hesitancy in accepting this testimony 
of the Alaskan natives as to the date of uplift.” The natives also “described 
the great shaking of the earth, the water waves, the fish killed or left stranded 
by these waves, the appearance of new islands, the uplift of sea caves and 
beaches (one of these the beach on which the natives camp each year in the 
sealing season), the formation of the whitened bryozoan film, and the ava-
lanches.” The natives were, in short, “keen observers of nature.” The local 
“white men,” on the other hand, residents of Yakutat Village, were likely not 
familiar enough with the bay to have taken note of such changes—“engaged 
in fishing or lumbering, [they] concerned themselves little with the wonder-
ful fiord at their doors.”96
The investigation also depended on the testimony of a group of eight 
prospectors who happened to be hunting gold and platinum in Yakutat Bay 
in 1899. Subject to the most violent effects of the earthquakes, these men 
“were too frightened to notice any change of level or saw too much of more 
spectacular things to report it.” Two of the prospectors published accounts 
of their experiences in Alaska newspapers. Tarr and Martin interviewed a 
third, whom they found to be “a very intelligent man, then working as a 
carpenter in Yakutat.” Only the most fortunate conjunction of events al-
lowed the prospectors to escape with their lives. The men had been camped 
on the edge of a glacier in a fjord of Yakutat Bay when the shocks began. The 
first strong one came on 3 September, after which the men strung up a seis-
moscope out of hunting knives, clanging against each other as the tremors 
began. It was a “rude” instrument, Tarr and Martin commented, “but more 
delicate than their own perception.” On 10 September the knives recorded 
fifty-two separate shocks between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m. The strongest one lasted 
nearly three minutes and threw the men to the ground. One of the men de-
scribed the motion as simultaneously “circular” and “waving up and down 
like the swells of the sea, only with considerably more energy.” They ran 
from their tents just in time to witness the bay roaring up from below on 

The Youngest Land / 211
one side, while the mountains crashed down on the other. It may have been 
the most extreme display of sheer tectonic power ever seen by human eyes. 
“About 20 yards back of the beach and above us about 100 yards was a lake 
about 2 acres in area and 15 to 30 feet deep. This lake broke from its bed 
and dashed down upon our camp while we ran along the shore and escaped 
its fury. Everything went before it or was buried by the thousands of tons 
of rock that came down. This deluge was almost immediately followed by 
one from the sea. A wall of water 20 feet high came in upon the flood from 
the lake and carried all debris back over the undulating morainic hills.” 
It seemed to the men that the glacier itself “ran out into the bay for half a 
mile,” though Tarr and Martin judged more likely that a mass of icebergs 
had been thrown into the sea. What the prospectors knew for sure was that 
the ground was “cutting some of the queerest capers imaginable.”97 While 
three of the men made it safely to higher ground, the others were caught 
running back and forth between the furious waves. Eventually, the earth 
settled down. To get some rest, the men tied themselves by their clothes to 
the trees on the mountain side, to avoid “being carried away.” Had they not 
been able to recover one of their boats and rescue a lost canoe, they would 
have been trapped for good. As they forded their way through the icebergs 
and toward the village of Yakutat, they saw marks left by the tidal wave 
“fully 60 feet up the bluffs.”98
Tarr and Martin judged that the prospectors’ story “contributes little of 
scientific interest.”99 Nonetheless, in their final report, they told this tale as 
the “thrilling story” that it was, devoting three pages to it and mostly let-
ting the men speak for themselves. The authors did not turn their attention 
away from the prospectors until the men had made it safely to the village 
four days after the main shock. By contrast, the authors devoted a mere 
paragraph of their final report to seismographic records. As Grove Karl Gil-
bert pointed out in his preface to the final report, few “great shocks” since 
the advent of seismography had been “adequately” and “directly observed.” 
In other words, teleseismic analysis as yet had little value in the absence of 
field studies. Gilbert attempted to differentiate between “two directions” in 
the study of earthquakes: “In its relation to man an earthquake is a cause. 
In its relation to the earth it is chiefly an incidental effect of an incidental 
effect.”100 Yet Tarr and Martin’s analysis frustrated this distinction at every 
turn. They showed how an analysis of the earthquake as a geophysical “ef-
fect” was inextricable from an appreciation of the event “in its relation  
to man.”
Roughly eight years after the earthquake tore through the region, Tarr 
and Martin sent a questionnaire to about six hundred addresses in Alaska, 

212 / Chapter Nine
the Yukon Territory, British Columbia, and the western United States. The 
authors targeted a remarkably wide section of the population—including 
newspaper offices; private individuals suggested by various sources; US 
and Canadian officials, such as Weather Bureau observers and postmasters; 
“ministers and missionaries of all churches, and to managers of all canner-
ies, salteries, etc., in Alaska”; “to the secretary of each Alaskan Brotherhood 
Lodge”; “and to others.” An introductory note ended with the request “that 
you send some reply, even if it be that you know nothing of the matter.”101 
Despite the time elapsed, the scientists reaped about 140 substantive re-
sponses. Fewer than forty of these reported that no earthquake had been 
felt, the rest “contained valuable information, either specifying places where 
we had not previously known certainly that the shocks were felt, or verifying 
information already at hand, or correcting mistakes printed in sensational 
contemporary newspaper reports, or referring to still other persons who 
had valuable information.” These replies were “invaluable in determining 
the boundaries of the region where the shock was sensible to persons and 
in verifying, correcting, and rewriting many sections of the text, a few of 
the better replies being quoted in full. Those who filled out and returned 
the printed circular or showed it to others who did so have conferred a 
real favor upon all interested in the advancement of knowledge concerning 
earthquakes.”102
The Yakutat Bay earthquake came to be cited as “one of the most remark-
able for revealing the nature of the earth movements to which the quakings 
were due.”103 As Martin later observed, “In contrast with practically all the 
great earthquakes of historic times, the Yakutat Bay shocks of September 
1899, stand conspicuous for the absence of loss of life and destruction of 
property. This was because they took place in an area largely wilderness at 
that time and because the frontier inhabitants lived in tents, in log cabins, 
or in low frame buildings.”104 The extent of the reported damage was the 
“shifting of an uninhabited log cabin,” “the cracking of a few chimneys,” 
and “slight damage to a wharf.” These shocks were “in the unfortunately 
small class of world-shaking disturbances of which one may read without 
turning with a shudder at the loss of human life.” Martin might have added 
that only in such “wilderness” conditions could eyewitness testimony have 
survived of such cataclysmic convulsions. Human constructions would 
surely have made the quake lethal.
In 1906, Tarr and Martin were putting the finishing touches on a pre-
liminary publication of their research when a “world-shaking disturbance” 
struck the booming city of San Francisco. Writing in haste on 19 April, just 
before putting the manuscript in the mail, the authors added a postscript. 

The Youngest Land / 213
They invoked the American faith that the presence of civilization in Califor-
nia, rather than Alaska, was environmentally preordained. Yet they could 
muster less conviction than Shaler had in the 1880s. “It seems evident . . . 
that the [San Francisco] shock is the result of a normal process of mountain-
building here as in Alaska.” The great difference, they added fatalistically, 
was that in San Francisco “other geographical conditions have determined 
that a large city must develop.”105


ten
A True Measure of Violence:  
California, 1906–1935
“1906 marked the dawn of the scientific revolution” proclaims a 
website of the US Geological Survey.1 No event has received more credit 
for having jump-started the science of seismology in the United States than 
the San Francisco earthquake of 18 April 1906. The investigation is cited 
as the most thorough ever undertaken of a seismic disaster. The evidence 
collected is hailed as the source of the elastic-rebound theory, the corner-
stone of the explanation given by seismologists today for most earthquakes. 
Yet 1906 would hardly have looked like a revolution to anyone who had 
followed the European history of seismology since the 1870s. The San 
Francisco investigation was, above all, an exercise in what Suess and his 
European colleagues called the monographic method, and the conclusions 
were essentially an elaboration of his tectonic theory. Nor did the earth-
quake shake the confidence of California’s boosters.2 No, the designation of 
1906 as a scientific revolution expresses an aspiration rather than a reality. 
Since 1755, the earthquake has been the symbol of choice for an intellec-
tual rupture that produces a “modern” discipline. But the foundations of a 
scientific discipline are rarely so easily shaken.3 Well after 1906, indeed into 
the 1930s, “modern” seismology relied heavily on the eclectic methods of 
nineteenth-century Erdbebenkunde. That very continuity disturbed seismolo-
gy’s newfound American promoters. The history of seismology in California 
from 1906 through the publication of the Richter scale in 1935 is a story of 
attempts to distill a “pure” science from one that was deliberately hybrid.
It is also the story of Harry O. Wood, an unlikely hero for this book. 
Wood was an East Coast boy—born in Maine, a graduate of Harvard Col-
lege. He failed to earn a PhD and struggled to find academic work in Cali-
fornia. All his life his colleagues addressed him as “Mr. Wood,” while 
he addressed them with academic titles. Wood seems to have brought  

216 / Chapter Ten
something of a Puritanical spirit with him from New England to South-
ern California. He was a serious, conscientious man, and an independent 
thinker. “I am a good deal of an individualist myself,” he once wrote, “and so 
I like to be good-naturedly tolerant of such traits in others.”4 He never mar-
ried and seems to have had few confidants. He made no mention of family 
nor friends in his will. Instead, he left everything he owned to the Carnegie 
Institution of Washington, to support seismological research.5 “Shy to the 
point of mortification around women,”6 Wood was not cut out for public 
relations. “Wood did not like publicity,” comments one historian, “at least 
in the beginning.”7 His interest in the public and their observations grew 
gradually, as his research showed him the limits of instrumental research. 
“Seismology owes a largely unacknowledged debt,” attested Charles Richter 
in 1980, “to the persistent efforts of Harry O. Wood for bringing about the 
seismological problem in Southern California.”8 But this tribute came fifty 
years too late. It was in the early 1930s that Richter, Wood’s junior collabo-
rator, began to steer California seismology in a direction that Wood resisted. 
After 1934, Wood watched from the sidelines, the victim of a virus that ate 
away at his spinal cord. Though he lived until 1958, his subsequent work 
was, as he put it, “done little by little, with innumerable interruptions and 
intermissions.”9 He feared that “my own work and effort will have been 
wasted largely.”10
Counting Seconds
The earthquake of 18 April 1906 tore a rift in the ground 290 miles long 
and caused an estimated $20 million worth of damage to downtown San 
Francisco. For roughly a minute, buildings shook like ships at sea. When 
the ground came to rest, most structures were damaged but still standing. 
The real horror was yet to come. Where the quake had cracked gas mains 
and chimneys, flames began to lick the ruins; within hours, firestorms were 
engulfing the city from multiple sides. The fires raged for three days, exacer-
bated in part by the fire department’s misguided use of dynamite to create 
backfires. Crushed, trapped, singed, or asphyxiated, about three thousand 
people perished in the disaster. An unknown number were killed not by 
earthquake or fire but by some of the tens of thousands of military troops 
that descended on San Francisco to prevent the crowd from becoming “tur-
bulent,” with instructions to shoot “looters” and anyone else engaged in 
criminal activities.11
In these circumstances, it might have seemed absurd to expect San Fran-
ciscans to furnish seismological observations. What’s more, the earthquake 

A True Measure of Violence / 217
struck when most residents were still sleeping. The scientists in charge of the 
investigation complained, “So few people were awake at the time the shock 
began that but a small proportion of the replies come from people who 
were in full possession of their observational faculties at the beginning of 
the disturbance; and of those who were suddenly and rudely awakened, few 
were sufficiently alert for deliberate perception at the time and had to rely 
upon a somewhat confused memory for the character of the shock.”12 And 
yet, accounts of the earthquake are remarkable precisely for their character 
of “deliberate perception.”
Several scientists were immediately alert. Grove Karl Gilbert, for one, 
counted himself lucky to have witnessed the temblor:
It had been my fortune to experience only a single weak tremor, and I had, 
moreover, been tantalized by narrowly missing the great Inyo earthquake of 
1872 and the Alaska earthquake of 1899. When, therefore, I was awakened in 
Berkeley on the eighteenth of April last by a tumult of motions and noises, it 
was with unalloyed pleasure that I became aware that a vigorous earthquake 
was in progress. The creaking of the building, which has a heavy frame of 
redwood, and the rattling of various articles of furniture so occupied my at-
tention that I did not fully differentiate the noises peculiar to the earthquake 
itself. The motions I was able to analyze more successfully, perceiving that, 
while they had many directions, the dominant factor was a swaying.13
The astronomer A. O. Leuschner was no less precise in his report. His es-
timate of the duration of the shaking was, improbably, “based on count-
ing seconds while carrying my small children out of the house.” Leuschner 
counted seventy-five seconds, but feared he could have overestimated by 
ten, it being “safe to assume that I counted seconds too rapidly in the excite-
ment of the moment.”14
Today, it is easy to poke fun at the “pedantic precision” of these observ-
ers.15 Such jokes made the rounds in 1906 as well. At Stanford, the statue of 
America’s first great naturalist, Louis Agassiz, was thrown headfirst from atop 
a column of the zoology building. “Many stories were told about Agassiz’s 
natural instinct that when the earthquake came he decided to stick his head 
underground to find out what was going on in the earth below and with his 
finger pointing saying, ‘Hark! Listen!’” But to mock Agassiz’s living counter-
parts is to miss the ways in which the earthquake called into question what 
it meant to observe an earthquake scientifically. (See figure 10.1.)
No one had worked harder in this vein than Alexander McAdie, chief 
of the San Francisco Weather Bureau. The San Francisco Chronicle reported 

218 / Chapter Ten
on 24 April that McAdie “stayed by his post in the Mills building until the 
structure caught fire and he was the last man to leave the building; he has 
not stopped work. His instruments are destroyed, but the records of the last 
sixty years are believed to be intact in the safe. He has been able, through the 
cable station at the [Ocean] beach and through wireless messages sent from 
Admiral Goodrich, to keep in constant communication with Washington, 
and only three observations have been lost in thirty-six hours.” Even more 
remarkable were McAdie’s personal observations of the earthquake. He be-
gan by noting that his “error” was “1 minute slow” according to the time 
signals received at the Weather Bureau,
with which my watch has been compared for a number of years. The rate of 
my watch was 5 seconds loss per day. . . . I would say perhaps that 6 or more 
seconds may have elapsed between the act of waking, realizing, and looking 
at the watch and making the entry. I remember distinctly getting the minute-
hand’s position, previous to the most violent portion of the shock. The end 
of the shock I did not get exactly, as I was watching the second hand and the 
end came several seconds before I fully took in the fact that the motion had 
Fig. 10.1.  The statue of Louis Agassiz on the Zoology Building at Stanford was knocked  
down by the earthquake of 1906; Humboldt, next to Agassiz, stayed put. http://commons 
.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Agassiz_statue_FN-32903.jpg.

A True Measure of Violence / 219
ceased. The second-hand was somewhere between 40 and 50 when I realized 
this. I lost the position of the second-hand because of the difficulty in keep-
ing my feet, somewhere around the 20-second mark. I suppose I ought to say 
that for twenty years I have timed every earthquake I have felt, and have a 
record of the Charleston earthquake, made while the motion was still going 
on. My custom is to sleep with my watch open, note-book open at the date, 
and pencil ready—also a hand electric torch. These are laid out in regular 
order—torch, watch, book, and pencil.
How then was McAdie to explain the fact that his reported time was about a 
minute later than most? He continued: “However, there is one uncertainty; I 
may have read my watch wrong. I have no reason to think I did; but I know 
from experiment such things are possible.”16
Training, precision, experimentation, and skepticism: McAdie underlined 
the building blocks of his scientific attitude at this moment of crisis. He 
held himself to a heroic ideal of earthquake observation. As we have seen, 
it was an ideal with an illustrious heritage in the memoirs of Humboldt, 
Darwin, and Muir. McAdie, a founding member of the Sierra Club, once 
imagined what Muir would have said of a newly reported landslide in the 
Pamirs: “We would have had a description, both accurate and eloquent, for 
he would have written into it not only what the eye beheld, but much that 
other men must have failed to note, because they failed to feel.” It was then 
that McAdie recalled Muir’s famous account of the earthquake at Yosemite: 
“Mr. Muir often described the scene to the writer and fellow members of the 
Sierra Club. It is plain that after the first two or three seconds of doubt and 
trepidation, Muir realized what was happening and enthusiastically wel-
comed such an opportunity for close observation of the swaying trees, and 
the piling up of the talus by the torrent of rocks from the cliffs, forming a 
luminous bow as they fell. His intense interest and forgetfulness of self were 
not assumed, but the natural expression of a spirit all eager to observe and 
interpret, if he could, the shaking earth and allied phenomena.”17 Perhaps, 
on that April morning when McAdie’s home on Clay Street began to heave, 
he conjured his friend Muir. At Yosemite, as McAdie pointed out, Muir “was 
probably the one man in the valley who kept his head.”
McAdie’s tribute to Muir implied that the act of earthquake observing 
was not simply a matter of scientific discipline. Muir’s attitude was “the nat-
ural expression” of his “spirit,” not a trained habit; it constituted a “forget-
fulness of self” that was “not assumed.” Perhaps these descriptions sound 
familiar. They recall similar testimony, from men like Erwin Baelz, Albert 
Heim, and William James, of the peculiar objectivity of the human mind 

220 / Chapter Ten
in the midst of disaster. Like them, McAdie implied that this demeanor was 
more a primal instinct than a product of scientific education. Indeed, he 
hinted that Muir’s qualities as an observer were precisely those that were 
missing from the science of his day—he was not just “accurate,” but also 
“eloquent,” expressive not only of “what the eye beheld,” but also of what 
he managed “to feel.” In this way, even the most “scientific” accounts of the 
earthquake raised questions about the nature and origins of acute percep-
tion in the face of an elemental catastrophe.
Scientists were not alone in staking a claim to an alert, expansive, and 
impersonal perspective on the 1906 earthquake. The event seemed custom 
made for youth with “literary aspirations” like the writer Kathleen Norris. 
Like five of her young literary friends, Norris experienced the earthquake as 
an “unmitigated delight.” “How I wish that to every life there might come, 
if once only, such days of change and freedom, so deep and intoxicating a 
draught of realities, after all the artificialities of civilization and society.”18 
On the afternoon of 19 April, she and her friends sent off their first stories of 
the disaster: “We realized that here was our golden opportunity, and we lost  
no time.”19 The writer Gertrude Atherton, who lost her home in the fire, like-
wise seized on the earthquake as a literary windfall. Harper’s Weekly soon 
quoted her advice that there was “no better ‘cure’” than an earthquake “for 
those that live where nature has practically forgotten them.” The earthquake 
reappeared in Atherton’s novel Sisters-in-Law, which opens with a young girl 
out alone after midnight for the first time. The anticipated scene of sexual 
awakening turns into quite a different form of liberation:
Alexina was a child of California and knew what was coming. She barely had 
time to brace herself when she saw the sleeping city jar as if struck by a sudden 
squall, and with the invisible storm came a loud menacing roar of impris-
oned forces making a concerted rush for freedom. She threw her arms about 
one of the trees, but it was bending and groaning with an accent of fear, a 
tribute it would have scorned to offer the mighty winds of the Pacific. Alexina 
sprang clear of it and unable to keep her feet sat down on the bouncing earth. 
Then she remembered that it was a rigid convention among real Californians 
to treat an earthquake as a joke, and began to laugh. There was nothing hys-
terical in this perfunctory tribute to the lesser tradition and it immediately 
restored her courage. Moreover, the curiosity she felt for all phases of life, 
psychical and physical, and her naïve delight in everything that savored of 
experience, caused her to stare down upon the city now tossing and heaving 
like the sea in a hurricane, with an almost impersonal interest.20

A True Measure of Violence / 221
In the course of this passage, sexual imagery—the trees “bending and groan-
ing” in Alexina’s embrace—gives way to something more radical: a natural 
world that calls on the young girl to abandon the conventions of femininity. 
Her laughter expresses “courage,” not “hysteria,” and her attitude of “curios-
ity,” “naïve delight,” and “impersonal interest” marks her as an observer in 
the tradition of Muir and James. What unites their earthquake accounts and 
Atherton’s is the “impersonal” quality of their attention, their “forgetfulness 
of self”—that state of pure objectivity that Albert Heim described as charac-
teristic of near-death experiences.
The Report
“There was no hysteria, no signs of real terror or despair,” recalled Arnold 
Genthe, who photographed San Franciscans gaping at the spectacle of the 
fires.21 What to do with their testimony, however, was not immediately clear 
to the experts who set out to investigate the earthquake—commissioned 
by the state government and funded by the Carnegie Institution of Wash-
ington. “Many of these replies are rather questionable scientific evidence,” 
the commission judged, “inasmuch as many of them were in response to a 
leading and suggestive question, and very few of them have been subjected 
to the clarifying process of cross-examination.”22 The commission was de-
termined to distance its research as much as possible from the sensational 
reporting of the press. Commission-member J. C. Branner explained: “The 
picturesque and sensational features of earthquakes are abundant and en-
tertaining, but to the geologist these features have only a passing and acci-
dental interest. For example, if a chimney top, broken off by an earthquake, 
should fall on a man in such a fashion as to go right over his head and leave 
him standing unhurt in the flue, it would be a striking, and to the man a 
very important, fact; but, from the geological point of view, its only impor-
tance would lie in the fact that the shock was severe enough to throw down 
the chimney.”23 Like Kant in 1755, Branner initially attempted to divide the 
“geological” point of view from the human one.
Working with felt reports was a learning process for the commission 
members, several of whom were new to seismology altogether. At first, they 
found much of the testimony hard to believe. For instance, they doubted 
widespread reports of “visible undulations of the ground.” By their esti-
mates, the velocity of seismic waves in the crust—approximately two to 
three kilometers per second—was “so swift that they would scarcely be ob-
served visually.” Still, they found “considerable testimony, of a consistent and  

222 / Chapter Ten
independent character, that much slower undulations were observed . . .  
a great deal of it is positive and unequivocal as to what seemed to be the 
fact. The evidence suggests that there is a type of wave in the ground, in the 
region of high intensity, which has not yet been sufficiently recognized, and 
the origin of which is obscure.”24 Based on the ratio of horizontal compres-
sion to vertical expansion at the earth’s surface, the ordinary longitudinal 
seismic waves could indeed be expected to produce surface waves of ap-
proximately 1.33 inches. However, “it is not necessary to believe that the 
amplitudes of surface waves are nearly as large as they appear, for it must 
be remembered that an observer being shaken by the strong vibrations of 
a violent earthquake is in a difficult position to make good observations 
on the phenomena about him, and particularly to distinguish between the 
movements which are actually taking place and those which he apparently 
sees, but which are really due to his own oscillations.”25 The question of the 
reality of visible surface waves and their “obscure” origin was a persistent 
motivation for the analysis of felt reports over the following decades.
Reports of earthquake sounds also aroused skepticism at first. In an early 
publication, McAdie doubted that these sounds were a genuine seismic phe-
nomenon: “in our judgment most of these sounds can be explained by the 
noise due to violent shaking of dwellings.”26 In the course of the investiga-
tion, however, the commission concluded otherwise. Of eighty-one people 
reporting having heard a sound accompanying the shocks, forty stated that 
the sound preceded the jolt, and “evidence as to the character of the sounds 
is consistent and uniform.” These were low vibrations, “below the range of 
audibility of some people.” This limit would explain the fact that the earth-
quake seemed not to have been heard in some places where its effects were 
seen. The commission went so far as to inquire of a professor of psychology 
at Johns Hopkins “in regard to the limit of sound.” They were told that indi-
viduals varied as to the lower limit and were referred to Helmholtz’s classic 
treatise on sensations of tone.27 Eventually, scientists were willing to believe 
that San Francisco residents might indeed have seen the earth undulate and 
heard it roar.
For the harder hit regions, the distribution of intensity could be ascer-
tained from surveys of structural damage alone. It was on this basis that 
Harry Reid developed his seminal theory of elastic rebound. He employed 
the “absolute scale of destructive earthquakes” that Fusakichi Omori had con-
structed from experiments with a shaking table. Assuming that most ground 
motion is horizontal, Omori determined the ground acceleration necessary 
to overturn or fracture brick columns of varying dimensions and quality. He 

A True Measure of Violence / 223
correlated these laboratory results with field evidence from the Mino-Owari 
earthquake of 1891, producing a scale of seven degrees—from a “strong” 
earthquake that slightly cracks brick walls “of bad construction” (maximum 
acceleration no more than 300 mm/sec2) to the upper limit of a “violent” 
earthquake that destroys all buildings, “except a very few wooden houses” 
(maximum acceleration above 4,000 mm/sec2).28 Reid used Omori’s scale 
to translate damage reports into values of maximum ground acceleration. 
He then used the method Dutton had introduced in 1886 to calculate the 
approximate focal depth of the shock—a shallow fault of only twenty ki­
lometers. This estimate of the depth figured directly into his calculation of 
the “work done by the elastic stresses.”29 Reid thus worked primarily with 
data at the high end of the intensity scale, where he could rely on architec-
tural damage as evidence.
In order to trace fault lines beyond the hardest hit regions, however, it 
was essential to map the distribution of weaker effects. This meant working 
at the more ambiguous, lower end of intensity scales. In Sacramento, in-
tensity was estimated between 6 and 7 on the Rossi-Forel scale (6: “general 
awakening of those asleep,” “some startled persons leaving their dwellings”; 
7: “general panic”), but at Santa Barbara it dipped down to 4 (“felt by per-
sons in motion”). Effects were reported as far as 340 miles east of the fault. 
“Farther east the most notable feature of the reports is that wherever the 
effects of the earthquake were made evident, the physical signs, such as the 
swinging of suspended objects, etc., were described almost to the exclusion 
of direct physiological effects.” George Louderback of Berkeley explained 
this contradiction to the Rossi-Forel scale by noting that the region was 
sparsely inhabited and its residents largely asleep when the shock occurred; 
“the few who were up were moving about at active work and were in general 
not of a sensitive type.” A few people engaged in irrigation noticed slight 
waves in the water, an odd sight on a still morning. But those who men-
tioned it to others were met with “sallies of wit at the expense of the report-
ers.”30 There was thus no shortage of frustrations for researchers measuring 
weaker intensities east of the Sierra Nevada.
Indeed, it became evident in the course of the investigation that the com-
mission was uncomfortable with the very concept of intensity. Lawson’s 
introduction cautioned that intensity as measured by field observations 
was to be regarded as mere “apparent intensity,” in contrast to the “real 
intensity” corresponding to the “energy” of the “earth-waves.” “Inasmuch 
as we have to deal primarily with observable effects and record these as a 
basis for inference, it has been found convenient to use the term ‘apparent 

224 / Chapter Ten
intensity’ in a technical sense throughout this report.” “Intensity” as used 
in the report was “arrived at by applying literally the criteria of the Rossi-
Forel scale,” a remark echoed later in the discussion of the plotting of iso-
seismals.31 Clearly, the investigators did not appreciate that the Rossi-Forel 
scale and its relatives exist solely in order to be applied literally; their criteria 
derive from the reports of ordinary observers, as codifications of typical ver-
nacular reports. One researcher was even assigned by Lawson to determine 
a coefficient for converting “apparent intensity,” as reported on alluvial sur-
faces, to a “real intensity” corresponding to some ideal terra firma.32 It was a 
quest that California’s seismologists would pursue fitfully for the next three  
decades.
Despite such hesitations, the commission’s final report consists in large 
part of the stories of survivors. It is two volumes and over six hundred 
pages of field observations, eyewitness testimony, photographic plates, and 
theoretical synthesis. As the British seismologist Charles Davison noted in 
1925, “No report on any previous earthquake has been issued on so liberal 
a scale.” The first volume, all 450 pages, is sold as a paperback today with 
a full-color cover view of sailboats on a rocky bay. The report synthesized 
observations from no fewer than three hundred individuals. As Davison ob-
served, “Whenever possible, they have been allowed to speak for themselves 
in short notes and papers, so neatly worked into the text that, in reading 
it, there seems to be no breach of continuity.” In this way, the report was 
able to follow the effects of the quake all along the San Andreas fault from 
the Mexican border to the Pacific. As Perry Byerly would note years later, 
“the earthquake itself had a certain simplicity—one unbelievably long fault 
which over much of its length was a single surface break.”33 The Lawson 
report has since acquired iconic status. It is perhaps the single best instantia-
tion of Ernst Mach’s ideal of complete knowledge of an earthquake.
Rebuilding a City and a Science
Lawson’s commission had every right to expect that their massive research 
effort and meticulous survey of structural damage would lead once and for 
all to a reform of construction practices in the Bay Area. What they didn’t 
foresee was the continuing strength of the boosters. In the logic of capital-
ism, destruction was conceived as an opportunity for modernization, not 
for pausing to take stock.34 The policies of the insurance industry also pro-
moted the continued denial of seismic risk. Insurers refused to pay claims 
for damage resulting from the earthquake, defined as an “act of God.” Prop-
erty owners therefore claimed that damage was the result of fire. Already 

A True Measure of Violence / 225
on 21 April the San Francisco Examiner’s headline announced “The Water 
Front Destroyed / To Resume Business at Once.” The conservationist Mary 
Austin noted a sign in one ruined building: don’t talk earthquake / 
talk business.”35 Austin was an eloquent critic of this rush to rebuild. As 
she pointed out, “the greater part of this disaster—the irreclaimable loss of 
goods and houses, the violent deaths—was due chiefly to man-contrivances, 
to the sinking of made ground, to huddled buildings cheapened by greed, to 
insensate clinging to the outer shells of life . . . for most man-made things 
do inherently carry the elements of their own destruction. How much of all 
that happened of distress and inestimable loss could have been averted if 
men would live along the line of the Original Intention, with wide, clean 
breathing spaces and room for green growing things to push up between?”
Austin’s critique reflected lessons she had learned from Native Ameri-
cans, whom she credited with knowing how to “live off a land upon which 
more sophisticated races would starve, and how the land itself instructed 
them.”36 She was not entirely alone in seeking out the perspective of Native 
Americans after the devastation of 1906. Anthropologists interviewed the 
few surviving members of the Wintun tribe, located about eighty-five miles 
north of San Francisco. The tribe was of two minds on the meaning of the 
earthquake and its many aftershocks. To some it seemed to be the onset of 
the “great levelling” of the world, which would flatten the mountains and 
possibly destroy all life in the process. Others believed it betokened the 
“stretching” of the world by Old Coyote Man, in order to make room for the 
growing numbers of whites. Yet the Wintuns agreed that “ultimately there 
would be a great upheaval and levelling which would obliterate all things 
at present upon the earth.” The anthropologists seemed to sympathize with 
the Wintuns’ tragic vision.37
Natural scientists tended to be more optimistic. The geologist T. C. Cham­
berlin, better known for his theory of the greenhouse effect, suggested that 
the earthquake might liberate the public from unwarranted fears: “If, for 
instance, it shall later be shown, as I think not improbable, that the earth 
is now in a general way receding from a period of special deformation into 
one of relative quiescence, and that catastrophic action is on the decline, 
it will be a contribution of no small value to the comfort of mankind. The 
public is now very generally depressed by needless apprehension of great 
impending disasters, if not a universal and final catastrophe, apprehensions 
derived from the narrow and pessimistic views of the past. From my point 
of view, which is doubtless a partial one, a contribution of supreme value 
to the happiness and well-being of mankind is likely to grow out of recti-
fied views . . . derived from the prosecution of the earth sciences.”38 Like 

226 / Chapter Ten
ancient natural philosophers, Chamberlin viewed science in ethical terms 
as an antidote to fear.
The members of the Lawson commission shared this cautious optimism. 
They might even have been mistaken for boosters themselves, since they 
claimed that the quake had released the stress on the San Andreas fault for 
a long time to come.39 Geschwind has characterized them as typical Pro-
gressives, valuing “objectivity, efficiency, and expert guidance.”40 However, 
Geschwind also makes clear that it took time for these scientists to settle 
on what he calls their “progressivist” strategy—meaning “deference to ex-
pertise” rather than “grassroots organization and protest,” and the incorpo-
ration of seismologists into the “regulatory-state apparatus.”41 Otherwise 
known as technocracy, this solution was not a foregone conclusion.42
The Seismological Society of America
From 1906 to 1933, these scientists were experimenting with various ap-
proaches to the politics of seismic safety. At first, they turned hopefully 
to the public for support. In July of 1906, Lawson, Reid, and Leuschner, 
joined by Weather Bureau officials McAdie and Marvin, began plans for 
what would become the Seismological Society of America. The society was 
formally founded in late August, with the aim of “the acquisition and dif-
fusion of knowledge concerning earthquakes and allied phenomena and 
[enlistment of ] the support of the people and the government in the attain-
ment of these ends.” The annual dues were set at just $2, cheap compared 
to those charged by the Astronomical Society of the Pacific and the Sierra 
Club at the time ($5 and $3, respectively).43 Scientists made up fewer than 
half the members, with the rest drawn primarily from engineering and ar-
chitecture. Indeed, McAdie later credited the idea of the SSA to his next-door 
neighbor, W. R. Eckart, an engineer at the Union Iron Works whose mete-
orological instruments McAdie borrowed during the fire of 1906.44 John 
Muir joined the society, as did other members of the Sierra Club. From the 
start, the plan was to organize an instrumental network to record both local 
and distant earthquakes, as well as a network of “200 to 300 cooperating 
observers who, every time they felt an earthquake, would report the quake’s 
time of occurrence, duration, intensity, and other pertinent information to 
the central bureau. In this way . . . a complete catalogue of earthquakes on 
the Pacific Coast might be assembled.”45 The term “cooperative observers” 
suggests that the SSA modeled its network on that of the Weather Bureau.
Previous catalogs of California earthquakes had been designed to prove 
the insignificance of the seismic threat. The SSA’s founders hoped instead 

A True Measure of Violence / 227
to convince the public of the need for seismic safety measures.46 They did 
not mean to cause alarm, nor to halt development. Instead, they aimed “to 
supplant any element of terror or helplessness which results from imperfect 
knowledge by an interest in natural phenomena and a sense of security 
resulting from familiarity with the facts and the taking of reasonable precau-
tions.”47 Or, as J. C. Branner put it as president of the SSA in 1913, it was 
necessary to locate seismic faults “so that we can keep our houses, bridges, 
dams, pipe lines and other structures off them, or, we can do our engineer-
ing so that, when the next earth-slip comes, the damage will be negligible.” 
In the society’s Bulletin, the reports of the cooperating observers were “prob-
ably read more widely by the general membership of the society than the 
‘scientific’ articles.”48
The scientist in charge of collecting the volunteers’ observations was Al-
exander McAdie, the man who slept with his watch, notebook, and pencil 
at the ready. McAdie’s research interests lay in such practical areas as storm 
prediction and agricultural climatology. He was “an able interpreter of his 
science to the public,” as a colleague commented.49 In 1899 he published 
an article in Century Magazine on “Needless Alarm during Thunder-Storms.” 
There McAdie distinguished between the “depression of spirits which is 
physical and real, brought about by some as yet unknown relation between 
the nervous system and conditions of air-pressure, humidity, and purity” 
and the “unnecessary” fear that was “largely the work of the imagination.” 
McAdie hoped to teach the public to make rational distinctions between, in 
his terms, appropriate and “needless” fear.
McAdie and his fellow members of the SSA did not consider fear to be 
an irrational response to geophysical hazards. On the contrary, the society 
was invested in documenting an emotional response that was understood 
as “physical and real.” At the same time, the SSA sought to serve the needs 
of industrial development. By no means did its members abandon the prin-
ciple, long associated with Buckle, that fear of earthquakes could discour-
age investment and cripple a capitalist economy. As J. C. Branner would 
put it during his presidency of the society, “The more we know about them 
[earthquakes] the less harm they can do us, and the less reason we shall 
have to fear them.”50 The key, then, was to assess just how much fear was 
appropriate.
Branner’s Society
By early 1911, when J. C. Branner took over as the SSA’s president, the soci-
ety appeared “moribund.”51 Branner immediately launched a campaign to 

228 / Chapter Ten
revive it. In just a few months, he succeeded in doubling the society’s mem-
bership. He added, “The Berkeley crowd seems to have wanted the society 
for personal use. I want it to awaken and keep alive an interest in seismol-
ogy.”52 Though he failed to meet his goal of one thousand members, he had 
soon raised the number from 143 to four hundred, where it remained until 
the late 1920s.
Branner was, in his own estimation, a child of an oral culture. He had 
spent his early years on a Tennessee farm in the 1850s. He had little access 
to books as a boy, and instead delighted in the stories told by slaves. In 
1921 he published a collection of these “How and Why Stories,” transcribed 
in full dialect. In a preface he explained that it “seemed best to write them 
down as nearly as possible in the spirit and language in which they were told 
me without concerning myself with inconsistencies of which the narrators 
themselves were not aware.”53 As a product of the antebellum South and a 
critic of Reconstruction, Branner was also adept at casting suspicion on the 
federal government and positioning himself as a defender of the people. 
More than any other California seismologist of his era, he had a politician’s 
instincts. At the time of the 1906 earthquake, his rhetorical skills were on 
display in a conflict with the director of the US Geological Survey, Charles 
Walcott. Walcott was “a skilled scientist-politico who was wont to breakfast 
with a congressman, a senator, or a President.”54 Walcott informed Branner 
that the USGS planned to take over the survey of Arkansas coal fields (which 
Branner had led in the 1890s), and forbade him from publishing anything 
on the topic. In a series of letters to Science, Branner framed Walcott’s move 
as an “invasion” by the federal government of the province of a state survey: 
the issue was “not a question of geology, but a question of the administra-
tion of a public bureau.”55 Branner styled himself as a representative of “the 
people of Arkansas” against an expansionist federal office. He went so far 
as to accuse the USGS of being a trust. “Trusts and trust methods are in the 
air,” he declared, but so are “protest, rebellion and resentment against these 
high-handed methods.”56 Branner’s dispute with Walcott would return to 
haunt him after he took over the leadership of the SSA.
Branner was convinced from the start that the society would need to en-
list a large number of cooperative observers. Perhaps he was swayed by his 
first experience with a seismoscope, a year after the Charleston earthquake 
of 1886. The journal in which he had intended to record tremors ended up 
with the title “Troubles with a Seismo, by J.C.B., 1887–8.”57 In 1909 he ar-
gued that locating faults could not be accomplished instrumentally, at least 
not for a “young” organization with limited funds. There was, however, 

A True Measure of Violence / 229
“one excellent kind of a seismograph . . . that we can all use to great advan-
tage if we will only set about it, and will take the trouble to put the records 
on paper and send them in. I refer to our own bodies.”58 It therefore seemed 
natural to Branner that seismology should be administered by the Weather 
Bureau, with its network of volunteer observers.
Soon after becoming president of the SSA, Branner pressed this view on 
the Weather Bureau’s chief, Willis Moore. The bureau, Branner wrote, with 
its “large working organization covering the entire national domain, its per-
manent stations, and its intelligent observers trained to make observations 
and reports every day only needs a slight broadening of its field and the 
necessary equipment, funds, etc. to make it immediately the most effective 
organization in the world for gathering and using seismological data.”59 To 
Senator Frank Briggs, member of the Committee on the Geological Survey, 
Branner urged that “seismological investigations, in order to be efficient, 
must have a large number of observers, and that those observers must be 
accustomed to making, recording, and sending in certain observations.” 
Emphasizing the value of lay volunteers, he noted that “these observers do 
not need to be geologists, but it is of the utmost importance that they be 
numerous, and that they be widely distributed over the area to be studied. 
It is only by such means that it is, or can ever be, possible to locate the 
seismologically active faults, zones or centres.” Otherwise, he warned, “the 
machinery of the Weather Bureau would have to be practically duplicated at 
great expense and with much delay.”60 Of course, the Weather Bureau had 
collected seismological observations for years in an unsystematic way and 
without expending any significant portion of its budget to do so. Making 
this function official would hardly seem like a matter for controversy.
In 1909, however, Charles Walcott had succeeded Samuel Langley as 
director of the Smithsonian Institution. Walcott was soon lobbying Con-
gress to establish a national seismological service—under the auspices of 
the Smithsonian. Branner feared that his opposition to Walcott’s plan “is 
liable to be regarded as a purely personal affair which it is certainly not.”61 
In 1910 the Treasury Department explicitly barred the Weather Bureau from 
applying its funds to earthquake research. The New York Times reported the 
verdict with a jeer: “The Controller says seismology relates to what is under-
ground, while meteorology relates to conditions above ground. Therefore 
the study of seismology is not comprehended in the work of the Weather 
Bureau.” An editorial described it as a decision made “in a moment of truly 
departmental inspiration.” Surely the Treasury’s controller would now be 
invited to join the world’s elite scientific societies: “Possibly they will first 

230 / Chapter Ten
want to know, as a mere formality, how he discovered that there is no rela-
tion between weather and earthquakes . . . the Controller’s competency to 
decide the matter being universally recognized.”62 This was just the kind 
of political control over scientific research that American scientists of the 
Progressive Era could not abide.63
Finally, in 1914, Congress reversed the 1911 decision and approved the 
Weather Bureau’s bid to nationalize seismological research. Branner wrote 
a relieved letter to C. F. Marvin at the bureau: “I should tell you frankly that 
I have hitherto found the English language quite inadequate to express my 
indignation at the attitude of Congress toward the Weather Bureau’s work 
on earthquakes. . . . You can count on the cordial support of intelligent  
people out here, I am sure. . . . I think you are quite right to begin with 
non-instrumental reports. I am confident that the results will be well worth 
while. Instruments are too expensive to undertake in the early part of the 
work.”64
The cooperatives had won the day. Each of the more than four thousand 
volunteer observers across the nation was furnished with cards for report-
ing ground movement, to be collected by their regional section directors. 
Farmworkers and women were still well represented among the coopera-
tives, as in the late nineteenth century. The Weather Bureau hoped that 
an instrument would soon be available that could “easily be cared for by 
inexperienced individuals and that will give a trustworthy measure of the 
intensity of local shocks.” Such an instrument, however, was “more or less 
completely unavailable at the present time.”65 Felt reports were thus the 
bureau’s priority. In California, 167 cooperative observers agreed to begin 
reporting earthquakes to the bureau in 1915, in addition to the twelve regu-
lar weather stations.
Their reports went to Andrew Palmer, chief of the San Francisco office 
of the Weather Bureau. Despite the disruptions of the war, the number of 
cooperatives participating reached 350 by 1919.66 Palmer vouched for the 
integrity of these volunteers. “As it is recognized that psychological factors 
play an important part in the recording of sensible earthquakes, the char-
acter of the observers deserves special consideration.” Palmer praised the 
cooperatives in the terms traditionally used at the bureau: “Nearly all of 
these observers render both climatological and seismological reports with-
out compensation, and this fact alone indicates their interest in and capac-
ity for the work. Actuated largely by public spirit, these observers are almost 
without exception leading citizens in the various communities which they 
represent. Furthermore, the care required in the daily meteorological obser-
vations is a form of discipline which soon makes one exercise good judg-

A True Measure of Violence / 231
ment in the recording of natural phenomena.”67 However, like so many 
California scientists before him, Palmer thought he knew all the results al-
ready. At the end of 1915, he was confident that no sensible earthquake in 
California had gone unreported. More shocks had been noted on the state’s 
5 percent of the total area of the United States than in the other 95 percent.68 
Yet his report would be “incomplete” if he did not add that California’s 
earthquakes were less hazardous than hurricanes and tornadoes elsewhere 
in the country. Indeed, his “inevitable conclusion” after five years of macro-
seismic surveys was that California’s tremors possessed “a constancy from 
year to year,” indicating that “these slightly but constantly recurring trem-
ors may well be regarded as a safety valve in efficient operation.”69 Palmer 
offered the public little incentive to report on the weaker movements that 
could have helped locate faults.
At the national level, oversight of the bureau’s seismological program 
was handed to William J. Humphreys, an atmospheric physicist who had 
trained in the high-precision physics laboratory of Henry Rowland. Hum-
phreys defined “modern seismology” in 1914 as a highly technical, instru-
mental science. It was “so very modern as to require considerable liberality 
in conceding it an age of even 30 to 40 years.” “Modern seismology” had 
originated with the first instruments capable of detecting otherwise in-
sensible tremors, as well as the geophysical expertise and “none too easy 
mathe­matics” necessary to interpret the instrumental records. Yet Hum-
phrey worried that “modern seismology” had thereby acquired an image 
problem. “From this it might seem that seismology is an ideal subject for 
the private diversion of the abstract scientist, as indeed it is. Those who at-
tempt difficult problems for the mere exhilaration they afford, or revel in the 
luxury of intricate equations, can find in seismology every excuse for end-
less self-indulgence.” Clearly, such a field would be hard-pressed to attract  
either government funding or popular participation, especially with a war 
brewing in Europe. But there was another side to seismology, Humphreys 
remarked, one that could in fact engage “the engineer” or “the man of af-
fairs”: the location of active faults. This was a topic of immediate relevance 
to “a careful engineer” contemplating the erection of a bridge across a fault, 
or to “a properly informed and prudent banker” asked to invest in such a  
project.70
Under the Weather Bureau, then, earthquake observing was defined nar-
rowly at both the state and national levels. It was a practical effort, divorced 
from the “modern” science of seismology, and serving the needs of engi-
neers and businessmen. In California, it was expected to produce only fur-
ther evidence of long-term environmental stability.

232 / Chapter Ten
“Making It Local”
Even as he fought political battles in Washington, Branner pursued the 
other prong of his seismological program: enlisting local observers. His cor-
respondence from 1911 and 1912 is filled with letters soliciting new mem-
bers for the SSA, as many as 2,500 of them.71 These efforts flagged only after  
1913, when his new duties as president of Stanford University took prec­
edence. Branner expected that his correspondents would not immediately 
recognize the value of felt reports. He explained that the investigation of an 
earthquake should collect “any facts that can be had of residents. Such notes 
seem worthless at first glance, but it often happens that we are enabled 
by them to determine the area and intensity of shocks.”72 Branner quickly 
perfected a pragmatic, antielitist tone and a grassroots rhetoric. One letter 
to a J. S. Rossiter in Pasadena announced, “As president of the Seismologi-
cal Society of America I am trying to get the people of this state interested 
in earthquakes. To that end we want to get as many members as possible 
so that we can after a while organize some sort of systematic collection of 
data. . . . if you give me the names of a few others who will help I shall be 
greatly obliged to you. No particular skill or knowledge is required.”73 When 
Rossiter agreed to join and mailed his two dollars the following week, Bran-
ner replied, “It is pleasant to run across people who take a rational view 
of earthquakes. We cannot conceal from ourselves or from others that we 
have them, and the reasonable thing seems to be to study them and to find 
out how we can prevent their doing serious damages. That is what sensible 
people do about disagreeable things of all sorts. If we can get the coopera-
tion of a large number of persons on this coast we shall soon have the earth-
quake business run into its hole.”74 A letter to a mining engineer expressed 
a modest view of seismological expertise: “None of us knows much about 
earthquakes, but if we all try to find out we hope to know something after 
a while.”75
By the summer of 1911, then, a preliminary network was in place. On  
1 July, a strong earthquake struck central California—strong enough to throw  
the seismographs at the Lick Observatory and at Santa Clara College out 
of order. As Harry Wood put it, it proved impossible to obtain an “unmu-
tilated” seismogram of the event. It would have been an ideal test case of 
Branner’s observing network, but for the fact that Branner was out of town, 
on a research trip to Brazil. Without his prompting, the network failed to 
spring into action. The collection of reports did not begin until Branner’s 
return in late August, when he assigned the task to one of his graduate stu-
dents. The conclusion was that the earthquake had reached a maximum 

A True Measure of Violence / 233
intensity of Rossi-Forel 8–9 and was palpable over a region of about four 
hundred miles at its widest. There was no good reason for it not to have 
been reported by the SSA’s observers.76
By early 1913, Branner was complaining publicly about the failure of 
his observing network. “The collection of information on the west coast of 
North America in regard to earthquakes is not as simple and as easy as it 
looks at first glance.” A first problem, he explained, was that weak shocks 
were so frequent that “most people are accustomed to them. . . . It is a com-
mon experience to hear a remark like this in the middle of a conversation: 
‘By the way, did you feel that earthquake last night?’ and after a yes or no, 
the conversation goes on without further interruption.” Most earthquakes 
did not seem to most people to be “worthwhile” to report. But there was 
also a more insidious problem at work: the “deliberate suppression of news 
about earthquakes.”77 Branner was not the first seismologist since 1906 to 
have raised the charge of seismic denial, and he would hardly be the last.
Branner wanted California’s residents and scientists alike to acknowl-
edge what they did and did not know about earthquakes. He stressed that 
“no one needs apologize for any fact he sends in. To our requests for in-
formation about earthquakes we are frequently told apologetically that ‘I 
don’t know anything about earthquakes.’ There is but one reply to be made 
to such remarks, and that is that ‘we know precious little about them our-
selves; we are just now trying to find out, and we want your help.’”78 One 
respondent freely admitted his ignorance: “Would you kindly notify me, 
and I presume the information would be of interest to the other lay mem-
bers of the Society, just how to recognize the disturbance occasioned by an 
earthquake. That is, how to differentiate it from similar disturbances. Not 
infrequently we have a little jar which we wonder about, as to whether it 
is an earthquake or the result of some blasting or explosion.”79 In another 
case, an engineer wrote to Branner asking for information on earthquakes in 
two states where his company planned to construct dams. Branner replied 
that he was sorry he had no information. He used this exchange in a 1913 
article for the BSSA to “urge upon these very engineers the great importance 
and necessity of their own cooperation. . . . ‘Help us and we shall gladly do 
all we can to help you. If you feel an earthquake, report the time, place, and 
intensity to the Seismological Society of America.’” It was crucial to “keep 
up our observations right straight along, year in and year out, whether the 
earthquakes are big or little.”80 Nonetheless, earthquakes continued to strike 
without being reported. The entire program was still experimental in 1914. 
It was still a matter of “try[ing] out the plan of locating the epicenters of our 
California earthquakes from personal observations.”81

234 / Chapter Ten
Branner’s team resorted to canvassing the affected areas on foot. They 
found that people were often more willing to broach the subject of tem-
blors in person. After a quake in the Santa Cruz Mountains in late 1914, 
Carl Beal noted that “only about twenty observations and notes were sent 
to the Seismological Society,” likely because of the low population in the 
mountainous region of highest intensity. “The writer therefore spent four 
days in the field, and gathered from the people themselves most of the in-
formation contained in this brief account.” One “interesting and valuable 
contribution to the subject” came from a young woman at Stanford who 
was phoning a friend in San Francisco: the friend said she would have to 
hang up, there had been an earthquake; it was only after a pause that the 
woman at Stanford exclaimed, “Here it is now!”82 In January 1915, Beal 
spent nine days collecting information on a quake in Santa Barbara County. 
The locals were mainly ranchers, “who cooperated with the writer in the 
most courteous and efficient manner.” He also interviewed fellow passen-
gers during his train ride south, and contacted others via “the long-distance 
telephone,” since some of the mountain roads were impassable in winter. 
Beal’s published report cited witnesses’ statements in detail, noting cases of 
dizziness, fainting, and nervousness; he noted effects on animals, “peculiar 
things” such as the starting of a stopped clock, and the fact that “near Santa 
Rita all the cream was spilled off the milk in a number of pans on a large 
table.”83 When a severe quake struck southwestern California the following 
June, Beal knew what he had to do: “It was impossible to get trustworthy in-
formation in any way except by going into the district affected and gathering 
it directly from those who experienced the disturbance”—even though Beal 
would have to rely on the military governor to give “sufficient guarantees of 
safety to permit the writer to travel through the northern part of Lower Cali-
fornia.”84 Beal’s adventures resulted in a preliminary fault map of Southern 
California in the spring of 1915.85
In February 1920, Los Angeles entered a period of heightened seismic 
activity. Over the following eight months, more than one hundred shocks, 
mostly of low intensity, were recorded in the city. In June a severe earth-
quake struck Inglewood, ten miles to the south; on 16 July a series of shocks 
caused minor injuries and light damage to buildings in Los Angeles’s busi-
ness district. “It has been many years since Los Angeles was subjected to 
earthquakes of as high an intensity,” remarked Stephen Taber, a visiting 
geologist from the University of South Carolina who had trained with 
Branner. “People rushed from the buildings after each shock; many women 
fainted and some had hysteria. Business was practically at a standstill after 
the afternoon shocks, and many stores and offices closed for the day.”86 

A True Measure of Violence / 235
With funding from the SSA, Taber spent a total of seven days investigating 
these two events. His experience was highly discouraging. He had “con-
siderable difficulty” during this investigation “in securing such data, some 
people refusing to give us any information, and others giving us incorrect 
data, probably thinking it none of our business; and that the apparently 
trivial things we were asking about could be of no possible value.”87 Taber 
got around this problem in a creative way, using drugstores as his primary 
indicators of the distribution of intensity. As he explained, there was a drug-
store roughly every half-mile throughout the affected area. “These stores are 
all on the ground floor, and they all have many bottles of different shapes 
and sizes similarly arranged on shelves.” One couldn’t ask for a quicker 
means of measuring relative intensity than counting overturned bottles. In 
this way he was able to locate the epicenter of the strongest July shock at the 
prominent fold in Elysian Park. The folds and faults in this area were known 
at the time as obstacles to prospecting in the surrounding oil fields. Taber 
saw their significance differently. This was a spot where mountain building 
had occurred “on a grand scale” for millions of years, and it did not look 
likely to stop in the near future.88
Meanwhile, Los Angeles’s population was growing fast. In the SSA’s Bul-
letin Taber stressed the need for geologists and engineers to work together 
to track earthquakes and their damage. Together, they could rationalize in-
surance premiums and devise proper means to protect the swelling city. 
“The society has not had the assistance of those people who would be most 
directly benefited by it,” Taber charged. “Instead of being helped by the 
people of this state, we have had chiefly opposition.” Thanks to this “os-
trich policy,” Taber argued, American seismology was “behind other coun-
tries which we are accustomed to regard as backward and uncivilized.”89 As 
so often before, the scientific study of earthquakes was being invoked as a 
measure of civilization, yet one that now threatened to class the Japanese 
ahead of Americans.
Taber’s research in 1920 was aided by several Los Angeles engineers who 
helped collect felt reports and evidence of damage. Indeed, it was becom-
ing clear that the SSA’s tactics had shifted. They were no longer counting on 
a permanent observing network of ordinary citizens. Instead, the society 
was pinning its hopes on one small segment of California’s population: 
engineers.
Engineers had a unique perspective on earthquakes in a fast-growing, 
water-starved region like Southern California. As Diana Di Stefano has re-
cently noted, industrial workers in this period were not necessarily tools of 
the “capitalist exploitation of nature.” In some cases, they were the most 

236 / Chapter Ten
trusted repositories of knowledge about environmental risk. In her study  
of the “avalanche country” of western North America in this period, Di­
Stefano shows that railway men were regularly called on as expert witnesses 
to determine whether or not damages caused by an avalanche could have 
been prevented. Her research identifies an unfamiliar moment in the tran-
sition to the “risk society”—before environmental risk became a matter of 
abstract, quantitative expertise.90
Southern California’s engineers had a great deal of experience with seis-
mic faults; the question was what they would do with it. In the aftermath 
of 1906, structural engineers and architects had sent the public mixed mes-
sages about the lessons of the San Francisco earthquake. Some lent credence 
to the state’s boosters by attributing damage to the fires, or simply to shoddy 
workmanship.91 In the face of these tendencies, the SSA helped redirect the 
seismic knowledge of California’s engineers toward disaster mitigation. 
Those involved with mining and the construction of dams and reservoirs of-
ten had the keenest sense for locating faults and estimating seismic hazard.
Within weeks of the Los Angeles earthquake of 16 July 1920, the South-
ern California section of the American Institute of Mining Engineers met 
to discuss the earthquake threat. The meeting was organized by Ralph Ar-
nold, a former Branner student whose research on the California oil fields 
had turned a nice profit. The featured speaker was William Mulholland, the 
chief engineer of the Los Angeles aqueduct. Back in 1906 Mulholland had 
downplayed seismic hazard. Earthquakes threatened nothing “beyond the 
possibility of repair in reasonable time and at moderate cost.” He cheered 
the residents of Los Angeles who would take “their chances on earthquakes 
or other abnormal though seemingly inevitable happenings, rather than 
see the welfare of this fair country languish from lack of water.”92 In 1920, 
however, Mulholland struck a far more cautious note. He began by explain-
ing that what he had to share were “observations not made in a scientific 
way at all, but the mere observations of a practical engineer, accustomed to 
stresses and strains in structures . . . the talk of a layman, pure and simple.”93 
His knowledge came from long experience with building and maintaining 
the city’s waterways. He had “known for many years of the existence of a 
fault or fold of the crust [by Inglewood]. . . . Along that hill or ridge the first 
earthquake I experienced in California occurred . . . in 1878. I was working 
at that time in a sewer pipe works near Santa Monica.” The 1878 shock had 
been similar to that of 1920, Mulholland recalled, and in the intervening 
years he had felt “four similar shocks” on this same ridge. In 1918, Mulhol-
land had built a water tank there. “When I constructed that tank, I knew the 
seismological character of the country, and I kept telling my young engineer 

A True Measure of Violence / 237
assistants that it would be the most vulnerable part of the Los Angeles Water 
Works.” Vulnerable, indeed: “Nothing is more inelastic and less contrived 
to accommodate itself to sudden shocks, than a great big tank full of water, 
for water is the most inelastic substance in nature. . . . There are major frac-
tures, grand faults, that run through the country. . . . I have worked,—done 
lots of engineering work,—along that fault; made explorations at different 
points along it, and I know that it is a major fracture.” These faults had 
cracked a reservoir of his own construction on Salano Hill, a reservoir “ob-
liquely crossed by a fault line of minor character; but it broke the walls, and 
threw the walls about an inch and a half out of level. I repaired that, but 
came back in six months and found it had faulted the other way.” In short, 
Mulholland had come a long way from his optimism of 1906. Instead of 
giving Californians a slap on the back for their pluck, he expressed humility. 
Rather than calculating acceptable damages, he was ready to rule out certain 
projects altogether. Mulholland compared his experience with earthquakes 
to that of his colleague Homer Hamlin, who had abandoned construction 
of an outfall sewer near the same ridge outside Santa Monica. Earthquakes, 
as Mulholland put it, were a “subject that gives a waterworks man a whole 
lot of worry, for those things are unavoidable. You cannot get around them. 
There are some things we have to face. . . . If an earthquake comes, there 
is nobody on earth that can build an aqueduct, or a building, that will be 
proof against it. You can build it so the damage will be slight; but it is going 
to rupture.”94
Homer Hamlin had made a similar appeal to this same audience in Jan-
uary 1918, describing his efforts to “collect data and records pertaining to 
earthquakes in southern California.” Hamlin was the autodidact director 
of the Engineering Department of the city of Los Angeles. Three months 
after the earthquake of 1906, he had written to Andrew Lawson to offer his 
support to the investigative commission: “I am of course much interested 
and would like to be in the field. Would such data as the location of some 
of the principal fault zones in Southern California be of interest or value to 
you. Two years ago I went down the Colorado River to the head of the Gulf 
of California and then down the west side for about 40 miles. There are 
many evidences of great faulting there. Will be pleased to write you about 
them if the data will be of any use.”95 Hamlin was just the figure the fledg-
ling SSA needed. Following the disappointing performance of the volunteer 
observers, Branner was all too happy to fall back on Hamlin’s knowledge 
and connections. When an earthquake struck the northeastern corner of Los 
Angeles County in October 1916, Hamlin was responsible for collecting 
most of the reports that informed Branner’s published study. Branner even 

238 / Chapter Ten
cited Hamlin’s fieldwork on the Tejon Pass fault. Hamlin had also begun 
distributing questionnaires following each tremor near Los Angeles. “At the 
outset I thought we might have eight or ten shocks,” he explained, “if it were 
a good year for earthquakes. In all, over fifty shocks have been recorded; 
but even these are not all, for I am sure that many slight shocks have passed 
unnoticed, or were not considered important enough to report. The effort is 
worthwhile and the work should be carried on even if it is rather strenuous 
at times, for we shall never solve our own earthquake problems until we 
study our own territory.”96
Hamlin’s informal network was tested three months later by an earth-
quake near the San Jacinto Mountains, which seriously injured several 
people. Hamlin and Sydney Townley, the secretary of the SSA, jointly in-
vestigated the affected region three days later. In all, Hamlin collected 166 
reports; other researchers only managed to collect eight. Townley seemed 
genuinely surprised by the usefulness of these observations. “It is well 
known,” he remarked, “that only a very few people are able to estimate a 
short time interval in a way which even roughly approaches scientific ac-
curacy”; fortunately, two of the observers used their watches to estimate the 
duration of the shaking. “The moment the shock started,” wrote one witness, 
“I pulled out my watch and caught the exact duration of the shock, which 
was one minute and thirty-one seconds.”97 Another witness took pleasure 
in describing the aftershocks—one was a “corker,” another “twisted things 
up proper.” This man had a good laugh at his wife, who “grabbed the baby 
and rushed outside” each time she heard a car approaching, mistaking it for 
an earthquake.98 Hamlin’s research began with such mundane details of the 
earthquake. But it culminated in meticulous knowledge of the damage and 
of the topography and geology of the San Jacinto fault.99
At the close of their 1920 meeting, the engineers voted to form a “South-
west Section of the Seismological Society of America” with Mulholland as 
chairman. Arnold likened the task at hand to the “organization of a fire 
department. Its members may sit around for a month or two months or 
even a year, and not respond to a fire call; but they go on practicing every 
day, so that they will know how to fight a fire when it does occur. When the 
necessity arises for their activity, they are prepared and ready to respond.” 
Within four months, the SSA’s first local section had won an additional 
forty-five members.100 Arnold thanked the engineers who had volunteered 
for “organizing the work and making it local.”101 By 1920, then, “making it 
local” in Southern California meant appealing to a technical elite, not the 
general public.

A True Measure of Violence / 239
“Dear Fellow Co-ops”
Ironically, just as the SSA was narrowing its outreach to target professional 
engineers, the Weather Bureau was expanding its own network of volun-
teer observers. Meteorology had proven its value for aviation in World War 
One,102 but its practitioners found themselves hesitating between two di-
vergent courses at war’s end. Historians typically see the war as a watershed 
for technocracy, as military, industrial, and economic questions were rede-
fined as problems for scientific experts. One sign of the growing political 
authority of scientists was the founding, in 1916, of the National Research 
Council, which directed postwar efforts to organize large-scale, collabora-
tive research—including Harry Wood’s efforts on behalf of seismology in 
California.103 Yet even the NRC was aware, for its part, that future scientific 
funding was largely at the mercy of the public. Voters would have to be con-
vinced that “pure” research was the key to military and industrial advance. 
In this sense, the war also pointed American science in a second direction, 
toward public outreach.104
The American Meteorological Society was founded in 1919 specifically 
as a means of outreach. As the AMS’s first Bulletin explained, the “exten-
sion of meteorological knowledge and its applications require cooperation 
between amateur and professional meteorologists on the one hand, and 
teachers, business and professional meteorologists on the other hand.” The 
AMS could soon count an eclectic membership of six hundred, about half 
of whom were either amateur or professional meteorologists, with the rest 
drawn from a variety of other occupations. The society planned to reach an 
even wider audience through “educational work,” newspapers, trade jour-
nals, and direct mail. Laypeople would be encouraged to form committees 
that “might cooperate with the Weather Bureau . . . in gathering data and 
pursuing original lines of investigation.”105 For its part, the Weather Bu-
reau recognized the AMS as a valuable tool for recruiting new cooperative 
observers and facilitating communication between them and professional 
meteorologists. In 1922 the Bulletin introduced a “Co-operative Observers’ 
Department for Voluntary Weather Observers in the Americas.”106 It con-
tained a letter from one Cola W. Shepard in Colony, Wyoming, addressed 
“Dear Fellow Co-ops”:
For many years we have been contributing our little mites toward the ad-
vancement of meteorological knowledge by accumulating daily records of 
the weather, you in your small corner, and I in mine. Like soldiers in the 

240 / Chapter Ten
German army, we have known little of the results of our work, but have un-
questioningly read our thermometers and measured the precipitation, oc-
casionally recording a “thunder storm,” or “Lunar Halo.” We have received 
the monthly and annual summaries of climatological data for our respective 
sections, where our figures were printed beside those of other observers, and 
our names appeared in type. We are not expected to know very much about 
meteorology, and most of the more important observations are left to the 
regular stations of the WB. But we are real meteorological enthusiasts. . . . 
And it is possible also that the WB may through this magazine become more 
confidential with us and less distant, for the Society includes in its member-
ship most of the personnel of the WB, and, outside of being government em­
ployees, they are scholars and gentlemen and “regular fellows.”107
This letter lets us glimpse the motivations of one participant in an ambi-
tious experiment in “citizen science.” The writer derived satisfaction from 
seeing his name printed in the bureau’s publications and from knowing, 
like a German soldier in the trenches, that his work gained significance as 
part of a larger whole. Most meaningful, however, was contact with the 
bureau’s scientists. Shepard confirms what European scientists had come to 
suspect: that the public craved contact with “scholars and gentlemen and 
‘regular fellows,’” not “government employees.” It was for this reason that 
central European scientists had worried about the transfer of a volunteer 
observing network from a scientific academy to a state bureaucracy. In the 
United States, cooperatives hoped to interact with scientists who behaved 
like “regular fellows,” but who were, in their eyes, “scholars and gentle-
men”—a status still at odds with the identity of a “government employee.” 
The cooperative observer system promised to forge just this type of bond 
between scientist and citizen.
That promise faded quickly, however. In 1922 the AMS made the fateful 
move of raising its annual dues from one to two dollars (on par with the 
SSA). Most amateurs dropped their membership, and, ever since, the society 
has been a typical professional scientific organization.
“From a Commercial Viewpoint”
The final blow to Branner’s scheme for a cooperative seismic observing net-
work came in 1924. It was then that responsibility for collecting instrumen-
tal and felt reports of earthquakes was transferred from the Weather Bureau 
to the Coast and Geodetic Survey (CGS).108 The transfer represented a shift 
in the perceived significance of seismology at the federal level. Where the 

A True Measure of Violence / 241
bureau had emphasized the “practical” value of seismological observation 
broadly, the survey stressed its “commercial” value. The bureau had called 
for a “scientific” approach to earthquakes, whereas the survey now called 
for an “engineering” approach. Since World War One, the survey had been 
in the hands of Colonel E. Lester Jones, who pressed aggressively for the 
expansion of the agency’s role.109 In a programmatic government pamphlet 
issued in 1925, Jones wrote, “It would be an indictment of modern civili-
zation and of human intelligence to say that it [the earthquake problem] 
cannot be solved. In a large measure the problems belong to engineering, 
and it is therefore not inappropriate that the Coast and Geodetic Survey, an 
engineering bureau which also makes investigations of physical phenom-
ena, would take a part in earthquake investigation.”110 Likewise, Thomas 
Maher, the director of the CGS station in San Francisco, explained that the 
significance of an earthquake could be measured according to its disruption 
of commerce: “From a scientific standpoint, earthquakes may be great or 
small, depending on the extent and magnitude of earth movement; from a 
commercial viewpoint, they will be great or small depending on the damage 
done, and the problem is becoming more and more one for the engineer 
and for the man interested in industrial development.”111
It was soon decided that the survey would rely for felt reports not on 
members of the public, but on “large public-service corporations of Califor-
nia.” The explanation was that such corporations operated around the clock, 
had an expansive network of plants, and were supervised by “intelligent 
men.” Speaking for the survey, Maher assured the SSA that “a very intelligent 
class of men are co-operating with us. From the public-service corporations, 
the reports are mostly by engineers, and such reports are generally accurate, 
without exaggeration, and without the suppression of important facts. Oth-
ers are from business men who realize the danger of sensationalism and yet 
the necessity for having information of value.”112 As a “commercial” prob-
lem, macroseismology became a matter of ensuring the continuing prof-
itability of California big business. The survey’s new system would avoid 
“sensationalism,” but at the expense of driving a wedge between the public’s 
experience of earthquakes and scientists’ interpretations of them.
Harry O. Wood and Regional Seismology
Although the 1906 earthquake was no “scientific revolution,” it did mark a 
minor revolution in the life of Harry O. Wood. In 1906 Wood was a poorly 
paid instructor of mineralogy at Berkeley, grateful to find work with the 
Lawson commission. The disaster proved revelatory for him. He devoted 

242 / Chapter Ten
the rest of his life to understanding California’s seismic threat. Most im-
mediately, he conceived the ambition of surveying all of California’s past 
earthquakes, from the eighteenth century to the San Francisco megaseism. 
This was to be no mere catalog in the style of Trask or Holden. It was to be a 
“synthetic study of recorded shocks”—a work of analysis, not mere compi-
lation. Wood would correlate each event with a known fault. For such a vast  
job of data analysis, his goal sounded remarkably modest: “merely to bring 
out clearly the suggestion that there is a causal association of earthquakes 
with fault zones in this region—a relationship fraught with significance for 
human affairs.”113 Wood’s “synthetic study” would occupy him for nearly a 
decade and make him the American scientist best versed in the subtleties of 
exploiting felt reports.
Wood soon began to hone an argument for the value of noninstrumental 
observations and for the integration of geophysical, geological, and social 
analysis. Like his nineteenth-century predecessors, Wood viewed macroseis-
mology as a hermeneutic challenge. He devoted twenty pages to a criti-
cal discussion of his sources, including the errors arising from incomplete 
records and from the exercise of his own judgment in interpreting them. 
Based on this experience, in 1911 Wood drew up a set of instructions to 
earthquake observers for the first volume of the SSA’s Bulletin. The problem 
with seismographic observatories, he noted, was that their goal was “the in-
crease of scientific knowledge,” rather than what “the practical public deems 
of greatest importance.” More to the point, such observatories, “even if es-
tablished in fair abundance, will not afford any detailed or precise knowl-
edge of the size and shape of the area in which the shock is ‘felt,’ nor of the 
way in which its intensity varies over this area, nor of the character of the 
manifold attendant phenomena,—such as damage to structures or distur-
bances in the soil and rock.” The public urgently needed to know “when and 
where will strong shocks occur in the future, and what conditions, which are 
subject to human control, tend to mitigate their disastrous consequences.” 
Wood’s most important insight in 1911 was that this question could only 
be answered by combining knowledge of geology, the built environment, 
and human perceptions. Seismologists would have to study “the relations 
between the places of origin and the distribution of the perceptible effects 
of shocks; the relation between these effects and the geological character 
of the ground where they occur; how the character of structures affects the 
degree of the disaster,—in short, the interrelationships of all these things, 
place of origin, phenomena, character of ground and of structures through-
out the whole area in which the shock is felt perceptibly.” Finally, true to 
seismology’s nineteenth-century European tradition, Wood insisted that 

A True Measure of Violence / 243
human observations could contribute to new scientific insights, even in the 
seismographic age: “Besides its practical bearing, the results of such correla-
tions have much scientific value, no less than the purely instrumental stud-
ies.”114 Wood would argue this point with growing passion for the rest of his 
career: that the study of earthquakes as a geophysical problem must not be 
divorced from the study of earthquakes as an environmental hazard.
Again on the model of nineteenth-century seismology, Wood concluded 
that such a holistic investigation would depend on “the co-operation of 
large numbers of observers,” for “even the keenest observer cannot compass 
all that is taking place about him.” The greater the number of observers re-
porting on an earthquake, the “more complete its description.” It remained 
only for Wood to furnish guidelines to potential witnesses—a full thirty 
pages of instructions. Thirteen years later, he would regret overburdening 
his readers.115 Indeed, his guidelines were discursive, anecdotal, speculative, 
and open-ended. Like earlier European counterparts, they addressed the ob-
server as both a register of geophysical effects and a naturalist in her own 
right. Wood encouraged observers to record their “Sensations and Emo-
tions.” These fell into two classes. In the first were those that were “part 
objective” and “part subjective,” “undoubtedly effects of [the earthquake’s] 
motion, subjectively modified.” These included “faintness, dizziness, nau-
sea, fear in varying degrees, and all analogous feelings.” The second class 
included indirect results of the shaking and effects that preceded the earth-
quake by hours or even days—potential predictors, in other words. These 
included “nervous irritability, restlessness among brutes and birds, ill- 
defined dread, a sense of oppression, and the like,” which possibly had 
“an objective basis in the physical conditions which prevail just before the 
shock.” Since “effects of this sort are not susceptible of classification, observ-
ers should report them by giving brief descriptions.” This held all the more 
for “Unclassified Phenomena,” such as the appearance of lights or flames. 
Wood speculated that these might be of “still greater scientific importance, 
because uncommon and sporadic, and hence rarely subjected to observa-
tion, criticism, and interpretation,” and he asked that “a full description” 
be given.116 In this way, Wood preserved seismology’s nineteenth-century 
character as a phenomenological, epistemically open field, dependent on 
and well suited to nonexpert contributions.
On the Margins
In 1913 Wood left his dead-end lectureship at Berkeley to become the first 
seismologist at the newly founded Hawaiian Volcano Observatory on the 

244 / Chapter Ten
rim of the Kilauea crater. The setting was spectacular, and a hotel close by 
the volcano had been drawing tourists since 1866.117 But the position was 
a marginal one, apparently one of the few open to Wood without a PhD. 
Finding himself in a wilderness 2,500 miles from California’s booming cit-
ies, Wood began to ask new questions. He began to wonder, for instance, 
if the paucity of felt reports of earthquakes at Kilaeua was a function of 
something other than the low population density. It seemed that observ-
ers nearby were not sensing tremors that registered on his instruments as 
exceeding 1 cm/sec2—the value of ground acceleration that Holden had 
postulated as the minimum perceptible to humans. Wood pointed out that 
this minimum unit had “never been determined by psychological experi-
mentation.”118 The question he raised was a fundamental one: what exactly 
did humans feel when they felt an earthquake?
The answer, according to his analysis of twenty-nine earthquakes re-
corded in Kilauea, was that the relevant stimulus was not the acceleration 
of the shock alone, but rather the acceleration in combination with the am-
plitude of the ground movement. Ever since the work of Dutton, Holden, 
and Mendenhall on the mechanical interpretation of intensity in the 1880s, 
seismologists had assumed that the dependence of seismic intensity on the 
amplitude of ground motion was as simple as the dependence of sound 
intensity on the amplitude of sound waves. Wood was pointing to a more 
complex relationship: the amplitude-dependence of the intensity of an 
earthquake as judged by human observers actually varied with the accelera-
tion of the shock. For weaker shocks, amplitude might even become more 
important than acceleration in determining perceptibility. Wood called for 
further study—“if possible, by experimentation.”119 A decade later, the Brit-
ish seismologist R. D. Oldham challenged Wood on this point. Oldham sus-
pected that Wood’s value for the “minimum unit of seismic perceptibility” 
was artificially low, due to the use of “skilled observers.” He cited evidence 
that the sensitivity of observers rose with prior exposure to earthquakes or 
with training.120 Wood objected (in an unpublished manuscript) that the 
observations had by no means come from “skilled observers, specially on 
the look-out, and living in lightly framed timber dwellings raised clear of 
the ground, especially suited, consequently, for the recognition of feeble 
shocks.” On the contrary, the observations “were made and reported by all 
sorts of people and most of the structures.”121
Wood was gaining a sense of the differences between studying nearby 
earthquakes and distant ones. It was a distinction he would often phrase in 
terms of “regional” versus “world” seismology, or “local” versus “teleseis-

A True Measure of Violence / 245
mic” studies. Thus it was at Kilauea that Wood determined the need for  
an instrument capable of recording weak local earthquakes. The seismo-
graphs in his care at Kilauea convinced him that existing instruments were 
unable to detect very weak shocks at distances of over one hundred kilo­
meters. This worried Wood greatly, because weak tremors “should be telling 
harbingers of strong ones.”122 Close to its epicenter, a weak tremor produced 
faint, short-period oscillations, but sensitive seismographs attuned to dis-
tant quakes registered periods no shorter than six seconds.123 Wood was 
convinced that seismologists must prioritize the study of the seismicity of 
their own regions, not the analysis of distant vibrations. To do so would 
require new methods.
In fact, much of the remainder of Wood’s career was devoted to defin-
ing the aims and methods of “regional” as opposed to “world” seismology. 
Regional seismology comprised the study of the interrelations of various 
problems: “geological,” “physical,” “human,” and “economic.”124 Thus a 
major article in the BSSA in 1916 called for research into earthquakes “in 
their importance to human life,” which in turn “inevitably will increase 
immensely our knowledge of the physics of the earth, and of the specific, 
dynamical behavior of the earth’s crust in this province.” Wood looked to 
Europe and its many geophysical institutes as a model of “an enlightened 
public policy.” He argued that the work of such an institute in California 
should consist of the close coordination of “laboratory” (seismographic) 
and “field” (geological and geodetic) studies, to be complemented by spe-
cial collaborations with engineers (whose concerns would otherwise be 
outside the institute’s “scientific” domain). Taking up this theme again in 
1921, Wood described the “strictly scientific” and “practical” dimensions 
of earthquake research as “inextricably intertwined.” By “scientific,” Wood 
here meant questions of structural and tectonic geology; the “practical” 
dimension was “economic and humanitarian.” There could be no strict 
division in the investigation of an earthquake: “the investigation of dam-
age is required, its causes, from both the natural and the structural point 
of view, and its geographical distribution, all in relation to the underly-
ing geologic structure, and in relation to surface developments and their 
bearing on living conditions (as sites for buildings, routes for transporta-
tion or conduits, and so forth), and the study of the problem from the 
point of view of engineering science, education, protective legislation and 
insurance.”125 Wood’s “regional seismology” thus recognized the com-
plex interplay of social and environmental factors in determining seismic  
risk.

246 / Chapter Ten
The Seismo Lab
When the United States joined the First World War, Wood took the op-
portunity to move from the margins to the center of American science. He 
found work at the Bureau of Standards in Washington, where his research 
on the detection of distant artillery fire sharpened his expertise with seismic 
registering devices. At the same time, he established contacts with scien-
tists who would emerge from the war as key figures in the organization 
of American science. These were men like George Ellery Hale, the founder 
of the National Research Council, and John Merriam, the former Berkeley 
geologist who became president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington 
(CIW) in 1920. Naomi Oreskes has described the philosophy of the CIW at 
this time as “science as service.” Like Wood, the CIW viewed basic and ap-
plied research as “synergistic, not competing” pursuits.126 Wood had found 
the allies he needed.
In 1921, Wood became the director of the first seismological research 
program in California, sponsored by the CIW and centered at Caltech. There 
he got his first experience with public relations. He lectured to private clubs, 
associations of businessmen, engineering and scientific societies, and civic 
leaders, asking for sites to house seismographic stations and for help in 
locating active faults.127 He also got the names and addresses of all the co-
operative earthquake observers in California. “It is my hope that I may be 
able to enlist the services of some of these [observers], at a future time, in 
the work I hope to develop in regional seismology here,—without prejudice 
to their co-operation with the WB.”128 Wood was promised duplicates of 
the observers’ reports when they came in each month. Yet the shortcom-
ings of the bureau’s network soon became clear. These reports amounted to 
no more than one per month, often fewer—not even keeping up with the 
tremors reported in the press.
At the center of Wood’s research program at Caltech was the detection of 
weak shocks from nearby sources. As we have seen, weaker shocks could be 
attributed with greater certainty to a given fault, because they were felt over 
a smaller area—typically only directly over the causal fault.129 Throughout 
his years in Hawaii, Wood had focused on the development of instrumen-
tal techniques for measuring tremors close to the epicenter. In the early 
1920s Wood and his collaborators worked, often frenetically, to devise a 
suitable local seismograph. The results were mixed. The Wood-Anderson 
seismograph introduced in 1922 succeeded in recording nearby shocks (as 
well as the initial phases of distant ones). But it recorded only horizontal 

A True Measure of Violence / 247
movement, not vertical, and the construction of a regional network of these 
instruments was not completed until 1927. Even then, Wood and his Cali-
fornia colleagues were repeatedly troubled by failures of the timekeeping 
mechanisms on these seismographs.130
By 1924, it was clear to Wood that tracking nearby earthquakes could 
not be done by instruments alone. He turned to the public with a new sense 
of urgency. From this point, Wood’s outreach campaign was not merely a 
matter of raising awareness of seismic risk and attracting research money. It 
was an effort to recruit and train observers. This was not mere propaganda, 
but rather a two-way exchange.131
Wood realized that the observing guide he had published in 1911 had 
“failed to enlist the services of voluntary observers, probably in part because 
it did not present a concrete list of items or questions to be checked or an-
swered.”132 So, having consulted with colleagues in Europe, and drawing 
on his knowledge of historical accounts of California earthquakes, he for-
mulated a new questionnaire.133 It was essentially a list of “a great many of 
the observations which commonly have been made in connection with the 
occurrence of earthquakes, great and small.” He even provided readers with 
models of questionnaires completed by hand, which he described as “ficti-
tious,” but “founded on reports actually made by ordinary, untrained observ-
ers. They are made composite in order to bring out points not adequately 
emphasized in any single bona fide report at hand.” Noteworthy on these 
reports were descriptions of the observer’s state of mind. Sample replies 
included: “Dressing, still somewhat sleepy”; “Did not notice—too much 
confused and disturbed”; “Could not discriminate”; “Unknown.” A report 
of a weak shock ended with the comment, “The observer was awakened 
with the impression of having experienced an earthquake. Some moments 
later, while still awake, two or three rather slow, undulatory movements 
were felt distinctly. The motion was slight and the shock would not have 
been felt if the observer had not been awake and attentive. If the observer 
was awakened by an earlier shock, as is believed, it must have been some-
what stronger.”134 In these examples, Wood was defining and modeling a 
standard of scientific observation. What he asked of the public was not un-
realistic, but nor was it trivial. Beyond frank and thorough reporting, he 
demanded that observers calibrate their own degree of certainty. Wood’s 
questionnaire thus codified his working knowledge of the psychology and 
sociology of earthquake response in Southern California, even as it was de-
signed to elicit a more reflective response.

248 / Chapter Ten
“Substantial Citizenship”
In renewing his call for volunteer observers, Wood may also have been in-
spired by a colleague—the Stanford geologist Bailey Willis, president of the 
SSA from 1921 to 1926. In his vigorous public activity, Willis hammered 
home the message that the work of the SSA could only be accomplished 
“in cooperation” with “laymen.” Willis set the goal of expanding the so-
ciety’s membership from four hundred to one thousand, and by 1927 he 
had achieved it. He earned himself the popular nickname the “Earthquake 
Professor.”135
Early one June morning in 1925 an earthquake struck the picturesque 
city of Santa Barbara, roughly a quarter of the way up the Pacific Coast 
from Los Angeles to San Francisco. The death toll of twelve was lower than 
it might have been if the city had been hit during business hours, but the 
damage was estimated at $5 million. The Santa Barbara Mission, which 
had been wrecked by earthquake in 1812 and rebuilt on the same spot, was 
again severely damaged. An earthquake with a similar distribution of inten-
sities had struck Santa Barbara in 1883. Back then, the press had rejoiced 
that the shock had “waked her [the city] from her Rip Van Winkle sleep” 
and “stirred her pulses to activity.” “Santa Barbara is not stagnant,” the San 
Francisco Times had concluded in 1883; “It is in the bud now, but by and by 
it will open into the perfect blossom.”136 This style of California providen-
tialism was repugnant to Willis. To him, the Santa Barbara earthquake of 
1925 laid bare the folly of American-style development.
Willis painted a bucolic image of Santa Barbara back in Spanish colonial 
times: a place of “stateliness, license, piety, and poetic romance.” The city’s 
subsequent history was, on his telling, typically American. It had become a 
playground for the wealthy, where “wonderfully landscaped estates . . . bore 
forbidding ‘No Trespass’ signs.” The town had lost a sense of community, of 
“substantial citizenship”—“where wealth is spent freely, lavishly, it is inevi-
tably exploited, and the cohesion of society is weakened by the domination 
of self-interest.” Its civic leaders were “thoroughly American, gifted with 
the American capacity for organization and engineering, but limited, as too 
many Americans are, in appreciation of history, art, and architecture.” Such 
a society was apt to forget the lessons of past disasters: “Progress and com-
mon sense crowded tradition and romance to the wall, heedless of their 
charm, regardless of their permanent value in the life, yes, even in the pros-
perity of the community, forgetful also of the earthquake.”137 Willis sug-
gested that Californians had even forgotten how to observe their landscape 
properly (see figure 10.2). The cliffs of Santa Barbara had become merely a 

Fig. 10.2.  Teaching Californians how to perceive seismic hazard: Willis’s photographs of  
the Santa Barbara hills from his study of the 1925 earthquake. The climbers in the top  
photo highlight the beauty of the view; the dotted lines in the bottom photo delineate  
the fault. Bailey Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake of June 29, 1925,”  
Bulletin of the Seismological Society 15 (1925): 255–78, plate 28, after 256.

250 / Chapter Ten
lure to a luxurious holiday. Willis made them speak of alternative values: of 
the romance of an undeveloped landscape, the wisdom of historical tradi-
tion, and the imperative of civic duty.
The wreckage of this charming town offered Willis an opportunity to 
demonstrate the value of felt reports. Writing in the BSSA for a nonspecial-
ist audience, Willis called for “better methods of observing and recording 
those shocks which are perceptible to our senses.”138 He demonstrated what 
could be learned from such observations. For instance, reports of shaking 
from the mountains near the Santa Ynez fault indicated that the Mesa fault 
was not the sole source of the shocks. A fortuitous piece of evidence came 
from a civil engineer who happened to be driving down State Street (which 
runs northwest from the coast) when he “felt a blow from behind as though 
someone had run into the rear of his car.” Willis took this observation as 
“definite evidence of an earthquake movement from the north or north-
west.”139 Willis also offered his personal observations in great detail—per-
haps, considering the circumstances, excessive detail:
The writer was at the hotel Miramar, four and one-half miles east of Santa 
Barbara. Lying awake, he heard, as it seemed, a train approaching along the 
Southern Pacific tracks from the east, experienced such rapid vibrations as are 
produced by a train close at hand, and then felt the sharp jolt of the advanc-
ing wave of an earthquake, it came from the west. He was thrown sidewise in 
that direction. Recognizing the meaning of the shock, he noted the approxi-
mate time (6:44 a.m.) and began to count seconds. He had reached fifteen 
when the movement stopped. In the meantime the bed was rotating in an 
anti-clockwise direction with sufficient energy to cause him to put out his 
hand to steady himself. Had the motion continued or increased materially in 
violence it would have become alarming. As it was he and his friend dressed 
without haste, taking nineteen minutes, and in that interval there occurred 
six earthquake shocks including the first. Others followed, of course, but were 
not specifically noted.140
Willis did not note the gender of his “friend,” and one can only imagine 
what Willis’s wife thought upon reading this account. Whatever the circum-
stances were, however, Willis rose above them: he was the model of a cool, 
composed scientific observer.
Daring to challenge the American image of seismology as a matter of in-
terest only to scientists, engineers, and businessmen, Willis set out to make 
the field genuinely popular. “The science of seismology has in the past ex-
cited but little interest among laymen, as compared for instance with as-

A True Measure of Violence / 251
tronomy, because it has offered too slight an appeal to the imagination, has 
not made itself known, and in relation to human affairs has been without 
practical significance.”141 Willis appealed to the “imagination” of Southern 
Californians by placing earthquakes in a cosmic context, in the tradition 
of Seneca. Like Eduard Suess and Albin Belar, he portrayed seismicity as a 
necessary feature of “the living globe,” a developmental process continuous 
with the formation of the solar system. In the manner of Clarence King, he 
tried to teach his audiences to see for themselves the geological forces at 
work in familiar landscapes. He did not hide the romantic infatuation with 
mountains that had led him to landscape painting and the conservation 
movement. Indeed, he fed the public’s fantasy with the “stupendous” image 
of “a mountain chain or an ocean deep, conceived as a growing thing.”142 
He revealed “stories” of dramatic uplift and fracture: “He who would read 
the history of a mountain range cannot be guided by the age or nature of 
the rocks, since they are usually much older than the uplift, but must seek 
to read the story in the canyons, valleys, hills, and peaks. Their individual 
forms and their relations to one another are full of meaning, and he who 
rides [presumably on horseback] may read as his eye sweeps over them.” 
In the end, his lesson was straightforward: “The universe is not an accom-
plished fact. It is a growing thing. It is evolving.” The point was to enable 
the public to see this evolution with their own eyes: “With our own eyes 
we see that the rains wash away the soil and thus attack the hills, which in 
the course of ages must waste away, and thus we reason that the mountains 
themselves are but transient features of the landscape.”143 In this way, Willis 
worked to fuse the environmental perceptions of scientists and of ordinary 
Californians.
Willis presented the observation of earthquakes as an essential facet of 
the aesthetic experience of California’s landscape. It was “well known to 
all competent observers that the mountains of California exhibit in their 
sculptured forms the evidence of having experienced uplift.”144 He asked 
his audience to train their senses on this subterranean process. His message 
was really quite simple: “We want to go to work and make [the earthquake 
record] complete so that we may be able to make deductions from it. That 
work also we shall ask for help on.”145
Seeking Postmasters and Enthusiasts
Harry Wood agreed with Willis that seismology had suffered as a conse-
quence of the decline of earthquake reporting in the California press. 
Weaker tremors, so revealing of seismic hazard, went unrecorded. “In early 

252 / Chapter Ten
years,” Wood wrote, “though places of residence in this part of the country 
were not numerous and were separated widely for the most part, yet the 
local earthquakes which were felt in those years were put on record about 
as well as could have been expected. In the last few decades, however, these 
happenings have not been recorded adequately. This is true especially of 
very weakly felt shocks which are, perhaps, more significant and interesting 
for serious seismologic studies than many of the shocks of greater energy. 
They tell us more definitely what they have to tell.”146 Felt reports could 
do more than supplement and corroborate other forms of data; they also 
held “practical value of their own which in some respects possesses more 
immediate importance than much of the more fundamental data of survey 
and measurement.” Wood urged the formation of “permanent groups of 
cooperative observers, comprising from one person to a half-dozen per-
sons in a given place . . . made up of people who will agree to make report 
upon all earthquakes which come to their notice in their vicinity, whether 
felt by themselves or by others.” Of the utmost importance, Wood stressed, 
was that each and every shock be reported: “Those who make use of the 
assembled reports must feel confident that, on any given occasion, no 
earthquake came to notice in the locality of the observer, if no report is re-
ceived from him.”147 What was needed was a permanent network of vigilant  
citizen-observers.
As Wood complained to his Berkeley colleague Perry Byerly in Septem-
ber of 1927, he had “at present no mechanism for obtaining reports effi-
ciently.”148 At that time Wood was relying on the Coast Survey to distribute 
questionnaires following shocks. That November the survey’s director Lester 
Jones telegraphed Wood: “Not ready to obtain reports on recent earth-
quakes. Hope to have plan organized soon.” As Wood admitted to Byerly, 
“I have no machinery for gathering reports other than this.”149 It turned out 
that Byerly was already in the habit of sending out questionnaires after each 
shock in Northern California. He had “learned that speed is essential.”150 
Wood’s own stock of questionnaires from 1924 had unfortunately been 
“destroyed.” He asked for Byerly’s advice on designing a new form.151 Wood 
thought it best that they share a standard questionnaire. Over the next three 
years, the two men frequently traded ideas for improving their reporting 
forms. Wood sent Byerly a draft in March of 1928 with the request to “criti-
cize it as savagely as you please.”152 They agreed that brief postcards should 
be used for assessing intensities and epicenters. Full-length questionnaires, 
on the other hand, would ask for more detailed information, such as ac-
companying sounds and the direction of shaking (if felt outdoors, to avoid 
the distorting effects of buildings). They sought the aid of ordinary citizens 

A True Measure of Violence / 253
and agreed to do “everything possible to prevent the card from having a for-
midable aspect.”153 In a bow to the legacy of the boosters, Byerly suggested 
that there be a check box for “damage: none,” since “the loyal Californian 
is very anxious to tell when no damage has been done and he should be 
given the opportunity.”154 Wood and Byerly also considered how to tar-
get the best observers. Byerly insisted that postmasters were more reliable 
than schoolteachers, and he was not prepared to cede them to the Coast 
Survey.155 In April of 1928 the pair agreed on a division of California for 
the purpose of earthquake investigations: the “Byerly-Wood line,” as their 
colleagues called it, ran along the northern border of Santa Barbara County, 
then curved north of Inyo Valley. For events near the border, they agreed to 
“interchange telegrams before we decide who is to send out questionnaires 
and go into the field.”156
Though trained as a physicist rather than a geologist, Byerly generally 
shared Wood’s perspective on the field of seismology. Byerly complained 
to Wood that he resented a “slighting reference to seismologists” from the 
physicist Frank Wenner at the Bureau of Standards, who had lately been in 
California working on the design of seismographs. “The idea that we are 
ignorant of the elements of physics seems prevalent among a certain type 
of physicists.” Byerly alluded to the ongoing dispute over the instrumental 
equivalent of seismic intensity—whether the “violence” of the shock corre-
sponded to ground displacement, velocity, acceleration, or some combined 
function of these variables. “We are not wed to displacement meters as they 
seem to think. And our intellects are capable of comprehending even ac-
celeration. After all there have been a few things accomplished in this world 
by men who did not bear the title of ‘Physicist.’”157 Wood tried to convince 
Byerly not to take the matter personally: “You must not forget that your own 
introduction to the subject [of seismology] was from the side of physics, 
whereas more than nine in ten have entered the field from meteorology, or 
geology, or astronomy, or scattering fields in which a thorough training in 
dynamics is rare.”158
Despite his training in physics, Byerly was unimpressed by mathematical 
niceties. He felt his colleagues focused unduly on aspects of seismology that 
were highly mathematical and often poorly understood: “It impresses them 
far more than descriptions of what happened in the earthquake, which they 
themselves might have observed if they had taken the trouble to go into the 
field and look.”159 Byerly has been aptly described as a philosophical prag-
matist. “Like William James,” a colleague recalled, “it amused him to shock 
by insisting that truth must have a ‘cash value.’”160 Byerly’s pragmatism led 
him to a healthy skepticism about claims to precision in seismology. As 

254 / Chapter Ten
he was known to tell students, “an epicenter is a cross placed on a map 
by a seismologist.”161 Much as phenomenalism did for Mach (chapter 7), 
for Byerly pragmatism collapsed the Kantian tension between the quest for 
physical knowledge of the environment and the need for reflexive, critical 
evaluation. Byerly’s suspicion of claims to absolute truth made him toler-
ant of the uncertainties of macroseismic evidence. All his life he was a firm 
believer in the value of felt reports.
Yet Byerly was discouraged by the results of his surveys. In 1930 he ad-
mitted to Wood that he was compelled to use an intensity scale with no 
more than ten degrees: “from the kind of data which I get I cannot make 
distinctions even as nice as the Rossi-Forel scale requires.”162 By 1934, he 
was forced to admit publicly that his analysis of a Northern California 
earthquake suffered from incomplete data. “The lists show that of the earth-
quakes recorded at more than one station 75 were not reported felt and 
21 were reported felt. It seems certain that many of the 75 must have been 
felt but were not reported. Also the fact that only two shocks of maximum 
intensity I to III R-F were reported shows that observers are likely to allow 
slight shocks to pass unnoted.”163
By contrast, Wood expressed satisfaction with the observations he was 
able to gather from the public in Southern California. “On the whole,” he 
wrote to Byerly in 1930, “I think that this report form is working exceed-
ingly well, especially in respect to the percentage of replies received. If we 
could receive reports from any adequate number of real enthusiasts, I would 
prefer my own old more complete form, but I recognize the impracticabil-
ity of using this under present conditions or any likely to be encountered 
for some time to come.”164 Wood was learning what he could expect of the 
local population.
Wood’s papers at Caltech include a sampling of felt reports from this 
period. Most observers simply crossed out or underlined the pertinent items 
from Wood’s list of common effects. But some added further descriptions, 
along the lines of Wood’s samples in his 1924 article. Thus a Miss Elizabeth 
Connor sought to describe the course of the shaking more precisely than 
the checklist allowed: “Following the first severe shock, when the observer 
was out of doors, the earth seemed sometimes to heave, at other times to 
jerk with a sideways motion. During the rest of the day, in the lighter shocks 
which came at intervals, the earth seemed to tremble.” Another observer 
added an unusual analogy: “P.S. Earthquake similar to a large bird flying 
into aerial of radio fastened to house. The same kind of vibration and jerk.” 
The most consistent reporter was Mrs. Muriel Sweet of Pasadena, who had 
been a member of the SSA since 1921.165 She sent Wood a total of seven let-

A True Measure of Violence / 255
ters (those bearing dates were all marked the second half of 1925, following 
the Santa Barbara earthquake). One included a chart from the “Stormo-
graph barometer” at her mother’s home in Santa Barbara, which had been 
badly damaged in the earthquake. All her observations were made while 
lying down, all but one at night. In one undated letter she wrote that she 
had “not sent in the report of the last shake as I wanted to find out if you 
wanted more than one person checking up on them, you undoubtedly feel 
them all and note them down and basically mine are not necessary. I shall 
be very glad however to continue if you wish me to.” Wood’s response, from 
29 October 1925, assured her: “While it is true, of course, that it would be 
possible to have so many earthquake reports for a given region that their 
use would be burdensome, in practice up to the present we have not had 
enough. A moderate number of reports from independent observers in the 
same small region usually present small differences which make them all 
useful. So, if you do not find it burdensome, we shall be glad to have you 
continue to send in reports on all occasions when you feel a shock, or learn 
with details that one has been felt by others. With thanks for your interest 
in this.”166
This gracious response seems to have been typical of Wood’s exchanges 
with the public in these years. In other cases, he sought to demonstrate to 
the observers the scientific value of their observations. In 1933 a resident 
of Santa Catalina Island wrote Wood noting the elapsed time between the 
radio announcement of the Long Beach earthquake and his own percep-
tion of it. Wood replied: “I thank you sincerely for your letter. . . . While of 
course the time arrival determined [sic] by direct observation is somewhat 
lacking in the degree of precision which we obtain from measurement on 
our records it nevertheless will prove very useful to us and I may say at once 
that it confirms roughly our latest estimates of distance from Pasadena and 
neighboring stations.”167 The following September a report arrived from a 
man in Los Angeles whose wife and two neighbors had felt what he termed 
an “earthquake” in scare quotes. Wood’s note of thanks was dated two days 
later and offered thoughtful comments: “If this was actually a natural shock 
it must have been very small indeed. Our seismometers here register very 
small disturbances, but there is no trace of any record at the time referred to. 
A small artificial disturbance might be felt over a small area in your vicinity 
and yet not be large enough to register in Pasadena.”168 In 1933 the BSSA 
published a lengthy letter from a man who described visible surface waves; 
Wood appended a discussion of the possible physical, physiological, and 
psychological factors.169 Through such exchanges, Wood was paving a broad 
avenue of communication with the public.

256 / Chapter Ten
His efforts paid off. Evidence of success came with the investigation 
of the Santa Monica earthquake of 1930. The study was a joint effort by 
Wood, Richter, and Beno Gutenberg—Europe’s premier geophysicist, newly 
arrived at Caltech. The researchers “obtained an unusually large number of 
observations on the action of the shock.” Indeed, more than three hundred 
noninstrumental reports were supplied by “private individuals, postmasters 
and other public officials, and representatives of corporations, co-operating 
with the Survey.” These reports were, in fact, “more numerous and more 
suitably and adequately distributed over the area of perceptibility than ever 
before for a shock in Southern California.” Despite this auspicious start, 
a critical note soon crept into their article for the BSSA. The information 
available did not match what “has been available on some occasions in 
other parts of the world.” This allusion to European seismology hints that 
the voice was now Gutenberg’s. The critique continued: “little of the data 
is precise enough or explicit enough to permit critical study. On the whole 
very praiseworthy, necessarily in most instances the reports were not made 
by trained or expert investigators, and in many instances it is difficult to 
judge which of two grades of intensity is indicated.” These lines depart radi-
cally from Wood’s positive assessment of the felt reports in his letter to  
Byerly that February. They sound like the opinion of an observatory scientist 
with little previous experience in the use of nonexpert observations. The rest 
of the article vacillated over the significance of the noninstrumental data. 
Intensity values showed “inconsistencies” when plotted against a CGS map 
of the region that displayed relief and drainage. These were attributed in 
part to “the experience and psychology of the observers.” It seemed fruitless 
to plot isoseismals, given the complexity of this intensity distribution. At 
the same time, however, the map was also said to demonstrate “important 
peculiarities.” For instance, the “spotted” character of the intensity distribu-
tion was likely due to the brevity of the shaking, which may have subsided 
before producing stronger effects on humans or structures; thus the accelera-
tion had perhaps been higher than the visible effects suggested. Meanwhile, 
“tentative isoseismals” seemed to display an interference pattern—was this 
a real effect or an artifact? The article struggled to account for it in physical 
terms and ultimately flagged it as a question for the future. In all, the article 
hinted at disagreements among its coauthors about what could and could 
not be learned from felt reports.170
Wood continued to press ahead with his recruitment of citizen-observers,  
even when others were ready to admit defeat. After a conversation with an 
acquaintance who owned a small country newspaper, he drew up a request 
to editors to print reports of each weak local tremor. Wood was confident 

A True Measure of Violence / 257
that the California press had already shed the bad habit of seismic denial-
ism.171 In fact, he was favorably impressed by recent reporting: “I find that 
several of the newspapermen have in Imperial Valley had printed very good 
accounts of the recent shocks, and they appeared to be very interested in 
the whole subject.”172 If Wood saw a problem with the reporting, it was an 
“exaggerated tone.” His goal in partnering with the press was not to sway 
public opinion. Rather, he was devising a research strategy, as became clear 
in the text that Wood proposed to send to the “rural” papers:
A shock generally noticed in an out-of-the-way district may never come to 
the attention of earthquake students, nor find any place in any list of earth-
quakes, unless some account of it is printed. Such earthquake lists or catalogs 
are the basis of practical or statistical studies, as well as more strictly scientific 
investigations, and the more complete the lists are the more value they have. 
By printing brief accounts of shocks whenever they occur the local papers can 
make a real and valuable contribution to the advancement of our knowledge 
of earthquakes.
Knowledge of the occurrence of such weak earthquakes is of scientific, 
and practical value in various ways. For example, mention, and non-mention, of 
weak earth motion helps to determine the boundary between the region in 
which a shock is definitely felt and that in which it is definitely not felt. This 
aids in fixing the place of origin of the shock, in approximating its depth, and 
in estimating the amount of energy involved. Knowledge of the occurrence 
and place of origin of weak shocks help in determining geologic faults which 
are still active. The frequency with which such shocks originate on a given 
fault affords some index of its degree of activity and so the extent to which it 
may be a source of danger.
Such information is valuable in many other ways which cannot be ex-
plained here in detail.173
To his disappointment, Wood’s colleagues were reluctant to help distrib-
ute this letter to local newspapers. Maher, the chief of the CGS, refused to 
approach the press at all. Louderback at Berkeley thought that journalists 
were covering earthquakes well enough already. Even Byerly pointed out 
that “earthquakes are a ticklish business to mention to the public.” Wood 
would not give up. In March he told Byerly that he hoped “that you and 
Dr. Louderback may reconsider your opinion about the desirability of ap-
proaching the press. . . . By and large, day in and day out, the papers do not 
do anything like as good a job of reporting earthquakes as they should and 
I hope that you may find it feasible to make an approach in the name of  

258 / Chapter Ten
the University along the line suggested. If the Carnegie Institution of  Wash-
ington were well known to the rural press and had such a standing that its 
request would be heeded, I would take this action myself.” In April Wood 
again urged Byerly to “reconsider the matter.”174 The initiative to enlist the 
help of local papers in seismological research seems to have died there.
The Language of Violence
Wood’s growing experience with felt reports made him increasingly aware 
of the shortcomings of existing scales of seismic intensity. The Rossi-Forel 
scale was “ambiguous and badly sub-divided,” while the Sieberg was “rather 
wordy.” Neither was suited “to phenomena observed in American commu-
nities.”175 Wood hoped to develop a revised scale that would be adopted 
for use throughout California. Tellingly, however, he only pushed for the 
use of a standard intensity scale in public. For research purposes, he and his 
colleagues continued to use whatever scale best fit their data and interests. 
At heart, Wood shared Byerly’s pragmatic attitude toward intensity measure-
ment. As he put it to his Berkeley colleague, “I am under the impression that 
you, personally, attach less importance to this than I may appear to you to 
be doing. In reality, I think we make about the same appraisal of the situa-
tion. I am convinced that when it comes to publication it is desirable that 
we all use the same scale and that a better scale than the Rossi-Forel is now 
desirable and it is with this in mind that I have done this additional work. 
What scales we choose to use in our own offices is quite a different thing, 
but it is, I think, desirable to secure general adoption for professional use 
of a better scale than the old Rossi-Forel.”176 Wood’s quest for an improved 
scale was not about producing a universal standard or an absolute measure. 
It was about reducing ambiguities in communication with the public.
Like Sieberg’s 1912 scale, on which it was based, the “Modified Mer-
calli Scale” that Wood published with Frank Neumann in 1931 relied partly 
on human sensations to define its degrees. It simplified and streamlined 
Sieberg’s descriptions, eliminating ambiguities. But it also inserted explicit 
statements about the mental states conducive to certain reported effects: a 
shock of degree 4 “awakened few, especially light sleepers; frightened no 
one, unless apprehensive from previous experience.” These were among 
the social-psychological insights that Wood had gained from his experience 
with volunteer observers. Wood and Neumann also made clear that instru-
ments would not soon replace the human seismograph. They insisted that 
“we do not know exactly what factors combine to constitute intensity as it 

A True Measure of Violence / 259
is ordinarily understood. We are not yet in position to correlate destructive 
effects with instrumental data so as to establish an adequate measure of 
intensity. Though the importance of the factor of acceleration is recognized, 
we have as yet no satisfactory definition of intensity, no formula express-
ing earthquake violence in terms of ground movement.”177 They were not 
alone in judging that instruments had yet to be accurately correlated with 
felt reports. In 1915, C. F. Marvin had gone so far as to claim that “measure-
ment of the intensity of earthquake movements on the acceleration basis is 
as yet chiefly a concept of the imagination of the seismologist” and reflected 
“grave ignorance of the imperfections of the seismograph.”178 Ten years later 
Richard Oldham still concurred: “For determining the acceleration and am-
plitude instrumental methods must be left out of count, as suitable instru-
ments are still rare, sparsely scattered, and practically never happen to be 
where the records would be of use.”179
This was the problem that Wood encouraged the young Charles Rich-
ter to take up: the determination of a mechanical equivalent of intensity. 
Richter had arrived at the Seismological Laboratory in 1927 with a PhD 
in theoretical physics. His thesis had dealt with the latest developments in 
quantum mechanics. “I never took courses in geology in my student years,” 
he later admitted. He reasoned that working under Wood would allow him 
to remain in Pasadena and “keep in touch” with the physics community.180 
Richter was by all accounts an odd man—“introverted,” “awkward,” “un-
able to laugh at himself.” Unbeknownst to most colleagues, among whom 
he seemed unable to make close friends, he was also a poet, womanizer, 
and, by the 1930s, a nudist. His biographer concludes that he suffered from 
Asperger’s syndrome.181 Richter was soon drawn into Wood’s program for 
exploiting felt reports, down to the detail of seeking “a better word than the 
word ‘furnishings’ in the item ‘moved small objects, furnishings.’”182 At a 
personal level, though, Richter was hardly an ideal candidate to help main-
tain Wood’s cooperative network.
Existing accounts of the development of the Richter scale take Richter’s 
perspective, rather than Wood’s.183 They suggest misleadingly that the goal 
was an absolute geophysical measure. In a somewhat cryptic statement, 
Richter later explained: “We needed something which would not be subject 
to misinterpretation in terms of the size and importance of the events.” 
This explanation only makes sense in light of the question that prompted 
it: whether the purpose of the scale had been above all a “public” one. Rich-
ter continued: “And also in the process of working with the scale it devel-
oped, which we had already suspected, that the statistics on earthquakes in  

260 / Chapter Ten
general were in a very bad way because they had been too much influ-
enced by accidental circumstances of local intensity. It seemed desirable 
to have some objective and instrumentally-founded means of comparing 
earthquakes with each other.”184 Thus the original purpose of Richter’s 
scale was to avoid “misinterpretation” by the public of the comparative 
“importance” of earthquakes; only later did the goal emerge of achieving 
an “objective and instrumentally-founded” measure of relative intensity. 
Finally, Richter pointed to a further use of the scale, one which he implied 
was unanticipated: “Even within a limited region such as California it had 
advantages, and when it developed that it could be expanded to cover the 
entire world, the value of the thing was greatly increased.” Read carefully, 
Richter’s account contradicts the prevailing understanding of the scale. It 
did not originate in a quest for a universal, objective, and absolute measure 
of earthquake strength. To the contrary, the initial goal was a local and rela-
tive basis for classifying earthquakes—but one that the public would not 
“misinterpret.”
Specifically, the goal was a basis for comparing actual damage with the 
damage to be expected based on the earthquake’s intrinsic violence. It was, 
in other words, a matter of comparing the “is” and “ought” of an earth-
quake.185 The same interpretation emerges from Wood’s private correspon­
dence at the time. He repeatedly searched for an adequate way to express the 
gap between an earthquake’s intrinsic potential for violence and its actual 
effects. For instance, a shock that hit Santa Barbara in 1928 proved “too 
strong here for useful registration” by seismograph, forcing him to rely on 
felt reports. Yet his impression was that the damage was out of propor-
tion to the quake’s strength. “The close proximity of the origin, unsuitable 
building and unsuitable foundation ground—rather than great force (no-
tice that I avoid intensity)—appear to be the factors which led to so much 
destruction.”186 Neither “intensity” (based on observed effects) nor “force” 
(proportional to acceleration) was the word Wood was looking for. Clearly, 
a new vocabulary was needed. Wood expressed a similar frustration toward 
the end of his work on the revised scale. He told Byerly, “Though I have 
worked hard on this scale, it still contains inconsistencies such as the one 
you point out respecting the chimney. I have never experienced an earth-
quake in which all works of construction were greatly damaged or destroyed, 
but such earthquakes have occurred. Such a fault slip as occurred in 1906 or 
in 1915 must be indicative of great energy whether or not productive of great 
intensity. There were anomalies in 1906 and in any experience there always 
are. . . . No scale is or can be perfect, but before we adopt this one or accept 
any other change we must do our best to adjust the definition and eliminate 

A True Measure of Violence / 261
any absurdities, bearing in mind that some anomalies will always be found. 
Occasionally there will be things that indicate very high intensity when it is 
obvious that the intensity is low, and more rarely there will be effects which 
indicate low intensity when it is obvious that the intensity must have been 
high.”187 The purpose of an intensity scale was to rate earthquakes relative to 
each other in terms of destructive effects and human impacts. “Anomalies” 
were unavoidable because the thresholds for different forms of damage var-
ied. Even after eliminating any “absurdities,” the seismologist would still be 
left with the problem that no intensity scale could, in every case, express his 
own overall intuition of the violence of the shock. Still, a consistent rating 
scheme was necessary for seismology’s public dimension.
This need became pressing in the aftermath of the devastation of Long 
Beach in 1933. Wood and his colleagues quickly got the sense that this 
earthquake had been far more destructive than it had any right to be: 120 
deaths and over $40 million of damage for a shock that (as future com-
mentators would note) rated only 6.2 on Richter’s new scale.188 It was clear 
to Wood that foolish building practices were to blame. The question in 
1933 was how to express that perception to the public. Unusually, Wood 
chose to use the modified term “‘apparent’ intensity.” Of course, he knew 
that intensity was always a measure of appearances. It was, however, es-
sential at this moment to convey to the public that the damage due to this 
shock was out of all proportion to its intrinsic force—however that force 
might be measured. He struggled to convey this counterfactual claim to the 
press: “While the total amount of damage was large, there is good evidence 
from numerous well-distributed structures which survived the shock with 
little or no obvious injury, and from the sparseness of minor geological 
evidence of hard shaking, that the intensity or violence of the shaking was 
no greater than is usual in strong local shocks. . . . The nature and amount 
of the structural damage was out of proportion to the energy and violence 
of the shock. . . . ‘Apparent’ intensity of this value [grade 9, 1931 scale] 
was manifested in a number of places on exceptionally bad ground, where 
the intrinsic intensity as shown on good ground near by was substantially 
less.”189 Here we can see Wood grasping for words to convey his conviction 
that the earthquake had caused more damage than it should have. What was 
the telling variable: “energy,” “violence,” “intrinsic intensity”? At the time, 
rumors were circulating that Long Beach was one of the strongest earth-
quakes of all time. Wood was furious about these “wholly irresponsible and 
mischievous” reports. Different versions cited different forms of quantita-
tive “evidence” to back their claim. In a bitter letter to the Los Angeles Times, 
Wood offered the following example:

262 / Chapter Ten
“In order of severity the quakes have been: Tokio 5.8; Long Beach, 4.6; Santa 
Barbara 3.4; San Francisco, 2.5.”
Note—Anything man-built cannot withstand a velocity of 10.00.
Wood made clear that the paper’s numbers were entirely meaningless. In 
this context, it must have been a relief to Wood to be able to state, with the 
support of Richter’s new scale, that Long Beach was “not a great earthquake. 
It was a fairly strong and moderately large shock in the local earthquake 
class. It had about the same magnitude and violence as the Santa Barbara 
shock in 1925, perhaps a little greater, perhaps a little less.”190
Richter’s scale originated, then, not in a quest for geophysical truth, but 
within this pragmatic effort to classify earthquakes in terms of the dam-
age they could be expected to cause. Richter’s idea was straightforward: the 
ratio of the amplitudes produced by a single shock at two stations should 
be inversely related to the ratio of the distances of each station from the 
epicenter. The scale defined a unit magnitude corresponding to the response 
of a standard seismometer to a standard shock at a distance of one hundred 
kilometers. This was not meant to solve the fundamental physical question 
of what intensity measured—whether, for instance, acceleration, amplitude, 
or duration of shaking. Indeed, Richter himself judged the scale according 
to the pragmatic criteria of consistency. The only way to “demonstrate the 
reality of the computed grades of magnitude” was to compare calculated 
values of magnitude to the “observed effects of a number of representative 
shocks.”191 Moreover, contrary to the air of precision with which earthquake 
magnitudes are often cited, Richter himself had no expectation of produc-
ing an exact measure: “Precision in this matter was neither expected nor 
required.” Indeed, he stressed the method’s many sources of inexactness, 
including “inhomogeneity in the propagation of elastic waves, of varying 
depth of focus, of difference in mechanism of shock production, of the 
ground at the several stations, and of the instrumental constants.” In other 
words, instruments might respond nearly as contingently as people did. 
Equally important, Richter did not aim from the start to make his scale uni-
versal. It emerged firmly within Wood’s tradition of regional seismology. It 
took decades to generalize the scale beyond Southern California because of 
the need to develop corrections for different soil conditions and instrument 
types.
Nevertheless, Richter’s scale soon took on a life of its own, and its popu-
larity edged out alternative perspectives. As Byerly would later write, “It has 
been a struggle throughout the years to keep the record of felt earthquakes. 
The public, both scientific and lay, have become so enamored of epicenters 

A True Measure of Violence / 263
and magnitudes, that there is danger of neglecting field observations.”192 
Richter himself lost sight of the original meaning of his scale. In 1958, he 
argued that epicenters should be located only on the basis of instrumental 
data, not the distribution of macroseismic intensity: “The practice . . . of 
drawing isoseismals and then locating an ‘epicentre’ at the centre of the 
figure should be discontinued.”193 Even Richter had come to think of mag-
nitude as a replacement for intensity, not a complement to it.
Conclusion
By 1935, California seismology had turned down a path quite different 
from the course Wood had charted in three ways. First, it had acquired a 
new leader. Beno Gutenberg had earned his fame using Göttingen’s seismo-
graphic records to measure the depth of the earth’s core. Caltech’s president 
Robert Millikan pegged him as the future of seismology. To lure Gutenberg 
to Pasadena in 1930, Millikan offered him one of the highest salaries at the 
university.194 When Wood contracted his debilitating illness in 1934, Guten-
berg became the effective director of the Seismological Laboratory. There 
was no longer any question that the lab would prioritize geophysical stud-
ies of distant tremors over research on local seismicity.195 Wood speculated 
that if he had not fallen sick, seismology might have developed differently: 
“Richter would have worked much more with me and less with Gutenberg, 
the final Long Beach earthquake paper would have been completed and 
published, and other local earthquake papers as well.”196 This points to a 
second divergence: as Goodstein puts it, “Technology now led the science.” 
Field studies and felt reports were passé. Wood was informed by a colleague 
that “the most serious criticism I ever heard anyone make of your work in 
Pasadena, was substantially this, that you have the best instruments in the 
world but are doing nothing with them.”197 Third, California’s seismologists 
had taken a new political tack. As Geschwind argues, they learned from the 
mistakes of Bailey Willis, who carried his public campaign too far. From 
1925, Willis made increasingly bold predictions that a catastrophic earth-
quake would soon hit Southern California—indeed, within ten years. The 
evidence on which this claim rested was challenged by business interests 
and fellow scientists alike. Willis was publicly chastised, and his colleagues 
soured on public relations. The result was a turn away from public outreach, 
toward technocratic solutions. From then on, Wood’s colleagues tended to 
focus on “quietly building consensus among technical experts and fostering 
alliances with government bureaucrats, who could bring the power of the 
state to bear.”198

264 / Chapter Ten
Wood, capable of working only in spurts after 1934, produced many 
pages of critical notes that never saw publication. In part, he was testing 
out various arguments for the value of felt reports in a high-tech age. Many 
of these ideas were incomplete, but they revealed the holes where further 
research was needed. “In more recent years there has come about a ten-
dency to neglect [noninstrumental] studies, owing to the rapid develop-
ment and utilization of seismometric instruments and methods.” Wood’s 
experience had convinced him that the public’s observations were generally 
sound scientific evidence: “the great majority of persons whose occupation 
or temperament renders them observant are well qualified to aid in making 
observations and reports.” The evaluation of felt reports required scientists’ 
“critical judgment,” of course, but the public could also be taught to be 
more critical: “Although the reporter or observer who cooperates with the 
professional seismologist is not immediately concerned with this critical 
evaluation of the data it is well that the situation be made clear so that the 
information submitted by reporters may be made as objective as possible.” 
Wood also reflected on the scientific value of felt reports. Even in locations 
that were well covered by seismographic stations, noninstrumental studies 
“may indicate with greater certainty the place from which the maximum 
energy is radiated—as, for example, when the tract of origin of maximum 
vibration is not the same as that where the shaking begins.” Even reports 
of nausea were not to be discounted, since they could be used to mark “the 
margin of perceptibility of a large shock, where other effects are few and un-
certain,” and where ground motion itself might not otherwise be perceived. 
Observational reports could also help guide field investigations and record 
transient effects. Local variations of intensity deserved close study, for they 
might shed light on the nature of surface waves; it was possible, for instance, 
“that these do not originate at the exact epicenter but rather at a small dis-
tance from it.” Wood turned at this point to questions of basic geophysics; 
as the manuscript reflects, his hand could barely keep up with his train of 
thought. In these private notes Wood articulated better than anyone else the 
moral of seismology’s history in Southern California: “Seismologists (and 
those who aid them by supplying reports of observations) are, or should 
be, interested in both apparent and ‘intrinsic’ values of intensity, and study 
of the distribution of these values geographically will serve more than one 
purpose, now and in future as well as in the past.”199
Byerly, who lived another twenty years after Wood’s death in 1958, con-
tinued to argue this point publicly. During the Cold War, while American 
seismology was swollen with defense funding and fixated on the problem 
of nuclear detection, Byerly dared to suggest that his colleagues were wrong 

A True Measure of Violence / 265
to ignore low-tech research. In his pragmatic manner, he swiftly dismissed 
the charge that felt reports were “subjective.” The search for an earthquake’s 
“‘true’ measure” was futile, as he explained sardonically: “It has been popu-
lar, of recent years, to belittle ratings of intensity because the subject enters 
into the ratings. It is popular to talk of an as yet uninvented instrument, 
inexpensive and accurate, which will measure some as yet unselected physi-
cal quantity which will be a ‘true measure’ of the earthquake. Apparently 
this ‘true’ measure will enable one to conclude what damage occurred to 
buildings in the region without inspecting them.” There was no good rea-
son, he argued, to favor instruments over human observers: “instruments 
as we now know them are very selective in their response, and it would take 
batteries of them scattered all over a town to give us as much information 
regarding damage as one careful observer (if we can find him) will give us. 
The human being has a very wide range of sensitivity qualitatively, albeit his 
quantitative sense may not be all we would desire. We need intensity as well 
as ‘true measure.’” Byerly’s pragmatic reasoning brought him to the same 
conclusion as Wood: instruments might record the expected violence of an 
earthquake, but only human observers could survey the actual damage. The 
first could never replace the second. Wood and Byerly had realized what 
human geographers did not articulate until the 1970s: that “the common 
units of measurement employed for physical delimitation may be unsuited 
for assessment of social impact.”200 Byerly put the point memorably: “One 
of my colleagues in the days past used to harangue regarding ‘apparent in-
tensity’ (a description of what happened), and ‘true intensity’ (what would 
have happened had the valley town been built on rock and all the buildings 
soundly constructed). It reminds me of Rudyard Kipling’s reference to ‘the 
god of things as they ought to be and the god of things as they are.’”201
Then Byerly took this argument one step further. “Every now and then 
throughout the years a man who makes the statement that we need quan-
titative measures for assessing the strength of an earthquake adds that the 
intensity evaluations now made should be suppressed. . . . It is the addition 
of the recommendation that we should suppress the history of what hap-
pened to the county court house, merely because it was poorly designed, 
shoddily constructed on filled ground, which has made me feel I should oc-
casionally speak up. . . . Whatever the originators of intensity scales expected 
of it, its purpose today is to describe what happened. We must preserve 
the history, the record of what happened.” Byerly was raising a provocative 
charge. Seismologists’ search for a “true” measure of intensity had abet-
ted the suppression of information about earthquake damage; it had al-
lowed Californians to shirk responsibility for poor construction. Wood had  

266 / Chapter Ten
distinguished “true” from “apparent” intensity precisely in order to reveal 
where damage had exceeded expectations. By the 1960s, however, it was 
widely assumed that an earthquake was fully described by its epicenter and 
Richter magnitude. Byerly was warning that such a description constituted 
willful ignorance. Macroseismology, the study of an earthquake’s percepti-
ble effects, was nothing short of an ethical obligation: to “preserve the his-
tory, the record of what happened.”

Conclusion
By 1935, Wood’s science of seismic disaster resembled an aging dam, barely 
able to contain the multiple currents that flowed into it. The publication  
of the Richter scale struck it like an earthquake, cracking its walls. Its waters 
rapidly diverged. Seismology’s internationalist current was channeled into 
the high-tech observatory science of the International Seismological Sum-
mary. Its concern with the human impact of disaster was funneled into the 
nationalist enterprise of Cold War disaster studies. Its methods of measur-
ing sensible earthquakes fed into the risk-management strategies of earth-
quake engineering. These new enterprises were generally managerial and 
technocratic, sharing little of seismology’s earlier concern with environmen-
tal adaptation and public communication. Twentieth-century seismology 
replaced earthquakes with “microseisms,” felt reports with seismographic 
traces, “violence” with so many meters-per-second-squared. The earthquake 
as scientific object became something unrecognizable to its victims.
Future research might compare the fates of other nineteenth-century sci-
ences of disaster. Famines, droughts, and epidemics also became objects of 
scientific investigation in the late eighteenth century in frameworks that en-
compassed natural and social factors. In these early scientific accounts, vic-
tims would have seen their own experiences clearly reflected. Then, from the 
1870s, scientific explanations of climate-related catastrophes grew increas-
ingly reductive, focused on sunspot cycles and global atmospheric oscilla-
tions. Simultaneously, the hunt for microbes replaced the early nineteenth 
century’s more multifaceted, socio-environmental explanations of disease. 
Human experiences of disaster no longer counted as scientific evidence. 
In this sense, the histories of climatology, epidemiology, and seismology 
since the 1870s all involve the construction of incommensurability between  

268 / Conclusion
scientific expertise and common experience, with implications for public 
discussions of science today.1
At the same time, the built environment of the twentieth century was be-
coming increasingly vulnerable to devastating accidents triggered by natural 
hazards. By the 1970s, the realization was dawning that many complex feats 
of recent engineering—bridges, dams, skyscrapers, freeways, and, above all, 
nuclear reactors—had not been reinforced against earthquakes.2 It was also 
becoming clear to a small group of engineers and seismologists that local 
seismic risk could not be evaluated on the basis of instrumental records 
alone. Seismographs have not been around long enough to give an accu-
rate picture of a region’s seismicity over time. Accelerometers can provide 
mechanical parameters that are easy to plug into engineers’ equations, but 
they say nothing about future damage. Knowing the value of “peak ground 
acceleration” during past tremors won’t tell you how many buildings are 
likely to collapse in the next one. The better measure of seismic risk is inten-
sity, calculated from the observed effects of shaking. Intensity is a scientific 
measure of “actual earthquake experience”; it is therefore the best predictor 
of the human impact of future events.3
It was not easy, however, to revive the organization and habits of earth-
quake observing in the late twentieth century. The British were not alone 
in finding that the public had “other things on their mind” (chapter 2). 
Institutional memories of earthquake-observing networks survived in some 
places, but many of the lessons learned through their day-to-day operation 
had been forgotten. “One thing is sure,” recalls the Ljubljana seismologist 
Ina Cecic´, “the lack of written information about macroseismology in gen-
eral was huge; this was something that was simply not discussed, and was 
considered to be simple and clear, but everybody had a different way how to 
deal with things. This goes both for data evaluation and data collection.”
In May 1989, six months before the fall of the Berlin Wall, scientists  
from Yugoslavia, Austria, Hungary, and Italy gathered in a village in Slo­
venia to discuss—in English—macroseismic methodology. Since the collapse  
of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy in 1918, there had been little coopera-
tion among these countries in macroseismological research. Cecic´ć believes 
this was “the first known occasion that seismologists from several coun-
tries sat together and explained to everyone how the macroseismic studies 
were organized at their institutes.”4 One theme was the incongruity between 
the data obtained from citizen-observers and the analytical methods of the 
computer age. At one point, the Austrian representative admitted that, at his 
institute, aggregate intensities and isoseismals were generally “determined 
by experience.” “That is not objective enough,” responded an Italian col-

Conclusion / 269
league. This critic was a geophysicist familiar with theoretical models of 
macroseismic data, but with no experience collecting and evaluating obser-
vations. “Although the primary data are subjective,” he continued, “it makes 
sense to use a more objective method of analysis, for example computer 
programs for the drawing of isoseismal lines.” Those familiar with the in-
tricacies of felt reports tried to convince the Italian that analysis could not 
be left to a computer. One colleague shot back, “Before we start working on 
any computer program for isoseismal lines, we must make a unique defini-
tion of what an isoseismal line is.” Another noted that a computer “cannot 
take into account the credibility of the observations.”5 The bottom line was 
that interpreting macroseismic observations was something of an art. It of-
ten forced the geophysicist to think like a psychologist or sociologist. By the 
standards of other fields of twentieth-century physical science, the data and 
methods of macroseismology seemed inexcusably subjective. As Cecic´ć puts 
it, “the rest of seismologists think we’re strange (who wants to have physics 
without numbers? disgraceful!).”6
Standard measures of disaster continued to elude the international sci-
entific community in the late twentieth century. When an earthquake oc-
curred near an international border, it was not uncommon for seismologists 
in the affected countries to work independently of each other and come to 
conclusions that do not match up. The international seismological commu-
nity has struggled in the past two decades to agree on uniform measures and 
methods. Since 2006, European governments and reinsurance companies 
have sponsored GEM, the Global Earthquake Model: “a uniform, indepen­
dent standard to calculate and communicate earthquake risk worldwide.” 
GEM plans to develop a comprehensive and universal model of seismic 
risk assessment (including a standard intensity scale and questionnaire), 
available through open-source software. It aims to serve a broad spectrum 
of users and prioritizes “community involvement” and “open debate.” As 
of 2011, however, at least three different seismic intensity scales are in use 
internationally.7
This problem of international comparison is not confined to seismol-
ogy, as the Fukushima catastrophe of 2011 demonstrated. The International 
Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale, introduced in 1990, has much in 
common with scales of seismic intensity. Its stated purpose is to give the 
public a clear sense of the severity of an accident, and thus “facilitate a 
common understanding between the technical community, the media and 
the public.” Yet the scale seems to produce more confusion than clarity. 
Like seismic intensity scales, INES involves a baffling variety of parameters. 
When Japanese experts initially declared Fukushima a level 5 event, on par 

270 / Conclusion
with Three Mile Island, the media expressed skepticism. When it was up-
graded to the maximum of 7, matched only by Chernobyl, the reaction 
turned to exasperation. What meaning could such a comparison have, given 
that the radioactive material from Fukushima was estimated at one-tenth 
the amount from Chernobyl? Indeed, the INES scale was published with the 
unlikely caveat that it was meant to aid international communication, but 
not “international comparisons.”8
Earthquake Observers in the 1970s
Seismic disaster abruptly recaptured the attention of American geophysicists 
in 1964, when Alaska experienced the most powerful shock ever recorded 
in North America. In 1965 Frank Press of Caltech began coordinating a 
national effort to address seismic hazards, with a notable emphasis on 
prediction.9 While seismic risk assessment is about the future likelihood 
of earthquakes of a given severity, short-term prediction is about generat-
ing timely warnings. Earthquake prediction briefly became part of main-
stream geophysics in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, but the use 
of untrained observers remained marginal. It was apparently not until the 
mid-1970s that efforts at prediction in California began to recruit local ob-
servers. By then, it was clear that seismic observations could also serve the 
cause of California’s antinuclear movement. A number of proposed nuclear 
reactors in California were canceled when residents argued against them 
on the basis of the local earthquake threat.10 Then, in 1977, the question of 
earthquake prediction was taken up by the Center for Applied Intuition, a 
San Francisco–based organization founded by a Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology–trained electrical engineer, William Kautz. According to Kautz, 
the center’s purpose was to employ “expert intuitives”—otherwise known as 
“psychics, channelers, clairvoyants, and healers”—to derive hypotheses that 
could be subjected to experimental testing.11 Without revealing the source 
of his hypotheses, Kautz proposed four experiments to the USGS. Of the 
two that won funding, one was a statistical study of animal behavior pre-
ceding earthquakes, Project Earthquake Watch. The experiment consisted of 
“an active network of 1500 volunteer observers of pets, farm animals, zoo 
animals and others—eventually a total of 200 species—in selected seismic 
areas throughout California.” Kautz reported “positive results” for seven 
of the thirteen moderate earthquakes registered in the four-year period of 
the study.12 Despite the support of the USGS, however, Project Earthquake 
Watch unfolded on the outer fringe of academic science, fueled by the coun-
terculture of the 1970s.

Conclusion / 271
A parallel experiment took place simultaneously in Europe. In 1976 
Helmut Tributsch, a successful physical chemist, returned to his native vil-
lage in the mountains of northern Italy to help his family rebuild after the 
devastating Friuli earthquake. “What left the most profound impression on 
me,” he recalled, “was meeting and talking with the people living there, 
most of them peasants, whom I had known since childhood.” Some of the 
neighbors mentioned that their animals had behaved strangely in the days 
before the earthquake. Tributsch took these comments seriously, because 
these were individuals “whom I trusted completely.” Yet he recognized that 
“any scientist interested in studying this problem would risk not only his 
reputation but also any chance of getting support.” The prospect of a fight 
strengthened his resolve. It seemed to him that twentieth-century science 
was failing to recognize its duty to these people: “After I had talked with 
the people of my village it became clear to me that injustice had been com-
mitted here and that science had failed.” Tributsch pursued the hypoth-
esis that animals responded to changes in atmospheric electricity preceding 
earthquakes. The observations of these peasants figured prominently in his 
research, as did nineteenth-century felt reports. “Against the scientific rules 
that demand that basic observations of nature must be as precise and reli-
able as possible, I have adopted these people’s faith in what can be seen and 
experienced so that I might be better able to defend their case.” Tributsch 
lamented that earthquake observing had been abandoned: “With the twen-
tieth century came the seismograph, and with it the age of exact earthquake 
research. Stationmasters were no longer asked about their observations, and 
the uneducated people also lost their opportunity to pass on their observa-
tions to enlightened scholars.” Appropriately, his account of this research 
for a general audience bore the dedication: “To the observers of nature with-
out name, title, or career for their contributions to the progress of science.”13 
Yet Tributsch’s research on earthquakes remained marginal, even as he him-
self went on to a successful career in physical chemistry.
Only in one country did ordinary citizens become central to late twentieth- 
century research on earthquake prediction, as they had been to nineteenth-
century seismology. Under Mao Tse-tung, the Chinese built a network of 
observers to report regularly on well-water variations, telluric currents, and 
animal behavior—all phenomena long suspected to be of value for predict-
ing earthquakes. Fa-ti Fan argues that earthquake prediction “provided a 
perfect opportunity for mass science,” where “mass science” meant the Mao-
ist principle of the integration of technical and folk knowledge to utilitarian 
ends.14 As Fan shows, this research drew admiring scientific visitors from 
around the world. Tributsch, for instance, remarked that “it is the Chinese  

272 / Conclusion
earthquake researchers who are working more in the open-minded spirit of 
von Humboldt.”15
Following the trail of the methods of observational seismology thus 
leads to a remarkable comparison. In states as different as republican 
Switzerland, imperial Austria, progressive-era California, and Communist 
China, a similar system of “citizen science” flourished. We can conclude 
that seismology’s cultivation of amateurs made it ideologically useful to 
very different political regimes. As Fan points out, “citizen science” is an in-
herently political concept, an outgrowth of the “ideology, institutions, and 
functions of a state.” As we have seen, seismic observing networks served as 
testing grounds for a remarkable range of political principles—populism in 
Comrie, anarchism in San Francisco, multinationalism in imperial Austria. 
Both the Swiss in the late nineteenth century and the Chinese in the 1960s 
and 1970s used seismological networks to inculcate scientific habits and a 
sense of national unity. Both states fostered a scientific epistemology that 
prioritized mass participation. As Fan observes, the mobilization of citizens 
to produce knowledge of environmental hazard has been a basic tactic of 
nation-building in very different political contexts.16
This analogy between direct democracy and totalitarianism might cast 
doubt on the alleged potential of citizen science to democratize the sciences. 
Yet we should recognize the limits of the comparison. Nineteenth-century 
seismology stands out for the modesty with which its practitioners ap-
proached the public. Maoist science was instead “mostly top-down despite 
its claim of the mass line.”17 Moreover, the Chinese demanded observations 
of phenomena that, by definition, preceded earthquakes. They relied on 
instruments, not observers, for records of ground movement. Nineteenth-
century seismology, by contrast, asked observers to record the moment 
of potential catastrophe. It explicitly placed the conditions of knowledge 
under investigation, subverting Kant’s division between the pragmatic and 
the critical. Whether in China, Europe, or the United States, seismology 
since the 1930s has avoided that radical move. As scientists canvassing sur-
vivors of the 1994 Northridge earthquake put it, “We emphasize that this 
questionnaire was constructed to study earthquake intensities and not the 
sociological and psychological aspects of human response to earthquake 
shaking.”18
Translation
As I write, six seismologists face charges of manslaughter in Italy because of 
an alleged failure of public communication. These scientists and one gov-

Conclusion / 273
ernment official are being held responsible for the deaths of over three hun-
dred people in the earthquake that struck the city of L’Aquila in April 2009. 
International seismologists have responded with outrage but also concern. 
They admit to being hard-pressed to express their knowledge of seismic risk 
in terms that the public will understand and act on.19
Many of the scientists and engineers who began to worry about seismic 
hazard in the 1970s had little hope of explaining the risk to the public. 
Seismic risk was defined as a cost-benefit calculation to be made by seis-
mologists and engineers.20 “The risk communication expert conceived of 
the subject of environmental risk as needing to know conclusively, in order 
to act, in order to divert panic.”21 One of the first sociological studies of seis-
mic risk perception, published in 1982, set out from the assumption that 
“public perceptions of seismic hazards rarely conform to common sense.” 
The author, today one of the leading sociologists of environmental risk, 
advocated “a vigorous public information and education campaign . . . that 
eliminates the biases introduced when the public interprets information.”22 
But how can “common sense” be defined if not by means of public percep-
tions? In a similar vein, a Reaganite political scientist warned in 1978 that it 
was impossible to fully “translate” seismology into lay terms. “The problem 
of how to convert or translate scientific language into ordinary language is 
fundamental. The assumption of the undertaking is that popular speech is 
adequate for this translation. Yet, in making the translation, some of the 
meaning is bound to be lost.” Seismologists were thus instructed to with-
hold information from the public in order to protect property values and 
business interests. The danger was too great that the public would “misun-
derstand it.”23 From this perspective, public communication is a form of 
marketing, best left to nonscientists. According to a recent article on “out-
reach” in Seismological Research Letters, “Scientific data must be translated 
into meaningful information to be used by potential users, that is, they 
must become products.”24
As the sociologist Brian Wynne cautions, talk of translating science for 
public consumption invites citizens to “sit back, and wait to be told what 
they must do, rather than go out and learn as well as take their share of 
responsibility for what could have been presented as a more complex, mul-
tidimensional and inherently indeterminate set of human problems, which 
citizens and their representatives can and should help define.”25 “Transla-
tion” had been an operative concept in nineteenth-century seismology, 
but it had nothing to do with diluting research for public consumption. 
Scientists patiently translated instructions, questionnaires, and research re-
ports from one vernacular into another in order to enlist the participation of 

274 / Conclusion
wider circles of the population. They drew on stores of local knowledge and 
the wisdom of oral and written traditions. They also took pains to translate 
earthquake effects between humans and instruments, correlating typical 
expressions and behaviors with mechanical traces. These moves were em-
phatically antireductive. They sought a comprehensive, multiperspectival 
description of the event: total knowledge, in Mach’s sense. One might even 
say that in pursuing a scientific vernacular, nineteenth-century seismolo-
gists offered something akin to the “language therapy” called for by central 
European philosophers like Mach and Wittgenstein. Like Mach, they as-
sumed that science was only of value to the extent that its conclusions could 
be translated back into the observations of ordinary people.26 In this way,  
nineteenth-century seismology cultivated a scientific vernacular, a language 
that mediated between expert analysis and common experience. It was 
not that science had “contradicted and corrected” ordinary sensibilities.27 
Rather, the scientific description of the environment merged with the pub-
lic’s own perceptions. When scientists announced that “the notion that the 
ground is naturally steadfast is an error,”28 the public was already develop-
ing the capacity to feel that instability. A common language shaped a com-
mon vision: a living earth meant a quaking earth.
As Karl Kraus observed over a century ago, disasters create a knowledge 
vacuum. Immediate official information tends to be uncertain and incon-
sistent, and the public quickly grows suspicious of scientific expertise.29 In 
the past few years, Internet tools like Twitter and Google Maps have enabled 
citizens to self-organize and produce knowledge to fill that void—tracking 
wildfires in California or reporting personal dosimeter readings in Japan. 
Scientists in turn are thinking creatively about how to use data like this. 
In the early 1990s, the USGS launched a website to collect data on seismic 
events in real time. Called Did You Feel It?, the site mimics the question-
naires developed by Swiss scientists in the 1870s. As a former USGS geolo-
gist explains, “Another indicator for the future is that thousands of ordinary 
people, just by using the CCI [Community Internet Intensity] system, are 
becoming better earthquake observers. As their skill grows, their aware-
ness of earthquake issues also rises. That in turn promises to make each 
of them—each of you—more effective members of society. And that is one 
of the great benefits of this kind of citizen science.” Like the nineteenth- 
century science of seismology, Did You Feel It? seeks to “provide an im-
portant human perspective on earthquakes, providing documentation of 
the way people behave and respond, and how they perceive risk.” Like 
nineteenth-century observing networks, the site is meant to be a “two-way 

Conclusion / 275
street” between experts and nonexperts. It is “fundamentally a citizen science 
endeavor.”30 Yet Internet-based questionnaires have radically constricted 
such exchanges. Nineteenth-century observers were free to modify the terms 
of a survey or replace it with a free-form letter. Today, data that do not fit the 
expected format never reach scientists at all. 
Fear
In 1908, three days after Christmas, an earthquake and tsunami killed more 
than eighty thousand people in southern Italy. Four weeks earlier, the Swiss 
psychoanalyst Carl Jung had welcomed his second child into the world. 
Jung’s four-year-old daughter had been peppering her parents with ques-
tions about the baby, refusing to believe it had been brought by a stork. 
Then she overheard the adults discussing the Italian disaster, and her curios-
ity took a new turn:
She repeatedly asked her grandmother to tell her how the earth shook, how 
the houses fell in and many people lost their lives. After this she had noctur-
nal fears, she could not be alone, her mother had to go to her and stay with 
her; otherwise she feared that an earthquake would happen, that the house 
would fall and kill her. . . . Many means of calming her were tried, thus she 
was told, for example, that earthquakes only occur where there are volcanoes. 
But then she had to be satisfied that the mountains surrounding the city were 
not volcanoes. This reasoning led the child by degrees to a desire for learning, 
as strong as it was unnatural at her age, which showed itself in a demand that 
all the geological atlases and text-books should be brought to her from her 
father’s library. For hours she rummaged through these works looking for 
pictures of volcanoes and earthquakes, and asking questions continually.
At last, the girl was given a more plausible account of human reproduction 
(this time with a botanical theme). With that, her fear of earthquakes “en-
tirely vanished.” Jung even tested her with illustrations of disaster scenes: 
“Anna remained unaffected, she examined the pictures with indifference, 
remarking, ‘These people are dead; I have already seen that quite often.’ The 
picture of a volcanic eruption no longer had any attraction for her. Thus all 
her scientific interest collapsed and vanished as suddenly as it came.”31
Jung wrote the incident up as the case of “Little Anna,” and it figures 
in the history of psychoanalysis as a counterpart to Freud’s “Little Hans,” 
revealing the neurotic effects of sublimation in children. Jung used it to 

276 / Conclusion
argue against “prudishness” with respect to children’s interest in sexual mat-
ters. But consider the story from another angle. Perhaps Little Anna’s curios-
ity about earthquakes was no less natural than her interest in sex. Perhaps 
she was just as clever to doubt her parents when they claimed that earth-
quakes were caused by volcanoes as when they claimed that her brother was 
brought by a stork. “Fear is the expression of converted libido,” wrote Jung, 
implying that the child could not genuinely be afraid of earthquakes.32 Per-
haps, in Jung’s denial of this possibility, we have met with a resistance that 
requires its own interpretation.
The tendency of modernist thought in the human sciences is to peer 
behind allusions to natural disasters for what is presumed to be the hidden 
source of anxiety, whether it be sexual, socio-economic, or political. Fear of 
an unmasterable, external threat is recast as a diffuse “anxiety,” requiring 
therapy to identify its true origin.33 As in the case of Little Anna, the disas-
ter itself is quickly made to “vanish” from the story. Too quickly. It seems 
that we have stumbled on a mighty defense mechanism—and behind it, 
a profound anxiety about nature out of control.34 It falls to the historian 
to probe the background to stories like Jung’s. The pat answers that adults 
offered his daughter about the earthquake masked their own ignorance. 
This book has tried to reveal the processes by which earthquakes were alter-
nately confronted and displaced in the modernist age, a process much like 
the rapid awakening and extinction of Little Anna’s “scientific interest” in 
earthquakes. It falls to the historian to follow the clues back to the scene of 
knowledge in the making.
Enlightenment
On 11 May 1910, a light tremor shook Vienna. Among the eyewitness re-
ports published in the papers the next day was that of a bank clerk: “At the 
start of the earthquake, before I could form a judgment of the nature of the 
phenomenon, I already saw how my wife, with jerky motions and a terri-
fied expression, threw her head to the side and gripped at her heart. . . . She 
whispered just one word: earthquake. Only with this utterance did I find en-
lightenment [Erst durch diese Äußerung bin ich aufgeklärt worden].” The sharp 
eyes of Karl Kraus seized on the word aufgeklärt—literally, “enlightened.” 
He mocked the clerk’s scientific ambitions: “In the event of the world’s de-
struction, the learned professions must immediately form a judgment of the 
nature of the phenomenon, this they have learned from the newspapers.” 
Kraus feigned wonder at the clerk’s observation that the earthquake had 
“begun with an explosive sound, during which I felt a vertical shock from 

Conclusion / 277
below, which was followed by a horizontal shock, probably in the direction 
northwest-southeast.” “That is the marvelous thing,” Kraus remarked, “and 
it has always amazed me about these learned professions: that they at the 
instant of an earthquake immediately look at the clock and are even clearly 
oriented with respect to the direction of the shock. The likes of us are not 
capable to distinguish west from east when all is calm, certainly not in the 
manner of an Englishman and that of a reader of Die Zeit. But the readers 
of Die Zeit, as soon as their wives whisper the word earthquake, they are 
already enlightened, whisper northwest-southeast, and moreover have the 
presence of mind to sit down immediately and send the shiksa from the 
country, who is not enlightened, and is instead howling and clanging plates 
in the kitchen expecting the end of the world, to the editorial office, so that 
the letter will be in the morning paper for sure.”35
Kraus’s insight was worthy of his nemesis Freud. All around him, Kraus 
saw denial—denial of the power of nature to escape human control. It had 
become impossible to perceive disasters as disasters. All one saw were rep-
resentations of disaster through the lens of the press, recast in the “scientific 
intonation” that stripped them of the horrific. Well before Jünger, Kraus 
perceived that firsthand accounts of disaster were being transformed into 
a predictable genre. He thus recognized the tendency of modernism to re-
press natural disasters beneath a veneer of stylization and metaphor. Kraus 
portrayed the reports of earthquake observers as a narcissistic, self-indulgent 
genre akin to the feuilleton: a jargon-ridden and vacuous form of “cosmic 
prattle.” He decried the very goal of training the public to perceive a threat-
ening natural world through the lens of modern science. It was a lens of 
false security, transforming disasters into geophysical specimens. “A lowly 
genre,” as Kraus once described satire—“as far below the dignity of a histo-
rian as an earthquake.”36
Kraus saw as clearly as anyone what was at issue when the newspapers 
talked earthquakes. Since the eighteenth century, a society’s response to 
earthquakes had been a measure of its enlightenment. Yet, in Kraus’s view, 
what a poor bank clerk took for “Aufklärung” in 1910 could not have been 
further from the real thing. In these terms, only the “unenlightened” would 
be so crass as to display fear at such a moment, to “expect the end of the 
world.” Kraus, the messenger of apocalypse, cast his lot with the unenlight-
ened. Once again, Kant’s ghost was haunting Europeans’ encounters with 
seismic instability. The question was plain: what was enlightenment?
What Kraus failed to see was that this bank clerk was engaged in a dia-
logue. What did Kraus really know of the project that Eduard Suess had 
launched in 1873 with his appeal to the public for seismic observations? 

278 / Conclusion
To Kraus, Suess embodied the shared hubris of science and liberalism. 
Kraus failed to recognize the modesty with which nineteenth-century seis-
mologists approached citizens. Far from tolerating “cosmic prattle,” these 
scientists took pains to express themselves in the vernaculars of their lay 
observers and to preserve even the original idioms of their testimony. Kraus 
took no notice when scientists admitted how little they knew. He did not 
read the instructions in which they urged observers to gauge their own un-
certainty. To be sure, this was a project of “enlightenment,” yet with only a 
superficial resemblance to Kraus’s caricatures. For scientists like Suess, Al-
bert Heim, Charles Davison, Harry Wood, and Perry Byerly, enlightenment 
required a frank and accurate assessment of the limits that nature posed to 
human ambitions. Disasters—floods, earthquakes, avalanches—were cen-
tral to this worldview, as to Kraus’s. Suess was, after all, the man credited 
with having reintroduced disasters to geohistory. For Suess, as for Kraus, the 
need to adjust humanity’s sense of scale was an urgent ethical imperative. 
It was the task of natural science “to ascertain the place of humanity in the 
universe.”37
The earthquake observers of the nineteenth century succeeded in refram-
ing Kant’s question for a scientific age. In the face of the “concept-quake” 
that was tearing through the foundations of traditional beliefs, the dialogue 
between scientists and citizens offered an intellectual compass. It furnished 
no easy answers, but it showed how to pose the questions. Exactly how 
much fear of untamed nature did enlightenment call for? Precisely how 
much skepticism toward intellectual authority did enlightenment warrant? 
In the midst of disaster, who was the model of enlightenment: The Euro-
pean who slipped into “hysteria”? The native of the “savage regions” who 
kept her “presence of mind”? The distant scientist counting oscillations on 
a seismograph? The bank clerk who reported a northwest-southeast shock? 
How, in short, might the experience of enlightenment feel when the ground 
itself was adrift?

Acknowledgments
The seeds for this book were planted by two generous colleagues and nur-
tured by many others. Raine Daston first piqued my interest in the Lisbon 
earthquake eight years ago, with a casual note on a draft of my disserta-
tion. She has quietly continued to drop crumbs of genius ever since. But 
I knew nothing of human seismographs until I had the good fortune to 
meet Andrea Westermann in 2007. From Andrea I learned about the curious 
project of the Swiss Earthquake Commission, and she has offered excellent 
advice and kind support ever since. I have been lucky to share my interest 
in nineteenth-century earthquakes with Conevery Valencius, with whom I 
have happily indulged in conversations about newspaper clippings, fallen 
chimneys, and much else. Fa-ti Fan and Jeremy Vetter have been generous 
with their expertise about Chinese seismology and American meteorology, 
respectively. Carl-Henry Geschwind shared his incomparable knowledge 
of archival collections on American seismology. Ina Cecic´, Monika Gisler, 
Christa Hammerl, Roger Musson, and Leonardo Seeber have patiently dis-
cussed seismology’s recent history with me. For very helpful conversations 
or comments on drafts I warmly thank Marwa Elshakry, Peter Galison,  
Michael Gordin, Christopher Harwood, Matthew Jones, Alexandre Métraux, 
Mark Mazower, Nara Milanich, Ted Porter, Jonathan Schorsch, Pamela 
Smith, Jan Surman, Lisa Tiersten, and Conevery Valencius; and thanks to 
Stefan Andriopoulos for advice on German translation. I owe a particu-
lar debt to Andre Wakefield, who provided indispensable feedback first 
as a conference commentator and then as a reviewer for the University of 
Chicago Press. My editor, Karen Darling, has been an absolute pleasure 
to work with. Valuable suggestions have also come from audiences at the 
University of British Columbia, Yale, and Columbia’s Earth Institute; from 

280 / Acknowledgments
commentators, panelists, and audiences at meetings of the History of Sci-
ence Society and the American Historical Association; and from the orga­
nizers and participants of the workshop “Earth Science, Global Science” 
at York University. Special thanks to those who attended the workshop on 
comparative histories of earthquake science and response held at Barnard in 
2008, especially Peder Anker, Paola Bertucci, Gregory Clancey, Jan Kozák, 
Stuart McCook, Matthew Stanley, Charles Walker, and Paul White.
I gratefully acknowledge the help of the research assistants who gath-
ered archival documents for me: Cathrin Hermann in Vienna, Valérie Graf 
in Zurich, Jaime Raba in Berkeley and Palo Alto, and Lan Li in Pasadena; 
and many thanks to Manuela Krebser for transcribing several of these docu-
ments for me. At Barnard, I had the pleasure of working with two excellent 
undergraduate research assistants, Sally Davis and Amelia Steinman.
My research was generously supported by a grant from the University of 
Chicago’s Defining Wisdom Project and the John Templeton Foundation. 
I am grateful to the project’s directors, staff, and participants for the assis­
tance and intellectual stimulation they provided. I also thank the provost’s 
office at Barnard for research funds and a leave from teaching in 2010–11.
Portions of the book have appeared in Science in Context, Modern Intel-
lectual History, and The Nationalization of Scientific Knowledge in the Habsburg 
Empire, 1848–1918, edited by Mitchell Ash and Jan Surman (Palgrave, 
2012).
Most importantly, I thank my family for making this book possi-
ble. Without the constant support of my husband, parents, and in-laws, I 
would not know how to begin to combine motherhood with scholarship. 
The sensitivity and good humor of my children, Amalia and Adam, make 
motherhood a delight and a privilege. I dedicate this book with love and 
appreciation to my husband, Paul.

NOTES
I n t r o d u ct i on
1. 
Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908). Unless otherwise noted, all translations are my 
own.
2. 
To my chagrin, a week after completing this manuscript (23 August 2011), I mistook 
a rare East Coast tremor for the subway passing underground.
3. 
Nietzsche, “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life,” 120. In fact, “The 
earthquake metaphor is a veritable topos of the reception of Nietzsche” (Meyer,  
“Nietzsche und die klassische Moderne,” 13).
4. 
Exner, Der Schlichten Astronomia, 138.
5. 
Popper quoted in Dawson, “The Reception of Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems,” 
84; Menger, “The New Logic,” 336.
6. 
Dawson, “Reception of Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems.”
7. 
Schütz, Der Grubenhund, 37. 
8. 
Voss, Symbolische Formen, 13.
9. 
De la Beche, How to Observe, 142. On representations of earthquakes, see Dombois, 
Über Erdbeben. Jamie Rae Bluestone’s excellent dissertation on pre-instrumental seis-
mology, “Why the Earth Shakes,” came to my attention as I was completing this 
project.
10. Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 305.
11. Isaac Esterbrock  to Charles Rockwood, 10 August 1884, book 3, Rockwood Papers, 
Princeton University Archives.
12. Heim, Die Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung, 24.
13. Favre, “Tremblement de terre à Fleurier,” 132. Visual representations of earthquakes 
are another crucial source of information for historical seismologists today; see 
Kozák and Cˇermák, Illustrated History of Natural Disasters. On the divergence between 
scientific illustrations of earthquakes and artistic conventions in the late eighteenth 
century, see Keller, “Sections and Views.” 
14. Fan, “‘Collective Monitoring’”; Valencius, “Accounts of the New Madrid Earthquakes.”
15. Palm and Carroll, Illusions of Safety.
16. Quervain, “Erdbeben der Schweiz 1910.”
17. Steinberg, Acts of God; Hoffman and Oliver-Smith, “Anthropology and the Angry 
Earth.” “Risk” is defined as “hazard” multiplied by “vulnerability,” where hazard is a 

natural condition and vulnerability is the probability of damage, given an event of 
a certain magnitude. 
18. Stein, “Continental Intraplate Earthquake Issues,” 2; Fréchet et al., Historical Seismol-
ogy; Valencius, “New Madrid Earthquakes.”
19. Hilhorst and Bankoff, introduction, 1.
20. Sarton, “Secret History,” 187. 
21. Mauch, Natural Disasters, Cultural Responses, 7; Davids, “River Control”; Poliwoda, 
Aus Katastrophen Lernen.
22. Suess, Antlitz der Erde, 1:25.
23. Latour, Never Been Modern.
24. There was a delay of four weeks before the quake was reported in Hamburg and 
Berlin papers (Wilke, “Das Erdbeben von Lissabon als Medienereignis”).
25. Fischer, Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, 151.
26. Kant, “Naturbeschreibung des Erdbebens,” 434.
27. Gerland, “Immanuel Kant.”
28. Fisher, Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, 152; Benjamin, “Lisbon Earthquake,” 
538. For a more sober assessment of the scientific significance of the Lisbon earth-
quake and of Kant’s research, see Oldroyd et al., “The Study of Earthquakes.”
29. Wilson, Kant’s Pragmatic Anthropology, 11. 
30. Kant, Physische Geographie, vol. 1, part 1, 14.
31. Until the past few years, this tension tended to hold the field of history of science 
aloof from environmental history (Anker, “Environmental History versus the History 
of Science”). Doing environmental history seemed to preclude critical analysis of 
the construction of environmental knowledge. Recent work—in particular, by Gregg 
Mitman, Michelle Murphy, and Linda Nash—has shown how to integrate the strong 
points of each field, and this book seeks to follow their examples. 
32. Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 305. On the Portuguese use of questionnaires to investigate 
the quake of 1755, see Oliveira, “1755 Lisbon Earthquake.”
33. Herbert, Victorian Relativity, 147.
34. Gerland, “Immanuel Kant,” 449. 
35. White, “Darwin, Concepción.” On the naturalization of disaster, see Steinberg, Acts 
of God, and Davis, Late Victorian Holocausts.
36. Richter, “Instrumental Magnitude Scale”; Hough, Richter’s Scale; Goodstein, “Waves 
in the Earth”; Geschwind, California Earthquakes.
37. Barth, “Politics of Seismology.”
38. Other romantics pursued natural knowledge by scaling mountain peaks, cultivat-
ing somnambulism, sticking pins in their eyes, or even electrocuting themselves. 
See Strickland, “Ideology of Self-Knowledge”; Felsch, Laborlandschaften; Dettelbach, 
“Face of Nature.”
39. On nonexpert observers, see Vetter, ed., “Lay Participation”; Charvolin et al., Des 
sciences citoyennes?; on scientific observation more broadly, Daston and Lunbeck, 
Histories of Scientific Observation.
40. The reference is to Willy Hellpach’s “geopsyche” theory; Hennig, “Abhängigkeit vom 
Wetter,” 780.
41. Golinski, British Weather, chapter 5; on sensitivity to air pollution in particular, see 
Thorsheim, Inventing Pollution; on the regimentation of meteorological observation 
in the eighteenth century, see Daston, “Empire of Observation.” On amateur weather 
observers in the nineteenth century, see Locher, Le savant et la tempête, chapter 3. 
On the pathologization of weather, see Jankovic´, Confronting the Climate. On the 
282 / Notes to Pages 5–10

development of meteorological instruments to mimic lay “weather wisdom,” see 
Anderson, Predicting the Weather, chapter 5. On climatology and colonization, see 
Osborne, “Acclimatizing the World,” and Jennings, Curing the Colonizers.
42. Whitman, “Kosmos” (1860), quoted in Walls, Passage to Cosmos, 280.
43. Bennett, Vibrant Matter, 120.
44. Katharine Anderson hints that such a “reflexive turn” is appropriate for the history 
of meteorology, in which “the meaning of global science needs to be investigated 
through exactly these shifting contemporary characterizations of meteorology as  
global, national, or local science” (Predicting the Weather, 290).
45. Clark, Academic Charisma.
46. Kafka, “Public Misconceptions.”
47. Kuhn, Structure, 20.
48. Koerner, Linnaeus, 40. On Galileo’s scientific vernacular, see Redondi, “Galilée et 
Comte.”
49. Porter, “How Science Became Technical”; Cohen and Wakefield, “Introduction”; Va-
lencius, Health of the Country; Hamblyn, Invention of Clouds; Anderson, Predicting the 
Weather; Daston, “Empire of Observation”; Huler, Defining the Wind; for examples of 
the transformation of vernacular sciences into technical sciences, see Barrow, Passion 
for Birds, and Endersby, Imperial Nature; on recent initiatives to vernacularize science, 
see Irwin, Citizen Science; on induced seismicity and the citizen science movement, 
see Schneider and Snieder, “Putting Partnership First.”
50. Carl Schmitt identified the judicial response to the Messina earthquake of 1908 as a 
prototype for the “state of exception” (Orihara and Clancey, “The Nature of Emer-
gency”). See too Walker, Shaky Colonialism.  
51. Baudrillard, “Paroxysm.”
52. Daston, “Life Chances,” 14.
53. Robin, Fear.
54. Matthias Dörries shows how fear has been invoked in recent climate discourse both 
to motivate action and inaction (Dörries, “Climate Catastrophes and Fear”).   
55. Quoted in Gardner, Science of Fear, front matter. 
56. Smith, “Fear,” 19. 
57. Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, 438–48. Adela Pinch explains that “empiricism 
allows emotion to be a way of knowing” (Strange Fits, 18). 
58. Luhmann, Ecological Communication.
59. Murphy, Sick-Building Syndrome.
60. Wilkinson, Anxiety, 19.
61. Smith, “Preface,” 1, cited in Bourke, Fear, 283.
62. Beck, Risk Society.
63. Bourke, Fear; Orr, Panic Diaries.
64. In addition, a Norwegian earthquake service was founded in 1887; by 1900 it had 
collected felt reports on 269 earthquakes, revealing a higher seismicity than antici-
pated for the territory. See Muir Wood et al., “Earthquakes in the Northern North 
Sea.” Serbia organized a permanent observing network in 1906, relying both on 
private citizens and civil servants; see Radovanovic´ and Mihailovic´, “Die Erdbeben 
in Serbien.” 
65. Kozák and Plešinger, “Regular Seismic Service”; Früh, “30-jährige Tätigkeit,” 61.
66. On the paucity of macroseismic sources for the late Ottoman Empire, see Ambraseys 
and Finkel, “Seismicity of Turkey.” In the late Russian Empire, scientists investigated 
individual strong quakes macroseismically and compiled a catalog, but there was no 
Notes to Pages 10–14 / 283

attempt to organize an observational network; see Tatevossian, “Earthquake Studies 
in Russia.” The French Académie des Sciences began collecting macroseismic obser-
vations in the 1760s, but systematic macroseismic investigations were not under-
taken in France until the founding of a seismological service in 1908; Quenet, Les 
tremblements de terre; Fréchet, “Historical Seismicity.” 
67. On technocratic trends, see Alder, Engineering the Revolution, and Porter, Trust in 
Numbers.
68. Steinberg, Acts of God, 20; Hecht, “Introduction” (thanks to Gabrielle Hecht for shar-
ing this in advance of publication).
C h a p t er  o n e
1. 
The OED cites Mallet, Earthquake Catalogue, as the first use of “seismology”; it was 
adopted into French and German by the early 1860s. William Whewell coined “sci-
entist” in 1833: Yeo, Defining Science, 110.
2. 
Montaigne, “Of Cannibals,” 152.
3. 
Gisler, Göttliche Natur.
4. 
Valencius, “New Madrid Earthquakes.”
5. 
Gisler, Göttliche Natur. 
6. 
Cited in Thouvenot and Bouchon, “Lowest Magnitude Threshold,” 314.
7. 
Keller, “Sections and Views,” 158; see too Oldroyd et al., “Study of Earthquakes.”
8. 
Dean, “Robert Mallet.” 
9. 
Ferrari and McConnell, “Robert Mallet,” 53.
10. Mallet, Observational Seismology, 1:7.
11. Mallet, “First Report,” 2.
12. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 99–100.
13. Mazzotti, “Jesuit on the Roof,” 76–77.
14. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 100.
15. Muir Wood, “Earthquakes Incorporated,” 124. 
16. Davison, “Scales of Seismic Intensity,” 49. 
17. Milne, “Earthquakes in Great Britain,” 346. Davison remarked that Milne “during his 
whole career investigated only one earthquake, that of February 22, 1880 in Japan” 
and “received only 120 replies to his circular, a number far too small for drawing 
the isoseismal lines of a strong earthquake.” Davison, “Scales of Seismic Intensity,” 
121. Milne’s textbook, Seismology, does not discuss the use of human observers at all. 
As Montessus de Ballore observed, “It is a noteworthy fact that John Milne almost 
never made any use of intensity scales, nor did he delineate isoseismal curves in his 
many seismological papers” (quoted in Cecic´ et al., “Epicentre Determination from 
Macroseismic Data,” 1014).
18. Clancey, Earthquake Nation, 157.
19. Rockwood, “Japanese Seismology,” 469.
20. Mallet, Observational Seismology, 2: 2878.
21. Fort, Book of the Damned, 7, 15.
22. This summary is based on Dewey and Byerly, “Early History of Seismometry,” and 
Howell, Jr., Introduction to Seismological Research.
23. Quervain, “Erdbeben des Wallis,” 85.
24. Thovenot and Bouchon, “Lowest Magnitude Threshold,” 313. 
25. Brush, “Discovery of the Earth’s Core.” 
26. Oreskes, Rejection of Continental Drift.
27. Wegener, Entstehung der Kontinente, 20, 37.
284 / Notes to Pages 14–21

28. On Suess, see Hamann, Eduard Suess.
29. Suess, Boden der Stadt Wien, 255–57.
30. Tollmann, “Eduard Suess,” 48, 69.
31. Suess, Erinnerungen, 238.
32. Suess, Erdbeben Nieder-Österreichs, 2.
33. Hoefer, “Erdbeben Kärntens,” 2.
34. Schmidt, “Erdbeben am 15. Jänner 1858,” 131. On the significance of the 1858 in-
vestigation, see Vaneˇk and Kozák, “First Macroseismic Map.”
35. Suess, Erdbeben Nieder-Österreichs, 1.
36. Greene, Geology in the Nineteenth Century.
37. Strehlau, “Eduard Sueß’ Study of Earthquakes.”
38. Oreskes, Rejection of Continental Drift.
39. Greene, Geology in the Nineteenth Century, 171.
40. Greene, Geology in the Nineteenth Century, 178.
C h a p t er  t w o
1. 
Quoted in Gray, “Highland Potato Famine,” 358.
2. 
Carment, Scenes and Legends.
3. 
Quoted in Carment, Scenes and Legends, 6, 7.
4. 
Carment, Scenes and Legends, 29.
5. 
Davison, “Earthquakes of Comrie.” 
6. 
“Experiences of Earthquakes in Great Britain.” 
7. 
Musson, “Comrie.”
8. 
Davison, British Earthquakes, 65.
9. 
Carment, Scenes and Legends, 21.
10. Morrell and Thackray, Gentlemen of Science.
11. He added his wife’s last name when she inherited a set of estates in 1852, becoming 
known as David Milne Home. See Milne Home, Biographical Sketch.
12. Milne, “Earthquake-Shocks Felt in Great Britain,” 93.
13. Cited in Milne Home, Biographical Sketch, 65.
14. Milne Home, Biographical Sketch, 72.
15. Milne, “Earthquake-Shocks Felt in Great Britain,” 260.
16. Davison, British Earthquakes, 64.
17. The failures were blamed on friction between the writing stylus and the surface; 
Dewey and Byerly, “Early History of Seismometry,” 188. 
18. Times (London), 13 December 1824; for the 1957 report, see Muir Wood and Mel­
ville, “Who Killed the British Earthquake?,” 170. 
19. Darwin to Milne, 20 February 1840, Letter 560, and Milne to Darwin, 28 March 
1840, Letter 562f, Darwin Correspondence Project.
20. Darwin to Milne, 20 February 1840, Letter 560, Darwin Correspondence Project.
21. Drummond, Comrie Earthquakes, 12.
22. Drummond, Comrie Earthquakes, 3, 4, 5, 12.
23. Drummond, “Table of Shocks,” 240.
24. Drummond, Comrie Earthquakes, 7.
25. Drummond, Comrie Earthquakes, 8. 
26. Hunt, Maxwellians, 169.
27. Varley reported to the Society of Telegraph Engineers in 1873 that the line between 
London and Valentia was more strongly disturbed by earth currents on the day pre-
ceding an earthquake in India. See John Graves, “On Earth Currents,” 115–16.
Notes to Pages 21–30 / 285

28. Drummond, Comrie Earthquakes, 8.
29. Carment, Scenes and Legends, 112.
30. Davison, “Earthquakes in Great Britain (1889–1914),” 358.
31. Musson, “Curious Seismological Monument.” 
32. Buckle, Civilization in England, 87; see chapter 5, below.
33. Times (London),  8 October 1863.
34. Davison, British Earthquakes, 245.
35. Lowe, “Earthquake of 1863,” 60.
36. “The Earthquake,” Times (London),  8 October 1863, 8.
37. “Earthquakes,” All the Year Round 3 (1860): 197–201, on 201.
38. Editorial, Times (London),  8 October 1863, 6.
39. Musson, “Seismicity: Fatalities in British Earthquakes,” 15.
40. “Earthquake in England,” Times (London),  23 April 1884, 7.
41. Davison, The Hereford Earthquake, 224.
42. Milne, Letter to the Times (London),  28 September 1881, 8; “The Earth in Its Vig-
our,” Times (London),  8 September 1883 (this article was reprinted in the Glasgow 
and Bristol papers). 
43. Milne, “The Recent Earthquake in Essex,” 9.
44. Quoted in Orange, “The British Association for the Advancement of Science,” 329.
45. Meldola and White, East Anglian Earthquake. Meldola was professor of chemistry at 
Finsbury Technical College, and White was a member of the Geologists’ Association.
46. Meldola and White, East Anglia Earthquake, vi.
47. Davison, Hereford Earthquake, 3.
48. Davison, “British Earthquakes of 1889.” 
49. H. J., “Charles Davison”; Richards, “Dr. C. Davison,” 805.
50. Davison, Hereford Earthquake, 4.
51. Musson, “A Critical History of British Earthquakes.” 
52. Davison, “Robinson Crusoe’s Earthquake.” 
53. Davison, “Effects of Earthquakes on Human Beings.” See too Davison, “Effects of an 
Observer’s Conditions.”
54. Roger Musson, conversation with author, 29 July 2011; Lovell, The Dr ATJ Dollar 
Papers; Musson, “A Critical History of British Earthquakes.”
55. Milne, Letter to the Times (London),  29 December 1896, 9.
56. “The Belt of Earthquakes . . . ,” Aberdeen Journal, 10 September 1886, 1. 
57. “People Must Not Run Away . . . ,” Aberdeen Journal, 14 July 1894, 1.
58. “Comrie as an Earthquake Centre: The Reputation of the Village at Stake,” Pall Mall 
Gazette, 25 August 1898, 6.
59. “Comrie as an Earthquake Centre,” Pall Mall Gazette, 25 August 1898, 6.
60. Times (London),  18 December 1896.
61. “Objects of the Society,” Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research 1 (1882–83): 
3–6, on 4; Oppenheim, The Other World; Owen, The Darkened Room.
62. “On the Trail of a Ghost,” Times (London),  12 June 1897, 11.
63. Davison, “On the Comrie Earthquake of July 12, 1895,” 77; Davison, “The Earth-
quakes of Comrie.”
64. “On the Trail of a Ghost,” Times (London),  15 June 1897, 12.
65. “On the Trail of a Ghost,” Times (London),  21 June 1897, 4.
66. Noakes, “Telegraphy Is an Occult Art.”
67. Lang, The Book of Dreams and Ghosts, xiv. The reference is to Byron, Childe Harold’s 
286 / Notes to Pages 30–41

Pilgrimage: “and now, the glee Of the loud hills shakes with its mountain-mirth, As 
if they did rejoice o’er a young earthquake’s birth.”
68. “On the Trail of a Ghost,” Times (London),  24 June 1897, 10.
69. “On the Trail of a Ghost,” Times (London),  6 November 1897, 9. In a final bit of 
hairsplitting, “A Cynical Observer” responded to “An Earnest Inquirer”: “Were he 
really to inquire earnestly he would find that the noises said to have been heard in 
Ballechin were not accounted for as the results of ‘seismic disturbance.’ It was merely 
suggested that, if there were any noises which could not be referred to ordinary phys-
ical causes, then it was more probable that they were due to seismic disturbances 
than that they were caused by a ‘bogie.’ There is much virtue in an ‘if.’” “On the Trail 
of a Ghost,” Times (London),  8 November 1897, 6.
70. Dunning, “The Story of the Earth,” 101.
71. Quoted from an unpublished manuscript by Dunning, in Dombois, Über Erdbeben, 
178.
72. Roger Musson, e-mail to author, 28 October 2010.
73. Roger Musson, e-mail to author, 28 October 2010.
74. Cecic´ and Musson, “Macroseismic Surveys,” 52.
75. Musson, “From Questionnaires to Intensities,” 512.
76. Musson and Cecic´, “Intensity and Intensity Scales,” 12.
77. New Scientist, 20 October 1983; “Shaken to the Core,” Times (London),  27 August 
1983.
78. Muir-Wood and Melville, “Who Killed the British Earthquake?”
79. Musson, “Comrie: A Historical Scottish Earthquake Swarm,” 479.
80. “Quake Missed Due to Paper Shortage,” Times (London),  3 March 2008, 27.
C h a p t er  t h ree
1. 
Conboy, Journalism, 110.
2. 
Conboy, Journalism, 125.
3. 
Quoted in Conboy, Journalism, 122.
4. 
Le Bon, La psychologie des foules; Vyleta, Crime, Jews, and News, 72; for media influences 
on public perceptions of hazards, see Wilkinson, Anxiety in a Risk Society, chapter 5.
5. 
Anderson, Predicting the Weather, chapter 2.
6. 
Hoernes, “Erdbeben in Steiermark 1880,” 66. See too Belar, “Praktische Bedeutung.” 
7. 
Keilhack, Lehrbuch der praktischen geologie, 295.
8. 
Sieberg, “Makroseismische Bestimmung der Erdbebenstärke,” 238. For example, the 
1902 earthquake in Salonika was reported to have caused heavy damages and casu-
alties, but Hoernes found evidence of only four deaths. Hoernes, “Erdbeben von 
Saloniki.”
9. 
“Vom Tage,” 727.
10. Neue Freie Presse, 7 January 1873, 18 July 1876, 22 and 23 September 1885; Kraus, 
“Das Erdbeben.” Likewise, the newspaper accounts of the 1812 earthquakes in New 
Madrid, Missouri, were “generally agreed to be intelligible only when many indi-
vidual accounts from many different places could be collected and compared” (Va-
lencius, “New Madrid Earthquakes”).
11. For examples of “participatory journalism” with a meteorological theme, see Marko-
vits, “Rushing into Print.” 
12. Wood, “Earthquake Reports,” 60.
13. Martin, “Earthquake of December, 1874,” 191.
Notes to Pages 41–47 / 287

14. On the iconography of Victorian weather maps, see Anderson, “Mapping Meteorol-
ogy.” On macroseismic intensity maps, see chapter 4, below.
15. Daniel Martin to Charles Rockwood, 11 May 1875, box 1, book 1, Rockwood Papers, 
Princeton University Archives. 
16. Kafka et al., “Earthquake Activity in the Greater New York City Area”; Kafka, “Public 
Misperceptions.”
17. Burton, “Volcanic Eruptions,” 51–52.
18. Martin to Rockwood, 18 June 1875, box 1, book 1, Rockwood Papers, Princeton 
University Archives.
19. Milne, Earthquakes and Other Earth Movements, 276
20. On their sons’ stamp collections, see Alexis Perrey to Charles Rockwood, 2 August 
1879 and 23 February 1882, box 1, book 1, Rockwood Papers.
21. “Prof. Charles G. Rockwood.”
22. Fuchs to Rockwood, 4 April 1880, box 1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
23. Fuchs to Rockwood, 1 June 1880, box 1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
24. J. Goodrich (Boston Post) to Rockwood, 14 November 1877, box 1, book 1, Rock-
wood Papers.
25. E. H. Little to Rockwood, 6 May 1876,  box 1, book 1, Rockwood Papers.
26. Illegible name in Caracas to Rockwood, 13 August 1883, box 1, book 2, Rockwood 
Papers.
27. Rockwood, “Notices of Recent American Earthquakes II” (1878), 21.
28. “Shock of an Earthquake,” Times (London),  13 December 1824.
29. “From Notices in Our Papers . . . ,” Times (London),  11 December 1839.
30. “Les Tremblements de terre italiens,” Journal de Genève, 30 December 1908.
31. Cited in Belar, Laibacher Erdbebenstudien, 7.
32. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 49.
33. Cited in Milne, “Seismology at the British Association,” 124. 
34. Belar, “Die jungsten amerikanischen Katastrophen,” 13 (originally published in 
Neues Wiener Tagblatt).
35. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 88.
36. Te Heesen, Cut and Paste.
37. Perry Byerly to Harry O. Wood, 19 February 1930, Wood Papers, Caltech.
38. Te Heesen, Cut and Paste, 326, 327.
39. Falb, “Aus dem Leben Rudolf Falbs.” 
40. Falb, Umwälzungen im Weltall.
41. Neue Freie Presse, 16 March 1885.
42. “The Falb Earthquake Theory,” New York Times, 26 June 1887.
43. Hoernes, Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falbs, 88.
44. Neue Freie Presse, 28 December 1887; the second is cited in Makowsky, “Ueber die 
Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falb’s.”
45. Cited in Hammerl and Lenhardt, Erdbeben in Österreich, 131.
46. In 1877 Hoernes called Falb’s claim “ingenious” (geistreich). Hoernes, “Das Erdbe-
ben von Belluno,” 45.
47. “Zur Falbschen Theorie,” 362; Fuchs, “Vulkanische Ereignisse 1871,” 718–19; 
Schmidt, Vulkane und Erdbeben, 1.
48. Falb, Land der Inca, xi.
49. Hoernes, Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falbs.
50. “Ursache der Erdbeben.”
51. Makowsky, “Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falb’s,” 54.
288 / Notes to Pages 48–55

52. Belar, “Über die praktische Bedeutung der modernen Erdbebenforschung,” 30.
53. Fleming, The Pleasures of Abandonment, 47.
54. New York Herald, 11 August 1884, box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers.
55. Puget Sound Daily Courier, 16 December 1872; Olympia Weekly Pacific Tribune, 21 
December 1872, box 1, book 1, Rockwood Papers.
56. “Wiener Erdbeben Chronik,” Die Bombe, 14 November 1880, and Neue Freie Presse, 
11 November 1880, late edition, 2.
57. “Das Erdbeben,” Der Floh, 14 November 1880.
58. Twain, Early Tales, 2:289. On seismic denialism in nineteenth-century California, see 
Geschwind, California Earthquakes, and chapter 9, below.
59. Twain, Roughing It, 1:140.
60. Twain, “The Great Earthquake in San Francisco,”  304.
61. Twain, “A Page from a Californian Almanac,” 132–34.
62. Salpeter, “Das Erdbeben,” 339.
63. “Die Erde will nicht mehr. Es war bloß ein nervöses Zucken,—und der Jammer ist 
unendlich. Wenn ihr aber wirklich einmal die Geduld reißt?”; Kraus, “Erdbeben” 
(1908).
64. Reitter, The Anti-Journalist.
65. Benjamin, “Karl Kraus,” 433, 437.
66. Edward Timms identifies the 1908 essay “Apocalypse: An Open Letter to the Public” as 
the moment when Kraus first adopted his “apocalyptic” role. Timms, Karl Kraus, 206.
67. Kraus, “The Discovery of the North Pole,” 56.
68. Beck, Risk Society.
69. Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 19. 
70. Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 23. 
71. Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 21–22.
72. Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 22. 
73. Reitter, Anti-Journalist, 86.
74. Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 23.
75. Kraus, “Antworten des Herausgebers: Geolog,” 20.
76. Belar, “Praktische Bedeutung der modernen Erdbebenforschung,” 28.
77. Kraus, “Antworten des Herausgebers: Geolog,” 20.
78. Kraus, “Messina,” 1.
79. “Das, was Eduard Suess so geistvoll den Pulsschlag des Erdballs genannt hat, wird 
mit wissenschaftlicher Genauigkeit bekannt sein . . . Das wird aber den Pulsschlag 
der Erde nicht weiter genieren. Und ihre Bonmots sind überraschender.” Kraus, “Erd­
beben” (1909), 46.
80. Kraus, “Erdbeben” (1909), 46.
81. Kraus, “Nach dem Erdbeben,” 22.
82. Schütz, Der Grubenhund, 38.
83. “Indem sie den Journalismus hineingelegt hat, hat sie ihre Identität bewiesen und 
sich selbst dazugelegt.” Kraus, “Nach dem Erdbeben,” 21.
84. Kraus, “Nach dem Erdbeben,” 24.
85. “Kraus, “Das Erdbeben” (1908), 20.
C h a p t er  f o ur
1. 
Forel, “Les tremblements de terre 1879–1880,” 463.
2. 
From the 1890s, articles in the Schweizerische Bauzeitung took earthquakes into 
account as factors in the design of tunnels and buildings; e.g., Locher, “Zum  
Notes to Pages 55–69 / 289

Jungfraubahnproject von Oberst Locher”; Koch, “Ursachen des Verfalles der Hoch-
bauten”; “Die Chemie der hohen Temperaturen,” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 27 
(1896): 133–35; “Ueber die Geschwindigkeit von Erdbebenstössen,” Schweizerische 
Bauzeitung 32 (1898): 100; plus several articles on the restoration of buildings in 
Basel that were damaged by the great earthquake of 1356.
3. 
Früh, “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen,” 147.
4. 
Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz 1909, 1.
5. 
Gisler et al., Nachbeben.
6. 
Früh, “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen,” 146.
7. 
Forel, “Tremblement de terre du 30 décembre 1879,” 14.
8. 
Favre, “Tremblement de terre à Fleurier,” 134.
9. 
Früh, “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen,” 146.
10. Westermann, “Disciplining the Earth.”
11. Volger, Erdbeben in der Schweiz, 2:67.
12. Gisler et al., “The 1855 Visp Earthquake.”
13. Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung, 168.
14. Volger, Erdbeben in der Schweiz, 67.
15. Volger, Erde und Ewigkeit, 266.
16. Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung, 170, 253.
17. Quoted in Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung, 406.
18. Volger, Erdbeben in der Schweiz, 363, 380, 81.
19. Volger, Erdbeben in der Schweiz, 84.
20. Oeser, “Historical Earthquake Theories.” 
21. Vaneˇk and Kozák, “First Macroseismic Map,” 595, 597. On the popularization of 
weather maps, see Anderson, Predicting the Weather, chapter 5.
22. Gisler et al., “The 1855 Visp Earthquake”; Heim, Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung, 10. 
The first generalizable seismic intensity scale was devised in Prussia by P. N. C. Egen 
in 1828, with six degrees ranging from “slight traces sensed” to “significant damage.” 
Davison, “Scales of Seismic Intensity.”
23. Quervain, “Erdbeben von Wallis,” 75.
24. Früh, “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen,” 148.
25. Heim, “Über den Stand der Erdbebenforschung.”
26. Heim to Charles Rockwood, n.d., box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers, Princeton Uni-
versity Archives.
27. Mousson, “Organisation meteorologischer Beobachtungen,” 197.
28. Mousson, “Organisation meteorologischer Beobachtungen,” 104.
29. Heim to Charles Rockwood, 5 March 1885, box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers, Prince­
ton University Archives.
30. Heim, Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung, 27.
31. Heim, “Zur Prophezeiung der Erdbeben,” 141.
32. Heim, Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung, 5, 22.
33. Seneca, Dialogues and Letters, 112; Williams, “Greco-Roman Seismology,” 146.
34. Heim, “Bergsturz und Menschenleben,” 128; Heim, “Bergsturz von Elm.”
35. Speich, “Draining the Marshlands,” 437; Pfister, Am Tag danach.
36. The Helvetii were the Celtic tribe that inhabited the Swiss Plateau prior to the Roman 
conquest. Zimmer, Contested Nation, 200, 206.
37. Forster, “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1879–1880,” 102.
38. Porter, “How Science Became Technical,” 299.
39. Bensaude-Vincent, “Science and Its ‘Others.’” 
290 / Notes to Pages 69–78

40. “Bergschläge im Simplontunnel”; Sulzer-Ziegler, “Der Bau des Simplon-Tunnels”; 
Heim, “Ueber die geologische Voraussicht beim Simplon-Tunnel”; Heim et al., 
“Étude géologique sur le nouveau projet.” 
41. Brockmann-Jerosch et al., Albert Heim, 206.
42. Heim et al., “Étude géologique sur le nouveau projet,” 20, 24.
43. Brockmann-Jerosch et al., Albert Heim, 181, emphasis in original.
44. For the figure of the cautious and modest engineer, see Christopher Harwood’s Hu-
man Soul of an Engineer. Harwood brilliantly analyzes the Russian novelist Andrei 
Platonov’s development of a philosophically nuanced and literarily dexterous cri-
tique of the Stalinist cult of technology at its height. The ideal to which Heim held 
himself can be compared to the Platonovian hero, the “humane engineer.”
45. Quervain, “Erdbeben als Folge von Tunnelbau.” 
46. Heim had a hand in other progressive causes as well, including temperance, absti-
nence, and cremation. Brockmann-Jerosch et al., Albert Heim.
47. Aubert, “La protection des blocs erratiques”; Bachmann, Zwischen Patriotismus und 
Wissenschaft.
48. Brockmann-Jerosch et al., Albert Heim, 24.
49. Heim, Sehen und Zeichnen, 13, 21. 
50. Heim, Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung, 23.
51. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 81.
52. Tributsch, When the Snakes Awake.
53. Daston and Galison, “The Image of Objectivity.”
54. Heim, “Über den Stand der Erdbebenforschung,” 147. 
55. Forel, Le Léman, 1:x.
56. Forel, Handbuch der Seenkunde, 668–69.
57. Forel, Le Léman, 1:xi.
58. Forel, Handbuch der Seenkunde, 171.
59. Forel, “Tremblement de terre du 30 décembre 1879,” 1, 2; Forel, “Les tremblements 
de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 463, 481.
60. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 463, 464.
61. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 465.
62. Forel, “Tremblement de terre du 30 décembre 1879,” 8.
63. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 490.
64. Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz 1909, 9.
65. Früh, “Bericht der Erdbebenkommission 1907/08,” 68.
66. Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz 1912, 12.
67. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 490.
68. Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz 1909, 2.
69. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 465.
70. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 465.
71. Rossi, “Programma dell’osservatorio,” 67–68; Davison, “Scales of Seismic Inten-
sity,” 47.
72. Anderson, Predicting the Weather; Huler, Defining the Wind; Daston, “Empire of Ob-
servation”; Hamblyn, Invention of Clouds.
73. Musson et al., “Comparison of Macroseismic Intensity Scales.” 
74. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 4.
75. Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz 1909, 1.
76. Daston and Galison, Objectivity; Daston and Lunbeck, eds., Scientific Observation.
77. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 7.
Notes to Pages 79–86 / 291

78. Mercalli, “Scala sismica De Rossi-Forel,” 189.
79. Früh, “Ueber die 30-jährige Tätigkeit der Schweizerischen Erdbebenkommis-
sion,” 65.
80. Früh, “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen,” 146; Davison, 
“Effects of an Observer’s Conditions,” 69.
81. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 8.
82. Cooper, Inventing the Indigenous; Mendelsohn, “The World on a Page”; Golinski, Brit-
ish Weather; Bowker, Memory Practices; Edwards, A Vast Machine; Strasser, “Laborato-
ries, Museums, and the Comparative Perspective.”
83. Forster, “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1878–1879,” 115.
84. Forel, “Tremblements de terre de 1879 à 1880,” 464.
85. Billwiller, “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1899–1900,” 167.
86. Schröter, “Prof. Christian Brügger,” x.
87. Schröter, “Prof. Christian Brügger,” xviii. 
88. Brügger Nachlass, Signatur B564/4, Staatsarchiv Graubünden, Chur.
89. Nyhart, Modern Nature, 253–56.
90. Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 263.
91. Forster, “Die Schweizerischen Erdbeben in den Jahren 1884 und 1885,” 17.
92. Vidal, Piaget before Piaget. 
93. Suter, “Prof. Dr. Hans Schardt.”
94. Leuba, “Le professeur Hans Schardt,” 106.
95. Hs 389:1077.10 and 1077.8, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
96. Quervain, Erdbeben der Schweiz Jahre 1909, 3–4.
97. Hs 389:1080.5, Hs 389:1080.2, Hs 389:1077.15, Hs 389:1077.8, Hs 389:1077.10, 
Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
98. Hs 389:1080.5, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
99. Hs 389:1077.2.7, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
100. Hs 389:1080.3, 1080.4, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
101. Brügger Nachlass B 564/4, Staatsarchiv Graubünden, Chur.
102. Forster, “Bericht der Erdbebenkommission” (1888), 128. 
103. Mousson, “Organisation meteorologischer Beobachtungen,” 223.
104. Vetter, “Regional Development of Science.” 
105. Phillips, “Friends of Nature.”
106. Hs 389:1078.7, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
107. Bel-Perrin to Schardt, 20 February 1909, Hs 389:1077.3, Nachlass Schardt, ETH,  
Zurich. 
108. Hs 389:1077.1.3, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
109. Hs 389:1077.17, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
110. Hs 389:1079.3.2, Nachlass Schardt, ETH, Zurich.
111. Josef Pernter to education ministry, 19 March 1903, ÖStA/AVA/folder 678, 4A/ 
document 9523.
112. Josef Pernter to education ministry, 3 February 1909, ÖStA/AVA/folder 678, 4A/
document 4511. Cf. Clark, Academic Charisma.
113. Schardt, “Tremblement du terre du 29 mars 1907,” 314.
114. “Das Erdbeben vom 26. Mai,” Intelligenzblatt, 28 May 1910.
115. Forel, “Tremblements de terre dans les cantons de Vaud et de Neuchâtel.” 
116. Forster, “Bericht der Erdbebenkommission” (1888), 127.
117. Tribelot, “Tremblements de terre ressentis dans le canton de Neuchâtel,” 373.
118. Früh, “Ueber die 30-jährige Tätigkeit der Schweizerischen Erdbebenkommission.” 
292 / Notes to Pages 87–98

119. “Les Tremblements de terre italiens,” Journal de Genève, 30 December 1908, 3.
120. Schardt, “Les causes du tremblement de terre de Messine,” 111.
121. Hs 389:1076.6, Schardt Nachlass, ETH, Zurich.
122. Forster, “Die Schweizerischen Erdbeben in den Jahren 1884 und 1885,” 19, 29, 30.
123. Früh, “Bericht der Erdbeben-Kommission für das Jahr 1913/14,” 121.
124. Quervain, “Erdbeben von Wallis,” 79.
125. Quervain, “Erdbeben von Wallis,” 85.
126. Phillips, “Friends of Nature.”
C h a p t er  f i v e
1. 
Milne, “Earthquake Effects,” 91.
2. 
For example: “Like cyclones and other electric disturbances in the atmosphere, earth-
quakes and volcanoes prevail chiefly in the tropical regions” (“New Theory of Earth-
quakes and Volcanoes,” 396). 
3. 
Buckle, History of Civilization in England, 1:87–89, 90. Darwin was often quoted to 
this effect: “Earthquakes alone are sufficient to destroy the prosperity of any coun-
try.” Yet unlike Buckle, Darwin emphasized the absence of innate differences be-
tween Europeans and natives of the New World. Darwin went on to imagine that if 
England were prone to earthquakes, its civilization would be reduced to bankruptcy, 
anarchy, and death; “the hand of violence and rapine would go uncontrolled.” In 
private, he added portentously: “Who can say how soon such will happen?” Darwin,  
Voyage of the Beagle, 228, 233; White, “Darwin, Concepcíon, and the Geological  
Sublime.”
4. 
Branco, Wirkungen und Ursachen der Erdbeben, 54; Middendorf, Peru, 138; compare 
Charles Kingsley on the “idle” colonials plagued by earthquakes in Peru (Madame 
How and Lady Why, 38–39). 
5. 
On nineteenth-century scientific internationalism, see Mazower, Governing the World. 
On the construction of natural hazards as a “tropical” problem and its political con-
sequences, see Bankoff, “The Historical Geography of Disaster: ‘Vulnerability’ and 
‘Local Knowledge’ in Western Discourse.” When the interwar German field of Geo-
politik became concerned with earthquakes as a cause of economic instability, its 
evidence came largely from nineteenth-century travelers’ accounts of panic-stricken 
natives. One scholar devised a simplistic “instability factor” to produce, on a “purely 
quantitative” basis, an international map of economic risk from earthquakes. Severit, 
“Anthropogeographische Bedeutung der Erdbeben,” 99.
6. 
Coit, A Memoir, 110; Forel quoted in Davis, “Swiss Earth-Quake Commission,” 197. 
On the modern desire for “riskless risk,” see Rozario, Culture of Calamity.
7. 
Gilbert, “California Earthquake of 1906,” 215.
8. 
Wallace, Malay Archipelago, 2:238.
9. 
James, “Mental Effects of the Earthquake,” 209.
10. Sachs, Humboldt Current, 57, 138, 211, 225. 
11. New York Times, 12 August 1881.
12. Muir, Our National Parks, 262–67.
13. New York Times, 26 July 1872.
14. Rozario, Culture of Calamity, 101.
15. Dauncey, The Philippines, 286.
16. Mallet, “Earthquakes,” 234.
17. Seebach, “Erdbebenkunde.”
18. On “Humboldtian science”: Cannon, Science in Culture; Tresch, “Even the Tools Will 
Notes to Pages 99–106 / 293

Be Free”; Sachs, Humboldt Current; Dettelbach, “Global Physics and Aesthetic Em-
pire.” For critical views of Humboldt’s relationship to imperialism, see Pratt, Imperial 
Eyes, and Cañizares-Esguerra, “How Derivative Was Humboldt?”
19. Brown, “The ‘Demonic’ Earthquake.” 
20. On 1755 as “an iconographic moment,” see Lauer and Unger, “Angesichts der Katas-
trophe: Das Erdbeben von Lissabon und der Katastrophendiskurs im 18. Jahrhun-
dert,” 43. 
21. Walls, Passage to Cosmos. 
22. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1995), 126–29
23. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1995), 130.
24. Janz et al., “Einleitung,” 22.
25. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1995), 130.
26. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1995), 129.
27. Dettelbach, “Humboldt between Enlightenment and Romanticism,” 20.
28. In A Natural History of Revolution, Mary Ashburn Miller argues that metaphors of 
geophysical cataclysm made the Revolution seem like the product of unstoppable 
forces rather than individual agency. 
29. Walls, Passage to Cosmos, 129.
30. Quoted in Dettelbach, “Global Physics and Aesthetic Empire,” 283.
31. Humboldt, Cosmos, 1:212–13.
32. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1995), 93.
33. Humboldt, Personal Narrative (1853), 3:5.
34. Eliot, Middlemarch, 189.
35. Struck, “Kenntnis afrikanischer Erdbebenvorstellungen,” 90. 
36. Severit, “Anthropogeographische Bedeutung der Erdbeben.” 
37. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 1:285.
38. Ratzel, Völkerkunde, 1:178. 
39. Lasch, “Erdbeben im Volksglauben,” 237.
40. White, “Darwin, Concepcíon, and the Geological Sublime.”
41. Darwin, Voyage of Beagle, 228.
42. John McPhee tells a more recent story of seismic epiphany: the geologist Anita Harris 
was instantly convinced of the significance of catastrophes to geohistory by her own 
experience of an earthquake. McPhee, Annals of the Former World, 168–71.
43. Fuchs to Rockwood, 1 June 1880, box 1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
44. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 39. 
45. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 48
46. Quoted in Davison, Founders of Seismology, 73.
47. Mallet and Mallet, Earthquake Catalogue, 46.
48. Mallet and Mallet, Earthquake Catalogue, 61.
49. Mallet and Mallet, Earthquake Catalogue, 58.
50. Davison, Founders of Seismology, 72.
51. “The Earthquakes,” Times (London),  13 January 1885.
52. Cisternas, “Montessus de Ballore.”
53. Montessus de Ballore, Ethnographie sismique, 30.
54. Montessus de Ballore, “La théorie sismico-cyclonique du déluge”; see too Montessus 
de Ballore, “La Sismologia en la Biblia”; Girard, La théorie sismique du deluge.
55. Milne, “Notes,” Nature 26 (4 May 1882): 16–18, on 17.
56. Milne to Rockwood, 17 December 1881, box 1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
57. Clancey, Earthquake Nation; Fan, “Redrawing the Map.”
294 / Notes to Pages 107–116

58. Fan, “Redrawing the Map,” 533.
59. Milne, “Prehistoric Remains,” 62.
60. Anonymous (John Milne), “The Earthquake,” Japan Gazette, 13 December 1879; box 
1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
61. Milne, “Earthquake Effects,“ 109–10.
62. Milne, “Earthquake Effects,” 112.
63. Clancey, Earthquake Nation, 83.
64. Mallet, “Earthquakes,” 225.
65. Herschel, Manual of Scientific Inquiry, 333.
66. Neumayer, Anleitung zu wissenschaftlichen Beobachtungen, 1st ed., 1:310. 
67. Neumayer, Anleitung zu wissenschaftlichen Beobachtungen, 2nd ed., 1:xi.
68. Richtofen, Führer für Forschungsreisende, iv.
69. Ella, “Physical Phenomena of the South Pacific Island,” 563.
70. Nunn, “Fished Up or Thrown Down.” On myths as geohistorical evidence, see Pic-
cardi and Masse, Myth and Geology.
71. E.g., Friedländer, “Beiträge zur Geologie der Samoa-Inseln” (1910) cites Samoan 
names for geological formations and refers to their oral tradition as at least “halfway 
reliable” as a source of historical information for the past three hundred years (on 
513).
72. Pyenson, Cultural Imperialism and the Exact Sciences, 33–138. On the use of native 
technicians in volcanology on Montserrat (and its link to deskilling in twentieth-
century experimental physics), see Galison, Image and Logic, 164.
73. Wagner, “Das Samoa Observatorium,” 11.
74. Wegener, “Die seismischen Registrierungen am Samoa-Observatorium 1909–
1910.”
75. Tetens, “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 1904 
und 1904,” 40.
76. Linke, “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 1905 
und 1906,” 65.
77. Linke, “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 1905 
und 1906,” 65.
78. Wegener, “Die seismischen Registrierungen am Samoa-Observatorium 1909–1910,” 
325.
79. Tetens, “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 1904 
und 1904,” 41.
C h a p t er  s i x
1. 
Palmer, “California Earthquakes during 1916,” 17.
2. 
Dror, “Seeing the Blush.” 
3. 
Hagner, “Psychophysiologie und Selbsterfahrung.” 
4. 
Janz et al., Schwindelerfahrungen.
5. 
Review of De effectibus terraemotus in corpore humano, by Vincenzo Domenico Mig-
nani, Monthly Review 72 (1785): 526.
6. 
Valencius, “Histories of Medical Geography”; Nash, Inescapable Ecologies, 53–54.
7. 
Mayer-Ahrens, “Beziehungen des Vulkanismus,” 294, 332.
8. 
Schivelbusch, The Railway Journey.
9. 
E. B. [Edgar Bérillon], “Les névroses,” 98. 
10. Charcot, Leçons du Mardi, 36.
11. Micale, Hysterical Men, 143.
Notes to Pages 117–127 / 295

12. Guinon, Les agents provocateurs de l’hystérie, 52.
13. Review of Atlasoff, “Ueber den Einfluss der Erderschütterungen auf den geistigen 
Zustand,” Zentralblatt für Nervenheilkunde 7 (1889): 146.
14. Quoted in Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 286; repeated by Hoernes, Erdbebenkunde, 133, 
and Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 384.
15. Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 383.
16. Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 402.
17. Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 404.
18. Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 405.
19. Phleps, “Psychosen nach Erdbeben,” 404, emphasis added.
20. Hentig, “Über die Wirkung von Erdbeben auf Menschen,” 559.
21. Hentig, “Über die Wirkung von Erdbeben auf Menschen,” 562.
22. Matus, Shock, Memory, and the Unconscious, 56.
23. Adams, The Education of Henry Adams, 495. 
24. This was the case even in fields as disparate as British ecology in Africa and Soviet 
ethnography in Central Asia; e.g., Anker, Imperial Ecology; Hirsch, Empire of Nations.
25. Lombroso, Crime, Its Causes and Remedies, chapters 1–2.
26. Agamben, State of Exception, 17; Orihara and Clancey, “The Nature of Emergency.”
27. Stierlin, “Störungen nach Katastrophen,” 2029.
28. Lombroso and Lombroso, “La Psicologia dei Terremotati,” 126, 128.
29. “Homo nobilis u. bête humaine,” Archiv für Kriminologie 27 (1906): 362–64, on 362.
30. Komine and Maki, “Psychiatric Observations.” An American physician noted that “ir-
ritable heart,” a typical earthquake symptom, had been a frequent complaint during 
the US Civil War “and again, when the stress and strain in the struggle for existence 
was markedly intensified during the World War, many observers recorded the same 
phenomena” (Marshall, “Biological Reactions to Earthquakes”).
31. Simson, “Psychische und psychotische Reaktionen,” 138. 
32. Hentig, Kosmische, biologische und soziale Krisen; on Hentig, see Geyer, Verkehrte Welt, 
101.
33. Hentig, “Wirkung von Erdbeben auf Menschen”: quote on 568; on Jewish earth-
quake sensitivity, 547.
34. Hentig, Kosmische, biologische und soziale Krisen, 104–5.
35. Brussilowski, “Beeinflussung der neuropsychischen Sphäre,” 462.
36. Simson, “Psychische und psychotische Reaktionen,” 134.
37. Brussilowski, “Beeinflussung der neuropsychischen Sphäre,” 463–64.
38. Brussilowski, “Beeinflussung der neuropsychischen Sphäre,” 444.
39. Brussilowski, “Beeinflussung der neuropsychischen Sphäre,” 470.
40. Simson, “Psychische und psychotische Reaktionen,” 134.
41. Menand, The Metaphysical Club, 138. 
42. Quoted in Palm and Carroll, Illusions of Safety, 14.
43. James, “Mental Effects of the Earthquake,” 209, 211–14. On James’s evolutionary 
thought, see Richards, Emergence of Evolutionary Theories, 409–50; on James and the 
1906 earthquake, see Solnit, Paradise Built in Hell, 49–57.
44. Baelz, “Ueber Emotionslähmung,” 718, emphasis added.
45. “Bericht über die Jahresversammlung des Vereins der deutschen Irrenärzte in Berlin,” 
Psychiatrische Wochenschrift 1901: 65–68, on 66.
46. Stierlin, “Nervöse und psychische Störungen nach Katastrophen,” 2032.
47. Jaspers, Allgemeine Psychopathologie, 305–7.
48. Cannon, The Wisdom of the Body.
296 / Notes to Pages 128–135

49. Heim, “Notizen über den Tod durch Absturz,” 335.
50. Matus, Shock, Memory, and the Unconscious, 7.
51. Baelz, “Über Besessenheit.” 
52. Compare Samuel Prince in what is typically cited as the founding work of disaster 
studies: “Catastrophe opposes the tendency to eliminate from life everything that 
requires a calling forth of unusual energies.” Prince, Catastrophe and Social Change, 53.
53. “Wie ein Seismograph hatten seine empfindlichen Nerven die unterirdischen  
Erschütterungen schon dann verzeichnet, als andere sie noch völlig überhörten.” 
Heise, Erinnerungen an Aby Warburg, 56.
54. “Beide sind sehr empfindliche Seismographen, die in ihren Grundfesten beben, 
wenn sie die Wellen empfangen und weitergeben müssen.” Quoted in Krummel, 
Nietzsche und der deutsche Geist, 2:55.
55. “Man hält die Feder hin, wie eine Nadel in der Erdbebenwarte, und eigentlich sind 
nicht wir es, die schreiben; sondern wir werden geschrieben.” Frisch, Tagebuch 1946–
49, 19.
56. “Nach dem Erdbeben schlägt man auf die Seismographen ein. Man kann jedoch 
die Barometer nicht für die Taifune büßen lassen, falls man nicht zu den Primitiven 
zählen will.” Jünger, Strahlungen, 9.
57. “Den Ablauf der Geschehnisse zeichnen die ‘Stahlgewitter’ mit der ganzen Macht der 
Frontjahre am stärksten, ohne jedes Pathos geben sie das verbissene Heldentum des 
Soldaten wieder, aufgezeichnet von einem Menschen, der wie ein Seimograph alle 
Schwingungen der Schlacht auffängt.” Quoted in Esposito, Mythische Moderne, 320. 
58. “Die Feder ist aber nur ein seismographischer Griffel des Herzens. Erdbeben lassen 
sich damit festhalten, aber nicht vorhersagen.” Kafka quoted in Janouch, Conversa-
tions with Kafka, 47.
59. “Ich . . . denke mir den Verleger—wie soll ich sagen—etwa als Seismograph, der 
bemüht sein soll, Erdbeben sachlich zu registrieren. Ich will Aeusserungen der Zeit, 
die ich vernehme, soweit sie mir irgendwie wertvoll erscheinen, überhaupt gehört zu 
werden, notieren und für die Oeffentlichkeit zur Diskussion stellen. (Seismograph 
nicht Seismologe sein.)” Karl Kraus und Kurt Wolff Briefwechsel, 47.
60. “[Der Dichter] gleicht dem Seismographen, den jedes beben, und wäre es auf 
Tausende von Meilen, in Vibrationen versetzt. Es ist nicht, daß er unaufhörlich an 
alle Dinge der Welt dächte. Aber sie denken an ihn. Sie sind in ihm, so beherrschen 
sie ihn. Seine dumpfen Stunden selbst, seine Depressionen, seine Verworrenheiten 
sind unpersönliche Zustände, sie gleichen den Zuckungen des Seismographen, und 
ein Blick, der tief genug wäre, könnte in ihnen Geheimnisvolleres lesen als in seinen 
Gedichten.” Hofmannsthal, “Der Dichter und diese Zeit,” 34.
61. “Der Dichter erscheint als Zeiger, als Seismograph, von dem der Gewissenszustand 
seiner Umwelt abgelesen werden kann.” Hesse, Briefe, 178–79.
62. Huyssen, “Fortifying the Heart”; Herf, Reactionary Modernism.
63. Quoted in Huyssen, “Fortifying the Heart,” 16, emphasis added.
64. Jünger, Copse 125, 1.
65. Treitel, Science for the Soul, 141.
66. Quoted in Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 254.
67. Adams, Education of Henry Adams, 495; Shelley, Frankenstein, 47, 216; Nordau, De-
generation, 7.
68. Spector, Prague Territories, 110.
69. Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 255.
70. Bucholtz, “Vorwort,” n.p.
Notes to Pages 136–140 / 297

71. Jünger, “Über die Gefahr,” 16.
72. Long, “Ernst Jünger, Photography, Autobiography, and Modernity.” 
C h a p t er  s e ven
1. 
Mach, Analysis of Sensations, 155. 
2. 
Between 1867 and 1918, the two halves of the dual monarchy were bound by a joint 
army, common foreign policy and currency, and economic agreements, as well as by 
allegiance to the emperor. Within each half of the monarchy, burgeoning national 
movements competed for privileged positions, with the Czechs and Poles in Austria 
and the Croatians in Hungary winning limited concessions to independence. For 
historiographical discussion, see Coen, “Rise, Grubenhund”; for climatology as ex-
emplary of Habsburg science, see Coen, “Imperial Climatographies.” 
3. 
Kozák and Plešinger, “Regular Seismic Service,” 105; Lehner, Geschichte der Natur-
katastrophen, 143. 
4. 
Für Laibach.
5. 
   Wo gab’s Slovenen da, wo Deutsche, 
Wo Sprachenzwist und Kampf um Macht?
Nur Menschen gab es, bange, bleiche,
Nur Menschen, zitternd, angstverwirrt,
Nur Brüder, Einige und Gleiche—
Die nun das Unglück—coalirt.
 
“Naturlehre,” Der Floh, 21 April 1895.
6. 
Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 1:305–6.
7. 
Reprinted in Hochstetter, “Ueber Erdbeben,” 11.
8. 
Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 306.
9. 
Hantken, Erdbeben von Agram.
10. Skoko and Mokrovic´, Andrija Mohorovicˇic´, 94–95.
11. Neumayr, Erdgeschichte, 306.
12. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 5.
13. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 17
14. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 149–52.
15. “Das fürchterliche Getöse [tutnjava] begann mit der Erde und den Häuserern immer 
stärker und stärker zu schütteln” (Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 153). Getöse is com-
monly translated into English as “roar,” tutnjava as “boom.”
16. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 141.
17. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 289.
18. Spengler, “Franz Wähner,” 310.
19. Ash, “Wissenschaftspopularisierung.”
20. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 288.
21. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 288.
22. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 4.
23. Namely, the Styrian Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein and the Carinthian Naturhistor-
isches Landesmuseum.
24. Hoernes, “Erdbeben und Stoßlinien Steiermarks,” 1–2.
25. Albini, “Earthquakes in the Eastern Adriatic.” 
26. Quoted in Skoko and Mokrovic´, Andrija Mohorovicˇic´, 96.
27. Canaval, “Erdbeben von Gmünd”; Hoernes, “Erdbeben in Steiermark 1880.” 
28. Hoernes, Erdbebenkunde, 168.
29. Hoernes, “Erdbeben in Steiermark,” 114.
298 / Notes to Pages 140–149

30. E.g., Suess, Erdbeben Nieder-Österreichs; Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram; Faidiga, “Erdbe-
ben von Sinj.” 
31. Canaval, “Erdbeben von Gmünd,” 354, emphasis added.
32. Davison, Hereford Earthquake, 11.
33. Hoernes, Erdbeben-Theorie Falbs, 3.
34. Hochstetter, “Ueber Erdbeben.” The two lectures together raised nine hundred gul-
den for the victims.
35. Hochstetter, “Ueber Erdbeben,” 13. See too the popular lecture by geologist Franz 
Toula, “Ueber den gegenwärtigen Stand der Erdbebenfrage.” 
36. Wähner, Erdbeben von Agram, 4.
37. Günther Hamann observes that although Suess took a “German-Austrian stand-
point,” he advised tolerance and equality, and warned against “disdain for one’s 
neighbors” (Hamann, “Eduard Suess als liberaler Politiker,” 88–89).
38. A Buddhist proverb quoted by Suess in his 1888 rectorial address, “The Progress of 
the Human Race”; Hamann, “Eduard Suess als liberaler Politiker,” 93.
39. Neue Freie Presse, 21 July 1898
40. “Die Erde lebt und bebt—und jeder Stillstand bedeutet Weltentod.” “Erdbebenkatas-
trophen und ihre Ursachen,” 21. Reprinted in Die Erdbebenwarte 1908–9: 17–21,  
on 21.
41. Clerke, “Earthquakes and the New Seismology,” 312.
42. Quoted in Hamann, “Eduard Suess als liberaler Politiker,” 93.
43. Westermann, “Overcoming the Division of Labor.”
44. Suess, Über den naturgeschichtlichen Unterricht, 12. 
45. Hoernes, “Erdbeben in Steiermark,” 73.
46. Suess, Erdbeben von Laibach, 7.
47. Suess, Erdbeben von Laibach, 203.
48. Herscher, “Städtebau as Imperial Culture.”
49. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar.
50. Bettelheim, ed., Biographisches Jahrbuch und deutscher Nekrolog, 7:114.
51. “Zur Geschichte der Gründung der Erdbebenwarte in Laibach,” reprinted in Ham-
merl et al., Die Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik, 87.
52. See Belar’s flattering obituary for Joseph Suppan in Die Erdbebenwarte 2 (1902–3): 
99–100.
53. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar, 127.
54. On the emergence of German and Slovene identities through 1848, see Hösler, Von 
Krain zu Slowenien.
55. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar, 135.
56. See, for instance, his chart comparing three years of human and instrumental records 
in Laibacher Erdbebenstudien, Tafel II.
57. Belar, “Was erzählen uns die Erdbebenmesser,” 101.
58. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar.
59. Kozák and Plešinger, “Seismic Service.”
60. Commenda, “Aufruf zur Einsendung von Nachrichten über Erdbeben und andere 
seltene Naturereignisse,” 3.
61. Láska, “Die Erdbeben Polens,” 1–2.
62. Mojsisovics, “Allgemeiner Bericht und Chronik 1900,” 6.
63. Mojsisovics, “Allgemeiner Bericht und Chronik 1900,” 71.
64. Minutes of the Meeting of the Earthquake Commission, 1 October 1901, folder 2, 
carton 1, Archive of the Earthquake Commission, Austrian Academy of Sciences.
Notes to Pages 149–159 / 299

65. Minutes of the Meeting of the Earthquake Commission, 9 November 1900, folder 2, 
carton 1, Archive of the Earthquake Commission, Austrian Academy of Sciences.
66. For details see Coen, “Faultlines and Borderlands.” For the parallel case of imperial 
climatology see Coen, “Climate and Circulation in Imperial Austria.”
67. Kozák and Plešinger, “Seismic Service.”
68. Jan Surman (“Figurationen der Akademia”) refers to a “philosophy of science of 
small nations”: the principle that small nations contribute to world science not in 
spite of but by virtue of their unique histories and languages. 
69. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar, 87.
70. Vidrih and Mihelicˇ, Albin Belar, 149.
71. Mach, Analysis of Sensations, 155. Mach had previously cited earthquakes as events 
that disrupt the normal experience of gravity, producing a “sensation of constant 
ascent” and rendering useless a terrestrial system of coordinates. In the Analysis of 
Sensations Mach was concerned with earthquakes as a problem not of mechanical 
explanation but of observation.
72. Mach was a very active member at the time; Lotos 11 (November 1869): 165.
73. Mach, Analysis of Sensations, 19.
74. On other possible reasons for Mach’s resignation, see Blackmore, Ernst Mach, 80. 
Blackmore points out that such resignations were not common.
75. Daston and Galison, Objectivity.
76. Klotz, “Seismological Work in the Pacific,” 300.
77. Steve Fuller notes, “If Planck’s principle of unity was reduction, Mach’s was transla-
tion” (Thomas Kuhn, 118).
78. E.g., Woldrˇich, “Zemeˇtrˇesení v Pošumaví.” 
79. Montgomery, Science in Translation. 
80. See Coen, “Rise, Grubenhund.”
C h a p t er  e i ght
1. 
The official founding date of the ISA was 1904, but the association’s work began with 
the First International Seismological Conference held in Strasbourg, Germany, in 
April 1901. Far from representing a cross-section of the world or even of active scien-
tists, most members of the ISA came from German-speaking central Europe. Britain 
and France had both declined to send official delegates and, along with Austria and 
the United States, refused their support until 1906–8. Moreover, the selection of 
Strasbourg as the site of an international scientific organization could not but be 
perceived in geopolitical terms. Ever since Prussia had won Alsace from the French 
in 1871, Strasbourg had served as a theater for demonstrations of German cultural 
power. The premier English seismologist John Milne regarded Gerland’s bid to con-
trol global seismology as an insult to his own priority and expertise. He attempted 
to shame the British into backing his own network against Strasbourg’s, accusing 
his government of having “accepted shelter from a Continental aegis” by subscrib-
ing to the ISA (Milne, “Recent Earthquakes,” 593). At the insistence of the Russian 
and Japanese delegates to the 1901 meeting, the ISA was formed as an association 
of states rather than of scholars; it was thus an international organization in the lit-
eral sense. Marielle Cremer’s dissertation, “Seismik zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts,” 
gives the diplomatic and institutional history of the ISA; see too Kozák, “100-Year 
Anniversary” and Schweitzer, “Birth of Modern Seismology.” I will use the French 
spelling of Strasbourg since it is the familiar one today, but until 1918 the city was 
officially known by the German spelling, Straßburg or Strassburg.
300 / Notes to Pages 159–163

2. 
Gerland, “Die moderne seismische Forschung,” 148, 157. 
3. 
In other branches of environmental science in this period, international cooperation 
seemed to function smoothly. Crawford, Nationalism and Internationalism; Crawford 
et al., Denationalizing Science; Rozwadowski, “Internationalism, Environmental Ne-
cessity”; Anderson, Predicting the Weather; Edwards, A Vast Machine.
4. 
Vetter, introduction to Knowing Global Environments, 13.
5. 
Aubin et al., introduction to The Heavens on Earth. According to John Tresch, Arago 
envisioned a Humboldtian, democratic future for the observatory sciences (“The Da-
guerreotype’s First Frame”).
6. 
Gerland, foreword to the first issue of Beiträge zur Geophysik (1887), vi.
7. 
Sieberg, “Methoden der Erdbebenforschung,” 295.
8. 
Greene, Geology in the Nineteenth Century, esp. chapters 6 and 7. 
9. 
Gerland, “Die Kaiserliche Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung,” 465. For Gerland’s 
own perfunctory version of a macroseismic questionnaire, see Sieberg, Erdbebenkunde 
(1904), 259.
10. Montessus de Ballore, “Mémorandum pour la conférence sismologiques internation-
ale,” 134.
11. Cited in Bernard, “Erdbebenstudien des Grafen de Montessus de Ballore,” 133. 
12. Montessus de Ballore, “Les visées de la sismologie moderne,” 20. 
13. For inevitable constraints on the internationalization of disaster management, see 
Burton et al, Environment as Hazard, chapter 7.
14. Gerland, “Die moderne seismische Forschung,” 151. 
15. Gerland, “Die kaiserliche Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung,“ 433.
16. Gerland, foreword to the first issue of Beiträge zur Geophysik, xv.
17. Gerland, foreword to the first issue of Beiträge zur Geophysik , xxix. 
18. Gerland, “Die kaiserliche Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung,” 431.
19. Gerland, “Die moderne seismische Forschung,” 152.
20. Gerland, “Die moderne seismische Forschung,“ 152.
21. Quoted in Sieberg, Handbuch, 313.
22. Aubin et al., introduction to The Heavens on Earth, 7; see too the essays in that volume 
by Theresa Levitt and Ole Molvig. On industrial and military applications of seismol-
ogy in the First World War, see Cremer, “Seismik zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts,” 
193–208.
23. Jaehnike, “Das Gebäude der Kaiserlichen Hauptstation.”
24. Gerland, “Die kaiserliche Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung,” 427.
25. Gerland, “Moderne Erdbebenforschung,” 448. 
26. Gerland, “Moderne Erdbebenforschung,” 449. 
27. Montessus de Ballore, “Visées de la sismologie modern,” 12
28. Gould, Time’s Arrow, 67–70. Thanks to Andre Wakefield for this reference. 
29. Montessus de Ballore, “Introduction à un essai de description sismique,” 352.
30. Milne, “Seismological Observations and Earth Physics,” 2.
31. Quoted in Rudolph, Verhandlungen der Zweiten Internationalen Seismologischen Kon-
ferenz, 48.
32. Montessus de Ballore, “Géosynclinaux et Régions à Tremblements de Terre,” 244. 
33. Montessus de Ballore, “Physique du globe,” 609.
34. Westermann, “Eduard Suess’ The Face of the Earth.”
35. Austrian Academy of Sciences to Imperial Ministry for Religion and Education, 13 
November 1902, folder 678_4A, document 36277, Meteorological Institute Papers.
36. Suess, preface to Hobbs, On Some Principles of Seismic Geology, 220.
Notes to Pages 163–171 / 301

37. Leighly, “Methodologic Controversy in Nineteenth-Century German Geography,” 254.
38. Darwin, Descent of Man, 90, 230.
39. Boas, The Mind of Primitive Man, 13.
40. Gerland, Aussterben der Naturvölker, 123, 141. 
41. Zimmerman, Anthropology and Antihumanism, 11.
42. Gerland, “Immanuel Kant.”
43. Gerland, Anthropologische Beiträge, 1:iv.
44. Gerland, Anthropologische Beiträge, 424.
45. Sarton, “Secret History,” 191–92.
46. Montessus de Ballore, “Introduction à un essai de description sismique,” 333.
47. Montessus de Ballore, “Introduction à un essai de description sismique,” 333, 334.
48. Fréchet, “Past and Future of Historical Seismicity Studies,” 135. 
49. Rayward, introduction to European Modernism and the Information Society, 12. See too 
Krajewski, Zettelwirtschaft. 
50. Verhandlungen des Siebenten Internationalen Geographen Kongress, 202.
51. Von Kövesligethy, ed., Procès-Verbaux de l’Association Internationale de Sismologie  
1907, 23. 
52. Von Kövesligethy, ed., Procès-Verbaux de l’Association Internationale de Sismologie 1907, 
22, 195.
53. Forel, “A la Commission du Catalogue de l’Association sismologique internation-
ale,” 190–95. 
54. Sieberg, “Methoden der Erdbebenforschung,” 287.
55. “Réponse à la note ‘Denkschrift, betreffend die Herstellung der dem Zentralbureau 
übertragenen makroseismischen Kataloge,’” 198. 
56. Palazzo, “Projet de réforme du catalogue macrosismique,” 202–3. 
57. “Katalog der im Jahre 1903 bekannt gewordenen Erdbeben,” Gerlands Beiträge zur 
Geophysik, Ergänzungsband 3, Vorwort, xi. 
58. Montessus de Ballore, “Réponse à la note . . .,” 197, 198–99. 
59. Forster, “Bericht der Erdbebencommission für 1882/83,” 93.
60. Davison, “Scales of Seismic Intensity,” 104.
61. Apparently, ISA meetings were conducted primarily in French. The Hungarian repre-
sentative provided translations into French of remarks in German or English. One at-
tendee wryly noted that language posed a problem, since “becoming a seismological 
expert does not immediately make one a polyglot.” Berloty, “Bulletin Scientifique: 
Sismologie,” 872.
62. Sieberg, “Über die makroseismische Bestimmung der Erdbebenstärke,” 230.
63. Sieberg, “Über die makroseismische Bestimmung der Erdbebenstärke,” 231–35. 
64. Wood and Neumann, “Modified Mercalli Scale”; Musson, “The Comparison of Mac-
roseismic Intensity Scales.” 
65. Montessus de Ballore, “Earthquake Intensity Scales,” 230.
66. Rockwood, “Notes on American Earthquakes No. 15,” 7.
67. Townley and Allen, “Descriptive Catalog,” 1.
68. Montessus de Ballore, “Earthquake Intensity Scales,” 229.
69. Davison, “Scales of Seismic Intensity.”
70. Davison, “On Scales of Seismic Intensity” (1921), 129. 
71. Author’s conversation with Roger Musson, 29 July 2011; Davison, “On Scales of 
Seismic Intensity” (1921), 129.
72. Actes de la Conference internationale de bibliographie et de documentation (1908), 87. 
73. Lecointe, “Motion sur la publication annuelle de la bibliographie sismologique,” in 
302 / Notes to Pages 171–181

Verhandlungen der Intentionationalen Seismologischen Association 1906, 181–83, and 
discussion at the ISA transcribed in Verhandlungen 1907, 21–23.
74. Quoted and translated in van den Heuvel, “Building Society, Constructing Knowl-
edge,” 132.
75. Rayward, introduction to European Modernism. 
76. Quoted and translated in Rayward, introduction to European Modernism, 15.
77. Quoted and translated in Rayward, introduction to European Modernism, 16.
78. Bigourdan, “Classification bibliographique de la Sismologie actuelle.” 
79. Berloty, “Bulletin Scientifique: Sismologie,” 876.
80. This discussion draws on Bowker, Memory Practices, and Bowker, “Biodiversity Data 
Diversity.”
81. Guidoboni and Eben, Earthquakes and Tsunamis in the Past, chapter 10.
82. Rohr, “The Danube Floods and Their Human Response and Perception (14th to  
17th C).”
83. Discussion of Gerland, “Die moderne seismische Forschung,” 196. 
84. Von Kövesligethy, ed., Procès-Verbaux des séances de la deuxième conférence de la Com-
mission Permanente et de la première assemblée générale de l’Association Internationale de 
Sismologie réunie a la Haye du 21 au 25 septembre 1907, 192. 
85. Montessus de Ballore, “Les visées de la sismologie moderne,” 21. 
86. Calhoun, “The Imperative to Reduce Suffering.”
87. Montessus de Ballore, “Réponse à la note,” 199.
88. Pyenson, Cultural Imperialism, 39
89. Wiechert, “Entwurf einer Denkschrift über seismologische Beobachtungen in den 
Deutschen Kolonien,” 314. 
90. Schweitzer, “Birth of Modern Seismology”; see the list of stations in Schweitzer, “Old 
Seismic Bulletins to 1920,” table 1. 
91. Pyenson, Cultural Imperialism, 126–35.
92. Kaddoura, “A Tremendous Privilege,” 489; Barth, “Politics of Seismology.”
93. Tilley, Africa as a Living Laboratory; Cremer, “Seismik zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhun-
derts,” 118; Crawford, Nationalism and Internationalism. 
C h a p t er  n i ne
1. 
Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake of June 29, 1925,” 256.
2. 
Buckle, History of Civilization in England, 71.
3. 
Congressman Abram S. Hewitt, quoted in Sachs, Humboldt Current, 254.
4. 
Shaler, “The Stability of the Earth,” 270. For the many sides of Shaler’s thought—util-
itarian, romantic, conservationist, racist—see Livingstone, Nathanial Southgate Shaler 
and the Culture of American Science; see too Kingsland, Evolution of American Ecology, 
and Hones, “Distant Disasters, Local Fears.” On disasters in California, see Davis, 
Ecology of Fear.
5. 
Shaler, The Story of Our Continent, 246.
6. 
Shaler, “The Stability of the Earth,” 269, 267, 268.
7. 
Shaler, “California Earthquakes,” 351–60, on 359.
8. 
Hones, “Distant Disasters, Local Fears,” 185; Rozario, Culture of Calamity.
9. 
Nash, Inescapable Ecologies, 53–54.
10. Geschwind, California Seismology; Meltsner, “Public Communication”; Steinberg, 
Acts of God, chapter 2; Proctor and Schiebinger, eds., Agnatology.
11. Meltsner, “Communication of Scientific Information”; Geschwind, California Earth-
quakes, 12–18.
Notes to Pages 181–189 / 303

12. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 17.
13. Soulé et al., The Annals of San Francisco, 165.
14. Kevles, The Physicists, 49.
15. S¸engör, The Large-Wavelength Deformations of the Lithosphere, 225.
16. Sachs, Humboldt Current, chapter 7.
17. Whitney, “Earthquakes,” 608. 
18. Whitney, “Owen’s Valley Earthquake.”. 
19. Reprint from San Francisco Bulletin in Boston Advertiser, 5 June  1872, box 1, book 1, 
Rockwood Papers (concerning the 17 May earthquake).
20. Stearns, “Dr. John B. Trask, a Pioneer of Science on the West Coast,” 243.
21. Trask, Report on the Geology of the Coast Mountains, and Part of the Sierra Nevada: Em-
bracing Their Industrial Resources in Agriculture and Mining, 8.
22. Trask, “Earthquakes in California, 1812–1855.”
23. Trask, “Earthquakes in California in 1856,” 342. 
24. See Aldrich et al., “The ‘Report’ of the 1868 Haywards Earthquake.” 
25. Twain, Roughing It, 423.
26. Huber, “The San Francisco Earthquakes of 1865 and 1868,” 270.
27. Huber, “The San Francisco Earthquakes of 1865 and 1868,” 266.
28. Rowlandson, Treatise on Earthquake Dangers, 58.
29. Rowlandson, Treatise on Earthquake Dangers, 95.
30. Rowlandson, Treatise on Earthquake Dangers, 57.
31. Fleming, Meteorology in America, 1800–1870, 81–93.
32. Abbe to Rockwood, 19 August 1884, box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers.
33. Unknown to Rockwood, 17 February 1887, box 2, book 4, Rockwood Papers.
34. Kafka et al., “Earthquake Activity in the Greater New York City Area: Magnitudes, 
Seismicity, and Geologic Structures.” 
35. Contained in box 3, Rockwood Papers; see Rockwood, “Notes on American Earth-
quakes, No. 14.”
36. “Miscellaneous Scientific Intelligence,” American Journal of Science 28, no. 165 (Sep-
tember 1884): 242.
37. New York Herald, 12 August 1884, 3.
38. New York Herald, 12 August 1884, 4.
39. New York Herald, 12 August 1884, 4.
40. New York Herald, 12 August 1884, 4.
41. Abbe to Rockwood, 19 August 1884, box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers.
42. Powell to Rockwood, 12 November 1884, box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers.
43. “Washington Letter,” Science 6 (1885): 491–92, on 492. 
44. New York Herald, 14 November 1884, 12.
45. Davis, “The Work of the Swiss Earth-Quake Commission,” on 197.
46. Heim to Rockwood, n.d., received January 1885; Heim to Rockwood, 5 March 1885, 
box 2, book 3, Rockwood Papers.
47. Vetter, “Regional Development of Science”; biographical sketches of cooperative ob-
servers are included in Hinrichs, Report of the Iowa Weather Service 1886. 
48. Hinrichs, Report of the Iowa Weather Service 1886, 14.
49. Hinrichs, First Annual Report of the Iowa Weather Stations; Alter, “The Cooperative 
Weather Bureau Observers of Utah.” Only observers involved with telegraphic net-
works were paid a small sum (Jeremy Vetter, e-mail to author, 20 July 2011). 
50. Alter, “The Cooperative Weather Bureau Observers of Utah,” 273. 
51. Compare Vetter, “Lay Observers, Telegraph Lines, and Kansas Weather,” 268.
304 / Notes to Pages 189–198

52. Hinrichs, Report of the Iowa Weather Service 1886, 16.
53. Vetter, “Lay Observers, Telegraph Lines, and Kansas Weather: The Field Network as a 
Mode of Knowledge Production,” 264.  
54. Pietruska, “Looking Forward.” See too Goldstein, “⁜‘Yours for Science.’⁜”
55. Bauer, “Monthly Meteorological Reports of Volunteer Observers,” 174.
56. Hinrichs, First Annual Report of the Iowa Weather Stations. 
57. Hinrichs, Fifth Biennial Report of the Central Station of the Iowa Weather Service, 13.
58. Francis Nipher to Charles Rockwood, 9 August 1880, box 1, book 2, Rockwood  
Papers.
59. Alter, “The Cooperative Weather Bureau Observers of Utah,” 273.
60. H. Dow to Rockwood, 21 January 1881, box 1, book 2, Rockwood Papers.
61. Fleming, Meteorology in America, 162.
62. The Signal Service had been “unfriendly to State Service work” in the 1870s (Nipher, 
“The Missouri Weather Service: Shall It Be Sustained as a State Service?,” 340); in 
the 1880s, however, under H. A. Hazen and Horace Greeley, the state services en-
joyed “liberal and hearty co-operation” (Annual Report of the Iowa Weather and Crop 
Service for the Year 1890 [Des Moines: Ragsdale, 1891], 6). The decentralization of 
the weather service continued when it passed to civilian hands at the Department of 
Agriculture in 1891.
63. Dutton and Hayden, “Abstract of the Results of the Investigation of the Charleston 
Earthquake.” 
64. Steinberg, Acts of God, 6.
65. Taber, “Seismic Activity in the Atlantic Coastal Plain,” 118.
66. McGee, “Some Features of the Recent Earthquake.” 
67. Dutton, Earthquakes in the Light of the New Seismology, iii.
68. “Notes,” Nature, 3 May 1888, 16.
69. Rockwood, “Notes on American Earthquakes No. 14,” 426.
70. Dutton and Hayden, “Abstract of the Results of the Investigation of the Charleston 
Earthquake,” 489, emphasis added.
71. Oldham, “The New Seismology: Two New Text-Books,” 321, emphasis added.
72. Holden, “Earthquakes in California (1888),”  392.
73. Holden, List of Recorded Earthquakes, 3. 
74. Holden, List of Recorded Earthquakes, 18. Holden had already published a proposed 
local warning system for tornadoes: Holden, “A System of Local Warnings against 
Tornadoes.” 
75. Osterbrock, “The Rise and Fall of Edward S. Holden: Part 2,” 172.
76. Rothenberg, “Organization and Control: Professionals and Amateurs in American 
Astronomy, 1899–1918,” 308.
77. Quoted in Neubauer, “A Short History of the Lick Observatory,” 369.
78. Holden, “The Work of an Astronomical Society,” 13.
79. Holden, “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them,” 759.
80. Holden, “Earthquake Observations,” 73.
81. Holden, “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them,” 749.
82. Holden, “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them,” 750.
83. Holden, “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them,” 758.
84. Maximum velocity 
, Maximum acceleration
π
=
                       =
2
2 a
                     V
V
t
                     a  (a = maximum displace-
ment or amplitude). Holden, “Note on Earthquake-Intensity in San Francisco.” 
85. Holden, A Catalogue of Earthquakes on the Pacific Coast, 1769–1897, 22.
Notes to Pages 198–207 / 305

86. As, for instance, Harry O. Wood did in 1911: “By acceleration is meant the rate of 
change of speed in the motion of the earth particles. It will be obvious after a little 
thought that it is not either a rapid motion of the earth particles nor a slow mo-
tion which produces the oversetting of objects and the wrecking of structures on the 
earth’s surface—because, for example, there is no effect of this sort in a rapidly but 
uniformly moving train nor in a vehicle moving with a slow, uniform speed—but 
it is a sudden, rapid change from a very slow speed or from absolute rest at one in-
stant to a relatively rapid velocity at the instant following, or vice versa. It is change 
of speed, bringing inertia into action, which produces earthquake damage, and the 
rate of change of speed is the acceleration.” Wood, “The Observation of Earthquakes: 
A Guide for the General Observer,” 61.
87. See Mendenhall, “On the Intensity of Earthquakes, with Approximate Calculations 
of the Energy Involved.” 
88. Mendenhall, “On the Intensity of Earthquakes,” 190–95. 
89. Neubauer, “A Short History of the Lick Observatory,” 370.
90. Neubauer, “A Short History of the Lick Observatory,” 370.
91. Osterbrock, “The Rise and Fall of Edward S. Holden: Part 2,” 171.
92. Reid, “Records of Seismographs in North America and the Hawaiian Islands.” 
93. Tarr and Martin, “Recent Change of Level in Alaska.”
94. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 15. 
95. Martin, “Recent Changes of Level in the Yakutat Bay Region, Alaska,” 45. 
96. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 26, 62.
97. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 27, 15, 16.
98. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 17.
99. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 64.
100. Gilbert, preface to Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 9.
101. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 63.
102. Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, 63.
103. Hobbs, review of Martin, “Alaskan Earthquake of 1899,” 96.
104. Martin, “Alaskan Earthquake of 1899,” 405.
105. Tarr and Martin, “Recent Change of Level in Alaska,” 42.
C h a p t er  t e n
1. 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/revolution.php, accessed 5 June  
2010. 
2. 
Meltsner, “Public Communication”; Geschwind, California Earthquakes; Rozario, 
Culture of Calamity; Steinberg, Acts of God.
3. 
This is one lesson of Peter Galison’s Image and Logic, which argues, against Thomas 
Kuhn’s concept of paradigm shifts, that theory, experiment, and instruments rarely 
change at once.
4. 
Wood to Byerly, 12 March 1928, box-folder 14.6, Wood Papers.
5. 
Box-folder 24.13, Wood Papers.
6. 
Hough, Richter’s Scale, 60. 
7. 
Goodstein, “Seismology Comes to Southern California,” 206.
8. 
Quoted in Hough, Richter’s Scale, 51.
9. 
Wood, “Earthquakes in Southern California, Part 1.” 
10. Wood to Buwalda, 1938, quoted in Goodstein, “Waves in the Earth,” 230.
11. Solnit, A Paradise Built in Hell, 36–37. On the 1906 earthquake’s role in shaping 
306 / Notes to Pages 207–216

twentieth-century forms of international aid, see Hutchinson, “Disasters and the In-
ternational Order.”
12. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 2, 374.
13. Gilbert, “San Francisco Earthquake,” 97.
14. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 2:4.
15. Winchester, A Crack in the Edge of the World, 270.
16. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 2:3.
17. McAdie, “Muir of the Mountains,” 20.
18. Quoted in Rozario, Culture of Calamity, 113.
19. Norris, Noon, 24
20. Atherton’s advice is quoted in Rozario, Culture of Calamity, 101; see too Solnit, Paradise 
Built in Hell, 13–70; Rozario, Culture of Calamity, 101–33. Atherton, Sisters-in-Law, 8.
21. Genthe, As I Remember , 88.
22. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 2, 374.
23. Branner, “Geology and the Earthquake,” 66.
24. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 2, 380.
25. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 2:48.
26. Richter and McAdie, “Phenomena Connected with the San Francisco Earthquake,” 
505.
27. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 2, 377.
28. Omori, “Seismic Experiments.” 
29. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 2:22.
30. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 2, 321.
31. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, vol. 1, pt. 1, 4, 162, emphasis added.
32. Lawson, California Earthquake of April 18, 1906, 2:49–56.
33. Byerly, review of the 1969 edition of the Lawson Report, 2089.
34. Rozario traces the effects of the earthquake on urban planning in San Francisco (Cul-
ture of Calamity, 75–100). 
35. Austin, “The Temblor: A Personal Narration,”  359.
36. Quoted in Sachs, Humboldt Current, 340.
37. Kroeber, “Earthquakes,” 322–23; Barrett, “Indian Opinions of the Earthquake of 
April, 1906,” 324–25.
38. Chamberlin, “Letter to George Darwin, June 30, 1906,” 66; quoted in part in Oreskes, 
Rejection of Continental Drift, 132.
39. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 36.
40. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 7.
41. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 7–8.
42. See Jeremy Vetter’s insightful review of Geschwind’s book: Environmental History 7 
(2002): 701–2.
43. Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific; Sierra Club Bulletin.
44. Townley, “John Casper Branner,” 1.
45. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 40.
46. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 41–42.
47. “The Seismological Society of America,” Science 25 (1907): 437.
48. Byerly, “History of the Seismological Society of America.” 
49. Koelsch, “Alexander McAdie.”
50. Branner, “Earthquakes and Structural Engineering,” 3.
51. Branner to W. H. Hobbs, 15 February 1911, box 9, 30:453, Branner Papers. In 1909, 
Notes to Pages 217–227 / 307

fifteen Jesuit colleges across the United States formed the Jesuit Seismological Ser­
vice, but they showed little interest in enlisting the “laity”—in either the religious or 
scientific sense. See Geschwind, “Embracing Science and Research.”
52. Branner to Taber, 27 March 1911, box 9, 31:53, Branner Papers.
53. Branner, How and Why Stories, vi.
54. Kevles, The Physicists, 104.
55. Branner, “Survey of the Coal Fields of Arkansas,” 537.
56. Branner, “The Policy of the U.S. Geological Survey,” 728.
57. Townley, “J. C. Branner.”
58. Branner, “Seismologic Work on the Pacific Coast,” 6.
59. Branner to Willis Moore, 23 February 1910, box 8, 28:264–66, Branner Papers. 
60. Branner to Frank Briggs, 5 March 1910, box 8, 29:88, Branner Papers. 
61. “To Foretell ‘Quakes,’” Washington Post, 15 May 1910. Walcott hinted at this inten-
tion in 1909, and he had consulted on the matter with Harry Reid in 1910 (Walcott, 
“Progress of the Smithsonian Institution,” 526; Branner to Andrew Palmer, 27 Au-
gust 1912, box 10, 33:216; on Walcott, see too Branner to Taber, 13 March 1914, box 
11, 36:181, Branner Papers).
62. “Topics of the Times,” New York Times, 28 August 1911, 6.
63. Kevles, The Physicists, 53.
64. Branner to Marvin, 13 May 1914, box 11, 36:310, Branner Papers.
65. Palmer, “Inauguration of Seismological Work.” 
66. Palmer, “California Earthquakes during 1918.”
67. Palmer, “California Earthquakes during 1916,” 1.
68. Palmer, “California Earthquakes during 1915,” 16.
69. Palmer, “California Earthquakes during 1919,” 4.
70. Humphreys, “Seismology,” 687.
71. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 46.
72. Branner to Chas. N. Gould, 18 September 1911, box 9, 31:289, Branner Papers.
73. Branner to J. S. Rossiter, 5 September 1911, box 9, 31:239, Branner Papers.
74. Branner to J. S. Rossiter, 13 September 1911, box 9, 31:272, Branner Papers.
75. Branner to Gordon Surr, 2 October 1911, box 9, 31:340, Branner Papers.
76. Templeton, “Central California Earthquake.” 
77. Branner, “Earthquakes and Structural Engineering,” 2.
78. Branner, “Earthquakes and Structural Engineering,” 5.
79. Carl S. Clemans to J. C. Branner, 26 February 1911, box 43, folder 203. 
80. Branner, “Earthquakes and Structural Engineering,” 4.
81. Beal, “The Earthquake in the Santa Cruz Mountains,” 215.
82. Beal, “The Earthquake in the Santa Cruz Mountains,” 215, 216.
83. Beal, “The Earthquake at Los Alamos, Santa Barbara County, California, January 11, 
1915,” 22.
84. Beal, “The Earthquake in the Imperial Valley, California, June 22, 1915,” 130, 148.
85. Beal, “The Earthquake in the Imperial Valley,” 132.
86. Taber, “The Los Angeles Earthquakes of July, 1920,” 66; Geschwind, California Earth-
quakes, 50–51.
87. Taber et al., “The Earthquake Problem in Southern California,” 285.
88. Taber, “Los Angeles Earthquakes of July, 1920,” 67, 75.
89. Taber, “Los Angeles Earthquakes of July, 1920”; Taber et al., “Earthquake Problem  
in Southern California,” 283, 287. He mentioned Chile, Japan, Russia, and  
England.
308 / Notes to Pages 228–235

90. Distefano, “Disasters, Railway Workers, and the Law in Avalanche Country, 1880–
1910.”
91. On reinforced concrete, and on boosterism after 1906, see Geschwind, California 
Earthquakes, 28–31.
92. Quoted in Mulholland, William Mulholland and the Rise of Los Angeles, 131.
93. Taber et al., “Earthquake Problem in Southern California,” 297.
94. Taber et al., “Earthquake Problem in Southern California,” 289–93.
95. Hamlin to Lawson, 10 July 1906, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, 
http://bancroft.berkeley.edu/.
96. Hamlin, “Earthquakes in Southern California,” 20.
97. Townley, “The San Jacinto Earthquake of April 21, 1918,” 56.
98. “Aftershocks of the San Jacinto Earthquake, from Data Collected by Homer Hamlin 
of Los Angeles, California,” 132, 133.
99. Townley, “San Jacinto Earthquake”; Rolfe and Strong, “The Earthquake of April 21, 
1918 in the San Jacinto Mountains”; Arnold, “Topography and Fault System of the 
Region of the San Jacinto Earthquake.”
100. Rolfe, “The Southwest Section of the Seismological Society of America,” 5.
101. Taber et al., “Earthquake Problem in Southern California,” 298.
102. See Friedman, Appropriating the Weather, 97–137.
103. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 55.
104. Kevles, The Physicists, 110.
105. “The American Meteorological Society,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Soci-
ety 1 (1920): 1–6, on 1, 5.
106. Marvin, “Foreword: Co-Operative Observers’ Department.” 
107. Shepard, “Dear Fellow Co-Ops.” 
108. Donald R. Whitnah states incorrectly that responsibility for collecting felt reports 
from cooperative observers remained with the Weather Bureau. Whitnah, A History 
of the United States Weather Bureau, 164.
109. http://www.lib.noaa.gov/noaainfo/heritage/coastandgeodeticsurvey/Joneschapter 
.pdf.
110. Jones, Earthquake Investigation in the United States, 5.
111. Maher, “The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey—Its Work in Collecting Earth-
quake Reports in the State of California,” 78
112. Maher, “The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey,” 79.
113. Wood, “California Earthquakes,” 62.
114. Harry O. Wood, “The Observation of Earthquakes: A Guide for the General Ob-
server,” 49, 51, 52, 62.
115. Wood, “Earthquake Reports.” 
116. Wood, “Observation of Earthquakes.”
117. Apple, “Thomas A. Jaggar, Jr., and the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory.” 
118. Wood, “Concerning the Perceptibility of Weak Earthquakes and Their Dynamical 
Measurement.” 
119. Wood, “Concerning the Perceptibility of Weak Earthquakes,” 38.
120. Oldham, “The Depth of Origin of Earthquakes,” 74.
121. Wood, “The Observation of Earthquakes: Second Paper,” ms., n.d. (post-1942), 
Wood Papers, emphasis added.
122. Wood, “A Further Note on Seismometric Bookkeeping”; Wood, “‘Regional’ vs. 
‘World’ Seismology in Relation to the Pacific Basin”; Wood, “The Earthquake Prob-
lem in the Western United States,” 209.
Notes to Pages 236–245 / 309

123. Goodstein, Millikan’s School, 134.
124. Wood, “Earthquake Problem in Western United States,” 201.
125. Wood, “‘Regional’ vs. ‘World’ Seismology,” 382.
126. Goodstein, Millikan’s School, 131. Oreskes, “Weighing the Earth from a Submarine: 
The Gravity Measuring Cruise of the U.S.S. S-21,” 65 and 66.
127. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 59, 64.
128. Wood to E. A. Beals, 20 June 1921, Wood Papers.
129. Wood, “California Earthquakes,” 64.
130. Byerly to Wood, 7 March 1928; Byerly to Wood, 14 December 1929; Byerly to Wood, 
4 December 1931; Wood to Byerly, 7 December 1931.
131. Note that noninstrumental observations had not been on the agenda for the Car­
negie’s Advisory Committee on Seismology; nor had Wood systematically collected 
felt reports on Hawaii. Wood, “The Study of Earthquakes in Southern California”; 
Wood, “The Earthquake Problem in the Western United States”; Wood, “The Seismic 
Prelude to the 1914 Eruption of Mauna Loa,” 40. Geschwind (California Earthquakes, 
98–99) treats Wood’s outreach as simple propaganda.
132. Wood, “Earthquake Reports,” 62.
133. Wood to Byerly, 23 May 1927, box-folder 14.7
134. Wood, “Earthquake Reports,” 65–68.
135. Waters, “Memorial to Bailey Willis (1857–1949)”; Geschwind, California Earth-
quakes, 67–96.
136. “Santa Barbara’s ‘Quake,’” Los Angeles Times, 8 September 1883, 3.
137. Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake of June 29, 1925,” 256.
138. Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake,” 275; Geschwind, California Earth-
quakes, 76–7.
139. Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake,” 264
140. Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake,” 263.
141. Willis, “Coöperation,” 120.
142. Willis, “Coöperation,” 120. On Willis’s involvement in the conservation movement, 
see Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 67.
143. Willis, “Essays on Earthquakes,” 35–36.
144. Willis, “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake,” 261, emphasis added.
145. Willis, “The Next Earthquake,” 379.
146. Wood, “Earthquake Reports,” 60.
147. Wood, “Earthquake Reports,” 61, 62, emphasis in original.
148. Wood to Byerly, 26 September 1927, Wood Papers, box-folder 14.7.
149. Wood to Byerly, 12 November 1927, box-folder 14.7.
150. Byerly to Wood, 14 November 1927, box-folder 14.7.
151. Wood to Byerly, 23 May 1927, box-folder 14.7.
152. Wood to Byerly, 5 March 1928, box-folder 14.6.
153. Wood to Byerly, 12 March 28, box-folder 14.6.
154. Byerly to Wood, 22 March 1930, box-folder 14.6
155. Byerly to Wood, 13 April 1928, box-folder 14.6
156. Byerly to Wood, 13 April 1928, box-folder 14.6; see too Bolt, “Memorial: Perry  
Byerly (1897–1978),” BSSA 69 (1979): 928–45, on 932.
157. Byerly to Wood, 5 July 27, box-folder 14.7
158. Wood to Byerly, 7 July 1927, box-folder 14.7
159. Louderback, in Bolt, “Memorial: Perry Byerly,” 934.
310 / Notes to Pages 245–253

160. Bolt, “Memorial: Perry Byerly,” 934.
161. Bolt, “Memorial: Perry Byerly,” 935.
162. Byerly to Wood, 19 November 1930, box-folder 14.6.
163. Byerly, “Northern California Earthquakes, April 1932–1933,” 117.
164. Wood to Byerly, 20 February 1930, box-folder 14.6.
165. “Members of the Seismological Society of America: December 20, 1921,” BSSA 11 
(1921): 205–17.
166. Wood to Mrs. M. Sweet, 29 October 1925, and letters from Sweet to Wood, box-
folder 3.1.
167. Wood to Lawrence F. Cook, 24 December 1932, box-folder 14.6.
168. Wood to R. W. Lohman, 26 September 1933, box-folder 14.6.
169. Warne, “Earthquake Waves.” 
170. Gutenberg et al., “The Earthquake in Santa Monica Bay, California, on August 30, 
1930.” 
171. Wood, “Earthquake Reports.” 
172. Wood to Byerly, 10 March 1930, box-folder 14.6.
173. A copy of the text is included in Wood to Byerly, 6 February 1930, box-folder 14.6.
174. Byerly to Wood, 19 March 1930, box-folder 14.6; Wood to Byerly, 22 April 1930, 
box-folder 14.6.
175. Wood to Byerly, 25 March 1928, box-folder 14.6.
176. Wood to Byerly, 20 February 1930, box-folder 14.6.
177. Harry O. Wood and Frank Neumann, “Modified Mercalli Scale of 1931.”
178. “Discussion of President McAdie’s Address.” McAdie responded that Marvin had “an 
unnecessarily gloomy outlook regarding instruments,” 189.
179. Oldham, “The Depth of Origin of Earthquakes,” 73, 74.
180. Charles Richter, interview by Ann Scheid, Pasadena, CA, 15 February–1 Septem-
ber 1978, Oral History Project, California Institute of Technology Archives, http:// 
resolver.caltech.edu/CaltechOH:OH_Richter_C, 19, accessed 10 June 2010.
181. Hough, Richter’s Scale, 212–40.
182. Wood to Byerly, 20 February 1930, box-folder 14.6.
183. The canonical interpretation of the origins of the Richter scale is Goodstein, “Waves 
in the Earth: Seismology Comes to Southern California,” which is based on Richter’s 
publications and on Scheid’s interview.
184. Richter interview, 33.
185. See Byerly, “Seismic Intensity Scales.”
186. Wood to Byerly, 23 July 1928, box-folder 14.6.
187. Wood to Byerly, 26 March 1930, box-folder 14.6.
188. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 105.
189. Wood, “Preliminary Report on the Long Beach Earthquake,” 51.
190. Wood to Los Angeles Times, 4 May 1933, A4
191. Richter, “An Instrumental Magnitude Scale,” 14.
192. Byerly, “History of the Seismological Society of America.” 
193. Quoted in Cecic´ et al., “Do Seismologists Agree upon Epicentre Determination from 
Macroseismic Data? A Survey of ESC Working Group ‘Macroseismology,” 1015.
194. Goodstein, Millikan’s School, chapter 7.
195. Knopoff, “Beno Gutenberg,” 131.
196. Quoted Goodstein, “Waves in the Earth,” 230.
197. Quoted Goodstein, “Waves in the Earth,” 213.
Notes to Pages 253–263 / 311

198. Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 118.
199. Wood, “The Observation of Earthquakes: Second Paper,” ms., n.d. (post-1942).
200. Burton et al., Environment as Hazard, 2nd ed., 34.
201. Byerly, “Seismic Intensity Scales.”
C o nc l u s i o n
1. 
Davis, Late Victorian Holocausts, chapter 7; Nash, Inescapable Ecologies; Abbasi, Ameri-
cans and Climate Change, 24.
2. 
For example, a 1973 article on seismic risk aimed at an engineering audience opened 
with the observation, “The technological age in which we live is marked among other 
things by large structures, construction of which would have been impossible just 
half a century ago.” Wohnlich, “Erdbebenprognose und seismisches Risiko,” 1139.
3. 
Musson and Henni, “Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Mapping,” 385; Lapajne, “MSK 
Intensity Scale and Seismic Risk.” 
4. 
Ina Cecic´, e-mail to author, 18 November 2010.
5. 
“First AB Workshop on Macroseismic Methods,” Polycˇe, Slovenia, 9–11 May 1989; 
thanks to Ina Cecic´ for providing a scan of the workshop proceedings.
6. 
Ina Cecic´, e-mails to author, 18 November 2010 and 2 February 2011. An impor-
tant question for macroseismological research today is how best to use an observed 
intensity distribution to locate the fault that caused the tremor. See Cecic´ et al., “Do 
Seismologists Agree?”
7. 
Tertulliani et al., “Unification of Macroseismic Data Collection Procedures”; Musson, 
“Intensity and Intensity Scales”; author’s conversation with Roger Musson, 29 July  
2011.
8. 
The International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale User’s Manual, 1.  On Fuku-
shima, see, e.g., “Fukushima Crisis Raised to Level 7, Still No Chernobyl,” http://
www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2011/04/fukushima-crisis-raised-
to-lev.html, accessed 19 July 2011.
9. 
Geschwind, California Earthquakes, 142.
10. Gyorgy, No Nukes, 120–21.
11. Kautz, Opening the Inner Eye, 3.
12. Kautz, Opening the Inner Eye, 182.
13. Tributsch, When the Snakes Awake.
14. Fan, “‘Collective Monitoring, Collective Defense.’”
15. Tributsch, When the Snakes Awake, 131.
16. Fan, “‘Collective Monitoring, Collective Defense;’” I thank Fa-ti Fan for clarifying this 
point in conversation.
17. Fan, “‘Collective Monitoring, Collective Defense.’”
18. Dengler and Dewey, “Households Affected by the Northridge Earthquake,” 444.
19. “Trial over Earthquake in Italy Puts Focus on Probability and Panic,” New York Times, 
4 October 2011.
20. Cornell, “Engineering Seismic Risk Analysis.” 
21. Fortun, “From Bhopal to the Informating of Environmentalism,” 285.
22. Mileti, “Public Perceptions of Seismic Hazards,” 18, emphasis added. 
23. Meltsner, “Communication of Scientific Information,” 343, 345, 331. 
24. Goltz, “Science Can Save Us,” 492.
25. Wynne, “Strange Weather,” 300.
312 / Notes to Pages 264–274

26. “Language therapy” is a concept associated with Wittgenstein, but Steve Fuller argues 
convincingly that it also describes Mach’s goals, for instance, his engagement with 
forms of “folk science.” Fuller, Thomas Kuhn, 119.
27. Canguilhem, “The Living and Its Milieu,” 27.
28. Shaler, “The Stability of the Earth,” 259. 
29. Button, Disaster Culture.
30. http://geology.about.com/od/quakemags/a/didyoufeelit.htm, accessed 14 February 
2012; http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/dyfi/background.php, accessed 24 
January 2011. See too Allen, “Transforming Earthquake Detection.”
31. Jung, “Experiences Concerning the Psychic Life of the Child,” 140, 144. For the bio-
graphical context, see Bair, Jung.
32. Jung, “Experiences Concerning the Psychic Life of the Child,” 141.
33. This recalls the Austrian painter Alfred Kubin’s response to a proposed treatment for 
his depressive delusions: “They want to take away my fear, but it is my only asset!” 
(Dittmar, “Mein Kapital: Die Angst!”)
34. Only in its second generation did psychoanalysis begin to acknowledge the sensitiv-
ity of psychic health to the natural environment. As the Hungarian analyst Michael 
Balint observed, “without water it is impossible to swim, without earth impossible 
to move on.” Quoted in Sedgwick, “The Weather in Proust.” 
35. Kraus, “Erdbeben” (1910), 5, emphasis added. 
36. Kraus, “Nestroy und die Nachwelt. Zum 50. Todestag,” 16.
37. Quoted in Hamann, “Eduard Suess.”
Notes to Pages 274–278 / 313


Bi b liography
A r c h i v a l  C o l l e c t i o n s
Charles Greene Rockwood Collection on Earthquakes, Princeton University Library,  
Princeton, NJ
Christian Brügger Papers, Graubünden Canton Federal Archive, Chur, Switzerland
Darwin Correspondence Project, www.darwinproject.ac.uk
Earthquake Commission Papers, 1895–1919, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna
John Casper Branner Papers, Stanford University Archives, Stanford, CA
Hans Schardt Papers, Library of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich
Harry O. Wood Papers, California Institute of Technology Archives, Pasadena, CA
Meteorological Institute Papers, 1849–1914, General Administrative Archives, Austrian 
National Archives, Vienna
A b b r e v i a t i o n s
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America: BSSA
Verhandlungen der Schweizerischen Naturforschenden Gesellschaft: VSNG
P r i n t e d  S o u r c e s
Abbasi, Daniel R. 2006. Americans and Climate Change: Closing the Gap between Science and 
Action. http://environment.yale.edu/climate/americans_and_climate_change.pdf. Ac­
cessed 17 November 2011.
Adams, Henry. The Education of Henry Adams. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1918.
“Aftershocks of the San Jacinto Earthquake, from Data Collected by Homer Hamlin of Los 
Angeles, California.” BSSA 8 (1918): 131–34.
Agamben, Giorgio. 2005. State of Exception. Translated by Kevin Attell. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Albini, Paola. “A Survey of Past Earthquakes in the Eastern Adriatic.” Annals of Geophysics 
47 (2004): 675–703.
Alder, Ken. Engineering the Revolution: Arms and Enlightenment in France, 1763–1815. Prince­
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Aldrich, Michele L., Bruce A. Bolt, Alan E. Leviton, and Peter U. Rodda. “The ‘Report’ of the 
1868 Haywards Earthquake.” BSSA 76 (1986): 71–76.
Allen, Richard M. “Transforming Earthquake Detection?” Science 335 (2012): 297–98.

316 / Bibliography
Alter, J. Cecil. “The Cooperative Weather Bureau Observers of Utah.” Monthly Weather 
Review 40 (1912): 272–74.
Ambraseys, N. N., and C. F. Finkel. “Seismicity of Turkey and Neighbouring Regions, 
1899–1915.” Annales Geophysicae 5B, no. 6 (1987): 701–26.
“The American Meteorological Society.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 1 
(1920): 1–6.
Anderson, Katharine. “Mapping Meteorology.” In Intimate Universality: Local and Global 
Themes in the History of Weather and Climate, edited by James R. Fleming, Vladimir 
Jankovic, and Deborah R. Coen, 69–92. Sagamore Beach, MA: Science History Publi­
cations, 2006.
————. Predicting the Weather: Victorians and the Science of Meteorology. Chicago: University 
Chicago Press, 2005.
Anker, Peder. “Environmental History versus History of Science.” Reviews in Anthropology 
31 (2002): 309–22.
————. From Bauhaus to Ecohouse: A History of Ecological Design. Baton Rouge: Louisiana 
State University Press, 2010.
————. Imperial Ecology: Environmental Order in the British Empire, 1895–1945. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Apple, Russell A. “Thomas A. Jaggar, Jr., and the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory.” http://
hvo.wr.usgs.gov/observatory/hvo_history.html. Accessed 28 June 2010.
Arnold, Ralph. “Topography and Fault System of the Region of the San Jacinto Earth­
quake.” BSSA 8 (1918): 68–73.
Ash, Mitchell. “Wissenschaftspopularisierung und bürgerliche Kultur im 19. Jahrhundert. 
Essay-Rezension,” Geschichte und Gesellschaft 28 (2002), 322–34.
Atherton, Gertrude. The Sisters-in-Law. New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1921.
Aubert, Daniel. “La protection des blocs erratiques dans le canton de Vaud.” Bulletin de la 
Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles 79 (1989): 185–207.
Aubin, David, Charlotte Bigg, and H. Otto Sibum, eds. Introduction to The Heavens on 
Earth: Observatories and Astronomy in Nineteenth-Century Science and Culture. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
Austin, Mary. “The Temblor: A Personal Narration.” In The California Earthquake of 1906, 
edited by David Starr Jordan, 339–61. San Francisco: A.M. Robertson, 1907.
B., E. [Edgar Bérillon]. “Les névroses provoquées par les tremblements de terre.” Revue de 
l’Hypnotisme 4 (1905): 97–98.
Bachmann, Stefan. Zwischen Patriotismus und Wissenschaft: Die schweizerischen Naturschutz-
pionere (1900–1938). Zurich: Chronos, 1999.
Baelz, Erwin. “Über Besessenheit und verwandte Zustände.” Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft 
Deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte 78 (1906): 120–38. 
————. “Ueber Emotionslähmung.” Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie 58 (1901):  
717–21.
Bair, Deirdre. Jung: A Biography. New York: Little, Brown, 2003.
Bankoff, Greg. “The Historical Geography of Disaster: ‘Vulnerability’ and ‘Local Knowl­
edge’ in Western Discourse.” In Mapping Vulnerability, edited by Greg Bankoff, Georg 
Frerks, and Dorothea Hilhorst, 25–36.
Barrett, S. A. “Indian Opinions of the Earthquake of April, 1906.” Journal of American 
Folklore 19 (1906): 324–25.
Barrow, Mark. A Passion for Birds: American Ornithology after Audubon. Princeton, NJ: Prince­
ton University Press, 1998.

Bibliography / 317
Baudrillard, Jean. “Paroxysm: The Seismic Order.” European Graduate School. http://
www.egs.edu/faculty/jean-baudrillard/articles/paroxysm-the-seismic-order/ Accessed 
1 May 2008.
Barth, Kai-Henrik. “The Politics of Seismology: Nuclear Testing, Arms Control, and the 
Transformation of a Discipline.” Social Studies of Science 33 (2003): 743–81.
Bauer, J. W. “The Examination of Monthly Meteorological Reports of Volunteer Observers: 
Is It Desirable to Report Back to the Volunteer Observer the Errors and Irregularities 
Discovered in His Report?” In Proceedings of the Second Convention of Weather Bureau 
Officials (1901), edited by James Berry and W. F. R. Phillips, 172–75. Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1902.
Beal, Carl H. “The Earthquake at Los Alamos, Santa Barbara County, California, January 
11, 1915.” BSSA 5 (1915): 14–25. 
————. “The Earthquake in the Imperial Valley, California, June 22, 1915.” BSSA 5 
(1915): 130–49.
————. “The Earthquake in the Santa Cruz Mountains, California, November 8, 1914.” 
BSSA 4 (1914): 215–19.
Beck, Ulrich. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: Sage, 1992.
Belar, Albin. “Die jungsten amerikanischen Katastrophen im Lichte der modernen Erdbe­
benforschung.” Die Erdbebenwarte 6 (1907): 72–75.
————. “Erdbebenkatastrophen und ihre Ursachen.” Die Erdbebenwarte 8 (1909): 16–21.
————. Laibacher Erdbebenstudien. Ljubljana: Kleinmayr & Bamberg, 1899.
————. Obituary for Joseph Suppan. Die Erdbebenwarte 2 (1902–3): 99–100.
————. “Über die praktische Bedeutung der modernen Erdbebenforschung.” Erdbeben-
warte 8 (1908–9): 21–30.
————. “Was erzählen uns die Erdbebenmesser von den Erdbeben.” Die Erdbebenwarte 6 
(1906–7): 101–10.
Benjamin, Walter. “Der Erzähler: Betrachtungen zum Werk Nikolai Lesskows.” In Illumi-
nationen, 385–410. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1977. 
————. “Karl Kraus.” In Selected Writings: 1931–1934, vol. 2, edited by Michael W. Jen­
nings, Howard Eiland, and Gary Smith, 433–58. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1999.
————. “The Lisbon Earthquake.” In Selected Writings, vol. 2, part 2, edited by M. W. Jen­
nings et al., 536–42. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2010.
Bensaude-Vincent, Bernadette. “A Historical Perspective on Science and Its ‘Others.’” Isis 
100 (2009): 359–68.
“Bergschläge im Simplontunnel.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 64 (1914): 68–70.
“Bericht über die Jahresversammlung des Vereins der deutschen Irrenärzte in Berlin.” Psy-
chiatrische Wochenschrift 1901: 65–68.
Berloty, B. “Bulletin Scientifique: Sismologie.” Études 44 (1907): 870–87.
Bernard, F. M. “Erdbebenstudien des Grafen de Montessus de Ballore.” Die Erdbebenwarte 
1 (1902): 129–35.
Bettelheim, Anton, ed. Biographisches Jahrbuch und deutscher Nekrolog, vol. 7. Berlin: Georg 
Reimer, 1903.
Bigourdan, M. G. “Projet de classification bibliographique des matières qui constituent la 
sismologie actuelle.” Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des séances de l’Académie des Sciences 
144 (1907): 113–19.

318 / Bibliography
Billwiller, R. “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1899–1900.” VSNG 83 (1900): 166–68.
Blackmore, John T. Ernst Mach: His Work, Life, and Influence. Berkeley: University of Cali­
fornia Press, 1972.
Bluestone, Jamie Rae. “Why the Earth Shakes: Pre-Modern Understandings and Modern 
Earthquake Science.” PhD diss., University of Minnesota, 2010.
Boas, Franz. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: Macmillan, 1911.
Bolt, Bruce. “Memorial: Perry Byerly (1897–1978).” BSSA 69 (1979): 928–45.
Bourke, Joanna. Fear: A Cultural History. Emeryville, CA: Shoemaker & Hoard, 2005.
Bowker, Geoffrey C. “Biodiversity Data Diversity.” Social Studies of Science 30 (2000): 
643–83.
————. Memory Practices in the Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Branco, Wilhelm. Wirkungen und Ursachen der Erdbeben. Berlin: Gustav Schade, 1902.
Branner, John Casper. “Correspondence Relating to the Survey of the Coal Fields of Arkan­
sas.” Science 24 (1906): 532–37. 
————. “Earthquakes and Structural Engineering.” BSSA 3 (1913): 1–5.
————. “Geology and the Earthquake.” In The California Earthquake of 1906, edited by 
David Starr Jordan, 63–78. San Francisco: A. M. Robertson, 1907.
————. “The Policy of the U.S. Geological Survey and Its Bearing upon Science and Educa­
tion.” Science 24 (1906): 722–28.
————. “Suggested Organization for Seismologic Work on the Pacific Coast.” BSSA 1 
(1911): 5–8.
Brockmann-Jerosch, Marie, and Arnold and Helene Heim, Albert Heim: Leben und For­
schung. Basel: Wepf & Co., 1952.
Brown, Robert H. “The ‘Demonic’ Earthquake: Goethe’s Myth of the Lisbon Earthquake 
and Fear of Modern Change.” German Studies Review 15 (1992): 475–91.
Brush, Stephen G. “Discovery of the Earth’s Core.” American Journal of Physics 48 (1980): 
705–24.
Brussilowski, L. “Beeinflussung der neuropsychischen Sphäre durch das Erdbeben in der 
Krim 1927.” Zeitschrift für die gesammte Neurologie und Psychiatrie 116 (1928): 442–70.
Bucholtz, Ferdinand. “Vorwort.” In Der Gefährliche Augenblick: Eine Sammlung von Bildern 
und Berichten, edited by Ferdinand Bucholtz. Berlin: Junker und Dünnhaupt, 1931.
Buckle, Henry Thomas. History of Civilization in England, vol. 1, 2nd edition. New York: 
Appleton, 1860.
Burton, Ian, Robert W. Kates, and Gilbert White. The Environment as Hazard. 2nd edition. 
New York: Guilford Press, 1993.
Burton, Captain Richard. “The Volcanic Eruptions of Iceland in 1874 and 1875.” Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 9 (1875–76): 44–58.
Button, Gregory. 2010. Disaster Culture: Knowledge and Uncertainty in the Wake of Human 
and Environmental Catastrophe. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2010.
Byerly, Perry. “History of the Seismological Society of America.” BSSA 54 (1964): 1723–41.
————. “Northern California Earthquakes, April 1932–1933.” BSSA 1934: 115–17.
————. Review of the 1969 edition of the Lawson Report. BSSA 60 (1970): 2089–91.
————. “Seismic Intensity Scales.” BSSA 59 (1969): 1735.
Calhoun, Craig. “The Imperative to Reduce Suffering: Charity, Progress, and Emergencies 
in the Field of Humanitarian Action.” In Humanitarianism in Question: Power, Politics, 
Ethics, edited by Thomas G. Weiss and Michael Barnett, 73–97. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2008.
Canaval, Richard. “Das Erdbeben von Gmünd am 5. November 1881.” Sitzungsberichte der 
kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften IIa, vol. 86 (1882): 353–409.

Bibliography / 319
Canguilhem, Georges. “The Living and Its Milieu.” Translated by John Savage. Grey Room 
3 (2001): 6–31.
Cañizares-Esguerra, Jorge. “How Derivative Was Humboldt? Microcosmic Narratives in 
Early Modern Spanish America and the (Other) Origins of Humboldt’s Ecological 
Sensibilities.” In Nature, Empire, and Nation: Explorations in the History of Science in the 
Iberian World, 112–28. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2006.
Cannon, Susan Faye. Science in Culture: The Early Victorian Period. New York: Science His­
tory Publications, 1978.
Cannon, Walter Bradford. The Wisdom of the Body. New York: Norton, 1932.
Cantor, Geoffrey, and Michael J. S. Hodge, eds. Conceptions of Ether: Studies in the History of 
Ether Theories, 1740–1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Carment, Samuel. Scenes and Legends of Comrie and Upper Strathearn. Dundee: James P. 
Mathew & Co., 1882.
Cecic´, Ina, and Roger Musson. “Macroseismic Surveys in Theory and Practice.” Natural 
Hazards 31 (2004): 39–61.
Cecic´, Ina, Roger M. W. Musson, and Massimiliano Stucchi. “Do Seismologists Agree 
upon Epicentre Determination from Macroseismic Data.” Annali di Geofisca 39 (1996): 
1013–27.
Cisternas, Armando. “Montessus de Ballore, a Pioneer of Seismology: The Man and His 
Work.” Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 175 (2009): 3–7.
Chamberlin, Thomas C. “Letter to George Darwin, June 30, 1906.” In Science in America: 
A Documentary History 1900–1939, edited by Nathan Reingold and Ida H. Reingold. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Charcot, Jean-Martin. Leçons du Mardi à la Salpêtrière, vol. 1. Paris: Lecrosnier & Babé, 
1889.
Charvolin, Florian, André Micoud, and Lynn K. Nyhart, eds. Des sciences citoyennes? La 
question de l’amateur dans les sciences naturalists. Paris: Éditions de l’Aube, 2007.
Clancey, Gregory. Earthquake Nation: The Cultural Politics of Japanese Seismicity, 1868–1930. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.
Clark, William. Academic Charisma and the Origins of the Research University. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 2005.
Clerke, A. “Earthquakes and the New Seismology.” Edinburgh Review 201 (1905): 294–
312.
Clouzot, E. “Histoire et Météorologie.” Bulletin Historique et Philologique du Comité des 
Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques 1906: 117–35.
Coen, Deborah R. “Climate and Circulation in Imperial Austria.” Journal of Modern History 
82, no. 4 (December 2010): 839–75.
————. “Faultlines and Borderlands: Earthquake Science in Imperial Austria.” In The Na-
tionalization of Scientific Knowledge in the Habsburg Empire, 1848–1918, edited by Mitch­
ell Ash and Jan Surman. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2012. 
————. “Imperial Climatographies from Tyrol to Turkestan.” Climate and Cultural Anxi­
ety, edited by James Fleming and Vladimir Jankovic, Osiris 26 (2011): 45–65.
————. “Rise, Grubenhund: On Provincializing Kuhn.” Modern Intellectual History 9 
(2012): 109–26.
Cohen, Claudine, and Andre Wakefield. Introduction to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Pro-
togaea, edited by Claudine Cohen and Andre Wakefield, xiii–xlii. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2008.
Coit, Daniel Wadsworth. A Memoir. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1908.
Commenda, Hans. “Aufruf zur Einsendung von Nachrichten über Erdbeben und andere 

320 / Bibliography
seltene Naturereignisse.” Jahresberichte des Vereins für Naturkunde in Österreich ob der 
Enns zu Linz 36 (1907): 3–15.
Conboy, Martin. Journalism: A Critical History. London: SAGE, 2004.
Cooper, Alix. Inventing the Indigenous: Local Knowledge and Natural History in Early Modern 
Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Cornell, C. A. “Engineering Seismic Risk Analysis.” BSSA 58 (1968): 1583–1606.
Crawford, Elisabeth. Nationalism and Internationalism in Science, 1880–1939. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Crawford, Elisabeth, Terry Shinn, and Sverker Sörlin, eds. Denationalizing Science: The Con-
texts of International Scientific Practice. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993.
Cremer, Marielle. Seismik zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts—Internationalität und Disziplinbil-
dung. Berlin: ERS-Verlag, 2001.
Darwin, Charles. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, vol. 1. New York: 
Appleton, 1871.
————. Voyage of the Beagle. New York: Penguin, 1989.
“Das Erdbeben vom 26. Mai.” Intelligenzblatt, 28 May 1910, 6.
Daston, Lorraine, ed. Biographies of Scientific Objects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2000. 
————. “The Empire of Observation, 1600–1800.” In Daston and Lunbeck, Histories of 
Scientific Observation, 81–113.
————. “Life, Chances, and Life Chances.” Daedalus 137 (2008): 5–14.
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison. “The Image of Objectivity.” Representations 40 (1992): 
81–128.
————. Objectivity. Cambridge, MA: Zone Books, 2007.
Daston, Lorraine, and Elizabeth Lunbeck, eds. Histories of Scientific Observation. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Daum, Andreas. Wissenschaftspopularisierung im 19. Jahrhundert. Munich: R. Oldenbourg 
Verlag, 1998.
Dauncey, Mrs. Campbell. The Philippines: An Account of Their People, Progress, and Condi-
tion, vol. 15. Boston: J. B. Millet, 1910.
Davids, Karel. “River Control and the Evolution of Knowledge: A Comparison between Re­
gions in China and Europe, c. 1400–1850.” Journal of Global History 1 (2006): 59–79.
Davis, Mike. Ecology of Fear: Los Angeles and the Imagination of Disaster. New York: Metro­
politan Books, 1998.
————. Late Victorian Holocausts: El Niño Famines and the Making of the Third World. Lon­
don: Verso, 2001.
Davis, W. M. “The Work of the Swiss Earth-Quake Commission.” Science 5 (1885): 196–98.
Davison, Charles. “The Earthquakes of Comrie, in Perthshire.” Knowledge: A Monthly Jour-
nal of Science 6 (1909): 143–46.
————. “Earthquakes in Great Britain (1889–1914).” Geographical Journal 46 (1915): 
357–74.
————. “The Effects of an Observer’s Conditions on His Perception of an Earthquake.” 
Gerlands Beiträge zur Geophysik 8 (1907): 68–78.
————. “The Effects of Earthquakes on Human Beings.” Nature 63 (1900): 165–66.
————. The Founders of Seismology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1927.
————. The Hereford Earthquake of December 17, 1896. Birmingham: Cornish Brothers, 
1899.
————. A History of British Earthquakes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1924.

Bibliography / 321
————. “On Scales of Seismic Intensity and on the Construction and Use of Isoseismal 
Lines.” BSSA 11 (1921): 95–130.
————. “On the British Earthquakes of 1889.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 48 
(1890): 275–77.
————. “On the Comrie Earthquake of July 12, 1895, and on the Hade of the Southern 
Border Fault of the Highlands.” Geological Magazine 3 (1896): 75–79.
————. “Robinson Crusoe’s Earthquake: The Realism of  Defoe.” Times (London), 19 March  
1934, 17.
————. “Scales of Seismic Intensity.” Philosophical Magazine 50 (1900): 44–53.
Dawson, John W. “The Reception of Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems.” In Perspectives 
on the History of Mathematical Logic, edited by Thomas Drucker, 84–100. Boston: 
Birkhäuser, 1991.
Dean, Dennis R. “Robert Mallet and the Founding of Seismology.” Annals of Science 48 
(1991): 39–67.
De la Beche, Henry Thomas. How to Observe: Geology. London: Charles Knight, 1836.
Dengler, L. A., and J. W. Dewey. “An Intensity Survey of Households Affected by the 
Northridge, California, Earthquake of 17 January, 1994.” BSSA 88 (1998): 441–62.
Dettelbach, Michael. “Alexander von Humboldt between Enlightenment and Romanti­
cism.” Northeastern Naturalist 8 (2001): 9–20. 
————. “The Face of Nature.” Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedi-
cal Sciences 30 (1999): 473–504.
————. “Global Physics and Aesthetic Empire: Humboldt’s Physical Portrait of the Trop­
ics.” In Visions of Empire: Voyages, Botany, and Representations of Nature, edited by David 
Philip Miller and Peter Hanns Reill, 258–92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996. 
Dewey, James, and Perry Byerly. “The Early History of Seismometry (to 1900).” Bulletin of 
the Seismological Society of America 59: 183–227.
“Die Chemie der hohen Temperaturen.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 27 (1896): 133–35.
“Discussion of President McAdie’s Address.” BSSA 5 (1915): 177–89.
Di Stefano, Diana L. “Disasters, Railway Workers, and the Law in Avalanche Country, 
1880–1910.” Environmental History 14 (2009): 476–501.
Dittmar, Peter. “Mein Kapital: Die Angst!” Die Welt, 8 December 2000.
Dombois, Florian. “Über Erdbeben.” PhD diss., Humboldt University, 1998.
Dörries, Matthias. “Climate Catastrophes and Fear.” Climate Change 1 (2010): 885–89.
————. “Krakatau 1883: Die Welt als Labor und Erfahrungsraum.” In Welt-Räume. Ge-
schichte, Geographie und Globalisierung seit 1900, edited by Iris Schröder and Sabine 
Höhler, 51–73. Frankfurt am Main: Campus, 2005.
Dror, Otniel. “Seeing the Blush: Feeling Emotions.” In Daston and Lunbeck, Histories of 
Scientific Observation, 326–48.
Drummond, James. The Comrie Earthquakes. Perth: C. Paton, 1875.
————. “A Table of Shocks of Earthquake, from September 1839 to the End of 1841, Ob­
served at Comrie, Near Crieff.” Philosophical Magazine 20 (1842): 240–47.
Dunning, Frederick W. “The Story of the Earth: Exhibition at the Geological Museum, 
London.” Museum 26 (1974): 99–109.
Dutton, C. E., and Everett Hayden. “Abstract of the Results of the Investigation of the 
Charleston Earthquake.” Science 9 (1887): 489–501.
————. Earthquakes in the Light of the New Seismology. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 
1904.

322 / Bibliography
“The Earthquakes.” Times (London), 13 January 1885, 10.
Edwards, Paul N. A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of Global 
Warming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.
Eliot, George. Middlemarch: A Study of Provincial Life. New York: Harper & Brothers, 
1876.
Ella, Samuel. “Some Physical Phenomena of the South Pacific Island.” In Report of the 
Second Meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, 559–72. 
Sydney, 1890.
Endersby, Jim. Imperial Nature: Joseph Hooker and the Practices of Victorian Science. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Esposito, Fernando. Mythische Moderne: Aviatik, Faschismus und die Sehnsucht nach Ordung 
in Deutschland und Italien. Munich: Oldenbourg, 2011.
Exner, Franz Serafin. Der Schlichten Astronomia. Vienna: self-published, 1908.
“Experiences of Earthquakes in Great Britain.” Chambers’s Edinburgh Journal 9 (1841): 
58–59.
Faidiga, Adolf. “Das Erdbeben von Sinj am 2. Juli, 1898.” Mitteilungen der Erdbeben-Kommission  
der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien 17 (1903).
Falb, Otto. “Aus dem Leben Rudolf Falbs.” Heimgarten 29 (1905): 112–21.
Falb, Rudolf. Das Land der Inca. Leipzig: J. J. Weber, 1883.
————. Von den Umwälzungen im Weltall. Vienna: Hartlebens, 1880 and later editions.
Fan, Fa-ti. “‘Collective Monitoring, Collective Defense’: Science, Earthquakes, and Politics 
in Communist China.” Witness to Disaster: Earthquakes and Expertise in Comparative 
Perspective, special issue, edited by Deborah R. Coen, Science in Context 25 (2012): 
127–54. 
————. “Redrawing the Map: Science in Twentieth-Century China.” Isis 98 (2007): 524–38.
Favre, Louis. “Tremblement de terre observé à Fleurier en 1817.” Musée Neuchatelois 19 
(1883): 131–34.
Felsch, Philipp. Laborlandschaften: Physiologische Alpenreisen im 19. Jahrhundert. Göttingen: 
Wallstein, 2007.
Ferrari, Graziano, and Anita McConnell. “Robert Mallet and the ‘Great Neapolitan Earth­
quake’ of 1857.” Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 59 (2005): 45–64.
Fleming, James. Meteorology in America, 1800–1870. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1990.
Fleming, Paul. The Pleasures of Abandonment: Jean Paul and the Life of Humor. Würzburg: 
Königshausen & Neumann, 2006.
Fischer, Kuno. Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, vol. 3. Heidelberg: F. Bassermann, 
1869.
Forel, F. A. “A la Commission du Catalogue de l’Association Sismologique Internation­
ale.” In Procès-Verbaux des séances de la Troisième Conférence de la Commission Perma-
nente de l’Association Internationale de Sismologie . . . 1909, edited by R. de Kövesligethy, 
appendix XII, 190–95. Budapest: V. Hornyánsky, 1919.
————. Handbuch der Seenkunde. Allgemeine Limnologie. Stuttgart: Verlag von J. Engelhorn, 
1901.
————. Le Léman: Monographie limnologique. 3 vols. Lausanne: Librairie de l’Université, 
1892, 1895, 1901.
————. “Les tremblements de terre étudiés par la Commission Sismologique Suisse de 
novembre 1879 à fin décembre 1880.” Archives des sciences physiques et naturelles 6 
(1881): 461–94.
————. “Observations sur les tremblements de terre sentis récemment dans les canons de 
Vaud et de Neuchâtel.” Archives des sciences physiques et naturelles 6 (1881): 266–67.

Bibliography / 323
————. “Tremblement de terre du 30 décembre 1879.” In Jahrbücher des Tellurischen Ob-
servatoriums zu Bern, edited by A. Forster, 1–2. Bern, 1880. 
————. “Tremblement de terre du 30 décembre 1879.” Jahrbücher des Tellurischen Observa-
toriums zu Bern, edited by A. Forster, 14. Bern, 1880.
Forster, Aimé. “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1878–1879.” VSNG 62 (1879):  
112–18. 
————. “Bericht der Erdbeben-Commission, 1879–1880.” VSNG 63 (1880): 101–3.
————. “Bericht der Erdbebencommission für 1882/83.” VSNG 66 (1883): 92–94.
————. “Bericht der Erdbebenkommission.” VSNG 71 (1888): 126–28.
————. Die Schweizerischen Erdbeben in den Jahren 1884 und 1885. Bern: Stämpfli, 1887.
Fort, Charles. The Book of the Damned. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1919.
Fortun, Kim. “From Bhopal to the Informating of Environmentalism: Risk Communica­
tion in Historical Perspective.” Osiris 19 (2004): 283–96.
Fréchet, J. “Past and Future of Historical Seismicity Studies in France.” In Fréchet et al., 
Historical Seismology, 131–46. 
Fréchet, J., M. Meghraoui, and M. Stucchi, eds. Historical Seismology: Interdisciplinary Studies 
of Past and Recent Earthquakes. Dordrecht: Springer, 2008.
Friedländer, I. “Beiträge zur Geologie der Samoa-Inseln.” Abhandlungen der Bayerischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften II 24 (1910): 507–41.
Friedman, Robert Marc. Appropriating the Weather: Vilhelm Bjerknes and the Construction of 
a Modern Meteorology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989.
Frisch, Max. Tagebuch 1946–1949. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1950.
Früh, Johannes. “Bericht der Erdbebenkommission für das Jahr 1907/08.” VSNG 91 
(1908): 67–70. 
————. “Bericht der Erdbeben-Kommission für das Jahr 1913/14.” VSNG 96 1914:  
117–22.
————. “Ergebnisse fünfundzwanzigjähriger Erdbebenbeobachtungen in der Schweiz 
1880–1904.” VSNG 88 (1905): 144–49.
————. “Ueber die 30-jährige Tätigkeit der Schweizerischen Erdbebenkommission.” 
Jahresversammlung der Schweizerischen Naturforschenden Gesellschaft, vol. 1, Vorträge und 
Sitzungsprotokolle 94 (1911): 67–80. 
Fuchs, C. W. C. “Bericht über die vulkanische Ereignisse des Jahres 1871.” Neues Jahrbuch 
für Mineralogie, Geologie und Paläontologie 1872: 701–19.
Fuller, Steve. Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2000.
Für Laibach: Zum besten der durch die Erdbeben-Katastrophe im Frühjahre 1895 schwer betrof-
fenen Einwohner von Laibach und Umgebung. Vienna: Genossenschaft der Bildenden 
Künstler Wiens, 1895.
Galison, Peter. Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1997.
Gardner, Daniel. The Science of Fear. New York: Penguin, 2008.
Genthe, Arnold. As I Remember. New York: Reynal and Hitchcock, 1936.
Gerland, Georg. Anthropologische Beiträge. Halle: Max Niemayer, 1875. 
————. “Die Kaiserliche Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung in Strassburg und die mod­
erne Seismologie.” Gerlands Beiträge zur Geophysik 4 (1899): 427–72.
————. “Die moderne seismische Forschung.” In Verhandlungen des 7. Internationalen  
Geographen-Kongresses Berlin 1899, vol 2. Berlin: Kühl, 1901.
————. Foreword to Beiträge zur Geophysik 1 (1887).
————. “Die moderne Erdbebenforschung.” Deutsche Rundschau 96 (1898): 438–49.

324 / Bibliography
“Immanuel Kant, seine geographischen und anthropologischen Arbeiten.” Kant-Studien 
10 (1905):1–43; 417–547.
————. Über das Aussterben der Naturvölker. Leipzig: Friedrich Fleischer, 1868.
Geschwind, Carl-Henry. California Earthquakes: Science, Risk, and the Politics of Hazard Miti-
gation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001. 
————. “Embracing Science and Research: Early Twentieth-Century Jesuits and Seismol­
ogy in the United States.” Isis 89 (1998): 27–49.
Geyer, Martin H. Die verkehrte Welt: Revolution, Inflation und Moderne: München 1914–
1924. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1998.
Gilbert, Grove Karl. “The Investigation of the California Earthquake of 1906.” In The Cali-
fornia Earthquake of 1906, edited by David Starr Jordan, 215–56. San Francisco: A. M. 
Robertson, 1907.
————. Preface to Martin and Tarr, The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay.
Girard, Raymond de. La théorie sismique du deluge. Freiburg: Fragnière Frères, 1895.
Gisler, Monika. Göttliche Natur? Formationen im Erdbebendiskurs der Schweiz des 18. Jahrhun-
derts. Zurich: Chronos Verlag, 2007.
Gisler, Monika, Donat Fäh, and Domenico Giardini, eds. Nachbeben: Eine Geschichte der 
Erdbeben in der Schweiz. Bern: Haupt Verlag, 2008.
Gisler, Monika, Jan Kozák, and Jir˘í Vane˘k. “The 1855 Visp (Switzerland) Earthquake: 
A Milestone in Macroseismic Methodology?” In Fréchet et al., Historical Seismology, 
231–47. 
Gilbert, Grove Karl. “The Investigation of the San Francisco Earthquake.” Popular Science 
Monthly (1906): 97–115.
Goldstein, Daniel. “⁜‘Yours for Science’: The Smithsonian Institution’s Correspondents 
and the Shape of the Scientific Community in Nineteenth-Century America.” Isis 85 
(1994): 573–99.
Golinski, Jan. British Weather and the Climate of Enlightenment. Chicago: University of Chi­
cago Press, 2007.
Goltz, James D. “Science Can Save Us: Outreach as Necessity and Strategy.” Seismological 
Research Letters 74 (2003): 491–93.
Goodstein, J. R. Millikan’s School: A History of the California Institute of Technology. New 
York: Norton, 1991.
————. “Waves in the Earth: Seismology Comes to Southern California.” Historical Studies 
in the Physical Sciences 14 (1984): 201–30.
Gould, Stephen Jay. Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1987. 
Graves, John. “On Earth Currents.” Journal of the Society of Telegraph Engineers 2 (1873): 
102–23.
Gray, Malcolm. “The Highland Potato Famine of the 1840s.” Economic History Review 7 
(1955): 357–68.
Greene, Mott. Geology in the Nineteenth Century: Changing Views of a Changing World. Ith­
aca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982.
Guidoboni, Emanuela, and John E. Eben. Earthquakes and Tsunamis in the Past: A Guide to 
Techniques in Historical Seismology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Guinon, Georges. Les agents provocateurs de l’hystérie. Paris: De la Haye et Lecrosnier, 1889.
Gutenberg, B., C. F. Richter, and H. O. Wood. “The Earthquake in Santa Monica Bay, 
California, on August 30, 1930.” BSSA 22 (1932): 138–54.
Gyorgy, Anna. No Nukes: Everyone’s Guide to Nuclear Power. Boston: South End Press, 
1979.

Bibliography / 325
Hagner, Michael. “Psychophysiologie und Selbsterfahrung. Metamorphosen des Schwind­
els und der Aufmerksamkeit im 19. Jahrhundert.” In Aufmerksamkeiten. Archäologie der 
literarischen Kommunikation VII, edited by Aleida Assmann and Jan Assmann, 241–63. 
Munich: Fink, 2001.
Hamann, Günther, ed. “Eduard Suess als liberaler Politiker.”
————. Eduard Suess zum Gedenken. Vienna: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1983. 
Hamblyn, Richard. The Invention of Clouds: How an Amateur Meteorologist Forged the Lan-
guage of the Skies. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001.
Hamlin, Homer. “Earthquakes in Southern California.” BSSA 8 (1918): 20–24.
Hammerl, Christa, and Wolfgang Lenhardt. Erdbeben in Österreich. Vienna: Leykam, 
1997.
Hammerl, Christa, et al., eds. Die Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik 1851–
2001: 150 Jahre Meteorologie und Geophysik in Österreich. Graz: Leykam, 2001.
“Hans von Hentig, Eighty Years Old.” Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Sci-
ence 58 (1967): 427.
Hantken, Miksa. Das Erdbeben von Agram im Jahre 1880. Budapest: Legrady, 1882.
Harwood, Christopher W. “Human Soul of an Engineer: Andrei Platonov’s Struggle with 
Science and Technology.” PhD diss., Columbia University, 2000.
Hecht, Gabrielle. “Introduction: The Power of Nuclear Things.” In Hecht, Being Nuclear: 
Africans and the Global Uranium Trade, 1–46. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Heck, André, ed. The Multinational History of Strasbourg Astronomical Observatory. Dor­
drecht: Springer, 2005.
Heesen, Anke te, ed. Cut and paste um 1900: Der Zeitungsausschnitt in den Wissenschaften. 
Berlin: Vice Versa, 2002.
Heim, Albert. “Bergsturz und Menschenleben.” Der Schweizer Geograph 8 (1931):  
126–28.
————. “Der Bergsturz von Elm.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Geologischen Gesellschaft 34 
(1882): 74–115. 
————. Die Erdbeben und deren Beobachtung. Zurich: Zürcher & Furrer, 1879.
————. “Einiges über den Stand der Erdbebenforschung.” In Comptes-Rendus des Séances 
de la Troisième Réunion de la Commission Permanente de l’Association Internationale de 
Sismologie Réunie à Zermatt, edited by R. de Kövesligethy, 146–50. Budapest: Victor 
Horyánszky, 1910.
————. “Notizen über den Tod durch Absturz.” Jahrbuch des Schweizer Alpenclub 27 
(1892): 327–37.
————. Sehen und Zeichnen. Basel: Benno Schwabe, 1894.
————. “Ueber die geologische Voraussicht beim Simplon-Tunnel. Antwort auf die An­
griffe des Herrn Nationalrat Ed. Sulzer-Ziegler.” Eclogae Geologicae Helvetiae 8 (1904): 
365–84.
————. “Zur Prophezeiung der Erdbeben.” Vierteljahrsschrift der Naturforschenden Gesells-
chaft in Zürich 32 (1887): 129–48.
Heim, Albert, et al. “Étude géologique sur le nouveau projet de tunnel coudé au travers du 
Simplon.” Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles 19 (1883): 1–27.
Heise, Carl Georg. Persönliche Erinnerungen an Aby Warburg. Edited by Björn Biester and 
Hans-Michael Schäfer. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2005.
Hennig, R. “Die Abhängigkeit des menschlichen Seelenlebens vom Wetter.” Gartenlaube 
37 (1912): 779–80.
Hentig, Hans. “Über die Wirkung von Erdbeben auf Menschen.” Archiv für Psychiatrie 69 
(1923): 546–68.

326 / Bibliography
————. Ueber den Zusammenhang von kosmischen, biologischen und sozialen Krisen. Tübin­
gen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1920.
Herbert, Christopher. Victorian Relativity: Radical Thought and Scientific Discovery. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Herf, Jeffrey. Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture, and Politics in Weimar and the 
Third Reich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Herschel, John, ed. Manual of Scientific Enquiry. 4th edition. London: John Murray, 1871.
Herscher, Andrew. “Städtebau as Imperial Culture: Camillo Sitte’s Urban Plan for 
Ljubljana.” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 62 (2003): 212–27.
Hesse, Hermann. Briefe. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1959.
Heuvel, Charles van den. “Building Society, Constructing Knowledge, Weaving the Web: 
Otlet’s Visualizations of a Global Information Society and His Concept of a Universal 
Civilization.” In European Modernism, edited by W. Boyd Rayward, 127–54. Aldershot: 
Ashgate, 2008.
Hilhorst, Dorothea, and Greg Bankoff. Introduction to Mapping Vulnerability: Disasters, 
Development and People, edited by Greg Bankoff, Georg Frerks and Dorothea Hilhorst. 
London: Earthscan, 2004.
Hinrichs, Gustavus. Fifth Biennial Report of the Central Station of the Iowa Weather Service. 
Des Moines, IA: Geo. E. Roberts, 1887.
————. First Annual Report of the Iowa Weather Stations. Des Moines, IA: R. P. Clarkson, 
1877.
————. Report of the Iowa Weather Service for the Year 1886. Des Moines, IA: Geo. E. Rob­
erts, 1887.
Hirsch, Francine. 2005. Empire of Nations: Ethnographic Knowledge and the Making of the 
Soviet Union. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hobbs, W. H. Review of Martin, “Alaskan Earthquake of 1899.” BSSA 2 (1912): 96–97.
Hochstetter, Ferdinand. “Ueber Erdbeben, mit Beziehung auf das Agramer Erdbeben vom 
9. November 1880.” Monatsblätter des Wissenschaftlichen Clubs in Wien 2, no. 3 (1880): 
1–14.
Hoefer, H. “Die Erdbeben Kärntens und deren Stosslinien.” Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften 42 (1880): 1–88.
Hoernes, Rudolf. “Das Erdbeben von Belluno am 29. Juni 1873 und die Falb’sche Erdbeben- 
Hypothese.” Mittheilungen des naturwissenschaftlichen Vereines für Steiermark 1877: 
33–45. 
————. “Das Erdbeben von Saloniki am 5. Juli 1902 und der Zusammenhang der makedo­
nischen Beben mit den tektonischen Vorgängen in der Rhodopemasse.” Mitteilungen der 
Erdbeben-Kommission der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien 13 (1902).
————. Die Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falbs und ihre wissenschaftliche Grundlage, kritisch 
erörtert. Vienna: Broackhausen und Bräuer, 1881.
————. “Erdbeben in Steiermark während des Jahres 1880.” Mittheilungen des naturwis-
senschaftlichen Vereines für Steiermark 1880: 65–114. 
————. Erdbebenkunde: Die Erscheinungen und Ursachen der Erdbeben, die Methoden ihrer 
Beobachtung. Leipzig: Veit & Co., 1893.
————. “Erdbeben und Stoßlinien Steiermarks.” Mittheilungen der k. k. Erdbebenkommis-
sion Neue Folge 7 (1902): 1–2.
Hoffman, Susanna M., and Anthony Oliver-Smith. “Anthropology and the Angry Earth: 
An Overview.” In Oliver-Smith and Hoffman, The Angry Earth, 1–16.
Hofmannsthal, Hugo von. “Der Dichter und diese Zeit.” In Die Prosaischen Schriften Gesam­
melt, 1:1–52. Berlin: Fischer, 1907.

Bibliography / 327
Holden, Edward S. A Catalogue of Earthquakes on the Pacific Coast, 1769–1897. Washington, 
DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1898. 
————. “Earthquake Observations.” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2 
(1890): 73–74.
————. “Earthquakes and How to Measure Them.” The Century 47 (1894): 749–59.
————. “Earthquakes in California (1888).” American Journal of Science 1889: 392–402.
————. List of Recorded Earthquakes in California, Lower California, Oregon, and Washington 
Territory. Sacramento, CA: J. D. Young, 1887.
————. “Note on Earthquake-Intensity in San Francisco.” American Journal of Science 35 
(1888): 427–31.
————. “A System of Local Warnings against Tornadoes.” Science 2 (1883): 521–22.
————. “The Work of an Astronomical Society.” Publications of the Astronomical Society of 
the Pacific 1 (1889): 9–20.
“Homo nobilis u. bête humaine.” Archiv für Kriminologie 27 (1906): 362–64.
Hones, Sheila. “Distant Disasters, Local Fears: Volcanoes, Earthquakes, Revolution, and 
Passion in the Atlantic Monthly, 1880–1884.” In American Disasters, edited by Steven 
Biel, 170–96. New York: NYU Press, 2001.
Hösler, Joachim. Von Krain zu Slowenien. Munich: Oldenbourg, 2006.
Hough, Susan E. Richter’s Scale: Measure of an Earthquake, Measure of a Man. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2007.
How and Why Stories. Recorded by John C. Branner. New York: Henry Holt, 1921.
Howell, Jr., Benjamin F. An Introduction to Seismological Research: History and Development. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Huber, Walter L. “The San Francisco Earthquakes of 1865 and 1868.” BSSA 20 (1930): 
261–72.
Huler, Scott. Defining the Wind: The Beaufort Scale, and How a Nineteenth-Century Admiral 
Turned Science into Poetry. New York: Random House, 2004.
Humboldt, Alexander von. Cosmos: A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe, vol. 1. 
Translated by E. C. Otté. London: Henry G. Bohn, 1848.
————. Personal Narrative of a Journey to the Equinoctal Regions of the New Continent. Trans­
lated by Jason Wilson. New York: Penguin, 1995.
————. Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of America. Translated by 
Thomasina Ross. London: Bohn, 1853.
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford: Clarendon, 1888.
Humphreys, W. J. “Seismology.” Monthly Weather Review 42 (1914): 687–89.
Hunt, Bruce. The Maxwellians. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.
Hutchinson, John F. “Disasters and the International Order: Earthquakes, Humanitarians, 
and the Ciraolo Project.” International History Review 22 (2000): 1–36.
Huyssen, Andreas. “Fortifying the Heart, Totally: Ernst Jünger’s Armored Texts.” Special 
Issue on Ernst Jünger, New German Critique 59 (1993): 3–23.
International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale User’s Manual. http://www-pub.iaea 
.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/INES-2009_web.pdf. Accessed 19 July 2011.
Irwin, Alan. Citizen Science: A Study of People, Expertise, and Sustainable Development. New 
York: Routledge, 1995.
J., H. “Charles Davison.” Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society 97 (1941): lxxxv–lxxxvi.
Jaehnike, Alfred. “Das Gebäude der Kaiserlichen Hauptstation für Erdbebenforschung zu 
Strassburg i. E.” Gerlands Beiträge zur Geophysik 4 (1900): 421–26.
James, William. “On Some Mental Effects of the Earthquake.” In Memories and Studies, 
209–26. New York: Longman, 1911.

328 / Bibliography
Jankovic´, Vladimir. Confronting the Climate: British Airs and the Making of Environmental 
Medicine. New York: Palgrave, 2010.
Janouch, Gustav. Conversations with Kafka. Translated by Goronwy Rees. New York: New 
Directions, 1971.
Janz, Rolf-Peter, Fabian Stoermer, and Andreas Hiepko. “Einleitung.” In Schwindeler-
fahrungen: Zur kulturhistorischen Diagnose eines vieldeutigen Symptoms, 7–45. 
Jaspers, Karl. Allgemeine Psychopathologie. 9th edition. Berlin: Springer, 1923.
Jennings, Eric. 2006. Curing the Colonizers: Hydrotherapy, Climatology, and French Colonial 
Spas. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Jones, E. Lester. Earthquake Investigation in the United States. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1925.
Jung, C. G. “Experiences Concerning the Psychic Life of the Child.” In Collected Papers 
on Analytical Psychology, edited by C. E. Long, 132–55. New York: Moffat Yard & Co., 
1916.
Jünger, Ernst. Copse 125. Translated by Basil Creighton. London: Chatto & Windus, 
1930. 
————. Strahlungen. Tübingen: Heliopolis, 1949.
————. “Über die Gefahr.” In Bucholtz, Der Gefährliche Augenblick, 11–16.
Kaddoura, Abdul-Razzak. “A Tremendous Privilege.” In Sixty Years of Science at UNESCO, 
ed. P. Petitjean, V. Zharov, G. Glaser, et al., 487–90. Paris: UNESO, 2006. 
Kafka, Alan L. “Public Misconceptions about Faults and Earthquakes in the Eastern United 
States: Is It Our Own Fault?” Seismological Research Letters 71 (2000): 311–12.
Kafka, Alan L., Ellyn A. Schlesinger-Miller, and Noel L. Barstow. “Earthquake Activity in 
the Greater New York City Area: Magnitudes, Seismicity, and Geologic Structures.” 
BSSA 75 (1985): 1285–1300.
Kant, Immanuel. “Geschichte und Naturbeschreibung der merkwürdigen Vorfälle des Erd­
bebens. . . .” In Kants gesammelte Schriften, 1:431–61. Berlin: Georg Reimer, 1902.
————. Physische Geographie, vol. 1, part 1. Mainz: Vollmer, 1801.
Kautz, William. Opening the Inner Eye: Explorations on the Practical Application of Intuition in 
Daily Life and Work. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 2003.
Keilhack, Konrad. Lehrbuch der praktischen Geologie. Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke, 1908.
Keller, Susanne B. “Sections and Views: Visual Representation in Eighteenth-Century 
Earthquake Studies.” British Journal for the History of Science 31 (1998): 129–59.
Kevles, Daniel J. The Physicists: The History of a Scientific Community in Modern America. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Kingsland, Sharon. Evolution of American Ecology, 1890–2000. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2005.
Kingsley, Charles. Madam How and Lady Why. New York: Macmillan, 1888.
Klotz, Otto. “Present Status of Seismological Work in the Pacific.” BSSA 10 (1920):  
300–310.
Knopoff, Leon. “Beno Gutenberg.” Biographical Memoirs (National Academy of Sciences) 
76: 115–47.
Koch, Julius. “Ursachen des Verfalles der Hochbauten.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 20 
(1892): 73–78.
Koelsch, William A. “Ben Franklin’s Heir: Alexander McAdie and the Experimental Analy­
sis and Forecasting of New England Storms, 1884–1892.” New England Quarterly 59 
(1986): 523–43.
Koerner, Lisbet. Linnaeus: Nature and Nation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1999.

Bibliography / 329
Komine, A., and A. Maki. “Psychiatric Observations of Earthquake Catastrophe of Tokyo 
and Vicinity.” Japanese Journal of Neurology and Psychiatry 1924.
Kövesligethy, Rado von, ed. Procès-Verbaux des séances de la deuxième conférence de la Com-
mission Permanente et de la première assemblée générale de l’Association Internationale de 
Sismologie réunie a la Haye du 21 au 25 septembre 1907. Budapest: V. Hornyanszky, 
1908. 
Kozák, J. “100-Year Anniversary of the First International Seismological Conference.” Stu-
dia Geophysica et Geodaetica 45 (2001): 200–209.
Kozák, J., and Vladimir Cˇermák. The Illustrated History of Natural Disasters. Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2010.
Kozák, J., and Axel Plešinger. “Beginnings of Regular Seismic Service and Research in the 
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.” Studia Geophysica et Geodaetica 47 (2003): 99–119, 
757–91.
Kozák, J., and J. Vaněk. “The 1855 Visp (Switzerland) Earthquake: Early Attempts of Earth­
quake Intensity Classification.” Studia Geophysica et Geodetica 50 (2006): 147–60.
Krajewski, Markus. Zettelwirtschaft. Berlin: Kadmos, 2002.
Kraus, Karl. “Antworten des Herausgebers: Geolog.” Die Fackel 4, no. 103 (1902): 20–22. 
————. “Das Erdbeben.” Die Fackel 9, no. 245 (1908): 16–24.
————. “The Discovery of the North Pole.” In In These Great Times: A Karl Kraus Reader, 
edited by Harry Sohn, translated by Joseph Fabry et al., 48–57. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1990.
————. “Erdbeben.” Die Fackel 10, no. 270 (1909): 45–48.
————. “Erdbeben.” Die Fackel 12, no. 303 (1910): 4–6.
————. “Messina.” Die Fackel 10, no. 273 (1909): 1–2.
————. “Nach dem Erdbeben.” Die Fackel 13, no. 338 (1911): 18–24.
————. “Nestroy und die Nachwelt. Zum 50. Todestag.” Die Fackel 14, no. 349 (1912): 
1–23.
Kraus, Karl, Kurt Wolf, and Friedrich Pfäfflin Zwischen. Jüngstem Tag und Weltgericht: Karl 
Kraus und Kurt Wolff Briefwechsel 1912–1921. Tübingen: Wallstein, 2007.
Kroeber, A. L. “Earthquakes.” Journal of American Folklore 19 (1906): 322–23.
Krummel, Richard Frank. Nietzsche und der deutsche Geist, vol. 2. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
1998.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd edition. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1970.
Lang, Andrew. The Book of Dreams and Ghosts. London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1899.
Lapajne, Janez. “The MSK Intensity Scale and Seismic Risk.” Engineering Geology 20 (1984): 
105–12.
Lasch, Richard. “Die Ursache und Bedeutung der Erdbeben im Volksglauben und Volks­
brauch.” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 5 (1902): 236–57, 369–83.
Láska, Wenzel. “Die Erdbeben Polens.” Mittheilungen der Erdbeben-Commission der k. k. 
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien Neue Folge 8 (1902): 1–2.
Latour, Bruno. We Have Never Been Modern. Translated by Catherine Porter. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Lauer, Gerhard, and Thorsten Unger. “Angesichts der Katastrophe: Das Erdbeben von Lis­
sabon und der Katastrophendiskurs im 18. Jahrhundert.” In Das Erdbeben von Lissabon 
und der Katastrophendiskurs im 18. Jahrhundert, edited by Lauer and Unger, 13–44. 
Göttingen: Wallstein, 2008.
Lawson, A. C. California Earthquake of April 18, 1906: Report of the State Earthquake Investi-
gation Commission. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution, 1908.

330 / Bibliography
Lecointe, G. “Motion sur la publication annuelle de la bibliographie sismologique.” In 
Verhandlungen der Internationalen Seismologischen Konferenz 1906, 181–83. Budapest: 
V. Hornyanszky, 1907.
Le Bon, Gustave. La psychologie des foules. 2nd edition. Paris: F. Alcan, 1896.
Lehner, Martina. “Und das Unglück ist von Gott gemacht . . .”: Geschichte der Naturkatastro-
phen in Österreich. Vienna: Praesens, 1995.
Leighly, John. “Methodologic Controversy in Nineteenth-Century German Geography.” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 28 (1938): 238–58.
“Les Tremblements de terre italiens.” Journal de Genève, 30 December 1908, 3.
Leuba, J. “Le professeur Hans Schardt: 1858–1931.” Bulletin de la Société Neuchâteloise des 
Sciences Naturelles 56 (1931): 106.
Linke, Friedrich. “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 
1905 und 1906.” In Wagner, “Das Samoa Observatorium,” 55–70.
Livingstone, David. Nathanial Southgate Shaler and the Culture of American Science. Tusca­
loosa: University of Alabama Press, 1987.
Locher, Eduard. “Zum Jungfraubahnproject von Oberst Locher.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 
15 (1890): 149–51.
Locher, Fabien. Le savant et la tempête: Étudier l’atmosphère et prévoir le temps au XIXe siècle. 
Rennes: Presses Universitaires, 2008.
Lombroso, Cesare. Crime, Its Causes and Remedies. Translated by Henry P. Horton. Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1911.
Lombroso, Paola, and Cesare Lombroso. “La Psicologia dei Terremotati.” Archivio di Antro-
pologica Criminale, Psychiatria, Medicina Legale e Scienze Affini 30 (1909): 122–30.
Long, J. J. “From Das Antlitz des Weltkrieges to Der gefährliche Augenblick: Ernst Jünger, 
Photography, Autobiography, and Modernity.” In German Life Writing in the Twentieth 
Century, edited by Birgit Dahlke, Dennis Tage, and Roger Woods, 54–70. Rochester, 
NY: Camden House, 2010.
Lovell, J. H. The Dr ATJ Dollar Papers Held in the National Seismological Archive. British Geolog­
ical Survey Technical Report WL/99/15. Edinburgh: British Geological Survey, 1999.
Lowe, E. J. “History of the Earthquake of 1863.” Proceedings of the British Meteorological 
Society 2 (1864): 55–99.
Luhmann, Niklas. Ecological Communication. Translated by John Bednarz, Jr. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 1989.
Mach, Ernst. Contributions to the Analysis of the Sensations. Translated by C. M. Williams. La 
Salle, IL: Open Court, 1897.
————. Lotos 11 (November 1869): 165.
Maher, Thomas J. “The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey—Its Work in Collecting 
Earthquake Reports in the State of California.” BSSA 19 (1929): 77–79.
Makowsky, A. “Ueber die Erdbeben-Theorie Rudolf Falb’s im Lichte der Geologie.” Ver-
handlungen des Naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn 25 (1886): 54–63.
Mallet, Robert. “Earthquakes.” In A Manual of Scientific Enquiry; Prepared for the Use of Of-
ficers in Her Majesty’s Navy; and Travellers in General, edited by John Herschel, 205–36. 
London: John Murray, 1851.
————. The First Principles of Observational Seismology, vol. 1. London: Chapman and Hall, 
1862. 
————. The First Principles of Observational Seismology, vol. 2. London: Chapman and Hall, 
1862.
————. “First Report on the Facts of Earthquake Phenomena.” In Report of the Twentieth 

Bibliography / 331
Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1–87. London: John 
Murray, 1851.
Mallet, Robert, and John William Mallet. The Earthquake Catalogue of the British Association. 
London: Taylor and Francis, 1858.
Markovits, Stefanie. “Rushing into Print: ‘Participatory Journalism’ during the Crimean 
War.” Victorian Studies 50 (2008): 559–86.
Marshall, Michael. “Fukushima Crisis Raised to Level 7, Still No Chernobyl.” 12 April 
2011. http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2011/04/fukushima-
crisis-raised-to-lev.html. Accessed 19 July 2011.
Marshall, Wallace. “Biological Reactions to Earthquakes.” Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology 30 (1936): 462–67.
Martin, Daniel S. “Notes upon the Earthquake of December, 1874.” American Journal of 
Science 10 (1875): 191–94.
Martin, L., and Ralph S. Tarr. “Alaskan Earthquake of 1899.” Bulletin of the Geological Soci-
ety of America 21 (1910): 339–406.
————. The Earthquakes at Yakutat Bay, Alaska, in September, 1899. USGS Professional 
Paper 69 (1919).
————. “Recent Changes of Level in the Yakutat Bay Region, Alaska.” Bulletin of the Geo-
logical Society of America 17 (May 1906): 29–64.
Marvin, C. F. “Foreword: Co-Operative Observers’ Department.” Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 3 (1922): 72–73.
Matus, Jill. Shock, Memory, and the Unconscious in Victorian Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2009.
Mauch, Christof, ed. Natural Disasters, Cultural Responses. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 
2009.
Mayer-Ahrens, Conrad. “Ueber die Beziehungen des Vulkanismus zur Gesundheit des 
thieri­schen Organismus.” Deutsche Klinik 31 (1857): 293–95, and 329–33.
Mazower, Mark. Governing the World: The Rise and Fall of an Idea since 1815. New York: 
Penguin, 2012.
Mazzotti, Massimo. “The Jesuit on the Roof: Observatory Sciences, Metaphysics, and Na­
tion Building.” In Aubin et al, The Heavens on Earth, 58–85.
McAdie, Alexander. “Muir of the Mountains.” John Muir Memorial, special issue, Sierra 
Club Bulletin, 10, no. 1 (January 1916): 20–22.
McCray, Patrick. Keep Watching the Skies! The Story of Operation Moonwatch and the Dawn of 
the Space Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008.
McGee, W. J. “Some Features of the Recent Earthquake.” Science 8 (24 September 1886): 
271–75.
McPhee, John. Annals of the Former World. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1998.
Meldola, Raphael, and William White. Report on the East Anglian Earthquake of April 22, 
1884. London: MacMillan & Co. and the Essex Field Club, 1885.
Meltsner, Arnold J. “The Communication of Scientific Information to the Wider Public: 
The Case of Seismology in California.” Minerva 17 (1979): 331–54.
————. “Public Support for Seismic Safety: Where Is It in California?” Mass Emergencies 
3 (1978): 167–84.
“Members of the Seismological Society of America: December 20, 1921.” BSSA 11 (1921): 
205–17.
Menand, Louis. The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America. New York: Farrar, Straus, 
& Giroux, 2001.

332 / Bibliography
Mendelsohn, J. Andrew. “The World on a Page: Making a General Observation in the Eigh­
teenth Century.” In Daston and Lunbeck, Histories of Scientific Observation, 396–420.
Mendenhall, T. C. “On the Intensity of Earthquakes, with Approximate Calculations of the 
Energy Involved.” Proceedings of the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
37 (1889): 190–95.
Menger, Karl. “The New Logic.” Philosophy of Science 4 (1937): 336.
Mercalli, Giuseppe. “Sulle modificazioni proposte alla scala sismica De Rossi-Forel.” Bol-
letino della Società Sismologica Italiana 8 (1902): 184–91.
Meyer, Theo. “Nietzsche und die klassische Moderne.” In Nietzsche und Schopenhauer: 
Rezeptionsphänomene der Wendezeiten, edited by Marta Kopij and Wojciech Kunicki, 
13–46. Leipzig: Leipziger Universitätsverlag, 2006.
Micale, Mark. Hysterical Men: The Hidden History of Male Nervous Illness. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2008.
Middendorf, Ernst W. Peru: Beobachtungen und Studien über das Land und seine Bewohner, 
vol. 1. Berlin: R. Oppenheim, 1893.
Mignani, Vincenzo Domenico. Review of De effectibus terraemotus in corpore humano. The 
Monthly Review 72 (1785): 526.
Mileti, Dennis S. “Public Perceptions of Seismic Hazards and Critical Facilities.” BSSA 72 
(1982): 13–18.
Miller, Mary Ashburn. 2011. A Natural History of Revolution: Violence and Nature in the 
French Revolutionary Imagination, 1789–1794. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Milne, David. “Notices of Earthquake-Shocks Felt in Great Britain, and Especially in Scot­
land, with Inferences Suggested by These Notices as to the Causes of Such Shocks.” 
Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal 31 (1841): 92–122.
————. Seismology. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., 1898. 
Milne, John. “The Earth in Its Vigour.” Times (London), 8 September 1883. 
————. Earthquakes and Other Earth Movements. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, & Co., 
1886.
————. “Earthquake Effects, Emotional and Moral.” Seismological Journal of Japan 11 
(1887): 91–113.
————. Letter. Times (London), 28 September 1881, 8
————. Letter. Times (London), 29 December 1896, 9.
————. “On the Study of Earthquakes in Great Britain” Nature 42 (1890): 346–49
————. “Prehistoric Remains from Otaru and Hakodate, Part I.” Transactions of the Asiatic 
Society of Japan 8 (1880): 61–73.
————. “Preliminary Notes on Observations Made with a Horizontal Pendulum in the 
Antarctic Regions.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 76 (1905): 284–95.
————. “Recent Earthquakes.” Nature 77 (1908): 592–97.
————. “The Recent Earthquake in Essex.” Times (London), 7 August 1884, 9.
————. “Seismological Observations and Earth Physics.” Geographical Journal 21 (1903): 
1–22.
————. “Seismology at the British Association.” Nature 88 (1911): 124–25.
Milne-Home, Grace. Biographical Sketch of David Milne Home. Edinburgh: David Douglas, 
1891.
“Miscellaneous Scientific Intelligence.” American Journal of Science 28, no. 165 (September 
1884): 242.
Mitman, Gregg, Michelle Murphy, and Christopher Sellers. “Introduction: A Cloud over 
History.” Landscapes of Exposure: Knowledge and Illness in Modern Environments, 
edited by Mitman, Murphy, and Sellers, Osiris 19 (2004): 1–17.

Bibliography / 333
Mojsisovics, Edmund von, ed. “Allgemeiner Bericht und Chronik der im Jahre 1900 im 
Beobachtungsgebiete eingetretenen Erdbeben.” Mittheilungen der Erdbeben-Kommission 
der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften Neue Folge 2 (1901).
Monatsblätter des Wissenschaftlichen Clubs in Wien 2, no. 2 (15 November 1880): 13.
Montaigne, Michel de. “Of Cannibals.” In The Complete Essays of Montaigne, translated by 
Donald Frame, 150–59. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1958.
Montessus de Ballore, Fernand. “Earthquake Intensity Scales.” BSSA 6 (1916): 227–31.
————. Ethnographie sismique et volcanique. Paris: E. Champion, 1923.
————. “Introduction à un essai de description sismique de globe et mesure de la sismi­
cité.” Gerlands Beiträge zur Geophysik 4 (1900): 331–82.
————. “Géosynclinaux et régions à tremblements de terre.” Bulletin de la Société Belge de 
Géologie, de Paléontologie et d’Hydrologie 18 (1904): 243–67.
————. “La Sismologia en la Biblia.” Boletin del Servicio Seismológico de Chile 11 (1915): 
27–158.
————. “La théorie sismico-cyclonique du déluge par Suess.” Revue des questions scienti-
fiques 26 (1902): 577–89.
————. Les visées de la sismologie moderne. Louvain: Polleunis & Ceuterick, 1904.
————. “Mémorandum pour la conférence sismologique internationale.” Verhandlungen 
der ersten internationalen seismologischen Konferenz, edited by E. Rudolph. Beiträge zur 
Geophysik, supplement (1902): 132–36.
————. “Physique du globe.” Revue Scientifique 20 (1903): 609–14.
————. “Réponse à la note ‘Denkschrift, betreffend die Herstellung der dem Zentralbu­
reau übertragenen makroseismischen Kataloge.’” In Procès-Verbaux des séances de la 
Troisième Conférence de la Commission Permanente de l’Association Internationale de Sis-
mologie réunie à Zermatt du 30 août au 2 septembre 1909, edited by R. de Kövesligethy, 
197–98. Budapest: V. Hornyánsky, 1919.
Montgomery, Scott. Science in Translation: Movements of Knowledge through Cultures and 
Time. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000
Morrell, Jack, and Arnold Thackray. Gentlemen of Science: Early Years of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science. Oxford: Clarendon, 1981.
Mousson, Albert. “Bericht über die Organisation meteorologischer Beobachtungen in der 
Schweiz.” VSNG 48 (1864): 196–312.
Muir, John. Our National Parks. Boston: Riverside, 1901.
Muir-Wood, Robert. “Robert Mallet and John Milne—Earthquakes Incorporated in Victo­
rian Britain.” Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics 17 (1988): 107–42.
Muir-Wood, Robert, and Charles Melville. “Who Killed the British Earthquake?” New Sci-
entist 100 (20 October 1983): 170–73.
Muir-Wood, Robert, G. Woo, and H. Bungum, “The History of Earthquakes in the Northern 
North Sea.” In Historical Seismograms and Earthquakes of the World, edited by W. H. K. 
Lee, H. Meyers, and K. Shimazaki, 297–306. San Diego: Academic Press, 1988.
Mulholland, Catherine. William Mulholland and the Rise of Los Angeles. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 2000.
Murphy, Michelle. Sick-Building Syndrome and the Problem of Uncertainty: Environmental Pol-
itics, Technoscience, and Women Workers. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006.
Musson, R. M. W. “The Comparison of Macroseismic Intensity Scales.” Journal of Seismol-
ogy 14 (2010): 413–28. 
————. “Comrie: A Historical Scottish Earthquake Swarm and Its Place in the History of 
Seismology. Terra Nova 5 (1993): 477–80.
————. “A Critical History of British Earthquakes.” Annals of Geophysics 47 (2004): 597–609.

334 / Bibliography
————. “Discovery of a Curious Seismological Monument from 19th Century Scotland.” 
Terra Nova 5 (1993): 513.
————. “From Questionnaires to Intensities—Assessing Free-Form Macroseismic Data in 
the UK.” Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Part A 24 (1999): 511–15.
————. “Seismicity: Fatalities in British Earthquakes.” Astronomy and Geophysics 44 (2003): 
14–16.
Musson, R. M. W., and I. Cecic´. “Intensity and Intensity Scales.” In New Manual of Seis-
mological Practice. International Association of Seismology and Physics of the Earth’s 
Interior, 2012.
Musson, R. M. W., Gottfried Grünthal, and Max Stucchi. “The Comparison of Macroseis­
mic Intensity Scales.” Journal of Seismology 14 (2010): 413–28.
Musson, R. M. W., and P. H. O. Henni. “Methodological Considerations of Probabilis­
tic Seismic Hazard Mapping.” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering 21 (2001): 
385–403.
Nash, Linda. Inescapable Ecologies: A History of Environment, Disease, and Knowledge. Berke­
ley: University of California Press, 2006.
“Naturlehre.” Der Floh, 21 April 1895.
Neubauer, Ferdinand J. “A Short History of the Lick Observatory.” Popular Astronomy 58 
(1950): 369–87.
Neumayer, Georg. Anleitung zu wissenschaftlichen Beobachtungen auf Reisen. 1st edition,  
vol. 1, 1875; 2nd edition, vol. 1. Berlin: Robert Oppenheim, 1888.
Neumayr, Melchior. Erdgeschichte. Leipzig: Bibliographisches Institut, 1887.
“New Theory of Earthquakes and Volcanoes.” Littell’s Living Age 102 (1869): 387–99.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life.” In Untimely 
Meditations, translated by R. J. Hollingdale, 120. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1983.
“1906 Marked the Dawn of the Scientific Revolution.” USGS. http://earthquake.usgs 
.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/revolution.php. Accessed 5 June 2010.
Nipher, Frances. “The Missouri Weather Service: Shall It Be Sustained as a State Service?” 
In Thirty-First Annual Report of the State Horticultural Society of Missouri, 1888, 340–44. 
Jefferson City, MO: Tribune, 1889.
Noakes, Richard J. “Telegraphy Is an Occult Art: Cromwell Fleetwood Varley and the Dif­
fusion of Electricity to the Other World.” British Journal for the History of Science 32 
(1999): 421–59.
Nordau, Max. Degeneration. New York: Appleton, 1895.
Norris, Kathleen. Noon: An Autobiographical Sketch. New York: Doubleday, 1925.
“Notes.” Nature 26 (4 May 1882): 16–18.
“Notes.” Nature 37 (3 May 1888): 16.
Nunn, Patrick D. “Fished Up or Thrown Down: The Geography of Pacific Island Origin 
Myths.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93 (2003): 350–64.
Nyhart, Lynn K. Modern Nature: The Rise of the Biological Perspective in Germany. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2009..
“Objects of the Society.” Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research 1 (1882–83): 3–6.
Oeser, Erhard. “Historical Earthquake Theories.” Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution & 
Cognition Research. 2001. http://www.univie.ac.at/wissenschaftstheorie/heat/heat 
.htm. Accessed 17 September 2010.
Oldham, Richard D. “The Depth of Origin of Earthquakes.” Quarterly Journal of the Geologi-
cal Society 82 (1926): 67–93. 
————. Oldroyd, David, Filomena Amador, Jan Kozák, et al. “The Study of Earthquakes 

Bibliography / 335
in the Hundred Years Following the Lisbon Earthquake of 1755.” Earth Sciences History 
26 (2007): 321–70.
Oliveira, C. S. “Review of the 1755 Lisbon Earthquake Based on Recent Analyses of His­
torical Observations.” In Fréchet et al., Historical Seismology, 261–300.
Oliver-Smith, Anthony, and Susanna M. Hoffman. The Angry Earth: Disaster in Anthropo-
logical Perspective. New York: Routledge, 1999.
Omori, Fusakichi. “Seismic Experiments on the Fracturing and Overturning of Columns.” 
Publications of the Earthquake Investigation Committee in Foreign Languages 4 (1900): 
69–141.
Oppenheim, Janet. The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research in England, 1850–
1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Orange, A. D. “The British Association for the Advancement of Science: The Provincial 
Background.” Science Studies 1 (1971): 315–29.
Oreskes, Naomi. The Rejection of Continental Drift: Theory and Method in American Earth 
Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
————. “Weighing the Earth from a Submarine: The Gravity Measuring Cruise of the 
U.S.S. S-21.” In The Earth, the Heavens and the Carnegie Institution of Washington, edited 
by Gregory A. Good, 53–68. Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union, 1994.
Orihara, Minami, and Gregory Clancey. “The Nature of Emergency: The Great Kanto 
Earthquake and the Crisis of Reason in Late Imperial Japan.” Witness to Disaster: 
Earthquakes and Expertise in Comparative Perspective, special issue, edited by Debo­
rah R. Coen, Science in Context 25 (2012): 103–26.
Orr, Jackie. Panic Diaries: A Genealogy of Panic Disorder. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2005.
Osterbrock, Donald E. “The Rise and Fall of Edward S. Holden: Part 2.” Journal of the His-
tory of Astronomy 15 (1984): 151–76.
Owen, Alex. The Darkened Room: Women, Power, and Spiritualism in Late Victorian England. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Palazzo, M. “Projet de réforme du catalogue macrosismique.” In Procès-Verbaux des séances 
de la Troisième Conférence de la Commission Permanente de l’Association Internationale de 
Sismologie réunie à Zermatt du 30 août au 2 septembre 1909, edited by R. de Kövesligethy, 
appendix XIV, 202–3. Budapest: V. Hornyánsky, 1910.
Palm, Risa, and John Carroll. Illusions of Safety: Culture and Earthquake Hazard Response in 
California and Japan. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1998.
Palmer, Andrew H. “California Earthquakes during 1915.” BSSA 6 (1915): 8–25.
————. “California Earthquakes during 1916.” BSSA 7 (1917): 1–17.
————. “California Earthquakes during 1918.” BSSA 9 (1918): 1–7.
————. “California Earthquakes during 1919.” BSSA 10 (1920): 1–8.
————. “The Inauguration of Seismological Work in the United States Weather Bureau.” 
BSSA 5 (1915): 63–71.
Pfister, Christian, ed. Am Tag danach. Zur Bewältigung von Naturkatastrophen in der Schweiz 
1500–2000. Bern: Haupt, 2002.
Phillips, Denise. “Friends of Nature: Urban Sociability and Regional Natural History in 
Dresden, 1800–1850.” Science and the City, Osiris 18 (2003): 43–59.
Phleps, Eduard. “Psychosen nach Erdbeben.” Jahrbücher für Psychiatrie und Neurologie 23 
(1903): 382–406.
Piccardi, L., and W. B. Masse, eds. Myth and Geology. London: Geological Society, 2007.
Pietruska, Jamie. “Looking Forward: Forecasting and the Making of Modern America.” 
Unpublished manuscript.

336 / Bibliography
Pinch, Adela. Strange Fits of Passion: Epistemologies of Emotion, Hume to Austen. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1996.
Poliwoda, Guido. Aus Katastrophen Lernen: Sachsen im Kampf gegen die Fluten der Elbe 1784 
bis 1845. Cologne: Böhlau, 2007.
Porter, Theodore. “How Science Became Technical.” Isis 100 (2009): 292–309.
————. Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1995.
Prince, Samuel. Catastrophe and Social Change: Based upon a Sociological Study of the Halifax 
Disaster. New York: Columbia University Press, 1920.
“Prof. Charles G. Rockwood.” Proceedings of the New Jersey Historical Society (1914):  
144–45.
Pyenson, Lewis. Cultural Imperialism and the Exact Sciences. New York: Lang, 1985.
Quenet, Grégory. Les tremblements de terre aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles: La naissance d’un ris-
que. Seyssel: Champ Vallon, 2005.
 Quervain, Alfred de. Die Erdbeben der Schweiz im Jahre 1909. Zurich: Schweizerischen 
meteorologischen Zentral-Anstalt, 1910.
————. “Die Erdbeben der Schweiz im Jahre 1910.” Annalen der schweizerischen meteorolo-
gischen Centralanstalt 47 (1910).
————. Die Erdbeben der Schweiz im Jahre 1912. Separatabdruck aus den Annalen der  
schweizerischen meteorologischen Centralanstalt, 1912.
————. “Erdbeben als Folge von Tunnelbau.” VSNG 96 (1914): 139–42.
————. “Über die Erdbeben von Wallis und der Schweiz und ihre seismographische Er­
forschung.” VSNG 104 (1923): 74–95.
Radovanovic´, S., and J. Mihailovic´. “Die Erdbeben in Serbien.” Annales Géologiques de la 
Péninsule Balkanique 6 (1911): 5–13.
Ratzel, Freidrich. Völkerkunde, vol. 1. Leipzig: Bibliographisches Institut, 1885.
Rayward, W. Boyd. Introduction to European Modernism and the Information Society, edited 
by Rayward. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.
Reid, Harry. “Records of Seismographs in North America and the Hawaiian Islands.” Ter-
restrial Magnetism and Atmospheric Electricity 10 (1905): 177–89.
Reitter, Paul. The Anti-Journalist: Karl Kraus and Jewish Self-Fashioning in Fin-de-Siècle Eu-
rope. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Report of the Iowa Weather and Crop Service for the Year 1890. Des Moines, IA: Ragsdale, 
1891.
Revkin, Andrew C. “On Elephants’ Memories, Human Forgetfulness, and Disaster.” New York 
Times, 12 August 2008, http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/08/12/on-elephants- 
memories-human-forgetfulness-and-disaster/?scp=2&sq=wisdom%20disaster&st=cse.
Richards, C. H. “Dr. C. Davison.” Nature, 25 May 1940, 805.
Richards, Robert J. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Behavior. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Richter, C. F. Interview with Ann Scheid. 15 February–1 September 1978. Pasadena: Oral 
History Project, California Institute of Technology Archives. http://resolver.caltech 
.edu/CaltechOH:OH_Richter_C. Accessed 10 June 2010.
————. “An Instrumental Magnitude Scale.” BSSA 25 (1935): 1–32.
Richtofen, Ferdinand. Führer für Forschungsreisende. Berlin: Robert Oppenheim, 1886.
Robin, Corey. Fear: The History of a Political Idea. Oxford: Oxford University Press,  
2004.
Rockwood, Charles G. “Japanese Seismology; How an Impetuous Man Fell Down from 
Up-Stairs.” American Journal of Science 22 (1881): 468–79.

Bibliography / 337
————. “Notes on American Earthquakes, No. 14.” American Journal of Science 29 (1885): 
425–37.
————. “Notes on American Earthquakes No. 15.” American Journal of Science 32 (1886): 
7–19.
————. “Notices of Recent American Earthquakes” (Article II). American Journal of Science 
15 (1878): 21–27.
Rohr, Christian. “The Danube Floods and Their Human Response and Perception (14th 
to 17th C).” History of Meteorology 2 (2005): 71–86.
Rolfe, Frank, and A. M. Strong. “The Earthquake of April 21, 1918 in the San Jacinto 
Mountains.” BSSA 8 (1918): 63–67.
————. “The Southwest Section of the Seismological Society of America.” BSSA 11 (1921): 
4–5.
Rossi, Count Michele Stefano de. Programma dell’osservatorio ed archivio centrale geodinam-
ico. Rome: Pace, 1883.
Rothenberg, Marc. “Organization and Control: Professionals and Amateurs in American 
Astronomy, 1899–1918.” Social Studies of Science 11 (1981): 305–25.
Rowlandson, Thomas. A Treatise on Earthquake Dangers, Causes and Palliatives. San Fran­
cisco: Dewey & Co., 1868.
Rozario, Kevin. Culture of Calamity: Disaster and the Making of Modern America. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Rozwadowski, Helen M. “Internationalism, Environmental Necessity, and National Inter­
est: Marine Science and Other Sciences.” Minerva 42 (2004): 127–49.
Rudolph, Emil, ed. Verhandlungen der Zweiten Internationalen Seismologischen Konferenz. 
Leipzig: Engelmann, 1904.
Rupke, Nicolaas. Alexander von Humboldt: A Metabiography. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2008.
Sachs, Aaron. The Humboldt Current: Nineteenth-Century Exploration and the Roots of Ameri-
can Environmentalism. New York: Penguin, 2007.
Salpeter (pseud.). “Das Erdbeben.” Simplicissimus 31 (1926): 339.
Sarton, George. “Secret History.” Scribner’s Magazine 67 (1920): 187–92.
Schaffer, Simon. “A Manufactory of Ohms: Late Victorian Metrology and Its Instrumenta­
tion.” In Invisible Connections: Instruments, Institutions, and Science, edited by Robert Bud 
and Susan Cozzens, 23–56. Bellingham, WA: SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 1992.
Schardt, Hans. “Quelques détails sur les causes du tremblement de terre de Messine.” Bul-
letin de la Société Neuchâteloise des Sciences Naturelles 36 (1909): 109–12. 
————. “Tremblement du terre du 29 mars 1907.” Bulletin de la Société Neuchâteloise des 
Sciences Naturelles 34 (1907): 314–15. 
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the 
19th Century. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.
Schmidt, J. F. Julius. Studien über Vulkane und Erdbeben. Leipzig: C. Alwin Georgi, 1881. 
————. “Untersuchung über das Erdbeben am 15. Jänner 1858.” Mittheilungen der k. k. 
Geographischen Gesellschaft 2 (1858): 131–203.
Schneider, Jen, and Roel Snieder. “Putting Partnership First: A Dialogue Model for Science 
and Risk Communication.” GSA Today 21 (2011): 36–37.
Schröter, Carl. “Prof. Christian Brügger, 1883–1899.” VSNG 83 (1900): vii–xxiii.
Schütz, Arthur. Der Grubenhund: Experimente mit der Wahrheit. Edited by Walter Hömberg. 
Munich: R. Fischer, 1996.
Schweitzer, Johannes. “The Birth of Modern Seismology in the Nineteenth and Twentieth 
Centuries.” Earth Sciences History 26 (2007): 263–80.

338 / Bibliography
————. “Old Seismic Bulletins to 1920: A Collective Heritage from Early Seismolo­
gists.” International Handbook of Earthquake and Engineering Seismology 81B (2003):  
1665–1723.
Sedgwick,Eve Kosofsky. The Weather in Proust. Edited by Jonathan Goldberg. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2011.
Seebach, Karl von. “Erdbebenkunde.” In Anleitung zu wissenschaftlichen Beobachtungen auf 
Reisen, edited by G. Neumayer, 309–32. Berlin: Robert Oppenheim, 1875.
“The Seismological Society of America.” Science 25 (1907): 437.
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus. Dialogues and Letters. New York: Penguin, 2005.
S¸engör, A. M. Celâl. The Large-Wavelength Deformations of the Lithosphere: Materials for a 
History of the Evolution of Thought from the Earliest Times to Plate Tectonics. Boulder, CO: 
Geological Society of America, 2003.
Severit, Wilhelm. “Die anthropogeographische Bedeutung der Erdbeben.” PhD diss., Uni­
versity of Würzburg, 1928.
Shaler, N. S. “California Earthquakes.” Atlantic Monthly 25 (1870): 351–60.
————. “The Stability of the Earth.” Scribners’ 1 (1887): 259–79.
————. The Story of Our Continent: A Reader in the Geography and Geology of North America 
for the Use of Schools. Boston: Ginn & Co., 1892.
Shelley, Mary. Frankenstein, or, The Modern Prometheus, The 1818 Text. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1974.
Shepard, Cola W. “Dear Fellow Co-Ops.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 3 
(1922): 76.
Sieberg, August. Handbuch der Erdbebenkunde. Braunschweig: Vieweg & Sohn, 1904. 
————. “Methoden der Erdbebenforschung.” In Lehrbuch der praktischen Geologie, 2nd edi­
tion. Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke, 1908.
————. “Über die makroseismische Bestimmung der Erdbebenstärke.” Gerlands Beiträge 
zur Geophysik 11 (1912): 227–39.
Simson, T. “Psychische und psychotische Reaktionen Erwachsener und Kinder bei Erdbe­
ben.” Zeitschrift für die gesammte Neurologie und Psychiatrie 118 (1929): 130–43.
Skoko, Dragutin, and Josip Mokrovic´. Andrija Mohorovicˇic´. Zagreb: Školska knj., 1982.
Sloterdijk, Peter. Sphären III—Schäume. Frankfurth: Suhrkamp, 2004.
Smith, M. Brewster. “Preface.” Journal of Social Issues 10 (1954): 1.
Smith, N. Kemp. “Fear: Its Nature and Diverse Uses.” Philosophy 32 (1957): 3–20.
Solnit, Rebecca. A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise in Disas-
ter. New York: Viking, 2009.
Soulé, Frank, John H. Gihon, and Jim Nisbet. The Annals of San Francisco. New York: Ap­
pleton, 1855.
Spector, Scott. Prague Territories: National Conflict and Cultural Innovation in Franz Kafka’s 
Fin de Siècle. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Speich, Daniel. “Draining the Marshlands, Disciplining the Masses: The Linth Valley  
Hydro Engineering Scheme (1807–1823) and the Genesis of Swiss National Unity.” 
Environment and History 8 (2002): 429–47.
Spengler, Erich. “Franz Wähner.” Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien 46 
(1931): 309–12.
Stearns, Robert E. C. “Dr. John B. Trask, a Pioneer of Science on the West Coast.” Science, 
new series, 28 (1908): 240–43.
Stein, Seth. “Approaches to Continental Intraplate Earthquake Issues.” In Continental In-
traplate Earthquakes: Science, Hazard, and Policy Issues, ed. Seth Stein and Stéphane 
Mazzotti, 1–16. Boulder, CO: Geological Society of America, 2007. 

Bibliography / 339
Steinberg, Ted. Acts of God: The Unnatural History of Natural Disaster in America. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Stierlin, Eduard. “Nervöse und psychische Störungen nach Katastrophen.” Deutsche 
Medizinische Wochenschrift 37 (1911): 2028–35.
Strasser, Bruno. “Laboratories, Museums, and the Comparative Perspective: Alan A. 
Boyden’s Quest for Objectivity in Serological Taxonomy, 1924–1962.” Historical Stud-
ies in the Natural Sciences 40 (2010): 149–82.
Strehlau, Jürgen. “‘ . . . Earthquakes occur on specific points and lines which . . . mostly coin­
cide with traceable fracture lines . . . ’: Eduard Sueß’ Study of Earthquakes in Lower Aus­
tria and Southern Italy . . .” Berichte des Geologischen Bundesanstalts 69 (2006): 67–68.
Strickland, Stuart W. “The Ideology of Self-Knowledge and the Practice of Self- 
Experimentation.” Eighteenth-Century Studies 31 (1998): 453–71.
Struck, Bernhard, “Zur Kenntnis afrikanischer Erdbebenvorstellungen.” Globus 95 (1909): 
85–90.
Stucchi, Massimiliano. “Do Seismologists Agree upon Epicentre Determination from 
Macroseismic Data? A Survey of ESC Working Group ‘Macroseismology.’” Annali de 
Geofisica 39 (1996): 1013–27.
Suess, Eduard. Bemerkungen über den naturgeschichtlichen Unterricht an unseren Gymnasien. 
Vienna, 1862.
————. Der Boden der Stadt Wien, nach seiner Bildungsweise, Beschaffenheit, und seinen Be­
ziehungen zum bürgerlichen Leben. Vienna: Braumüller, 1862.
————. Das Antlitz der Erde, vol. 1. Prague: F. Tempsky, 1885. 
————. Die Erdbeben Nieder-Österreichs. Vienna: k. k. Hof- und Staatsdruckerei, 1873.
————. Erinnerungen. Leipzig: G. Hirzel, 1916.
————. Preface to W. H. Hobbs, On Some Principles of Seismic Geology. Leipzig: Wilhelm 
Engelmann, 1907.
Suess, Franz E. Das Erdbeben von Laibach am 14. April 1895. Vienna: k. k. Geologische 
Reichsanstalt, 1897.
Sulzer-Ziegler, Eduard. “Der Bau des Simplon-Tunnels.” VSNG 87 (1904): 128–71.
Surman, Jan. “Figurationen der Akademia. Galizische Universitäten zwischen Imperialis­
mus und multiplem Nationalismus.” In Galizien—Fragmente eines diskursiven Raums, 
ed. Doktoratskolleg “Galizien.” Innsbruck: Studienverlag, 2010.
Suter, H. “Prof. Dr. Hans Schardt, 1858–1931.” VSNG 112 (1931): 411–22.
Taber, Stephen. “The Los Angeles Earthquakes of July, 1920.” BSSA 11 (1921): 63–79. 
————. “Seismic Activity in the Atlantic Coastal Plain near Charleston, South Carolina.” 
BSSA 4 (1914): 108–60. 
Taber, Stephen, et al. “The Earthquake Problem in Southern California.” BSSA 10 (1920): 
276–99.
Tarr, Ralph S., and Lawrence Martin. “Recent Change of Level in Alaska.” Geographical 
Journal 28 (1906): 30–43.
Tatevossian, Ruben. “History of Earthquake Studies in Russia.” Annals of Geophysics 47 
(2004): 811–30.
Taussig, Michael. Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses. New York: 
Routledge, 1993.
Templeton, E. C. “The Central California Earthquake of July 1, 1911.” BSSA 1 (1911): 
167–69.
Tertulliani, A., I. Cecic´, and M. Goded. “Unification of Macroseismic Data Collection Proce­
dures: A Pilot Project for Border Earthquakes Assessment.” Natural Hazards 10 (1999): 
221–32. http://www.globalquakemodel.org/about-gem. Accessed 29 July 2011.

340 / Bibliography
Tetens, Otto. “Bericht über die Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums in den Jahren 1904 
und 1904.” In Wagner, “Das Samoa Observatorium,” 27–54.
Thorsheim, Peter. Inventing Pollution: Coal, Smoke, and Culture in Britain since 1800. Athens: 
Ohio University Press, 2006.
Thouvenot, F., and M. Bouchon. “What Is the Lowest Magnitude Threshold at Which an 
Earthquake Can Be Felt or Heard, or Objects Thrown into the Air?” In Fréchet et al., 
Historical Seismology, 313–26.
Tilley, Helen. Africa as a Living Laboratory: Empire, Development, and the Problem of Scientific 
Knowledge, 1870–1950. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Timms, Edward. Karl Kraus: Apocalyptic Satirist: Culture and Catastrophe in Habsburg Vienna. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986.
“To Foretell ‘Quakes.” Washington Post, 15 May 1910, 7.
Tollmann, Alexander. “Eduard Suess—Geologe und Politiker.” In Eduard Suess zum Gedenken, 
edited by Günther Hamann, 27–78. Vienna: Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1983.
“Topics of the Times.” New York Times, 28 August 1911, 6.
Toula, Franz. “Ueber den gegenwärtigen Stand der Erdbebenfrage.” Schriften des Vereines 
zur Verbreitung naturwissenschaftlicher Kenntnisse in Wien 21 (1881): 523–601.
Townley, Sidney D., and Maxwell W. Allen. “Descriptive Catalog of Earthquakes of the 
Pacific Coast of the United States 1769–1928.” BSSA 29 (1939): 1–297.
————. “John Casper Branner.” BSSA 12 (1922): 1–11.
————. “The San Jacinto Earthquake of April 21, 1918.” BSSA 8 (1918): 45–62.
Trask, John Boardman. “Earthquakes in California, 1812–1855.” Proceedings of the Califor-
nia Academy of Sciences 1 (1856): 85–89.
————. “Earthquakes in California in 1856.” Science 23 (1857): 341–45.
————. Report on the Geology of the Coast Mountains, and Part of the Sierra Nevada: Em-
bracing Their Industrial Resources in Agriculture and Mining. Sacramento: B. B. Redding,  
1854.
Treitel, Corinna. Science for the Soul: Occultism and the Genesis of the German Modern. Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004.
Tresch, John. “The Daguerreotype’s First Frame: François Arago’s Moral Economy of In­
struments.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 38 (2007): 445–76.
————. “Even the Tools Will Be Free: Humboldt’s Romantic Technologies.” In The Heav-
ens on Earth: Observatories and Astronomy in Nineteenth-Century Science and Culture, 
253–84. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
Tribelot, Maurice de. “Notice sur les tremblements de terre ressentis dans le canton de 
Neuchâtel, du 2 avril au 16 mai 1876.” Bulletin de la Société des Sciences Naturelles de 
Neuchâtel 10 (1876): 358–73.
Tributsch, Helmut. When the Snakes Awake: Animals and Earthquake Prediction. Translated 
by Paul Langner. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
Twain, Mark. Early Tales and Sketches, vol 2. Edited by Edgar Marquess Branch. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1981.
————. “The Great Earthquake in San Francisco.” In Early Tales and Sketches, 303–10.
————. “A Page from a Californian Almanac.” In The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras 
County, and Other Sketches, 132–34. London: George Routledge & Sons, 1867.
————. Roughing It, vol. 1. New York: Harper Brothers, 1913.
Tylor, Edward B. Primitive Culture, vol. 1. London: Murray, 1871.
“Ueber die Geschwindigkeit von Erdbebenstössen.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 32 (1898): 
100.
“Ursache der Erdbeben.” Aus der Natur 51 (1870): 550–52.

Bibliography / 341
Valencius, Conevery Bolton. “Accounts of the New Madrid Earthquakes: Personal Narra­
tives across Two Centuries of North American Seismology.” Witness to Disaster: Earth­
quakes and Expertise in Comparative Perspective, special issue, edited by Deborah R. 
Coen, Science in Context 25 (2012): 17–48.
————. The Health of the Country: How American Settlers Understood Themselves and Their 
Land. New York: Basic Books, 2002.
Vaneˇk, Jirˇi, and Jan Kozák. “First Macroseismic Map with Geological Background (Com­
posed by L. H. Jeitteles).” Acta Geophysica 55 (2007): 594–606.
Verhandlungen des Siebenten Internationalen Geographen-Kongresses. Berlin: Kühn, 1901.
Vetter, Jeremy. Introduction to Knowing Global Environments. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, 
2010. 
————. “Introduction: Lay Participation in the History of Scientific Observation.” Science 
in Context 24 (2011): 127–41.
————. “Lay Observers, Telegraph Lines, and Kansas Weather: The Field Network as a 
Mode of Knowledge Production.” Science in Context 24 (2011): 259–80.
————. “The Regional Development of Science: Knowledge, Environment, and Field 
Work in the United States Central Plains and Rocky Mountains, 1860–1920.” PhD 
diss., University of Pennsylvania, 2005.
————. Review of California Earthquakes, by Carl-Henry Geschwind. Environmental History 
7 (2002): 701–2.
Vidal, Fernando. Piaget before Piaget. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vidrih, Renato and Jože Mihelicˇ. Albin Belar: Pozabljen slovenski naravoslovec. Radovljica: 
Didakta, 2010.
Volger, G. H. Otto. Erde und Ewigkeit. Frankfurt am Main: Verlag von Meidinger Sohn & 
Co., 1857.
————. Untersuchungen über das Phänomen der Erdbeben in der Schweiz, vol. 2. Gotha: Justus 
Perthes, 1858.
“Vom Tage.” Simplicissimus 13 (1909): 727.
Voss, Martin. Symbolische Formen. Grundlagen und Elemente einer Soziologie der Katastrophe. 
Bielefeld: transcript, 2006.
Vyleta, Daniel M. Crime, Jews, and News: Vienna 1895–1914. New York: Berghahn, 2007.
Wagner, H. “Das Samoa Observatorium, Ergebnisse der Arbeiten des Samoa– 
Observatoriums I.” In Ergebnisse der Arbeiten des Samoa-Observatoriums der Königlichen 
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, vol. 1. Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhand­
lung, 1908.
Wähner, Franz. Das Erdbeben von Agram am 9. November 1880. Vienna: Akademie der Wis­
senschaften, 1883.
Walcott, Charles. “Progress of the Smithsonian Institution.” Nature 85 (1911): 526–28.
Walker, Charles. Shaky Colonialism: The 1746 Earthquake-Tsunami in Lima, Peru, and Its 
Long Aftermath. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008.
Wallace, Alfred Russell. The Malay Archipelago, vol. 2. 2nd edition. London: MacMillan & 
Co., 1869.
Walls, Laura Dassow. The Passage to Cosmos: Alexander von Humboldt and the Shaping of 
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
Warne, William E. “Earthquake Waves.” BSSA 23 (1933): 169–71.
Waters, Aaron C. “Memorial to Bailey Willis (1857–1949).” Geological Society of America 
Bulletin 73 (1962): 55–72.
Wegener, Alfred. Die Entstehung der Kontinente und Ozeane. Braunschweig: Vieweg & Sohn, 
1920.

342 / Bibliography
Wegener, Kurt. “Die seismischen Registrierungen am Samoa-Observatorium der Kgl. Ge­
sellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen in den Jahren 1909 u. 1910.” Nachrichten 
der königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, 1912.
Westermann, Andrea. “Disciplining the Earth: Earthquake Observation in Switzerland and 
Germany circa 1900.” Environment and History 16 (2010).
————. “Overcoming the Division of Labor in Global Tectonics: Eduard Suess’s The Face 
of the Earth.” Workshop Earth Science—Global Science, 30 September–2 October 
2010, York University, Toronto.
White, Gilbert F. “Human Adjustment to Floods.” University of Chicago Department of 
Geography Research Paper No. 29, 1942.
White, Paul. “Darwin, Concepcíon, and the Geological Sublime.” Witness to Disaster: 
Earthquakes and Expertise in Comparative Perspective, special issue, edited by Debo­
rah R. Coen, Science in Context 25 (2012): 49–71.
Whitnah, Donald R. A History of the United States Weather Bureau. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1965.
Whitney, J. D. “Earthquakes.” North American Review 108 (1869): 578–610.
————. “Owen’s Valley Earthquake.” Overland Monthly 9 (1872): part 1, 131–40, part 2, 
266–78.
Wiechert, Emil. “Entwurf einer Denkschrift über seismologische Beobachtungen in den 
deutschen Kolonien.” Verhandlungen der Ersten Internationalen Seismologischen Kon-
ferenz, 313–18.
Wilke, Jürgen. “Das Erdbeben von Lissabon als Medienereignis.” In Das Erdbeben von 
Lissabon und der Katastrophendiskurs im 18. Jahrhundert, edited by Gerhard Lauer and 
Thorsten Unger. Göttingen: Wallstein, 2008.
Wilkinson, Iain. Anxiety in a Risk Society. New York: Routledge 2001.
Williams, G. D. “Greco-Roman Seismology and Seneca on Earthquakes in ‘Natural Ques­
tions 6.’” Journal of Roman Studies 96 (2006): 124–46.
Willis, Bailey. “Coöperation.” BSSA 13 (1923): 119–23.
————. “Essays on Earthquakes.” BSSA 16 (1926): 27–40.
————. “The Next Earthquake.” Transactions of the Commonwealth Club of California 16 
(1922): 375–79.
————. “A Study of the Santa Barbara Earthquake of June 29, 1925.” BSSA 15 (1925): 
255–78.
Wilson, Holly. Kant’s Pragmatic Anthropology: Its Origin, Meaning, and Critical Significance. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 2006.
Winchester, Simon. A Crack in the Edge of the World: America and the Great California Earth-
quake of 1906. New York: Harper Collins, 2005.
“Wirkung von Naturereignissen auf schwache Gemüter.” Archiv für Kriminologie 30 (1908): 
368.
Wohnlich, M. “Erdbebenprognose und seismisches Risiko.” Schweizerische Bauzeitung 91 
(1973): 1139–48.
Woldrˇich, J. N. “Prˇedbe˘žná zpráva o zeme˘trˇesení v Pošumaví.” Cˇeské akademie císarˇe Františka  
Josefa pro veˇdy, slovesnost a umeˇní v Praze II, vol. 6 (1897): 1–6.
Wood, Harry O. “California Earthquakes: A Synthetic Study of Recorded Shocks.” BSSA 
6 (1916): 55–180.
————. “Concerning the Perceptibility of Weak Earthquakes and Their Dynamical Meas­
urement.” BSSA 4 (1914): 29–38. 
————. “The Earthquake Problem in the Western United States.” BSSA 6 (1916): 197–217.
————. “Earthquake Reports.” BSSA 14 (1924): 60–68.

Bibliography / 343
————. “Earthquakes in Southern California, Part 1.” BSSA 37 (1947): 107–57.
————. “A Further Note on Seismometric Bookkeeping.” BSSA 7 (1917): 106–12
————. “The Observation of Earthquakes: A Guide for the General Observer.” BSSA 1 
(1911): 48–82.
————. “Preliminary Report on the Long Beach Earthquake.” BSSA 23 (1933): 43–56.
————. “‘Regional’ vs. ‘World’ Seismology in Relation to the Pacific Basin.” In Proceedings 
of the First Pan-Pacific Scientific Congress, 378–91. Honolulu: Honolulu Star-Bulletin, 
1921. 
————. “The Seismic Prelude to the 1914 Eruption of Mauna Loa.” BSSA 5 (1915): 39–51.
————. “The Study of Earthquakes in Southern California.” BSSA 8 (1918): 28–33.
Wood, Harry O., and F. Neumann. “Modified Mercalli Scale of 1931.” BSSA 21 (1931): 
2772–83.
Worster, Donald. Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930s. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1979.
Yeo, Richard. Defining Science: William Whewell, Natural Knowledge, and Public Debate in 
Early Victorian Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Zimmer, Oliver. A Contested Nation: History, Memory and Nationalism in Switzerland, 1761–
1891. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Zimmerman, Andrew. Anthropology and Antihumanism in Imperial Germany. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 2001.
“Zur Falbschen Theorie.” Humboldt 8 (1889): 362.


animals as seismic forecasters, 81, 270–71
anthropology: of earthquakes, 112, 116, 
225; and physical geography, 8, 171–74
anthropomorphism, 9–11, 112
archives, 22, 49, 88, 106. See also catalogs 
of earthquakes
Atherton, Gertrude, 105, 220
Austria, seismology in, 14, 22–24, 141–62
Baelz, Erwin, 134–35, 219
Belar, Albin, 51, 55, 62, 152, 156–57, 
159–60, 251
Benjamin, Walter, 7, 59
Branner, John Casper, 221, 227–33
Britain, seismology in, 17, 19, 25–44
British Association for the Advancement of 
Science, 43; Earthquake Committee of 
the, 26, 28, 35
Buckle, Henry Thomas, 32, 76, 103, 187
Byerly, Perry, 224, 252–54, 264–68
Caltech Seismological Laboratory, 53, 246, 
263
Carnegie Institution of Washington (CIW), 
216, 221, 246
catalogs of earthquakes, 87; and docu­
mentation movement, 181; of the 
International Seismological Associa­
tion, 175–77, 184; by Mallet, 114; by 
Montessus de Ballore, 174; by Perrey, 
51, 114; by Rockwood, 49–53; by 
Volger, 73
Cecic´, Ina, 268
China, seismology in, 19, 271–72
citizen science, 3, 240, 272; and the Inter­
net, 274
criminology, 130–32
Darwin, Charles, 22, 27, 28, 81, 113
Davison, Charles, 17n16, 17n17, 36–38, 
43, 149, 180, 224
Dickens, Charles, 32–33, 129
disaster studies, 5, 136n52, 165n13, 265, 
267
Dutton, Clarence, 201
earthquake intensity: instrumental equiv­
alent of, 202–3, 206–7, 223, 244, 253, 
259, 265; maps of, 4, 48, 73, 114; scales  
of, 4, 11, 26, 73, 74n22, 84, 126, 202, 
222–24, 258; standardization of, 
176–80. See also Mercalli, Giuseppe; 
Rossi-Forel scale
earthquakes: Alaska (1964), 270; Calabria 
(1783–84), 16, 126; Charleston (1886), 
37, 201–4; Colchester (1884), 34–35; 
Comrie (1840s), 19, 26–30; Concep­
ción (1835), 113; Crimea (1927), 132; 
Cumana (1799), 107; Hereford (1863), 
32–34; Hereford (1896), 36; L’Aquila 
(2009), 273; Lisbon (1755), 7, 32, 106, 
108; Ljubljana (1895), 128, 141–43, 
153–56; Long Beach (1933), 261; Los 
Angeles (1920), 234–36; Lower Austria  
(1873), 22–24, 46; Lower Austria (1908),  
1, 46, 61; Messina (1908), 46, 60, 63– 
64, 94, 95, 98, 130, 275; New Madrid 
(1811–12), 15, 200; 
Inde x

346 / Index
earthquakes (cont.) 
	
San Francisco (1865), 57, 192; San 
Francisco (1868), 192–93; San Fran­
cisco (1906), 212, 215–25, 236; Santa 
Barbara (1925), 248; Santa Monica 
(1930), 256; Visp (1855), 71; Yakutat 
Bay (1899), 209–13; Zagreb (1880), 54, 
142, 144–47
earthquake theories: atmospheric and 
astronomical, 19, 22, 28, 53–54, 73, 
99, 196; elastic rebound, 222; electrical, 
19, 22, 28–30; mythical and biblical, 
112–13, 115, 118, 120, 194; subterra­
nean collapse, 72, 99; tectonic, 22, 99, 
146, 164; volcanic, 27, 28, 109 
ecology, 81–82, 86
engineers: and anti-seismic construction, 
5, 43, 69n2, 268; contributions of to 
seismology, 16, 78–79, 235–38
Falb, Rudolf, 53–55, 150, 161
fear, 6, 12, 126, 133, 135, 151, 178, 227; in 
psychoanalysis, 13, 276
Forel, François Alphonse, 81–86, 175
Fukushima nuclear disaster, 12, 269–70
gender, 4, 86–87, 93, 105, 139, 221. See 
also women earthquake observers
geohistory, 22, 24
Gerland, Georg, 7, 9, 163–85
Gilbert, Grove Karl, 104, 211, 217
Gutenberg, Beno, 184, 256, 263
hazard, 14; defined, 5n17
Heim, Albert, 69, 74, 76, 135, 170, 219, 
221
Hoernes, Rudolf, 54–55, 147, 152, 154
Holden, Edward Singleton, 204–8
Humboldt, Alexander von, 9, 82, 107–14, 
272
Humboldtian science, 106, 163–64, 171
Hume, David, 13
induced seismicity, 4, 11, 12n49, 79
instruments. See seismography
insurance, 129, 189, 224, 235, 269
intensity. See earthquake intensity
internationalism, 104n5, 163, 182, 185; 
critiques of 171, 184; and documenta­
tion movement, 181; and seismic risk 
assessment, 269
International Seismological Association 
(ISA), 163–85
intraplate earthquakes, 5, 11, 21
Italy, seismology in, 14, 16–17, 19, 271
James, William, 104, 133–34, 219, 221, 253
Japan, seismology in, 14, 17, 19, 116
journalism. See newspapers
Jünger, Ernst, 137–38, 140
Kant, Immanuel: on Lisbon earthquake,  
7; on physical geography, 173; on prag­
matic versus critical knowledge, 9, 254, 
272
King, Clarence, 104, 190, 251
Kövesligethy, Radó de, 37
Kraus, Karl, 1, 59–67, 137, 276
Landeskunde, 90, 101, 147–48
Latin America, seismology in, 28, 107–12, 
115, 177, 179
Lisbon earthquake of 1755. See under 
earthquakes
Lyell, Charles, 16, 22, 24
Mach, Ernst, 141, 142, 160–62, 224, 254
magnitude (seismic), 9, 259–63	
Mallet, Robert, 16–18, 74, 106, 114, 119
maps. See under earthquake intensity
McAdie, Alexander, 217–20, 226–27
Mendenhall, T. C., 207
Mercalli, Giuseppe, 86; intensity scale of, 
126
Messina earthquake of 1908. See under 
earthquakes
meteorological observers, 75, 85, 194–95, 
198, 230, 239–40
microseisms, 168
Milne, David, 26–29, 41
Milne, John, 17, 34, 38, 41, 49, 51, 103, 
116–19, 163n1, 169
Montessus de Ballore, Fernand de, 115–16, 
164–65, 168–70, 174, 177, 179, 184
Muir, John, 105, 219, 221, 226
Muir-Wood, Robert, 43–44
Musson, Roger, 43–44
nature protection, 80, 225. See also Sierra 
Club
newspapers, 45; reports of earthquakes in, 
21, 32, 34, 38–39, 257, 277

Index / 347
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 1–2, 135, 136
Norway, seismology in, 14n64
observatories: and the observatory sciences,  
163; public access to, 167, 208; short­
comings of, 169, 184, 242, 267. See  
also Caltech Seismological Laboratory;  
Samoa Geophysical Observatory; Stras­
bourg Imperial Central Station for 
Seismology
Oldham, Richard Dixon, 203, 244, 259
Omori, Fusakichi, 17, 222
Palmieri, Luigi, 74
perceptibility of earthquakes, 178, 244,  
264
Perrey, Alexis, 49, 51, 53, 114
plate tectonics, 20
Plutonism, 72–73
Powell, John Wesley, 190, 196, 197
prediction of earthquakes, 30, 53–55, 263, 
270–71
psychic effects of earthquakes, 37, 125–40, 
219–21, 243
public communication of science: and citi­
zen observers, 93; and construction of a 
scientific vernacular, 82; and disasters, 
274; and introduction of the Richter 
scale, 255; and seismology before 1900, 
71, 101, 205, 227, 251; and seismology 
today, 11, 273
Quervain, Alfred de, 79, 84, 95
Reid, Harry, 208, 222
Richter, Charles, 9, 216, 256, 259–60
Richter scale, 9, 259–63
risk, 14; assessment of, 5, 268–69; com­
munication of, 273; defined, 5n17; 
perception of, 4
rock slides, 70, 77, 80
Rockwood, Charles, 48–53, 74, 179, 195, 
197, 202
Rossi, Count Michele Stefano de, 17, 85
Rossi-Forel scale: introduction of, 84–86, 
89, 177; modifications of, 258; and 
psychological factors, 126; in United 
States, 202, 223–24
Samoa Geophysical Observatory, 120–23, 
185
San Francisco earthquake of 1906. See 
under earthquakes
Schardt, Hans, 92–99
seiches, 71
seismic waves: classification of, 20; as vis­
ible to observers, 222, 255
seismography: failures of, 28, 74, 122, 170, 
206, 246, 262; and noninstrumental ob­
servations, 100, 156, 264–66; pre-1900 
history of, 19–21
Seismological Society of America (SSA), 
226–29, 232–33, 235
Sekiya, Seikei, 118–19
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, 77, 251
Serbia, seismology in, 14n64
Shaler, Nathaniel Southgate, 187–89
Sieberg, August, 176, 178; Sieberg intensity 
scale, 178, 258
Sierra Club, 219, 226
simulation of earthquakes, 32, 42
sounds associated with earthquakes, 
17–18, 27, 146, 222
Strasbourg Imperial Central Station for 
Seismology, 167, 176
Suess, Eduard: earthquake research of, 21, 
151; on the International Seismologi­
cal Association, 170–71; Karl Kraus on, 
62–64; on nationalism, 151n37, 161; 
planetary perspective of, 6, 152–53; 
tectonic theory of, 24
sustainability, 14, 79–80
Switzerland, seismology in, 14, 69–101, 197
translation: and emergence of a scientific  
vernacular, 18, 158–59, 162, 177, 178n61,  
181; between human language and ins­
trumental data, 101; and public commu­
nication of science, 11, 273–74
trauma psychiatry, 127–30, 132–36
Tributsch, Helmut, 271
Twain, Mark, 57–58, 192
uncertainty: communication of 4, 5, 79, 
100, 233, 247; and fear, 13
vernacular science, 11–12, 73, 198, 274; 
and seismological terminology, 82–85, 
146
vertigo, 109, 125
Volger, Otto, 71–74
vulnerability, 5n17

348 / Index
weather observers. See meteorological 
observers
Whitney, Josiah, 115, 190
Wiechert, Emil, 121, 185
Willis, Bailey, 248–51
women earthquake observers, 198; acuity 
of, 86–87, 93; enthusiasm of 105, 220. 
See also gender
Wood, Harry O., 47, 215–16, 232, 241–47, 
251–66


