
The Metaphysical Vision 
 

 
 
 
PETER LANG 
New York y Washington, D.C./Baltimore y Bern 
Frankfurt am Main y Berlin y Brussels y Vienna y Oxford 
 

Ulrich Pothast 
 
 
 
The Metaphysical Vision 
 
 ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER’S  
PHILOSOPHY OF ART AND LIFE  
AND SAMUEL BECKETT’S OWN  
WAY TO MAKE USE OF IT 
 
 
  
 
PETER LANG 
New York y Washington, D.C./Baltimore y Bern 
Frankfurt am Main y Berlin y Brussels y Vienna y Oxford 
 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Pothast, Ulrich. 
[Eigentlich metaphysische Tätigkeit. English] 
The metaphysical vision: Arthur Schopenhauer’s Philosophy of art and life  
and Samuel Beckett’s Own way to make use of it / Ulrich Pothast 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1788–1860—Aesthetics.  2. Aesthetics,  
Modern—19th century.  3. Beckett, Samuel, 1906–1989.  I. Title.  
B3148.P6613   700.1—dc22    2008027532 
ISBN 978-1-4331-0286-8 
 
 
 
Bibliographic information published by Die Deutsche Bibliothek. 
 Die Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication in the “Deutsche  
Nationalbibliografie”; detailed bibliographic data is available  
on the Internet at http://dnb.ddb.de/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for permanence and durability 
of the Committee on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity 
of the Council of Library Resources. 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 Peter Lang Publishing, Inc., New York 
29 Broadway, 18th floor, New York, NY 10006  
www.peterlang.com 
 
All rights reserved. 
Reprint or reproduction, even partially, in all forms such as microfilm, 
xerography, microfiche, microcard, and offset strictly prohibited. 
 
Printed in the United States of America  
 

For Kurt Tetzeli von Rosador


CONTENTS
 
Acknowledgements 
xi
 
References to Beckett’s and Schopenhauer’s works 
xiii
 
Introduction 
1
 
 1. “Metaphysical vision” 1
 
 2. Schopenhauer out of fashion; Beckett his student 7
 
 3. Intentions and limits 16
Part One 
Metaphysics of art and life 
21
Chapter I 
On Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
23
 
 4.  Premises from Schopenhauer’s theory 
of knowledge and metaphysics 23
 
 5. Dissolution of self and creation of art 32
 
 6. The truly metaphysical activity of this life 40

viii 
contents
  
 7. Idea and sensory perception 44
 
 8. Symbols trivial 46
 
 9. Realism vulgar 48
 
10. Every thing beautiful 50
 
11. Genius objective 54
 
12. Bliss, not just pleasure 58
 
13. Will-less, not just disinterested 61
 
14. Music 64
 
15. Tragedy and the vanity of life 67
 
16. Denial of the Will-to-live 71
 
17. Affirmation of the Will-to-live 75
 
18. Happiness negative 78
 
19. Suffering productive 79
 
20. The metaphysical drama 81
 
21. Timeless present, no ending 86
 
22. Life pensum, suicide no escape 88
 
23. The primacy of nothingness 92
Chapter II 
Beckett’s philosophical view of art and life in Proust 
95
 
24. True reality and caricature of reality 95
 
25. Idea versus concept 98
 
26. Causality, time, will 100
 
27. Habit 102
 
28. Two kinds of memory 104
 
29. Vulgarity 106
 
30. Death of habit – waking madness 108
 
31. Purity, impurity 112
 
32. The necessity of art 115
 
33. Schopenhauer made use of 118
 
34. Schopenhauer altered 123
 
35. The Proustian equation – the Proustian solution 129

 
contents 
ix
 
36. Affirmation of the will. Voluntarily Tantalus 132
 
37. Desert of loneliness. No morality 134
 
38. Existence of the artist 136
Part Two 
On some details in Beckett’s literary work 
141
Chapter III Murphy 
145
 
39. I am not of the big world, I am of the little world 145
 
40. Vision 147
 
41. Will-lessness, yearning for Nothing 149
Chapter IV Moran 
153
 
42. Remnants of a pensum 153
 
43. A work which will subsist 157
 
44. Finality without end 160
 
45. Images of this kind the will cannot revive 162
 
46. Dispossessed of self 164
Chapter V The Unnamable 
169
 
47. What if we were one and the same after all 169
 
48. There is no pronoun for me 173
 
49. I have a pensum to discharge 177
 
50. I’m all these words 181
 
51.  I am doing my best and failing: new 
thoughts about art and the artist  183
Chapter VI Gogo and Didi, Hamm and Clov 
 
191
 
52. In a cage out of time and space 191
 
53. In a single night 194
 
54. You pollute the air 196
 
55. Is it not time for my pain-killer? 199
 
56. This is not boring you I hope 202

x 
contents
 
57. Why will you never let me sleep? 208
 
58. Old endgame lost of old 213
 
59. The form of life is the endless present 217
 
60.  Since that’s the way we’re playing it, 
let’s play it that way 220
 
Concluding remarks 
225
 
61. Schopenhauer made use of 225
 
62. Schopenhauer altered 228
 
63. Schopenhauer left behind 232
 
Works cited 
235
 
Index 
241

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Quotations from Samuel Beckett’s works are reprinted by permission of the 
publishing houses Faber & Faber, London, and Grove/Atlantic, New York. 
 Permission to quote from Samuel Beckett’s letters, and from his manuscripts 
and notebooks held at the Reading University Library was granted by the Estate 
of Samuel Beckett, c/o Rosica Colin Ltd., London. Suhrkamp Verlag Frankfurt/
Main generously allowed the use of earlier material of my own.
I am grateful to James Knowlson and John Pilling for their very  friendly 
encouragement, and to Mark Nixon for extremely helpful advice  concerning 
 Beckett’s unpublished notebooks and help in the process of consulting them. 
Thanks are also due to the staff of Beckett International Foundation at 
 University of Reading and Trinity College Library, Dublin for their support in 
the actual process of working with unpublished material. Deutsche 
 Forschungsgemeinschaft supported my work by a travel grant.
I am grateful to Rolf Peter Horstmann for early suggestions and Phil McManus 
for helping to find mistakes and weed out Germanisms. Kathryn  Plaisance read 
the whole manuscript with meticulous care and contributed an overwhelming 
number of supremely helpful corrections, ideas, and commentaries.
My wife and children provided an atmosphere full of love and sheltered me 
from all kinds of distracting influences.

xii 
acknowledgements
My greatest debt is to my friend Kurt Tetzeli von Rosador for spending 
so much of his precious time helping me more than I can express in all stages 
of my work on this book, from the start years ago till the very last moment. 
His  comments helped to improve quite considerably my English, my views on 
 Beckett, and the mental condition of my old self.
As I did not follow the suggestions of my friendly helpers in every case, they 
will not agree with the outcome at all points. Any remaining flaws are mine.
Ulrich Pothast

REFERENCES TO BECKETT’S AND 
SCHOPENHAUER’S WORKS
The relevant data for quotations from Samuel Beckett’s works, in principle, are 
given in the notes. This also applies to unpublished material.
When a chapter is chiefly about a single one of Beckett’s works, the data 
for the chapter’s first quotation from that opus (page no. and bibliographical 
 information) are given in a note. Page numbers for further quotations from the 
same work are given in parentheses within the text.
References for quotations from Arthur Schopenhauer’s principal works are 
given within the text in parentheses containing an abbreviation for the relevant 
work, and the page number.
The following abbreviations have been used:
WWR I 
 The World as Will and Representation, Volume I, trans. E.F.J. Payne, 
New York (Dover), 1966.
WWR II 
 The World as Will and Representation, Volume II, trans. E.F.J. Payne, 
New York (Dover), 1966.
PP I 
 Parerga and Paralipomena, Short Philosophical Essays, Volume I, trans. 
E.F.J. Payne, Oxford (Clarendon Press), 1974.
PP II 
 Parerga and Paralipomena, Short philosophical Essays, Volume II, trans. 
E.F.J. Payne, Oxford (Clarendon Press), 1974.

xiv 
references
I found it necessary, at minor points, to deviate from Payne’s translation, 
partly because Samuel Beckett translates a word or passage differently 
(and his use of Schopenhauer is in focus here), and partly because of 
 philosophical, though rarely of linguistic, reasons. Every deviation is explained 
in a note.

1. “Metaphysical vision”
The title of this book is a quotation. When Arthur Schopenhauer tried to 
explain his view of our empirical life as a mere phenomenon of a deeper and 
essentially timeless reality which he called “the Will”, he wrote:
The present alone is that which always exists and stands ﬁ rm and immovable. 
That which, empirically apprehended, is the most ﬂ eeting of all, manifests itself 
to the metaphysical vision that sees beyond the forms of empirical perception as 
that which alone endures … The source and the supporter of its content is the 
Will-to-live or the thing-in-itself – which we are.1
1 Arthur Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, trans. E.F.J. Payne, New York 
(Dover), 1966, vol. I, p. 279. When quoting Schopenhauer’s works I shall use Payne’s transla-
tion unless otherwise indicated. When I ﬁ nd it necessary, at minor points, to deviate from this 
translation, I shall give the reason in a note. Here I replaced “glance” by “vision” since according 
to Schopenhauer we cannot glance beyond the forms of empirical perception as we like, but we 
can, in very rare states of mind and self, have a vision which shows the true reality beyond. The 
older translation by Haldane and Kemp (4th ed. London 1896) indeed has “vision” at this point 
(p. 360), but turns out to be awkward in several other respects. Above all, its title, “The World 
as Will and Idea”, leads to a most confusing ambiguity in the word “idea” when dealing with 
Schopenhauer’s theory of art – which makes it unsuitable for our main purpose. In the above 
INTRODUCTION

2 
the metaphysical vision
According to Schopenhauer, the only human activity which can come close to 
a full account, not just an abstract description, of the transphenomenal, deeper 
reality of life is art. He argued that the basic experience which makes the artist 
capable of giving us a near replica of true, non-empirical reality is a meditative 
as well as, in some way, ecstatic state of mind in which the artist comes close to 
perceiving true reality as opposed to the mere phenomena which we normally 
can see. In this sense, the basic experience of art, according to Schopenhauer, 
is a metaphysical vision. He also thinks that, if a beholder, listener, etc., contem-
plates a work of art with adequate concentration, the work of art can stimulate 
a similar visionary experience in him or her.
The actual process of artistic work, the forming of the said near replica of 
true reality, was described by the first and most important philosophical follower 
of Schopenhauer, the young Friedrich Nietzsche, as “the supreme task and the 
truly metaphysical activity of this life.”2 Nietzsche gives the complete argu-
ment for this bold thesis in The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music, his first 
philosophical book. It is known that the most important conceptual tools of this 
argument stem partly from Nietzsche’s unconventional interpretation of some 
manifestations of Greek art and partly straight from Schopenhauer’s aesthetics. 
Young Nietzsche considers philosophy, inasmuch as it attempts at conforming to 
the standards of science, to be one of the optimistic illusions which the inces-
santly striving Will-to-live offers its creatures to keep them in the dark about 
the true character of the life they have to lead. When philosophers hope to 
“penetrate to the depths of being”3 by their work, applying scientific methods 
and seeing themselves as quasi-scientists, they follow, Nietzsche claims, nothing 
but a deeply rooted illusion, as does any other epistemic activity which is not 
informed about its true limits and its true purpose in the economy of life.
When Samuel Beckett published his essay Proust in 1930, the most exten-
sive and, considering its philosophical claims, the most ambitious of his less 
than numerous writings on art, he also proclaimed a metaphysical pre-eminence 
of art over philosophy. Art, he declares in this first book of his, is a necessity 
quotation I furthermore used capital W in “Will-to-live” so as to distinguish the Will as essence 
of the world from the individual will we attribute to individual persons. For this difference see 
p. 30 below. For the need to alter existing English translations of Schopenhauer at minor points 
see B. Magee’s Prefatory Note to his The Philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, Oxford 1997. When 
referring to Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Representation I shall henceforth abbreviate the 
title “WWR”, give the volume in Roman numerals and the page in Arabic numbers.
2 Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music, ed. M. Tanner, London 1993, p. 13.
3 The Birth of Tragedy, p. 73.

 
introduction 
3
when it comes to decipher the surface of seemingly banal experiences so as to 
 understand “the mystery, the essence, the Idea, imprisoned in matter.”4 Only art, 
Beckett claims (in line with Proust himself), is able to produce achievements 
like this. Philosophy, on the other hand, the field in which metaphysical efforts 
and theories would traditionally be expected, is implicitly denounced by Beckett 
as a futile undertaking in precisely those matters. The reason in Beckett’s eyes 
is that philosophy belongs to the broad class of intellectual activities which 
people undertake with elaborate methods and conscious intentions but which 
are unfit to uncover the true reality of the world and of this life from beneath 
the empirical surface of daily phenomena. They are unfit to do this because they 
keep using the wrong means. Insistently, Beckett repeats the  Schopenhauerian 
thesis that any attempt to grasp true reality through the use of concepts, as 
traditional philosophy tries to do, must fail. Contrary to philosophy, artistic 
experience, being not conceptual but visionary, according to Beckett is indeed 
able to get true reality into focus. Beckett describes artistic experience in terms 
which seem almost literally to be taken from Schopenhauer’s aesthetics. It “can 
capture”, he says, “The Model, the Idea, the Thing in itself”. (90) At another 
point, Beckett characterizes artistic experience as being “at once an evocation 
and a direct perception, real without being merely actual, ideal without being 
merely abstract, the ideal real, the essential, the extratemporal” (75).
To capture the Model, the Idea, the Thing-in-itself: This sounds like the pro-
gram of a metaphysics which attempts to gain knowledge of something which 
lies beyond or beneath the world of phenomena, as the basis on which those 
phenomena rest, or the true reality of which the phenomenal world is just a poor 
copy. It is by no means trivial that it is art which should be capable of achieving 
this. For art normally makes use of what can be perceived by the senses and 
which is prima facie not considered to be transphenomenal or extratemporal. 
And if one wants to see an explicit difference between the “mock reality of 
experience” and what this experience “never can and never will reveal – the 
real”, as Beckett does in Proust (33), is it not a matter of course that works of 
art, being perceivable by the senses and depicting things perceivable by the 
senses, belong to the world of empirical phenomena? How, then, can Beckett 
come to claim that art, being thoroughly part of the phenomenal world, is able 
to open up true reality beyond all phenomena, whereas philosophical concepts, 
4 S. Beckett, Proust and Three Dialogues with Georges Duthuit, London (John Calder) 1965, 
p. 76. When quoting Beckett’s Proust I shall refer to this edition, giving the page number in 
parentheses.

4 
the metaphysical vision
the traditional building blocks of metaphysical systems, are rejected as perfectly 
insufficient for this purpose?
There is no doubt that Beckett read Schopenhauer shortly before and, 
 possibly, even in the very process of working on his Proust. His few lines of justi-
fication for reading this unfashionable author in a letter to Thomas MacGreevy, 
probably of 25th July 1930, are well known:
I am reading Schopenhauer. Everyone laughs at that. Beaufret and Alfy etc. But I 
am not reading philosophy, nor caring whether he is right or wrong or a good 
or worthless metaphysician. An intellectual justiﬁ cation of unhappiness – the 
greatest that has ever been attempted – is worth the examination of one who is 
interested in Leopardi and Proust rather than in Carducci and Barrès.5
That Beckett’s literary work often may be called “pessimistic” and in this sense 
presents attitudes, characters, patterns of action or, rather, non-action which 
show some kind of kinship with Schopenhauer’s pessimism, has been observed 
early in the history of Beckett studies.6 It also has been observed, of course, that 
the essay Proust leans heavily on Schopenhauer’s philosophy 7, not only on his 
pessimism but also on his theory of art. It is less obvious and has escaped the 
attention of many critics, that Beckett’s essay on Proust can also be seen as an 
attempt to interpret Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu as a metaphysical 
venture undertaken by the means of an artist, not of a philosopher. Beckett 
arrives at this interpretation by taking central theses from Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics and using them in his own way, i.e., using them as the starting point 
for developing his own philosophical ideas on the metaphysics of art. He does 
so by giving his own view of Proust’s work which is not at all perfectly in line 
with Proust’s text. Beckett takes this text, just as Schopenhauer’s philosophy, 
as a stepping stone for setting out on his own thoughts about art and the role 
of the artist – which are in fact philosophical and metaphysical thoughts. This 
sketchy attempt at philosophical aesthetics, undertaken by the 24-year-old 
Samuel Beckett, has hardly been analyzed yet in detail from a philosophical 
5 Quoted from: James Knowlson, Damned to Fame: The Life of Samuel Beckett, London 1996, 
p. 118.
6 Cf.: S.Rosen, Samuel Beckett and the Pessimistic Tradition, New Brunswick NJ, 1976.
7 See, e.g.: J. Pilling, Beckett’s ‘Proust’, Journal of Beckett Studies 1 (1976), 8–29; J. Acheson, 
 Beckett, Proust and Schopenhauer, Contemporary Literature 19 (1978), 165–179; K, Jones, 
 Schopenhauer and Beckett’s ‘Proust’, in: Etudes Irlandaises 11 (1986), 71–81; J. D. O’Hara,  Beckett’s 
Schopenhauerian Reading of Proust, in: E.v.d. Luft (ed.), Schopenhauer, Essays in honor of his 200th 
Birthday, Lewistin 1988, 273–292.

 
introduction 
5
point of view. In general, critical attention directed towards Beckett’s Proust 
focussed, understandably, rather more on that book’s difficult relation to its 
main subject, Proust’s Recherche, than on its philosophical content. To leave this 
early document of Beckett’s thinking on philosophy of art and the deeper real-
ity of life aside, however, would mean to neglect an important and influential 
stage in Beckett’s intellectual career and, philosophically, to miss an ingenious 
twist by which Beckett partly modified and modernized the largely romantic 
aesthetics of Schopenhauer so as to make it fit for dealing with classic works of 
twentieth-century art.
There is an obvious parallelism between Beckett and Nietzsche in that both 
set out with Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art and left it behind later in their 
lives. For Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music was his first 
printed attempt at philosophy. In it he sketched, borrowing important ideas 
from Schopenhauer, his own aesthetics and completed this sketch by adding 
remarks on the theory of knowledge, the philosophy of culture, and, of course, 
on metaphysics. Despite the fact that Nietzsche, in writing this book, already 
took his first steps away from Schopenhauer (just as Beckett does in Proust), 
one can still understand many elements of his later philosophy by looking at 
them from his Schopenhauerian beginnings. I assume that this is also the case 
with Beckett, not only in matters of world view, but also – despite important 
differences in later years – in matters of aesthetics.
His early Proust, just like The Birth of Tragedy, is not a piece of research in 
the history of literature, let alone Proust philology, but is, besides being a very 
independent interpretation of the Recherche, an original and determined state-
ment on philosophy of art, trying to say what art is and has to do. The most 
important trait of this brief aesthetic sketch is the assumption that all serious 
art is based in some way on a characteristically metaphysical vision and that the 
actual work of art is a means to communicate the contents of this vision to the 
reader, listener, spectator, etc. To put it in more general terms: Beckett’s view 
of art at the time of writing Proust is a resolutely metaphysical one. I shall try to 
show that Beckett, despite later on turning away from Schopenhauer’s aesthet-
ics and from his own ideas on aesthetics as presented in Proust, remained an 
author with a distinctly metaphysical tendency. My thesis concerning  Beckett’s 
literary work is that very important parts of this work can still be seen as rep-
resenting a metaphysical vision of human life and the world we have to live 
in. The contents of this metaphysical vision show amazing similarities with the 
contents of Schopenhauer’s metaphysical view of life and world, notwithstand-
ing that important elements of the theoretical as well as aesthetic framework of 

6 
the metaphysical vision
Schopenhauer’s philosophy were left behind by Beckett very soon after  having 
used them for his very own purposes in Proust. Apart from the vocabulary 
and philosophical tools applied in that book, I would very much hesitate to 
speak of an ‘influence’ of Schopenhauer on Beckett. Concerning Beckett’s 
literature, the idea of influence seems to be altogether mistaken. As his letters 
and notebooks suggest, there probably was on Beckett’s part, from the first 
intellectual contact with Schopenhauer, a strong feeling of kinship with that 
philosopher’s description of life and human relationships, of everyday reality as 
a will-dominated illusion, of true reality as a wretched realm of pain. The fact 
that Beckett picked Schopenhauer’s philosophy as a suitable means to express 
his own early philosophical ideas and later wrote works which indeed show basic 
traits of a Schopenhauerian world view, probably is grounded in an elementary 
closeness of feeling and experience between two individuals separated by more 
than a century, rather than in an ‘influence’ as traditional history of literature 
would have it.
After having stressed Schopenhauer’s presence in Beckett’s work, philo-
sophical as well as literary, I hasten to add that Schopenhauer is very far from 
being the only philosopher whose ideas Beckett makes use of. He is not even 
the only one who plays a role in Beckett’s philosophical beginnings. Beckett’s 
way of dealing with philosophical tradition is quite free and without unneces-
sary respect. He takes what he can use and forgets what is not to his purpose. 
And he takes a lot: it would not be easy to determine the exact number of 
philosophical authors to whose ideas we find allusions in Beckett’s work.8 
8 There are quite a few books (not to mention articles) which centre on ties between Beckett 
and philosophy. The classic in that ﬁ eld, exploring Beckett’s Cartesian and other rationalist 
imagery, is, of course, Hugh Kenner’s Samuel Beckett: A Critical Study, New York, 1961. D. Hesla, 
The Shape of Chaos: An Interpretation of the Art of Samuel Beckett, Minneapolis, 1971, gives an 
‘ontological’ interpretation of Beckett’s work, referring to many thinkers from Parmenides to 
Sartre. A self-explaining title is: H.-J. Schulz, ‘This hell of stories’: A Hegelian Approach to the novels 
of Samuel Beckett, Den Haag, 1973. A decisively existentialist stance is taken by L. St.J. Butler, 
Samuel Beckett and the Meaning of Being, London, 1984. For attempts to link Beckett with 20th 
century philosophers, even some present day thinkers, see: R. Lane (ed.), Beckett and Philosophy, 
Basingstoke, 2002. For a focus on Poststructuralism see A. Uhlmann, Beckett and Poststructuralism, 
Cambridge, 1999. Uhlmann applies other philosophical theories as well in: Uhlmann, Samuel 
Beckett and the philosophical image, Cambridge, 2006. A variety of philosophical elements from 
Hindu philosophy to Adorno and Derrida is used in a collection edited by A.Uhlmann et al.: 
After Beckett/D’après Beckett, Amsterdam 2004. John Calder, The Philosophy of Samuel Beckett, 
London, 2001, considers it likely that future generations will see Beckett as we now see Voltaire: 
Primarily as a philosopher who just expressed his ideas in literary form. Schopenhauer’s presence 

 
introduction 
7
It would be even harder to draw up a complete account of Beckett’s  philosophical 
reading as well as a complete list of the adaptations and transformations of 
philosophical material, sometimes adequate, sometimes bizarre, which exist 
in Beckett’s texts. The extremely detailed study notes he took when giving 
himself a course in the history of philosophy from the Presocratics to Nietzsche, 
largely along the lines of Windelband’s Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Philosophie 9, 
cover more than five hundred pages, partly typewritten but mostly in Beckett’s 
small handwriting. His nineteen-thirties notebooks contain brief quotations 
from many different philosophers as well as carefully produced extracts from 
authors as far apart in time and theory as Epictetus, St. Augustine, Geulincx, 
Kant, and Mauthner.
It is quite natural that Beckett’s use of philosophical elements has been 
noticed very early. Today, after half a century of criticism, “Samuel Beckett 
and the Philosophers” is a well-discussed subject. However, the case may have 
been misunderstood at times. The interesting question is certainly not: Are 
there philosophical notions in Beckett? There are hundreds. Nor is the ques-
tion: Is there a philosopher whose theory we might use to read Beckett? There 
are dozens. The interesting question is, rather: Is there a philosopher whose 
writings Beckett held in high esteem, read intermittently during his life, and 
whose view of human existence and the world indeed comes close to what we 
find in Beckett’s work? For the answer to this question, Schopenhauer is the 
most promising candidate.
2. Schopenhauer out of fashion; 
Beckett his student
It is an unwritten agreement among many of today’s professional philoso-
phers that Schopenhauer’s philosophy, despite being brilliant in its literary 
aspects, is, in matters of philosophical theory, less interesting than that of 
important competitors of his time like Hegel, Schelling, even Kierkegaard 
in Beckett’s literary work is at least taken into account by James Acheson, Samuel Beckett’s Artistic 
Theory and Practice, New York, 1997 (which also informs about Schopenhauerian elements in 
Beckett’s own literary criticism), Catharina Wulf, The Imperative of Narration, Brighton, 1997, 
and Shane Weller, A Taste for the Negative: Beckett and Nihilism, London, 2005.
9 Trinity College Dublin Library MS 10967. Beckett set out on this enormous undertaking in 
April 1933 (see J. Pilling, A Samuel Beckett Chronology, Basingstoke, 2006, p. 42). It seems yet to 
be determined exactly when he ﬁ nished.

8 
the metaphysical vision
or Marx. I do not know of any philosophical movement of our time or even 
of the second half of the 20th century that considers Schopenhauer one of 
its important  predecessors. This is so despite the fact that we are living in a 
philosophical period which finds it necessary to ‘actualize’ former philoso-
phies at many points. There is hardly a nineteenth-century classic, who did 
not have, or for whom was not at least claimed that he has had, some sort of 
‘renaissance’. This is hardly so with Schopenhauer. The time of Lebensphiloso-
phie, including that of  Bergson, both of which Schopenhauer did influence 
strongly indeed, has long since passed, with the possible exception of very 
few isolated authors. The most influential twentieth-century philosopher 
who seriously discussed Schopenhauerian ideas was Ludwig Wittgenstein.10 
He did so at some points in his early Tractatus logico-philosophicus and, more 
extensively, in the diaries preceding and preparing that book. But, typically, 
Wittgenstein’s early interest in Schopenhauer has by now become a subject 
of mere historical research and has not left many traces in the works of 
 Wittgenstein’s important followers.
It is also typical that the weight of Schopenhauer’s ideas outside profes-
sional philosophy, that is to say in the arts, is quite different and much 
 stronger.11 One need not refer to Herwegh, Wagner, Hebbel, Strindberg or 
Tolstoy. They belong to the period which discovered Schopenhauer and gave 
him a very wide readership in his last years and soon after his death. Authors 
who are closer to us in time and literary taste such as D.H. Lawrence, Thomas 
Mann, André Gide, Marcel Proust, Rainer Maria Rilke, Robert Musil,  Hermann 
Broch, Jorge Luis Borges, and, of course, Samuel Beckett, knew  Schopenhauer 
quite well. Some of them made decisive efforts to understand and interpret 
their work as artists in terms of Schopenhauer’s philosophy. Thus, the interest 
in Schopenhauer’s philosophy throughout the 20th century as well as today is 
thoroughly asymmetric: He has quite a number of readers and followers among 
persons who are not professional philosophers but who make use of his ideas 
to interpret their doings and understand their lives. With well installed 
10 For further details see: D. Jacquette, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, Chesham, 2003, ch. 8, esp. 
p. 249–261. Jacquette also argues for a Schopenhauer inﬂ uence in Heidegger. So does J. Young, 
Schopenhauer, Heidegger, art, and the will, in: D. Jacquette, (ed.), Schopenhauer, philosophy, and the 
arts, Cambridge, 1996, p. 162–180.
11 For contributions to a wider view than can be presented here see: D. Jacquette (ed.), 
 Schopenhauer, philosophy, and the arts, Part III. Cf. also: A. Henry (ed.), Schopenhauer et la création 
littéraire en Europe, Paris, 1989, as well as: G. Baum and D. Birnbacher (eds.), Schopenhauer und 
die Künste, Göttingen 2006.

 
introduction 
9
 present-day philosophers, apart from a few exceptions, he tends to be the 
subject of polite praise without much genuine interest. The reasons for this 
imbalance probably lie to a lesser extent in Schopenhauer’s choleric attacks 
on university philosophy, on modern social ideas, on women, and other sub-
jects, but much more in the unevenness of originality and profundity which 
we find in the different parts of his system itself as set forth, book by book, in 
The World as Will and Representation.
The theory of knowledge which Schopenhauer develops in the First Book 
of that work starts with some premises taken from Kant’s theoretical philoso-
phy. At the same time, other parts of Kant’s theory are either not taken into 
account or are sort of simplified. The premises taken from Kant concern certain 
basic differences on which Kant insists in the development of his systematic 
epistemology. These are, e.g., the difference between the subject of knowledge 
and the object known; the difference between phenomenon and thing-in-itself; 
the difference between the matter of experience, taken from the senses, and a 
priori forms of experience, taken from a priori structures of the mind; the dif-
ference between two areas of reality, namely that which is subject to the forms 
of experience, and another area of reality for which those forms do not have 
and cannot have any validity.
That Schopenhauer’s theory of knowledge did not find many followers 
among philosophers may be due to the fact that this theory, on the one hand, 
rests on Kantian premises, whereas, on the other hand, it declares important 
proofs and other parts of Kant’s theoretical philosophy to be both inconclusive 
and unnecessary. In Schopenhauer’s theory of knowledge we do not find any 
elaborate arguments of his own for the subjectivity of space and time, we do 
not find any equivalent for Kant’s metaphysical or transcendental deduction of 
 categories, we miss Kant’s transcendental schemata. Schopenhauer’s reduction 
of Kant’s categories to the one category of causality and his attempted deduction 
of all forms of knowledge from the principle of sufficient reason has not con-
vinced many philosophers. Any trained person who compares  Schopenhauer’s 
theory of knowledge as developed in the First Book of his main opus with Kant’s 
Critique of Pure Reason is likely to find Schopenhauer’s work on knowledge 
easier to understand and certainly more elegant than Kant’s but, alas, question-
able at a number of points.
The Second Book of Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Representa-
tion, offering the second main part of the system, is a decisively metaphysical 
account of the thing-in-itself which Kant had declared to be forever inac-
cessible to human knowledge. Schopenhauer’s answer to the question which 

10 
the metaphysical vision
Kant considered unanswerable is based on an argument from analogy which 
will be presented in detail later. Schopenhauer himself, however, admits that 
his philosophical means of focussing on the last reality of this world are poor 
in comparison to the metaphysical vision which for him is the source of art. 
Schopenhauer’s candidate for Kant’s thing-in-itself is the Will as some kind 
of blind, permanent striving which never ends and never is fulfilled. There 
was but one important philosopher who followed Schopenhauer literally in 
this matter, the young Friedrich Nietzsche. It is significant, however, that 
Nietzsche after his very first writings in the Schopenhauerian mood hur-
ried to give this mood a different feel, by shifting it from the pessimistic to 
the optimistic. Nietzsche’s later thesis on the metaphysical grounds of this 
world is not anymore Schopenhauer’s “Will”, but “der Wille zur Macht”, 
“the Will to Power”. And the timelessness of Schopenhauer’s metaphysical 
reality which Schopenhauer himself described in the most gloomy terms, 
motivated Nietzsche to postulate a highest form of optimistic affirmation, 
namely saying “yes” to the eternal recurrence of the same, that is, the eternal 
recurrence of all events, lives, persons that ever existed. Neither Nietzsche 
nor Freud nor Bergson, whose theories may be considered to be echoing 
 Schopenhauer’s theory of the Will, did anything to strengthen or confirm 
the latter, but went on to form their own quite different ideas for different 
purposes. Of all the elements of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, his metaphysics 
of the Will is likely to find the least acceptance and support among contem-
porary philosophers.
There remain two important parts of The World as Will and Representation: 
the Third Book the subject of which in our terms would be called “aesthetics” 
and the Fourth Book, containing what might be called “practical philosophy”. 
This latter part of Schopenhauer’s system, however, is no theory of action and 
only in a limited sense is it an ethics. Schopenhauer refuses to give a rationally 
designed system of ethical norms, as might have been expected from a phi-
losopher of his time. Instead, he provides his own metaphysically based, very 
dark view of human life and of life in general. Hence, his place in the history of 
ethics is even more precarious than his place in the history of the philosophical 
theory of knowledge: His philosophy of knowledge alters and simplifies Kant 
in a way that did not serve to make his system very attractive to the experts. 
In ethics he declares typical tasks of this field, as post-Kantian philosophy 
saw it, to be perfectly impracticable. This, it seems, further contributed to the 
asymmetrical reception he found among his readers. Philosophers were often 
disappointed by his lack of interest in ethical theory and by his general outlook 

 
introduction 
11
on human life. Artists, on the other hand, tended to be strongly attracted to 
this part of his system. Schopenhauer does indeed provide an overall idea of 
nature, meaning, and, in fact, the futility of life. Overall views like this are 
rare in modern  philosophy because they do not conform to the typically mod-
ern claim that philosophy should be quasi-scientific. Moreover, the perfectly 
unconventional, daring and verbally brilliant character of Schopenhauer’s 
statements served even to strengthen their attraction for persons who were 
sensitive to exactly those traits. The admiration for Schopenhauer’s courage to 
aim at a metaphysical view of life and world in total instead of doing research 
bit by bit is well expressed in the words of his most ardent admirer as well as 
opponent:
His greatness lies in having set up before him a picture of life as a whole, in order 
to interpret it as a whole; while even the most astute heads cannot be dissuaded 
from the error that one can achieve a more perfect interpretation if one minutely 
investigates the paint with which this picture is produced and the material upon 
which it is painted; perhaps with the result that one concludes that it is a quite 
intricately woven canvas with paint upon it which is chemically inexplicable. … 
one can say, indeed, that only he who has a clear view of the picture of life and 
existence as a whole can employ the individual sciences without harm to himself, 
for without such a regulatory total picture they are threads that nowhere come to 
an end and only render our life more confused and labyrinthine. Schopenhauer 
is, as I said, great in that he pursues this picture …12
This is how Friedrich Nietzsche in his Schopenhauer as educator tries to 
describe the task of a true philosopher as opposed to that of a quasi-scientist. 
 Schopenhauer’s excellence as a practical philosopher does not rest on detailed 
reasoning within a systematic framework in which all theorems occupy their 
due place and fulfil their well-defined function. He is neither primarily a prob-
lem solver nor is he primarily a theory architect. When he comes forward with 
his most authentic thoughts and shows his philosophical personality in the 
most decisive and  intimate way, he presents his reader with a metaphysical 
picture of life, not a systematic building of well cut philosophical arguments. It 
has often been observed that Schopenhauer, in doing so, at many points comes 
closer to being an artist than a typical philosopher. This is echoed in his way of 
writing: His power of metaphor and poignancy of style prove him to be one of 
the greatest masters of the German language, quite contrary to most of his 
12 F. Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, Cambridge 1983, No. III: Schopenhauer as Educator, 
p. 141.

12 
the metaphysical vision
philosophical colleagues and competitors. It is very understandable that the 
most  enthusiastic readers of Schopenhauer’s practical philosophy were (and 
still are) artists and persons who seek a general orientation in life as opposed 
to professional philosophers.
The asymmetry of Schopenhauer’s reception appears still more obvious 
when we come to his aesthetics. There is no ‘classic’ philosophical aesthet-
ics that influenced all kinds of artists more strongly than Schopenhauer’s. 
There probably does not even exist one which equals his influence. It is, above 
all, by means of two tenets that Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art gained its 
 remarkable following among artists: the metaphysical pre-eminence of art over 
 philosophy, and the dissolution of time, space and self as the most important neces-
sary conditions of artistic states of mind. The former trait served to convince 
many metaphysically inclined artists from Schopenhauer’s last years until today; 
the latter was especially attractive to twentieth-century artists who saw them-
selves in radical opposition to the norms and traditions of their own art. They 
could use Schopenhauer’s aesthetics as a means for their own encouragement 
and justification because it helped to support their tendency to do away with 
traditional formal structures of artistic person and artistic object. I shall try 
to show in detail why, in Schopenhauer’s eyes, when those structures are dis-
solved, the metaphysical vision of the artist can yield a farther reaching and 
more reliable visionary image of what world and life truly are, than traditional 
philosophy or science can provide.
Samuel Beckett, maybe the most eminent twentieth-century artist who was 
strongly interested in Schopenhauer, remained perfectly unimpressed by the 
negative judgment of professional philosophers (like Jean Beaufret, as quoted). 
Thanks to the invaluable biography by James Knowlson we now know that 
Beckett was a reader of Schopenhauer throughout his life.13 I quote another 
letter to Thomas MacGreevy, from 21st September 1937, as communicated by 
Knowlson. Beckett, being ill with gastric influenza, wrote that he
found the only thing I could read was Schopenhauer. Everything else I tried only 
conﬁ rmed the feeling of sickness. It was very curious. Like suddenly a window 
opened on a fug. I always knew he was one of the ones that mattered most to 
me, and it is a pleasure more real than any pleasure for a long time to begin to 
understand now why it is so. And it is a pleasure also to ﬁ nd a philosopher that 
can be read like a poet …14
13 Cf. Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 118, 215, 226, 268, 271, 653. 
14 Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 268.

 
introduction 
13
By that time, Beckett read Schopenhauer in German 15 and could use his own 
edition of his works. Beckett’s “Whoroscope” notebook 16, which he had with him 
on his tour of Germany in 1936 and 1937, contains an extremely wide variety 
of notes and extracts, philosophical and other, ranging over several years. An 
entry, probably from December 1936, lists “Books sent home” and has as first 
item: “Schopenhauer: Werke”.17 It is the only edition of philosophical works 
mentioned in that list, the other titles referring mainly to German literature 
apart from Brunschvicg’s Spinoza et ses contemporains. In later parts of that note-
book we find brief quotations from Schopenhauer’s Über die vierfache Wurzel des 
Satzes vom zureichenden Grundes [On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient 
Reason] which Beckett seems to have studied extensively indeed 18, following 
Schopenhauer’s often neglected advice that this book should be read first before 
one starts on his chief work, The World as Will and Representation.
There is even a short philosophical meditation by Beckett himself, written 
in German in August 1936 in his “Clare Street” notebook, the beginning of 
which reads like being from the hand of a convinced Schopenhauer follower. 
This is how Mark Nixon translates the first lines of that text:
There are moments when the veil of hope is ﬁ nally torn apart and the liberated 
eyes see their world, as it is, as it must be. Unfortunately it does not last long, 
15 Two notebooks of the mid-thirties, Reading University Library MS 5002 and MS 5006, show 
Beckett as a very advanced student of the German language, assiduously jotting down idi-
omatic expressions, writing small texts in German of his own (e.g. on the situation of a young 
man, “der keine menschliche Bindung und keinen Beruf, so wenig inneren wie äusseren, und 
keinen Glauben an auch die schönsten und hochwürdigsten Dinge ﬁ nden konnte”(MS 5002, 
p. 45)) and sarcastically importing his very personal world view into some German expressions. 
E.g.: “man soll den Tag nicht vor dem Abend loben” [“One should not praise the day before 
the evening.” –  German proverb. Beckett comments with stronger pencil:] “Nur vorm Abend 
ist der Tag zu loben.” [“One should only praise the day before the evening.”] (MS 5006, about 
October 1936).
 I am much indebted to Mark Nixon for being the ﬁ rst to have directed my attention to all 
the notebooks quoted here.
16 Reading University Library MS 3000.
17  “Whoroscope” notebook, RUL MS 3000, p. 18 (recto).
18 I conclude this from the fact that Beckett not only quotes from the introduction to The Four-
fold Root but also from § 20 of that book, where Schopenhauer presents central elements of his 
analysis of causality. The latter quotation is part of Schopenhauer’s comment on the way he was 
treated by his philosopher colleagues. It reads (in Beckett’s orthography and with his  comment): 
“Zitto! Zitto! das nur das Publikum nichts merke! (Conspiracy of silence against Schop er.V.W. 
p. 50)”. “Whoroscope” notebook, p. 83 (recto).

14 
the metaphysical vision
the revelation quickly passes. The eyes can only bear such pitiless light for a 
short while, the membrane of hope grows again and one returns to the world 
of phenomena.19
The Schopenhauerian approach shows in the overall world view which is 
 suggested here, and in some particular expressions. Beckett assumes that we 
exist in a “world of phenomena”, the world of ‘normal’ life but not the world as 
it truly is. This true world only becomes visible in rare moments, and it is a world 
of pitiless light which most likely shows a pitiless reality. There is a “veil” which 
has to be torn apart for the eyes to see their world as it truly is. This is strongly 
reminiscent of Schopenhauer’s “veil of Maya” which normally keeps human 
persons in the world of illusion, i.e., the world of phenomena, and does not allow 
them to see true reality.20 As in Beckett, so in Schopenhauer, it is only in rare and 
brief states of mind that human beings are able to ‘see’ their world as it truly is. 
Needless to say, Schopenhauer’s description of true reality shows a pitiless world 
the ‘sight’ of which would be hard to bear. The pitiless light of some Beckett stage 
settings, not to mention the plays’ world, may be foreshadowed here.
Just as Becket turned to Schopenhauer as a young man, he still turned 
to him in his seventies – possibly more intensely and more thoroughly than 
19 Mark Nixon, “Scraps of German”: Samuel Beckett reading German Literature, in: Samuel  Beckett 
Today/Aujourd’hui, 16 (2006), 273. Beckett’s German original, also given by Nixon, reads: 
“Es gibt Augenblicke, wo der Hoffnungsschleier endgültig weggerissen wird und die plötzlich 
befreiten Augen ihre Welt erblicken, wie sie ist, wie sie sein muss. Es dauert leider nicht lange, 
die Wahrnehmung geht schnell vorüber, ein so unverbittliches Licht können die Augen nur auf 
kurze Zeit ertragen, das Häutchen der Hoffnung bildet sich von neuem, man kehrt in die Welt 
der Phänomene zurück.” (Nixon loc. cit. p. 273 and Reading University Library MS 5003, p. 33). 
The word “unverbittlich” does not exist in German. This is either a neologism coined by Beckett 
and roughly meaning the same as “unerbittlich”, or Beckett indeed meant “unerbittlich” and just 
spelt the word incorrectly.
 For the full text of Beckett’s meditation (in German) see Mark Nixon’s doctoral dissertation: 
“What a tourist I must have been”: The German Diaries of Samuel Beckett, PhD thesis, University of 
Reading 2005, p. 178. Nixon’s English translation is on p. 179.
20 For “veil of Maya” in Schopenhauer’s philosophy see p. 69f. below. Cf. also Nixon, “Scraps of 
German”, p. 280 (his fn. 14). The metaphor of a veil which has to be torn apart in order to get 
at the reality – or whatever – behind it keeps recurring in Beckett’s thinking. The document 
likely to be known best is his letter to Axel Kaun from 9th July 1937 where he takes his own lan-
guage as the veil to be torn apart in order to reach the things, or the nothing, behind it (Disjecta 
51–54). For a reading of Beckett’s work, esp. The Unnamable, setting out from this letter and 
Schopenhauer’s philosophy, see: D. Wellbery, Schopenhauers Bedeutung für die moderne Literatur, 
München, 1998, 17–35.

 
introduction 
15
before. His “Sottisier” notebook 21 has a number of entries between July 1979 
and December 1980 which show that he re-read Schopenhauer again in that 
period, taking notes from the text as he went along. Most of these notes are in 
German. I quote a few of those entries here. Their significance for Beckett’s 
work, together with other parts of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, will become 
evident later.
“Das Leben ist ein Pensum zum Abarbeiten: in diesem Sinne ist defunctus 
ein schöner Ausdruck.”22 [“Life is a pensum to be worked off: in that sense 
‘defunctus’ is a fine expression.”23] The idea of life as a pensum to be worked off 
can be found at a number of places in Beckett’s work; the special meaning of 
“defunctus” in that same context is alluded to at the end of Proust and will be 
discussed when we come there.
“Die Welt ist eben die Hölle, u. die Menschen sind einerseits die gequälten 
Seelen u. andererseits die Teufel darin.”24 [“The world is just a hell and in 
it human beings are the tortured souls on the one hand, and the devils on 
the other.”] There is little need to point out that Beckett’s characters more 
than once explicitly see their world as hell and that their fellow sufferers often 
may be seen as devils. Beckett continues this line of thought by noting: “Life 
penal colony”. The relevant passage in Schopenhauer about life reads: “eine 
 Strafanstalt, a penal colony – ein ε1ργαστη′ριον”25. The idea of life as a penal 
colony may not only have convinced Beckett but also, much earlier, might have 
contributed to Franz Kafka writing his “In der Strafkolonie”.
Beckett’s Schopenhauer studies of 1979 and 1980 not only concentrate on 
the latter’s famous essays in Paralipomena, like Additional Remarks on the Doctrine 
of the Vanity of Existence, Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Suffering of 
21 Reading University Library MS 2901. The following Schopenhauer quotations from this note-
book are not dated by Beckett himself, but the entries immediately before and after them are, 
making it evident that the Schopenhauer notes were taken between 11th July 1979 and 28th 
December 1980. The notes show different ink or pencil, and handwriting, thus are likely to have 
been written at different dates during that period.
22 Cf. Schopenhauer, Parerga und Paralipomena, Kleine philosophische Schriften, vol. II, § 156.
23 This and the next translation basically after Payne’s English version: Parerga and Paralipomena: 
Short Philosophical Essays, Oxford Clarendon), 1974, vol. II, p. 300. However, since Beckett in 
Proust and in his literary works, too, keeps to Schopenhauer’s original “pensum” instead of Payne’s 
“task”, I judge it better to use “pensum” as well. See p. 90f. below.
24 Schopenhauer, ibid.
25 Schopenhauer, ibid. – Ergasterion in Greek antiquity was a place of hard labour, often a penal 
house for slaves; “penitentiary” might be an adequate translation for Schopenhauer’s meaning.

16 
the metaphysical vision
the World, On Suicide, Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Affirmation and 
Denial of the Will-to-Live. In those years Beckett also studied for another time 
Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Representation, even his doctoral disser-
tation On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, and took notes, 
in German again, on Schopenhauer’s early theory of knowledge. It does not 
come as a surprise that he concentrated on Schopenhauer’s determinist view 
of the empirical world which is so similar to his own and translated from the 
philosopher’s occasional Latin into German: “Nichts ist ohne Grund warum es 
sei”26 [“Nothing is without reason why it should be”].
I do not know of any other artist who, like Samuel Beckett, would not 
have been content with reading Schopenhauer’s standard writings like The 
World as Will and Representation and the essays of Parerga and Paralipomena 
(including Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life) which made the philosopher famous, 
but would undertake the considerable effort to read and understand a system-
atically relevant but in fact (apart from its polemic passages) rather dry book 
like On the Fourfold Root... There can be little doubt that Beckett’s interest in 
 Schopenhauer was a lifelong intellectual commitment, probably stronger and 
deeper than his contact with any other of the many philosophers whom he 
quotes or refers to in passing.
3. Intentions and limits
I shall present an account of Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and philosophy of 
life and try to give a reconstruction of the way Beckett used those parts of 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy in Proust. This will be Part One of this book. Its 
title is: Metaphysics of art and life.
In Part Two, I shall follow significant traces of Schopenhauer’s thought 
in Beckett’s literary work. Those traces very rarely consist in direct quota-
tions from Schopenhauer, although a few of those exist. Beckett transformed 
 Schopenhauer’s ideas about art and life at several points so as to make them 
suitable for his own purposes. However, the Schopenhauerian origin often can 
be shown quite clearly. At other times, assuming a Schopenhauerian back-
ground is just a more or less plausible hypothesis. My Part Two has the title: On 
some details in Beckett’s literary work.
26 cf. Schopenhauer, Über die vierfache Wurzel  , § 5. He quotes Christian Wolff: “Nihil est sine 
ratione, cur potius sit quam non sit.”

 
introduction 
17
One of the objects of Part Two is to make visible how Beckett’s use of Scho-
penhauerian material from the philosophy of art and the metaphysics of life has 
changed in time. Of course I do not claim that Beckett meant his literature or 
even any bit of it to be an intentional, let alone consciously planned, re-writing 
of Schopenhauerian ideas in a different medium. Rather, it seems to me that 
central parts of Schopenhauer’s philosophy remain present in Beckett’s liter-
ary oeuvre and keep being used as well as transformed by Beckett without the 
author being necessarily aware of it. My talk of Beckett “making his own use” 
of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, as far as Beckett’s literary work is concerned, 
therefore is to be understood in the sense of objective presence and further 
transformation of Schopenhauerian material. It is not to be understood in the 
sense of conscious intentional translation of philosophy into literature.
When talking about a work of literature and its possible philosophical inter-
pretations, a note of caution seems necessary. Reading a work of art of course 
differs greatly from interpreting (explaining, reconstructing) a philosophical 
theory. The main difference is that when giving one’s reading of a work of art 
one should be aware that there may be other equally viable but incompatible 
interpretations. One can read Beckett’s work, especially the trilogy of novels and 
the greater dramas, as giving us the contents of a Schopenhauerian metaphysical 
vision in an artistic form which Schopenhauer himself did not anticipate. One 
can read Beckett’s literary work quite differently, too. But one cannot read some 
direct philosophical statements by Beckett without recurring to Schopenhauer. 
These direct statements are to be found mainly in the essay on Proust. That 
means when reading these direct statements from Beckett, the Schopenhauerian 
interpretation of the relevant passages can claim to be the true one. On the other 
hand, reading Beckett’s literary works from a  Schopenhauerian point of view 
just means to come forward with a suggestion, supported by fairly good reasons. 
There may be other suggestions as well. Examples of philosophically-oriented, 
but incompatible interpretations of a Beckett work are Theodor W. Adorno’s 
Versuch, das Endspiel zu verstehen 27 [Attempt at Understanding Endgame], Stanley 
Cavell’s Ending the Waiting Game 28 and the interpretation of Endgame from a 
Schopenhauerian standpoint given below, p. 196–223.
In detail, the order of subjects is as follows. My starting point, 
 Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and philosophy of life, will be presented so as to 
27 in: Adorno, Noten zur Literatur II, Frankfurt/M., 1961, 188–236; English translation in: 
H. Bloom (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, New York, 1988, 9–40.
28 in: H. Bloom (ed.) Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, 59–77.

18 
the metaphysical vision
prepare an understanding of the way Samuel Beckett made use of it. This 
means that I shall especially focus on points which were of importance for 
Beckett, e.g., the pre-eminence of art over philosophy in matters of the meta-
physical vision, the role and properties of the artist, the true meaning of this 
life as  Schopenhauer sees it, the general character of a world under the reign 
of “the Will”. I shall also try to point out some traits of Schopenhauer’s phi-
losophy which help to explain why it was primarily this philosopher that many 
artists of what we now call “classic modernity” turned to for a philosophical 
 understanding of their own artistic activity.
My account of Beckett’s Proust, following that of Schopenhauer’s aesthet-
ics and view of life, will concentrate on extracting the philosophical view of 
art Beckett held by 1930 from the extremely compressed form he gave it in 
his essay.29 I also hope to show how Beckett deviated from the theory of his 
philosophical mentor so as to venture forth on aesthetic notions of his own 
which were not bound by the conventions of early nineteenth-century thought. 
Beckett did not accept all of Schopenhauer’s ideas about art. He did stress the 
primacy of art over philosophy in matters of metaphysical insight, he did use 
central parts of the Schopenhauerian theoretical framework and terminology, 
but he also cut or altered several systematic details of Schopenhauer’s aesthet-
ics. Which parts of Schopenhauer’s philosophy Beckett could use, which ones 
he did not use, which ones he altered and which ones he just dropped is not 
only significant for Beckett’s views by this time but also for the question as to 
what extent Schopenhauer’s aesthetics may still be considered up to date with 
‘modern’ art – even at the cost of altering some of its theses.
My Part Two, which is devoted to Beckett’s literature, will, mainly for 
 reasons of space, give a narrower account of Schopenhauer’s presence in 
 Beckett’s work than would be desirable. I shall start with attitudes and actions 
of Murphy, the main character of Beckett’s first printed novel written 1935/36. 
Then I shall focus on the trilogy of novels Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnam-
able. These works belong to Beckett’s enormously fertile period after World 
War II. They strongly differ in artistic technique and style from Beckett’s earlier 
works and they also represent a new stage in Beckett’s thinking about art. Fairly 
obviously, Beckett has now dropped his earlier Schopenhauerian approach to 
29 Beckett’s Proust is seen as a philosophical essay of its own right by Rupert Wood, too: “The 
result is that Proust often reads like an encounter between Beckett and Schopenhauer, with 
Proust’s novel supplying pertinent material for a philosophical essay.” R. Wood, Beckett as Essayist, 
in: J. Pilling (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Beckett, Cambridge, 1994, p. 3.

 
introduction 
19
questions of art, traces of which could still be found in Murphy. In his Three 
Dialogues with Georges Duthuit of 1949 and in other writings of the same time 
(mainly on his painter friends) which I shall discuss in the context of the tril-
ogy of novels, he breaks away very brusquely from his own earlier views just as 
from any traditional view of art. In his literary writings, this stage is tentatively 
reached with Molloy of 1947. More important than the character and doings of 
Molloy is, in my opinion, the second ‘hero’ of this novel, Moran. His attitudes 
and even more clearly those of the Unnamable to me seem to be the attitudes 
not of an everyday person, but, to a large extent, those of an artist. Thus, in 
these novels we can study a concept of artistic activity (or something very much 
like it) as deployed in the work itself. In the case of Moran, there still is some 
remote similarity to the aesthetic attitudes Beckett advocated in Proust. The 
Unnamable, however, shows Beckett’s fully developed new understanding of 
his writing, for which Three Dialogues and his essays on the van Velde brothers 
read like a commentary.
To conclude my attempt at reading Beckett’s most influential works I shall 
turn to Waiting for Godot and Endgame – two plays which brought Beckett 
world-wide fame. I shall especially concentrate on the personalities, actions 
and non-actions of the main characters Gogo and Didi (Waiting for Godot), and 
Hamm and Clov (Endgame). Their existence and especially their way of see-
ing themselves as beings who have to live this existence without escape, to me 
show an image of life which emerges when Schopenhauer’s metaphysical vision 
is not understood as Schopenhauer wanted it to be, but in a new, Beckettian 
way. Both plays can be taken as examples of a hitherto unseen kind of art as 
metaphysical activity, the objects of which, in a Schopenhauerian perspective, 
must be considered to be truer and more merciless than any kind of traditional 
theatre. Leaving the nineteenth-century elements of Schopenhauer’s aesthet-
ics behind (as Beckett certainly did) and keeping the metaphysical perspective, 
Beckett’s dramas present a theatre of metaphysical vision. If we look at Beckett’s 
theatre from a Schopenhauerian standpoint, we may see that in his most pow-
erful works Beckett not only overturned the architecture of Schopenhauer’s 
theory of art, but also gave a kind of stage presence to a metaphysical view of life 
very similar to that of Schopenhauer, in an artistic form which this philosopher 
himself could never have conceived.


PART ONE
METAPHYSICS OF ART AND LIFE


4. Premises from Schopenhauer’s theory of
knowledge and metaphysics
In Schopenhauer’s philosophy any kind of awareness, inasmuch as it is directed 
towards anything one is aware of, is based on the relation between subject and 
object.30 For Schopenhauer, this relation is the most general form of represen-
tation (“Vorstellung”). “Vorstellung” is a term which Schopenhauer, following 
Kant, uses in an extremely wide sense so as to cover all kinds of awareness, 
empirical as well as non-empirical. The subject-object relation is also a 
 necessary condition for there to be a subject on the one hand and an object 
30 By the time of Schopenhauer the “subject-object relation” suggested itself as a starting point 
for German philosophers, although writing about it in those terms as an elementary relation (!) of 
greatest epistemic importance only seems to have originated in the 1780s, probably with Carl 
Leonard Reinhold, a little known follower of Kant. Kant hardly ever writes about a “subject-object 
relation”. His standard terminology, as well as that of all his important predecessors, is different. 
For the relata of the said relation see C. Janaway, Self and World in Schopenhauer’s Philosophy, 
Oxford, 1989, 117–139. For a broader picture of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, not organized along 
the lines of his presence in Beckett’s work, see: B. Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, rev. 
ed. Oxford 1997; C. Janaway: Schopenhauer. Oxford, 1994, and C. Janaway (ed.), The Cambridge 
Companion to Schopenhauer. Cambridge, 1999.
· I ·
ON SCHOPENHAUER’S AESTHETICS
AND WORLD VIEW

24 
the metaphysical vision
on the other. For Schopenhauer, subject and object do not exist outside that 
relation.
In this philosophy, the normal, everyday way in which anything may become 
an object for a subject, is experience. Experience is structured by additional forms 
which are less general than that of representation (awareness of any kind). 
These necessary forms of experience for Schopenhauer are space, time, and 
causality. For him, objects of worldly experience are not only objects to a subject 
but also necessarily have a place in space and time, and they necessarily are 
imbedded in causal relations, that is, they are effects of a cause and they are 
themselves causes or potential causes of effects. The word “necessarily” may be 
used here because Schopenhauer, leaning on Kant, claims that nothing can 
become an object of experience unless it appears in the forms of experience. 
The entire world which we empirically perceive outside ourselves, and which 
we know in further detail by science, consists, according to Schopenhauer, of 
objects arranged in the forms of space, time, and causality. The ‘inner’ self-
awareness of persons, Schopenhauer claims, is not spatial, but is subject to the 
forms of time and a certain kind of causality, and so shares these forms with 
outside experience. Schopenhauer calls causality, when inwardly  experienced, 
“motivation”, but apart from minor differences the causal form of  self-experience 
is basically that of experience in general. There are very rare exceptional states 
of awareness in which the person does perceive, but does not perceive objects of 
experience in the general forms of experience. In these states the person does 
not perceive objects of our normal world. I shall talk about those exceptional 
states of mind later.
Schopenhauer thinks that the subject has to arrange all data which are to 
become objects of experience, into the forms of space, time, and causality. The 
necessity of this arrangement is not normally known to the subject, let alone 
the actual process of arranging. Moreover, the validity of the said forms is lim-
ited to ‘normal’ sense perception, that is, to our experience of the empirical 
world including ourselves, or the world of phenomena. Anything that exists 
outside possible experience of that kind, i.e., outside our normal way of perceiv-
ing the world and ourselves, is free from space, time and causality. When the 
person happens to perceive in a way which is not experience of that kind, he or 
she does not perceive parts of the empirical, phenomenal world but something 
quite different. In this case, according to Schopenhauer, the person perceives 
an extratemporal, extraspatial reality with no causal structure.
Space, time, and causality for Schopenhauer are aspects (“Gestalten”) of 
what he considers to be the one single highest principle of human knowledge 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
25
and worldly existence, the principle of sufficient reason. This principle basically 
is well known from Leibniz and his follower Wolff. In his doctoral dissertation, 
On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, Schopenhauer tried to 
explain that this principle operates in the apparatus of human understanding 
in a fourfold way, namely as space/time, logical consequence, causality, and 
motivation. Schopenhauer finds the most general version of his highest  principle 
in the works of Christian Wolff and quotes: “Nihil est sine ratione, cur potius 
sit quam non sit.”31 – [“Nothing is without reason why it is rather than is not.”] 
According to Schopenhauer, this principle cannot be proven because it would 
have to be itself the principle of any proof which could possibly be given.
That Schopenhauer just assumes one highest principle of both knowledge 
and reality, of which all other principles of our knowledge and the world are 
special forms or aspects, is one of the most important points at which he alters 
the basic structure of Kant’s theory. The alteration in detail has several features, 
the most consequential of which are: Uniting causality and logical consequence 
under one principle; establishing a strong parallelism of space and time (stron-
ger than what Kant had claimed already); and, above all, assuming that there 
is just one category, i.e., causality, the validity of which cannot and need not 
be proven since it is one of the aspects of the principle of sufficient reason. This 
means that Schopenhauer does away with some distinctions which Kant had 
thought to be unavoidable. Logical and empirical truth come under one 
 principle. Under the same principle comes causality as the only remaining 
 category, which Schopenhauer considers to be the most important formal 
instrument by which our understanding organizes data of awareness so as to 
turn them into empirical knowledge of the phenomenal world. In Kant’s system, 
this task was assigned to a well-ordered set of different categories as concepts 
of pure understanding which Kant had presented to his readers in a special 
“table of categories”. Schopenhauer drops this elaborate order entirely by 
 claiming that Kant’s system of categories, apart from causality, is an unnecessary 
and confusing complication. This motivates him to do away with one of the 
most important proofs of Kant’s entire philosophy, the transcendental  deduction 
of categories: As there is no multiplicity of categories anymore, let alone a 
 systematic order, and as the only remaining category, causality, in  Schopenhauer’s 
thinking is perfectly justified by its being an aspect of the principle of sufficient 
reason, there is no need for a special proof of the validity of categories  concerning 
all our experience. Followers of Kant always considered this Schopenhauerian 
31 Christian Woff, Philosophia Prima sive Ontologia, Frankfurt/O., 1729, § 70.

26 
the metaphysical vision
move to be too radical a cut which destroys the subtle and well argued structure 
of Kant’s theory of knowledge. Followers of Schopenhauer, on the other hand, 
valued his alterations as suitable means to avoid Kant’s most cumbersome and 
hard to read proof and yet to preserve the basic plausibility of his system.
Two details are important here for Samuel Beckett’s use of Schopenhauer’s 
ideas. Firstly: Schopenhauer considers time to be the most universal aspect of 
the principle of sufficient reason in matters of our perception of the empirical 
world: It not only gives a certain order to all events outside ourselves but, 
 contrary to space, also gives this order to all internal events, that is, all events 
of our self-awareness. As Schopenhauer thinks that causality in the area of 
 self-awareness is replaced by motivation, time remains the only aspect of 
 Schopenhauer’s highest principle which he considers valid for all phenomena, 
‘inside’ the subject as well as outside. Beckett will stress this universality of time 
in the strongest way. And secondly: Causality comes into play when the person 
is to experience objects in space and time, that is, external objects. Schopen-
hauer considered objects of that kind always to be based on matter which he 
thought to have an extended as well as temporal existence made possible by the 
parts of matter having effects on each other, i.e.,: being organized according to 
causality. Schopenhauer sums up this observation by writing: “Consequently, 
causality unites space and time.” (WWR I, 10) We shall find this with Samuel 
Beckett again.
The next premise from Schopenhauer’s theory of knowledge which is 
 relevant for Beckett (and also for Nietzsche) is the thesis that space and time, 
taken together, make up the principium individuationis, that is, the principle by 
which an individual can be recognized as individual. For Schopenhauer, there 
are no individuals outside space and time. Human persons, who normally 
 perceive themselves as individuals, can only do so as long as their perception is 
organized in the forms of space and time which enable them to see themselves 
as different from other persons or objects. But since space and time (as in Kant) 
are assumed to be just forms which belong to the apparatus of subjectivity for 
the purpose of organizing experience, it is impossible that the entity which in 
the last analysis is the non-phenomenal, never-experienced basis of all subjec-
tivity should be an individual. This is another Schopenhauerian element we 
shall find in Beckett.
The central problem in the theory of knowledge since Descartes has been 
the question how persons can gain knowledge of the world outside themselves 
and what kind of reliability such knowledge possibly may have. Schopenhauer, 
following Kant, takes the understanding (“Verstand”) to be the most important 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
27
faculty of the subject in matters of building an outside reality. In order to 
 analyze more closely the working and the achievements of our understanding, 
he distinguishes between two kinds of perceptions: immediate perceptions and 
indirect perceptions. Immediate perceptions are sensations of one’s own body, 
presenting themselves to self-awareness without the need of a perceiving 
 medium. Other immediate perceptions, Schopenhauer claims, are the raw data 
provided by the outward directed sense organs – sense data as some twentieth-
century philosophers might say. Indirect perceptions are those which are already 
arranged and interpreted in certain ways so as to represent, for instance, outside 
objects. This arranging and interpreting, according to Schopenhauer, is the 
work of our understanding which performs that task without the subject being 
aware of it. The person’s understanding applies the category of causality to raw 
data of the senses and thereby interprets them as being caused by outward 
objects. It is only this unconscious causal interpretation through our under-
standing, Schopenhauer claims, which makes us experience outward objects 
instead of simple sense data which basically belong to us or our body, respec-
tively. Due to this operation of the understanding, persons see, feel, taste things 
instead of just having vague sensations without meaning. This performance is 
the understanding’s most important function by far in Schopenhauer’s system. 
A further, less elementary, function is to connect outward objects or events in 
a causal order, taking into account their place in space and time. This operation 
can only be performed by the understanding when its more basic function of 
silently interpreting raw data as effects of outward objects or events has been 
completed. An important consequence of this view is Schopenhauer’s thesis 
that any perception of objects whatsoever is not only due to the senses but also 
to the intellect (WWR I, 23). In his German he uses the term “intellektuale 
Anschauung” which must have been fairly provocative in his time because 
famous contemporaries considered “intellektuelle Anschauung” to be either the 
privilege of God only (Kant) or to be the very highest faculty of human persons, 
making them god-like in this respect (Fichte, Schelling). Samuel Beckett, like 
Schopenhauer, takes the understanding to be the organizing force of everyday 
experience and therefore to be the organizing force of the superficial, the merely 
phenomenal, the trivial and illusory world in which we lead our ‘normal’ lives.
Reason, as opposed to understanding, in Schopenhauer’s system is the fac-
ulty of forming concepts from given experiences, that is, the faculty of simple 
abstraction. This is another point at which Schopenhauer breaks away from the 
traditions of his time: Reason for him is not at all the source of high-ranking 
concepts referring to transcendent entities such as God or immortality, let alone 

28 
the metaphysical vision
the source of indisputable a priori knowledge. Its concept-forming activity is 
always based on experience which means that reason, in Schopenhauer’s 
 philosophy, is thoroughly empirical. Since he considers any science to be based 
on conceptual knowledge gained by reason, his theory of science is thoroughly 
empiricist, too. Even philosophy, when it tries to argue for statements about the 
non-phenomenal, non-empirical basis of this world, has to rely on concepts 
which have been formed from empirical knowledge by a process of abstraction. 
Thus, Schopenhauer’s philosophy, when it tries to perform typically  metaphysical 
tasks like describing the non-phenomenal, transcendent core of the world, is 
virtually an empirical metaphysics. This will have to be explained in more detail 
when we come to the very different means and achievements of philosophy on 
the one hand and art on the other in the system of this philosopher.
Schopenhauer’s metaphysics contains statements about the essence of the 
world beyond all phenomena, which essence Kant had called the “ thing-in-itself”, 
and via those statements it also gives an account of what the world of  phenomena 
and life inside this world in the last analysis mean. We may remember the 
 difference between direct or immediate perceptions and indirect perceptions: 
To the immediate ones belong the raw data of internal self-awareness which 
have not yet been interpreted by the understanding to represent outward 
objects. Schopenhauer notes that all immediate perceptions of our awareness 
which are not formed and interpreted by the understanding are somehow felt 
as drive or striving or impulse. Hence Schopenhauer talks about these percep-
tions as having the common character of willing or, as we might say, volition. He 
further observes that there is a correspondence between inner volitions and 
outward movements of the body. Noting also that the body as part of the exter-
nal world is only the spatial appearance of something else, he arrives at the 
thesis that my body, in fact, is nothing but my will having become externally 
visible as a spatial phenomenon. Thus, considering individual persons, 
 Schopenhauer differentiates between their individual will, immediately known 
by internal awareness, and the external appearance of this will which is the 
person’s body, extended in space and time and organized according to the prin-
ciple of causality. This body is known to the person only indirectly as its percep-
tion is formed by the understanding. Since the body has the form of an object 
of external experience and since its inner essence is will, Schopenhauer calls it 
“objectified will” – will that has taken the form of an external object. He also 
calls it the “objectivity” of the will.
The statement that the body is a phenomenon of the will, in  Schopenhauer’s 
eyes is the “philosophical truth κατ’ε1ξοχη′ν” (WWR I, 102), the epitome of 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
29
 philosophical truth or the original philosophical truth. Schopenhauer considers 
this to be the most basic insight of his system, the philosophical novelty not 
foreshadowed by any earlier philosophy and the thesis by which his world view 
fundamentally differs from any other.
According to Schopenhauer, all parts of the world extended in space are 
mere appearances, or phenomena. Since the true, transphenomenal essence 
of my body is will, would it not, therefore, be adequate to assume that all 
 phenomena have a similar transphenomenal essence which is also will? 
 Schopenhauer thinks along this line and finds it suitable that he can interpret 
all phenomena of nature as the actions of forces which, as forces, are not 
directly perceived, but merely named instead. The status of “force” as a 
 theoretical concept, the  referent of which can never be perceived itself but, 
nonetheless, is thought to be the basis of numerous effects which we ascribe 
to it, contributes to the argument from analogy which Schopenhauer then puts 
forward: If all movements of a person’s body correspond exactly to movements 
of that person’s will as their origin, and if all events of nature in general can be 
seen as originating from unseen forces comparable to what persons experience 
as their will, it is plausible that all phenomena, all worldly things, events etc., 
have will as their true basis or their “An-sich”. Schopenhauer’s metaphysical 
statement about the basis, the true transphenomenal reality of this world thus 
reads: The essence of the world which never, as such, becomes appearance or 
 phenomenon, but only can be thought of as the acting force underlying all  phenomena, 
is Will. This is the entity which Kant in vain aimed at, calling it the thing-in-itself, 
but was unable to give any description of.
The Will (capital W so as to distinguish the Will as thing-in-itself from the 
individual will we attribute to empirical persons32) exists outside time and space 
32 Henceforth I shall keep to this distinction, using “Will” for Schopenhauer’s metaphysical 
essence of the world, and “will” for the will we attribute to individual persons. I shall do the same 
when quoting passages from Payne’s translation of Schopenhauer’s chief works. At some points 
a perfectly clear distinction is not possible; in those cases I shall keep to “will” since the Will as 
thing-in-itself is rarely referred to by Beckett.
 My distinction between the Will as essence of the world and the individual will as a very 
 limited way in which that essence expresses itself in individual persons will not be approved 
by all  Schopenhauer scholars. For an in-depth analysis of the underlying systematic problem in 
 Schopenhauer see: C. Janaway, Will and Nature, in: Janaway, (ed.), The Cambridge Companion 
to Schopenhauer, 138–170. See also: B. Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, ch. 21: Misunder-
standing Schopenhauer, esp. p. 443, and Günter Zöller, Schopenhauer on the Self, in: Ch. Janaway 
(ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, p. 18–43.

30 
the metaphysical vision
and, since these are the principium individuationis, in Schopenhauer’s view is not 
an individual. As causality, being just one of the forms of appearance, does not 
apply to the Will, the relation between the Will and the empirical world as its 
mere appearance cannot be explained as a relation of cause and effect. The 
world which we perceive, for Schopenhauer, is the way by which the Will 
expresses itself in the forms of everyday experience. It is the Will having taken 
the form of empirical objects for a subject or, as Schopenhauer says, the “objec-
tivity” (“die Objektivation”) of the Will. Since this empirical and therefore (in 
the last analysis) deceptive appearance of the Will is arranged in the forms of 
space, time and causality, this objectivity of the Will is only an indirect one. We 
shall soon come to learn about a different objectivity of the Will which 
 Schopenhauer is ready to call its “direct objectivity”. The Will, having the 
nature of force, is constantly striving to express or objectify itself. There are lower 
and higher forms (“Gestalten”) of this expression. The higher ones show the 
characteristics of life. Life is nothing but a way in which the Will acts out its 
force, that is, expresses or objectifies itself. Hence, Schopenhauer sometimes 
says the thing-in-itself is “the Will-to-live”, although lower forms of its expression, 
like inorganic nature, do not fit this description well.
Samuel Beckett’s use of Schopenhauer’s theory relies on a further  peculiarity 
which has not yet been sufficiently explained. The word “will” in  Schopenhauer’s 
texts is used in two different ways which must be kept apart. The first and  foremost 
use is the one in which that word refers to the innermost nature of the world 
as just pointed out. The second use refers to mental phenomena of the indi-
vidual person such as wishes, fears, tendencies, strivings, etc. Human persons 
experience themselves as beings with an individual will which, primarily, always 
wills something for this individual person, although, secondarily, it may be 
directed towards the aims of a community, another individual person, other 
living beings, etc. The individual will expresses itself in the movements of the 
individual body belonging to the same person. The Will as thing-in-itself, the 
true reality of the world as a whole, cannot be considered an individual in this 
philosophy since it exists outside space and time and wills nothing for individual 
persons. Rather, individual persons and all their actions, for Schopenhauer, are 
transitory phenomena of this world, and on the whole they are fairly unimport-
ant expressions of the permanent, but unconscious and blind striving of the Will 
as thing-in-itself. The individual will which wills something for its ‘owner’ and 
is the directing force of his or her life, must be considered to be a tiny expression 
of the Will as true reality and nothing more than an expression. Strictly speaking, 
the individual will, though belonging to the phenomenal world in the cognitive 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
31
form of time, is not a phenomenon in the same sense as a limb of the body or 
an action of the person. The person does not ‘see’ his or her individual will as, 
say, a mental lump inside; rather, persons note that they want this and that, and 
they attribute this wanting to an entity which they call their “will”. The exact 
status of the individual will as opposed to the Will as thing-in-itself is not ana-
lyzed in Schopenhauer’s philosophy. This is part of an overall problem: The 
theory of self-awareness by which persons come to know about their own willing 
nature, is one of the most obscure parts in Schopenhauer’s system. I shall limit 
my discussion to what I shall need for explaining this philosopher’s aesthetics, 
his philosophy of life, and Beckett’s own way to deal with both.
The Will as thing-in-itself is not subject to the form of causality and there-
fore, according to Schopenhauer, is free. In the metaphysical sense, there exists 
nothing besides it and the expressions which it produces. It does not encounter 
any obstacles and is not subject to restricting conditions. The empirical world, 
however, to which all actions of human persons belong, is subject to the order 
of causality. According to Schopenhauer, there exists no genuine freedom in 
this world. In the process of acting we may feel free because we do not know the 
deeper mechanism by which the action comes about. But in fact, we are entirely 
determined to act or not to act according to conditions out of our control. For 
Schopenhauer, any human action whatsoever arises from a causally organized 
process, the main elements of which are the person’s character on the one hand 
and a motive (or motives) of some sort on the other. The motive may be some-
thing in the external world or its representation by a concept. The person’s 
character is the structure of his or her personality, according to Schopenhauer, 
in the last analysis an expressive ‘act’ of the Will as thing-in-itself, and as such 
is fixed and unchangeable from the person’s birth. Since this original ‘act’ does 
not belong to the phenomenal world, the person can never know its nature in 
full, which means that the person can never fully know her or his own character 
as far as it is an expression of the thing-in-itself. This unchangeable metaphysi-
cal character which transcends the range of our knowledge is contrasted by 
Schopenhauer with what we actually know about our individual personality. 
He calls this empirical knowledge of our personality the “empirical character”. 
In the course of our life we often become better acquainted with ourselves. The 
traits of our empirical character become clearer to us and we get a fuller picture. 
This may also lead to a better informed way to act. But although we often seem 
wiser in our actions later in life, Schopenhauer holds that there never was and 
never can be any substantial change in the underlying metaphysical character 
as an expression of the thing-in-itself.

32 
the metaphysical vision
Before turning to the subject of art, I have still to mention two premises 
from Schopenhauer’s metaphysics which I have to use when we get to Beckett: 
The Will as thing-in-itself expresses or objectifies itself in the empirical world 
in different levels or grades of complexity which form a certain order. There are 
lower and higher grades of objectivity. The higher ones express the nature of 
the thing-in-itself in a more elaborate and less primitive way than the lower 
ones. For instance, living beings which possess awareness express the nature of 
the Will more adequately than plants, and these in turn express its nature more 
adequately than inorganic objects of nature. Hence, Schopenhauer thinks of 
the empirical world as being organized in different grades of adequacy  concerning 
the expression of the world’s essence, i.e., the thing-in-itself.
Since space and time in his eyes form the principium individuationis, 
 Schopenhauer claims that the Will, expressing itself as empirical objects, living 
beings, persons, cannot but express itself as different individuals. Where there is 
expression of the Will in space and time, there is individuality and variety. 
 Different individuals have different aims and, since they are all of a willing 
nature, they compete and fight about their place in the phenomenal world. This 
is how Schopenhauer justifies his thesis that every form in which the Will 
expresses itself is the enemy of other forms. For Nietzsche this was one of the 
reasons to replace Schopenhauer’s metaphysical Will by his own metaphysical 
Will to power. Schopenhauer himself sees this world as a place of permanent 
conflict and quarrel. This applies especially to human persons since they 
 objectify the Will with the highest degree of adequacy. In a Schopenhauerian 
universe there is no place for genuine contact and closeness between persons 
of our kind. We shall find something similar in Beckett’s statements about love 
and friendship between human individuals, although Beckett’s reasoning does 
not follow Schopenhauer’s in every detail.
5. Dissolution of self and creation of art
The different grades in which the Will objectifies itself correspond to a special 
class of perceptions about which I’ve said nothing so far. The empirical world, 
including all its objects, was called the indirect objectivity of the Will, structured 
by the forms of space, time, and causality. In Schopenhauer’s system there also 
is a direct objectivity of the Will which, in principle, can also be an object for a 
subject, but not an object under the principle of sufficient reason. This direct 
objectivity provides a vision of the Will as an object, but not in space, time, and 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
33
causality, i.e., not as an object belonging to the world of phenomena which we 
normally perceive. The direct objectivity of the Will, according to  Schopenhauer, 
is the body of Platonic Ideas. The term “Platonic Ideas” is used by Schopenhauer 
although he is aware of important differences between his notion of “Idea” and 
that of Plato. Schopenhauer claims that to every grade of the Will’s objectifica-
tion in the empirical world, there corresponds a timeless archetype, a Platonic 
eternal form, in short: a Platonic Idea, as the immutable, non-individual  paradigm 
of all beings which belong to this level. Ideas in this sense are indestructible and 
not subject to any change in time. Not being perceived in the forms of space 
and time, they are not individuals.
These Ideas are the only objects in the Schopenhauerian system which can 
neither be destroyed nor changed in any way. The Will as thing-in-itself, of 
course, is immutable and indestructible as well, but it never does, as such, 
become an object. The Ideas represent the Will in the general form of an object 
for a subject but never in the special forms which come under the heading of 
the principle of sufficient reason. Anything which is subject to this principle is 
subject to change in time; anything outside the range of this principle is immu-
table and indestructible. Therefore, the Platonic Ideas among all entities which 
can become objects for a subject are the only truly existing ones, the only stable 
reality accessible to any subject.
These “eternal forms” or “prototypes” (WWR I, 130) are not only the time-
less paradigms of all objects of worldly experience; they also represent the Will 
as thing-in-itself more truly and more perfectly than would be possible in any 
part of the phenomenal world, since they are not subject to the principle of 
sufficient reason. They are not distorted by space, time, and causality. 
 Schopenhauer therefore calls the direct objectivity of the Will given by the 
Ideas the adequate objectivity of the Will.
Here we have the point of transition, in Schopenhauer’s philosophy, from 
theory of knowledge and metaphysics on the one hand, to philosophy of art on 
the other. For Schopenhauer, it is the aim and the privilege of art to represent, 
to give near replicas of the adequate objectivity of the Will, i.e., the Ideas, in the 
mutable, destructible matter of our empirical world.
The first question for any attempt to understand this thesis is: How can the 
artist gain access to and knowledge of Platonic Ideas, the adequate, timeless 
objectivity of the Will, since everybody’s perceptions of things in this world are 
bound to be subject to the forms of space, time, and causality? Philosophy of art 
in the Schopenhauerian system starts, and must start, with a theory of artistic 
states of awareness which allow a kind of perception not subject to the principle 

34 
the metaphysical vision
of sufficient reason which gives structure to everything we can perceive in the 
empirical world.
While the individuals in which it [the Idea] expresses itself are innumerable and are 
incessantly coming into existence and passing away, it remains unchanged as one 
and the same, and the principle of sufﬁ cient reason has no meaning for it. But 
now, as this principle is the form under which all knowledge of the subject comes, 
so far as the subject knows as an individual, the Ideas will also lie quite outside 
the sphere of its knowledge as such. Therefore, if the Ideas are to become object 
of knowledge, this can happen only by abolishing individuality in the knowing 
subject. The more deﬁ nite and detailed explanation of this is what will now ﬁ rst 
concern us. (WWR I, 169)
This is Schopenhauer’s introduction to his theory of artistic knowledge, and it 
already presents the central idea of this theory: If the subject is to perceive 
Platonic Ideas which exist outside space, time and causality and which, there-
fore, are not individuals, the subject must forget about his or her individuality 
and, in the process of perceiving the extraordinary, must not have any self-
awareness as a person of our common world. To achieve this, the subject must 
undergo a change which deeply alters the whole mode of perception.
The nature of this change can be made plausible, given the premises of 
Schopenhauer’s system, by remembering his metaphysical explanation of sub-
jectivity: All actions of the subject, all events of its normal awareness and 
empirical knowledge, even subjectivity itself, are expressions of the Will. Just as 
they are its expressions, they are devoted to its service. The way the Will 
expresses itself or appears inside an individual person is this person’s individual 
will which wills something for this person. All everyday experience and knowl-
edge of human individuals for Schopenhauer is a tool of their individual will 
and serves their purposes in the empirical world. The person permanently wants 
something, always primarily for him- or herself and only secondarily, at times 
and in an oblique way, for others. Acquiring knowledge about the empirical 
world, prepared by the activity of the senses, always serves the aims of the indi-
vidual will and is subject to the forms which are the necessary and sufficient 
conditions of individuality: space and time.
If the subject is supposed to cease perceiving the world in line with the 
priorities of the individual will, this subject must cease to want or ‘will’ anything 
during the process of perception. If it succeeds in doing so, there is a chance 
that the objects of its perception will not be normal worldly things, organized 
by the principium individuationis, but objects of a different kind. Schopenhauer 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
35
claims that these objects are free from the distortions of the individual will and 
free from those of the principle of individuation. When a human person man-
ages to renounce any claims of the individual will and to enter a very different 
state of awareness not dominated by this will, his or her self-awareness as an 
individual has vanished. What is left is a non-personal, will-less subject of 
awareness without personal identity and without self-knowledge. According to 
Schopenhauer, a person in this state of mind is no self. Not just once Samuel 
Beckett, following Schopenhauer’s terminology, will emphasize that a person 
in this state of mind is a pure subject, pure in the sense that any perception of 
this person is free from the distorting and deceptive effects which the individual 
will always introduces into a person’s mind.
This idea of a will-less awareness without typical traits of an empirical self 
immediately gives rise to the question: How does Schopenhauer think the per-
son can manage to separate from his or her individual will and arrive at a state 
of ‘pure’ awareness? The philosopher’s answer makes use of an old but, also, 
up-to-date observation: Since individual perception is always directed by an 
individual will, it always tends to see things, events, etc., in relation to the per-
ceiving person or in relation to other objects which, in turn, are themselves 
related to the aims of that person’s individual will. Everyday perception of 
worldly phenomena is thoroughly selective. This selection is performed accord-
ing to the individual person’s wishes, aims, needs, fears. The person normally is 
under the command of the individual will which also steers all of this person’s 
normal epistemic processes. This observation is Schopenhauer’s starting point 
for describing a different kind of perception which, though very rare, is free from 
the command of the individual will. This different kind of perception according 
to Schopenhauer comes about when the person’s attention does not mind the 
relations between objects, persons, etc., and especially does not concentrate on 
their relation to the aims of his or her own individual will. When the object is 
being perceived apart from all relations to other parts of the world, when the 
awareness is completely filled by the object and nothing else, when the sur-
rounding world as well as one’s own personality are, so to speak, obliterated, 
then this perception may be free of the aims of the individual will and the object 
may be perceived free of the forms of the principle of sufficient reason. In 
 Schopenhauer’s own words:
Raised up by the power of the mind, we relinquish the ordinary way of consider-
ing things, and cease to follow under the guidance of the forms of the principle of 
sufﬁ cient reason merely their relations to one another, whose ﬁ nal goal is always 
the relation to our own will. Thus we no longer consider the where, the when, the 

36 
the metaphysical vision
why, and the whither in things, but simply and solely the what. Further, we do not 
let abstract thought, the concepts of reason, take possession of our conscious-
ness, but, instead of all this, devote the whole power of our mind to perception, 
sink ourselves completely therein, and let our whole consciousness be ﬁ lled by 
the calm contemplation of the natural object actually present, whether it be a 
landscape, a tree, a rock, a crag, a building, or anything else. We lose ourselves 
entirely in this object, to use a pregnant expression; in other words, we forget our 
individuality, our will, and continue to exist only as pure subject, as clear mirror 
of the object, so that it is as though the object alone existed without anyone to 
perceive it, and thus we are no longer able to separate the perceiver from the 
perception, but the two have become one, since the entire consciousness is ﬁ lled 
and occupied by a single image of perception. If, therefore, the object has to such 
an extent passed out of all relation to something outside it, and the subject has 
passed out of all relation to the will, what is thus known is no longer the individual 
thing as such, but the Idea, the eternal form, the immediate objectivity of the Will 
at this grade. Thus at the same time, the person who is involved in this perception 
is no longer an individual, for in such perception the individual has lost himself; he 
is pure will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge. (WWR I, 178 f.)33
Schopenhauer’s description of this meditative as well as ecstatic state of mind 
makes use of a well known metaphor: the subject is “lost” in the object. This 
metaphor seems adequate in several respects: the subject has forgotten itself in 
favour of a purely objective perception, not disturbed by any element of 
 subjectivity; it has forgotten any other contents of consciousness except this 
one object; and it is obliterated in this moment as an individual with special 
properties of its own. The subject has no awareness of itself apart from this 
perception; Schopenhauer takes it that in this moment nothing is there but the 
presence of the Idea. The subject has lost its normal form of subjectivity (includ-
ing any self-awareness), the object has lost its form of a worldly object among 
others. Subject and object seem to have merged into one single entity. “… the 
subject, by passing entirely into the perceived object, has also become that 
object itself, since the entire consciousness is nothing more than its most  distinct 
image.” (WWR I, 180)
Knowing very well that, for the epistemic habits of common sense, he is 
proceeding to make a perfect fool of himself, Schopenhauer completes this 
description of ecstatic obliteration of self and world by adding that the subject 
in this state, since it does not differ any more from its object, knows itself as 
33 For a fuller understanding of this passage, cf. the German original or the somewhat  cumbersome, 
but syntactically closer translation by Haldane and Kemp, p. 231.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
37
identical with the whole world. Since he considers his own language to be weak 
and crutch-like, Schopenhauer quotes from his Latin version of the older 
 Upanishads: “Hae omnes creaturae in totum ego sum, et praeter me aliud ens 
non est.” (WWR I, 181)34 [“I am all this creation collectively, and besides me 
there exists no other being.”] This quotation formulates once more, from a 
 different point of view, the annihilation of the individual person and the anni-
hilation of a world structure based on individual, particular beings.
Not everybody is able to renounce his or her own will and its aims to such 
an extent that, instead of normal perception of worldly things, there is nothing 
left but a non-individual awareness of the Idea. Schopenhauer claims that this 
is the privilege of very few persons, although in principle all human beings must 
be considered able to do so. Of these very few persons, it is again only a few who 
possess the additional ability to, so to speak, reduplicate in worldly material the 
Idea which originally was experienced in will-less contemplation. In doing so, 
these persons are able to bring forth what, for Schopenhauer, is the work of art. 
A person capable of producing such a work Schopenhauer calls “genius”. And 
he defines the work of genius, art, since it represents objects originally experi-
enced outside of space, time, and causality as “the way of perceiving things inde-
pendently of the principle of sufficient reason.” (WWR I, 185)35
Schopenhauer explicitly declares art to be a means of acquiring as well as 
communicating knowledge (WWR I, 185 f.). Therefore art, in his view, has an 
important cognitive function in the overall context of human epistemic achieve-
ments. Being based on the vision of a will-less subject lost in perfect contempla-
tion of an Idea, art is the form in which the contents of this vision can be 
communicated to others. Of course, the work of art is an empirical object, a 
part of the phenomenal world and as such is no Idea but only an imperfect 
replica. Schopenhauer claims, however, that it provides an occasion for the 
emergence of a visionary experience similar or even equal to the original artistic 
one of the Idea in the reader, listener, spectator, etc. Whether the work of art 
is a painting, a sculpture, a piece of architecture, a poem, a novel, or other, 
depends on the material in which the artist forms the near replica of the original 
34 When writing The World as Will and Representation, Schopenhauer only knew the older 
 Upanishads in Latin, translated by a Frenchman named Anquetil-Duperron from an older  Persian 
translation of the original Sanskrit.
35 I replaced Payne’s “considering” with “perceiving” since “considering” introduces an element 
of thought into a situation where thinking as an activity of the person is absent. Haldane and 
Kemp say “viewing” (p. 230). Beckett translates: “the contemplation of the world independently 
of the principle of reason.” (Proust, 87).

38 
the metaphysical vision
vision. Other details of the work of art depend on the grade of adequate 
 objectivity of the Will to which the originally viewed Idea belongs.  Schopenhauer 
provides a systematic order of art forms according to the different grades in 
which the Will expresses (objectifies) itself as Idea. This order starts at its lower 
end with architecture as an art which represents the Ideas of inorganic forces 
of nature and has its highest point in the art of tragedy representing the nature 
of human life as suffering. Music has an especially eminent status because it 
provides even richer and closer metaphysical knowledge of what the world truly 
is than do other forms of art. This eminent status of music which we shall find 
again in Beckett will be discussed later.
I shall not report every detail of Schopenhauer’s systematic order of art 
forms. To provide a system of those forms is a common topic of aesthetic theo-
ries of the time, e.g. Schelling’s and, later on, Hegel’s. Schopenhauer’s philoso-
phy of art differs from that of contemporary competitors mainly by regarding 
artistic experience as metaphysical vision: The forms of the phenomenal world 
must be relinquished and the subject of the artist must lose itself in visionary 
contemplation when the very rare state of awareness is to emerge which pro-
vides contact with a deeper and more essential reality. This experience can then 
be the basis for a work of art as an imperfect and, yet, optimal rendering of the 
metaphysical contents in materials of this phenomenal world. Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics also differs from those of his contemporaries by an explicitly mystical 
trait: The state of contemplation into which the genius must, so to speak, 
 submerge him- or herself is not only an extraordinary epistemic experience but 
also an unio mystica, in which the subject ‘feels’ to be have become identical 
with the whole world, and its metaphysical core. It was detrimental to 
 Schopenhauer’s reception by readers of his time that he did not, as other 
 philosophers did, call the metaphysical essence of this world by a name  somehow 
known from the philosophical theology of those years like “Spirit”, “the 
 Absolute” or the like, but, instead, “the Will”. This term indeed foreshadows 
future thought and is part of Schopenhauer’s ‘modernity’, but it did not at all 
fit into the intellectual framework of early nineteenth-century Germany.
The mystical trait of Schopenhauer’s aesthetics is also an ecstatic one: 
Despite the fact that Schopenhauer called the genius’s visionary state of 
 awareness “contemplation” (a term taken from Kant) this state is certainly more 
than what we nowadays would call “contemplative”. It rather is a state of self-
loss, a state of great mental tension, not understandable by, even ridiculous to, 
rational onlookers. Beckett is going to say “the baffled ecstasy” (Proust 76) – 
“baffled” because all rational orientation in the empirical world is lost, and 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
39
“ecstasy” because the vision of true reality, although most gratifying, has to be 
gained by leaving one’s normal self behind in the process of transcending its 
limits. The awkward and even abstruse impression which the person lost in 
contemplation gives to rationally thinking witnesses causes Schopenhauer to 
refer to the well known comparison of genius and madness. He interprets this 
old comparison in a new way by explaining madness as the breakdown of mem-
ory and the inability to properly recognize the relations between one’s percep-
tions. The genius is similar to the mad person because he or she views objects 
of this world as unrelated to any other objects. The genius, however, can return 
from this state of contemplative ecstasy into the normal world and is able by 
conscious effort to closely repeat the contents of the metaphysical vision in a 
work of art.
These are not the only traits of Schopenhauer’s aesthetics which must have 
seemed strange to readers of his time. He differs from the majority of ‘classic’ 
philosophers of art by claiming that the annihilation of self-awareness and the 
abandonment of space, time, and causality are necessary conditions for the 
emergence of artistic mental states. This is unusual in modern philosophy. It is 
probably even more unusual that a philosopher declares exactly those thor-
oughly irrational, not ‘understandable’ states of mind to be the only states in 
which persons can come to have direct knowledge of true reality beyond the 
surface of the empirical world. This true reality, assumed to provide the forms 
of all phenomena which we normally perceive, is associated in the Platonic 
tradition with the word “Idea”. The visionary, artistic knowledge of Ideas 
according to Schopenhauer is entirely a matter of intuition (“Anschauung”). 
For Schopenhauer, this visionary knowledge of the artist is more reliable, more 
complete, more valid and therefore truer than any knowledge philosophy can 
provide. Thus Schopenhauer’s aesthetics is not only opposed to his own meta-
physics which also claims to provide knowledge of true reality; it also shows him 
to deviate from the rules of traditional metaphysical philosophies which nor-
mally assume that, if anything at all, it is rational philosophy from which we can 
expect to gain knowledge of the true nature, the essence, the absolute ground 
of this world. When philosophers admit that art may have a metaphysical role 
in human orientation about the world, these philosophers (with the possible 
exception of the young Schelling36) tend to claim that art gives true reality only 
36 Schelling’s System des transcendentalen Idealismus of 1800 was known to Schopenhauer when he 
wrote his aesthetics. Schopenhauer’s terminology at some points is similar to Schelling’s although 
the basic structure of his system is very different. There is a kind of pre-eminence of art over 

40 
the metaphysical vision
in an altered form, i.e., in a more indirect, less adequate form than the one to 
be found in philosophy.37 It was the supposed metaphysical pre-eminence of art, 
however, which brought Schopenhauer the enthusiastic acclaim of the young 
Nietzsche as well as the young Samuel Beckett. The justification for reading 
Schopenhauer in this way, i.e., to place art higher than philosophy in his meta-
physical system, is what I now want to focus on.
6. The truly metaphysical activity of this life
Schopenhauer gives his account of what philosophy is in the last part of a 
 section which, as its main subject, treats of the theory of science. There phi-
losophy is characterized as “the most universal rational knowledge”, “a state-
ment in the abstract of the nature of the whole world, of the whole as well as 
of all the parts” and “a complete recapitulation, so to speak, a reflection of the 
world in abstract concepts” (WWR I, 82 f.). It is essential for Schopenhauer’s 
view that philosophy in performing its task has always to rely on concepts. The 
possibilities and limitations of concepts are outlined by Schopenhauer in his 
general theory of knowledge. Concepts, according to his theory, are always 
based on sensory perception (“Anschauung”). Schopenhauer uses the word 
“Anschauung”, in that point true to Kant, very widely as the general term for 
all perceptions provided by the senses, outward sense organs as well as the 
‘inner sense’ of self-awareness. The procedure to form concepts based on per-
ceptions is reflection which, Schopenhauer says, “is necessarily the copy or 
repetition of the originally presented world of perception, though a copy of 
quite a special kind in a completely heterogeneous material. Concepts, there-
fore, can quite appropriately be called representations of representations.” 
(WWR I, 40) The faculty of the mind which performs this reflective procedure 
is reason. It is typical for Schopenhauer’s idea of this faculty that reason is not 
at all able to generate by itself any knowledge whatsoever about the world or 
even concepts of anything. Reason in Schopenhauer’s philosophy always 
philosophy and science in both. Schopenhauer was more radical in this and stuck to it all his life, 
whereas Schelling already by 1802 started to retreat from his early enthusiasm about a cognitive 
primacy of art. See his Lectures on Philosophie der Kunst of 1802.
37 This is very patent in Hegel. Despite the fact that he admits art to have the status of “Absolute 
Spirit” in whose forms the “Absolute” realizes itself, he insists that art is only an incompletely 
developed stage in the history of the Absolute Spirit, a stage which in fact already has been made 
obsolete by philosophy.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
41
depends on the material of perception from which it can start its reflective 
process, called “abstraction”:
All ultimate, i.e., original, evidence is one of sensory perception … (WWR I, 65)38 
Reason is feminine in nature; it can give only after it has received. Of itself alone, it 
has nothing but the empty forms of its operation. (WWR I, 50)
But, as reason always brings again before knowledge only what has been received 
in another way, it does not really extend our knowledge, but merely gives it 
another form. (WWR I, 53)
These propositions put philosophy, without Schopenhauer intending it, in an 
awkward position. On the one hand, it always has to rely on concepts and pro-
ceed through reason. This would justify the assumption that philosophy, when 
claiming to be knowledge, due to the narrow limits of reason, can only be knowl-
edge derived from other sources. On the other hand, metaphysical philosophy is 
supposed to acquire and communicate truths about the essence of the whole 
world, and, in fact, Schopenhauer’s philosophy is full of statements of this kind. 
The Will, the supposed essence of the world, however, as such never comes in 
the form of sensory perception from which all concepts of reason have to be 
gained by a process of abstraction. Schopenhauer moreover does not claim that 
the visionary perception of Platonic Ideas can provide concepts of reason. He 
has sound arguments for not doing so since, according to his own presupposi-
tions, in the state of will-less ecstatic contemplation the subject only has knowl-
edge of an Idea without having knowledge of itself or other persons. There would 
be no chance to form a concept by an active process of abstraction in this state 
of mind, nor would it be possible to introduce it to other persons in such a state. 
As long as there is awareness of the Idea, there is no contact with other persons; 
and when there is such contact, there is no awareness of the Idea.
Schopenhauer’s philosophy therefore, when trying to form and justify 
 typically metaphysical statements, must somehow contrive to shift from the 
field of sensory perception, where concepts of reason can have a reliable basis, 
to the field of transcendent metaphysical entities where there is no such basis 
at all. We saw that Schopenhauer justifies this transition by drawing a conclu-
sion from analogy. The main thesis of his metaphysics which enters all parts of 
his system as a central premise is the statement that the essence of the world is 
Will.  Schopenhauer’s argument in favour of this thesis was briefly pointed out 
38 I replaced Payne’s “intuitive” with “sensory”. Schopenhauer uses “Anschauung” and 
“ anschaulich”, following Kant, for sensory perception in general. To translate these words as 
“intuition” and “intuitive” may be misleading.

42 
the metaphysical vision
already: The philosopher observes states and events of self-awareness show to 
be striving or willing. He generalizes this observation to claim that all mental 
life of the individual is will. This quasi-empirical will then is interpreted as cor-
responding to a will as the non-empirical core of the individual. All physical 
properties, actions, etc. of the individual are interpreted as being expressions of 
that will. And finally, in analogy to the relation between physical appearance 
and will in the individual, Schopenhauer concludes that every appearance, i.e., 
every phenomenon whatsoever, in fact the entire empirical world, rests on one 
Will as thing-in-itself as its transcendent basis.
It is obvious that Schopenhauer in arguing from mere analogy has implicitly 
admitted that his philosophy, when talking about transcendent metaphysical 
entities, has no real proof for its claims. There always remains the objection that 
his system may rest on deceptive reasoning. The epistemic status of his meta-
physical propositions is no better than that of assumptions which the philoso-
pher tries to make plausible by referring to certain observed phenomena and 
proceeding from there by way of generalization and analogy. Moreover, the 
assumptions are formulated in concepts which, in the last analysis, stem from 
the empirical world and therefore are a dubious means for describing what is 
supposed to be totally different. The latter problem is akin to Kant’s difficulties 
in assuming a thing-in-itself, the dilemma of which Schopenhauer, in that point 
similar to Jacobi, saw and criticised quite clearly.
Schopenhauer was always aware of the precarious epistemic status of phi-
losophy in general and of an equally precarious status of his own philosophy 
according to the overall framework of his system. In Volume II of The World as 
Will and Representation, twenty-five years after publication of Volume I, he 
admits: “The origin of metaphysics from empirical sources of knowledge … 
 cannot honestly be denied …” (WWR II, 181)
Art, on the other hand, according to Schopenhauer’s aesthetics, is supposed 
to provide a special, non-philosophical and non-conceptual kind of access to the 
direct or adequate objectivity of the Will. To perceive an Idea as direct objectiv-
ity of the Will is the most advanced non-conceptual knowledge in metaphysical 
matters which, for Schopenhauer, any consciousness can possibly achieve. The 
Will as thing-in-itself has no direct self-knowledge of its own nature; it always 
remains blind and unconscious in that respect; it exists outside any form of 
perception. Not only do works of art provide something philosophy cannot 
provide – a possible occasion for the original metaphysical vision to emerge in 
the beholder, reader, listener, etc. if they manage to will-lessly contemplate the 
work; but art also enables anyone in this state of mind to not be subject to the 
deceptions of the phenomenal world in space and time, which, for the concepts 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
43
of philosophy, based in the last analysis on sensory perception, can never be 
perfectly excluded. The artistic vision of the Idea gives the Idea without a 
medium through which it appears and possibly is distorted. The work of art, 
which might be seen as a medium for the beholder, according to Schopenhauer, 
is not perceived anymore as an object in space and time when the beholder is 
immersed in the metaphysical vision. As long as the vision lasts, there is just 
the presence of the Idea and no worldly object. Schopenhauer repeats several 
times that in this state of vision there is no difference between subject and 
object; there is no place for a mediating and possibly adulterating third entity.
Schopenhauer considers works of art to have a truth value. (Of course, the 
meaning of “truth” here is different from that which we apply to statements of 
our language). For the authentic work of art this value can only be “true”. Since 
nothing is presented but the object itself, this object only shows the properties 
it has indeed: “… the genuine work of art can never be false, nor can it be 
refuted through any passing of time, for it gives us not opinion, but the thing 
itself.” (WWR I, 35) Conclusions may always be incorrect. When philosophy 
talks about the area beyond experience, its only instruments in Schopenhauer’s 
system are its own conclusions, the most important ones through analogy.
In Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art, therefore, this is the metaphysical 
pre-eminence of art over philosophy: Art provides an occasion for direct access to 
a ‘deeper’ and ‘truer’ reality beyond the phenomenal world, an access which is superior 
to that of philosophy in credibility and richness. And this access is such that, once it 
has been established, there is no possibility of deception or distortion. The authentic 
work of art is based on this kind of visionary experience, superior to any other source 
of knowledge open to human beings.
If metaphysics is taken to be knowledge of what exists beyond the world of 
phenomena as the true reality of this world, then it follows from Schopenhauer’s 
theory that, as Nietzsche wrote, creating a work of art is “the truly metaphysical 
activity of this life”.39
39 Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy, Preface to Richard Wagner, see p. 2 above. Sporadically, 
 Schopenhauer tried to defend the old claim that philosophy is superior to art in metaphysical 
matters. Cf. WWR II, 406. His arguments given there, however, rest on two theses which, consider-
ing his overall system, must be judged to be dubious: That the language of philosophy was perma-
nent, that of art only “ﬂ eeting”; and that philosophy spoke through universals, art only through 
particulars. But the basis of art, the Idea, the vision of which is to be communicated through art, 
cannot be called “ﬂ eeting”. And according to Schopenhauer’s own words the Idea possesses the 
same universality as the concept, despite being “thoroughly deﬁ nite”. Cf. WWR I, 234 f. The pre-
eminence of art is implicitly recognized by Schopenhauer, as stated above, through admitting that 

44 
the metaphysical vision
 7. Idea and sensory perception
Schopenhauer differed widely from his German contemporaries by redefining 
reason as a mere faculty to form abstract concepts from empirical data, and in 
emphasizing that the Idea can be grasped only in an experience of will-less 
contemplation. I briefly mention some implications of this move which facili-
tated Beckett’s re-interpretation of “Idea” in Proust.
Plato’s Ideas often are depicted as models or archetypes of individual things. 
But Plato primarily (and historically earlier in his work) took them to be the time-
less forms and the true reality of key concepts of his philosophy and world view, 
such as the Ideas of beauty, of goodness, of justice, of identity, of similarity and a 
number of other timeless forms for abstract concepts. Regarding the knowledge 
of Ideas, Plato strictly denied any possible role of the senses, although his meta-
phors of such knowledge often seem to presuppose some kind of supernatural 
visionary access which, it seems, is not normally available to human beings during 
their lifetime. Since art relies on the senses, Plato considers art to be deceptive 
and even dangerous. The true reality of the sphere of Ideas, if accessible to mortal 
beings at all, primarily discloses itself to the thinking mind, not to the sense 
organs. Therefore, in Plato’s eyes, philosophy has absolute and undoubted pre-
eminence over art. Schopenhauer’s Ideas are not timeless forms of concepts; they 
are timeless forms of phenomena of a certain grade of the objectivity of the Will. 
Schopenhauer admits that his view differs from that of Plato (WWR I, 233 f.), but 
does not discuss the differences in detail. There is no place in his philosophy for 
the Ideas of goodness, of beauty, of justice, of identity, and so forth.
Other differences between his philosophy and philosophical tradition come 
to light when we consider the means to acquire knowledge of Ideas – the means 
human beings have to use when trying to acquire temporary (and often just 
fragmentary) insight into true reality. In the continental philosophical scene 
since Kant at the latest, reason (“Vernunft”) was thought to be the adequate 
human faculty to deal with Ideas as conceptual representations of non- empirical, 
true reality. Notwithstanding the fact that the  meaning of the word “Idea” 
 differs strongly among philosophers of the time, there is a common assumption, 
namely that reason is the highest epistemic faculty of man and that, when we 
try to focus on Ideas (or “the Idea”), we of course do so by using our reason. Not 
so with Schopenhauer. Since he taught that reason has no material contents of 
his philosophical metaphysics, is, in the last analysis, empirical (i.e., a posteriori), whereas the 
visionary cognition of the artist in his opinion is “at least partly a priori” (WWR I, 222).

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
45
its own and that, for gaining any material information, it has to rely on sensory 
perception, he not only broke away from a powerful tradition but also created 
a new situation in his own theory of knowledge.
Kant assumed that the reality of an object for us is made possible by the 
structuring activity of the understanding. Basically and notwithstanding his 
alterations in the theory of empirical knowledge, Schopenhauer thinks so, too. 
But the activity of the understanding guarantees reality only in the empirical 
world, to which the Idea does not belong. The vision of the Idea in  Schopenhauer’s 
system must differ from a mere phantasma, and the difference must, among 
other things, consist in the Idea being perceived as real in the sense that the 
person cannot transform it at will by his or her own imagination. Perceiving 
something that has the status of reality differs from being aware of a phantasma 
on precisely that point: An entity which is real is not subject to imaginative 
caprice; there is something ‘hard’ in it which does not bend to the perceiving 
person’s attempts at altering, transforming, changing it. This ‘hard’ element in 
the metaphysical vision of the Idea, in Schopenhauer’s philosophical system as 
it stands, can only be conveyed by some kind of sensory perception.40
This not only is very unusual in Schopenhauer’s time, but also means that 
he bought himself a philosophical problem which he could not treat easily with 
the instruments of his theory of mental faculties. Schopenhauer took the com-
plete set of those faculties from Kant, but he considerably altered the function 
of each member of that set. We learnt this about understanding and reason 
already. With regard to sensory perception, Schopenhauer in fact attributes to 
this two different and hard to unite clusters of properties. On the one hand, if 
40 There is one isolated passage about the Idea in Schopenhauer with which my interpretation 
is not in line. In the First Book of The World as Will and Representation, where the Idea is not yet 
a central subject, Schopenhauer announces what will be his treatment of the Idea by writing: 
“The Platonic Idea that becomes possible through the union of imagination and reason is the 
main subject of the third book of the present work.” (WWR I, 40) This passage is in massive 
conﬂ ict with Schopenhauer’s many statements about the limitations of reason as a concept-
forming faculty which always has to rely on the data of sensory perception but cannot produce 
anything out of itself (cf. ibid., p. 50, 53, 57). Moreover, the passage cannot be made compatible 
with Schopenhauer’s often repeated assurance that knowledge of the Idea is entirely image-like 
or intuitive (“anschaulich”), a mere perception, without any contribution of concepts (WWR I, 
179, 182, and especially 186: “… but knowledge of the Idea is necessarily knowledge through 
perception, and is not abstract.” Cf. also WWR II, 63–90.) Obviously, the isolated passage quoted 
above, appearing at the beginning of § 9 of WWR I, was written by Schopenhauer in a preparatory 
context when the Idea for him was not yet a subject of concentrated, systematic thought. The 
systematic treatment of the Idea is to be found later, especially §§ 30 ff.

46 
the metaphysical vision
there were just sensory elements without the organizing activity of the 
 understanding, “there would remain only a dull, plant-like  consciousness of the 
changes of the immediate object which followed one another in a wholly mean-
ingless way, except in so far as they might have a meaning for the will either as 
pain or pleasure.” (WWR I, 12) These sensory elements may rightly be called 
“blind”, since they represent no object; they are sensations not organized and 
interpreted by the understanding. On the other hand, in Schopenhauer’s sys-
tematic terminology for cognitive activities and events we have no choice but 
to call the visions which are the basis of artistic creation and which are the 
effects of adequately beholding a work of art “sensory”  as well.
The fact that Schopenhauer’s treatment of Ideas and of man’s cognitive 
access to them turns out to be risky and labyrinthine upon closer inspection, 
seems to have two systematic causes. Firstly: he kept Kant’s set of human mental 
faculties, just altering their functions at a number of points. Yet he introduced 
a class of perfectly non-Kantian entities in his system, namely, the “the Platonic 
Ideas”. Secondly: Schopenhauer secularized the highest cognitive instrument 
of idealistic philosophies of his time, “intellektuelle Anschauung”, which Kant 
only attributed to God, and Fichte and Schelling attributed to man as a godlike 
power. Since Schopenhauer made this formerly highest epistemic faculty the 
servant of our everyday perception of the world of mere phenomena, not of 
Ideas, as set out above (p. 44), it is no longer available to him as a candidate for 
his highest kind of epistemic experience, the visionary contemplation of the 
Idea. His overall secularizing tendency and his disgust for the kind of philo-
sophical theology which we find with important philosophical competitors 
around 1816 (the time of writing The World as Will and Representation) made 
him unable to stick entirely to the Kantian theory of epistemic faculties. He 
both uses this theory and dismantles it at the same time. Thereby, he shows 
himself to be standing between eighteenth-century beliefs in a firm system of 
mental faculties, and twentieth-century views which refuse to departmentalize 
our mind in this way at all and even have become sceptical about a seemingly 
straightforward thing such as ‘consciousness’.
8. Symbols trivial
Having discussed Schopenhauer’s statements about the metaphysical task of 
art, we now can easily derive his opinion about works of art, the chief aim of 
which is to give an artistic equivalent for concepts.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
47
Every true work of art, Schopenhauer declared, is the result of a  transcendent 
vision. Its only use, if it is at all sensible to talk of use, is to awaken the same 
vision the artist originally had in the person adequately receiving the work, and 
thereby to provide this person with the same metaphysical insight. Products of 
art, the only purpose of which is to give a sensory image of abstract concepts, 
are about as good or bad as signs for these concepts in a sensory material. They 
are like picture puzzles. Once one has guessed the right concept from this kind 
of product, the product has fulfilled its function; the rest can be neglected.
But certainly no great perfection in the work of art is demanded for what is here 
intended; on the contrary, it is enough if we see what the thing is supposed to 
be; for as soon as this is found, the end is reached, and the mind is then led on 
to quite a different kind of representation, to an abstract concept which was the 
end in view.” (WWR I, 237)
It can also be seen, when we remember Schopenhauer’s theory of concepts, how 
uninteresting his aesthetics must find works which are just to give a sensory 
equivalent to a concept: Concepts always have to be formed after empirical 
perception. They always need empirical perception as their basis. When some-
body brings forth something only for the purpose of providing a sensory equiva-
lent for a concept, this sensory equivalent can only be a second-hand thing, 
since the concept is originally based on sensation already. Thus, we can easily 
understand Schopenhauer’s statement: “But a concept can never be the source, 
and its communication can never be the aim, of a work of art.” (WWR I, 240)
A minor complication, which, however, can easily be dissolved, arises from 
terminology. Schopenhauer considers all conceptual works of art to be allego-
ries. When the sensory equivalent of a concept, given by a certain pictorial 
representation, rests on pure convention, he calls this pictorial element a  symbol. 
He uses the word “symbol” to mean “a pictorial sign resting on convention and 
only to be understood through convention”. This use of “symbol”, at least when 
we talk about art, is not today’s use. I chose “Symbols trivial” as title for this 
section because for me symbolic art is art which tries to embody a concept in a 
medium fit for sensory perception. Seen from the standpoint of Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics, symbolic art in this sense of “symbol” is incorrigibly trivial. We shall 
see that Samuel Beckett thinks so as well.
A second complication, having to do with the first one, is this: Soon after 
having declared symbolic and allegoric works as alien to genuine art, 
 Schopenhauer suddenly admits allegory to be “quite admissible and very 
 effective” in poetry. But what seems to be a contradiction dissolves when we 

48 
the metaphysical vision
consider Schopenhauer’s explanations of this statement together with his 
 general theory of concepts. Since poetry has to use language and since an 
 allegorical language contains concepts, it is favourable for poetry when an 
abstract word is presented pictorially (this is how he explains the function of 
metaphors). This, however, does not at all mean that in poetry the concept is 
foremost and that the poem is the concept’s sensory representation. 
 Schopenhauer just means that poetry can profit from weakening the abstract 
element in language and strengthening the pictorial one. The true origin of 
poetry, as of all art in  Schopenhauer’s view, is the will-less metaphysical vision 
of the Idea. The aim of poetry, as the aim of all arts in this theory, is to enable 
the reader to have an experience similar to that of the artist when, encouraged 
by the work of art, the reader sinks into will-less contemplation.
9. Realism vulgar
There are at least two kinds of realism in art: One which strives to give a true 
representation of the phenomenal surface of an event, fact, or thing in this 
world for its own sake; and another one which uses realistic techniques for the 
purpose of making visible the truly essential traits of worldly situations and 
things, especially in areas normally considered banal and, hence,  uninteresting.41 
Schopenhauer would call the latter kind metaphysical, the former vulgar.
In his theory, the genius has to forget about his or her self and contemplate 
uninfluenced by the individual will. The person who adequately deals with a 
work of art is to experience the same kind of will-less contemplation which was 
the basis of the genius’s work. The attitude which enabled the artist to separate 
from his or her individual will and become a “clear mirror” of the Idea consisted 
in perceiving the object outside of any relation to other persons, things, etc., and espe-
cially outside of any relation to the aims of his or her individual will. The normal 
perception of empirical reality, however, our everyday way of gaining orientation 
in the world, is organized by the relations of things and other persons to our 
own wishes, needs, fears. Realistic art which depicts these relations, in 
 Schopenhauer’s eyes is vulgar because it tends to stimulate our individual will. 
The word “vulgar” is Schopenhauer’s epithet for anything dominated by the 
will (see WWR II, 380). Schopenhauer knows several ways in which an artistic 
41 I am aware that this is an incomplete opposition. Since my subject here is not a theory of realism 
but Schopenhauer’s aesthetics, I shall not differentiate further.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
49
enterprise can fail. One of them is disfiguring the perceivable image to be only 
a sign for a concept. Another one is sticking blindly to an experience of the 
world which is dominated by its relation to the individual will.
Schopenhauer has special expressions for works of art which are flawed by 
the influence of the artist’s will and/or which tend to influence the will of the 
person perceiving them: The charming or attractive and its contrary, the nega-
tively attractive, i.e., the disgusting or the loathsome. (WWR I, 207 f.)42 He 
distinguishes between two kinds of the attractive and declares both of them to 
be unworthy of art: “The one species, a very low one, is found in the still life 
painting of the Dutch, when they err by depicting edible objects. By their 
 deceptive appearances these necessarily excite the appetite, and this is just a 
stimulation of the will which puts an end to any aesthetic contemplation of the 
object. … In historical painting and in sculpture the charming consists in nude 
figures, the position, semi-drapery, and whole treatment of which are calculated 
to excite lustful feeling in the beholder. Purely aesthetic contemplation is at 
once abolished, and the purpose of art thus defeated.” (WWR I, 207 f.) Note: 
Schopenhauer is not a prude. He thinks sculptures should be nude. He just also 
thinks they should not be produced for the purpose of sensuous excitement.)
There is still another reason, equally important to Schopenhauer and  Beckett, 
why art cannot just be realistic: The true object of art exists outside of space, time, 
and causality. That is, it exists outside the basic structures of worldly experience 
which serve to make this experience possible in the first place. Mere experience 
as it presents itself to consciousness in the everyday frame of mind cannot, in 
Schopenhauer’s view, be the source of art: “No knowledge of the beautiful is at 
all possible purely a posteriori and from mere experience.” (WWR I, 222)
A supplement, as it were, to Schopenhauer’s theory of artistic knowledge is 
his notion of an artistically anticipated Idea. He calls a representation of that 
kind, given in material of the phenomenal world, “Ideal”, and he explains that 
notion: “… it is the Idea in so far as it is known a priori, or at any rate half-known; 
and it becomes practical for art by accommodating and supplementing as such 
what is given a posteriori through nature.” (WWR I, 222) That art deals with 
Ideals was a common assumption in the German philosophical scene of the time. 
We find this assumption, though with different meanings of the word “Ideal”, 
in the aesthetics of Kant, Schiller, Schelling, Hegel and other  philosophers. 
42 Both English translations offer a twofold equivalent for the German “reizend” on the one 
hand and “ekelhaft” on the other. Haldane and Kemp seem to come closer to the latter through 
“loathsome”.

50 
the metaphysical vision
The fact that Schopenhauer also explained the non-realistic character of all 
genuine art by referring to this dated commonplace was unanimously rejected 
by his followers Nietzsche and Beckett. They saw in him the philosopher of a 
new kind of art. Both Nietzsche and Beckett eagerly pick up the thesis that art 
alone can provide access to something totally different which exists beyond the 
world of phenomena and which provides both the real basis and the ultimate 
reality of this world. But both do not assume the Ideal to be of any use in art. 
Nietzsche still keeps some elements of Schopenhauer’s idealism in the Apolline 
dream world of his Birth of Tragedy. Beckett does not use Schopenhauer’s notion 
of “Ideal” as far as it means “anticipated Idea” at all.43
 10. Every thing beautiful
Schopenhauer uses “beautiful” indiff several different ways. It is obvious that 
the beautiful does not occupy the central position in his aesthetics which it had 
held in several older aesthetic theories, e.g., that of Kant. (This, even more so, 
applies to the sublime). One of the anticlassical elements in Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics is that the beautiful is not defined unequivocally, that the concept 
of beauty becomes ambiguous and that the attempt at a definitive solution to 
the problem thus created does not belong to the central subjects of 
 Schopenhauer’s efforts in matters of philosophical aesthetics.
I shall differentiate between several concepts of beauty in Schopenhauer. I 
do not assume that my list is complete, but I hope that it will reveal how little 
Schopenhauer is concerned about what, for Kant, still was the subject of great-
est effort in aesthetics: To develop a philosophical explanation of the beautiful 
and to lay the ground for aesthetic judgments by which we may apply this predi-
cate to an object of nature, a person, or a work of art.
“Beautiful” in Schopenhauer is at first an epithet of the metaphysical 
object of visionary cognition, the Idea. “Beautiful” in a related sense is also 
an epithet of any empirical object which “anticipates” the Idea or gives a near 
equivalent of it in empirical material, i.e., the “Ideal”. Also “beautiful”, in a 
related sense, is used as an epithet of the true work of art. What underlies 
43 Beckett, as quoted above p. 3, still speaks of “the ideal real”. But he thereby does not mean 
Schopenhauer’s Ideal as phenomenal image of a perfectly formed type of a species of organic life. 
He uses “ideal” as a word for the ontological status of objects which belong to the sphere of the 
Idea – but he also takes these objects to be something else than what Schopenhauer meant them 
to be – as we shall see.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
51
these uses of “beautiful” is the assumption of a maximum similarity to the 
Idea. The Idea is called “beautiful” because it is perfectly similar to, i.e., 
identical with itself. The Ideal and the true work of art are so called because 
they come as close to the Idea as is possible under normal worldly conditions. 
This latter notion of beauty  corresponds to the idealistic traditions of 
 Schopenhauer’s time; similar notions of beauty can be found elsewhere. Even 
Hegel whose aesthetic theory differs from Schopenhauer’s at many important 
points and who assumes that an  adequate knowledge of what he calls “the 
Idea” is only possible in philosophy as the highest form of the “Absolute 
Spirit”, shows a certain proximity to  Schopenhauer in defining the beautiful 
as “the sensory appearance of the Idea”.44 Both philosophers, who otherwise 
differ in most parts of their systems, consider beauty to be the phenomenal 
appearance of “the Idea”. Both of them call the perfect realization of this 
phenomenal appearance the “Ideal”. Even Kant, differing strongly from both 
 Schopenhauer and Hegel with regard to central elements of his theory of 
Ideas, takes the “Ideal” of beauty to be an object of human effort which can 
never perfectly succeed, since the Idea, as a transcendent entity, is forever 
out of reach.45
From this concept of beauty, which might be called “classicistic”, 
 Schopenhauer derives another one which I only mention in passing because 
it is of little importance for our purpose. He finds the highest grade of beauty 
as phenomenal appearance of the Idea in representations of human beings. 
Since the Idea of the human being is the highest grade of objectivity of the 
Will and is superior to other Ideas in coming even closer to what the world 
is as the ever striving and suffering thing-in-itself, its representation in a 
work of art is, for Schopenhauer, the highest aim of art and more beautiful 
than other representations.46 From this, Schopenhauer derives a pre-
eminence of poetry: “The poet, however, apprehends the Idea, the inner 
being of mankind outside all relation and all time, the adequate objectivity 
of the thing-in-itself at its highest grade.” (WWR I, 245) Only music, for 
44 Hegel, Werke, ed. E. Moldenhauer and K.M. Michel, Frankfurt/M., 1971 ff., vol. XIII, p. 151, 
my translation. Cf. the different translation by T.M. Knox in: G.W.F. Hegel, Aesthetics, vol. I , 
Oxford 1975, p. 111: “the pure appearance of the Idea to sense”.
45 Cf. his Critique of Judgment § 17.
46  “Sometimes that eminent quality of special beauty in an object is to be found in the fact that 
the Idea itself, appealing to us from the object, is a high grade of the Will’s objectivity, and is 
therefore most signiﬁ cant and suggestive. For this reason, man is more beautiful than all other 
objects, and the revelation of his inner nature is the highest aim of art.” WWR I , 210.

52 
the metaphysical vision
reasons which we shall soon consider, stands higher than poetry in 
 Schopenhauer’s system.
Another demarcation of the beautiful which is more typical for 
 Schopenhauer is introduced via the theory of aesthetic contemplation. The 
state of mind in which the subject has lost any awareness of self and world and 
in a will-less manner is contemplating the Idea, can be induced more easily by 
some objects than by others. This difference is due to the different relations 
these objects hold to the individual will of human persons. Some objects seem 
to set human persons free from the domineering influence of their individual 
will and from being firmly bound to the aims of this will. Or, at least, these 
objects seem to make it easier to forget about one’s own self and the aims of 
one’s own will. Since those objects tend to free the person from his or her typi-
cal self-centred (and will-centred) everyday frame of mind, Schopenhauer says, 
they tend to make human subjects “objective” and can therefore be called 
“beautiful”:
By calling an object beautiful, we thereby assert that it is an object of our aes-
thetic contemplation, and this implies two different things. On the one hand, the 
sight of the thing makes us objective, that is to say, in contemplating it we are 
no longer conscious of ourselves as individuals, but as pure, will-less subjects of 
knowing. On the other hand, we recognize in the object not the individual thing, 
but an Idea … (WWR I, 209)
This is the passage in Schopenhauer’s aesthetics which comes closest to 
being some kind of definition of the beautiful. We can see immediately that 
it leads to difficulties which may have caused Schopenhauer himself not to 
stick to it consequentially. For this explanation of the beautiful cannot serve 
as the basis of judgments about the beauty of objects in general. We may 
remember: The Will as thing-in-itself objectifies itself in individual subjects 
as individual will with individual aims, which of course differ from person to 
person. The objectification of the thing-in-itself in space and time is neces-
sarily a splitting-up (“Selbstentzweiung”) so as to have the form of different 
individuals with different aims confronting the aims of other individuals. 
Vis-à-vis some object, say an object of art, one individual may feel that his 
or her individual will is being weakened and its aims fading. This may lead 
to a contemplative state of mind indeed. Another individual, however, may 
be stimulated by the same object of art, resulting in the irresistible wish to 
possess that object, so that the individual feels his or her will to be greatly 
aroused.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
53
But it was possibly not even this problem but the ambiguity of the passage 
quoted which moved Schopenhauer to alter his concept of beauty another time, 
not very long after:
Now since, on the one hand, every existing thing can be observed purely objec-
tively and outside all relation, and, on the other, the Will appears in everything 
at some grade of its objectivity, and this thing is accordingly the expression of an 
Idea, everything is also beautiful. (WWR I, 210)
What formerly was the distinguishing property of the beautiful, that it “makes 
us objective”, now only keeps the function of a means to measure different 
grades of beauty. Schopenhauer continues: “But one thing is more beautiful 
than another because it facilitates this purely objective contemplation, goes out 
to meet it, and, so to speak, even compels it, and then we call the thing very 
beautiful.”
The concept of beauty which the philosopher has now arrived at can be 
succinctly phrased as: to be a possible object of aesthetic contemplation. And this 
concept of beauty applies to any part of the empirical world since any part of 
this world is part of the objectivity of the thing-in-itself and as such corre-
sponds to an Idea as a grade of the objectivity of the Will and as timeless para-
digm of the class of objects which belong to this grade. If we want to uphold 
the old connection between art and beauty so that the object of art may be 
called “beautiful” and the work of art, too, we have to conclude: Any object 
can become a subject of artistic work, and any object can become itself a work 
of art.
The first half of this conclusion needs no explanation. The second half we 
can understand by remembering that the work of art is essentially a near replica 
of the artistically contemplated Idea in the material of the phenomenal world. 
Any bit of worldly material can induce a state of contemplation of the Idea in 
the mind of the genius, and any bit of worldly material can be isolated from its 
normal relations so as not to function anymore as part of a will-dominated 
worldly context but as an object stimulating the beholder to contemplate it 
independently of the forms of the principle of sufficient reason. This was the 
definition of art in Schopenhauer’s aesthetics: “the way of perceiving things 
independently of the principle of sufficient reason.” What remains as the dis-
tinguishing property of the work of art, is its metaphysical potential. This, how-
ever, may be found in any object whatsoever. Here, Schopenhauer’s aesthetics 
suddenly speaks to us without any traditional idiom of ornamentation and 
exaltation. Removing the beautiful from the centre of aesthetic theory may 

54 
the metaphysical vision
have hindered Schopenhauer’s reception in his time, but may well have helped 
it a century later.
11. Genius objective
When Schopenhauer wrote his aesthetics, around 1816, there was still a 
 popular tradition which tended to see the relevant characteristics of genius in 
a fancy-free subjectivity and creative power. These were two of the main prop-
erties which the genius cult of Sturm und Drang attributed to artists who were 
thought to break existing rules and bring forward not chaos, but new and freer 
forms of art. It was already Kant who, when writing the Critique of Judgment, 
saw that this bundle of properties was incomplete, open to misinterpretation, 
and rather worthless when we try to understand the creation of art. Kant, 
however, still kept to the framework of this tradition when assuming that 
imagination is the most important mental faculty of genius. He thought imagi-
nation to be  especially intense in artistic personalities, thereby enabling them 
to create unforeseen and daring works. Works of that kind, he assumed, can 
transcend the limits of his own theory of knowledge. The theoretical novelty, 
not foreseen in Kant’s  philosophical system before 1790 and with no place in 
his general theory of knowledge, was the assumption of “aesthetic ideas” 
(“ästhetische Ideen”47) in the later sections of the Critique of aesthetic judgment. 
Kant’s definition of “ aesthetic idea” reads: “And by an aesthetic idea I under-
stand that representation of the imagination which occasions much thought, 
without, however, any definite thought, i.e., any concept, being capable of being 
adequate to it; it consequently cannot be completely compassed and made 
intelligible by language.”48 Consequently, Kant included “the enunciation or 
expression of aesthetic ideas” in his list of the genius’s properties.49 Kant also 
introduced an element into his concept of genius which did not at all conform 
to fancy-free subjectivity: He claimed that in the genius there is a source of 
regularity and that this is a necessary condition for artistic production to bring 
forth not just anything, but a work of art. Kant’s first attempt at a definition 
47 Kant, Kritik der Urteilskraft, § 49.
48 Kant, Critique of Judgment, trans. J.H. Bernard, Amherst, 2000, § 49, p. 197. In line with the 
common usage of Kant scholars I altered the translation by preferring “aesthetic” to Bernard’s 
“aesthetical”. I shall henceforth refer to Bernard’s translation. Since that is not always convincing 
I shall sometimes give my own.
49 Critique of Judgment § 49, p. 203.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
55
for “genius” reads: “Genius is the innate mental disposition (ingenium) through 
which Nature gives the rule to Art.”50
The genius, according to Kant, is not able to explicitly formulate the rules 
of art along which he or she proceeds. The rules are part of the genius’s nature – 
the genius being unable to say how. Trained beholders of art, on the other hand, 
can pronounce judgments about art which claim to be approved by everybody. 
But the ground of these judgments does not, in the last analysis, lie in a thing-
in-itself beyond the surface of phenomena, but lies in an element of subjective 
suitability for the needs of imagination on the one hand and understanding on 
the other. Kant could only justify any possible adequacy of judgments about art 
by referring to the epistemic faculties of the subject. Similarly, he only could see 
the ground for a work of art being right to lie in the subjective “nature” of the 
genius.
When asking about the sources of Schopenhauer’s concept of genius we 
can, from the start, do away with those parts of German aesthetic theory in 
which geniality descends upon the work as some kind of god-likeliness as in 
Schelling and, partly, in Fichte. These theories were known to Schopenhauer, 
but he despised them (albeit following Schelling in some minor details). His 
relation with the German literary romanticism of the 1790s and later was 
ambivalent: He admired Wackenroder’s idea of the work of genius being based 
on a timeless entity, and he could make sense of Jean Paul’s attribution of calm-
ness to ingenious personalities.51 But, in general, the presence of Jena Idealism, 
above all that of Fichte and Schelling, and later on that of Hegel, in the self-
image of many German literary figures of the time was so strong that it would 
be hazardous to assume any influence on Schopenhauer here, given the enor-
mous animosity Schopenhauer felt against all the Jena philosophers.
It seems that Schopenhauer’s concept of genius can best be understood as 
both the continuation and radicalization of a Kantian tendency. In Schopen-
hauer, however, we have to assume a different theoretical basis and different 
constructive principles. The latter only made it possible to turn the Kantian 
tendency in a new direction. Kant had tried to free sound statements about art 
and the rules of art production from any suspicion of arbitrariness. He wanted 
to make us understand why works of art and sound judgments about them can 
claim a special kind of validity, independent of any personal fancy. Kant, given 
50 Critique of Judgment § 46, my translation.
51 For Schopenhauer’s contacts with German romanticism see A. Hübscher, Denker gegen den 
Strom, Bonn, 1988, 30–63.

56 
the metaphysical vision
his theory of knowledge, could only succeed in this undertaking by explaining 
the special kind of validity which he found in aesthetic judgments through refer-
ence to the epistemic apparatus of the beholding subject. Schopenhauer, who 
considered the genius to be a person who contemplates artistic objects inde-
pendently of the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, did not have to rely 
on Kant’s theoretical procedure. In addition, since he saw the artistic state of 
mind as being meditative and ecstatic, he would have rejected the Kantian 
position as too intellectualist. The most important property of the genius for 
Schopenhauer is not some kind of fancy freedom, not a special rule-giving 
“nature” of the artist, not imagination, not originality, but objectivity.52 The state 
of mind in which the subject is not an individual anymore and will-lessly is sunk, 
so to speak, into perceiving a timeless entity outside any epistemic forms of the 
understanding, is contemplation. This is how Schopenhauer relates contempla-
tion and genius:
Only through the pure contemplation described above, which becomes absorbed 
entirely in the object, are the Ideas comprehended; and the nature of genius 
consists precisely in the preeminent ability for such contemplation. Now as this 
demands a complete forgetting of our own person and of its relations and con-
nexions, the gift of genius is nothing but the most complete objectivity, i.e., the 
objective tendency of the mind, as opposed to the subjective directed to our own 
person, i.e., to the will. Accordingly, genius is the capacity to remain in a state of 
pure perception, to lose oneself in perception, to remove from the service of the 
will the knowledge which originally existed only for this service. (WWR I, 185)
“Objectivity” as the most important characteristic of the genius here is twofold: 
it is the ability to give up the will-dominated perception of the world, i.e., to 
forget about one’s own everyday subject (and especially one’s own will) entirely; 
and it is the ability to perceive “objectively” in the sense of perceiving true to the 
object, absolutely free from deception, since no worldly instrument or medium 
of information can distort the perceived Idea. The special kind of validity in 
aesthetic judgments and in the work of art which Kant tried to understand 
through an intricate theory of subjective cognitive processes, is explained in 
Schopenhauer’s aesthetics by removing any subjective element from the genius’s 
52 The use of “objectivity” with regard to the genius must not be confused with “objectivity” as 
direct or indirect expression of the Will. The Schopenhauerian word, in German, for the latter 
kind of objectivity is “Objektität”, for the former it is “Objektivität”. The ambiguity in English 
arises because there does not seem to be an English equivalent for “Objektität”, so that the 
standard translation for this Schopenhauerian term is “objectivity”.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
57
very special state of mind. “Truth”, when attributed to this state of mind, is 
explained through the absence of any potentially corrupting influence of the 
individual will and the exclusive presence of true reality. Schopenhauer, by 
declaring the artist’s vision to be, so to speak, the metaphysical eye of mankind, 
thereby turns the cult of the genius as a fancy-free subject into the opposite: The 
genius, in his or her truly inspiring moments of will-less visionary experience, is 
the perfectly “objective” person without any trace of subjective caprice.53
Imagination, in Schopenhauer’s view of the genius, is of only secondary 
importance. The genius does not need it for his or her most important state of 
mind but mainly for the technical side of artistic work: It serves to render the 
metaphysical contents of the artist’s vision in worldly material, i.e., in the forms 
of space, time, and causality. It also serves to merely imagine Ideas for which 
the genius in his or her actual experience does not find a suitable object of will-
less contemplation. If the genius had no imagination, his or her artistic knowl-
edge would be poorer:
Thus the knowledge of the genius would be restricted to the Ideas of objects 
actually present to his own person, and would be dependent on the concatena-
tion ofcircumstances that brought them to him, did not imagination extend his 
horizon far beyond the reality of his personal experience, and enable him to 
construct all the rest out of the little that has come into his own actual appercep-
tion, and thus to let almost all the possible scenes of life pass by within himself. 
(WWR I, 186)
The genius further needs imagination “in order to see in things not what nature 
has actually formed, but what she endeavoured to form, yet did not bring about, 
because of the conflict of her forms with one another …” Explicitly, the latter 
process is not described as altering the visual object so as to come near the Idea, 
but as altering it in the direction of a suitable phantasm for what nature endea-
voured to form. To contemplate this (like anything else) so as to arrive at the 
metaphysical vision of the Idea, imagination is not enough. The decisive  element 
in this latter process only can be made possible by something quite different 
from imagination: by objectivity.
53 Hegel also attributes “objectivity” to the genius in his “Vorlesungen über die Ästhetik” (cf. Hegel, 
Werke XIII, p. 362–385). But objectivity here, as is typical for Hegel, only can be fully realized 
in dialectical unity with the genius’s subjectivity. As Hegelian dialectics was absolutely alien to 
Schopenhauer, we can assume that Hegel’s use of “objectivity” here is a mere verbal parallel, but 
does not at all indicate a true correspondence.

58 
the metaphysical vision
To understand Samuel Beckett’s application of this theorem, we still have 
to mention one more point. For a subject, in Schopenhauer’s philosophy, there 
are two ways to relate to his or her object (which always is representation). 
The subject can perceive the object in the forms of the empirical world, i.e., the 
forms of the principle of sufficient reason. In this case the object always remains 
strictly separated from the subject: the principle of individuation is valid for 
these states of mind. Even when the subject tries to unite with the object (as 
tradition has it, happens in love), “uniting” is just to be understood metaphori-
cally. For Schopenhauer, there is no unity of subject and object in the world of 
phenomena. When, however, in the state of contemplation there is mere pres-
ence of the Idea, the principle of individuation has lost all validity. Therefore 
Schopenhauer describes presence of the Idea as a state in which subject and 
object are the same – not just metaphorically. The transcendent reality for this 
philosopher is present when subject and object have disappeared into each 
other and when no principle of individuality separates them anymore. This, 
according to Schopenhauer, is the true, or, as Beckett will say, “the complete 
identification of object and subject”.54
 12. Bliss, not just pleasure
That the perception of beauty is pleasant is equally a half-truth as well as a 
perfectly common part of our talk about art. Schopenhauer’s opinion on this 
point again can best be introduced via Kant.
Many readers will know that, according to Kant, the beautiful is the object 
of ‘pleasure without any interest’. This is what distinguishes the beautiful from 
other objects of pleasure in the Kantian system (like the agreeable and the mor-
ally good). The latter have relation to our will, and the pleasure we feel about 
them therefore is not free from interest in their existence. Beautiful objects, 
Kant claims, do not stimulate our will, if perceived as beautiful. Before 
 pronouncing a judgment of taste, we, so to speak, try to feel how the experience 
of beholding such objects affects our “Gefühl der Lust und Unlust” [“feeling of 
pleasure or displeasure”]. The “feeling of pleasure or displeasure” is a non-
appetitive or non-willing faculty of the mind in the Kantian taxonomy of such 
faculties. Kant’s theory of the beautiful as pleasing without any interest often 
was the subject of disapproval and ridicule in the course of history and in 
54 Proust p. 57.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
59
 popular discussions about art. However, Kant’s analysis of the aesthetic  judgment 
has an advantage which we find in few aesthetic theories: It can explain, using 
its own theoretical instruments, why, when beholding an accomplished work of 
art, we somehow tend to feel freer – vague and transitory as the impression may 
be. Kant’s explanation for this is: “We may say that of all these three kinds of 
satisfaction that of taste in the Beautiful is alone a disinterested and free satisfac-
tion; for no interest, either of Sense of or Reason, here forces our assent.”55 Here 
is the source of a thought which Schopenhauer is going to drive forward, so far 
as to reach a point whither Kant’s system of mental faculties cannot follow. This 
also is a point where Schopenhauer, since he usually relies on this system in a 
re-interpreted form, suddenly finds himself without suitable words. Kant’s 
explanation implied that, when we experience the beautiful, we tend to feel 
that our normal individual wishes, fears, and aims become temporarily unim-
portant, so that the person feels satisfaction and at the same time, in the 
 aesthetic experience, feels some kind of freedom from the pressure which all 
sorts of drives normally exert upon him or her.56
Kant’s critic Friedrich Schiller eagerly picked up Kant’s idea of a link between 
beauty and freedom. However, he took “freedom” to mean moral autonomy, too, 
and turned his new concept of beauty swiftly against Kant’s aesthetics as well as 
against his moral philosophy. I mention Schiller, because he sort of invented the 
way of proceeding from Kant into new territory which Schopenhauer did not 
choose. Schiller meant freedom to be the ability of moral self-determination in a 
strict sense, an ability which Kant only attributed to the reason-guided will of the 
person as member of a moral world beyond the world of phenomena. Since 
 Schiller saw that true freedom in this sense cannot straightforwardly exist under 
empirical conditions, and since he wanted to have an equivalent of true freedom 
in the empirical world, he declared beauty to be this equivalent. Beauty for  Schiller 
is “Freiheit in der Erscheinung”, “freedom in the world of appearance”57.
Schopenhauer, being a strict determinist in matters of the empirical world, 
could not link beauty to a non-empirical moral freedom. From Kant’s 
 observation, that we somehow feel freer when beholding the beautiful, he did 
55 Critique of Judgment, § 5, p. 54.
56 Much more prominent than in the theory of the beautiful is the close relation between  aesthetic 
experience and freedom in Kant’s theory of the sublime. I refrain from referring to this part of 
his Critique of Judgment because the meaning of “freedom” there is not exactly the same as in 
the theory of the beautiful and is certainly different from what led to Schopenhauer’s idea of 
will-less contemplation.
57 Friedrich Schiller, Kallias oder über die Schönheit, letter of 23rd February 1793. My translation.

60 
the metaphysical vision
not proceed in the direction of freedom of the will, but of the annihilation of 
the will. Temporary annihilation of the individual will is a necessary condition 
for the subject giving up its individuality and experiencing its object outside the 
forms of space, time, and causality.
However, the very positive feeling which, for Schopenhauer too,  accompanies 
the aesthetic experience, now has lost a well-defined place in the system of 
mental faculties which Schopenhauer, despite his alterations, took over from 
Kant. For Kant’s “feeling of pleasure and displeasure”, although free from  interest 
when we behold the beautiful, belongs to the mental equipment of a worldly and 
personal individual. It does not belong to any de-individualized entity like the 
will-less subject as “clear mirror” of the Idea, perceived in a visionary state of 
mind. Schopenhauer, who often uses Kantian concepts with altered meaning, 
finds himself in this situation without a well-established  philosophical language. 
He still uses sometimes the Kantian “Wohlgefallen” (“pleasure”), but is obviously 
not content in doing so. For “pleasure” belongs to the set of words a post-Kantian 
philosopher may use to describe a feeling of empirical subjects. But the person 
in the state of aesthetic vision has a frame of mind perfectly different from that 
of a typical empirical subject. One can see easily in his text, that Schopenhauer 
keeps looking for new words to describe the positive feeling which, for him, is 
characteristic of the will-less, self-less state of the  de-individualized person who 
is lost in the perception of the Idea.58 “All is well with us” is an expression he 
uses several times. But it is just of as little help to him as “calm, tranquil, will-free 
frame of mind”, “purely objective frame of mind”, “painless state”, “delivered 
from the miserable pressure of the will” (WWR I, 196 f.), “delivered from the 
miserable self” (WWR I, 199). The word which for Schopenhauer seems best to 
express the feeling of being freed from “the penal servitude of willing” (WWR I, 
196), is “bliss” [“Seligkeit”] (WWR I, 212)59. This, at least, is a word which does 
not belong to the standard vocabulary for describing the emotional apparatus of 
58 For the tranquil state of mind in aesthetic contemplation see also: C. Janaway, Knowledge and 
tranquillity: Schopenhauer on the value of art, in: D. Jacquette (ed.), Schopenhauer, Philosophy and 
the Arts, 39–61.
59 The English translator sometimes, without any apparent reason, also says “blessedness”. Cf. 
WWR I, 198. The German words “selig” and “Seligkeit” again make it necessary to avoid a mis-
understanding here. Hegel also calls the perception of the Ideal “selig” [“blissful”], and considers 
its form to be “the manifestation of spiritual freedom” (Werke XIII, p. 207). But this only is Hegel’s 
re-interpretation of Schiller’s “freedom in the world of appearance”, and Hegel’s use of “selig” 
has nothing to do with the blissful freedom from the ‘slavery’ of the individual will which is so 
important for Schopenhauer.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
61
a personal self, and which fits best, when Schopenhauer has to talk about the 
strange ecstasy in which the subject perceives true reality instead of mere phe-
nomena. “Bliss” also goes well with the expression “delivered from …” which 
Schopenhauer often uses when he talks about the moments of being freed from 
the rule and “slavery” of the individual will. At the same time, “bliss”, of course, 
is a word which is very suitable for the purposes of ridiculing the user as a some-
how preposterous or in any case unreasonable person. Hence, Schopenhauer 
uses it economically and with caution. When he has to characterize those states 
of mind, he prefers to quote mystical authors and the older Upanishads. He 
seems to be aware that, as a philosopher, he should not attempt to be a poet who 
tries to describe feelings not belonging to empirical persons. And he seems to 
believe that the most convincing linguistic documents for those feelings are not 
exactly to be found in philosophy.
13. Will-less, not just disinterested
It should be obvious by now that the “disinterested pleasure” which Kant 
 considered to be the distinguishing property of experiencing the beautiful as 
contrasted to the merely agreeable and the morally good, is very different from 
the temporary annihilation of the individual will which Schopenhauer thinks to 
be necessary for the person to have the metaphysical vision of the Idea. This sec-
tion is a marginal note which serves to enlarge once again on the difference 
between the aesthetic theories of Kant and Schopenhauer. My motive here, on 
the one hand, is that one reads too often the superficial remark that  Schopenhauer’s 
“contemplation” is roughly the same as Kant’s “contemplation”. It is, on the other 
hand, necessary with regard to Beckett’s sporadic use of  isolated fragments from 
Kant’s Critique of Judgment, to make sure we see the differences clearly so as not 
to confuse references to Kant with ones to Schopenhauer.
“Interest” in Kant’s aesthetics is defined right at the beginning: “The satis-
faction which we combine with the representation of the existence of an object 
is called interest.”60 This interest in the existence of a thing is not to influence 
our judgment about the beautiful:
Now when the question is if a thing is beautiful, we do not want to know whether 
any thing depends or can depend on the existence of the thing either for myself or for 
any one else, but how we judge it by mere observation (intuition or reﬂ ection).61
60 Kant, Critique of Judgment, § 2, p. 46.
61 ibid. p. 47.

62 
the metaphysical vision
This sentence, which still belongs to the introductory passages of Kant’s 
 argument, already allows us to see that Kant does not demand the perfect 
absence of any interest in the thing whatsoever. He only demands that such 
interest should not influence our aesthetic judgment, i.e., our answer to the 
question whether that thing is beautiful.
According to Kant, we decide about that question by asking whether the 
form of the perceived object is, in principle, fit to fulfil the needs of imagina-
tion on the one hand and understanding on the other “with reference to a 
cognition in general”62. The “free play of the cognitive faculties”63 in perceiv-
ing an object is evidence, for the subject, that these faculties are in a mutual 
relation of purposiveness for cognition in general. The relevant purposive-
ness on the side of the object is to be found in its form, not its material. The 
subject calls such an object “beautiful” and experiences a unique kind of 
satisfaction which is not satisfaction about the existence of the object (even 
if just imagined) but satisfaction about the harmony of the subject’s own 
cognitive faculties (imagination and understanding) in perceiving that 
object. Since Kant, given his premises, can assume that the epistemic facul-
ties of all persons follow the same logical structures which, in general, are 
the basis of our common objective access to the world, he also can assume 
that any person experiencing the special kind of disinterested pleasure in a 
beautiful object, can expect any other person to feel the same pleasure as 
well. Despite the judgment of taste, i.e., the judgment about the beautiful, 
being grounded on a purposiveness for the subject’s cognitive faculties (“sub-
jective purposiveness”64, “purposiveness without any representation of a 
purpose”65), the experience of this purposiveness is based on experiencing 
the object’s form and we can distinguish beautiful objects from other ones by 
referring to this form as a worldly property.
It should be obvious that the subject in this Kantian theory has not 
completely forgotten about itself in the experience of the beautiful and 
certainly is not “lost” in perceiving its object. On the contrary, the subject, 
for arriving at a judgment of taste, not only has to perceive the object’s form 
but also, at the same time, has to be aware of what happens to him- or 
 herself vis-à-vis this form. Despite Kant using the word “contemplation” and 
62 Kant, Critique of Judgment, § 9, p. 64.
63 ibid.
64 ibid., § 15, p. 78.
65 ibid., § 17, p. 90.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
63
despite Schopenhauer possibly having borrowed it from Kant, the word has 
rather different meanings for these two philosophers. Kant considers 
 contemplation to be a human  subject’s experience of a worldly object’s form 
in a  disinterested frame of mind. In this frame of mind the subject compares 
its experience of the object with its own “feeling of pleasure or displeasure”, 
in the last analysis checking the object’s possible purposiveness for the needs 
of imagination and understanding.  Schopenhauer considers contemplation 
to be the perception of a non-worldly, transcendent entity called “the Idea”, 
in which state the subject has lost any awareness of self as well as worldly 
objects whatsoever.
For Kant, any interest the person may have at the moment of an aesthetic 
experience apart from perceiving the beautiful object is of secondary impor-
tance. His main point when demanding disinterestedness is that the judgment 
of taste must not be influenced by any interest of the subject. Kant explicitly 
admits that the subject in other respects may well be interested in objects he or 
she judges to be beautiful as long as only the aesthetic judgment is in no way 
based on interest: “That the judgment of taste by which something is declared 
beautiful must have no interest as its determining ground has been sufficiently 
established above. But it does not follow that after it has been given as a pure 
aesthetic judgment, no interest can be combined with it.”66 This passage serves 
to introduce Kant’s remarks on our empirical interest in beautiful objects in the 
context of human society.
The person who, under Kantian premises, experiences an object as 
beautiful, thereby is not necessarily will-less. For Schopenhauer, the person 
is not just will-less but also has lost any self-awareness. The object contem-
plated aesthetically, under Kantian premises is part of the empirical world 
and is being perceived in the latter’s a priori forms, i.e., space, time and the 
categories. For Schopenhauer, the a priori forms of the empirical world, i.e., 
the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, have vanished in aesthetic 
contemplation and the object perceived exists beyond any of these forms. 
Kant’s aesthetics, we may say in short, is primarily a theory of the aesthetic 
judgment in the world of phenomena. Schopenhauer’s aesthetics is the theory 
of a quite exceptional state of subject and object in which we have a 
 de-individualized person perceiving a non-worldly, non-phenomenal, but 
“true” reality.
66 Critique of Judgment, § 41, p. 173f. I replaced Bernard’s “aesthetical” by “aesthetic”, see note 48 
above.

64 
the metaphysical vision
14. Music
“It was Schopenhauer who first recognized and determined with philosophical 
clarity the position of music relative to the other fine arts by attributing to it a 
character perfectly different from that of graphic and poetic art.”67 This is how 
Richard Wagner introduced an argument in which he not just emphatically 
approved of Schopenhauer’s theory of music but also used it to develop his own 
view of the musical genius. Since Wagner’s energetic partisanship, 
 Schopenhauer’s theory of music became a landmark in the history of philo-
sophical work on this art. Philosophers who write about music sometimes even 
determine their position still with reference to Schopenhauer although their 
opinion may be a totally different one. The unique position of music in 
 Schopenhauer’s metaphysical philosophy of art also influenced the way Proust’s 
narrator in his Recherche talks about the works of one of his characters, the 
composer Vinteuil. This, in its turn, is the basis for an important part of Samuel 
Beckett’s interpretation of Proust’s work where his use of Schopenhauer’s phi-
losophy shows most unambiguously.
Schopenhauer introduces the problem of music into the context of his 
aesthetics by observing that music needs no translation or explanation 
 whatsoever for being “understood” by everybody. Therefore he argues that, in 
comparison with other fine arts “we must attribute to music a far more serious 
and profound significance that refers to the innermost being of the world and 
of our own self.” (WWR I, 256) This statement, combined with the observation 
that music does not use pictorial elements of worldly objects, leads him to the 
assumption that music, so to speak, bypasses the Ideas and provides a direct 
representational reproduction of the Will as thing-in-itself:
Thus music is as immediate an objectiﬁ cation and copy of the whole Will as the 
world itself is, indeed as the Ideas are, the multiplied phenomenon of which 
constitutes the world of individual things. Therefore music is by no means like the 
other arts, namely a copy of the Ideas, but a copy of the Will itself, the objectivity 
of which are the Ideas. For this reason the effect of music is so very much more 
powerful and penetrating than is that of the other arts, for these others speak 
only of the shadow, but music of the essence. (WWR I, 257)
This is Schopenhauer’s straightforward thesis on the role and the unique posi-
tion of music among the arts in general and also in comparison with any other 
67 Richard Wagner, Beethoven, in: Wagner, Gesammelte Schriften und Dichtungen, Berlin, o.J.,
vol. IX, p. 66, my translation.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
65
kind of knowledge. He considers it impossible to give a proof for this thesis. But 
he also believes himself able to provide some kind of corroboration and partial 
confirmation of his statement by considering similarities between some struc-
tural properties of music and certain worldly objectifications of the Will.
More important than this attempt at confirmation are the conclusions 
Schopenhauer draws from his thesis. They were the historically consequential 
parts of this philosophy of music. Since music does not represent Ideas but 
provides a quasi-translation of the Will in a time-bound material, he concludes 
that music must be more comprehensive than other arts. As music does not rely 
on the Ideas as mediating entities, he also considers it to be a more reliable 
source of metaphysical knowledge than other arts. We may remember: The 
world of phenomena for Schopenhauer was the “indirect objectivity of the Will” 
since all worldly things have an Idea as the archetype of their grade of objecti-
fication. The Ideas were the “direct objectivity of the Will” because there is no 
mediating link between Ideas and the Will as thing-in-itself. This is what 
 Schopenhauer thinks about music, too. His chief thesis about music reads: 
Music is a direct objectification or direct representation of the essence of this 
world, the Will as thing-in-itself. Of course, music is not identical with this 
essence, since the latter itself forever retains its status outside of any represen-
tational form. But music, if we may use a spatial metaphor, is as close to the Will 
qua essence of this world as the Ideas are.
From this Schopenhauerian parallelism between music and the Ideas as 
direct objectifications of the Will it does not follow that music and the sphere 
of Ideas are identical. Schopenhauer (like Wagner after him in his essay 
Beethoven of 1870) differentiates between music and the Ideas through the 
assumption that they are two different languages presenting a direct objectivity 
of the world’s essence. The language of music, in addition to being different 
from that of the Ideas, is understood only unconsciously. The difference between 
conscious and unconscious artistic work serves Schopenhauer to distinguish 
between the composer and other artists. The composer unconsciously gives a 
representational form to the world’s essence in his special language. The inspired 
painter, sculptor, poet etc., in doing their artistic work, are at least partly con-
scious of reproducing something essential, a timeless form, in their worldly 
material. Therefore, the metaphysical character of the composer’s work also 
remains unconscious to him or her, whereas the painter, sculptor, poet, etc., 
possess some kind of awareness of the metaphysical task they are performing. 
“The composer reveals the innermost nature of the world, and expresses the 
profoundest wisdom in a language that his reasoning faculty does not  understand, 

66 
the metaphysical vision
just as a magnetic somnambulist gives information about things of which she 
has no conception when she is awake.” (WWR I, 260) This is how  Schopenhauer 
arrives at his famous reformulation of Leibniz’s dictum “Musica est exercitium 
arithmeticae occultum nescientis se numerare animi”68 to express his meta-
physical view of music: “Musica est exercitium metaphysices occultum nesci-
entis se philosophari animi” [“Music is an unconscious exercise in metaphysics 
in which the mind does not know it is philosophizing.”] (WWR I, 264)
The eminent metaphysical relevance of music, as expressed in this state-
ment, makes it clear once again that, for Schopenhauer, philosophy is, in its most 
relevant subject matter, viz. metaphysics, not the foremost human instrument. 
Philosophy, when doing metaphysics, was set down by Schopenhauer to be “the 
most universal rational knowledge”, “a complete recapitulation, so to speak, a 
reflection of the world in abstract concepts”. (WWR I, 82 f.) Since the world as 
a whole, however, is nothing but the Will in several grades of objectivity, and 
since music, more direct and more comprehensive than any other art, provides 
a direct expression of the Will in total, it has the same object and the same 
range as a metaphysical philosophy would have, if ever completed. It just uses 
different means and, as we already saw with the other arts, these means must 
be judged to be more reliable than those of philosophy, as the latter’s typical 
sources of error are missing. Since the language of music, as Schopenhauer said 
at the beginning, is (intuitively) “understood” by everybody and since this lan-
guage is more general that that of philosophical concepts, music must be con-
sidered not only to be richer in content, and less liable to mistakes, but also a 
more powerful medium of communication than any existing philosophy. The 
latter always is and must be incomplete:
Thus whoever has followed me and has entered into my way of thinking will not 
ﬁ nd it so very paradoxical when I say that, supposing we succeeded in giving a 
perfectly accurate and complete explanation of music which goes into detail, and 
thus a detailed repetition in concepts of what it expresses, this would also be 
at once a sufﬁ cient repetition and explanation of the world in concepts, or one 
wholly corresponding thereto, and hence the true philosophy. (WWR I, 264)
It is known that this leads to the central idea of Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy 
out of the Spirit of Music. Nietzsche took over Schopenhauer’s philosophy of 
music. Since, as we shall see, the latter’s metaphysical thoughts must be judged 
68  “Music is an unconscious exercise in arithmetic in which the mind does not know it is count-
ing.” Leibniz’s letter to Goldbach, 17th April 1712. My translation.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
67
to be deeply pessimistic, Nietzsche claimed that the immediate transfer of these 
thoughts into anybody’s consciousness, followed by the immediate transforma-
tion into a form of life, must destroy any person to whom this may happen. 
Nietzsche assigned music to the Greek Dionysiac mysteries, the pictorial arts to 
the Apolline world of Ideas. If human persons give themselves up completely 
to the Dionysiac state of mind, according to Nietzsche they indeed do have the 
most complete and most direct “knowledge” of the essence of the world; but in 
perpetuating this state of mind, they perish. The Greeks were so close to the 
metaphysical experience of their Dionysiac mysteries that, to not perish from 
this as a culture, they had to transform this experience into a series of Apolline 
images. Tragedy, according to Nietzsche, is the dramatic translation of  Dionysiac 
destructive experiences into the Apolline imagery of the stage action, which 
saves the spectators from the consequences which living the Dionysiac would 
have to have.
The reader may have noticed that I said nothing so far about Schopenhauer’s 
theory of tragedy in his system of aesthetics. This subject, however, still has to 
be dealt with to provide all that is needed for understanding Samuel Beckett’s 
use of Schopenhauer’s aesthetics for his own purposes. At this point, I also have 
to start dealing with Schopenhauer’s metaphysical description of human life 
under the reign of the Will as essence of the world. These chapters of 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy belong not only to the best known parts of his writ-
ing; some of their contents also entered immediately into Samuel Beckett’s early 
description of the true artist’s life. And Schopenhauer’s descriptive elements 
and metaphors of what life under the reign of the Will truly is, still seem to cor-
respond surprisingly well to the most forceful physiognomic traits of Beckett’s 
later works.
15. Tragedy and the vanity of life
“Death is the real inspiring genius or Musagetes of philosophy, and for this 
reason Socrates defined philosophy as θανα′του µελε′τη [preparation for death]. 
Indeed, without death there would hardly have been any  philosophizing.” 
(WWR II, 463) These are Schopenhauer’s words at the beginning of his supple-
ments to the Fourth Book of The World as Will and Representation in  Volume II 
of this work. He might also have used similar words to introduce his concise 
theory of the tragic and of tragedy in Volume I. For tragedy is to communicate 
to the spectator true knowledge about the essence of the world – which 

68 
the metaphysical vision
 knowledge, Schopenhauer thinks, will enable the spectator to adequately value 
this life so that death is felt to be no loss anymore.
The arts in Schopenhauer’s view, apart from music, try to reproduce the 
perception of a Platonic form in worldly material. Music directly expresses the 
essence of the world as thing-in-itself, but does so without the composer or 
the listener having to be conscious of it. Tragedy gives a view of this life stressing 
that life is essentially suffering and leads finally to death. It belongs to the arts 
which try to give a near replica of an Idea; in tragedy, this is the Idea of the 
human being. This Idea is common to tragedy and the other kinds of literary 
and poetic art. But only in tragedy is the Idea of human being presented as a 
living and dying person – to the effect that the value and nature of life as well 
as of death can be seen clearer than anywhere else:
Tragedy is to be regarded, and is recognized, as the summit of poetic art, both as 
regards the greatness of the effect and the difﬁ culty of the achievement. For the 
whole of our discussion, it is very signiﬁ cant and worth noting that the purpose 
of this highest poetical achievement is the description of the terrible side of life. 
The unspeakable pain, the wretchedness and misery of mankind, the triumph of 
wickedness, the scornful mastery of chance, and the irretrievable fall of the just 
and the innocent are all here presented to us; and here is to be found a signiﬁ cant 
hint as to the nature of the world and of existence. (WWR I, 252 f.)
Here is to be found a significant hint: It is not the totality of the world as thing-
in-itself which is presented in tragedy (as it is in music), but a certain side of 
human life and of the Idea of a human being, namely the terrible one. And this 
side provides a hint as to the true meaning of life and death or, as Nietzsche 
said, Schopenhauer’s answer to the question: What is the value of our 
existence?
The terrible side of existence in tragedy corresponds to an essential prop-
erty of the Will as thing-in-itself: It constantly strives to objectify itself, and its 
objectification in the phenomenal world governed by the principle of individu-
ation falls apart into innumerable individuals which fight against each other. 
This is the antagonism of the Will with itself in the world of appearances. The 
members of the organic world in all grades show the antagonism of the Will 
with itself as a constant fight for life or death, since there is a force in them 
which constantly pushes them forward against each other. “It is one and the 
same Will, living and appearing in them all, whose phenomena fight with one 
another and tear one another to pieces.” (WWR I, 253) The self-antagonism 
of the Will which constantly leads to the destruction of individuals belonging 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
69
to all grades of its objectivity is, for the grade of mankind, presented in 
tragedy.
Schopenhauer claims that tragedy, beyond presenting the Will’s self-
antagonism, also communicates an important insight into the ultimate nature 
of life. He thinks that it is already the characters of Greek tragedy who, before 
they die, pronounce this metaphysical insight and, for themselves, live up to 
the conclusion of it, i.e., accept their death. The insight Schopenhauer has in 
mind is knowledge of the common nature of all living beings as appearances of 
the Will, liable to persistent suffering, and of the voidness of individuality. The 
conclusion to be drawn from that is to give up the drive for self-preservation 
and of all individual aims striven for so far, and freely consent to death:
The motives that were previously so powerful now lose their force and 
instead of them, the complete knowledge of the real nature of the world, acting 
as a quieter of the will, produces resignation, the giving up not merely of life, but 
of the whole will-to- live itself. (WWR I, 253)
Schopenhauer calls the formal principles of the empirical world, space, 
time, and causality, the veil of Maya.69 By “Maya” he, in the first place, means 
“illusion” which also is an aspect of the word’s meaning in the Vedanta tradition. 
Another aspect of the meaning, in Western terms, is God as a metaphysical 
being behind or beyond the phenomenal world. So, “veil of Maya” in 
 Schopenhauer may be taken to be a veil of illusion, by which the metaphysical 
ground of the world deceives its creatures about the true nature of the world in 
which they have to exist, and about the true meaning of their lives. The veil of 
69  “… the ancient wisdom of the Indians declares that ‘it is Mâyâ, the veil of deception, which 
covers the eyes of mortals, and causes them to see a world of which one cannot say either that 
it is or that it is not, for it is like a dream, like the sunshine on the sand which the traveller 
from a distance takes to be water, or like the piece of rope on the ground which he regards as 
a snake’ ”. (WWR I , 8). Schopenhauer, as mentioned in note 34, when writing WWR I, knew 
Indian philosophy mainly via a Persian translation of the older Upanishads, translated into Latin 
by Anquetil-Duperron, published in Straßburg 1801/02 under the title Oupnek’hat. See Urs App, 
Schopenhauer’s Initial Encounter with Indian Thought, Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 87 (2006), 35–76. 
Since when quoting, Schopenhauer virtually never named the particular Upanishad, let alone a 
particular part or dialogue, and moreover often translated, another time, from Duperron’s Latin 
into German, it is not easy to trace his quotations in the original Upanishad texts although he 
sometimes gave the page number of his Duperron copy. Schopenhauer’s contact with Buddhism, 
again mainly through secondary sources, plays no signiﬁ cant role yet in the ﬁ rst edition of WWR I. 
It does so, however, in later revisions of that text from 1844 onwards. See: M. Nicholls, The 
 Inﬂ uences of Eastern Thought on Schopenhauer’s Doctrine of the Thing-in-Itself, in C. Janaway (ed.), 
The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, 171–212.

70 
the metaphysical vision
Maya, in Schopenhauer’s philosophy, keeps persons who are governed by their 
individual will from recognizing that individual personal existence is just a 
phenomenon, not true reality – the latter only being the Will, of no personal 
nature, not individualized, not knowing, but blind, striving, suffering. This veil 
according to Schopenhauer also helps to bind individual persons to pursuing 
their individual wishes, fears and their self-preservation permanently without 
seeing the emptiness and vanity of these aims. One may say that, for 
 Schopenhauer, the veil of Maya is the epitome of all illusions by which human 
individuals are constantly kept in a state of ignorance about what they truly are, 
and in a state of permanent, blind effort in pursuing fatuous goals.
Every tragedy’s stage action moves forward in the forms of space, time, and 
causality. The characters therefore strive and suffer as individuals, and they 
fight against each other as individuals, tearing each other to pieces, as 
 Schopenhauer says. But before they die, the excessive amount of suffering they 
had to undergo brings them to see through the veil of Maya and reach a higher 
level of knowledge. Their excessive suffering also frees them from being bound 
to their individual aims, fears, etc. They recognize that all living beings have a 
common ground and a common nature. So, according to Schopenhauer, they 
become free to adopt a new attitude towards their own life and their own death. 
The motives, i.e., causal factors, which normally drive and direct the actions of 
individual persons, lose their force. The emerging knowledge of the vanity of 
individual existence and of the true common nature of all beings becomes what 
Schopenhauer considers to be the opposite of a motive, a quieter [“Quietiv”] 
for the individual will. Contrary to a motive which tends to arouse the indi-
vidual will, a quieter in Schopenhauer’s eyes calms down any kind of willing 
movement in a person’s mind.70
This is Schopenhauer’s new interpretation of Aristotle’s catharsis: It is not 
fear and sympathy with the individual heroes of the tragic action which are to 
be induced, but rather, in the tragedy’s characters as well as in the spectators, 
a new kind of knowledge: the knowledge that individual existence in the world 
of appearances is thoroughly deceptive and that, therefore, individual death is 
unimportant, being nothing more than an illusion fading away. This knowledge 
allows the characters to free themselves from the drive of their individual will, 
and it allows the spectators to temporarily acquire the same attitude of freedom, 
70 I take it that Schopenhauer was the ﬁ rst philosopher to introduce into modern philosophy the 
idea of a quieter [“Quietiv”], the effects of which are assumed to work contrary to those of a typical 
motive. “Quietiv”, in German, is about as uncommon as “quieter” is in English.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
71
a kind of happiness, as we shall see. Schopenhauer characterizes the truly 
 philosophical way of life in this world with reference to the same knowledge and 
the same attitudes which are induced by genuine tragedy. Therefore, one can 
say that in Schopenhauer’s theory of tragedy, suffering and death of the leading 
characters become the inspiring genius of a philosophical world view in the 
spectators. The tragic action enables them to renounce their normal affirmation 
of the Will-to-live and to temporarily find a new attitude of freedom and 
calmness.
To ensure that we, later on, shall not miss an important difference between 
Schopenhauer and Beckett, we must keep in mind that the logic of dramatic 
action in Schopenhauer’s view of tragedy totally conforms to the logic of empiri-
cal events which are experienced by well-identified individuals in the forms of 
space, time, and causality. It is through their knowledge, induced by the tragic 
action, that the tragic characters can free themselves from the bounds of indi-
vidual existence and see through the veil of Maya. And only this knowledge 
also enables them to adopt the new attitude of resignation in which they even 
accept their individual death and give up their lives “cheerfully and willingly”.71 
The dying heroes, at the end of tragedy, are not driven anymore to pursue the 
aims they had so far, but, guided by their tragic knowledge, give up those aims 
and thereby show themselves to be free in a new sense. Only in a minimal, 
extremely reduced form will Beckett, in his dramas, stick to this last positive 
element in Schopenhauer’s notion of the tragic hero (below, p. 222f.).
16. Denial of the Will-to-live
The Fourth Book of The World as Will and Representation is entitled: The World 
as Will, Second Aspect: With the Attainment of Self-knowledge, Affirmation and 
Denial of the Will-to-Live. To understand how Samuel Beckett made use of 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy, we must now consider these subjects.
In Schopenhauer’s doctrine of the individual will we find the contrast 
between motive and quieter. The motive is an object or event of the world, rep-
resented to the mind by perception or concept, which moves the person to act 
and, in combination with the person’s unchangeable character, determines the 
person’s choice between alternative courses of action. The quieter consists in 
71  “Thus we see in tragedy the noblest men, after a long conﬂ ict and suffering, ﬁ nally renounce for 
ever all the pleasures of life and the aims till then pursued so keenly, or cheerfully and willingly 
give up life itself.” WWR I , 253.

72 
the metaphysical vision
the knowledge of the deceptive nature of all individual existence and, by 
 consequence, the vanity of anything the individual may wish for or may have 
to suffer. Seen from the standpoint of the metaphysical knowledge which can 
name the essence of the world, individual life, including anything that may 
happen to the individual, has no importance whatsoever. Birth and death as 
well as any other event in time do not affect the thing-in-itself. Since life is a 
common property of the higher grades of the Will’s  objectivity, the expression 
of the Will at these grades is striving to live:
We have therefore called the phenomenal world the mirror, the objectivity, of 
the Will; and as what the Will wills is always life, just because this is nothing 
but the presentation of that willing for the representation, it is immaterial and 
a mere pleonasm if, instead of simply saying ‘the Will’, we say ‘the Will-to-live’. 
(WWR I, 275)72
Seen from the metaphysical standpoint at which birth and death of the innu-
merable individuals in space and time have no importance, it is obvious that for 
the thing-in-itself there is forever objectivity and forever the present. Since 
every individual, so to speak, belongs to the thing-in-itself and is part of its 
objectivity, it is foolish to fear individual death. As the Will, the true substance 
of any worldly phenomenon, exists forever, it is in no way affected by birth or 
death of any living being in time. For this Will there is no coming-to-be or 
fading-away but just an eternal present and eternal expression through the 
grades of its objectivity.
According to Schopenhauer, relief from life, its drives and painful course, 
cannot be obtained through death but only through what he calls the denial of 
the Will-to-live, induced by the working of metaphysical knowledge as quieter, as 
a means to calm down the individual will. This denial is facilitated through 
insight into what life as expression of the Will really means: to be permanently 
driven towards new aims of the individual will, whereby obtaining an aim just 
brings a moment of satisfaction, a brief decrease of tension, upon which the 
thrust towards a new aim soon follows. If there is no new aim in sight, the indi-
vidual feels torturing emptiness and boredom. If the person really gets to know 
the true character of his or her life together with the perfect unimportance of 
72 As always, I used capital W (instead of Payne’s w), i.e., I preferred “Will” to “will” where it can 
be assumed that Schopenhauer meant the Will as essence of the word and not the individual 
will. See note 32 above, and p. 29ff.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
73
individual existence, something may happen which Schopenhauer describes 
thus:
If we compare life to a circular path of red-hot coals having a few cool places, a 
path that we have to run over incessantly, then the man entangled in delusion 
is comforted by the cool place on which he is just now standing, or which he 
sees near him, and sets out to run over the path. But the man who sees through 
the principium individuationis, and recognizes the true nature of things-in-
themselves, and thus the whole, is no longer susceptible of such consolation; he 
sees himself in all places simultaneously, and withdraws. His will turns about; it 
no longer afﬁ rms its own inner nature, mirrored in the phenomenon, but denies 
it. The phenomenon by which this becomes manifest is the transition from virtue 
to asceticism. (WWR I, 380)73
That the state so obtained can be called ascetic is easily seen from the  expressions 
“voluntary renunciation”, “resignation”, “voluntary and intentional poverty”, 
“constant mortification of the will, so that satisfaction of desires, the sweets of 
life, may not again stir the will, of which self-knowledge has conceived a horror” 
(WWR I, 379, 381f.).
It should be obvious that Schopenhauer is here describing a form of life 
which only extremely few persons will be able to practice. He may have wished 
himself to be capable of living that way but he also knew that he would not 
succeed. He literally defines this form of life as the life of holiness. He sees the 
founders of great religions as holy persons, who pronounced their wisdom about 
the essence of the world and the common nature of all living beings not in 
philosophical theories, but in religious mythology. He thinks these persons knew 
intuitively about the true thing-in-itself, but were not able or willing to present 
their knowledge through abstract concepts of a philosophical system.
I shall not try to comment extensively on Schopenhauer’s conception of 
holiness as a form of life which practices the denial of the will as its highest 
principle. But one remark is required as a point of later reference when we come 
to Samuel Beckett: We again find here, as with the heroes of tragedy, 
73 Schopenhauer says “transition from virtue to asceticism”, because one possible preparatory 
step for the denial of the individual will-to-live is to recognize the common essence of one’s own 
person and all the other ones. To know that the other person is essentially the same as oneself, 
according to Schopenhauer’s theory of moral phenomena is the basis of virtue. Cf. WWR I , 379, 
381 ff. The term “asceticism” is explained later on as follows: “By the expression ascetism, which I 
have already used so often, I understand in the narrower sense this deliberate breaking of the will 
by refusing the agreeable and looking for the disagreeable, the voluntarily chosen way of life of 
penance and self-chastisement, for the constant mortiﬁ cation of the will.” (WWR I, 392)

74 
the metaphysical vision
 Schopenhauer’s high esteem of suffering as a means to relinquish the individual 
will and finally become free of its stubborn and constant drive. This applies 
especially to non-holy persons who do not, by themselves, come to the point of 
denying their will. “Therefore in most cases the will must be broken by the 
 greatest personal suffering before its self-denial appears.” (WWR I, 392) The 
power to suppress all wishes and aims of the individual will by decision is not at 
one’s own disposal. To deny actively (i.e., in Schopenhauer’s system: by force of 
the will) one’s own will seems to be the opposite of a creatio ex nihilo: an annihi-
latio ex positivo. The premises of Schopenhauer’s theory of knowledge and meta-
physics of the Will make it hard to understand how the will of an individual, 
which is part of the objectivity of the thing-in-itself, can turn against itself and 
thereby perform an act of self-denial or self-annihilation. Schopenhauer may 
have seen this himself, since in § 161 of his latest book, Paralipomena, he picks 
up that point and re-interprets the denial of the Will-to-live so as not to be itself 
an utterance or act of the will, but just ceasing to will: “Contrary to certain silly 
objections, I observe that the denial of the will-to-live does not in any way assert 
the annihilation of a substance, but the mere act of not-willing; that which 
hitherto willed no longer wills.”74
Nietzsche reminds us that Schopenhauer is supposed to have turned away 
in pain from the picture of Rancé, the founder of the order of La Trappe, say-
ing: “That is a matter of grace.”75 Obviously he considered Rancé to be one of 
the very few persons who indeed arrived at the denial of the individual will. 
And he probably meant “grace” to be granted to rare individuals by an act of 
a greater and more powerful entity, in his system not God but the Will as thing-
in-itself, which by an original ‘act’ determines the person’s unchanging 
 character.76 Persons who are not granted this grace seem to need an excessive 
amount of suffering to arrive at the point of ceasing to will and to become free 
from the will’s permanent drive. Even metaphysical knowledge and insight into 
the common nature of all beings and the essence of the world are usually not 
enough to move persons to accept the ascetic attitude. “For only in the case 
of a few is mere knowledge sufficient to bring about the denial of the will …” 
74 Arthur Schopenhauer, Parerga and Paralipomena: Short Philosophical Essays, trans. E.F.J. Payne, 
Oxford, 1974, vol. II, p. 312. I shall henceforth quote that work PP, vol., page no.
75 Schopenhauer as educator, p. 143.
76 Cf. note 31 above. Schopenhauer’s theory of every person’s character which is brought about 
by the Will as thing-in-itself belongs to the paradoxical parts of his system and I shall not com-
ment on this here.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
75
(WWR I, 392). Therefore, one might well watch tragedies, be a philosopher, 
or otherwise (metaphorically) ‘see’ through the veil of Maya: we need more 
than knowledge to finally find calm and freedom in permanently ceasing to 
will; as normal, non-holy persons we need an overwhelming amount of 
suffering.
17. Affirmation of the Will-to-live
Until now I postponed Schopenhauer’s description of the non-holy, i.e., normal 
person’s, existence which remains completely bound to the affirmation of the 
individual’s will-to-live. Schopenhauer finds in this existence a very special kind 
of tragedy which he so far had not talked about. All the more haunting are his 
words when describing the everyday life of so-called ‘normal’ human beings 
under everyday conditions. These chapters of the Fourth Book of The World as 
Will and Representation show Schopenhauer not only as a philosopher but also 
as an eminent writer. Jean Paul, the only reviewer of historical importance who 
commented on the first edition, singled out this part of Schopenhauer’s system 
when, a full six years after publication, he wrote:
… a genially philosophical, daring, varied work, full of astuteness and deep 
insight, but with a depth often wretched and bottomless – comparable to the 
melancholy lake in Norway on which, encircled by its dark wall of steep rocks one 
never sees the sun but, in the depth, only the starry sky of the day, and above 
which there moves no bird and no wave. Luckily, I can only praise the book, not 
subscribe to it.77
The fact that the Will, expressing itself in any form of life, objectifies itself 
in painful and unhappy forms of existence is due to its nature as an incessant 
drive. If after brief satisfaction in the life of any person there is not immedi-
ately a new aim to attract the will, the pain of dissatisfaction may recede for 
a short time, but the will at once suffers another kind of pain: boredom, empty 
longing for an object. The will’s state when striving, as long as not satisfied, 
in Schopenhauer’s view is pain. This is the normal life form of the organism. 
Although the tiny moment of satisfaction, if an object of the will is attained, 
indeed comes under the title of “pleasure”, this pleasure necessarily is just a 
77 Jean Paul, Kleine Nachschule zur ästhetischen Vorschule, Jubilate-Vorlesung, Vierte Viertelstunde, in: 
Jean Paul, Sämtliche Werke, ed. N. Miller, Abteilung I, vol. V, p. 507f. My translation.

76 
the metaphysical vision
transitory event, a  transition either to the next state of pain, i.e., striving for 
a new object, or to the objectless longing for an object, i.e., an agonizing state 
of boredom.
Thus Schopenhauer justifies his famous formulae for existence under the 
serfdom of the Will:
nowhere is there a goal, nowhere a ﬁ nal satisfaction, nowhere a point of rest 
(WWR I, 309);
no measure or end of suffering (309);
essentially all life is suffering (310);
a concretion of a thousand wants and needs (312);
hunting for ever different deceptive forms (319);
our state is so wretched that complete non-existence would be decidedly 
 preferable to it (324); 
Life presents itself as a continual deception, in small matters as well as in great. If 
it has promised, it does not keep its word, unless to show how little desirable the 
desired object was; hence we are deluded now by hope, now by what was hoped 
for. If it has given, it did so in order to take. The enchantment of distance shows 
us paradises that vanish like optical illusions, when we have allowed ourselves to 
be fooled by them. (WWR II, 573)
Finally, there is the metaphor of the pendulum between pain and boredom which 
I present in its full context because it plays an important role in Beckett’s work. 
Schopenhauer writes about the nature of the human being:
Willing and striving are its whole essence, and can be fully compared to an 
unquenchable thirst. The basis of all willing, however, is need, lack, and hence 
pain, and by its very nature and origin it is therefore destined to pain. If, on the 
other hand, it lacks objects of willing, because it is at once deprived of them 
again by too easy a satisfaction, a fearful emptiness and boredom come over it; 
in other words, its being and its existence itself become an intolerable burden for 
it. Hence its life swings like a pendulum to and fro between pain and boredom, 
and these two are in fact its ultimate constituents. This has been expressed very 
quaintly by saying that, after man had placed all pains and torments in hell, there 
was nothing left for heaven but boredom. (WWR I, 312)
Pain and boredom are stated to be the ultimate constituents of life. In other 
words, Schopenhauer claims that everything in the phenomenon of life can be 
reduced to these two elements. Life itself, of course, does not recognize its 
elementary character thus described. Only after the veil of gleaming trash and 
constant deception has been pulled away from its aims can a living being 
 recognize what the last elements of its existence are. That this normally does 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
77
not happen and that persons are normally not even interested in knowing the 
true nature of their lives, is due the fact that they remain (and as  objectifications 
of the Will naturally tend to remain) in the state of affirmation of the will-to-live. 
No special act is necessary for this, just as the denial of the will-to-live, in 
 Schopenhauer’s later interpretation, needs no special act either. “The affirmation 
of the will is the persistent willing itself, undisturbed by any knowledge, as it fills 
the life of man in general.” (WWR I, 326) Therefore, human persons normally 
do not understand what happens to them through the process of living itself. 
Before their existence they were destined to be objectifications of the Will, and 
the self-affirmation of the individual will in constantly striving for new aims 
belongs to the very nature of the Will’s objectivity. This self-affirmation in no 
way depends on a special activity or want or volition of the individual, let alone 
its thinking; it just happens constantly as expression of the individual’s deepest 
nature. Schopenhauer seems to think about the affirmation of the will-to-live 
similarly as seventeenth-century philosophers thought about the drive to self-
preservation or conservatio sui78: As willing is the person’s nature, the person 
naturally strives to remain in the state of willing; no special decision or impulse 
is needed in addition to the person’s nature, and the person normally feels no 
want to know more than its will’s aims and means:
From the ﬁ rst appearance of his consciousness, man ﬁ nds himself to be a willing 
being, and his knowledge, as a rule, remains in constant relation to his will. He 
tries to become thoroughly acquainted only with the objects of his willing, and 
then with the means to attain these. Now he knows what he has to do, and does 
not, as a rule, aim at other knowledge. (WWR I, 327)
That living in the mode of affirmation of the Will-to-live means to be constantly 
deceived, blinded by gleaming hopes and aims which soon turn out to be illu-
sory, or empty, or of no lasting worth, is a message which Schopenhauer delivers 
again and again through the most powerful phrases and metaphors. In only very 
few individuals, and even in those only for very few moments, the veil of will-
dominated appearance and empty expectations is torn off and the world can be 
seen as it truly is.
This is echoed quite faithfully by Samuel Beckett’s notebook remark of 
1936 (quoted above p. 13f.) about rare moments when the “veil of hope” is torn 
78 Cf. Spinoza, Ethica III, prop. 6: “Unaquaeque res, quantum in se est, in suo esse perseverare 
conatur.” [“Any thing, inasmuch as it is in itself, strives to remain being in itself.” My translation]. 
Cf. also Th. Hobbes, De homine, cap. 11, sectio 6.

78 
the metaphysical vision
apart “and the liberated eyes see their world, as it is, as it must be . . . The eyes 
can only bear such pitiless light for a short while, the membrane of hope grows 
again and one returns to the world of phenomena.”79
18. Happiness negative
What may be called “happiness” under the conditions of this kind of life can, 
according to Schopenhauer, only be described in the negative. This applies 
above all to a life which remains in the state of affirmation of the will-to-live, 
i.e., in the state of being permanently driven by individual wishes which are 
regularly renewed even if one of them happens to be satisfied for a brief 
moment:
All satisfaction, or what is commonly called happiness, is really and essentially 
always negative only, and never positive. It is not a gratiﬁ cation which comes to us 
originally and of itself, but it must always be the satisfaction of a wish. For desire, 
that is to say, want, is the precedent condition of every pleasure; but with the 
satisfaction, the desire and therefore the pleasure cease; and so the satisfaction 
or gratiﬁ cation can never be more than deliverance from a pain, from a want. 
(WWR I, 319)
The meaning of the word “negative”, when applied to “happiness”, is here 
explained by the momentary deliverance from the pain of wanting. There is no 
feeling with a special, positively characterized quality of its own which might be 
called “happiness”. Positive feelings or experiences are, in Schopenhauer’s view, 
events of their own right; they introduce themselves by their own force, and 
they do not depend on some other mental event to occur first. Consequentially, 
Schopenhauer considers the state of want, the state of being driven by the 
individual will, to be the truly positive element in this context: “… the want, 
the privation, the suffering is what is positive and proclaims itself immediately.” 
(WWR I, 320) Want and suffering are the constant, independent and reliable 
elements of life; being freed from them is a dependent and ever fleeting state of 
mind.
Since permanent happiness in the mode of lasting satisfaction is impossible 
for Schopenhauer, he also thinks it impossible to represent, in a credible way, 
79 English translation of Beckett’s German by Mark Nixon, “Scraps of German”: Samuel  Beckett 
reading German Literature, in: Samuel Beckett Today/Aujourd’hui, 16 (2006), see note 19 above.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
79
such a fictitious happiness in art. He repeats the age-old observation that 
 representing the hunt for happiness or the fight against overwhelming threats 
may well provide the contents of great works of art. Only, these works have to 
come to an end as soon as the wanted satisfaction has been attained or the 
danger removed. For the representation of lasting satisfaction and lasting 
 happiness becomes idyllic and essentially untrue: “Since a genuine, lasting hap-
piness is not possible, it cannot be a subject of art.” (WWR I, 320)
So much for “happiness” in the everyday meaning of the word. There are 
two other kinds of happiness in Schopenhauer’s system80, both of them very rare 
and normally not available to persons who lead everyday lives. Firstly, there is 
the state of asceticism in which the individual – mostly after a long time of 
 suffering – has gained the metaphysical insight into the vanity of individual 
existence and individual wishes and, moreover, has ceased to want. This is the 
state of denial of the will-to-live which, as we have seen, is a matter of grace 
(not religious but, so to speak, metaphysical grace) and reserved to extremely 
few persons. There is no positive description of any special feelings in this form 
of life, despite the high praise Schopenhauer showers on the very few subjects 
who, usually after long suffering, arrive at the state of asceticism.
Secondly, there is the happiness of the will-less state in which the genius 
and, possibly, the person intensely contemplating a work of art have forgotten 
about themselves and the aims of their individual will. This kind of happiness 
is, of course, just a temporary one: The person is temporarily set free from the 
otherwise permanent pressure of his or her individual will. This freedom is 
experienced as a happy state of mind – though without self-awareness and 
without the individual being able to carry this happiness over into his or her 
worldly life which very soon has to resume again.
19. Suffering productive
Both of the aforementioned rare kinds of happiness are negative, for the same 
reasons as the popular and trivial ‘happiness’ of everyday life. Their description 
in the Schopenhauerian system does not refer to anything which introduces 
80 In Volume I of Parerga and Paralipomena, Schopenhauer gives yet another account of  happiness, 
deliberately not leaning on his philosophical system in order to be free for a more popular 
 language: Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life. PP I, 311–497. Some differences in style and content 
notwithstanding, Schopenhauer of course upholds his central thesis that happiness is essentially 
negative.

80 
the metaphysical vision
itself by its own natural force, but just to the fact that persons in these states 
are set free from willing which essentially is suffering. Even the happiness of the 
genius’s will-less state of vision is not described as a positive feeling in the sense 
of being grounded on an elementary trait of our nature. The subject who has 
forgotten about him- or herself and who perceives the Idea in a ‘pure’ manner, 
i.e., in a manner not contaminated by individual aims, needs, fears, etc., is free 
from willing as long as there is no self-awareness. This is the reason why the 
vision of the genius and the adequate, intense experience of a work of art are 
accompanied by a perfectly different kind of satisfaction than traditional ‘plea-
sure’. Artistic states of mind and art itself enable some individuals to experience 
‘happiness’ and ‘satisfaction’ in a sense which is contrary to the normal use of 
these words. It is not the fulfilment of strong wants, but temporary freedom from 
any wanting at all, temporary relief from our basic form of existence. After 
 having compared the everyday existence of human beings to that of the mytho-
logical sufferers Ixion and Tantalus81, Schopenhauer writes about the temporary, 
negative happiness which can be granted to the genius by the state of artistic 
vision and to the beholder of the artistic work by intense contemplation: “We 
celebrate the Sabbath of the penal servitude of willing; the wheel of Ixion stands 
still.” (WWR I, 196) Samuel Beckett will use Ixion and Tantalus as well to refer 
to our will-dominated ‘normal’ existence and to work out the contrast between 
that and the will-less state of metaphysical vision on the part of the artist.
That an exceptionally high degree of suffering can lead to the metaphysical 
insight into the vanity of individual existence and, in very rare cases, to asceti-
cism, has already been dealt with. Furthermore, Schopenhauer has suffering 
play an important part in matters of artistic experience. He declares that an 
exceptional ability to suffer usually accompanies the exceptional intellectual 
capacities of the person who is prone to will-less contemplation. He thinks that, 
in the artist the cognitive faculties can, as a prerequisite for contemplation, 
temporarily outweigh the forces of the individual will. But exactly these cogni-
tive faculties also correlate with the faculty of suffering, so that, the higher an 
individual stands intellectually, the better it can recognize the status of its own 
existence – and the more it will suffer from its basic condition:
What might otherwise be called the ﬁ nest part of life, its purest joy, just because it 
lifts us out of real existence, and transforms us into disinterested spectators of it, 
81 “Thus the subject of willing is constantly lying on the revolving wheel of Ixion, is always  drawing 
water in the sieve of the Danaids, and is the eternally thirsting Tantalus.” (WWR I, 196).

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
81
is pure knowledge which remains foreign to all willing, pleasure in the beautiful, 
genuine delight in art. But because this requires rare talents, it is granted only 
to extremely few, and even to those only as a ﬂ eeting dream. Then again higher 
intellectual power makes those very few susceptible to much greater sufferings 
than duller men can ever feel. Moreover, it makes them feel lonely among beings 
that are noticeably different from them, and in this way also matters are made 
even. (WWR I, 314)
With regard to their capacity for suffering, Schopenhauer sees living beings 
differ by grade. Plants do not have any sensation and therefore no pain. From 
the lowest animals up to man, the intellectual capacities rise step by step, and, 
in strict correlation with these, rises the receptivity for pain. Both reach their 
highest grade in the artist: “The person in whom genius is to be found suffers 
most of all.” (WWR I, 310) To suffer more and to be lonely among other persons 
are the genius’s price for the temporary will-less happiness of pure contempla-
tion. Samuel Beckett, too, will consider the artist’s existence to be inextricably 
bound to suffering and loneliness.
20. The metaphysical drama
I already pointed out that Schopenhauer’s theory of tragedy when compared to 
his description of life in the form of unbroken affirmation of the will-to-live is 
especially surprising for one reason: That this life which is the ordinary fate of 
almost every human person does not become the object of tragedy or of any other 
form of art.82 This is so notwithstanding that Schopenhauer indeed compares 
the everyday existence of human persons, quite traditionally, to a play. Only, 
this play in his philosophy necessarily remains a drama presented by nature or 
by the world, not by art. The everyday existence of persons cannot be the sub-
ject of art since Schopenhauer knows no art form which would be a suitable 
candidate for representing the pendulum between pain and boredom.
This is due to the fact that Schopenhauer described the task of art to be 
the reproduction of Ideas, giving near replicas of them in worldly material. 
82 One might claim that it implicitly is contained in music, since music expresses the Will as 
the thing-in-itself and therefore, implicitly, the whole world. But the everyday life of human 
persons in detail is not the subject of music, since music, despite expressing the Will as thing-in-
itself, should, according to Schopenhauer, not imitate or represent worldly situations or beings. 
 Schopenhauer considers such an imitation of events or beings in space and time absolutely alien 
to music. Cf. WWR I 261 ff.

82 
the metaphysical vision
The pendulum between pain and boredom as the normal form of human 
 existence (and, in the last analysis, of any non-holy living being), is no Idea. 
There is no paradigm or timeless model for it in Schopenhauer’s system of Ideas. 
Tragedy, according to Schopenhauer, presents the Idea of man, and, in detail, 
the horrible side of man’s existence. But this horrible side is just extreme suffer-
ing and finally death. Before the heroes of tragedy die they may gain insight into 
the vanity of life and briefly come to cease willing, i.e., momentarily arrive at 
the denial of the will-to-live. These special achievements are rare and, accord-
ing to Schopenhauer, are not at all granted to persons who lead normal lives 
under the veil of Maya in the so-called normal world. The overwhelming major-
ity of human persons lead their lives as a pendulum between pain and boredom 
without any insight into the true nature of their existence. They stick so faith-
fully to the aims of their individual will and are firmly bound by the comfortable 
illusions of space and time which provide the principium individuationis. Thus 
Schopenhauer can even say they are seized by dread83 when they dimly feel that 
their individual existence might be an empty appearance and that true reality 
might be quite different.
The tragedy which is being performed not in art but in the world as a whole 
with all individual beings as stage characters has no place in Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics. It is, at the same time, a comedy:
The life of every individual, viewed as a whole and in general, and when only its 
most signiﬁ cant features are emphasized, is really a tragedy; but gone through 
in detail it has the character of a comedy. For the doings and worries of the day, 
the restless mockeries of the moment, the desires and fears of the week, the 
83  “Just as the boatman sits in his small boat, trusting his frail craft in a stormy sea that is  boundless 
in every direction, rising and falling with the howling, mountainous waves, so in the midst of a 
world full of suffering and misery the individual man calmly sits, supported by and trusting the 
principium individuationis, or the way in which the individual knows things as phenomenon. The 
boundless world, everywhere full of suffering in the inﬁ nite past, in the inﬁ nite future, is strange 
to him, is indeed a ﬁ ction. His vanishing person, his extensionless present, his momentary grati-
ﬁ cation, these alone have reality for him; and he does everything to maintain them, so long as 
his eyes are not opened by a better knowledge. Till then, there lives only in the innermost depths 
of his consciousness the wholly obscure presentiment that all this is indeed not really so strange 
to him, but has a connexion with him from which the principium individuationis cannot protect 
him. From this presentiment arises that ineradicable dread common to all human beings (and 
possibly even to the more intelligent animals), which suddenly seizes them, when by any chance 
they become puzzled over the principium individuationis, in that the principle of sufﬁ cient reason 
in one or other of its forms seems to undergo an exception.” WWR I, 353.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
83
mishaps of every hour, are all brought about by chance that is always bet on 
some mischievous trick; they are nothing but scenes from a comedy. The never-
fulﬁ lled wishes, the frustrated efforts, the hopes mercilessly blighted by fate, the 
unfortunate mistakes of the whole life, with increasing suffering and death at 
the end, always give us a tragedy. Thus, as if fate wished to add mockery to the 
misery of our existence, our life must contain all the woes of tragedy, and yet we 
cannot even assert the dignity of tragic characters, but, in the broad detail of life, 
are inevitably the foolish characters of a comedy.” (WWR I, 322)
As we can expect from a well-invented play, this drama has also its own 
 consequential course of action. However suffering, boredom and the few transi-
tory satisfactions may be distributed among the characters, in the final analysis, 
the last substratum is always the Will itself, expressing and affirming itself 
through the lives of the characters. Hence, the Will is the unseen hero and 
tragic figure of all those scenes and it is the doer of all deeds and the sufferer of 
all pain. Anything that happens in this drama is perfectly fair, the action as a 
whole is an example of eternal justice, as Schopenhauer is quite ready to declare. 
Only as deceptive appearance does the Will express itself in the form of self-
antagonism, so that individuals necessarily fight against each other and, in the 
phenomenal world, guilt and pain often belong to different sides. Seeing the 
world as a whole and regarding worldly goings-on under the premises of his 
metaphysics, Schopenhauer finds that necessarily “the offender and the  offended 
are in themselves one, and that it is the same inner nature which, not  recognizing 
itself in its own phenomenon, bears both the pain and the guilt.” (WWR I, 
357)
The whole spectacle therefore is no object of rational regret, just as it is no 
object of rational indignation. Not considering the individual beings who are 
metaphysically insignificant, Schopenhauer claims that it is one and the same 
entity that produces the suffering, suffers it, and wills it. Not even an unin-
volved third party can be outraged about this since there is no such party, and 
if there were, there would be a superhuman justice through the identity of 
offender and offended. The only being which might know about it – not 
 recognizing itself – in Schopenhauer’s metaphysical terms is one who would 
simultaneously be doer, sufferer and spectator:
Yet no further complaint of this can be made from any direction, for the Will 
performs the great tragedy and comedy at its own expense, and is also its own 
spectator. The world is precisely as it is, because the Will, whose phenomenon is 
the world, is such a Will as it is, because it wills in such a way. (WWR I, 331)

84 
the metaphysical vision
At first glance it does not fit well into Schopenhauer’s system, that there is 
 supposed to be a spectator of this drama, obviously identical with its author and 
director, namely the Will as thing-in-itself. The problem here is that 
 Schopenhauer has stressed many times before he wrote this passage that the 
Will as thing-in-itself is unconscious and blind. Anything that might be consid-
ered a director or a spectator must possess an awareness of some kind, sense 
organs of some kind, etc. If we take Schopenhauer’s repeated assurances of the 
blind and unconscious nature of the Will seriously, we cannot assume the Will 
to be literally the spectator, performer, etc., but must find a way to read this and 
related passages differently.
The drama of animal existence and that of human existence especially, 
belongs to the expression, i.e., objectification of the Will in the sphere of appear-
ances. Since the Will as such does not enter the form of appearance and does 
not possess a conscious personality either, it seems reasonable to assume that 
any spectator of “the great comedy and tragedy” must belong to the human 
species. It cannot, however, be a single human person in his or her everyday frame 
of mind since such a person according to Schopenhauer is dominated by the 
individual will which always wills something for the individual and thereby nar-
rowly restricts the individual’s cognitive perspectives. The everyday business of 
human subjectivity in Schopenhauer is to bundle all forces of the person, abili-
ties of action as well as cognition, so as to serve the actual aims, fears, and needs 
of the individual will. In human persons, there is no room for a free overview 
of the totality of their existence as long as the individual will is directing all their 
doings.
For a first reading of the above passage, however, we may assume that the 
sum of all individual experiences is, of course, infinitely richer than any one of 
them and that, moreover, it contains all existing cognitive perspectives. Refer-
ring to this sum of all individual experiences, although this sum does not come 
into one single consciousness, we may see one way to understand  Schopenhauer’s 
assertion that the Will is at once performer and spectator of the great tragedy 
and comedy: The Will is performer in that it expresses itself in all the countless 
willing individuals; it is spectator in that it expresses itself in all the countless 
subjects and their very different cognitive outlooks alike, the sum of which is 
the totality of what is in fact being seen on the great stage. Of course, the Will 
as thing-in-itself, not being a subject, cannot “recognize itself” in the sum of all 
willing and all experiences in the phenomenal world. And this sum as such 
cannot “recognize itself”, since it does not unite in one and the same conscious-
ness. In short: When talking about the Will being both performer and spectator, 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
85
Schopenhauer cannot refer to a god-like theatre director, but he can refer to 
the sum of all actions; he cannot refer to one single god-like consciousness, but 
he can refer to the sum of all worldly experiences.
Another way to understand that passage might focus on the very few per-
sons in whom the intellect is strong enough to overcome the cognitive restric-
tions of the individual will and form a description of what life in this world is like. 
This cannot be considered literally to provide a view of the great spectacle and 
in this sense does not strictly conform to Schopenhauer’s words. But such a 
description at least would be some kind of cognition which transcended the 
usual limits of an individual person’s mind and therefore, using abstract words, 
could try to comprehend the world in total without claiming to catch every 
detail. It is here where a metaphysical philosophy like that of Schopenhauer 
would belong. As we remember, Schopenhauer explained philosophy to be “a 
statement in the abstract of the nature of the whole world, of the whole as well 
as of all the parts,” knowing at the same time that the perfect fulfilment of this 
task would be impossible for any human mind. But in the Schopenhauerian 
system, apart from the ascetic, the philosopher is the only person to have an 
abstract, metaphysical view of the nature of the world and of human existence 
in general so as to arrive at descriptions like those already quoted: “no measure 
or end of suffering”, “a penal colony”, “a continual deception”.
Since the arts, including literature, only can reproduce Ideas as grades of 
the objectivity of the Will, and since music, the only philosophical art as it were, 
just provides its metaphysical contents in a language not to be understood fully 
by any person’s reason, the metaphysical drama of human life as a whole is, 
according to Schopenhauer, only described by the philosopher. Schopenhauer 
does not know of any artist to present it to us. Hence in his philosophy, the 
pendulum between pain and boredom, the circular course of red-hot coal, the 
mockery of a thousand wishes mercilessly crushed by a very common fate, and 
daily life under the penal servitude of the Will with no way out have to remain 
philosophical metaphors for a reality not fully accessible to any human 
dramatist.
One important peculiarity of the metaphysical drama still has to be men-
tioned explicitly although it is implied in what has already been said: Contrary 
to man-made tragedies and comedies, the metaphysical drama can never end. 
There is no concluding action on the metaphysical stage, no final catastrophe 
or any other solution which would allow the spectacle to finish and the curtain 
to fall. The self-affirmation of the Will-to-live is eternal and eternally produces 
the same type of action over and over again: “The world stands out as the mirror 

86 
the metaphysical vision
of this affirmation, with innumerable individuals in endless time, and endless 
space, and endless suffering, between generation and death without end.” 
(WWR I, 331)
21. Timeless present, no ending
Schopenhauer’s metaphysical description of life and world in total, trying in 
abstract terms to reach beyond the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, 
focuses more than once on the timeless nature of the Will-to-live and its drive 
for expression in the form of an ever painful objectivity. One of these passages 
was quoted at the very beginning: “The present alone is that which always exists 
and remains immovable. That which, empirically apprehended, is the most 
transitory of all, presents itself to the metaphysical vision, which sees beyond 
the forms of empirical perception, as that which alone endures, as the nunc stans 
of the scholastics.” For the metaphysical view, life in Schopenhauer’s philosophy 
has no chance of any genuine development. Its basic traits remain the same, 
notwithstanding the appearance of change in time. Time, metaphysically, has 
no reality, and what we experience as change is not truly real either.
This applies, first, to the person’s character. Every human being’s personal-
ity is determined from the start as a minute part of the Will’s objectivity and 
cannot be changed in any way during the course of the person’s life. This is the 
person’s “metaphysical character”. What we call “development” in the lives of 
individual persons is, according to Schopenhauer, partly the empirical unfolding 
of the metaphysical character in the process of growing up and, in a long series 
of worldly actions, partly the process of the person becoming acquainted with 
him- or herself so as to acquire an “empirical character” – which is nothing but 
the knowledge of who one is as a person with certain personality traits in this 
world (p. 31 above).
Secondly, the absence of genuine development applies to history. History, 
in Schopenhauer’s view of life, is nothing but a never ending series of quite 
similar events in which the basic nature of the Will expresses itself – different 
in empirical appearance but perfectly the same for the metaphysical vision of 
the artist and the metaphysical description of the philosopher. This has often 
been criticized by observers who compared Schopenhauer with Karl Marx. 
Marx, thirty years younger than Schopenhauer but still his contemporary by 
some of his most important writings, described the fate of working-class persons 
of his time about as wretchedly as Schopenhauer describes life in general. 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
87
But the difference of course is that Marx, in the long run, has a positive view 
of history, expecting a bright future of mankind after the proletarian revolution, 
whereas Schopenhauer can see no real progress at all in matters of the human 
fate despite apparent and frequent changes in the phenomenal world, changes 
which, in the final analysis, remain perfectly irrelevant.
Thirdly, Schopenhauer’s metaphysical view of timelessness also applies to 
the individual life perspective of every person. He considers it to be deceptive 
and useless to hope for genuine relief in any predicament one may encounter. 
There is no chance that the basically painful or boring character of life may 
thoroughly change for the better; any seemingly positive development eventu-
ally turns out to be deceptive and disappointing or, in the rare cases where a 
wish is fulfilled, leads to the next state of want and need. This is also the basic 
difference from the Christian view, of course. When Christians describe life in 
this world as wretched and miserable, they, at the same time, point to the 
redemption through Christ and to the possibility of a perfectly different future 
after the resurrection of the flesh. There is nothing like this in Schopenhauer. 
On the contrary: any view which promises a truly better future seems to him to 
be part of a general fraud which only serves to keep people going despite 
 repeated failure and disappointment. The basic character of life as being subject 
to an ever continued fraud is often stressed in his writings, as is the illusory 
function of hope. In his general view of life he is much closer to Indian thought 
than to Christian doctrine. Inasmuch as the latter can be interpreted as being, 
in the final analysis, an optimistic world view, he certainly refuses to agree. Any 
optimistic view of life and world to him is part of the general deceit all living 
beings have to suffer:
I cannot here withhold the statement that optimism, where it is not merely the 
thoughtless talk of those who harbour nothing but words under their shallow 
foreheads, seems to me to be not merely an absurd, but also a really wicked, 
way of thinking, a bitter mockery of the unspeakable sufferings of mankind. 
(WWR I, 326)
Nearly all persons, when suffering, hope for an end of pain and for a better time. 
For the metaphysical view of the philosopher this hope is one of the deceptive 
illusions made possible by the veil of Maya under which human life has to be 
lived. The true reality is such that there never is the chance for a genuine end; 
at most there are short periods of transition from one wish or cause of suffering 
to the next one. And even those periods of transition tend to be filled by painful 
boredom, empty longing for an object – an object which, when it finally appears, 

88 
the metaphysical vision
causes nothing but the next period of painful striving and fraudulent 
 expectation. The individual death, seen metaphysically from Schopenhauer’s 
point of view, has no significance and brings no relief. As there is no end of 
suffering in  Schopenhauer, there is no end of the world and no hope for this. The 
idea of a genuine end is thoroughly alien to the Schopenhauerian world view. 
Just as there is no genuine history for him, no genuine development of any 
person or of mankind, there is no genuine apocalypse – unless we want to see 
the present itself as permanently apocalyptic. Timeless present in a painful state 
with no  possible end is the metaphysical status of the world and of human life 
in  Schopenhauer’s philosophy. His metaphor at this point is the famous one of 
an ever-burning sun in the zenith of a permanent mid-day: “The earth rolls on 
from day into night; the individual dies; but the sun itself burns without inter-
mission, an eternal noon. Life is certain to the Will-to-live; the form of life is 
the endless present; it matters not how individuals, the phenomena of the Idea, 
arise and pass away in time, like fleeting dreams.” (WWR I, 281)
22. Life pensum, suicide no escape
From this point of view, suicide is just as foolish as the fear of death. A person 
committing suicide, one may say, seeks in death relief from a painful life. But 
death, according to Schopenhauer, is just the end of an individual as part of the 
world of phenomena; it is not at all the end of the underlying Will as thing-in-
itself. The Will, being the only true reality, in its blind and obstinate way goes 
on objectifying itself, therefore incessantly through its objectification as a whole 
goes on producing life and suffering. Thus, the passage quoted above continues: 
“Therefore, suicide already appears to us to be a vain and therefore foolish 
action; when we have gone farther in our discussion, it will appear to us in an 
even less favourable light.”84
84 Just as suicide, seen metaphysically, is a thoroughly irrational action caused by a false view of 
life, the fear of individual death is irrational for the same reason. According to Schopenhauer, 
the wish to die and the fear of death both are typically foolish attitudes of persons under the veil 
of Maya: “But just as on the globe everywhere is above, so the form of all life is the present; and 
to fear death because it robs us of the present is no wiser than to fear that we can slip down from 
the round globe on the top of which we are now fortunately standing. The form of the present is 
essential to the objectiﬁ cation of the Will. As an extensionless point, it cuts time which extends 
inﬁ nitely in both directions, and stands ﬁ rm and immovable, like an everlasting midday without 
a cool evening, just as the actual sun burns without intermission, while only apparently does it 
sink into the bosom of the night.” WWR I, 280.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
89
This less favourable light is shed on suicide by the fact that it is not only 
foolish but also keeps the individual from arriving at the only wise conclusion 
which can be drawn from incessant suffering: the denial of the Will-to-live. 
Although only extremely few persons manage to arrive at an attitude of asceti-
cism where the individual will turns against itself in constant mortification and 
the person ceases willing, this, in Schopenhauer’s eyes, would be the only non-
illusory and metaphysically consequential way out. Suicide on the other hand, 
coming about by the wish to just put an end to a life full of suffering, is in the 
final analysis only another way in which the Will-to-live expresses itself and 
thereby fulfils its nature as permanent striving, in this case striving not to suffer. 
Schopenhauer blames the person who commits suicide, for two reasons: This 
person is blind and fatuous, since suicide merely kills the individual, but meta-
physically does not put an end to suffering at all. And suicide, in ending the 
person’s life, robs the person of the only chance to come through to the one real 
redemption there is: the denial of the Will-to-live, i.e., to cease willing alto-
gether. Schopenhauer comments on the person committing suicide:
Suffering approaches and, as such, offers the possibility of a denial of the Will; but 
he rejects it by destroying the Will’s phenomenon, the body, so that the Will may 
remain unbroken. This is the reason why almost all ethical systems, philosophical 
as well as religious, condemn suicide, though they themselves cannot state any-
thing but strange and sophistical arguments for so doing. (WWR I, 399)
There is another point of kinship between the Schopenhauerian view of life and 
the Christian view which still should be mentioned because we shall find it in 
Samuel Beckett, too: Despite being a non-religious philosopher, Schopenhauer 
at a number of points declares the painful course of individual life and final 
death as being the atonement for an original sin. We see this first in his theory 
of tragedy: “The true sense of the tragedy is the deeper insight that what the 
hero atones for is not his own particular sins, but original sin, in other words, 
the guilt of existence itself.” (WWR I, 254)
This passage might still be treated just as part of the philosopher’s theory 
of dramatic art. But Schopenhauer in a later section of his work claims that 
there is an obvious parallelism between the Christian doctrine of original sin 
and his own view of suffering as penalty for having been born and, altogether, 
for living, i.e., for the affirmation of the Will-to-live.85 In Volume II of The World 
as Will and Representation of 1844, containing the supplements to Volume I, we 
85 Cf. WWR I, 405.

90 
the metaphysical vision
find a more extensive treatment of this subject. Individual life with its pain and 
suffering is seen as atonement for a sin which was committed with the act of 
fathering, an act which Schopenhauer considers to be an utterly strong affirma-
tion of the Will-to-live.
The life of man, with its endless care, want, and suffering, is to be regarded as the 
explanation and paraphrase of the act of procreation, of the decided afﬁ rmation 
of the Will-to-live. Further, it is also due to this that he owes nature the debt of 
death, and thinks of this debt with uneasiness. Is not this evidence of the fact 
that our existence involves guilt? (WWR II, 569).
In Schopenhauer’s German, there is but one word for “guilt” and “debt”: 
“Schuld”. To atone for the guilt of having been born, therefore, in his texts is 
often compared to paying off a debt.
 In his Parerga and Paralipomena of 1851, Schopenhauer combines in an 
especially elaborate form the idea of procreation as the original sin which the 
individual has to atone for, with his view of individual life as an enduring pun-
ishment the total measure of which is only fulfilled through the individual’s 
death. Here we find some of the phrases Beckett noted in his “Sottisier” note-
book of 1979/1980 (quoted above p. 15). Schopenhauer admonishes his readers 
to accustom themselves to “regard this world as a place of penance and hence 
a penal colony …” (PP II, 302). Again he comes close to the Christian tradition 
by taking Hell as the place where the punishment of sin takes place: “The world 
is just a hell and in it human beings are the tortured souls on the one hand, and 
the devils on the other.” (PP II, 300) From there he concludes “that the really 
proper address between one man and another should be, instead of Sir, Mon-
sieur, and so on, Leidensgefährte, ‘soci malorum’, ‘compagnon de misères’, ‘my 
fellow-sufferer.’ ” (PP II, 304)86
The penalty inflicted upon human beings for being born in Schopenhauer’s 
works often is described like some kind of slave labour. This shows in his already 
quoted comparison of life to an ergasterion which, in ancient Greece, was a place 
of hard labour and also could be a penitentiary for slaves. Schopenhauer’s 
favourite metaphor in this context, however, is that of life as a pensum:
… life by no means presents itself as a gift to be enjoyed, but as a pensum, a 
drudgery, to be worked through. According to this we see, on a large scale as 
86  “Penal colony” is Schopenhauer’s English. “Leidensgefährte” is well translated by Schopenhauer’s 
own “fellow-sufferer”. In the quotation given here I kept to Schopenhauer’s “soci malorum” instead 
of Paynes’s “socii malorum”, “socii” being either a misprint or a misunderstanding of S.’s Latin.

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
91
well as on a small, universal need, restless exertion, constant pressure, endless 
strife, forced activity, with extreme exertion of all bodily and mental powers. 
(WWR II, 357)87
The word “pensum” originates from the Latin “pendere” which means “to weigh”. 
Pensum in Roman times was a certain amount of wool, weighed and given to 
female slaves to work off as a day’s labour. Schopenhauer obviously thinks of 
any individual’s life as a pensum of slave labour and suffering, which the indi-
vidual has to work off during his or her lifetime. This notion keeps recurring in 
Schopenhauer’s writings, published and unpublished, from an early period up 
to his latest works.88 A very descriptive section in Parerga and Paralipomena 
contains a dialogue between a fictitious world spirit and man:
WORLD SPIRIT:  Here then is the pensum of your labours and sufferings; for these 
you shall exist, as do all other things.
 
MAN:  But what have I from existence? If my existence is occupied, I have 
trouble; if it is unoccupied, I have boredom. How can you offer 
me so miserable a reward for so much labour and suffering?
WORLD SPIRIT:  And yet this reward is the equivalent of all your troubles, and it 
is precisely this by virtue of its inadequacy.
 
MAN:  Indeed? This really exceeds my powers of comprehension.
WORLD SPIRIT:  I know, – (aside) Should I tell him that the value of life consists 
precisely in its teaching him not to will it? For this supreme dedi-
cation life itself must first prepare him. (PP II, 321)89
We shall repeatedly find the idea of life as a pensum in Samuel Beckett’s literary 
opus again, just as Schopenhauer’s lesson, not to will.
87 Payne usually translates Schopenhauer’s “pensum” as “task”. I undid this in the above quotation 
and shall keep to this practice. “Task” certainly obliterates the aspect of slave labour which is pres-
ent in “pensum”. It also obliterates the aspect of a certain quantity of such labour, predetermined 
in advance – which is typical for Schopenhauer’s view of human life.
88 E.g.: “Life obviously is no present to enjoy, but a work, a pensum to be worked off.” (“Adver-
saria” notebook [1829], § 194, in: Schopenhauer, Der handschriftliche Nachlaß, ed. A. Hübscher, 
Frankfurt/M 1966 ff., vol. 3, p. 585. My translation); “Life presents itself as a problem, a pensum 
to be worked out, and in general therefore as a constant struggle against want and afﬂ iction.” 
(WWR II, 568); Beckett’s “Sottisier” notebook just as his Proust refer to the following remark of 
Schopenhauer’s: “Life is a pensum to be worked off; in this sense defunctus is a ﬁ ne expression.” 
(PP II, 300). See below, p. 122, and above p.15.
89 As before, I exchanged Payne’s “task” by Schopenhauer’s “pensum”. In this case it is especially 
obvious that “task” ﬁ ts badly and that Schopenhauer’s use of “pensum” is very close indeed to the 
Roman one of a predetermined amount of labour.

92 
the metaphysical vision
23. The primacy of nothingness
The last section of Schopenhauer’s chief work is a philosophical reflection on 
“Nothing” [“Nichts”]. Starting off with Kant’s table of different ways to con-
ceptualize the idea of nothing, Schopenhauer, in line with Kant, rejects the 
possibility to think consistently of a “nihil negativum”, since any idea of that 
would be contradictory in itself. He claims instead that every sensible way to 
think of ‘nothing’ must consist in thinking of it as a privation relative to some-
thing, i.e., as “nihil privativum” (WWR I, 409). For our view, as long as we are 
held captive by our own permanent affirmation of the Will, the broadest  possible 
‘something’ that we can think ourselves deprived of is, according to 
 Schopenhauer, the world of phenomena in total. However, this world is the 
world of our daily life and can never under normal circumstances shrink to 
nothing. ‘Nothing’ remains a mere thought for those in whom the Will keeps 
affirming itself and producing its objectivity. In Schopenhauer’s view, only the 
happy few who ceased to will altogether, the ones in whom the Will “has denied 
itself”, reached a state in which, not just temporarily but permanently, the 
world in total has indeed been negated and ‘nothing’ has taken the place of any 
object or thought that might be considered ‘something’. Schopenhauer is aware 
that this state is not really accessible to the language of philosophy and can only 
be hinted at indirectly. This is how he tries to write about it:
If, therefore, we have recognized the inner nature of the world as Will, and have 
seen in all its phenomena only the objectivity of the Will; … we shall by no means 
evade the consequence that, with the free denial, the surrender, of the Will, all 
those phenomena also are now abolished. That constant pressure and effort, 
without aim and without rest, at all grades of objectivity in which and through 
which the world exists; the multifarious forms succeeding one another in grada-
tion; the whole phenomenon of the Will; ﬁ nally, the universal forms of this phe-
nomenon, time and space, and also the last fundamental form of these, subject 
and object; all these are abolished with the Will. No Will: no representation, no 
world. Before us there is certainly left only nothing … (WWR I, 410 f.)
There can be no doubt about Schopenhauer’s valuation of this state: It is to be 
preferred to any other state in which human beings may find themselves. His 
reflection about ‘nothing’ starts as if he wanted to give an appendix to a minor 
issue of Kant’s theoretical philosophy. It turns into an enthusiastic praise, ethi-
cal in a wide sense, of what can only be achieved by the strictest asceticism, the 
denial of the Will-to-live – which is not at the person’s disposal but only comes 
about by an event or process contrary to the laws of nature and therefore is not 

 
on schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
93
fully understandable. Schopenhauer concludes his chief work, The Word as Will 
and Representation:
We then look with deep and painful yearning at that state, beside which the 
miserable and desperate nature of our own appears in the clearest light by the 
contrast. … we freely acknowledge that what remains after the complete aboli-
tion of the Will is, for all who are still full of the Will, assuredly nothing. But also 
conversely, to those in whom the Will has turned and denied itself, this very real 
world of ours with all its suns and galaxies, is – nothing. (WWR I, 411 f.)
Schopenhauer stuck to this primacy of Nothing for his entire life. In the work 
that finally brought him the deserved recognition, Parerga and Paralipomena, he 
often reflects about the negative value of life. One of his most outspoken and 
most personal statements, going much farther than what the label “pessimism” 
usually implies, and crossing the border towards an ontology of ‘nothing’, is this: 
“We can also regard our life as a uselessly disturbing episode in the blissful 
repose of nothingness.” (PP II, 299)90
It has often been observed, and is in line with his own very few direct dis-
closures about himself, that Samuel Beckett attached greatest significance, in 
both ontological as well as ethical respect (in a wide sense), to the notion of 
nothing. He advised the critic Sigle Kennedy who had presented him with an 
interpretation of his work that, if he himself had to study his work, his points 
of departure would be Naught is more real than nothing (attributed to Democri-
tus) and Ubi nihil vales, ibi nihil velis [where you are worth nothing, you should 
want nothing] (attributed to Geulincx). Beckett added that both statements 
are already to be found in Murphy.91 Apart from Murphy, I find an unmistakable 
yearning for what Schopenhauer termed “the blissful repose of nothingness” in 
several figures of Beckett’s literature, among others the leading characters of 
Endgame.
As his literary works will be discussed below, I restrict myself here to two 
of Beckett’s notebook remarks. They may be taken to show something about 
90 Both ‘nothing’ and ‘nothingness’ in Payne’s translation stand for the German word “ Nichts”. 
It seems the translator shifted to “nothingness” when he conjectured that Schopenhauer 
used “Nichts” for an ontological notion, i.e., ‘nothing’ as the absolute opposite to any kind of 
‘being’.
91 The letter to Kennedy is in Disjecta, p. 113. In the Jupiter Book edition of Murphy, London 
(Calder & Boyars), 1963, the quote from Geulincx is on p. 124, the reference to Democritus on 
p. 168. Shane Weller, A Taste for the Negative: Beckett and Nihilism, London (Maney), 2005, 
explicitly sets out to read Beckett from the starting points given in the Kennedy letter.

94 
the metaphysical vision
Beckett himself, not hidden behind a fictional character. His “Sottisier”  notebook 
has a decided preference for nihil in an ontological context and thereby indeed 
may be taken as partly confirming what he wrote to Kennedy. The relevant 
entry, written between 13th Jan. and 18th Jan. 1978, is: “Ex nihilo omne fit” 
[“From nothing originates everything”].92 The word “omne” [“everything”] is 
written in bold letters and strong ink or pencil above another word of similar 
length which has been so energetically crossed out that it is no longer legible. 
But from philosophical tradition we may safely conjecture that the original 
entry, so decisively altered by Beckett, was the quite familiar “Ex nihilo nihil fit” 
[“From nothing originates nothing”] which he may have found in Leibniz or 
another author from the history of philosophy. Beckett’s energetic alteration, 
in contrast to the original text, is quite self-explanatory.
The other entry which seems to show a preference for the negative, repeat-
edly written down, is “Omnis determinatio est negatio” [“Every determination is 
negation”] which Beckett may have found in Spinoza or some other philosopher, 
possibly one who refers to him or takes this notions as a starting point. This 
entry appears at least twice around 1936/37.93 The usual meaning of this phrase 
is an epistemological rule saying that any attempt to determine the properties 
of any object whatsoever must make use of a negation so as to differentiate 
between that object and any other. The non-epistemological connotations of 
“determinatio” and “negatio”, especially when one substitutes the English “deter-
mination” and “negation”, are many. It may be assumed that Beckett attached 
so great a significance to that statement because he read it in a wider sense and 
differently from its original use in epistemology. For instance, he may well have 
read it as an ontological principle stressing the basic role of negation in the 
origin and in any formative event of the universe.
92  “Sottisier” notebook, Reading Univ. Library MS 2901, p. 19.
93  “Whoroscope” notebook, Reading Univ. Library MS 3000, p. 59 (recto), and Reading Univ. 
Library MS 5006, not unequivocally paginated, Beckett’s entry made after 14th Jan. 1937.

24. True reality and caricature of reality
As was pointed out, Samuel Beckett read Schopenhauer very shortly before and 
probably also in the very process of writing his Proust. His terminology in 
 philosophical matters is quite technical at some points and often differs from 
what we actually find in Proust’s work. Hence, I assume that the  Schopenhauerian 
material in Beckett’s essay chiefly originates from his own Schopenhauer  studies, 
and to a small extent, indeed if at all, from the less than numerous  unequivocally 
Schopenhauerian elements which we find in A la recherche du temps perdu or in 
Proust’s letters. In any case I shall not dwell on the question whether any of 
Beckett’s ideas are also to be found in Proust. Beckett identifies with Proust at 
certain points and shares his views. At other points he deviates from him almost 
ostentatiously.94 But this would be a different subject.
The first point of accord with Schopenhauer’s philosophy is the assumption 
that there exists a difference between the phenomenal surface of the world and 
94 For Beckett’s very own way to deal with Proust’s work cf., among others, the papers by Pilling, 
Acheson, Jones, O’Hara, quoted in n. 7 above. Furthermore: N. Zurbrugg, Beckett and Proust, 
Totowa, N.J. 1988, R. Wood, Beckett as Essayist, in: J. Pilling (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to 
Beckett, 1–16.
· I I ·
BECKETT’S PHILOSOPHICAL VIEW OF ART 
AND LIFE IN PROUST

96 
the metaphysical vision
the true reality beyond. Beckett introduces this difference when he writes about 
a very Proustian theme: the normal condition of human persons under the rule 
of Time and the impossibility to reconstitute the true reality of past events and 
situations through voluntary memory. When spelling “Time” he uses the capital 
T to stress the domineering influence which this structuring form exerts on 
worldly events and personal life. The normal condition of human persons is that 
of subjects who live in a world dominated by Time, who are incessantly  changing 
with Time, but who long for a reality exempt from Time. Beckett describes our 
longing for this reality by comparing us to Tantalus, but a Tantalus who confirms 
his thirst in the state of thirsting itself – just as Schopenhauerian subjects 
 confirm their willing nature in the very state of willing: “So that we are rather 
in the position of Tantalus, with this difference, that we allow ourselves to be 
tantalised.” (13) The subject-object terminology comes in when Beckett tries 
to say what the – normally impossible – attainment of our wants would be: “But 
what is attainment? The identification of the subject with the object of his 
desire.” (14) What normally contributes to our not being able to attain true 
reality is “the haze of our smug will to live, of our pernicious and incurable 
optimism.” (15) This is Schopenhauerian language: the desired attainment of 
true reality would be a state of identity between subject and object. The will-
to-live as well as optimism95 are obstacles to this. These statements obviously 
echo basic elements of Schopenhauer’s way to describe human life and tempo-
rary redemption during the moments of artistic vision. As mentioned above, we 
find the Tantalus metaphor in Schopenhauer, too.96
Beckett (just as Proust) insists on “all conscious intellectual effort to 
reconstitute the invisible and unthinkable as a reality being fruitless.” (14) 
This may be read to mean that the thinking activity of the understanding, just 
as everyday sense perception, is fruitless when the point is to get in contact 
with what indeed is real, i.e., timeless and imperishable. Soon afterwards in 
Beckett’s text “the real” is contrasted with “the caricature furnished by direct 
perception”. Beckett continues: “There is only one real impression and one 
adequate mode of evocation. Over neither have we the least control.”(14 f.) 
In the same chapter, still the first, Beckett characterizes the truly real as “an 
ideal object, immutable and incorruptible” (17) and goes on, at the beginning 
of the next chapter, to call the world “a projection of the individual’s 
95 Schopenhauer about optimism, as quoted above p. 87: “an absurd, but also a really wicked, way 
of thinking, a bitter mockery of the unspeakable sufferings of mankind”. WWR I, 326.
96 WWR I, 196.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
97
 consciousness (an objectivation of the individual’s will, Schopenhauer would 
say).” (19)
Here we have already a combination of elements which in very important 
respects is congruent with the epistemological and metaphysical configuration 
from which Schopenhauer commences his aesthetics: There is the assumption 
of a true reality for which the author uses the term “ideal object”. This reality 
is not accessible to direct perception and conscious intellectual effort. The ideal 
reality is opposed to the world of everyday life which is a projection of the indi-
vidual’s consciousness. The deliberate efforts of direct perception can at most 
furnish a deceptive image of true reality. Our will-to-live and our pernicious 
optimism permanently produce a state of mind comparable to a haze which 
helps to keep us from coming into contact with true reality. The frame of mind 
which enables human beings to penetrate the surface of everyday phenomena 
is unique and not subject to the person’s intentional control.
That by the words “ideal object” Beckett means the Idea becomes clear in 
later passages of the book, where he offers his view more explicitly. He explains 
Proust’s states of “baffled ecstasy” vis-à-vis seemingly banal objects as being due 
to “the mystery, the essence, the Idea, imprisoned in matter” (76) soliciting the 
subject passing by to become aware of their true beauty. A little later, realists and 
naturalists are characterized as artists who are “content to describe the surface, 
the façade, behind which the Idea is prisoner.” In the same context Beckett writes: 
“Proust does not deal in concepts, he pursues the Idea, the concrete.” (79) To 
describe the Idea as being the essence of worldly objects and as being concrete 
(in contrast to abstract) is again congruent with Schopenhauer’s description.
The Idea as the essence of empirical phenomena exists outside time, space 
and causality. In other words, it exists outside the forms which Schopenhauer 
considered to be aspects of the principle of sufficient reason. These forms 
 constitute the basic order of the empirical world and warrant its continuous 
existence. Shortly before the end of the essay, in a passage I shall refer to more 
often, when Beckett compares the artist Proust to a “pure subject”, he writes in 
terms amazingly close to Schopenhauer’s: “When the subject is exempt from 
will the object is exempt from causality (Time and Space taken together).” And 
he characterizes this non-empirical object as “the Model, the Idea, the Thing 
in itself.” (90) Very often, following Proust, Beckett mentions Time as the most 
important and an especially distorting form of the world furnished by everyday 
perception.
Normally, in Beckett’s (and Proust’s) view, human subjects are kept by their 
will from penetrating the time-structured surface of the empirical world. 

98 
the metaphysical vision
The individual’s will is the main obstacle to perceiving true reality and makes 
persons stick to what Beckett has called the “caricature furnished by direct 
perception”. In every so-called normal perception there are traits which in 
principle would be suitable as objects of contemplative concentration leading 
to a visionary experience of the Idea – it’s just that the will-dominated subjec-
tivity is unable to notice those traits and will-lessly relate to them. One of 
Beckett’s statements on this point is: “But the essence of any new experience is 
contained precisely in this mysterious element that the vigilant will rejects as 
an anachronism.” (72) “Anachronism” here seems to mean “not compatible to 
the universal structure of time.”
25. Idea versus concept
Although this is not the point yet to explain the details in which Beckett’s view 
of the Idea differs from Schopenhauer’s, it seems now necessary to confront Idea 
and concept so as to understand Beckett’s statements about their relative merits 
and limitations.
The Idea is concrete, not abstract, and as something concrete it has innu-
merably many properties and is inexhaustible by words. It can only be perceived 
by human subjects in a very special mode of consciousness. In addition to the 
impossibility to effectuate this mode at will, frequently emphasized by Beckett, 
he also describes it as “intuition” (61, 83) which conforms to Schopenhauer’s 
occasional Latin “intuitio” for his “Anschauung”. Despite Ideas being concrete, 
Beckett (just as Schopenhauer) considers them to function as a special kind of 
universal: they are the timeless models for parts of the empirical world. To dis-
tinguish the universality of Ideas from that of concepts, Schopenhauer refers to 
the status of Ideas as archetypes or timeless forms which exist independently of 
(metaphorically speaking: exist “before”) the many individuals that correspond 
to them and, using a Scholastic expression, describes Ideas as “universalia ante 
rem”, “universals before the thing”. The opposite for Schopenhauer are the 
“universalia post rem”, “universals after the thing”, which is his description for 
concepts (WWR II, 366). Beckett follows this description when criticizing 
Baudelaire’s symbolism as “abstract and discursive” and blaming him for aiming 
at “a unity ‘post rem’ ”. (79)97 Beckett’s inverted commas for “post rem” seem 
to indicate that he is using a quotation here, most likely from Schopenhauer.
97 For Schopenhauer’s remarks on “unitas post rem” see WWR I, 235.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
99
Beckett’s main objections against an art geared to concepts rest on their 
abstract and discursive character. A traditional concept (“conceptus communis”) 
is abstract as opposed to concrete since it only gives quite a limited number of 
properties which are common to the (potentially) many individuals that con-
stitute the concept’s extension. The more abstract a concept, the wider its 
potential scope and the smaller the amount of information it actually carries. 
In this sense the concept is poorer by far than the Schopenhauerian Idea which, 
having infinitely many properties, is considered to be inexhaustible by words.
A traditional concept is discursive since it is assumed that the typical way of 
forming it is a process of “discurrere”, a process of the mind running to and fro 
between many individuals so as to find common properties which can be bundled 
by a single expression: the concept. Its content is the set of these properties. 
Describing the set can yield the concept’s definition. In any case the concept does 
not communicate more than what would be contained in its definition. The 
poverty of the concept’s content as opposed to the richness of concrete experi-
ences (let alone the Idea) and the possibility to convey the concept’s whole 
content by just using the words of its definition motivate Beckett to criticize 
Baudelaire’s poetic procedure and take sides with Proust (as partly quoted 
already):
The Baudelarian unity is a unity ‘post rem’, a unity abstracted from plurality. His 
‘correspondence’ is determined by a concept, therefore strictly limited and 
exhausted by its own deﬁ nition. Proust does not deal in concepts, he pursues the 
Idea, the concrete. (79)
Beckett’s strongest objection against any art which aims at rendering concepts 
seems to be their exhaustibility. He scathes any allegorical practice in poetry 
and in that matter even attacks Dante whom he otherwise only mentions with 
adoration: “Dante, if he can ever be said to have failed, fails with his purely 
allegorical figures.” (79) Allegorical art is rejected just as the symbolism of 
Baudelaire and his followers – at least as far as this can be taken as an art domi-
nated by concepts. For Beckett, one of Proust’s most important attitudes as an 
artist, which also proves his independence, is “his rejection of the Concept in 
favour of the Idea…” (81) Schopenhauer’s critique of the concept’s role in any 
kind of art was already discussed. He sums up his views:
Now it follows from all that has been said that the concept, useful as it is in life, 
serviceable, necessary, and productive as it is in science, is eternally barren and 
unproductive in art. The apprehended Idea, on the contrary, is the true and only 
source of every genuine work of art. (WWR I, 235)

100 
the metaphysical vision
The concept’s usefulness for ‘normal’ life is in no way disputed by Beckett either. 
It is a tool of the will-dominated intellect which secures the individual’s self-
preservation in everyday situations. This becomes apparent when Beckett 
 discusses voluntary attempts at evoking true reality. As for the Proustian 
 narrator, so for Beckett, any such voluntary attempt is fruitless, “being an act of 
intellection, it is conditioned by the prejudices of the intelligence which 
abstracts from any given sensation, as being illogical and insignificant, a 
 discordant and frivolous intruder, whatever word or gesture, sound or perfume, 
cannot be fitted into the puzzle of a concept.” (71 f.)98 It is exactly the elements 
that cannot be used for a concept-oriented way of life that enable the artist, 
when the “vigilant will” loosens its control, to have a perfectly different experi-
ence through will-lessly perceiving the Idea.
26. Causality, time, will
The surface appearance of the world according to Beckett’s text is structured 
by the three “forms” of Schopenhauer’s “understanding”: Space, time, and 
causality. However, in Beckett their relative weight and the underlying system 
of mental faculties have been altered. Although there may be a variety of 
 reasons for these changes, Beckett’s main motive for rearranging the basic 
assumptions of Schopenhauer’s epistemology is obviously the need to find 
 suitable means for interpreting Proust’s opus. Some of Beckett’s alterations may 
also have been taken straight from Proust.
Causality, which in Schopenhauer warrants the coherence of matter, has 
for Beckett mainly the function to secure an understandable, in a wide sense 
‘logical’, order of events in the empirical world. The principle of causality 
 provides a rule-governed connection between appearances and thereby 
 facilitates human attempts at explaining what happens in the world and what 
happens to us. To associate the causal order of events with logical consequence 
is not universally acclaimed by philosophers today, but it is typical for 
98 There is an ambiguity in Beckett’s use of “to abstract”. The word, originating from the Latin 
“abstrahere”, normally is used to mean that in the process of concept formation the mind 
abstracts, in the sense of “picks out”, from given experiences the very few traits which form the 
contents of the concept to which the latter’s deﬁ nition refers. On the other hand, “to abstract” 
may also be used in the sense of neglecting, forgetting, possibly obliterating those traits of the 
given experience which do not ﬁ t into the narrow frame of a concept. Both uses can be found in 
Beckett, the passage quoted being an example of the latter one.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
101
 Schopenhauer’s thesis that both are just two aspects of the single principle of 
sufficient reason. Beckett seems to maintain Schopenhauer’s position: the 
causal relation for him is a logical relation. But because of its logical character 
which guarantees intelligibility for our understanding and our voluntary 
attempts at explanation, the causal order for Beckett is the epitome of deception 
and falsity. It not only fails to represent the structure of true reality, it is even 
detrimental to any attempt to grasp the true order of our immediate impres-
sions. Beckett comments on Proust’s impressionism: “By his impressionism I 
mean his non-logical statement of phenomena in the order and exactitude of 
their perception, before they have been distorted into intelligibility in order to 
be forced into a chain of cause and effect.” (86) This also helps us to understand 
why the standard order of the empirical world is, for Beckett, a “caricature”, 
whereas for Schopenhauer, despite not being true reality, it at least helps human 
beings to lead will-dominated ‘normal’ human lives.
Causally connected events are connected in time. We tend to perceive the 
causal order also as a temporal order. Beckett’s statements about time are 
numerous – a fact obviously due to the work of literature he is writing about. 
They are also quite varied. I shall only single out a few statements here and 
append others later on. Beckett notes very early in his book:
Proust’s creatures, then, are victims of this predominating condition and 
 circumstance – Time; victims as lower organisms, conscious only of two  dimensions 
and suddenly confronted with the mystery of height, are victims: victims and 
 prisoners. There is no escape from the hours and the days. Neither from  tomorrow 
nor from yesterday. There is no escape from yesterday because yesterday has 
deformed us, or been deformed by us. The mood is of no importance. Deforma-
tion has taken place. (12 f.)
We are used to thinking of time as one dimension only. Obviously Beckett 
thinks of it as two, most likely past and future. However, life in two dimensions 
is still very limited and comparable to life on a geometrical plane. The experi-
ence of height for such organisms would be a mystery. Whatever that may 
mean, there seems to be at least a logical possibility to leave the  two-dimensional 
life and gain a view from above. However, Proust’s creatures seem to be locked 
in the two-dimensionality of time, they are victims and prisoners. It does not 
 follow, though, that the “mystery” is forever impossible. We know that  according 
to Beckett there are objects outside time, the true reality, the essence, which 
become accessible to the mind when the subject manages to have a perception 
free of time, causality, and space. This applies most notably to the artist who 

102 
the metaphysical vision
hopes to uncover the essence of his experience, especially of past phenomena, 
and who for this purpose has to withdraw from the relations of his ‘normal’ life: 
“The only fertile research is excavatory, immersive, a contraction of the spirit, 
a descent. The artist is active, but negatively, shrinking from the nullity of 
extracircumferential phenomena, drawn into the core of the eddy.” (65 f.)
The main obstacle to such research which produces a “haze” covering the 
potential research objects is “our smug will to live”. (15) As for Schopenhauer, 
so for Beckett: the person’s “normal” epistemic functions which day by day form 
the world and provide orientation in it are subservient to the will. Beckett as 
reader of Proust has to interpret two foremost mental instruments which the 
human will uses for dealing with events in time: habit and voluntary memory. 
They are the will-dominated mind’s ‘normal’ modes of perception for the pres-
ent and the future on the one hand, and the past on the other. They serve to 
bind persons to their existence under the rule of time by presenting temporal 
events in a form suitable for the will-to-live. Beckett states: “Memory and Habit 
are attributes of the Time cancer.” (18)
27. Habit
“The laws of memory are subject to the more general laws of habit.” (18) 
After the general statements on time in the first chapter of his book, Beckett 
presents the theory of habit in the second chapter and uses this theory in the 
third to interpret Proust’s well-known distinction between two kinds of memory. 
When treating the subjects “habit” and “memory”, Beckett keeps very close to 
Proust’s own statements. He just seems to underpin them with material from 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy.
Beckett explains the destructive effects of habit by confronting two modes 
of perception, an “enchanting” one and a disfigured one:
But when the object is perceived as particular and unique and not merely the mem-
ber of a family, when it appears independent of any general notion and detached 
from the sanity of a cause, isolated and inexplicable in the light of ignorance, then 
and then only may it be a source of enchantment. Unfortunately Habit has laid its 
veto in this form of perception, its action being precisely to hide the essence – the 
Idea – of the object in the haze of conception – preconception. (22 f.)
Beckett also names what he considers to be the true agent, the doer of habit’s 
activities. He focuses on this when treating the visions due to which the 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
103
 Proustian narrator in Sodom et Gomorrhe, on his second visit to the Grand Hotel 
of Balbec one year after his grandmother’s death, perceives the deceased in a 
way independent of any form of the understanding. Writing about the moment 
when the vision is dying, Beckett states:
But already will, the will to live, the will not to suffer, Habit, having recovered 
from its momentary paralysis, has laid the foundations of its evil and necessary 
structure, and the vision of his grandmother begins to fade and to lose that 
miraculous relief and clarity that no effort of deliberate rememoration can impart 
or restore. (43)
The will-to-live uses habit as a means to control the person’s perception so as 
to keep the perceived world uniform, free from surprise and risk and, metaphysi-
cally speaking, perfectly unreal. It is worth noting explicitly that Beckett thinks 
there is a conceptual element in habit, an element which contributes to hiding 
the true reality (the Idea) of the object in a haze. Habit for Beckett is primarily 
a convention of experience which serves to keep unnoticed every part of the 
person’s perception that cannot be fit into the pattern of preconceived con-
cepts. He compares the person with habit-controlled perception to a tourist 
who reads in his Baedeker a conceptual preformation of the objects to be visited 
and who is satisfied to find upon actual inspection during his visit those and 
only those properties which the Baedeker recommended. Aesthetic experience 
degenerates into a series of identifications between a concept provided in 
advance and the relevant details of the perception which follows. Anything 
which does not fit into the preconceived pattern will not be noticed. The person 
in a habit-controlled state of mind, when perceiving an object only looks for 
details fitting preformed concepts. Schopenhauer, when explaining the aes-
thetic attitude and its opposite, wrote that the concept-geared person in situa-
tions newly experienced concentrates only on finding and applying suitable 
concepts, “just as the lazy man looks for a chair.” (WWR I, 187) This person is 
unable to grasp the full contents of his or her experience and thus only sees 
what is preconceived to be seen. As Beckett writes: “The creature of habit turns 
aside from the object that cannot be made to correspond with one or other of 
his intellectual prejudices, that resists the propositions of his team of syntheses, 
organized by Habit on labour-saving principles.” (23)99
The most important “positive” function of habit is a protective one. It 
serves to hide from the subject’s attention a large variety of experiential details. 
99 See also the Baedeker metaphor immediately before this passage.

104 
the metaphysical vision
It is those details that might cause the subject to realize that the everyday world 
of his or her life is, in the last analysis, unreal, and that all personal aims in this 
world are, in a well-defined sense, empty. Schopenhauer wrote that the subject, 
when realizing the irreality of the so-called ‘normal’ world, is suddenly filled 
with dread. Nietzsche based his theory of tragedy on the assumption that the 
Greeks had to protect themselves as a culture against the destructive effects of 
coming into contact with the deeply pessimistic character of true reality.  Beckett 
assumes that habit also has a protective function for human individuals: It keeps 
personal experience homogeneous and free from epistemic disruption which 
might cause disorientation, just as it might damage the person’s instinct of self-
preservation. And it keeps persons from realizing that, in the last analysis, their 
life in this world is inevitably nothing but suffering or boredom. Habit is a means 
to adapt to this basic and unchangeable character of life. Beckett occasionally 
speaks of habit as the result of negotiation: “Habit is a compromise effected 
between the individual and his environment, or between the individual and his 
own organic eccentricities, the guarantee of a dull inviolability, the lightning-
conductor of his existence.” (18 f.) If the individual is for some reason unable 
to keep to a form of adaptation once acquired, it is necessary to negotiate and 
stabilize another one. “The periods of transition that separate consecutive 
adaptations … represent the perilous zones in the life of the individual, danger-
ous, precarious, painful, mysterious and fertile, when for a moment the boredom 
of living is replaced by the suffering of being.” (19)
“The suffering of being”: this is Beckett’s standard expression for the reality 
which the individual painfully recognizes when habit does not fulfil its function 
anymore. “The boredom of living” is his expression for the well-protected, dull, 
inattentive, concept-blinded everyday existence. Once again:
The fundamental duty of Habit, about which it describes the futile and stupefy-
ing arabesques of its supererogations, consists in a perpetual adjustment and 
readjustment of our organic sensibility to the conditions of its worlds. Suffering 
represents the omission of that duty, whether through negligence or inefﬁ ciency, 
and boredom its adequate performance.” (28)
28. Two kinds of memory
Proust’s most important artistic means of cognition is involuntary memory. 
Beckett emphasizes strongly that in this kind of memory the directing and 
energizing force of everyday experience is deactivated. His statements about the 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
105
unfitness of will-controlled memory for any meaningful cognition and the need 
for a different instrument for the evocation of lost time sometimes are literally 
congruent with those of Proust.
The reason that voluntary memory does not deserve the title of memory at 
all and that a person who claims to have a good memory thereby indeed con-
firms to have a perfectly fatal one, in Beckett’s eyes, is this: Memory, as long as 
it remains in the service of the will, is a function of habit. This memory is one 
of the mechanisms through which persons manage to secure a dull inviolability 
for their so-called ‘normal’ frame of mind and for their tendency to sluggishly 
retain this. Voluntary memory reconstitutes the world according to the laws 
after which habit has structured it in the first place; i.e., for Beckett: distorted 
into a caricature. Even curiosity is considered to be one of the protective instru-
ments which serve to stabilize the habitual way of perceiving the world. Beckett 
takes curiosity to be a primitive, elementary reaction to danger, therefore to 
serve the purposes of self-preservation and, in the last analysis, the will.  Curiosity 
actively selects the objects of the person’s attention, and voluntary memory 
provides near-photographic images of those objects as curiosity left them. Both 
serve the same purposes. Certain bits of information are important for the con-
tinuation of ‘normal’ life; voluntary memory reproduces those bits strictly in the 
order of their importance. The ‘unimportant’ parts of the person’s experience, 
Beckett claims, are “abstracted” in the sense mentioned above, i.e., they simply 
are cut. Since voluntary memory is abstract, Beckett can associate it with the 
intellect: “This is the uniform memory of intelligence; and it can be relied on 
to reproduce for our gratified inspection those impressions of the past that were 
consciously and intelligently formed. … It presents the past in monochrome.” (32) 
These lines follow Beckett’s statement that voluntary memory is no  memory at all. 
Indeed he calls it “the application of a concordance to the Old Testament of 
the individual.” (32) I take this to mean: Voluntary memory does not reconsti-
tute the full content of the person’s original experience but only functions like 
an index for the aspects considered important by habit.
Involuntary memory on the other hand, not being beneficial for self-
preservation, “abstracts” (i.e., cuts off) something else: “the useful, the oppor-
tune, the accidental.” (33) The accidental for Beckett seems to be the opposite 
of the essential, i.e., the opposite of what is indicative of true reality. He 
 estimates that “the miracle” of involuntary memory occurs to the Proustian 
narrator twelve or thirteen times which of course means: rarely. Involuntary 
memory in Beckett’s (and in Proust’s) view does not just give a true  reproduction 
of a past experience as it happened in the ‘normal’ course of events. It rather 

106 
the metaphysical vision
restores elements which in the actual situation of a past experience may have 
been neglected and overlooked. The ordinary experience of human subjects is, 
as Beckett tells his reader right from the beginning, structured by the person’s 
will; it represents its object in the forms of time, space, and causality, and it 
tends to obliterate or, at least, overlook anything that points to true reality. 
From this distorted perception, involuntary memory restores the traits which 
are not caricature-like because not deformed by the mechanisms of habit. Beck-
ett assumes that involuntary memory gives the past experience in a form which 
is truer than the one in which it was in fact present to the person’s perception. 
It would be hard to understand Beckett’s lengthy explanation differently, from 
which fragments have already been quoted:
It restores, not merely the past object, but the Lazarus that it charmed or tor-
tured, not merely Lazarus and the object, but more because less, more because 
it abstracts the useful, the opportune, the accidental, because in its ﬂ ame it has 
consumed Habit and all its works, and in its brightness revealed what the mock 
reality of experience never can and never will reveal – the real. (33)
29. Vulgarity
When Beckett describes artistically fertile attitudes which help to obtain 
 knowledge of true reality, he tends to confront these attitudes with opposite 
mindsets, i.e., mindsets of everyday life. More often than not he characterizes 
these opposites as “vulgar”. This unusual predicate asks for a brief commentary.
Immediately before introducing involuntary memory as the chief means of 
getting into contact with true reality, Beckett writes about the material which, 
unnoticed by our will-controlled mind, may have accumulated already and be 
waiting to be uncovered by a suitable instrument:
Strictly speaking, we can only remember what has been registered by our extreme 
inattention and stored in that ultimate and inaccessible dungeon of our being to 
which Habit does not possess the key, and does not need to, because it contains 
none of the hideous and useful paraphernalia of war. But here, in that ‘gouffre 
interdit à nos sondes’100, is stored the essence of ourselves, the best of our many 
selves and their concretions that simplists call the world, the best because accu-
mulated slyly and painfully and patiently under the nose of our vulgarity … (31)
100  “gouffre interdit à nos sondes”: Baudelaire, Les ﬂ eurs du mal, XXXVI: Le balcon. I am indebted 
to Katharina Raabe’s well annotated German edition of Beckett’s Proust, Frankfurt/M. 1989, for 
tracing the source of several of Beckett’s quotations.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
107
The “nose of our vulgarity” obviously is our ‘normal’ kind of perception, 
 controlled by habit and subject to the standard forms of the intellect. This kind 
of perception may be compared to a sense organ which misses or disfigures 
essential details of its object. Beckett seems to use “vulgarity” here in 
 Schopenhauer’s sense: to hint at the lowness of attitudes and personalities in 
which knowing and obtaining knowledge are strictly subordinated to willing. 
Schopenhauer defines vulgarity thus: “At bottom, vulgarity consists in the fact 
that in consciousness willing so completely outweighs knowing that knowledge 
appears only in the service of the will.” (PP I, 337)101
The knowing mind has several means to give order to the subject’s 
 experiences, to distinguish between important and unimportant details, and to 
create relations which are of interest to the all-dominating will. For Beckett, 
one of those means is the logical arrangement of perceived events. This logical 
arrangement helps to keep the subject’s world explainable, predictable, free 
from genuine surprise, and it also helps to lay the world open for manipulation 
through people who know how to use this arrangement. It has already been 
pointed out that Beckett considers the relation of cause and effect to be our stan-
dard way to order the details of perception in a logical way. When commenting 
on Proust’s rejection of the concept in favour of the Idea and his antagonism 
against arranging events in a consequential chronology along a solid causal 
chain, Beckett ascribes to Proust a “fine Dostoievskian contempt for the 
 vulgarity of a plausible concatenation.” (81 f.) Plausible concatenations are 
“vulgar”: In Beckett’s eyes this applies to the order of perceptions in an  individual 
mind just as well as to the order of events or any other details in a work of art. 
Plausibility is secured through logical order; logical order is the achievement of 
a well-organized intellect, and the well-organized intellect is subordinate to the 
will. Hence, the products of that intellect are vulgar.
Of course, this also applies to voluntary memory. Memory that can be called 
up at will presents the past according to the standards of will-dominated knowl-
edge. For Beckett, this is not true memory, since it does not present the true 
reality of past experience but a caricature of it. When commenting on the series 
of mystical experiences in which the Proustian narrator finally and involuntarily 
can remember, among other things, the undistorted reality of his perception of 
101 Cf. also WWR II, 380: “The stamp of commonness, the expression of vulgarity, impressed on the 
great majority of faces, really consists in this, that there becomes visible in them the strict  subordination 
of their knowing to their willing, the ﬁ rm chain linking the two together, and the impossibility that 
follows from this of apprehending things save in reference to the will and its aims.”

108 
the metaphysical vision
Venice, Beckett writes: “And suddenly Venice emerges from the series of 
 forgotten days, Venice whose radiant essence he had never been able to express 
because it had been rejected by the imperious vulgarity of a working-day 
 memory…” (70)
Schopenhauer already had considered realism in art to be vulgar (cf. above 
p. 48f.), and, in addition to this, he had not hesitated to call those artistic 
 products “very low” (WWR I, 207) which directly appeal to the will of the 
beholder. Beckett sides with Proust and Schopenhauer in their rejection of 
realistic art. Since everyday experience is subject to the will and his chief tool, 
habit, any art which attempts to represent reality in the order of so-called nor-
mal, everyday experience is, according to Beckett, limited to “just transcribe 
the surface, the façade, behind which the Idea is prisoner.” (79) Again, the 
scene in the courtyard of the Hôtel Guermantes where the Proustian narrator 
fully understands his task as an artist and the nature of his art provides a wel-
come occasion for Beckett to scathingly denounce “the grotesque fallacy of a 
realistic art” and “the penny-a-line vulgarity of a literature of notations.” (78)
Beckett even extends his notion of vulgarity to human relations in general. 
Just as forms of knowledge (including memory) and forms of art for him are 
vulgar when will-dominated, so are those forms of human existence which only 
strive to fulfil the aims of an individual’s will. We shall see that Beckett (very 
much like Schopenhauer) declares it impossible to find true satisfaction in love 
and to achieve genuine contact between human persons. In that context he 
states that
at least the failure to possess may have the nobility of that which is tragic, whereas 
the attempt to communicate where no communication is possible is merely a 
simian vulgarity, or horribly comic, like the madness that holds a conversation 
with the furniture. (63)
30. Death of habit – waking madness
“Habit is a compromise effected between the individual and his environment, 
or between the individual and his own organic eccentricities, the guarantee of 
a dull inviolability …” (18 f.) Beckett calls this compromise a “pact”. (19) The 
pact is necessary to protect the individual from unforeseen experiences which 
do not fit into the expected causally organized course of events and perceptions. 
Those experiences might destabilize the well-balanced equilibrium of ‘normal’ 
existence. Since the individual’s life is subject to the order of time, Beckett 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
109
assumes that the individual is, strictly speaking, a succession of subjects and 
that therefore the “pact” must be continually renewed. There is, in the life of 
every person, an innumerable multitude of such pacts: “Habit then is the  generic 
term for the countless treaties concluded between the countless subjects that 
constitute the individual and their countless correlative objects.” (19)102 The 
necessity of renewal, Beckett concludes, also necessitates periods of transition, 
and it is these in which the protective function of habit may break down and a 
vision of true reality may emerge:
The periods of transition that separate consecutive adaptations (because by no 
expedient of macabre transubstantiation can the grave-sheets serve as swaddling-
clothes) represent the perilous zones in the life of the individual, dangerous, 
precarious, painful, mysterious and fertile, when for a moment the boredom of 
living is replaced by the suffering of being. (19)
Of course, the person’s reflexes of self-preservation normally and without full 
awareness manage to cope with most periods of transition. The fertile moments 
in which the habitual view of the world breaks down103 and a different state of 
mind can unfold are extremely rare. There are some conditions, however, which 
are conducive to this. The most important one in Beckett’s eyes is an unnoticed 
slackening of voluntary self-control, “a relaxation of the subject’s habit of thought 
and a reduction of the radius of his memory, a generally diminished tension of 
consciousness following upon a phase of extreme discouragement.” (72)
The “mystical experience” (75), the “miracle” (72) as a rule happen to the 
Proustian narrator when he least expects them and when he would least be able 
to consciously facilitate them (if that were of any use). In Schopenhauerian 
terms: The fertile moments are those in which the individual will does not 
control and direct the subject’s cognition anymore, i.e., when the mind is set 
free to enter a different mode of experience by concentrating on one and only 
one object without paying attention to any of its ‘normal’ relations, especially 
causal relations, to other objects anymore. Of course, Schopenhauer did not 
think of involuntary memory when working out his theory of the artistic vision, 
and I do not know of any unquestionable evidence which would prove that 
Proust resorted to Schopenhauer in presenting his notion of mémoire involon-
taire. It seems to be only Beckett who uses Schopenhauerian material to  interpret 
102 Note the subject-object terminology which seems to be imported from Schopenhauer 
 straightaway. Cf. note p. 23f. above.
103 Beckett: “the death of Habit” (23).

110 
the metaphysical vision
Proust’s most important cognitive means as a state of will-less perception the 
object of which is exempt from time and causality.
Among other things, Beckett considers “the rare dispensation of waking 
madness” to be a possible description for the exceptional states of mind which 
enable Proust to bring forth the true essence of past experiences: “From this 
deep source Proust hoisted his world.” (32) Madness, as we saw above, in 
 Schopenhauer’s view of art comes close to the visionary states of the genius, 
and for this philosopher the main characteristic of madness is the breakdown 
of memory – not of memory in general but of that memory which presents its 
contents in the basic forms of the understanding, especially in the order of cause 
and effect. The similarity between the mad person and the genius consists in 
both being able to have experiences independently of the principle of sufficient 
reason. In Proust all perceptions that initiate the “mystical experience” are 
perceptions of isolated objects or events, not imbedded in the network of will-
controlled experience of the world, the mind not focussing on their causal 
relations. The Madeleine steeped in a cup of tea, a musty smell, uneven cobbles 
under the narrator’s feet, a spoon being knocked against a plate, the noise of 
water in the pipes: these are some of the well-known phenomena which the 
narrator inadvertently perceives, not concentrating on their causal relations 
with other parts of his world – upon which the realm of mémoire involontaire 
suddenly opens up. Beckett needed not interpret much when writing:
But when the object is perceived as particular and unique and not merely the 
member of a family, when it appears independent of any general notion and 
detached from the sanity of a cause, isolated and inexplicable in the light of 
ignorance, then and then only may it be a source of enchantment. (22 f.)
Schopenhauer considers the particulars which form the extension of a concept 
to be like members of a family. And for him the concept is a cognitive tool 
which makes us see them as such family members. When an object is perceived 
independently of the forms of the understanding, i.e., also independently of any 
concept, this perception may unfold into the metaphysical vision of the Idea.
For Beckett, the most important opposition at this point seems to be that 
of “waking madness” versus “the sanity of a cause”. From the standpoint of an 
everyday world view, the artist’s visionary states can be compared to madness 
because the artist does not see his or her objects anymore in the most important 
of all relational forms, causality. Beckett considers that to be the guarantor of 
a logical world order. “Waking madness” may also be used as a key expression 
here because the Proustian narrator, when experiencing the grace of involuntary 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
111
memory, forgets about his actual situation in the world and about his present 
self completely.
His surroundings vanish, wattmen, stables, carriages, guests, the entire reality of 
the place in its hour, his anxiety and doubts as to the reality of life and art disap-
pear, he is stunned by waves of rapture, saturated in that same felicity that had 
irrigated so sparingly the desolation of his life. (70)
Beckett, following Proust’s mystical tendency, describes moments of this kind 
as “mystical experience” (69, 75, 35).104 Using Schopenhauer’s terms, he calls 
those extraordinary states of mind “identification of subject and object” (84). 
And adopting verbatim Schopenhauer’s Latin quote from Horace and his 
 German quote from Wieland, Beckett also uses “amabilis insania” and “holder 
Wahnsinn” (91) to describe those mental states.105 One of Beckett’s most dra-
matic descriptions of the artistic subject being sort of obliterated as an empirical 
person in the visionary experience of involuntary memory is this:
… if by some miracle of analogy the central impression of a past sensation recurs 
as an immediate stimulus which can be instinctively identiﬁ ed by the subject with 
the model of duplication (whose integral purity has been retained because it has 
been forgotten), then the total past sensation, not its echo nor its copy, but the 
sensation itself, annihilating every spatial and temporal restriction, comes in a rush 
to engulf the subject in all the beauty of its infallible proportion. (72)
Beckett’s “waves of rapture” for the person’s experience in situations of that kind 
is about as good or bad as Schopenhauer’s “bliss” for the artist’s feeling when he 
or she is lost in a metaphysical vision of true reality. In any case both expressions 
are apt to provoke the sneer of ignorant bystanders. And Beckett’s assumption 
that the breakdown of habit confronts the person with “the suffering of being” 
is close to Schopenhauer’s repeated statements about the “dread” experienced 
by persons whose sight for a brief moment is not obstructed by the veil of Maya 
anymore.106 For both Beckett as well as Schopenhauer, the “waking madness” in 
which true reality may be beheld is paradoxical and not perfectly accessible to 
104 Cf. Proust’s own description of the madeleine experience: “… cette essence n’était pas en moi, 
elle était moi.” Marcel Proust, A la recherche du temps perdu, ed. Jean-Yves Tadie, Paris (Gallimard, 
Editions de la Pléiade), 1987 ff., vol. I, p. 44. References to Proust’s work will henceforth be to 
this edition. I shall refer to it as Recherche, volume, page.
105 Cf. Schopenhauer WWR I, 190. Payne’s “amiable madness” stands for Schopenhauer’s “holder 
Wahnsinn”.
106 Cf. WWR I, § 63, p. 353, note 83 above.

112 
the metaphysical vision
rational explanation. However, both authors also describe this experience as a 
state of great mental clarity, not experienced on other occasions. Both seem to 
find it difficult to characterize this limpid state of mind. Beckett uses “lucidity”, 
“clarity” and “brightness” (21,43,44), Schopenhauer says “clear eye of the world”, 
“clear mirror of the world’s essence”. (WWR I, 186)107
31. Purity, impurity
It may be considered obvious by now that for Beckett philosophy as a form of 
conscious intellectual effort is not the means to uncover true reality. Typical 
philosophy as Beckett sees it is abstract and discursive, and therefore relies on 
abstract concepts and has no chance to uncover what the artist Proust pursues: 
“the Idea, the concrete”. (79) Even more importantly, philosophy as a kind of 
conscious intellectual effort is naturally directed by the person’s will. Despite being 
able to state abstract truths about the world, possibly even important ones, phi-
losophy is of no use when the person is to come into contact with true reality, 
since this kind of contact depends on the absence of voluntary control. Moreover, 
philosophy is committed to logical procedures which Beckett’s thinks to be unfit 
for the discovery of true reality. He thinks so because a logical mind, according 
to Beckett’s premises, tends to focus on causal relations, which keep the world 
explainable and intelligible. To uncover true reality, however, is impossible when 
the person’s perceptions have been “distorted into  intelligibility.” (86)
Beckett uses the words “pure” and “impure” to characterize the mental 
condition of persons who might or might not be granted a vision of true reality. 
The main factor distinguishing these is the absence or presence of the individual 
will as a dominating influence in the person’s experience. “Impure” is a subject 
which only in principle might become free from the will’s control, but does not, 
for the time being. Beckett comments on the Proustian narrator’s final insight 
into the nature of his art:
So now in the exaltation of his brief eternity, having emerged from the darkness 
of time and habit and passion and intelligence, he understands the necessity of 
art. For in the brightness of art alone can be deciphered the bafﬂ ed ecstasy that 
he had known before the inscrutable superﬁ cies of a cloud, a triangle, a spire, a 
ﬂ ower, a pebble, when the mystery, the essence, the Idea, imprisoned in matter, 
had solicited the bounty of a subject passing by within the shell of his impurity, 
107 In line with Beckett and Proust I used “essence” for Schopenhauer’s “Wesen”.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
113
and tendered, like Dante his song to the ‘ingegni storti e loschi’, at least an 
 incorruptible beauty: ‘Ponete mente almen com’io son bella.’ (75 f.)108
The “subject passing by within the shell of his impurity” is the person still under 
the influence of his or her will, the shell of impurity being a shell which can 
neither be cracked ad libitum by the subject from inside as it were, nor from the 
outside by the objects offering their beauty.
This use of the word “impurity” is committed to the Schopenhauerian 
philosophy of art. When talking about the metaphysical vision of the artist and 
the prerequisites for any person experiencing this vision, Schopenhauer uses 
“pure” in the sense of “free from any influence of the individual will.” The 
everyday life of human persons being strictly will-dominated, states of will-less 
perception or contemplation are extremely rare in Schopenhauer’s eyes. “Pure” 
is the term which Schopenhauer uses to characterize the artistic subject’s will-
less, visionary state of mind. In the same sense the object contemplated by such 
a subject, the Idea, possesses “pure objectivity” (WWR I, 180) Furthermore:
As we have said, the transition that is possible, but to be regarded only as a 
 exception, from the common knowledge of particular things to knowledge of 
the Idea takes place suddenly, since knowledge tears itself free from the service 
of the will precisely by the subject’s ceasing to be merely individual, and being 
now a pure will-less subject of knowledge. Such a subject of knowledge no 
longer follows relations in accordance with the principle of sufﬁ cient reason; on 
the contrary, it rests in ﬁ xed contemplation of the object presented to it out of its 
connexions with any other, and rises into this.(WWR I, 178)109
“Pure, will-less subject of knowledge” is Schopenhauer’s standing expression for 
the subject in the state of will-less contemplation of true reality. Only persons 
who experienced this state of mind are capable of bringing forth a work of art. 
It is worth noting that “pure” in the Schopenhauerian system is an epistemic 
predicate only. It is not a predicate of moral or social evaluation. The talk about 
purity and impurity in Schopenhauer’s theory of art originates in the last analy-
sis from the Kantian use of “pure” for any epistemic achievement which is free 
from empirical elements. Schopenhauer considers the influence of personal 
aims (aims of the individual will) to be an empirical element in the subject’s 
108  “Ponete mente … “- “Oh notice at least how beautiful I am.” From: Dante, Convivio II, 1, 
Canzone V. “Ingegni storti e loschi” – “wry and dark minds”. 
109 For the seemingly paradoxical statement that “knowledge tears itself free from the service of 
the will” see above, p. 35f..

114 
the metaphysical vision
experience. This element, if present, impairs the epistemic purity of the subject’s 
state of mind and therefore makes it impossible for genuine contemplation to 
occur. Only in a state of epistemic purity can the subject perceive true reality, 
i.e., the Idea.
Proust, when describing his narrator’s key experiences and thoughts in “Le 
temps retrouvé” also uses “pure” and “pureté”. Since he gives no explicit argu-
ments for this it would not be easy to ascertain whether his use belongs to the 
Schopenhauerian tradition or whether it originates from a different source. 
Beckett’s use of “pure” and “impurity”, on the other hand, are amazingly close 
to Schopenhauer’s theory of the individual will. This becomes clear when 
 Beckett explains his use of “pure” by reference to elements of Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy. In a self-documenting passage towards the end of his book, which 
I shall refer to soon again, he states: “Proust is that pure subject. He is almost 
exempt from the impurity of will. He deplores his lack of will until he under-
stands that will … is not a condition of the artistic experience. When the 
subject is exempt from will the object is exempt from causality (Time and Space 
taken together).” (90)
There is little doubt that Beckett, like Schopenhauer, uses “pure” and 
“impurity” as epistemic expressions here, “pure” standing for anything that is 
free from the impact of the will and “impurity” being the word for factors which 
are apt to impair the metaphysical validity of the artist’s experience or to avert 
this experience altogether. It seems perfectly adequate to read “the subject 
passing by within the shell of his impurity” as meaning “the subject passing by 
within the shell of his will-controlled view of the world.” A potential artist is 
epistemically “impure” as long as he or she remains in the said shell, i.e., sees 
the world and acts in the world according to his or her personal needs, fears, 
wishes, etc.
Like Schopenhauer, Beckett applies the terminology of epistemically “pure” 
and epistemic “purity” not only to the subject of the artistic vision, but to its 
object as well. In the above quoted passage about the true reality of past experi-
ence coming in a rush to engulf the subject, Beckett notes in parentheses about 
the object: “whose integral purity has been retained because it has been forgot-
ten” (72). Normal memory, the so-called ‘good memory’ of everyday life which 
is voluntary memory, obliterates, i.e., forgets, any part of experience which is 
not suitable to the will’s needs. Hence, these obliterated elements possess an 
“integral purity”. Since they are forgotten, their purity is retained. Had the 
person felt the need to keep them in mind they would have been affected by 
the will’s distortional influence and that purity had been lost.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
115
32. The necessity of art
In the Hôtel Guermantes the Proustian narrator according to Beckett 
“ understands the necessity of art”. (76). This is not only a report about Proust 
but also includes a statement by Beckett himself. There is little doubt that in 
writing those words the commentator Beckett also affirms the same necessity.
Given Beckett’s premises, the reasons for this position seem fairly self- 
evident: art is to be necessary because only art can provide a stable, definite 
form for the contents of the mystical experiences by which the Proustian nar-
rator is granted a vision of true reality. Of course, art also makes it possible to 
communicate the contents of that vision to persons who did not originally 
experience it. So far, the function of art here is similar to its function in the 
Schopenhauerian system.
But there are differences as well, the most obvious of which are due to the 
fact that Beckett writes about Proust’s Recherche. The Proustian work of art, 
Beckett states, is
neither created nor chosen, but discovered, uncovered, excavated, pre-existing 
within  the artist, a law of his nature. The only reality is provided by the hiero-
glyphics traced by inspired perception (identiﬁ cation of subject and object). (84)
It is art through which the artist “deciphers” those hieroglyphics. Important 
information about this function of art is provided by the Proustian narrator 
himself. In Le temps retrouvé the narrator experiences several times, initiated by 
seemingly banal details of his perception, an exquisite moment of mémoire invo-
lontaire through which the integral, undistorted, and therefore true reality of a 
past experience is evoked. He understands that all his efforts to obtain fulfil-
ment and satisfaction within the present world have only led to wrong and 
infertile results. And he asks himself what could be a suitable means to decipher 
those seemingly banal details which he perceived at times, somehow sensing 
that a similarly exquisite substance, a similarly rich and undistorted experience 
could be hidden behind or below them and was waiting to be dug up. The 
answer is given in a question again: Which other means can serve this task but 
creating a work of art?110
The artist has the gift of experiencing by way of “inspired perception” cer-
tain details or situations of his world, so that they appear as hieroglyphics of 
something else, something deeper. The work or, more precisely, the making of 
110 Cf. Proust, Recherche IV, p. 457.

116 
the metaphysical vision
the work (“faire une œuvre d’art”) is a means, in fact the only one, for 
 deciphering (“déchiffrer”111) those strange perceptions. Examples of such per-
ceptions which Beckett finds in Proust are “a cloud, a triangle, a spire, a flower, 
a pebble.” (76) That creating a work of art is a means to decipher perceptions 
of this kind certainly is a Proustian notion, adopted by Beckett here. Of course, 
it is not easy to reconcile this with Proust’s repeatedly stated idea that the work 
of art is in fact lying preformed within the artist and only has to be dug up or 
translated in the process of the artistic procedure. Beckett refers to this part of 
Proust’s  self-explanation also, calling the work of art “neither created nor 
 chosen, but discovered, uncovered, excavated, pre-existing within the artist, a 
law of his nature.” (84)
Thus, as far as the function of the work of art and the nature of the creative 
process are concerned, Beckett obviously deviates from his philosophical men-
tor Schopenhauer. But almost at the very moment of doing so he resorts to 
Schopenhauer’s philosophy by characterizing the hidden reality, the final object 
of the process of deciphering as “the mystery, the essence, the Idea, imprisoned 
in matter”. Although Proust himself uses his “essence” and “idée” not necessar-
ily in the Schopenhauerian sense, Beckett seems to keep closely to  Schopenhauer 
in this matter. This is demonstrated in the passage quoted above where “the 
Model, the Idea, the Thing in itself” are cited like synonyms, quite different 
from the language Proust is using. “Model” and “Thing in itself” certainly point 
to an underlying philosophical metaphysics, just as does the otherwise cryptic 
paraphrase of “inspired perception” by “identification of subject and object”. It 
seems that Beckett tries to do justice to the Proustian narrator’s self-explanation 
as a writer in Le temps retrouvé but, at the same time, gives a metaphysical inter-
pretation of his own for the true reality art is all about.
The Proustian narrator claims that a great writer does not invent the essen-
tial book, the only true book, but translates it. This is partly reproduced, partly 
commented on by Beckett: “The artist has acquired his text: the artisan trans-
lates it. ‘The duty and the task of a writer (not an artist, a writer) are those of 
a translator.’ ” (84)
There are two groups of statements in Proust which at first glance seem to 
be irreconcilable: the often repeated ones which insist on the strict absence of 
voluntary control in experiences of mémoire involontaire, and the other ones 
which refer to the creation of a work of art as the only means to transform those 
111 Proust, Recherche IV., p. 458.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
117
experiences into a spiritual equivalent. The latter group is well condensed in 
the narrator’s words:
En somme, dans un cas comme dans l’autre, qu’il s’agît d’impressions comme 
celle que m’avait donnée la vue des clochers de Martinville, ou de réminiscences 
comme celle de l’inégalité des deux marches ou le goût de la madeleine, il fallait 
tâcher d’interpréter les sensations comme les signes d’autant de lois et d’idées, 
en essayant de penser, c’est-à-dire de faire sortir de la pénombre ce que j’avais 
senti, de le convertir en un équivalent spirituel. Or, ce moyen qui me paraissait le 
seul, qu’était-ce autre chose que faire une œuvre d’art?112
Making a work of art is a voluntary activity, a translation, a transformation into 
a spiritual equivalent, as Proust says. This is what Beckett seems to consider the 
work of the artisan, the writer, the translator, as opposed to the artist. Especially 
in adopting the metaphor of the writer as translator, Beckett seems to side with 
Proust and to deviate from Schopenhauer. The latter’s notion of the artist’s vol-
untary work as a craftsperson, after the artist has returned from the self-forgotten 
state of contemplation into the ‘normal’ world, is not the notion of a translator 
but, rather, that of a person who tries to repeat as closely as possible the meta-
physical vision of timeless reality in material of the phenomenal world. Moreover, 
the Schopenhauerian artist’s work is not “discovered, uncovered, excavated” and 
it is not, as a work, “pre-existing within the artist”. These words are definitely 
Beckett’s tribute to Proust. But by insisting on the difference between the artist 
and the artisan, the artist and the writer, Beckett not only shows that for him the 
artist is different from the artisan (although both may be one and the same person 
in the phenomenal world); he also makes sure that he can differentiate clearly 
between the active, voluntary, excavational research of Proust the “écrivain”, as 
contrasted to Proust the artist. The latter one is the “pure subject” of “baffled 
ecstasy”, of “mystical experience”, the subject who is “will-less” and only therefore 
able to experience the “miracle” of involuntary memory. Beckett leaves no doubt 
that what the artist in his best moments will-lessly perceives is a metaphysical 
reality, the only true reality, to be referred to as “the Idea”.
112 Proust, Recherche IV, p. 457 “To summarize, in one case like the other, whether it was about 
impressions like those which the sight of the spires of Martinville had given me, or remembrances 
like that of the two unequal stepping stones or the taste of the madeleine, I had to attempt to 
interpret the sensations as signs of as many laws and ideas, by trying to think, that is to make 
emerge from the penumbra what I had felt, to transform it into a spiritual equivalent. Now, this 
means which to me seemed to be the only one, what else was it but to create a work of art?” (My 
translation). 

118 
the metaphysical vision
33. Schopenhauer made use of
It ought to have become clear by now that Beckett did not adopt  Schopenhauer’s 
aesthetics wholesale but that he transformed it where he found this necessary 
on the basis of his own insights. Before the details of Beckett’s transformation 
can be treated, however, it should be established as safely as possible that he 
used Schopenhauer’s philosophy and not anybody else’s as a starting point for 
his own thoughts in Proust. This section is a quasi footnote which I insert to 
remove any doubt about Schopenhauer’s philosophy being indeed the basis of 
Beckett’s thinking by the time of writing his first book – and not the philosophy 
of Descartes which he had studied in early 1930, nor any other classical philoso-
phy or a combination of elements just taken from Proust, or a mixture made up 
ad libitum from different philosophical sources.
The strongest argument in favour of Schopenhauer’s central role in 
 Beckett’s thinking about art by this time rests on the unique combination of 
theoretical elements which form the framework of his aesthetic statements in 
Proust. Beckett refers several times directly to Schopenhauer (19,87,91), at one 
point also quoting his definition of art. He does not mention any other philo-
sophical aesthetics which might be considered to compete with Schopenhauer’s 
in those matters. Beckett’s thinking, in addition to direct references to 
 Schopenhauer, is based on assumptions which are near-identical with pivotal 
theses of Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art and which indeed show that both 
authors are working from the same theoretical premises. Assumptions of that 
kind are: the difference between the world of appearances (“the mock reality 
of experience” (33)) and true reality, combined with the thesis that the former 
is just a projection of the will; the supposition of time, space and causality as 
basic forms of the subject’s ‘normal’ world as opposed to true reality which is 
free from these forms and which has the definitely metaphysical status of the 
Idea; the statement that the Idea is the proper object of art, combined with the 
assumption that the Idea is concrete, incompatible with the concept, and inac-
cessible to the latter; the postulate that genuinely artistic perception must be 
will-less and in this sense pure; the thesis that in the artistic vision subject and 
object become one and the same; the frankly declared analogy to mystic experi-
ences; the sharp contrast between will-controlled (therefore ‘untrue’) experi-
ences and will-less states of mind to which true reality opens up; the need to 
shift from the everyday world of time and causality into a seemingly absent-
minded, self-forgetful state of mind as the first prerequisite for the genuinely 
artistic, metaphysical cognition.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
119
In addition to these philosophical assumptions it seems most likely that 
Beckett’s conspicuous subject-object terminology also originates from 
 Schopenhauer, for whom this terminology is indeed characteristic. It  certainly 
does not originate from Beckett’s reading of Descartes in early 1930 as Des-
cartes’s terminology is different, and it is – despite Beckett’s wide interests 
in all kinds of authors – most unlikely to come from another  philosophical 
source, since there is practically no evidence that Beckett by this time had 
read one of the other philosophers who are committed to the subject-object 
language.
In any case the very strong parallels between Beckett’s essential state-
ments about philosophy of art and those of Schopenhauer show as clearly as 
one can wish for that it was indeed Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view 
from which the twenty-four year old Beckett set out to formulate his own 
philosophical ideas on both subjects. In addition to that evidence I present 
here a small list of details in Beckett’s text where Beckett silently uses 
 Schopenhauerian elements, sometimes even citing short passages from 
 Schopenhauer without always telling his reader.113 These details, it seems, 
must remove even the last doubts about the philosophical roots of Beckett’s 
work on Proust.
One of Schopenhauer’s most powerful metaphors for the basic charac-
1. 
ter of life is that of the pendulum between pain and boredom (above 
p. 76). When Beckett is to comment on the function of habit as an 
instrument of survival in the everyday world, he writes:
The pendulum oscillates between these two terms: Suffering – that 
opens a window on the real and is the main condition of the artistic 
experience, and Boredom – with its host of tophatted and hygienic min-
isters, Boredom that must be considered as the most tolerable because 
the most durable of human evils. (28)
When analyzing the Albertine affair as tragedy, Beckett brieﬂ y com-
2. 
ments on the nature of tragedy in general and declares: “Tragedy is 
not concerned with human justice. … The tragic ﬁ gure represents the 
113 Most of these details have also been traced by other critics, e.g. Pilling (1976), Acheson 
(1978), O’Hara (1988). See. note 7 above. However, as far as I can see, the most comprehensive 
account was published for the ﬁ rst time in the 1982 edition of my Die eigentlich metaphysische 
Tätigkeit, the forerunner of this present book.

120 
the metaphysical vision
expiation of original sin, of the original and eternal sin of him and all 
his ‘socii malorum’, the sin of having been born.” (67) Schopenhauer 
wrote about the problem of justice in tragedy which in his eyes is not 
human, but eternal justice: “The true sense of the tragedy is the deeper 
insight that what the hero atones for is not his own particular sins, but 
original sin, in other words, the guilt of existence itself”, and quotes 
Calderón:
Pues el delito mayor
Del hombre es haber nacido.114
 
Beckett cites this very passage from Calderón without further explana-
tion, without naming the author, immediately after his comment on 
the nature of tragedy.
In his note on tragedy just quoted, Beckett uses the less than common 
3. 
expression “socii malorum” [Latin, approximately: “comrades in dis-
tress”], thus literally echoing Schopenhauer’s searching for how to 
 address a human being properly. As quoted above: “… the really prop-
er address between one man and another should be, instead of Sir, 
Monsieur, and so on, Leidensgefährte, soci malorum, compagnon de 
 misères, my fellow-sufferer. (PP II, 304)115
Plants have no consciousness and are, therefore, not aware of them-
4. 
selves; they do not possess any self-representation. This prompted 
Schopenhauer to reﬂ ect:
Indeed it is remarkable how the plant world in particular invites one 
to aesthetic contemplation, and, as it were, obtrudes itself thereon. It 
might be said that such accommodation was connected with the fact 
that these organic beings themselves, unlike animal bodies, are not 
immediate object of knowledge. They therefore need the foreign intel-
ligent individual in order to come from the world of blind willing into 
the world of the representation. Thus they yearn for this entrance, so 
to speak, in order to attain at any rate indirectly what directly is denied 
to them. (WWR I, 201)
114 WWR I, 254 [“For man’s greatest offence / Is to have been born.”] Calderón, La vida es 
sueño, I, 2
115 For reading “soci” instead of “socii” see note 86 above.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
121
 
This reﬂ ection, which seems to be unique in the history of philosophy,116 
is applied by Beckett to the characters of Proust’s novel. It reads, in 
Beckett’s words:
Flower and plant have no conscious will. They are shameless, exposing 
their genitals. And so in a sense are Proust’s men and women, whose 
will is blind and hard, but never self-conscious, never abolished in the 
pure perception of a pure subject. They are victims of their volition, 
active with a grotesque predetermined activity, within the narrow 
limits of an impure world. … And, like members of the vegetable 
world, they seem to solicit a pure subject, so that they may pass from 
a state of blind will to a state of representation. Proust is that pure 
subject. (89 f.)
It has been pointed out above that Schopenhauer considers causality 
5. 
to be space and time in a uniﬁ ed structure: “Consequently, causality 
unites space and time.” (WWR I, 10) As far as I can see, this is anoth-
er element belonging to Schopenhauer’s philosophy alone. Beckett’s 
use of this has already been marked: “When the subject is exempt 
from will the object is exempt from causality (Time and Space taken 
 together).” (90)
We have seen that Beckett, when he tries to characterize the ecstatic 
6. 
quality of the Proustian narrator’s creative experiences, uses Latin and 
German terms for these states of mind: “amabilis insania” and “holder 
Wahnsinn”. These are exactly the expressions Schopenhauer had used 
in his treatment of genius: “It is often remarked that genius and mad-
ness have a side where they touch and even pass over into each other, 
and even poetic inspiration has been called a kind of madness: amabilis 
insania as Horace calls it (Odes, iii, 4); and in the introduction to 
Oberon Wieland speaks of ‘holder Wahnsinn’.” (WWR I,190)117
Towards the end of 
7. 
Proust, Beckett endorses most emphatically 
Schopenhauer’s philosophical interpretation of music118 as an art 
116 In a footnote to the third edition, Schopenhauer points to St. Augustine as his predecessor 
(De civitate Dei II, 27). But there the question is not at all aesthetic representation, and the theme 
of blind willing is by no means spoken about. This, however, is what Beckett concentrates on.
117 Payne, following Haldane and Kemp, translates “holder Wahnsinn”: “amiable madness”. 
 Beckett sticks to the original German. I followed Beckett and undid Payne’s translation.
118 For a closer look at Beckett’s way of applying Schopenhauer’s theory of music to Proust see: J. Pilling, 
Proust and Schopenhauer: Music and Shadows, in: M. Bryden (ed.), Beckett and Music, p. 174–178.

122 
the metaphysical vision
which does not represent Ideas but directly represents the Will, the 
essence of the world. Music, one may say, in Schopenhauer’s eyes, 
objectiﬁ es the Will as directly as the Ideas do; it is, in that respect, 
similar to the Ideas. Beckett even goes as far as to say: “… music is the 
Idea itself.” (92) Schopenhauer considered the ‘language’ of music to 
be familiar to everybody, although it cannot be exhausted by concepts. 
He wrote about our understanding of music despite its inexplicability 
and about the musical convention of repetition as well as the da capo:
The inexpressible depth of all music, by virtue of which it ﬂ oats past us 
as a paradise quite familiar and yet eternally remote, and is so easy to 
understand and yet so inexplicable, is due to the fact that it reproduces 
all the emotions of our innermost being, but entirely without reality 
and remote from its pain. … How full of meaning and signiﬁ cance the 
language of music is we see from the repetition signs, as well as from 
the Da capo which would be intolerable in the case of works composed 
in the language of words. In music, however, they are very appropri-
ate and beneﬁ cial; for to comprehend it fully, we must hear it twice. 
(WWR I, 264)
 
This is, shortly before the end of Proust, Beckett’s remark about the 
same subject: “These considerations explain the beautiful convention 
of the ‘da capo’ as a testimony to the intimate and ineffable nature of 
an art that is perfectly intelligible and perfectly inexplicable.” (92)
Schopenhauer has many famous metaphors for the sufferings of  human 
8. 
existence in the service of the Will. One of these is that life is a pensum 
to be worked off (above p. 90f.). Schopenhauer obviously thinks of life 
as a pensum of slave labour and suffering which the individual has to 
discharge during his or her lifetime. Music and the arts in general pro-
vide temporary relief from this labour because they free the person for 
a short interval from the service of the Will. The object of music is the 
essence of the world, the invisible Will as thing-in-itself which is the 
ultimate base and the true origin of all sufferings. Beckett writes about 
the Proustian narrator that he, unlike Swann, understands Vinteuil’s 
septet and indeed sees “the invariable world and beauty of Vinteuil, 
expressed timidly, as a prayer, in the Sonata,  imploringly, as an inspira-
tion, in the Septuor, the ‘invisible reality’ that damns the life of the 
body on earth as a pensum and reveals the meaning of the word: 
‘ defunctus.’ ” (93) With these words Beckett ends his Proust. 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
123
“Defunctus” in Latin is used for “the deceased”, but literally means 
“the one who has completed it” or “the one who has ﬁ nished it.” 
Schopenhauer wrote about this Latin word: “Life is a pensum to be 
worked off; in this sense defunctus is a ﬁ ne expression.” (PP II, 300)119
34. Schopenhauer altered
From what has been said so far, it cannot come as a surprise that Beckett, when 
using Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art and life for his own thinking, altered 
certain elements so as to make Schopenhauer’s system fit the purposes of 
 another time and literary temper. Beckett’s alterations differ in type and they 
apparently have varied reasons. At some points it was Beckett’s subject, Proust’s 
Recherche, which provided the motive for certain changes. Other alterations 
may have been initiated by the need to interpret Proust’s work, but are, regard-
less of this need, obvious improvements and acts of liberation from the plaster 
bed of idealistic philosophical traditions. Therefore, I assume that Beckett 
would also have introduced these latter alterations if his subject matter had not 
been Proust but some other great artist of his own time.
In Proust, Beckett adopts Schopenhauer’s elementary cognitive forms, 
which are space, time, and causality, but he alters their relative importance: 
Time has now become the all-dominating structure of everyday consciousness 
and of the empirical world. Moreover, obviously motivated by Proust, Beckett 
sees time not only as a cognitive form which gives a certain order to the subject’s 
experiences, but also as an all-embracing power which distorts and corrupts 
those experiences. This may contribute to Beckett’s quite derogatory remarks 
on the structure of the world of phenomena such as “caricature furnished by 
direct perception” (14) and “the mock reality of experience”. (33)  Schopenhauer 
does indeed consider the world of direct perception to be a mere phenomenon, 
but he also assumes that experiencing this world of appearances is a necessary 
condition of the individual’s survival. After all, the phenomenal world belongs 
for Schopenhauer under the heading of “objectivity of the Will” – although it 
is an indirect objectivity, less true in a metaphysical sense than the world of 
Ideas, but an indispensable compass for any person’s needs as a living organism. 
Apart from the mockery and the suffering of individual existence, which are 
119 As always, I kept to Schopenhauer’s “pensum” instead of Payne’s “task”. See note 87 above.

124 
the metaphysical vision
due to the will-to-live, Schopenhauer has no reason to call the world of direct 
perception, the world of phenomena as such, a “caricature”. Beckett does so 
with great emphasis.
Time as a basic structure of everyday experience and life from which human 
persons can only flee in very rare moments is complemented by habit and 
 voluntary memory. These elements, obviously adopted from Proust in the first 
instance, are in Beckett’s view also instruments of the will-to-live. Notwithstand-
ing that the ‘normal’ memory in Proust also is controlled by the person’s will, I do 
not find any unequivocal evidence that Proust definitely thought of the will in 
Schopenhauer’s sense. Beckett certainly does, but there is an important  difference 
from Schopenhauer here, too. Although using the word “thing-in-itself”, Beckett 
at no point explicitly insists that there is a Will as the essence of the world which 
is definitely a transcendent entity and therefore remains forever out of reach for 
the subject’s epistemic potentials. By “will to live” and by “will” in combination 
with habit, Beckett only seems to mean the individual person’s will-to-live which 
in Schopenhauer indeed is an expression of the Will as thing-in-itself, but not 
forever inaccessible to the individual’s self-experience. The fact that Beckett 
seems to focus exclusively on the individual will and on its impoverishing effects 
for the person’s experience and memory, shows a lack of interest in the transcen-
dent, never individualized, never directly perceived Will as essence of the world. 
It is absolutely central for Beckett’s philosophical ideas in Proust that he distin-
guishes between the world of mere phenomena, which is a “caricature”, and true 
reality, which is accessible only in very rare, quasi mystical states of mind. In this 
sense Beckett’s world view in Proust certainly is a metaphysical one: true reality 
is not the reality of our experience of things and events in space, time, and causal-
ity, but is a sphere beyond these forms with a perfectly different structure, having 
the status of the Idea, timeless, exempt from causality. For Schopenhauer it was 
all-important to add that underlying the sphere of Ideas there is a never-perceived, 
forever transcendent Will as the essence of the world and to determine its ele-
mentary character as blind striving, blind suffering. What Beckett certainly retains 
from this is the assumption of suffering as the basic character of all life. But for 
him, the transcendent, epistemically inaccessible status of the Will as the deepest 
core of the world seems to be of no special interest. He does not explicitly deny 
this ever-inaccessible entity, indeed he refers to a “Thing in itself”, but he does 
not dwell on the impossibility of ever obtaining any secure knowledge of it.
This scepticism with regard to Schopenhauer’s Will as the incognizable 
core of the world also appears in Beckett’s view of human personalities. Early 
in his essay, when interpreting the role of habit in Proust and its relation to 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
125
the  individual personality, Beckett has stated that “the individual is a 
 succession of individuals; the world being a projection of the individual’s 
consciousness (an objectivation of the individual’s will, Schopenhauer would 
say)”. (19) Two things should be noted here: First, Beckett does not refer to 
the  ever-transcendent Will as the entity which objectifies itself in the life of 
every person and in the world. Rather, he concentrates on the role of the 
individual will which, in Schopenhauer, indeed is not the standard agent of 
“objectifying”. Second, in assuming that the individual, strictly speaking, is 
a succession of individuals, Beckett makes no use of Schopenhauer’s theory 
of the intelligible character which this philosopher thinks is an expression of 
the Will as thing-in-itself and is not subject to any change in time, let alone 
subject to duplication. Although Beckett’s statement may well be due to 
Proust’s work, the fact that he does not discuss any possible role of 
 Schopenhauer’s Will as metaphysical centre of the world at this point seems 
to prove again his reticence about assuming a perfectly transcendent, ever-
inaccessible essence.
The most important divergence from Schopenhauer’s philosophy, how-
ever, is to be found in Beckett’s description and use of what he calls “the 
Idea”.120 Here, his tendency to do without unchanging entities, existing 
outside all time in a sphere of special ontological status, shows most clearly. 
Indeed, what  Beckett calls “the Idea” is perceived in rare moments in which 
the subject has forgotten about its worldly existence in space and time, and 
the perceived object is assumed to have a timeless existence. But “the Idea” 
is also the true reality of an experience once made in the course of time, and 
in itself shows, as it were, a temporal structure. These are obvious differ-
ences between Beckett and  Schopenhauer which now have to be examined 
more closely.
Involuntary memory according to Beckett bestows on the subject the non-
distorted and therefore true reality of a past experience which in this opulence 
and completeness had never been granted to the person before, since at the 
crucial moment of the past this experience was disfigured and partly amputated 
by habit. We may remember that Beckett claims that the “purity” of the past 
experience is preserved through the process of forgetting (72) which in turn is 
operated by habit. It is involuntary memory which can evoke all that habit had 
kept from being noticed at the very moment of the actual experience and thus 
120 Proust usually prefers “essence” for what in Schopenhauer is “the Idea”.

126 
the metaphysical vision
was not preserved by the will-controlled everyday memory which in Beckett’s 
eyes is no memory at all. To quote Beckett once again:
Strictly speaking, we can only remember what has been registered by our extreme 
inattention and stored in that ultimate and inaccessible dungeon of our being to 
which Habit does not possess the key, and does not need to, because it contains 
none of the hideous and useful paraphernalia of war. But here, in that ‘gouffre 
interdit à nos sondes’ is stored the essence of ourselves, the best of our many 
selves and their concretions that simplists call the world … (31)121
This means, among other things, that, in Beckett’s eyes, involuntary memory 
recalls the past self as well as the full extent of the self’s experience, both not 
disfigured by the will-controlled mechanisms of everyday survival and both 
therefore true. He states about involuntary memory:
It restores, not merely the past object, but the Lazarus that it charmed or tor-
tured, not merely Lazarus and the object, but more because less, more because 
it abstracts the useful, the opportune, the accidental, because in its ﬂ ame it has 
consumed Habit and all its works, and in its brightness revealed what the mock 
reality of experience never can and never will reveal – the real. (33)
The ‘true reality’ which is revealed by involuntary memory obviously is a stretch 
of past experience in its totality, i.e., the living person and the full contents of 
his or her feelings and perceptions, all of this in an “integral”, “essential”, undis-
torted Gestalt.
In other words, for Beckett, in perfect contrast to Schopenhauer, there is no 
stable, timeless set of Ideas anymore. There is no order of Ideas on different 
levels or grades of objectivity either. Beckett’s Ideas are not timeless models or 
archetypes of living beings, let alone of elementary forces of nature. Beckett 
assumes no system of Ideas in which each of them has their well-determined 
place and function. Moreover, Beckett does not distinguish, as Schopenhauer 
does, between two kinds of objectivity of the Will. The very special status of 
Ideas in Schopenhauer’s philosophy, being the direct and therefore adequate 
objectivity of the Will as thing-in-itself, is not at all mentioned by Beckett. 
Given his firm reluctance to write about an ever-transcendent Will as the 
essence of the world, he obviously sees no reason to discuss the adequacy or 
inadequacy of Ideas as a special kind of objectivity of this Will either. Beckett 
not only redefines the status of what he calls “the Idea”, but he also, by 
121 For “ ‘gouffre interdit …’ ” see note 100 above.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
127
 consequence, drops the detailed architecture of Schopenhauer’s world view in 
this matter. Among the consequences of this is the fact that Beckett does not 
at all relate his true reality, viz the Idea, to the corpus of Platonic Ideas. This is 
a further obvious difference between him and Schopenhauer, notwithstanding 
that Schopenhauer’s Ideas already differ from Plato’s in certain respects.  Beckett 
seems to see with perfect clarity that what he calls “the Idea”, since it is not a 
model or archetype of a multiplicity of beings or things, cannot seriously be 
associated with what Plato calls “forms” or “Ideas”.
Beckett’s world view as presented in Proust nevertheless remains a doubt-
lessly metaphysical one in the sense that typical empirical reality is untrue for 
several reasons and true reality is only accessible in very rare moments and very 
special states of mind (explicitly called “mystical”). These moments and states 
of mind are not to be brought about at will, and the structure of the relevant 
kind of experience differs radically from the will-directed purposeful observation 
of, say, an empirical scientist. The task of art in Beckett’s view also remains 
positively metaphysical: the work of art has nothing to do with empirical reality. 
Beckett’s scathing remarks about “the grotesque fallacy of a realistic art” (76) 
indeed are in line with Proust’s, but since Beckett differs from Proust quite 
decisively at other points, we may take his insistent commitment in this matter 
at face value. He certainly rejects any art which tries to picture empirical events 
and circumstances.
The metaphysical reality, which according to Beckett is the object of art, is 
no sphere of pre-existent a priori entities (like Schopenhauer’s Ideas), but the 
non-empirical, not will-controlled and therefore undistorted and unreduced 
totality of a past experience. The work of art is ‘true’ when it faithfully renders 
this reality. This ‘truth’ is incompatible with the ‘truth’ of what the intellect 
knows about the empirical world. This latter truth is merely the outcome of a 
“pact” (19) between the individual and its environment, arranging the person’s 
experience along the needs of his or her will-to-live and suppressing anything 
which is not suitable to those needs. Any reality of past experience, even the 
most insignificant one, if not subject to distortion by the will-to-live anymore, 
can be evoked by the “mystical experience” and become the object of a work of 
art. The reality of past experience tends not to be merely a once experienced 
object, but tends to be the totality of a complex situation in which the artist’s 
person experienced him- or herself within certain surroundings. It’s just that 
the evoked situation, freed from the needs of the will-to-live, in the artist’s 
metaphysical vision is perceived more clearly and much more richly than vol-
untary memory could have presented it. In moving away from Schopenhauer’s 

128 
the metaphysical vision
Ideas as ever-existing timeless archetypes and moving towards a metaphysical 
view of art as representing the non-empirical, undistorted, integral truth of a 
living person’s experience in his or her world, Beckett definitely erased the clas-
sicist elements in Schopenhauer and took his aesthetics as the starting point for 
a rather different and more ‘modern’ notion of what art is and has to do.
One important trait of Beckett’s view needs special emphasis. Not only does 
“the Idea”, as seen by Beckett, have relations of time in itself (however difficult 
it may be to reconcile this with its often-asserted timelessness), but the Idea in 
Beckett’s view of Proust’s work also contains, of course, the relation between a 
person and the world which he perceives at the relevant moment (the narrator 
in Venice, the narrator as a boy dipping the madeleine). In Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy it remained arguable whether or not its author claims that there are 
no relations at all within the timeless archetype of, say, a living species. Both 
Schopenhauer and Beckett indeed describe the process of an artist forgetting 
his or her worldly surroundings and becoming immersed in the vision of the 
Idea as a process of temporary disengagement from any relations with the world 
of ‘normal’ spatiotemporal phenomena. Beckett, however, considers the true 
reality, uncovered in the artist’s vision, to be the past experience (never having 
been noticed in this perfect completeness before), including the perceiving sub-
ject and its way to relate to what he or she is seeing, hearing, or sensing. Nev-
ertheless, the Idea does not seem to be an individual entity in Beckett, but, to 
a certain extent, a general one. As such, it is not the model of a species of living 
beings anymore, but rather the true, unabbreviated way of how a living being 
relates to his or her experience as a complete, not disfigured totality. Beckett 
uses the words “essence” and “essential” (which we find in Schopenhauer just 
as in Proust) when he tries to explain the general character of the Idea: “What 
is common to present and past is more essential than either taken separately.” 
(74) It seems obvious in Beckett’s treatment of the Idea that he remains true 
to Schopenhauer in retaining the notion of a timeless essence as the truly artis-
tic object, and in retaining the metaphysical status of this object as definitely 
not being part of the ‘normal’ phenomenal world in time, space, and causality. 
This world according to Beckett is untrue in the sense that the phenomena we 
do experience in it just have an impoverished, distorted Gestalt, geared to the 
individual will. What Beckett certainly left behind is the early nineteenth-
century Schopenhauerian notion of the Idea as a species archetype which seems 
like a lifeless statue in an area outside all time. He replaced this dusty thing by 
the much more convincing notion of the Idea as the true way a living being exists 
in its world.

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
129
35. The Proustian equation – the
Proustian solution
We can now turn to one of the more cryptic elements of Beckett’s Proust, 
viz the one which he uses to give an overall structure to his train of thoughts. 
The essay in total has the following form: problem named, treatment, solu-
tion. The problem is presented at the very beginning as one which poses 
itself with Proust’s work (and in the plot of Proust’s work). Then Beckett 
sketches his interpretation of a number of subjects from the Recherche, parts 
of a brief epistemology, metaphysics, and a brief aesthetics which eventually 
enable him to present the solution to the problem. The solution is not just 
named but offered in such a way as to make the reader understand how it 
has been arrived at. Since the problem is called “the Proustian equation”, 
the solution is named “the Proustian solution”. This is how Beckett’s essay 
starts:
The Proustian equation is never simple. The unknown, choosing its weapons 
from a hoard of values, is also the unknowable. And the quality of its action 
falls under two signatures. In Proust each spear may be a spear of Telephus. 
This dualism in multiplicity will be examined more closely in relation to Proust’s 
‘perspectivism’. For  
the purposes of this synthesis it is convenient to 
adopt the inner chronology of the Proustian demonstration, and to examine 
in the ﬁ rst place that double-headed monster of damnation and salvation – 
Time. (11)
It does not belong to my subject to focus on all enigmatic elements of this 
introduction. I concentrate on elements which not only are needed to compre-
hend the Proustian solution, but which also allow a better understanding of how 
Beckett sees the truly artistic experience.
The equation is never simple. This can mean it is not easy to solve. It also 
can mean that there are more than one unknown factors. In any case, “the 
unknown” is also “the unknowable”. I read that to mean: it also is the rationally 
or intellectually unknowable. It may be accessible to the artistic, viz mystical, 
experience, but not to anything else. The spear of Telephus was the spear with 
which Achilles wounded Telephus. Telephus did not recover again but led a 
painful life for years until, following an oracle, he moved the Greeks to heal him 
using the same spear which originally wounded him. This was done by putting 
rust from the original weapon on Telephus’s wound, whereupon he 
recuperated.

130 
the metaphysical vision
When Beckett explains the nature of time and the lesions time can  produce, 
he states, very soon after his obscure introduction:
There is no escape from the hours and the days. Neither from tomorrow nor from 
yesterday. There is no escape from yesterday because yesterday has deformed us, 
or been deformed by us. The mood is of no importance. Deformation has taken 
place. (13)
Together with Beckett’s statement about the spear of Telephus this may suffice to 
attempt a tentative reconstruction of equation and solution. The equation to be 
solved is the situation of the empirical person who lives in time, indeed in the 
state of deformation. Normally, this situation is stabilized as well as covered up 
by habit and made bearable by boredom. As long as the person’s cognition is under 
control of the will, any experience of this person suffers the typical distortion of 
any cognitive achievement which is subject to the influences of will, habit and 
time. The person can try to unravel the conundrum of his or her existence under 
such conditions by trying to find an unknown so that an elementary equation, 
the riddle of the person’s existence as it were, can be solved. Solving the equation 
would be similar to the recovery of Telephus who had to think up a whole series 
of wiles to motivate the Greeks to provide him with what he needed. Beckett’s 
mention of “yesterday” when deformation took place nearly is something like the 
oracle which told Telephus that only what wounded him was able to heal him. It 
was Schopenhauer who had already taken aesthetic contemplation, i.e., the mys-
tical identification of subject and object in the artistic vision of the Idea, to be a 
means which grants temporary redemption from the tragicomic existence of 
ordinary life. In Beckett’s essay, the Idea is the true and undistorted, not detrun-
cated reality of a past experience, including the reality of the experiencing subject. 
The essence of this situation has been preserved in deep areas of the person’s 
mind, waiting to be dug up and brought to light by a suitable process.
It can be assumed that, in this situation, for Beckett the solution consists 
in the will-less, undistorted perception of a past experience in its unimpaired 
totality. The same experience which the person once was aware of in a will-
controlled way which must be considered to be awareness in the mode of mental 
lesion may be reconstituted in its “integral purity” by involuntary memory. This 
reconstitution, the “mystical experience” of perceiving the true reality of what 
once was noticed in a mode of mental injury, temporarily frees the person from 
the influence of will, habit, and time, and may be compared to the healing of 
Telephus, albeit just a temporary healing. The person is healed through being 
touched by the true, undistorted Gestalt of an experience which once was 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
131
 perceived in a disfigured way and has, therefore, at the same moment disfigured 
the perceiver. There is a “multiplicity” of past experiences, which can play the 
role of the “unknown”, the finding of which would constitute the “solution” for 
this aspect of the person’s problematic existence. Therefore Beckett can use the 
expression: “this dualism in multiplicity” – i.e., the maiming as well as healing 
action in a multiplicity of cases which we find in Proust’s work. This is how 
Beckett describes the “Proustian solution”:
But if this mystical experience communicates an extratemporal essence, it follows 
that  the communicant is for the moment an extratemporal being. Consequently 
the  Proustian solution consists, in so far as it has been examined, in the negation 
of Time and Death, the negation of Death because the negation of Time. Death 
is dead because Time is dead. (75)
Following this, Beckett, in parentheses, commits “a brief impertinence” by criti-
cising Proust’s title Le temps retrouvé as being an inappropriate description of 
the Proustian solution: “Time is not recovered, it is obliterated.” (75) Proust 
probably would not even have protested: Beckett’s “impertinence” at this point 
is true to Proust’s actual text indeed.122
Time in Beckett’s introduction quoted above was called “that double-headed 
monster of damnation and salvation.” We now know how this is to be understood: 
As long as human persons exist in their own present time, their experience being 
organized by will-controlled mechanisms, they are damned to suffer the typical 
disfigurations of a will-dominated existence. If human persons manage to be 
completely absorbed by the will-less perception of true reality or “extratemporal 
essence”, they also manage for this “brief eternity” to be free from time. In these 
brief periods of their lives persons are temporarily healed, they are temporarily 
redeemed from the distortions which time itself has imposed upon them. Since 
they, in those moments, negate time, they also negate death. What they perceive 
is the “pure”, not volitionally crippled reality of a past state of themselves and 
their world. This state, originally experienced in the mode of distortion, is now 
experienced in the mode of healing that same distortion. Like the spear of 
 Telephus, any experience which in the course of habit-structured life brings 
 disfigurement, is, when evoked for a “brief eternity” in its true timeless Gestalt, 
the medicine which redeems the person from what he or she has suffered.
Many questions about Beckett’s Proust still remain unanswered. To  conclude 
my analysis of this essay, I shall only treat a small group of these questions which 
arise from the fact that Beckett describes the existence of human persons in 
122 Cf. Proust, Recherche IV, 450 ff.

132 
the metaphysical vision
their will-dominated, habit-structured way as “the boredom of living”, whereas 
he describes the opposite, obviously not habit-protected and not impoverished 
state of mind, as “the suffering of being.” (19) This can certainly be seen as 
another tribute to Schopenhauer’s philosophy. The importance of suffering can 
also be traced to Proust’s work. Apart from these historical parallels it seems 
important to obtain a clearer picture of what may be considered as Beckett’s 
metaphysics of personal existence by the time of writing Proust. This will not 
only permit a better understanding of his thinking during that period but will 
also throw more light on his originality, his power of creative transformation 
and independence of mind when dealing with the authors he refers to.
36. Affirmation of the will. 
Voluntarily Tantalus
We know that Beckett, in his essay, speaks of only one adequate unification or 
“identification” (84) of subject and object, happening at the moment when the 
person has lost his or her individual self-awareness as a member of the empirical 
world and is completely absorbed by the presence of true reality in a “mystical 
experience”. We also know that this true reality is assumed to be outside time and 
that therefore the perceiving subject at the relevant moment in Beckett’s eyes is 
a timeless being. Furthermore we know that the adequate union of subject and 
object is considered to be the person’s only means to get in touch with true reality. 
For the author of Proust this adequate union of subject and object in the “mystical 
experience” is the true source as well as the metaphysical privilege of art.
Is there also an inadequate union of subject and object? What would be the 
opposite of the adequate union? It seems quite obvious in Beckett’s text that 
the inadequate union consists of the constantly desired unification of a subject 
with the object of his or her wishes in the world dominated by will and habit – 
only, this unification is ultimately impossible and what seems to be such unifica-
tion is nothing but delusion, fraud, and self-deception.
In the case of a person striving to get into full contact with an object, one 
can single out at least two fundamentally different modes: the cognitive and 
the emotional. In the context of arguing for the superiority of the mystical 
experience, Beckett gives his reasons for stating that intentionally pursued 
cognition of any sort can never indeed reach its object:
Imagination, applied – a priori – to what is absent, is exercised in vacuo and 
cannot tolerate the limits of the real. Nor is any direct and purely experimental 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
133
contact possible between subject and object, because they are automatically 
separated by the subject’s consciousness of perception, and the object loses its 
purity and becomes a  mere intellectual pretext or motive. (74)
The subject’s consciousness of perception keeps subject and object separate, 
one can assume, because this consciousness includes the subject’s awareness of 
him- or herself. It is this self-awareness, however, which would be absent in a 
state of temporary oneness of subject and object. Beckett also seems to conclude 
that if this temporary oneness is lost, the object loses its “purity”, i.e., is affected 
by the will-dominated forms of everyday empirical knowledge in the world of 
mere phenomena.
Beckett argues at greater length for the impossibility of achieving emotional 
unity of subject and object, i.e., ob obtaining genuine emotional satisfaction in 
the world of time and habit. Again, Schopenhauer may be seen as his forerunner. 
In his philosophy, it is time together with space which constitutes the principium 
individuationis, the principle of individuation. Therefore, the objectivity of the 
Will in time is necessarily split in numberless individuals. All of these are con-
stantly driven by their individual will to strive for different individual aims and 
conflicting objectives. Seen in totality, the objectivity of the Will thus has in 
Schopenhauer’s thinking the form of everlasting self-antagonism. Beckett in turn 
gives several reasons for the thesis that genuine fulfilment and satisfaction in 
relations between human persons is forever impossible. Of course time plays an 
important role here, too. One of his arguments, still limited in scope, is this: 
Objects of desire which exist in time are extended in time. They can be possessed 
only in parts, never completely: “At the best, all that is realised in Time (all Time 
produce), whether in Art or Life, can only be possessed successively, by a series 
of partial annexations – and never integrally and at once.” (17 f.) This is the 
impossibility of complete union in time because the object is extended in time.
The general futility and impossibility of fulfilment of any desire in time is 
argued for also on the grounds that in the desiring process itself different sub-
jects succeed one another. As has been said above, Beckett assumes that any 
person, considered closely, is a succession of different individuals. From this 
Beckett concludes without further arguments that any fulfilment of a desire, by 
the time it happens, does not bring satisfaction to the original subject of this 
very desire anymore:
The aspirations of yesterday were valid for yesterday’s ego, not for to-day’s. We are 
disappointed at the nullity of what we are pleased to call attainment. But what is 
attainment? The identiﬁ cation of the subject with the object of his desire. The subject 

134 
the metaphysical vision
has died – and perhaps many times – on the way. For subject B to be  disappointed by 
the banality of an object chosen by subject A is as illogical as to expect one’s hunger 
to be dissipated by the spectacle of Uncle eating his dinner. (13 f.)
Any person’s hunger is not satisfied by watching another person eat, since the 
relevant subjects are different. The same holds in the case of a wish being ful-
filled: The fulfilment seems banal and useless to the attaining subject since it was 
not this subject who had that wish in the first place. Thus it is time as one of the 
very basic forms of the empirical world which averts any genuine fulfilment for 
the desires of subjects who have to live their lives in the framework of time. As 
long as there is time, there is at most a fragmentary and delusory attainment of 
any desired objective, never any satisfaction in the full and true sense.
Beckett’s resumé about personal existence as a willing individual, living in 
the form of time, continues and radicalizes Schopenhauer’s line of thought: “So 
that we are rather in the position of Tantalus, with this difference, that we allow 
ourselves to be tantalised.” (13) That we allow ourselves to be tantalized most 
likely is what Schopenhauer meant by “affirmation of the Will-to-live”: In the 
very process of willing we affirm the Will as the basic nature of all existence and 
we accept the condition under which this existence has to be lived: namely, 
that there is never any durable satisfaction. Beckett’s radicalization of 
 Schopenhauer’ thesis on personal existence seems to be this: For Schopenhauer, 
any willing life is unfulfilled life because there are just evanescent moments of 
satisfaction which in the very same instant start to vanish into new willing and 
new striving, or otherwise boredom, and in any case pain. But after all, 
 Schopenhauer still assumes that there are infinitesimal moments of satisfaction. 
Beckett has got rid of those moments altogether. For him, as willing individuals, 
we are completely and irrevocably in the situation of Tantalus who is never satis-
fied – and we remain in this situation voluntarily. In living our lives as willing 
individuals we accept and affirm the conditio sine qua non of willing existence: 
never to attain fulfilment. Beckett’s recommendation, if any, is eventually the 
same as Schopenhauer’s, namely to turn to “the wisdom of all the sages, from 
Brahma to Leopardi, the wisdom that consists not in the satisfaction but in the 
ablation of desire.” (18)
37. Desert of loneliness. No morality
Beckett uses the Tantalus metaphor when analyzing the Proustian narrator’s 
love for Albertine. Only the most general traits of this analysis are important in 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
135
the present context. In Beckett’s eyes the most salient feature of the Albertine 
affair is that genuine fulfilment of love is unobtainable, temporary physical 
union notwithstanding. Here Beckett’s view is almost congruent with 
 Schopenhauer’s, as is Proust’s own account. A condition for love or believing 
to be in love is that one does not possess the beloved object. At the very 
moment when possession seems to be obtained, the feeling of love tends to fade. 
Love, if it is supposed to be durable, needs a durable element of non-satisfaction, 
or else the pendulum swings from the side of want, i.e., suffering, to the side of 
tedium, i.e., boredom. Since there is no genuine fulfilment in love or durable 
possession of an object which still is being loved, there is just the transition from 
pain to ennui and from there back to pain. Beckett’s main argument for his 
thesis that any fulfilment in love is illusory, is again based on the all-embracing 
dominance of time and the impossibility of achieving a genuine union of subject 
and object in the empirical world:
And the Goddess … into whose faith and worship all mankind is born, is the 
Goddess of Time. No object prolonged in this temporal dimension tolerates 
possession, meaning by possession total possession, only to be achieved by the 
complete identiﬁ cation of object and subject. (57)
What applies to love, also applies (again as in Proust’s Recherche) to friendship. 
Of course, the problem here is not the same as in love, where the uncertainty 
of true fulfilment facilitates the prolongation of one’s illusions almost ad libitum. 
Beckett just assumes that the attempt to obtain friendship is an attempt to get 
into genuine contact with a different person. Genuine contact even between 
just two persons in the world order of will and time, however, is impossible, since 
two persons are “two separate and immanent dynamisms related by no system 
of synchronisation.” (17) Furthermore: “There is no communication because 
there are no vehicles of communication.” (64)
Beckett evidently has a very demanding notion of communication. Com-
munication for him seems to consist of the mutual contact and understanding 
of persons independent of their continuous changing in time and independent 
of their relative world views which (in Beckett’s Schopenhauerian terminology) 
are projections of their individual will. For genuine communication to occur, 
persons would have to be connected by a “system of synchronisation”, so as to 
be strictly coordinated in temporal progression and in will-organized projection. 
Both modes of coordination are impossible in a world for which the principle of 
individuation is a basic form. This form strictly singularizes human persons 
instead of facilitating contact between them. It seems that thoughts of this kind, 

136 
the metaphysical vision
together with material from Proust, motivate Beckett’s scathing statement on 
friendship: “Friendship implies an almost piteous acceptance of face values. 
Friendship is a social expedient, like upholstery or the distribution of garbage 
buckets. It has no spiritual significance.” (63 f.)
Friendship and love are similar in their delusory nature. This is so in Proust, 
Schopenhauer, and in Beckett’s essay. Beckett even goes a decisive step further 
and pronounces a resolute statement of his own: “Surely in the whole of litera-
ture there is no study of that desert of loneliness and recrimination that men 
call love posed and developed with such diabolical unscrupulousness.” (54) The 
words “desert of loneliness”, here relating to love, in Beckett’s eyes can certainly 
refer to friendship as well. As partly quoted above, he comments on the ever 
failing wish to communicate which is common to love and friendship alike, 
adding to Proust a most affirmative tone of his own:
at least the failure to possess may have the nobility of that which is tragic, where-
as the attempt to communicate where no communication is possible is merely 
a simian vulgarity or horribly comic, like the madness that holds a conversation 
with the furniture. (63)
There seems to be a similar approval of Proust’s views in Beckett’s brief report 
on the role of morality in the Recherche: “Here, as always, Proust is completely 
detached from all moral considerations. There is no right and wrong in Proust 
nor in his world.” (66) And, writing about Proust’s men and women whom 
Beckett describes as being without shame like flowers and plants, he states 
again: “There is no question of right and wrong.” (89)
If this is not just a plain assertion about Proust, underwritten by Beckett, 
one may think of Schopenhauer’s ‘practical philosophy’: This philosopher like-
wise had refused to provide his reader with a system of moral imperatives. He 
considered this to be philosophically impossible and useless alike. When persons 
act according to what philosophical tradition considers ‘morally right’, they do 
so on the basis of a more or less obscure feeling about the common nature and 
the common suffering of all living beings. If they act morally, they just follow 
this feeling instead of philosophically demonstrated principles.
38. Existence of the artist
There still remains one question which is of great interest to Beckett but has not 
been sufficiently treated so far. It concerns the prerequisites for artistic work. I 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
137
already quoted the passage where Beckett states that in moments when habit 
temporarily does not fulfil its reductive and impoverishing function, “the bore-
dom of living is replaced by the suffering of being.” (19) And I quoted Beckett’s 
note: “Suffering – that opens a window on the real and is the main condition of 
the artistic experience…” (28) Readers of Kant may have recognized an element 
of his Critique of Aesthetic Judgment in Beckett’s fragmentary remark: “The suf-
fering of being: that is, the free play of every faculty.” (20)123 These utterances 
seem to point to a central role of suffering in the life of the artist.
It is easy to understand that according to Beckett’s Proust the breakdown 
of habit initiates suffering. Habit is considered to be a pact between the subject 
and its environment as perceived by the subject for the purpose of protecting 
the person from vexing and confounding elements of his or her experience. 
Habit serves to maximize personal stability as well as safety and to minimize 
suffering. If habit ceases to function as the most efficient safeguarding instru-
ment of the individual’s will-to-live, there is not much left to curb suffering. But 
why should suffering be “the main condition of the artistic experience”? There 
are, of course, Proust’s own remarks on that subject. But Beckett’s statements 
seem to contain so much emphasis of his own that they can hardly be taken just 
as reporting Proustian ideas.
Schopenhauer named two reasons why suffering tends to be a companion 
of artistic activity and even may be considered to be one of its most important 
conditions: In Schopenhauer’s view any great ability in matters of cognition is 
associated with a greater capacity for suffering. In the general order of living 
beings, a scale which starts at the bottom with plants and very primitive animals 
and ends at the top with humankind, he sees the powers of the intellect and 
the sensitivity to suffer arranged in parallel order, both rising from zero in plants 
to their highest degree in human beings. When one keeps in mind that among 
human persons, according to Schopenhauer, the artist has extraordinary powers 
of the intellect, it is only logical that this philosopher attributes to the artist an 
extraordinarily high capacity for suffering as well. (Cf. WWR I, 310ff.)
123 Cf. Kant, Critique of Judgment, § 9, p. 64. Cf. also above p. 58f. Mentioning the “free play of 
every faculty” is one of two literal references to Kant in Beckett’s essay. The “free play of the 
cognitive faculties” in Kant is both a necessary condition of experiencing the beautiful and a nec-
essary condition of experiencing ‘aesthetic ideas’, therefore also a necessary condition of creating 
a work of art. – Beckett’s second literal reference to Kant in Proust is his somewhat strange use 
of the words “transcendental aperception” (sic) on p. 90. The familiar “perception” would have 
been closer to Beckett’s meaning at this point.

138 
the metaphysical vision
Schopenhauer’s second reason for associating the life of the artist with a 
high degree of suffering comes closer to Beckett in the salient respect of “open-
ing a window on the real.” An extraordinarily high degree of suffering in 
 Schopenhauer’s theory of tragedy is the reason why the heroes of tragedy 
towards the end of their lives can see through the veil of Maya and willingly 
give up their existence, since they recognize their insignificance as individuals. 
Apart from the stage action of tragedy, an extraordinarily high degree of suffer-
ing in Schopenhauer’s philosophy is highly conducive to artistic activity in 
general. The source of all artistic creativity, the metaphysical vision of true 
reality, is dependent on the intuitive powers of the intellect overwhelming the 
person’s will-to-live, so that the will-dominated order of the world can be for-
gotten and the vision of the Idea can arise. Anything that is apt to weaken the 
dominance of the individual will-to-live in the artist’s person and to make room 
for ceasing to will, ceasing to act, and allowing the contemplative attitude to 
take over, is also apt to “open a window on the real”. Just as in the heroes of 
tragedy, just as in the very few persons who after an extreme amount of suffering 
arrive at the denial of the will-to-live in asceticism, suffering according to 
 Schopenhauer may be a strong factor in the typically artistic way of withdrawing 
from personal aims in the surrounding world and turning to true reality which 
opens up only in will-less contemplation.
Apart from suffering which is “the main condition of the artistic experi-
ence”, Beckett mentions solitude as another ingredient of an artistic life. He 
does so in his remarks on friendship which have been partly discussed 
above:
For the artist, who does not deal in surfaces, the rejection of friendship is not only 
reasonable, but a necessity. Because the only possible spiritual development is in 
the sense of depth. The artistic tendency is not expansive, but a contraction. And 
art is the apotheosis of solitude. (64)
The rejection of friendship is a necessity: That means that the true artist, if 
engaging in friendship, loses the ability to do what he or she has to do. These 
statements, of course, rest solidly on the work Beckett is writing on: The Prous-
tian narrator’s notion of his own art as presented in Le temps retrouvé leaves no 
room for an artistic function of friendship. As Beckett repeats, the work of an 
artist of this kind indeed is excavatory, the true reality to be found exists in the 
depth of the artist’s own person, just as the potential object for the blissful 
moments of involuntary memory. Although Beckett dropped Schopenhauer’s 
static world of Ideas as timeless models or archetypes, he did keep to 

 
beckett’s philosophical view 
139
 Schopenhauer’s statements on will-lessness and isolation from human contacts 
and other worldly relations as a necessary condition for the artistic vision to 
arise. Thus, Beckett could find possible justifications for his acrid rejection of 
friendship, quite independently of his study object Proust, in the philosophical 
system he is using as the overall basis for his early view of art and the artist’s 
existence.


PART TWO
ON SOME DETAILS IN BECKETT’S 
LITERARY WORK


Turning now in a fragmentary way to a small part of Beckett’s literary work, 
I wish to repeat what was said from the outset: I shall not try to read Beck-
ett’s prose or his dramas as the literary equivalent of any philosophical theory 
whatsoever. It would be foolhardy to expect Beckett to write literature of that 
kind. Of course there is also no one-to-one counterpart in literary form for his 
own thoughts on the nature of art as put forward in his Proust. Nevertheless, 
there are behaviour patterns and personality traits in important characters of 
 Beckett’s work which possess a remarkable affinity to some of the attributes 
which Schopenhauer and the young Beckett ascribed to the artist. Examples 
of these patterns of behaviour and mindset can be found in, amongst oth-
ers, Murphy, Moran and the Unnamable. Of even greater importance with 
regard to Beckett’s oeuvre as a whole are some striking similarities between the 
dire view of human existence in Beckett’s literature since World War II and 
Schopenhauer’s metaphysical image of life and world. To point out a limited 
amount of those similarities I shall concentrate on Beckett’s two most seminal 
dramas Waiting for Godot and Endgame and especially on actions, wishes, and 
statements of the main characters Gogo and Didi, as well as Hamm and Clov. 
It is, of course, not a one-to-one equivalent of Schopenhauer’s metaphysical 
vision which we find here. But what we do find can be regarded as an altered, 
twentieth-century version of a Schopenhauerian world view which comes about 
when one drops certain traditional elements and concentrates on others which 
even deepen this philosopher’s bleak metaphysical outlook on human life.


39. I am not of the big world, I am 
of the little world
Beckett’s Murphy, written in 1935 and ‘36, is not the best source for traces of 
Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and world view in Beckett’s literary oeuvre. The 
novel shows vestiges of an extremely wide philosophical reading124, the most 
obvious ones being from the metaphysical systems of Descartes, Geulincx, 
 Spinoza, and Leibniz. Nonetheless, there are crucial passages where either the 
hero or the narrator uses phrases which reveal Schopenhauerian elements at 
key points of Murphy’s strange behaviour, aims, and philosophical opinions. 
The presence of these Schopenhauerian notions in the middle of a book which, 
in philosophical respects, is widely dominated by elements of seventeenth-
century metaphysics, is all the more interesting as evidence of the constancy of 
 Beckett’s Schopenhauer connection. Beckett himself, in a letter of July 17, 1936 
124 This, of course, has attracted much scholarly attention. See, among many others, J. Acheson, 
Murphy’s Metaphysics, in: Acheson, Samuel Beckett’s Literary Theory and Practice, p. 41–58. For a 
focus on Spinoza and Kant see: P.J. Murphy, Beckett and the philosophers, in: J. Pilling (ed.), The 
Cambridge Companion to Beckett, 222–240. For Murphy and Geulincx, see: R. Wood, Murphy, 
Beckett, Geulincx, God, in: J. of Beckett Studies 2, 2, p. 27–51.
· I I I ·
MURPHY

146 
the metaphysical vision
to Thomas MacGreevy, seems to connect Murphy explicitly with  Schopenhauer 
through using the Indian “tat twam asi”125 which that philosopher used so 
often.
The novel starts with a scene in which Murphy sits naked in his rocking-
chair to which he has bound himself with seven scarves and tries to become 
alive in his mind. Coming alive in his mind is one of the most important 
things  Murphy aims to achieve during the course of this book, i.e., for the 
rest of his life.
He sat in his chair in this way because it gave him pleasure! First it gave his body 
pleasure, it appeased his body. Then it set him free in his mind. For it was not 
until his body was appeased that he could come alive in his mind, as described 
in section six. And life in his mind gave him pleasure, such pleasure that pleasure 
was not the word.126
Murphy is attempting to meditate, one may say. This meditation allows him 
to leave the empirical world in which his body and his everyday self are con-
demned to exist and to enter another world, a very special one at that.
He worked up the chair to its maximum rock, then relaxed. Slowly the world 
died down, the big world where Quid pro quo was cried as wares and the light 
never waned the same way twice; in favour of the little, as described in section 
six, where he could love himself. (8)
A quid pro quo comes about by substituting one thing for another, by way of 
trade or deception, or otherwise. This term indicates right at the beginning 
that there is something fundamentally questionable in matters of the big world 
in which Murphy, who tries to become alive in his mind, is detained by “sights 
and sounds that he did not like.” One of these sounds is the echo of a street 
cry which Murphy perceives as “Quid pro quo! Quid pro quo!” The contrast 
between the big world, the world of outward empirical experience, and the little 
world, which opens up for Murphy only when he can close his consciousness 
hermetically against outward influences, is a decisive element of the hero’s 
private system of thought which helps him to find his course until the end of 
his worldly career. The big world is also the world in which Celia, Murphy’s 
girlfriend, repeatedly and urgently demands that Murphy should find a job so 
125 See: Knowlson, Damned to Fame, p. 215. The same passage also in Disjecta, p. 102.
126 Samuel Beckett, Murphy, London (Calder and Boyars) 1963, p. 6. Page numbers henceforth 
given in parentheses refer to this edition.

 
murphy 
147
as to earn some money. Otherwise, she would have to take up again her own 
previous job, a less than honourable one. In his attempts at refusing, Murphy 
recurs to metaphysics:
But it was not altogether a question of economy. There were metaphysical 
 considerations, in whose gloom it appeared that the night had come in which 
no Murphy could work. Was Ixion under any contract to keep his wheel in nice 
running order? Had any provision been made for Tantalus to eat salt? Not that 
Murphy had ever heard of. (18)
The world in which Murphy is required to work is the world of Will-dominated 
values and personal aims. This is the world which Schopenhauer saw as a world 
of suffering without end. The passages where he uses Tantalus and Ixion as para-
digms of human existence in this world have been quoted above (p. 80, n. 81).
The big world, in which Murphy’s empirical person is forced to exist, is also 
the world of so-called sane, healthy persons, the world with which the mentally 
disturbed have lost contact. The only job which Murphy can find in the big world 
is the job of an assistant warden in the “Magdalen Mental Mercyseat”, a mental 
hospital. From the very start of his job there, Murphy sides with the patients 
who are considered to be insane because they live in their private, closed, non-
 objective world, which Murphy compares to his little one. And he takes a firm 
stand against the big world which to him seems to be nothing but an enormous 
disaster. The psychiatrists, on the other hand, in “complacent scientific concep-
tualism” (122), call the big world “reality” and think it their task to re-establish 
contact between the hospital patients and that sphere of ‘normal’ life.
All this was duly revolting to Murphy, whose experience as a physical and rational 
being obliged him to call sanctuary what the psychiatrists called exile and to think 
of the patients not as banished from a system of beneﬁ ts but as escaped from 
a colossal ﬁ asco … The issue therefore, as lovingly simpliﬁ ed and perverted by 
Murphy, lay between nothing less fundamental than the big world and the little 
world, decided by the patients in favour of the latter, revived by the psychiatrists 
on behalf of the former, in his own case unresolved. In fact, it was unresolved, 
only in fact. His vote was cast. ‘I am not of the big world, I am of the little world’ 
was an old refrain with Murphy, and a conviction, two convictions, the negative 
ﬁ rst. (123 f.)
40. Vision
“Fiasco” is one of Murphy’s favourite epithets for the big world. This is 
 reminiscent of what Beckett said in Proust about the reality which is provided 

148 
the metaphysical vision
by voluntary memory and will-controlled experience: “the caricature furnished 
by direct perception.” That the entire world has two fundamentally different 
aspects that also can be described as two different worlds seems to be a lasting 
element in Beckett’s thinking during that time.127 It also is characteristic for 
his way of describing the two worlds, that the big one, so-called ‘reality’, is the 
world of life as a pensum (in plain language, slave labour) whereas the little one 
is the area of freedom, a temporary, fragile but blissful freedom. In Proust the life 
of the body on earth had already been called a pensum – in a context obviously 
borrowed from Schopenhauer. In Murphy, the description of the empirical, ‘nor-
mal’ world as the world where life is a pensum recurs at a highly significant point 
in the course of action. One of Murphy’s chief and most beloved objectives, to 
come alive in his mind, is also the attempt to withdraw from the world of fiasco, 
of slave labour, and to become free. He succeeds in achieving this through peri-
ods of mental absence from the world, accompanied by physical torpor and loss 
of ‘normal’ self-awareness. The narrator describes one of these events:
He therefore went to the other extreme, disconnected his mind from the gross 
importunities of sensation and reﬂ ection and composed himself on the hollow 
of his back for the torpor he had been craving to enter for the past ﬁ ve hours … 
 Nothing can stop me now, was his last thought before he lapsed into conscious-
ness, and nothing will stop me. In effect, nothing did turn up to stop him and he 
slipped away, from the pensums and prizes, from Celia, chandlers, public highways, 
etc., from Celia, buses, public gardens, etc., to where there were no pensums and 
no prizes, but only Murphy himself, improved out of all knowledge. (74)
Typical elements in this description are: the torpor of Murphy’s body, and the 
disconnection of his mind from any empirical perception or active reflection, a 
state which seems like sleep, but is a state of heightened awareness of a vision-
ary kind. Although what remains is described as “Murphy himself, improved 
out of all knowledge”, one can hardly assume that this is a state of increased 
 self-assurance, since it can be hypothesized that, in this state, Murphy’s phe-
nomenal, ‘normal’ self is forgotten, just as is the empirical world.128 Murphy, 
improved out of all knowledge, is likely to be no personal self anymore but 
127 Recall his small paper in German written soon after he ﬁ nished Murphy, on the world of phe-
nomena versus the world as it truly is, quoted above p. 13f. and note 19.
128 It seems signiﬁ cant that Beckett was greatly impressed by Heinrich von Kleist’s essay, On the 
Marionette theatre. Kleist considers the absence of self-awareness to be a necessary condition for 
reaching the state of true perfection. See: J. Knowlson, Beckett and Kleist’s essay ‘On the Marionette 
Theatre’, in: Knowlson and Pilling, Frescoes of the Skull, p. 277–285.

 
murphy 
149
something very different, possibly similar to Schopenhauer’s artistic subject lost 
in contemplation, having become identical with its artistic object. “Contempla-
tion”, by the way, belongs to the narrator’s vocabulary when he tries to master 
the difficult subject of “Murphy’s mind”. (79) In any case, the entity of which 
there is some kind of non-empirical awareness here lies beyond the structures 
of normal experience. Murphy, who has “lapsed into consciousness”, is certainly 
not the Murphy of the big world, not the Murphy of ‘normal’ self-awareness, 
but the Murphy of a deep visionary experience which, since not empirical, may 
be assumed to be at least temporarily a metaphysical one.
As “vision” can have several meanings, the narrator feels summoned to dis-
tinguish between the vision of ‘normal’ persons, which can be considered to be an 
empirical vision, and the very special vision of his hero Murphy. This distinction 
is made when the narrator briefly differentiates between Wylie and Murphy:
Wylie came a little closer to Murphy, but his way of looking was as different from 
Murphy’s as a voyeur’s from a voyant’s, though Wylie was no more the one in the 
indecent sense than Murphy was the other in the supradecent sense. The terms 
are only taken to distinguish between the vision that depends on light, object, 
viewpoint, etc., and the vision that all those things embarrass. (64)
The negative characteristic expressed in the last words of this remark is 
the  decisive one: Murphy’s vision does not depend on the typical necessary 
 conditions of empirical vision but is even hindered by these. This may be taken 
as another one of the narrator’s hints at the very exceptional character of 
 Murphy’s visionary experiences which certainly are not empirical and which 
may well have a metaphysical content in the most blissful moments of Murphy’s 
existence.
 41. Will-lessness, yearning for Nothing
Murphy’s mind is so different from what normally is understood by the word 
“mind” that the narrator has problems describing it in the familiar language of 
empirical psychology. The subject is introduced in the course of the story when 
the aged neighbour of Murphy and Celia, “the old boy”, has cut his throat and 
is lying on the lino in his blood, on the brink of death, but still living. Here the 
narrator pauses and discloses: “It is most unfortunate, but the point of this story 
has been reached where a justification of the expression ‘Murphy’s mind’ has 
to be attempted.” (76)

150 
the metaphysical vision
The section thus introduced is devoted to Murphy’s very private cosmology, 
the cosmology of the little world. That cosmology is an ingenious construction, 
largely built by the unorthodox use of metaphysical chunks from Descartes, 
 Spinoza, Leibniz, and Geulincx, with some bits from astrology and doing with-
out the existence of God. Murphy’s mind is depicted as an area of freedom from 
any worldly constraints. It has three zones: light, half light, dark. They can very 
roughly be classified as: the zone of optionally altered memories of the physical 
world, the zone of visionary, contemplative experience of ideal forms, and the 
zone of darkness containing “a flux of forms”, “forms becoming and crumbling 
into the fragments of a new becoming … Here he was not free, but a mote in 
the dark of absolute freedom.” (79)
The last remark points to a state of mind where there is no awareness of 
self anymore, no personal identity, no knowledge of a well-determined loca-
tion in space or time. This is obviously a realm of non-material, i.e., mental 
events, without firm order, without the everyday organization around a per-
sonal core, so devoid of structure that Murphy is not at all an active entity 
that controls or steers the goings-on, but just a mote – in the dark of absolute 
freedom. This absolute freedom cannot be the freedom of an individualized 
person, since there is no personal self here. The absolute freedom, as opposed 
to personal freedom, can only be seen as the perfect absence of determin-
ing or monitoring factors of any sort and certainly as the perfect absence of 
causality.
The sphere described as the third zone of Murphy’s mind has two rare 
groups of properties in common with states of mind which Schopenhauer 
thought suitable for his metaphysical vision: One group consists of the loss of 
self-awareness, the loss of anything that pertains to a certain individual person-
ality, the lack of conscious location in space and time, the nullity of the causal 
order, and therefore, instead of personal freedom, absolute freedom as absence 
of any potential influence, causal or other. The second group is denoted by one 
word: will-lessness. Murphy, when his body can be forgotten and life in his mind 
takes over, spends less and less time in the first zone, less in the second, “and 
more and more and more in the dark, in the will-lessness, a mote in its absolute 
freedom.” (80 f.)
“Will-lessness” is something less than a typically English word. It sounds 
like a Germanism, directly translating Schopenhauer’s “Willenlosigkeit”. 
As we saw, Beckett commented extensively in his Proust on the blinding, 
distorting effects of a will-dominated attitude towards the world and on the 
necessity that the artist who pursues the essence should be exempt from 

 
murphy 
151
will and therefore “pure”. Shortly before Murphy can “disconnect his mind” 
and slip away from the pensums of the world, the narrator reports that one 
of the shapes he had just sighted, announcing a possible transition into a 
freer status of his existence, was “the will dust in the dust of its object.” 
(74) This may be taken as another bit of evidence that Murphy’s most cher-
ished experiences for which the narrator uses the word “bliss” are states of 
detachment from a will-dominated form of life and from the objects such 
a life might strive for. “Bliss”, as we saw, is also an adequate translation of 
Schopenhauer’s “Seligkeit”, his word for the utterly positive feeling in states 
of the will-less metaphysical vision which in his opinion forms the basis of 
true works of art.
Murphy is granted several visionary experiences. The one which shows best 
that he too has a yearning for Nothing not perfectly dissimilar to Schopenhauer’s 
(above p. 92f.), occurs after the game of chess between him and the superb 
Mr. Endon. This game is finished by Murphy’s surrender which comes when he 
sees that there is no way to beat Mr. Endon in the strange competition of two 
players who both attempt to make the other player win. Murphy drops his head 
on his arms, and briefly experiences an after-image of Mr. Endon until this fades 
as well. The narrator describes the following events:
Murphy began to see nothing, that colourlessness which is such a rare postnatal 
treat, being the absence (to abuse a nice distinction) not of percipere but of per-
cipi. His other senses also found themselves at peace, an unexpected pleasure. 
Not the numb peace of their own suspension, but the positive peace that comes 
when the somethings give way, or perhaps simply add up, to the Nothing, than 
which in the guffaw of the Abderite naught is more real. Time did not cease, 
that would be asking too much, but the wheel of rounds and pauses did, as 
Murphy with his head among the armies continued to suck in, through all the 
posterns of his withered soul, the accidentless One-and-Only, conveniently called 
Nothing. (168)
For percipere and percipi we may refer to Beckett’s script of Film which, in the 
very first lines, gives an interpretation of Berkeley’s esse est percipi such that 
percipi [to be perceived] in the form of self-perception causes the “search of 
non-being” to break down.129 If for Murphy there is no percipi anymore, there 
is no self-perception either, which means that ‘normal’ consciousness has van-
ished. However, there is peace, a “positive peace”. The narrator associates this 
129 Film, p. 11.

152 
the metaphysical vision
 extraordinary peace with the emergence of Nothing and, after the brief refer-
ence to an alleged sentence of Democritus (“the Abderite”)130, proceeds to 
report that Murphy sucks in “the One-and-Only, conveniently called Nothing.” 
This, of course, is a sacrilege in the eyes of anybody who thinks the ultimate 
substance of the world, its One-and-Only, must at least be something, prefer-
ably something called “the Absolute” or even “God”. But it is well in line with 
Schopenhauer’s notion that the state of mind of those in whom the Will has 
turned and denied itself is such that there is just one word to describe the con-
tents of that state otherwise beyond description: Nothing. (WWR I, 412)
130 The narrator obviously refers to a popular translation of a much discussed sentence, attributed 
to Democritus by Plutarch. See Fragment B 156 in Diels-Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 
It is questionable and need not be decided here, whether the usually quoted central statement of 
that brief text, in fact a less than easy pun in Greek already, is reliably rendered by the narrator’s 
naught is more real than Nothing. As Beckett did not read Greek, he must have gotten his informa-
tion from a secondary source. Even if Democritus meant what the narrator says, his ethical image 
of humankind, as far as we can tell, was fairly different from the view of human life we ﬁ nd in 
Beckett’s literary work. Again, this need not be discussed here. For a closer look see W. Röd, Die 
Philosophie der Antike I: Von Thales bis Demokrit, 2nd ed. München 1988, p.194f. and 206–211. For 
Democritus’s cosmology in relation to his ethics see G. Vlastos, Ethics and Physics in Democritus, 
The Philosophical Review 54, p. 578–592, and 55, p. 33–64.

42. Remnants of a pensum
Murphy’s ability to at least temporarily “lapse into consciousness” is a blessing 
which allows him to move away from the pensums and prizes, from chandlers, 
buses, public gardens, in short, from the whole corrupt business of daily life in 
the big world. When he succeeds in entering the very different visionary state 
of mind in which his empirical person and his ordinary surroundings are forgot-
ten, he becomes will-less and free. This freedom is not only freedom from the 
constraints and demands of his “normal” empirical existence, but also freedom 
from the afflictions and sufferings which Schopenhauer considered typical of a 
life under the rule of the Will.
Molloy, Moran, Malone, the Unnamable and virtually all ‘heroes’ of 
 Beckett’s later oeuvre are not so blessed. Neither is Victor, the strange anti-
hero of Eleuthéria which was written shortly before Beckett began Molloy.  Victor 
indeed tries to cultivate will-lessness and explicitly aims at being free, but does 
not fully achieve these aims, let alone arrives at any kind of different, vision-
ary reality. For the leading characters of the trilogy and the strange personal-
ity of Victor it is a standard personal policy to renounce typical aims of the 
individual will. In this sense they all show a tendency towards will-lessness 
which closely reminds one of Schopenhauer. Only, none of them arrives at the 
· I V ·
MORAN

154 
the metaphysical vision
blissful state which this philosopher associated with the true loss of self in fully 
achieved  will-less contemplation. And none of them is granted the transition 
into a sphere of radical metaphysical freedom from constraint and distress 
which Schopenhauer thought was the reward of true asceticism and, though 
just temporarily, of will-less artistic states of mind.
The ‘heroes’ of the trilogy sporadically produce utterances which may be 
read as wishes, fantasies, and illusions of becoming free, and enter a different 
world. But there is no trustworthy exit from the one in which the ‘person’ has 
to exist. “Person” is put in inverted commas here since in the trilogy there is 
an obvious development towards progressive dissolution of what is usually so 
called. The novels have ‘first-person narrators’ who use “I” for themselves, 
but, especially in the later parts of the trilogy, the ‘course of action’ reveals, 
among other things, a fast proceeding disintegration of what usually is called a 
“personality”.
The first-person narrators give some kind of a report or at least attempt 
to do so. Talking or reporting or writing or even just quoting seems to be their 
main activity; several times it is even the activity through which they hope to 
make their ‘living’. They all write or talk, and in any case reflect about this 
activity so that this writing, talking, and jabbering becomes itself one of their 
foremost subjects. The weight of this subject grows in the course of the trilogy. 
The three novels increasingly become reports, thoughts, or comments on the 
very process of their making. Since this process is in any case a linguistic one 
and since the process of writing, talking, stammering, etc., is one of the subjects 
of the words and sentences uttered, we find several paradoxes which are likely 
to be produced when somebody talks about his or her own talking. The ‘life’ of 
those first-person narrators at some points has contracted so much as to consist 
partly or altogether of the process of talking itself.
For the present analysis, Moran and the Unnamable are the most important 
narrating characters.131 Molloy is so intimately connected with Moran that the 
latter cannot be treated without some remarks about the former. The situation is 
similar though not quite the same with the Unnamable and Malone. In  writing 
about the trilogy I shall try to keep approximately to the overall  succession of 
‘persons’ and events in this work. In detail, my analysis will focus on traces of 
Beckett’s ideas from his Proust, traces of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, and very 
substantial changes which have occurred in Beckett’s literary practice and in 
his thinking about art.
131 For a different view see: James H. Reid, Proust, Beckett, and Narration, Cambridge 2003.

 
moran 
155
In Proust, Beckett adopted Schopenhauer’s view of this life as a pensum 
which has to be worked off. He agreed that the idea of original sin, the sin 
of having been born, is an adequate justification and explanation of this 
existential predicament. He virtually quoted Schopenhauer’s thesis that 
tragedy is not concerned with human, but with eternal justice. The tragic 
figure is not punished for his or her own doings but represents the expia-
tion of the original sin. In Beckett’s literary work, living beings are often 
seen as having to atone for a guilt which was contracted at the moment of 
birth.132 Since the life activity of the first-person narrators in the trilogy of 
novels by and large consists in talking or thinking or writing or reporting (or 
quoting or stammering, etc.), and in any case producing the narration itself, 
this very production takes on the existential property of being a pensum in 
 Schopenhauer’s sense. Molloy more or less constantly talks about his narrat-
ing activity, for instance, thus:
And truly it little matters what I say, this or that or any other thing. Saying is 
inventing. Wrong, very rightly wrong. You invent nothing, you think you are 
inventing, you think you are escaping, and all you do is stammer out your lesson, 
the remnants of a pensum one day got by heart and long forgotten, life without 
tears, as it is wept. To hell with it anyway.133
The narrator, for a moment, considers his story-telling to be “inventing”. He 
corrects this immediately: he only stammers out his lesson, the remnants of a 
pensum. Inventing might be escaping from the actual situation and from one’s 
own friable self. This escape is not at the person’s disposal. That Molloy sees 
himself as stammering out “the remnants of a pensum one day got by heart” may 
be a weak kind of symptom that traces of Beckett’s notion of the artist, as laid 
down in his Proust, are still present in the trilogy. Molloy sees himself not as talk-
ing about subjects invented but about subjects once imprinted in his memory 
which now emerge again, though just in bits. The word “pensum” may be read 
here as an epithet for former phases in the working-off of one’s life as well as 
132 Cf., e.g., for the Unnamable p. 178 below. In Watt even animals have to repay “nature’s debt”. 
Cf. Watt, London (Calder & Boyars) 1963, p. 95. As was said: the German word “Schuld” means 
“guilt” as well as “debt”. In Schopenhauer, this leads to treating life as both a guilt to be expi-
ated and a debt to be repaid. The passage in Watt might be inspired by Schopenhauer’s latter 
meaning. 
133 The English text of the trilogy is quoted from: Samuel Beckett, Molloy, Malone Dies, The 
Unnamable, London (Calder and Boyars), 1966. This quotation p. 32. Page numbers henceforth 
given in parentheses refer to this edition.

156 
the metaphysical vision
for the present stammering by which bits of this life-labour are commemorated. 
There will be evidence that a helpful, if not necessary, condition for this is a 
special frame of mind, which is not the attitude of normal will-controlled mas-
tering of one’s life.
Moran, when writing about his own activity of reporting, i.e., writing, 
has a more direct mode of expression than Molloy. Without any ambiguity, 
his writing is a pensum, also in the sense of life-labour. In this he anticipates 
the basic attitude of the Unnamable who accounts for his talking, the only 
substance of his ‘existence’, as consistently working off a pensum as well. 
Moran writes:
But before coming to that I shall say what little I knew, on leaving my home, 
about the Molloy country, so different from my own. For it is one of the fea-
tures of this penance [French original: “ce pensum”134] that I may not pass 
over what is over and straightway come to the heart of the matter. But that 
must again be unknown to me which is no longer so and that again fondly 
believed which then I fondly believed, at my setting out. And if I occasionally 
break this rule, it is only over details of little importance. And in the main 
I observe it. And with such zeal that I am far more he who ﬁ nds than he 
who tells what he has found, now as then, most of the time, I do not 
exaggerate. (133)
The narrator openly alludes to conventions valid for much traditional story-
telling. And he keeps to these conventions with such zeal [“avec une telle 
chaleur”] that he is, for most of the time, what convention demands. But that 
indeed means that the mind of Moran as ‘author’ is not that of a traditional 
narrator anymore whose ignorance is part of the fiction, but is closely related 
to the perfectly different mind which Beckett demanded for the artist (not 
the artisan) in his Proust: To be like an explorer who descends into a hitherto 
unknown sphere135, aiming at excavation of hitherto unknown data, instead of 
reproducing what is known and on-hand anyway. Moran’s pensum is that of an 
explorer-writer.
134 The French text, given here in brackets, is quoted from: Molloy, Paris (Les editions de minuit) 
1954, p. 205. Beckett’s translation of “pensum” as “penance” at this point seems to show how 
intimately the notion of having to atone for an original sin and the notion of life as a pensum to 
be worked off are connected in his thinking. See p. 120ff. above.
135 Of course, in so describing himself and his task, Moran almost asks to be interpreted from the 
standpoint of psychoanalysis. See (among others): J.D. O’Hara, Samuel Beckett’s Hidden Drives, 
p. 211–280. 

 
moran 
157
43. A work which will subsist
Molloy as a novel is mysterious, among other things, because it has two  different 
narrators, two different ‘heroes’, two different clearly separated stories. The 
book has two parts, marked I and II, of which the first is the “work” of a certain 
Molloy and the second the “report” of a certain Moran. Each of them writes 
about a trip he has taken. During their relative trips they do not meet or get 
in touch in any conventional sense of these words. Also, the other characters 
as well as the localities are apparently different.136 According to traditional 
notions about the ‘unity’ of a narration, the novel Molloy should be two differ-
ent books. This impression is hardly alleviated by the fact that Moran sets out 
on his trip because he gets the order “to see about Molloy” (92) [“de m’occuper 
de Molloy”] from some employer through the mouth of the messenger Gaber. 
Moran introduces himself as an “agent” (95). Which kind of agent he is, which 
kind of activity is his specialty or job, he only tells most insufficiently. At least 
the said order seems to demand that he find Molloy in the first place. This is 
Moran’s intention when he starts his trip, but this trip is in vain. Moran falls ill 
and starts to cripple. He becomes increasingly unable to move on with his own 
limbs. His son whom he forced to be his travel mate grudgingly carries him on a 
bicycle for a while. Then the son leaves Moran. When it is obvious that Moran 
in this manner has no chance of finding the sought-after Molloy, the employer 
orders him to return. At this point in time, Moran, communing with himself, 
has already conceded defeat.
I take it that the relationship between Moran and Molloy is most dissimilar 
to a relationship between an agent and what he is searching for or  observing. 
Rather, the Moran-Molloy relationship is in important aspects astonishingly 
close to the relationship between an artist and his subject as described by 
 Beckett in his essay on Proust. I shall argue that the Moran-Molloy relationship 
can essentially be read as an aesthetic or artistic one and that Moran’s activity as 
an ‘agent’ is little more than a pretext for the presentation of this relationship, 
or a spatiotemporal vehicle for this purpose.
136 I do not make use of hints which might justify the guess that Molloy in the last analysis is 
 identical with Moran. Molloy, when describing his situation at the beginning, mentions a man 
who is somehow similar to Gaber. And he argues about a son who might exist somewhere. Moran 
in turn does not only have a strange and unexplained knowledge of Molloy, but also believes he 
(even more vaguely) knows Molloy’s mother. In any case the narrators of the trilogy progressively 
merge into each other. But this is only to be seen clearly from the ‘viewpoint’ of the Unnamable.

158 
the metaphysical vision
Moran lives in good middle-class circumstances with a cook, a maid, a son, 
beehives, a well-kept house, a neat garden, and nice neighbours. He even has 
good relationships with the local clergy. On a fine Sunday morning in summer, 
sitting in his garden in a wicker chair, Moran receives the visit of a man, a man 
whom he knows and does not like, a certain Gaber. Both seem to know well 
what this visit is all about. Gaber is the messenger who delivers an order of the 
“chief”. Gaber reads out a number of instructions from his notebook which 
Moran finds unnecessary, “for I knew my business” (95). The main point of the 
order is “to see about Molloy.” Moran at first tries to decline the order on the 
grounds that he is not interested. But he knows that this is an order he cannot 
refuse. He just wants to be assured explicitly that it is he and only he who can 
do this job:
When at last he had ﬁ nished I told him the job did not interest me and that the 
chief would do better to call on another agent. He wants it to be you. God knows 
why, said Gaber. I presume he told you why, I said, scenting ﬂ attery, for which I 
had a weakness. He said, replied Gaber, that no one could do it but you. This was 
more or less what I wanted to hear. (95)
A few minutes later, Moran attempts a second time to be singled out as the 
only one who can do this job. This time Gaber answers elusively. Finally Moran 
agrees: “In that case it’s hard for me to refuse, I said, knowing perfectly well 
that in any case it was impossible for me to refuse.” Gaber finishes his job: “You 
leave today. Today! I cried, but he’s out of his mind! Your son goes with you, 
said Gaber.” (95)
Moran knows about the kind of work he is ordered to do. He talks about 
former cases and former methods. He knows that he is not free to decline, 
although it is common among agents to grumble and give themselves “the airs 
of free men.” It is only Moran who can do this job. Other agents are indeed 
mentioned, but in the further course of action Moran discloses that there are no 
colleagues, certainly not in this case. (112) Moran’s repeated affirmations about 
a unique relation between himself and this job are in stark contrast to the result 
of his work. This result, once it is there, can be separated from the personality 
of Moran and from any agent whatsoever. The result is described as something 
which exists independently of the life and fate of those who brought it about:
For what I was doing I was doing neither for Molloy, who mattered nothing to me, 
nor for myself, of whom I despaired, but on behalf of a cause which, while having 
need of us to be accomplished, was in its essence anonymous, and would subsist, 

 
moran 
159
haunting the minds of men, when its miserable artisans should be no more. It will 
not be said, I think, that I did not take my work to heart. But rather, tenderly, Ah 
those old craftsmen, their race is extinct and the mould broken. (115)
Perhaps this, among Moran’s statements, is the clearest and most unmistakable 
one which openly denies an agent activity in any usual sense and, instead, refers 
to his work in a way an artist or artisan would talk about it. This puts Moran’s 
former statements about a unique relationship between himself and his work in 
a different context: The work cannot be accomplished without agents, but it is, 
in its essence, anonymous, not bound to the life or fate of a certain person. It will 
subsist, it will even haunt the minds of men [“qui habiterait l’esprit des hommes”]. 
It seems perfectly adequate to take this subsistence as the way in which a work 
of art will exist and be present in the minds of human persons once it is accom-
plished. A work of art may be called “in its essence anonymous”, even if it cannot 
be produced but by one and only one personality. “Artisan” of course reminds the 
reader of Beckett’s Proust and of the Proustian narrator’s remarks in the course of 
the Guermantes matinée. As the person who in fact writes, i.e., performs the craft 
of writing down a work, the author is a craftsman, an artisan whose activity con-
sists in translating a private mental content (possibly consisting of experiences, 
memories, visions, and thoughts) into a structure that can be communicated to 
others. The author is an artist (as opposed to an artisan) in that he is the one who 
acquires that mental text to be translated into a work of art.137
When one considers the actual circumstances of Moran’s life and asks what 
in his activity as an agent might be that subsisting, anonymous, impersonal 
entity which continues to be present in the minds of men, there is only one 
answer: It is the report which Moran writes about his work, i.e., the actual text 
of the second part of the novel Molloy which has Moran as its narrator.
As quoted, Moran observes his duties with so much zeal that he is “far 
more he who finds than he who tells what he has found now as then, most 
of the time…” To excavate, detect, and find is the role which Beckett in his 
Proust assigned to the artist, as opposed to the artisan who tells what was found, 
observing the rules of his craft. Judging from Moran’s scattered remarks about 
himself and his work, he considers himself to be both the artist who experiences 
a strange and hitherto unknown reality and the artisan who writes the report of 
this experience. The latter’s product will subsist when the mould [“la moule”], 
Moran as the living, reporting agent, will long be bygone.
137 Proust p. 84: “The artist has acquired his text: the artisan translates it.”

160 
the metaphysical vision
44. Finality without end
Where Moran will make his most important discoveries may be conjectured when 
one reads how he, even before starting his search, tries to establish some kind of 
contact with Molloy. He does so while preparing for his trip. It belongs to the weird-
est oddities of the “agent” Moran that he does not find the person he is supposed to 
look for in the external world, but finds him, although indistinctly, in himself:
Molloy, or Mollose, was no stranger to me. If I had had colleagues, I might have 
suspected I had spoken of him to them, as of one destined to occupy us, sooner or 
later. But I had no colleagues and knew nothing of the circumstances in which I had 
learnt of his existence. Perhaps I had invented him, I mean found him ready-made 
in my head. There is no doubt one sometimes meets with strangers who are not 
entire strangers, through their having played a part in certain cerebral reels. This had 
never happened to me, I considered myself immune from such experiences, and 
even the simple déjà vu seems inﬁ nitely beyond my reach. But it was happening to 
me then, or I was greatly mistaken. For who could have spoken to me of Molloy if 
not myself and to whom if not to myself could I have spoken of him? (112)
This bit of the report is written from the viewpoint of Moran beginning his 
travel. He has not yet identified as firmly with his task as he does later on. He 
has not become aware yet of his peculiar autonomy. He wonders about the quasi-
knowledge of his artistic object which he finds, not knowing how, within himself. 
He does not regard himself as prone to the phenomenon of déjà vu. However, 
he has to admit that something like that might contribute to his strange and 
otherwise inexplicable acquaintance with Molloy. He translates “invented” as 
“found ready-made in my head.” (112)138 The ‘agent’ tends to explain this finding 
through the assumption that Molloy possibly affected the goings-on in his brain 
some time in the past. His situation is reminiscent of Beckett’s Proust where the 
true reality of past experiences is not accessible to the subject in an everyday 
frame of mind, just possibly a strange “hieroglyph”, a trace, impoverished and 
disfigured by the individual’s will and will-dominated habit.
Moran’s resources, at the start of his trip, to get in touch with the Molloy 
in himself are fairly poor ones. “What I heard, in my soul I suppose, where 
the acoustics are so bad, was a first syllable, Mol …” (113). Besides “in my 
soul” [“dans mon for intérieur”], Moran uses other expressions to locate the 
138 The original French is slightly different here: “… j’ignorais dans quelles circonstances j’avais 
appris son existence. Peut-être l’avais-je inventée, je veux dire trouvée toute faite dans ma 
tête.” (173)

 
moran 
161
 sought-for Molloy. He speaks of a possible Molloy as “the true denizen of my 
dark places” [“celui de mes bas-fonds”] and calls him “he that inhabited me” 
(115) [“celui de mes entrailles”]. His ideas about Molloy are many; in fact he 
mentions several Molloys and several fantasies about them. But one thing seems 
to be clear: “Between the Molloy I stalked within me thus and the true Molloy, 
after whom I was so soon to be in full cry, over hill and dale, the resemblance 
cannot have been great.” (115)
Moran will not find the “true Molloy”. It also may remain undecided 
 whether finding this person would be of much use to Moran. For the “true 
Molloy”, if he can be taken to be the ‘real’ Molloy, would be part of the spa-
tiotemporal, empirical world and therefore subject to all the distortions and 
disfigurations any part of this world has undergone when perceived as ‘real’.
There is no need here to discuss the several other Molloys mentioned by 
Moran. It suffices to say that the distinction between the “true” Molloy and 
the one of Moran’s “soul” also leads to distinguishing between two Morans, or, 
rather, that the Moran who plays the part of the narrator and lives in the ‘real’ 
world goes about his business “to see about Molloy” in two perfectly different 
ways which cannot be integrated into a consistent picture. Moran undertakes 
a badly planned, badly prepared, and badly executed search in the ‘real’ world. 
This action of the ‘agent’ ends in disaster. At the same time there is a different 
search which is not actually undertaken by Moran but rather occurs to him. It is 
a search the object of which cannot in the usual sense be called “real”. But this is 
the search in the course of which some kind of relationship between Moran and 
Molloy is not, in the usual sense of the word, discovered, but, as it were, uncovers 
itself. Moran thinks of this possibility at the very beginning of his journey:
For it was only by transferring it to this atmosphere, how shall I say, of ﬁ nality 
without end, why not, that I could venture to consider the work I had on hand. 
For where Molloy could not be, nor Moran either for that matter, there Moran 
could bend over Molloy. And though this examination prove unproﬁ table and of 
no utility for the execution of my orders, I should nevertheless have established a 
kind of connection, and one not necessarily false. For the falsity of the terms does 
not necessarily imply that of the relation, so far as I know. And not only this, but 
I should have invested my man, from the outset, with the air of a fabulous being, 
which something told me could not fail to help me later on. (112)139
139 Moran’s remark about the falsity of terms not affecting the truth of the relation obviously is 
an allusion to a logical property of the material implication and coimplication: If both terms of 
these relations are false, the relation as such is nevertheless true.

162 
the metaphysical vision
For the atmosphere in which Moran can bend over Molloy, Beckett uses 
the expression which since Kant is a kind of synonym for the realm of 
 aesthetic – and hence also artistic – objects: “finality without end” [“finalité 
sans fin”].140 Whatever may be achieved in this atmosphere does not help 
the execution of Moran’s orders as an ‘agent’ in the external world. But if 
Moran can indeed temporarily forget about the official aim of his search as 
that ‘agent’ and enter the atmosphere of what Kant would have called “aes-
thetic contemplation”141, there is a chance that he will be able to establish a 
relationship with Molloy which neither depends on Molloy being real nor on 
the pathetic ‘agent’ being so. If Moran relinquishes being the goal-oriented 
‘agent’ and manages to deal with his ‘task’ in an aesthetic frame of mind, 
some kind of success is indeed possible. But this would be success in a per-
fectly different sense than that of the original task “to see about Molloy” in 
the spatiotemporal world.
45. Images of this kind the will cannot revive
Both Schopenhauer and the Beckett of 1930 agreed that only when the person 
has renounced the aims of the individual will can the visionary experience of a 
genuinely artistic object arise. Beckett, moreover, considered freedom from the 
individual will to be a necessary condition for the person’s cognition to become 
free from caricature-like distortion. Beckett also assumed that uncovering true 
reality is only possible as a process of evocation, not to be started at will, from 
an area deep inside the artist’s person where his or her past experience of true 
reality is kept in store without the person knowing. Moran reports his attempt 
to establish contact with the Molloy of his soul:
But images of this kind the will cannot revive without doing them violence. Much 
of what they had it takes away, much they never had it foists upon them. And 
the Molloy I brought to light, that memorable August Sunday, was certainly 
not the true denizen of my dark places, for it was not his hour. But so far as 
the essential features were concerned, I was easy in my mind, the likeness was 
there. (115)
140 Cf. Kant, Critique of Judgment § 17: “Schönheit ist Form der Zweckmäßigkeit eines Gegenstandes, 
sofern sie, ohne Vorstellung eines Zwecks, an ihm wahrgenommen wird.” This notion is usually 
referred to as “Zweckmäßigkeit ohne Zweck” which may be translated as “ﬁ nality without end”.
141 This is not Schopenhauer’s meaning of “contemplation”, see p. 61ff. above.

 
moran 
163
Moran, preparing for his journey on the evening of the Sunday in August after 
receiving his orders, tries to focus on the Molloy he has “to see about” in an 
attempt at deliberate concentration. He does not find the true Molloy as the 
inhabitant of his “dark places”, but only some essential features which at least 
allow him to feel at ease for the moment. Full contact with Molloy at this time 
is impossible for Moran, since his will is still involved in the effort to achieve 
this contact.
It is significant for Moran’s development as the central character of Molloy II 
that in the course of his trip he becomes more and more able to renounce will-
driven actions, especially those which aim at typical self-preservation. Quite a 
few remarks in his report suggest that his ‘actions’ increasingly become events 
of a sort different from what normally would be so called. An action, as differ-
ent from something that merely happens, is an activity done at will. Moran’s 
development tends towards becoming a man who acts less and less in the 
typical sense of that word and remains passive or indifferent instead. It cannot 
be overlooked that Moran considers this development to be a great personal 
progress, if not a priceless gain. When the journey of the ‘agent’ has come to a 
standstill, shortly before the end of the search after Molloy in the ‘real’ world, 
the transition that has happened to Moran becomes quite obvious. He still is a 
living being, but one who is not the member of a human community anymore 
and one who has relinquished the techniques of voluntary self-preservation. 
Instead of deploring this as a sign of decay, Moran, in that respect similar to the 
Victor of Eleuthéria, welcomes this state of himself as a sign of true strength:
And I remained for several days, I do not know how many, in the place where my 
son had abandoned me, eating my last provisions (which he might easily have 
taken too), seeing no living soul, powerless to act, or perhaps strong enough at 
last to act no  more. (162)142
The emergence of true reality, according to Beckett’s Proust and  Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy, cannot be effected at will, and Beckett praised Proust for being a 
will-less subject who therefore is able to bring forth true art. Moran, thinking 
about the report he is supposed to write about his trip, sees himself as a similarly 
142 This earlier note of Moran belongs to the same context: “And I who a fortnight before would 
joyfully have reckoned how long I could survive on the provisions that remained, probably with 
reference to the question of calories and vitamins, and established in my head a series of menus 
asymptotically approaching nutritional zero, was now content to note feebly that I should soon 
be dead of inanition, if I did not succeed in renewing my provisions.” (149 f.)

164 
the metaphysical vision
will-less being. Instead of Gaber and Youdi, he considers a voice to be the true 
source of his orders in matters of the “paltry scrivening” which is to become his 
report. This voice exhorts him to pursue a thoroughly impersonal objective:
And the voice I listen to needs no Gaber to make it heard. For it is within me and 
exhorts me to continue to the end the faithful servant I have always been, of a 
cause that is not mine, and patiently fulﬁ l in all its bitterness my calamitous part, 
as it was my will, when I had a will, that others should. (132)
To report on the journey is about the only matter worth mentioning which 
Moran indeed brings to an end. The trip fails pathetically, but the report is writ-
ten. This can be seen from the fact that the text of Molloy II, being this report, 
proceeds until the very end of the original search, when Moran has somehow 
managed to return home and sits down to write. Whatever the logical problems 
may be which arise from Moran’s writing at this point about his own writing; 
the report, the “paltry scrivening”, has lead to a presentable result, whereas 
the original undertaking, Moran’s trip as an ‘agent’, has not at all. It seems that 
precisely Moran’s abandonment of willing is the decisive contribution which 
helps him to fulfil his task of reporting much more convincingly than the task 
of finding Molloy:
I shall not tell of the obstacles we had to surmount, the ﬁ ends we had to circum-
vent, the misdemeanours of the son, the disintegrations of the father. It was my 
intention, almost my desire, to tell all these things, I rejoiced at the thought that 
the moment would come when I might do so. Now the intention is dead, the 
moment is come and the desire is gone. (158)
The fact that Moran writes his report without intention and without desire, 
i.e., in an attitude of will-lessness, may be taken as the crucial factor which 
helps him to succeed much better in his artistic undertaking – the writing 
of Molloy II – than in his ‘work’ as a pitiful ‘agent’ in the empirical world.
46. Dispossessed of self
Molloy II can be read as the story in the course of which the well-to-do, middle-
class Moran undergoes a radical change towards a new, different Moran who 
is neither able nor willing to sustain himself anymore as a self-preserving indi-
vidual in the ‘normal’ world. This change, however, makes Moran ready for a 
kind of behaviour and for mental attitudes which in Beckett’s essay on Proust 

 
moran 
165
and in Schopenhauer’s philosophy are considered suitable, if not necessary, for 
the life of the artist.
One of the peculiarities Moran acquires during this change is indeed new 
with regard to Beckett’s notions in his Proust and certainly with regard to 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy. This is the voice which the travelling and reporting 
Moran finally takes as the source of the orders he indeed does try to follow.143 
The order to write the report ceases after some time to be an order from a boss 
or employer or the like, and is experienced by Moran as an order coming from 
something inside himself. The voice is like a directing, law-giving entity inside 
Moran’s person which, however, as such an entity, has no personal character 
of its own. It has no personality traits, as it were. Hence, it is not perceived as 
Moran’s own voice. It becomes stronger as Moran’s body disintegrates more and 
more. In the same process Moran becomes more and more able to understand it. 
On the last page of his report, i.e. in terms of empirical time, when he actually 
begins to write down the report, Moran states:
I have spoken of a voice telling me things. I was getting to know it better now, to 
understand what it wanted. It did not use the words that Moran had been taught 
when he was little and that he in his turn had taught to his little one. So that at 
ﬁ rst I did not know what it wanted. But in the end I understood this language. I 
understood it, I understand it, all wrong perhaps. That is not what matters. It told 
me to write the report. (176)
Earlier, Moran has explicitly stated that the voice “is within me” (132). In 
committing himself to follow the voice and nothing else, Moran has changed 
from the citizen whose will aims at achieving personal goals, into an individual 
who does not care about himself anymore. During his work on the Molloy case, 
Moran has acquired a strange kind of impersonal autonomy. At the end of his 
trip he is much more certain of what he has to do than at the beginning. He 
is in no danger of being sidetracked anymore by any care for possessions and 
other persons, let lone by any care for his own self. He has become independent 
from an external boss or employer. He is not the subservient ‘agent’ anymore, 
but a self-dependent writer and researcher. The priest with whom he formerly 
used to socialize has become indifferent to him and the messenger of his former 
143 It has been observed early and commented on often since, that in the Trilogy the voice is  taking 
over the role of what formerly used to be seen as either the narrator or the hero, or both. For 
an almost classic view see: J. Fletcher, The Novels of Samuel Beckett, London, 1964, Part Three: 
The Hero as Voice.

166 
the metaphysical vision
employer has become ridiculous. As Moran’s decisions now basically come from 
the anonymous voice within him, his new autonomy is a non-personal one. By 
no means can Moran be said to be, as the person who writes the report, master 
of his own fate and doings. He is, at the end, perfectly independent of outward 
events of any kind, even independent of the vicissitudes of his own body. But 
his relation to the voice inside himself is one of humble obedience. To call him 
“autonomous” seems adequate upon considering his detachment from any out-
ward authority and his development towards being self-employed, as it were. 
But it is necessary to add that the new entity which organizes his life and work is 
no ego or self in any traditional sense. Moran experiences this entity, the voice 
within him, not as identical with himself and not dependent on his person in 
any way. In that sense the voice may be called “objective”. One is inclined to 
think of the “objective” attitude here which Schopenhauer demanded to be the 
decisive property of the genius. But it must be admitted at once that the word 
“objective”, when applied to Moran, cannot have exactly the same meaning 
as in Schopenhauer. Moran becomes “objective” inasmuch as his own self is 
among the mass of things which become indifferent to him. This he shares with 
Schopenhauer’s notion of the genius. But the voice in whose favour he gives up 
all personal aims and relations is obviously different from what  Schopenhauer 
considered to be the genius’s “object”. That an impersonal voice becomes 
all-important and that an empirical narrator, or what is left of him, is shading 
off into that voice is a most intriguing development in Beckett’s work. It will be 
considered more fully when we discuss the Unnamable.
Moran is aware that his person, in the course of his trip, is changing and 
developing to become something else from what he was before. He undergoes a 
process of losing several characteristics of traditional personhood. Several times 
he attempts to reflect upon his own person and the status of his ‘self’. Moran’s 
periods of reflection roughly follow the rhythm of his detachment from a person 
controlled and corrupted by the individual will and the emergence of a different 
being who is better able to deal with the artistic task to be fulfilled:
And on myself too I pored, on me so changed from what I was. And I seemed to 
see myself ageing as swiftly as a day-ﬂ y. But the idea of ageing was not exactly 
the one which offered itself to me. And what I saw was more like a crumbling, a 
frenzied collapsing of all that had always protected me from all I was condemned 
to be. … But I confess I attended but absently to these poor ﬁ gures, in which I 
suppose my sense of disaster sought to contain itself. And that I did not labour 
at them more diligently was a further index of the great changes I had suffered 
and of my growing resignation of being dispossessed of self. (149)

 
moran 
167
A little later, shortly before Moran receives the message of Youdi which conveys 
the order to end the search for Molloy, his ‘report’ states:
And as for myself, that unfailing pastime, I must say it was far now from my 
thoughts. But there were moments when it did not seem so far from me, when I 
seemed to be drawing towards it as the sands towards the wave, when it crests 
and whitens, though I must say this image hardly ﬁ tted my situation, which was 
rather that of the turd waiting for the ﬂ ush. (163)
Despite all the sarcasm in his mockery about the ‘agent’ who soon will be 
 discharged by his employer, Moran shows some knowledge of becoming or 
having become a different being. Whatever may be the deeper meaning of 
the wave-sands image (if there is one) Moran has ceased to see himself as the 
active centre of his doings and experiences. He is “dispossessed of self” and 
not  concerned about this. He sees himself becoming what “I was condemned 
to be.” He talks about “great inward metamorphoses.” (164) What emerges 
in the process of Moran’s change is a non-willing, non-possessing, not self-like 
human being who is committed to exclusively following an impersonal, in a 
sense ‘objective’, voice within him.
Although the voice is no Schopenhauerian element, there are still three 
salient characteristics of the being Moran has become, which were consid-
ered typical of the existence of the artist by Beckett in his Proust as well as by 
 Schopenhauer. These characteristics are: Not being interested in the well-being 
of one’s own person, accepting without complaint a high amount of suffering, and 
preferring loneliness to any company.
When it has become obvious that the agent’s search has ended in disaster, 
when the shipwrecked Moran has started on his way home, crippled and almost 
unable to move, he refuses on several occasions to accept help and make his life 
easier. He does so despite the fact that, due to his rapidly deteriorating health, the 
way home is certain to be even more laborious than the trip has been so far. In for-
mer days, he whose leg has painfully stiffened attached great importance to being 
transported by his son on the bicycle. Not so anymore. It cannot be seen how he 
in his crippled state is going to make his way home. Nevertheless, he says:
“The thought of taking to the road, to try and get a lift, never crossed my 
mind. The thought of turning for help to the villages, to the peasants, would 
have displeased me, if it had occurred to me.” (173)
When a farmer on whose land Moran is dragging himself along finds him 
there, Moran invents a “Turdy Madonna” as the aim of his trip and as the 
 justification for having intruded on the farmer’s property. Then he calms the 

168 
the metaphysical vision
furious proprietor down by asking him a favour: “Humbly to ask a favour of 
people who are on the point of knocking your brains out sometimes produces 
good results.” He just asks for a little hot tea, without sugar or milk. When the 
farmer cannot resist the temptation to help and invites Moran to his house so 
that he can dry his clothes by the fire, his reaction is:
But I cannot, I cannot, I cannot, I cried, I have sworn to make a bee-line to her! 
And to efface the bad impression created by these words I took a ﬂ orin from my 
pocket and gave it to him. For your poor-box, I said. … Above all nothing to eat, 
I said, no really, I must not eat. (174)
When Moran returns to his home, he has failed completely as ‘agent’; he has 
lost his health, he has lost any connections with people whom he formerly used 
to be friends with. He returns a cripple; he is, in his words “done for”. Anything 
that can be sold he has sold. However, he is burdened by debt. His house is 
decaying, his hens are dead, his bees have starved to death. He was left behind 
by his son, the cook ran away, he refuses to resume contact with the priest and 
the messenger. When he learns that his son is back, he reacts with indifference. 
The electricity company has cut off the power. When they want to connect it 
again, Moran declines. He states: “I have been a man long enough, I shall not 
put up with it any more.” (176) Observing that he now has a better understand-
ing of the voice who tells him to write the report, he asks himself whether he is 
freer now than he used to be.
There is no answer to this question in the text. Considering Beckett’s 
description of the artist in Proust, however, and considering the many similari-
ties between Moran and this artist (and Schopenhauer’s “genius”), one may 
assume Moran to be freer now in several respects. He is now free from the 
drive of a personal will. He is free from the distortions and disfigurations of 
habit-controlled perception and from a habit-dominated way of life. He is free 
from the bogus experience of friendship (Beckett in Proust: “a social expedient, 
like upholstery or the distribution of garbage buckets” (63)). He is free from 
the ‘caricature’ of a world view organized by the individual will. Moran’s final 
balance, calculated in terms of Beckett’s Proust and Schopenhauer’s philosophy, 
is overwhelmingly positive. To use Beckett’s words: Moran has traded in the 
“boredom of living” for the “suffering of being” and thus has opened himself a 
“window on the real” (Proust 20,28). His existence now is infinitely closer to 
that of a true artist in Beckett’s sense than the former existence he lost. Now 
he can write the report.

47. What if we were one and
the same after all
The decisive event of Moran’s trip is the sudden sensation of pain in his knee. 
One night Moran is sleeping alongside his son. Suddenly he wakes up and 
believes that he has been hit by a blow. He is about to tell himself that this was 
just a dream when he feels a stabbing pain in his knee, a pain the strength of 
which he can only compare to what it is like to be hit by a horse. In the morn-
ing the knee has become stiff. Any kind of walking the ‘agent’ may attempt is 
henceforth highly painful. As the leg becomes worse instead of better during 
the following days, the ‘agent’ has become an invalid. His son has to carry him 
on the rack of his bicycle. Persistent quarrels with his son make Moran think 
of a bicycle of his own, a bicycle which would be specially built for a man with 
a stiff leg. His son leaves him before he can get such a vehicle. Unable to con-
tinue his work, Moran must break off his search and start a laborious return trip 
home. After finally arriving in his derelict house, he reports: “I have crutches 
now.” (188)
These characteristics, a stiff knee, moving on crutches, and having a bicycle 
built for a man with a stiff leg, belong to Molloy, too. At least, this is so at 
the beginning of the trip which Molloy undertakes to find his mother. If it is 
an adequate hypothesis to see Moran as a being with artistic attitudes, the 
· V ·
THE UNNAMABLE

170 
the metaphysical vision
 conspicuous likeness between Moran and Molloy is in line with a notion of art 
that considers the identity of subject and object to be one of the main condi-
tions of artistic activity.
This identity of artistic subject and artistic object, which in the case of 
Moran and Molloy has to remain a speculation, can be observed more distinctly 
in the two remaining novels of Beckett’s trilogy. Malone, lying in bed dying and 
telling himself stories, starts with the life of a certain Sapo. Sapo is the son of 
a poor couple. Malone jabbers about Sapo’s education and other things which 
the couple does to promote their son. Then he remarks:
“What tedium. And I call that playing. I wonder if I am not talking yet 
again about myself. Shall I be incapable, to the end, of lying on any other 
subject?” (189)
The question whether Sapo is indeed Malone remains open until the end 
of the novel. But the development of the young man Sapo is astonishingly 
similar to that of Malone. Perhaps it can be said that the narrator recognizes 
this similarity by replacing, at a certain point, the name Sapo with one of 
the many names that start with an M (like Murphy, Mercier, Moran, etc.). 
“For Sapo – no, I don’t call him that any more, and I even wonder how I was 
able to stomach such a name till now. So then for, let me see, for Macmann, 
that’s not much better but there is no time to lose… ” (229 f.) Malone, like 
Moran and the Unnamable, refers to former characters of Beckett’s prose as 
belonging to his own activity of storytelling.144 He reckons himself to be one 
of them. “But let us leave these morbid matters and get on with that of my 
demise, in two or three days if I remember rightly. Then it will be all over 
with the Murphys, Merciers, Molloys, Morans and Malones, unless it goes on 
beyond the grave.” (236 f.)
Malone thinks of himself as a creature of mere storytelling, fictional like 
Murphy and the others. He is his own product. And Macmann alias Sapo, 
after a floppy affair with a certain Molly who looks after the bedridden one, 
develops towards the end of the book into be the inmate of a foster home or 
144 For a more detailed analysis of the multiplicity of Beckett’s trilogy narrators see: C. Renner, 
The Self-Multiplying Narrators of Molloy, Malone Dies and The Unnamable, in: H. Bloom (ed.), 
Samuel Beckett’s Molloy, Malone Dies,The Unnamable, New York, 1988, p. 95–114. For the self-
 contradictory process of narration and for the self-deconstruction of the narrators see: H. Iser, 
Subjektivität als Selbtaufhebung ihrer Manifestationen, in: Iser, Der implizite Leser, München 
1972, p. 252–273. (English trans. in H. Bloom (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Molloy, Malone Dies, The 
 Unnamable, p. 71–83).  

 
the unnamable 
171
mental  hospital or the like, a ‘person’ who differs from the narrator Malone only 
through a marginally greater degree of mobility.145
The Unnamable states and denies from the beginning his own part as the 
‘person’ speaking and subject spoken about. “I seem to speak, it is not I, about 
me, it is not about me.” (293) Just four of the ‘persons’, whom the speaking is 
about, have a certain permanence (not counting Malone who only appears at 
the beginning). The reader is first told about a single-arm, one-legged man, 
called Mahood. Then, one is told about some Mahood being a trunk without 
arms and legs, sitting on sawdust in some kind of container. The third charac-
ter is Worm, a non-existent ‘being’ whose emergence, which cannot even be 
called a birth, is commented on. The narrator, if he be anything at all, should 
be mentioned in the fourth place.
The narrator, or rather, a something which does the speaking in this book, 
is chiefly concerned with its own situation and the ‘characters’, about which 
it speaks as if they were different from itself. In The Unnamable the speaking 
entity fades much more quickly into the subject spoken about than in former 
parts of the trilogy when Moran slowly turned into someone similar to Molloy, 
and Macmann turned into someone similar to Malone. It is characteristic for 
the relation between the speaking something and the subject spoken about that 
there is no clear and stable distinction between them and that, moreover, the 
speaking is largely about this difficulty itself. The beings which the speaking 
entity focuses upon one after the other are called the speaking entity’s delegates 
or, sometimes, deputies. They deputize it in matters of existence. This is one of 
these remarks about the one-legged Mahood: “But before executing his portrait, 
full length on his surviving leg, let me note that my next vice-exister will be a 
billy in the bowl, that’s final, with his bowl on his head and his arse in the dust, 
plump down on thousand-breasted Tellus, it’ll be softer for him.” (317)
The portrait of the one-legged being is announced. The next vice-exister is 
alluded to. But for the time being it is Mahood. However: “What if we were one 
and the same after all, as he affirms, and I deny?” (317) By the time of this ques-
tion the speaking entity is, in the one chief respect characteristic for Mahood, 
145 Malone is not even sure of his own name. Also, his storytelling does not seem to have any 
other objects but himself and Macmann who more and more becomes like him. “I have spent 
two unforgettable days of which nothing will ever be known, it is too late now, or still too soon, 
I forget which, except that they have brought me the solution and conclusion of the whole story 
business, I mean the business of Malone (since that is what I am called now), and of the other, 
for the rest is no business of mine.” Malone Dies, 222 f.

172 
the metaphysical vision
exactly like him: “It’s not enough that I should know what I’m doing, I must also 
know what I’m looking like. This time I am short of a leg.” (317)
When the trunk which lives in a container is moved into the centre of the 
‘story’ (announced as a story about Mahood), the unnamable speaker uses “I” 
when referring to himself: “Stuck like a sheaf of flowers in a deep jar, its neck 
flush with my mouth, on the side of a quiet street near the shambles, I am at 
rest at last.” (329) Although grammar would allow him to uphold the difference 
between Mahood and himself, he is not sure whether it is not indeed Mahood 
who tells him this story. Then he talks about several speakers, possibly the sum 
of his deputies, who tell the story to him: “Perhaps all they have told me has 
reference to a single existence, the confusion of identities being merely apparent 
and due to my inaptitude to assume any.” (333) And he continues this specula-
tion by guessing that he and his former deputy are one and the same: “I may 
therefore perhaps legitimately suppose that the one-armed one-legged wayfarer 
of a moment ago and the wedge-headed trunk in which I am now marooned 
are simply two phases of the same carnal envelope…”
Even more copiously than about his identity with former deputies, the 
Unnamable discusses his shading into his third main subject, Worm. There are 
points when the speaking entity straightforwardly claims to be identical with 
Worm, and there are other points at which it claims at least to have been Worm 
(350 ff.). Since the role of time in these goings-on cannot at all be clearly deter-
mined, it remains uncertain what a statement like “I was really Worm” might 
indeed mean. As if it were presenting the conclusion from its insecurity about 
the identities involved, the speaking entity considers several producers of story 
elements to be involved, who, upon different inspection, are just one:
Sometimes I say to myself, they say to me, Worm says to me, the subject matters 
little, that my purveyors are more than one, four or ﬁ ve. But it’s more likely the 
same foul brute all the time, amusing himself pretending to be a many, varying 
his register, his tone, his accent and his drivel. (354)
The speaking entity is unable to describe some character or just speak about it 
without sooner or later starting to be this character. It is not possible to uphold a 
stable distinction between the speaker and the characters spoken about. This, 
to say the least, is one possible sense of “identity of subject and object”. The 
identity question is permanently present in The Unnamable. Besides unvarying 
statements of identity, there are also unvarying denials of it. To put forward a 
statement and to erase it immediately afterwards is part of the artistic tech-
nique of this book. It also defines the ontological status of anything talked 

 
the unnamable 
173
about as being contradictory and therefore logically impossible. Straight from 
the  beginning the Unnamable has declared his statements to be “hypotheses”. 
The speaking entity makes multiple use of the liar paradox to the effect that 
the whole narration takes on the status of something which cannot be real, 
however often insisted on that it is so. “Hypotheses” in the form of identity 
statements are permanently brought forward and denied almost in the same 
sentence. However, if the speaking entity, as it sometimes claims, did have 
nothing at all to do with its characters, there would be no reason to argue 
permanently about its identity with them, to affirm it and to deny it. The ques-
tion of identity between speaking subject and object spoken about is not only 
one of the most important topics of the novel (if there be any topic at all), but 
is always bewilderingly present in the very process of “speaking” or “story tell-
ing” or “reporting”. The identity question is so ubiquitous and persistent in the 
process of narration that the speaking entity, in the very moment of uttering 
something, often cannot be sure whether it is the author of its own words and 
has to ask whether it is not the thing or ‘person’ spoken about which indeed is 
the true source of speaking.
48. There is no pronoun for me
One and the same person can of course be known under two or more different 
names or descriptions. In a case like this it may become necessary to make an 
identity statement like “person A is identical with person B.” This does not 
affect, in principle, the individuality of the person spoken about. Likewise, 
identifying a fictional character A with a fictional character B does not in itself 
mean that the principium individuationis is abolished. If Beckett’s novels were just 
texts in which there is an identity error from time to time which the narrator 
corrects through a suitable identity statement, these novels would still be firmly 
built on the basic structure of phenomenal experience which Schopenhauer 
called “the veil of Maya”. To the veil of Maya belong the belief in the principium 
individuations and the expectation that persons should be experienced as indi-
viduals. There may be confusions, corrections of confusions, even persistently 
recurring errors. Hundreds of successful comedies live on that without the 
spectators ever having to doubt Bishop Butler’s “Everything is what it is and 
not another thing.”
This does not apply to The Unnamable. The narrator discloses his prob-
lems concerning individuation already in the first words of the novel: “Where 

174 
the metaphysical vision
now? Who now? When now? Unquestioning. I, say I. Unbelieving. Questions, 
hypotheses, call them that.” (293) It often has been noted that this beginning 
refuses to give the standard set of information on the who, the where, the when 
of the goings-on to be spoken about. Instead, the narrator declares his incredu-
lity even of the first person pronoun when applied to himself. Thus he has begun 
a narrative in the course of which he will recurrently comment on the difficulty, 
even impossibility, of describing himself as a person with a well-defined identity. 
If looked at from a Schopenhauerian point of view, the uncertainty of the narra-
tor about himself seems consequential and unavoidable as long as the situation 
given at the beginning does persist: If one cannot pin down the characters of 
a narrative in space and time, the artistic ‘subject’ of this narrative cannot be 
adequately individualized since, for Schopenhauer, space and time provide the 
principium individuationis.
There is no need to assume that Beckett, when writing The Unnamable, had 
indeed the intention to give an example of circumstances in which, according 
to Schopenhauer, individuation is impossible. It is obvious in any case that 
the narrator of this novel does not possess a principle of individuation which 
could successfully be applied to his own ‘person’. The ironic comments on his 
inaptitude to have a personal identity are many, and the course of the novel 
shows that he has none.
If one uses this as a starting point, one may summarize the ‘action’ of The 
Unnamable roughly thus: A speaking entity without body, without place in 
space and time, without name, without definitive existence or non-existence, 
is under the compulsion to try to materialize by inventing stories. Telling these 
stories is just putting forward “hypotheses” which can be revoked ad libitum. In 
each of the stories, the speaking entity, since it is unable to demarcate itself, 
sooner or later shades off into the character it is speaking about and, often in 
the same moment, denies doing so. The rhetorical form is that of speaking 
about beings which somehow seem to exist. But this existence always remains 
dubious. The impersonal speaking entity, which is one of the foremost subjects 
of its own storytelling, cannot acquire a well demarcated existence in space and 
time since it finds no way to make sure who it is (it cannot individualize itself 
in any safe way). Thus all characters whom the speaking entity speaks about 
and passes through, only remain deputies or delegates of that entity, no matter 
whether it be a single-arm, one-legged man named “Mahood”, a “Mahood” as 
a trunk without arms and legs, a non-existent, not born but somehow emerging 
“Worm”, or, finally, an incessantly jabbering mouth without body. The speak-
ing entity regularly puts forward hypotheses claiming its identity with one of 

 
the unnamable 
175
these candidates or another and revokes them soon afterwards. This impersonal 
entity even goes as far as to refer to earlier characters of Beckett’s prose and 
claim authority for them, that is, to be the compulsively speaking inventor of 
Murphy, Mercier, Molloy, Moran, and Malone. The claim is that it is not these 
characters or their narrators who had spoken at that time back in the past, 
but it, the impersonal, non-identifiable jabbering monster. Towards the end of 
the novel, when even the pulp-like Worm has long been treated of and when 
there is less than a chance to find beings even closer to nothing, the speaking 
entity finds a deputy which in a sense is something new. This last subject of the 
persistent jabbering is silence:
I am the absentee again, it’s his turn again now, he who neither speaks nor 
listens, who has neither body nor soul, it’s something else he has, he must have 
something, he must be somewhere, he is made of silence, there’s a pretty analy-
sis, he’s in the silence, he’s the one to be sought, the one to be, the one to be 
spoken of, the one to speak, but he can’t speak, then I could stop, I’d be he, I’d 
be he silence, I’d be back in the silence, we’d be reunited, his story the story to 
be told, but he has no story, he hasn’t been in story, it’s not certain, he’s in his 
own story … (417)
While the twaddling thing makes the silence its main subject the rhythm of 
speaking becomes even faster than it has been so far, there are no full stops 
between sentences anymore and no other points of rest. It is as if the speaking 
thing wants to disappear in the silence spoken about. To be the silence would 
mean to stop speaking. The last line of the book indeed claims: “… you must 
go on, I can’t go on, I’ll go on.” (418) But the point of concurrence between 
speaking ‘subject’ and the silence as its ‘object’ seems to be reached for the time 
being, despite the announcement to go on: this is the end of the novel.
The “Unnamable” is not unnamable because the author just wanted this 
designation, or for some other coincidence, but because the activity of narrating 
has to be accomplished from a standpoint from which the normal use of names 
is not possible anymore. To introduce a proper name for somebody or something 
in ‘normal’ circumstances implies that one knows the bearer of this name and/
or can identify the bearer if necessary. In a situation in which it is not possible 
to individuate anything or anybody, since there are not even distinctly identifi-
able entities, the normal conditions for the use of proper names do not apply. 
It is obvious that under such conditions there is no way to exist as a person, 
since there are none of the typical prerequisites for personhood. Philosophical 
tradition considers persons to be or to have a self, which implies at least that 

176 
the metaphysical vision
persons can (1) distinguish between themselves and other persons or objects 
and (2) attribute to themselves utterances, parts and states of their body, and 
other sorts of physical or mental properties. In many languages persons refer to 
themselves and their attributes by use of pronouns like “I” and derivative forms 
of this like “me”, “mine”, etc. The Unnamable is not interested whatsoever in 
any linguistic means of reference to his ‘self’ and, moreover, is utterly sceptical 
towards the ontology of individual persons in general:
But enough of this cursed ﬁ rst person, it is really too red a herring, I’ll get out of 
my depth if I’m not careful. But what then is the subject? Mahood? No, not yet. 
Worm? Even less. Bah, any old pronoun will do, provided one sees through it. 
Matter of habit. To be adjusted later. (345)
That pronouns can be seen through seems to suggest that they are a fraud, a 
forgery, at least some common kind of beguilement. Towards the end of the 
novel, the process of speaking shows a stronger and stronger distrust in pro-
nouns, in personal identity, in all the tacit assumptions which come with the 
common belief that there really are individual persons who remain identical in 
the course of time. This is how the speaking entity gives its final opinion on 
pronouns and persons:
Mercier never spoke, Moran never spoke, I never spoke, I seem to speak, that’s 
because he says I as if he were I, I nearly believed him, do you hear him, as if he 
were I, I who am far, who can’t move, can’t be found, but neither can he, he 
can only talk, if that much, perhaps it’s not he, perhaps it’s a multitude, one after 
another, what confusion, someone mentions confusion, is it a sin, all here is sin, 
you don’t know why, you don’t know whose, you don’t know against whom, 
someone says you, it’s the fault of the pronouns, there is no name for me, no 
pronoun for me, all the trouble comes from that, that, it’s a kind of pronoun 
too, it isn’t that either, I’m not that either, let us leave all that, forget about all 
that … (407 f.)
The process of speaking keeps using pronouns since grammar necessitates this. 
In proceeding towards the end, the narration, or what may be so called, increas-
ingly becomes an attempt to uncover a different ‘reality’ in which there are no 
stable objects anymore, no reliable relations in space and time, no individuals, 
and especially no persons in the usual sense of the word. One aspect of the book’s 
‘development’ or ‘plot’ is that the speaking entity succeeds better and better in 
the attempt to clear out ‘normal’ narrative subjects like human  individuals, 
spatiotemporal and personal relationships, and other typical story elements. 

 
the unnamable 
177
The situation presented at the very beginning by the novel’s first words “Where 
now? Who now? When now?” is executed more and more convincingly in the 
course of the book. The ‘subjects’ of speaking, especially the “deputies” of the 
speaking entity and their “stories”, become increasingly removed from any 
structures of personal or objective existence in a world as we know it. And 
silence, the last candidate in the row of deputies, certainly has no properties 
which might tempt the reader to confuse it with a personal being or any other 
spatiotemporal individual. “Silence” is definitely not meant to be silence at a 
certain place or point in time.
49. I have a pensum to discharge
In Proust, Samuel Beckett considered the artistic object to be something the 
knowledge of which is not at the artist’s disposal. The experience of true 
reality was called “the rare dispensation of waking madness,” and, as with 
 Schopenhauer, it was the vision of a self-forgetting person in a will-less state of 
mind. We saw that visionary states of mind play a role in Beckett’s own liter-
ary work, too. There is no need to consider these states of mind to be states 
of mystical contact with an ideal reality in the Schopenhauerian sense. What 
they certainly share with Schopenhauer’s artistic vision, however, is that the 
perceiving person cannot dispose of them at will.
There are visionary experiences of the narrators in Beckett’s novel trilogy, 
though not of the optical, but of the acoustical kind. The narrators perceive 
voices, one voice or several ones. There is a development from Molloy through 
Moran and Malone up to the Unnamable in which the share of the voice (the 
voices) in the activity of narration is greatly enlarged. Thus, the reporting 
that we still find with Molloy and Moran, increasingly loses the character of a 
 narrator’s intentional doing and passes into a perfectly different kind of ‘activ-
ity’ which owes less and less of its content to the will-controlled doing of a 
narrator and more and more to a voice which the narrator only communicates 
and, sometimes, translates. In The Unnamable, it becomes clear soon after the 
beginning that the true narrator is the voice (sometimes several voices).
It is this non-personal agent about whom a question must be asked which 
forces itself upon the reader of that book: Why is it that in this novel there has 
to be incessant speaking or jabbering? Why is it not possible just to keep silent, 
especially since the speaking, alias reporting, alias jabbering is described as pain-
ful and agonizing? Since the book does not have an action in space and time, 

178 
the metaphysical vision
and since the true subject of the ‘story’ is the permanently propelled speaking, 
forming of hypotheses, palavering and the like, that question is tantamount to: 
Why is it that anything here happens at all, instead of nothing?
The answer, for a change, is fairly clear-cut and can be given easily from 
what we know about Beckett’s trilogy-narrators: The Unnamable has to speak, 
i.e. to form hypotheses, twaddle, etc. because (1) this is his only manifest life 
process, and because (2) life is a pensum to be worked off. An entity, the life of 
which consists in speaking, has its pensum in the very process of speaking itself. 
The Unnamable says so unequivocally:
I spoke, I must have spoken, of a lesson, it was pensum I should have said, I 
confused pensum with lesson. Yes, I have a pensum to discharge, before I can 
be free, free to dribble, free to speak no more, listen no more, and I’ve forgotten 
what it is. There at last is a fair picture of my situation, I was given a pensum, at 
birth perhaps, as a punishment for having been born perhaps, or for no particular 
reason, because they dislike me, and I’ve forgotten what it is. (312)
The Unnamable has a distinctly Schopenhauerian view of himself and his ‘life’. 
At certain points there is also a discussion about a task to be performed, but this 
is obviously the same as the pensum mentioned before. Schopenhauer himself 
had sometimes interpreted the pensum, which is the essence of life, as a task: 
“Life presents itself as a pensum, a task to be worked out, and in general there-
fore as a constant struggle against want and affliction.”146 The Unnamable, too, 
briefly reflects on life as a task, shortly after describing it as a pensum:
Strange notion in any case, and eminently open to suspicion, that of a task to be 
performed, before one can be at rest. Strange task, which consists in speaking of 
oneself. Strange hope, turned towards silence and peace. Possessed of  nothing 
but my voice, the voice, it may seem natural, once the idea of obligation has 
been swallowed, that I should interpret it as an obligation to say something. But 
is it possible? (313)
The Unnamable corrects himself at a significant point in this passage: He 
replaces “my voice” with “a voice”. In this, he sticks to that which he has 
more explicitly stated earlier on about the speaking agent. The voice is the 
 Unnamable’s, and it is not. The Unnamable is the one who is speaking and 
notwithstanding that, he only speaks because some different entity is speaking 
in him or through him. The relationship between the Unnamable and the voice 
146 WWR II, 568. I kept to Schopenhauer’s “pensum” instead of Payne’s “problem”.

 
the unnamable 
179
which is speaking in him, through him, independent of him, is one of the chief 
topics of this novel altogether. The novel itself is produced through the continu-
ous speaking which goes on all the time, without intermission. Thus, from an 
aesthetic, analytical standpoint, the speaking is the quasi-artistic activity which 
brings forth the book. The weird relationship between producing ‘subject’ and 
the ‘object’ of its aesthetic or metaphysical doings is more fully described in 
this passage:
This voice that speaks, knowing that it lies, indifferent to what it says, too old 
perhaps and too abased ever to succeed in saying the words that would be its 
last, knowing itself useless and its uselessness in vain, not listening to itself but to 
the silence that it breaks and whence perhaps one day will come stealing the long 
clear sigh of advent and farewell, is it one? I’ll ask no more questions, there are no 
more questions, I know none any more. It issues from me, it ﬁ lls me, it clamours 
against my walls, it is not mine, I can’t stop it, I can’t prevent it, from tearing me, 
racking me, assailing me. It is not mine, I have none, I have no voice and must 
speak, that is all I know, it’s round that I must revolve, of that I must speak, with 
this voice that is not mine, but can only be mine, since there is no one but me, 
or if there are others, to whom it might belong, they have never come near me. 
I won’t delay just now to make this clear. (309)
We know by now that the speaking “I” only seems to be an individual because 
of a general defect of grammar which has to rely on pronouns in important 
respects. Since there is no principle of individuation available here, there also is 
no well-determined ‘subject’ to whom the predicates belong which are ascribed 
to the speaking “I”. The relationship between the speaking “I” and the voice, 
which in fact issues the words spoken, is perfectly unclear, not only because it 
cannot be determined who this “I” might be, but also because there is no other 
candidate who might be the owner of this voice. On the one hand, the voice 
is experienced as not belonging to the “I”, as autonomous and like a perfect 
stranger. However, after spatiotemporal individuation and, for that matter, any 
individuation at all, has become impossible, the speaking “I” cannot be char-
acterized except by linking it somehow to the voice. The voice is the most 
important thing to be mentioned when the “I” is to be described by the use of 
the very poor means which remain. The Unnamable has to jabber about this 
contradictory situation, the voice being his and not being his at all, until he 
finally manages to be silent – for the time being.
The voice is that of “I” and cannot be that of an “I”. This aligns the rela-
tionship between voice and “I” with other paradoxes of the situation which is 
“reported” here. The Unnamable is there and must have deputies to represent 

180 
the metaphysical vision
him; he lives somehow and is not born yet; he distinguishes himself through the 
use of “I” and cannot assure himself of the difference between him and others; 
he is outside time and talks about before and after nonetheless; he is outside 
space and jabbers about distance and vicinity. Since he lacks the epistemic 
means to firmly assert his own existence, he must admit that he does not exist. 
Conceding non-existence, he speaks, so he is. At several points he admits to 
being an absurdity. When discussing the question of Worm, Mahood, and him-
self possibly being one and the same, he says: “But what am I doing but living, 
in a kind of way, the only possible way, that’s the combination. Or by the absurd 
prove to me that I am, the absurd of not being able.” (349)
There is no steady referent for the word “I” independent of the  non-personal 
voice in this book. This is confirmed at the end of the novel. The last bits of 
non-personal speaking are about as ambiguous as those at the very beginning. 
The end negates typical assumptions about the relation between a narrator 
and his topic, just as does the entrée. Traditionally, when a book ends, the 
narrator’s mind does not cease to exist at the same moment. There are some, 
although few, paradoxical endings of narratives in the history of literature. The 
 Unnamable creates another one, possibly the most absurd specimen. The last 
words are: “… it will be I, it will be the silence, where I am, I don’t know, I’ll 
never know, in the silence you don’t know, you must go on, I can’t go on, 
I’ll go on.” (418)
The Unnamable will be “in the silence” but he will never know this because: 
“in the silence you don’t know.” This is reminiscent of certain philosophical 
theories of death (e.g., that of Epicurus) which claim that death as the state 
of being dead cannot be experienced, since there is no consciousness left. The 
‘reality’ of The Unnamable is such that, when the speaking ends, there is no 
possibility of knowing anymore. Speaking in this book is not just the true life 
process of its ‘hero’, but also the true stream of consciousness; there does not 
seem to be any awareness outside the incessant jabbering.
Traditional narration relies on several things being clearly different. In The 
Unnamable it is especially three of these differences which are abolished in a 
most conspicuous way: the difference between a narrator and the source of his 
information; the difference between a mind which tells the story and the very 
process of storytelling; the difference between the process of narration and its 
subject matter.
The speaking, when nearing its end, explicitly anticipates its ending. Due to 
the concurrence of knowing and speaking, the end of speaking is the end of any 
knowledge of what has happened. This is not because the bearer of knowledge 

 
the unnamable 
181
has suffered some mishap (e.g., a narrator might die in the process of doing his 
job) but because of a basic trait of this type of narration which, looking at it 
from Schopenhauer’s point of view, again might be described as “identification 
of subject and object”. Only, this “identification” is fulfilled in a new and much 
more radical sense than Schopenhauer ever dared to imagine.
50. I’m all these words
In discussing The Unnamable I have so far dealt with three topics which 
 correspond roughly to three important themes in Schopenhauer’s aesthetics 
and its further development and modification in Beckett’s essay on Proust. 
These topics are: the identification of subject and object; the invalidation of 
the principium individuationis; the self-loss of the artistic mind in its visionary 
object. Schopenhauer claimed that these were three aspects of the situation 
in which an artist experiences the metaphysical vision which precedes the 
making of a work of art and is but incompletely represented in the work itself. 
 Schopenhauer’s thesis on what Beckett has called “identification of subject 
and object”, was twofold: (1) In the aesthetic contemplation the subject feels 
in a dim way to be identical with its object and, more or less mystically, feels 
identical with the whole world, (2) since the subject does not perceive 
 spatiotemporal individuals anymore, its perception being free from the princi-
pium individuationis, it has ceased to be a self-aware person. There is nothing 
but the presence of the Idea. The subject, in aesthetic and metaphysical con-
templation, has disappeared in its object.
Schopenhauer considered will-lessness in the perceiving subject, the 
 invalidation of the principium individuationis, and voidness of space, time, and 
causality, to be the most important conditions for the emergence of the artistic, 
i.e., metaphysical object. Beckett, in his Proust, re-interpreted Schopenhauer’s 
Idea to be, not a timeless species archetype, but the true reality of a past 
 experience, only to be found deep inside the artistic person. The task of the 
artist, as for Proust himself, became the task of an inner exploration, a special 
kind of excavation, to be achieved only in a unique, will-less frame of mind. In 
accordance with this notion, Moran finds whatever he finds about Molloy, in 
himself instead of the outward world. And for the Unnamable the only source 
of reality is, finally, the voice which cries from “inside” against his “walls”, the 
voice which in fact is the only continuous and substantial element of his 
‘consciousness’.

182 
the metaphysical vision
The artist’s withdrawal from the empirical world and his identification with 
an artistic object is both more radically, and (free from traditional logic) more 
consequentially realized in The Unnamable than Beckett envisaged in Proust and 
Schopenhauer could have thought of. For Schopenhauer, the identity of artistic 
subject and artistic object comes about in the state of contemplation, when the 
artist’s mind is lost in perceiving the metaphysical object, and, moreover, “feels” 
identical with the whole world. But this state of mind only precedes the artistic 
production. Bringing forth a work of art is an activity done at will, in the 
 empirical world. To perform this task, the artist must return to his or her indi-
viduality and position in space and time. Creating a work of art, following this 
notion, is producing an incomplete replica of what has been perceived in the 
state of will-less, metaphysical vision. The difference between the state of will-
less, self-forgetful contemplation and the active, possibly well-planned making 
of a work of art, in the terminology of Beckett’s Proust (and that of Proust’s 
Recherche), is reflected in the difference between artist and artisan (or transla-
tor). In The Unnamable, this difference is erased as completely as one may wish. 
The narrator disappears in his speaking, up to the point where he has to state: 
“I’m in words, made of words … I’m all these words, all these strangers, this dust 
of words …” (390)
A traditional narrating mind would differentiate between the source of his 
or her information, the process of reporting or narrating, and the subject matter. 
The source of information in Schopenhauer was called the Idea. The philosopher 
assumed that the artist must have had, at least once, a will-less, self-forgetful 
perception of the Idea in a state of “identity of subject and object”, if the work 
of art was to be more than mere fantasy. In The Unnamable, that identity is 
realized as completely as possible through the narrator’s “I” being the voice or 
the words, in any case nothing at all apart from the speaking that goes on.
The process of reporting or narrating in Schopenhauer was different from the 
artist’s state of contemplation and had to be carried through under the  conditions 
of ‘normal’ life. The only reality of the non-existing, non-willing Unnamable is 
the speaking itself; there is no other substratum which could provide a basis for 
his existence in any kind of spatiotemporal world. Whereas Schopenhauer’s art-
ist, despite his or her mystical prerogatives, always has to return into the firm 
boundaries of a worldly individual for the purpose of actually bringing forth a 
work of art, the Unnamable exists in the process of uttering his words and in 
these words themselves. Just as the speaking entity is not ontologically different 
from any source of information, it has no ontologically separate existence from 
the very process of rendering what that source may insinuate.

 
the unnamable 
183
Finally, the subject matter of The Unnamable is nothing else but the 
 self-propelling process of speaking, jabbering, twaddling, palavering. 
 Schopenhauer meant the subject matter of an artistic narration to be a near 
replica of the Idea; of course he assumed this subject matter to be different from 
the person who does the storytelling. This difference, too, is annihilated in The 
Unnamable. The speaking entity does not ‘produce’, or ‘bring forth’ the contents 
of the work of art, it is nothing else but these contents.
51. I am doing my best and failing: new 
thoughts about art and the artist
One might be tempted to assume that Beckett’s narrators enjoy a high degree 
of faith in the success of their own doings, since they are in contact with voices 
which are supposed to be the true sources of what is being spoken, written or 
reported. The speaking or reporting person can act upon the words of a non-
personal entity which forms beforehand, and sort of certifies, what is to be the 
narrator’s text. In The Unnamable, the words of the impersonal voice and the 
process of reporting merge from a certain point onwards into one and the same 
stream. This, one might think, warrants authenticity and is the decisive factor 
for an indubitable success of the artistic undertaking. Schopenhauer’s criterion 
of “objectivity” as the chief characteristic of the true genius and the accom-
plished work of art seems to be fulfilled as a matter of course.
This notion of sure-fire success is openly contradicted by Beckett’s narra-
tors and by Beckett himself in his very few utterances, from the postwar period, 
on art and the role of the artist. The author and his narrator ‘heroes’ do not 
claim artistic success, nor do they wish to achieve such success. Instead, they 
claim failure to be their standard achievement and to fail their expected fate.147 
For one, Moran sort of adopts Beckett’s former characters (like Murphy, Watt, 
Yerk, Mercier) as subjects of his own narrating activity. Yet he announces that 
he was never able to tell the stories of these characters and will even fail to 
adequately tell his own. (138) Or Malone reports a re-beginning thus: “But 
little by little with a different aim, no longer in order to succeed, but in order 
147 For a focus on this trait see, among many others: J. Acheson, The Art of Failure: Molloy, Malone 
Dies, The Unnamable, in: Acheson, Samuel Beckett’s Artistic Theory and Practice, p. 96–140. There 
is one book which contradicts the prominent failure image of Beckett’s art just as well as his own 
testimony about the pre-eminence of nothing in the Kennedy letter (Disjecta 113): P.J. Murphy, 
Reconstructing Beckett: Language for Being in Samuel Beckett’s Fiction, Toronto, 1990.

184 
the metaphysical vision
to fail.” (195) The Unnamable identifies achieving his aim with failing, 
i.e.,  disappearing into the silence. “To fail” becomes the key term for what he 
does and has to do:
I am doing my best, and failing again, yet again, I don’t mind failing, it’s a  pleasure, 
but I want to go silent. Not as just now, the better to listen, but peacefully, victori-
ous, without ulterior object. Then it would be a life worth having, a life at last. My 
speech-parched voice at rest would ﬁ ll with spittle, I’d let it ﬂ ow over and over, 
happy at last, dribbling with life, my pensum ended, in the silence. (312)
The narrator considers ultimate failure in the form of going silent to be the right 
way to succeed. To fail is the Unnamable’s way to discharge the pensum of his 
‘life’ and his task of speaking, speaking about his speaking and his strange 
‘ existence’. It has already been said that describing his situation by the use of 
contrary predicates is typical for the Unnamable. He exists somehow and does 
not exist, he speaks somehow and nevertheless cites a voice which is in fact 
speaking, he is identical with this or that one of his characters and is not. He 
describes himself as failing and victorious.
From at least the time of writing the The Unnamable, “failure” is a key term 
in Beckett’s thinking about art. Whether this was inspired by the prominence 
of ideas on failure in existential philosophies of the time, like those of Camus, 
Sartre, Jaspers, or even the much earlier one of Kierkegaard, must be left unde-
cided here. However this has come about, a drastic change has taken place in 
Beckett’s views about the role of the artist and the conditions under which an 
artist has to do his or her work. This change can be studied in his postwar pub-
lications on painters and painting – not very many, but all quite explicit. It is 
especially his painter friends Bram and Geer van Velde – and Bram more than 
Geer – whom Beckett took as examples which served him to express his views 
on what the true situation of the artist is and what art might accomplish under 
those conditions.
The texts which document Beckett’s thinking on art in this period, as far 
as he consented to have them republished, are to be found in part III of 
 Disjecta.148 There is an obvious development here from 1945/46 up to 1949. 
The earlier publications (e.g. La peinture des van Velde ou le monde et le 
 pantalon of 1945 and Peintres de l’empêchement of 1948), notwithstanding 
their dazzling originality, are less radical and less explicitly paradoxical than 
Beckett’s remarks on Bram van Velde in Three Dialogues with Georges 
148 London (John Calder) 1983. Page numbers given in parentheses refer to this edition.

 
the unnamable 
185
Duthuit (1949).149 Looking now briefly at Beckett’s postwar thinking on art 
and the artist, which reveals a sharp break with Schopenhauer’s aesthetics 
(not with his world view!), I shall in the main keep to Three Dialogues as the 
most advanced document, and in detail primarily to the remarks on Bram 
van Velde. This is how the introductory passages of this bit depict the artist’s 
situation and task:
D.:  Speaking of Tal Coat and Masson you invoked an art of a different order, not 
only from theirs, but from any achieved up to date. Am I right in thinking that 
you had van Velde in mind when making this sweeping distinction?
B.:  Yes. I think he is the first to accept a certain situation and to consent to a  
certain act.
D.: Would it be too much to ask you to state again, as simply as possible, the 
situation and the act that you conceive to be his?
B.:  The situation is that of him who is helpless, cannot act, in the event cannot-
paint, since he is obliged to paint. The act is of him who, helpless, unable to 
act, acts, in the event paints, since he is obliged to paint.
D.: Why is he obliged to paint?
B.: I don’t know.
D.: Why is he helpless to paint?
B.: Because there is nothing to paint and nothing to paint with.
D.: And the result, you say, is art of a new order? (142)
If one uses Beckett’s terminology as deployed in Proust, one can re-describe the 
situation presented here in these terms: There is no artistic object and no artis-
tic means to form a work of art. However, the artist (the artistic subject) is under 
the obligation to do his or her job as an artist, i.e., to act as an artist in face of 
the impossibility to do so. Beckett himself uses the subject-object terminology 
in one of his earlier essays on the van Velde brothers, Peintres de l’empêchement: 
“La peinture des van Velde sort, libre de tout souci critique, d’une peinture de 
critique et de refus, refus d’accepter comme donné le vieux rapport sujet-objet.” 
(137)150 If it is assumed that the job of the artist consists in rendering as truly 
as possible an artistic object, it is perfectly logical to claim that this job cannot 
be done if there is no such object, and, a fortiori, no relation between it and the 
149 For several recent views of Three Dialogues from different angles see: M. Buning et al. (ed.), 
Three Dialogues Revisited, Amsterdam 2003, part 1.
150  “The painting of the van Veldes emerges, free from any critical concern, from a painting of 
critique and refusal, refusal to accept as given the old subject-object relation.” [my translation]

186 
the metaphysical vision
artist as “subject”. This is the first element of the artist’s situation in Beckett’s 
new thinking: no object, no relation, no way to do the artist’s job in the tradi-
tional sense.
The second element of the artist’s situation consists in his or her obligation 
to, however, do the artist’s work. Lacking an object and lacking an artist-object-
relation, the artist will necessarily and permanently fail. This is the artist’s 
destiny. It seems that Beckett sees this destiny not as a self-chosen one but as 
the result of an impersonal obligation under which the artist has to live. Trying 
to sidestep that destiny by evading the artistic obligation would be a serious 
betrayal on the part of the artist. That this betrayal is almost unavoidable, if 
the artist sticks to traditional notions of art, does not diminish the severity of 
the judgment. As Beckett says about Bram van Velde: “My case, since I am 
in the dock, is that van Velde is the first to desist from this estheticized automa-
tism, the first to admit that to be an artist is to fail, as no other dare fail, that 
failure is his world and the shrink from it desertion, art and craft, good house-
keeping, living.” (145)151
The “estheticized automatism” is a tendency which Beckett believes he has 
observed in recent painting. He takes it that painting has reacted to the 
 increasing fragility and unreliability of the artistic subject-object relation by 
trying to improve the stability of this relation through attempts to make it more 
authentic, all-embracing, less exclusive. Bram van Velde, he claims, is the first 
to admit that being an artist is to fail, once and for all, and the first to see that 
the refusal to fail guarantees the artist’s product to degenerate into a something 
which may be this or that, but certainly not art.
Three Dialogues appeared in print in December 1949, the same year in 
which Beckett finished The Unnamable. The painters discussed there (Tal Coat, 
Masson, and Bram van Velde) for Beckett represent different stages of artistic 
reaction to what he calls “the subject-object crisis”.152 According to Beckett, 
Tal Coat tried to master the crisis (similar to the Matisse of a certain period) by 
“thrusting towards a more adequate expression of natural experience.” (138) 
This does not lead to a truly new kind of art, but just to an expansion of the 
scope of traditional painting. As Beckett says: “All I wish to suggest is that the 
tendency and accomplishment of this painting are fundamentally those of 
151 This text, as given in Disjecta, seems to be incomplete. Cf. Proust and Three Dialogues p. 125 
and note 154 below.
152 See Beckett’s Henri Hayden, homme-peintre of 1952, in Disjecta, p. 146: “Elle n’est pas au bout 
de ses beaux jours, la crise sujet-objet.”

 
the unnamable 
187
 previous painting, straining to enlarge the statement of a compromise.” (138) 
Beckett depicts the next painter, Masson, as an artist who, despite being “liter-
ally skewered on the ferocious dilemma of expression … continues to wriggle.” 
(140) In Beckett’s eyes, Masson does not really face the artistic dilemma, but 
passes from one untenable position to another. Bram van Velde, Beckett claims, 
was the first to fully accept the artist’s situation and to perform the act a true 
artist has to perform: To paint in face of the impossibility to paint, to accept 
failure as the artist’s true condition. Beckett sees the recent history of painting 
as a series of persistent attempts to express as much as possible and to react to 
the present crisis by enlarging the scope of painting step by step. Bram van 
Velde, according to Beckett, resists the temptation to automatically secure 
himself a new object by taking as this object the situation of the artist himself.153 
Instead, he keeps to the paradoxical situation of painting without object, with-
out a subject-object relation, of persistent failure as the true state and destiny 
of the artist: van Velde is “the first to submit wholly to the incoercible absence 
of relation, in the absence of terms or, if you like, in the presence of unavailable 
terms …”154
There can be no doubt that by “terms” Beckett means the terms of the 
traditional artistic subject-object relation: the artistic subject and the object to 
be represented or, in Beckett’s words, the relation “between representer and 
representee”. Beckett’s thesis, that to be an artist is to fail and that openly 
accepting this failure is the only honest artistic attitude, is grounded straight-
forwardly on the assumption that the constituents of the supposed subject-
object relation do not exist and that, hence, there exists no relation of the kind 
which traditionally is taken to hold between the artist and what he or she is 
trying to represent in the work of art.
By the time of Proust, there is, for Beckett, an aesthetic object (the true 
reality of past experience) and there is an artistic subject (the artist who 
descends into him- or herself and, in a will-less, visionary, mystical state of 
mind, is granted contact with true reality). With The Unnamable, Beckett has 
153 Describing Bram van Velde in these terms, by the way, is one of the instances of  radicalization 
which can be observed in Beckett’s postwar thinking on art as it developed up to 1949. In Peintres 
de l’empêchement of 1948 (Disjecta 133–137), he still thought that the artist’s situation (to be 
without object and without relation to an object) is itself the true and adequate object of a new 
kind of art. Cf. Disjecta, 137.
154 Three Dialoges (in one volume with Proust), London (John Calder) 1965, p. 125. This  passage, 
strangely, is missing in Disjecta (see there, p. 145). It is to be inserted between “estheticized 
automatism …” and “… the ﬁ rst to admit that to be an artist is to fail.”

188 
the metaphysical vision
reached a radically different artistic position and has dropped the essentially 
dualist outlook to which his thinking about art so far had been committed. 
“Dualist” is Beckett’s own word (144). He does not talk about an “identifica-
tion of subject and object” anymore, since no referent for “object” is there in 
the first place, let alone a subject-object relation. There is no assumption of 
two entities which somehow have to be brought into contact. There is just one 
process which in the end is called “failing” and which, in The Unnamable, also 
appears under the titles of speaking, hypothesizing, twaddling, etc. It is not 
surprising that the Unnamable as the speaking entity is construed with con-
tradictory predicates. As a narrator, a quasi-artist, he is to be without object 
and without an existence of his own. The paradoxical, i.e. contradictory, status 
of the Unnamable and of his narration is the logical consequence of Beckett’s 
new notion of art. As the subject of the quasi-artistic process of narration, the 
Unnamable must be presented as somehow existing, even if inexplicitly. This 
existence must also be denied, since the process of narration according to that 
new notion of art is to be performed “in the absence of terms or, if you like, in 
the presence of unavailable terms.” The same applies to the objects of his nar-
ration. They must be described as being there, somehow, to function as the 
objects of a narrative process. We are told about a one-legged, single-armed 
one, we are told about Mahood in his container, we are told about Worm, 
although yet unborn. And, of course, the existence of these characters even in 
the fictional world of the novel has to be denied at the same time, since there is 
no artistic object.
It is adequate to describe the situation of he who, under these circum-
stances, has to tell the story by using the paradoxical phrases which Beckett 
applies to Bram van Velde. He cannot paint, since there is nothing to paint and 
nothing to paint with, and he paints, however, since he is under the obligation 
to paint. Beckett’s narrator has nothing he can speak about, nothing he can use 
for the purpose of speaking (not even his own mouth as he does not exist), and 
yet he speaks, since he is under an obligation to speak.
The only reason for this obligation given in the novel itself is still a 
 Schopenhauerian one: the idea of a pensum which has to be discharged (p. 90f. 
above). The narrator considers the desperate action of going on and on speak-
ing as his special pensum. No other source of artistic or quasi-artistic obligation 
can be discovered, either in the novel or in the Dialogues. The presence of this 
Schopenhauerian notion at a time when Beckett has dropped his mentor’s 
idealistic aesthetics shows that Beckett is very far from dropping Schopenhauer 
altogether.

 
the unnamable 
189
This can also be deduced from another Schopenhauerian element which 
has been retained: In the very sentences which Beckett uses to express his 
abrupt break with dualistic thinking about art, he still applies the language 
originally borrowed from Schopenhauer for Proust: the subject-object 
 terminology. “Le vieux rapport sujet-objet” [“the old subject-object relation”] 
which Beckett cites in Peintres de l’empêchement (137), is not that old after all, 
at least not in these terms. As pointed out (note 30), this terminology emerged 
shortly before Schopenhauer’s time and is typical for him. Around 1930, Beck-
ett had found this terminology in key passages of The World as Will and Repre-
sentation and still keeps using it as if this were a matter of course, precisely in 
the process of turning away from traditional thinking about art and the artist.
Despite his new ideas on art, Beckett did not at all turn away from 
 Schopenhauer in matters of his view of life and world. This may be seen from 
other parts of his literary oeuvre such as Waiting for Godot and Endgame. It is 
these works which shall be considered now in order to gain a full picture of 
Beckett’s relation to Schopenhauer. It is, on Beckett’s part, a relation of both 
great creative autonomy and firm commitment.


52. In a cage out of time and space
Molloy, when living in Lousse’s house and thinking about his own person and 
situation, comments on his special way to move around:
House and garden were ﬁ xed, … , and I, when I stayed still, as I did most of the 
time, was ﬁ xed too, and when I moved, from place to place, it was very slowly, 
as in a cage out of time, as the saying is, in the jargon of the schools, and out of 
space too to be sure. (51)
It belongs to the necessary conditions for the performance of a drama on a stage 
that the performance lasts a certain time and that, whatever happens on stage, 
technically happens in time as well. It is also inevitable that, for the players acting 
on the stage, there exists an above and below, an in front and behind, a left and 
right; that is, they move (or do not move) in some kind of space provided by the 
stage setting. This does not preclude that, for the fictional characters of the play 
presented on stage, there may be serious problems in matters of spatiotemporal 
orientation and, therefore, no secure way to locate themselves in time or space 
at all. In that sense it may be possible that the play’s characters move (or cease 
moving), as if their world was like a cage out of time and out of space, too.
· V I ·
GOGO AND DIDI, HAMM AND CLOV

192 
the metaphysical vision
In Waiting for Godot and Endgame, the characters repeatedly try to find 
for themselves a secure notion of yesterday, of tomorrow, and sometimes 
even of today. Similar problems arise about their location in space. In 
Waiting for Godot the leading characters keep asking where they are, 
where they were yesterday, where they will be tomorrow. They also keep 
reflecting about what happened yesterday, and if there seems to be some 
recollection of what this could have been, whether their memory indeed 
refers to yesterday or to any other odd point in time, if there is any reliable 
memory at all.
ESTRAGON: We came here yesterday.
  VLADIMIR: Ah no, there you’re mistaken.
ESTRAGON: What did we do yesterday?
  VLADIMIR: What did we do yesterday?
ESTRAGON: Yes.
  VLADIMIR: Why … (Angrily). Nothing is certain when you’re about
ESTRAGON: In my opinion we were here.
  VLADIMIR: (looking round). You recognize the place?
ESTRAGON: I didn’t say that.
  VLADIMIR: Well?
ESTRAGON: That makes no difference.
  VLADIMIR:  All the same … that tree … (turning towards the auditorium) … 
that bog.
ESTRAGON: You’re sure it was this evening?
  VLADIMIR: What?
ESTRAGON: That we were to wait.
  VLADIMIR: He said Saturday. (Pause.) I think.
ESTRAGON: You think.
  VLADIMIR: I must have made a note of it.
 
He fumbles in his pockets, bursting with miscellaneous rubbish.
ESTRAGON:  (very insidious). But what Saturday? And is it Saturday? Is it not 
rather Sunday? (Pause.) Or Monday? (Pause.) Or Friday?
  VLADIMIR:  (looking wildly about him, as though the date was inscribed in the 
landscape). It’s not possible!
ESTRAGON: Or Thursday?
  VLADIMIR: What’ll we do?

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
193
ESTRAGON:  If he came yesterday and we weren’t here you may be sure he won’t 
come again today.
  VLADIMIR: But you say we were here yesterday.
ESTRAGON:  I may be mistaken. (Pause.) Let’s stop talking for a minute, do you 
mind?155
The means which usually serve to secure oneself a firm foothold in time do not 
function anymore. In particular, memory, the most important instrument of this 
kind, has ceased to provide a fixed point from which even the present moment 
could be precisely determined. The existence of Gogo and Didi is such that 
there is no secure temporal orientation for them. They lack a reliable memory 
and they lack any other instruments whatsoever which could provide such an 
orientation.
There still is change, something which normally happens in time. But 
the way the characters experience change is usually such that the occurring 
events cannot be arranged in a reliable temporal order. This is also why the 
characters cannot utilize the experience of change for a secure navigation in 
time. The tree grows leaves without transition. Pozzo and Lucky on their second 
appearance are blind or dumb, respectively, without transition. Pozzo denies 
a well-ordered succession to the process of his going blind. He even concen-
trates into a single moment all those events which are normally separated in 
time. This means that he considers time as a basic structure of the empirical 
world to be null.
POZZO:  (suddenly furious). Have you not done tormenting me with your accursed  
time! It’s abominable! When! When! One day, is that not enough for 
you,  one day like any other day, one day he went dumb, one day I 
went blind, one  day we’ll go deaf, one day we were born, one day we 
shall die, the same day,  the same second, is that not enough for you? 
(Calmer.) They give birth  astride of a grave, the light gleams an instant, 
then it’s night once more. (He  jerks the rope.) On! (89)
The characters neither possess some kind of mental device which could be 
used as the source of a reliable orientation in time, nor are they in contact with 
a stable, objective world structure from which such an orientation could be 
155 Samuel Beckett, Waiting for Godot, London (Faber and Faber) 1956, 14 f. Page numbers hence-
forth given in parentheses refer to this edition.

194 
the metaphysical vision
derived.156 This applies to Hamm and Clov just the same, as their brief dispute 
about the use of temporal expressions shows:
HAMM: Go and get the oilcan.
   CLOV: What for?
HAMM: To oil the castors.
   CLOV: I oiled them yesterday.
HAMM: Yesterday! What does that mean? Yesterday!
   CLOV:  (violently). That means that bloody awful day, long ago, before this 
bloody awful day. I use the words you taught me. If they don’t mean 
anything any more, teach me others. Or let me be silent.157
The persistent malfunction of memory contributes to the character’s insecurity 
about their location in space. Vladimir and Estragon do not succeed in their 
attempt to make sure whether the place where they find themselves is the same 
as the one where they were last night, or not. Space, if large enough to need 
 successive experiencing, is experienced in time; if there is no certainty about 
temporal relations anymore, there is no certainty about spatial relations either.
In the form of ironic mirroring, the idea of an existence outside time and 
space recurs in Lucky’s presentation of his thinking. The personal God with 
white beard, subject of the public works of Puncher and Wattmann, exists 
“outside time without extension” and loves us dearly from the heights of divide 
apathia divine athambia etc. God’s well researched existence outside the famil-
iar four dimensions of human life is cited as the ideal complement to the very 
insecure situation of the dramatic characters. Only, this complement is the 
subject of a bygone belief and of sarcastic mockery about academic rituals.
53. In a single night
In Proust, Beckett agreed with Schopenhauer that the aesthetic object’s onto-
logical position is outside time, space, and causality. It seems but consequential 
156 The insecurity is not diminished by the fact that the author, at the beginning of the second 
act, gives this stage direction: “Next Day. Same Time. Same Place”. It is only the reader who gets 
to know that, not the spectators, let alone the characters. In the world in which the characters 
have to live, there is no certainty about time or space. For the role of time and the paradoxical 
structure of Gogo’s and Didi’s world see B.O. States, The Shape of Paradox, Berkeley CA, 1978.
157 Samuel Beckett, Endgame, London (Faber and Faber) 1958, p. 32. Page numbers referring to 
this edition will henceforth be given in parentheses.

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
195
that Beckett himself abandons causal correctness in most of his literary works 
and makes it the aim of drastic mockery. If causality, as he claimed in Proust, 
is part of some kind of secret contract to keep the world safe, uniform, and 
predictable, it can be assumed that he consequentially broke this contract in 
his own writing, at least since the war.
  VLADIMIR: Look at it.
 
 They look at the tree.
ESTRAGON: I see nothing.
  VLADIMIR:  But yesterday evening it was all black and bare. And now it’s covered 
with leaves.
ESTRAGON: Leaves?
  VLADIMIR: In a single night.
ESTRAGON: It must be the Spring.
  VLADIMIR: But in a single night!
ESTRAGON: I tell you we weren’t here yesterday. Another of your nightmares.
  VLADIMIR: And where were we yesterday evening according to you?
ESTRAGON: How do I know? In another compartment. There’s no lack of void.
  VLADIMIR:  (sure of himself). Good. We weren’t here yesterday evening. Now 
what did we do yesterday evening? (65 f.)
The persistent failure of memory which prevents any secure orientation in time 
and space makes it also impossible to construct any plausible causal sequence. 
If one does not succeed in arranging perceived events in a reliable temporal 
or spatial order, there is no chance to connect those events so as to form a 
dependable causal chain. The general insecurity about causal relations entails 
that the characters have to live in a world which is highly unpredictable and, 
in a certain sense, illogical. We tend to use the word “absurd” as the standard 
expression for this kind of world structure. It is grave irregularity which provides 
the most important mark of absurd events and situations, usually an irregularity 
with respect to causal relations.
The absurd, i.e. acausal, world structure of Beckett’s dramas is not due 
to some incidental decision of the author but should be seen as the result of 
a consequential development in matters of aesthetic, in Beckett’s case meta-
physical, properties of the artistic object. “The absurd” in Beckett’s works does 
not spell mere chaos. What we tend to call “absurd” in his case is just that the 
characters and their world, in short: the aesthetic object, do not follow causal 
principles with typical regularity. Causality has lost its binding force. In Proust, 

196 
the metaphysical vision
Beckett had claimed that causality is one of the will’s instruments to keep the 
person’s world uniform, reliable and, in the last analysis, untrue. True reality for 
Beckett is only accessible to an artistic procedure which is not committed to 
following the rules of empirical causality. Seen from the standpoint of his Proust 
and of the modernized Schopenhauerian aesthetics presented there, Beckett in 
his postwar works has arrived at artistic and metaphysical truth by way of pre-
senting an aesthetic object for which time, space, and causality have lost their 
cohesiveness. Their remaining fragments have become like artistic toys which 
the author uses to demonstrate their corruption and to show a different kind of 
reality, in his view truer and more pitiless than what a habit-controlled image 
of world and life would allow for.
54. You pollute the air
Schopenhauer taught that true reality becomes accessible by way of a visionary, 
metaphysical experience, if the subject perceives its object independently of any 
relation. If the person who sets out to contemplate an object manages to desist 
from following its relations with other objects, people, and the person itself, if 
the person’s attention is exclusively and will-lessly centred on the object alone, 
then the experience of a worldly thing or human being may undergo a substan-
tial change so as to present the true nature of the contemplated thing or person, 
i.e., a timeless, indestructible form.
There can be little doubt that Beckett presents his characters as human 
beings with progressively decaying relations to other persons and the surrounding 
world. This applies to all the characters we have considered so far. Murphy, 
during his strange career, develops more and more towards being a solus ipse in 
the real world. Instead of upholding his relations in this big world, he tries to 
spend more and more time in the little world of his own and of the – equally 
solitary – patients of Magdalen Mental Mercyseat. The little world, as we 
saw, is for Murphy the only relevant reality, the ‘normal’ world, i.e., the big 
one, just being a colossal fiasco. Molloy indeed looks for his mother, which 
is the external reason for his trip. But, first, he does not find his mother, and 
secondly he admits that even if he found her, he could only communicate with 
her by way of hitting her on the head and counting the blows – a procedure 
not quite up to the standards of a well-developed human relationship. Moran, 
before starting his trip, has a son, a cook, good relations with his neighbours 
and the local clergy. When he returns in a very different state of mind, one 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
197
may say having come to himself, i.e., to what he “was condemned to be” 
(149), his relations with other human beings in this world have broken down. 
He does not want to renew them. Malone tells his stories just to himself. And 
his own story, only communicated fragmentarily in between, is the story of the 
decay of all contact with the world around him. At the beginning, he is still 
taken care of by some hand which provides him with his soup and empties 
his chamber pot. At the end, he has lost all relation with outward reality, at 
least as far as activities of any kind are concerned. There was a man at some 
point in the meantime whom Malone only could identify as the employee of 
a funeral home who had arrived prematurely. The Unnamable, already by 
his name, is marked to be some kind of non-person without any relation to 
others. And the ones whom he calls his deputies develop from being some 
kind of body to a trunk, then a mouth, then something like mash, and in the 
end silence.
The plot of Waiting for Godot, if there is one in the usual sense, serves also 
to show the relationship between Estragon and Vladimir in its strange emptiness 
and, furthermore, to show how the ‘relation’ between Pozzo and Lucky degen-
erates to what can be communicated by someone blind to someone dumb by 
whipping or by jerking a rope. Towards the end of both acts, Estragon suggests 
that they part company. When, on his second appearance, Pozzo has the inap-
propriate idea to ask whether the two are friends, the author’s stage direction 
has Estragon “laughing noisily” and exclaiming: “He wants to know if we are 
friends!” It is left to Vladimir to understand the question in a less ridiculous 
sense which does not imply the unreasonable expectation of friendship between 
him and Estragon: “No, he means friends of his.” (85)
Endgame can also be understood as the story in which Hamm and Clov 
play parting company. Hamm’s first words addressed to Clov are: “You pollute 
the air!” (13) Before the end, when they have sort of bidden farewell, Hamm’s 
last request is that his servant or partner or lover or son Clov cover him with 
the sheet. This is the sheet under which Hamm, at the beginning, looked like a 
badly cloaked piece of furniture. Not even this request is fulfilled. Hamm, after 
throwing away the gaff, the dog, the whistle, sees no other way to withdraw 
further from the scene but by covering his face with the stained handkerchief. In 
between, Nell, sitting in her dustbin on the stumps of her legs on sand, has com-
mented to Nagg, whose dustbin is next to hers, on their progressive  inability to 
move. In an “elegiac” tone of voice she exclaims “ah yesterday”, when reminded 
of a better state of affairs at some earlier point in time for which Nagg has used 
the less than unambiguous “yesterday”. The stage direction for their attempt 

198 
the metaphysical vision
to kiss each other reads: “Their heads strain towards each other, fail to meet, fall 
apart again.” (18)
Beckett’s plots (if we stick to this traditional term) often consist of a process 
by which persons, or what is left of them, withdraw even further from human 
relations which already seem to have been reduced to a minimum in the first 
place. It is, of course, not only social losses which Beckett’s characters have to 
suffer in matters of their relation to the world. Even more conspicuous is the 
progressive decay of their bodies. It is not necessary here to enlist the manifold 
ailments, disfigurations, degenerations, the various forms of crippledness which 
befall Beckett’s characters in the course of what may be called their “lives”. 
These processes of increasing physical disability must also be seen as processes 
of successive destruction of their relations to the world and other persons. The 
lame ones, the diseased, the blind, dumb, mute, decrepit ones, whose bodies 
are permanently handicapped, the ones who sit in terrible containers, the ones 
reduced to single parts of a body like a mouth, the dead ones – all of them are 
also cases of progressive isolation and deterioration of worldly as well as personal 
relationships.
With these images of human persons, Beckett provides us with one possible 
understanding of Schopenhauer’s claim that the object of art, when function-
ing as the object of metaphysical cognition, is to be seen outside of all nor-
mal relations with the surrounding world and with other persons. Certainly, 
 Schopenhauer did not think of a Beckett-style fulfilment of his claim at all, and 
Beckett most likely did not think of this parallel with Schopenhauer’s theory 
of art either. Objectively, however, we have, in his characters and their dire 
histories, instances of a kind of art which in the work itself (not just in its genesis 
or its reception) shows how a Schopenhauerian annihilation of personal and 
worldly relations might look when realized in a way different from what this 
philosopher expected.
There is one question in Schopenhauer’s theory of “Dichtkunst”, i.e., litera-
ture, which remains notoriously difficult: In what aspect do the tragedies, com-
edies, etc., which he praises to be perfect, as works of art show the demanded 
similarity with the relation-less archetype which is supposed to be the basis and 
the true object of their formation? Beckett’s works represent at least one way in 
which that theory might be exemplified without assuming that literature has to 
be the description of statue-like, idealized images.
Part of the degeneration of worldly and personal relations which  Beckett’s 
characters have to suffer is that their own minds do not function as they 
used to do. The characters degenerate not just physically, but also mentally. 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
199
The most harmless but also most conspicuous part of this process is the clouding 
of the characters’ memory. This contributes to the more or less permanently 
demonstrated inability on their part to find a reliable orientation in space and 
time and, less than rarely, to even be sure of their own identity and that of 
 others. It would be too narrow to see this and the characters’ physical decay 
only as progressive dismantling of what may be called the traditional self. The 
total process which is presented in Beckett’s dramas and postwar novels rather 
consists in unfolding a kind of reality in which traditional notions of the world 
and human life do not apply anymore. However, in a Schopenhauerian perspec-
tive, modified by Beckett’s alterations as in Proust, this reality may be seen as the 
metaphysical truth, the true timeless form, of how living beings have to exist.
55. Is it not time for my pain-killer?
Schopenhauer thought that, when space and time have lost their binding force, 
when the causal order of things has been dropped, when the aesthetic object 
is being perceived in isolation from other parts of the world, there is a chance 
that true reality may emerge, the archetypal, everlasting Gestalt of what we, 
under ‘normal’ conditions, just experience as a distorted, untrue phenomenon. 
If one takes Beckett’s commitment to Schopenhauer seriously, as the note-
books and his Proust lead us to do, it becomes a desideratum to find out how 
Beckett’s literary world compares with Schopenhauer’s metaphysical view of 
true human reality and life in general. In Beckett’s postwar works, time, space, 
causality, and often even individuality have become like empty moulds which 
are referred to mainly pro forma. It would only be consequential if the world 
which emerges after these traditional instruments of human orientation have 
become corrupt did show a close similarity to the metaphysical view of life and 
world as  Schopenhauer presents it.
Philosophically, there is a shift here from aesthetics to metaphysics. I do not 
see any good reason to assume that Beckett produced his works in the wake of 
Schopenhauerian states of contemplation and presence of what this philosopher 
called “Platonic Idea”. Rather, as was pointed out in the analysis of Proust,  Beckett 
re-interpreted Schopenhauer from the start in his own way. He dropped the whole 
idealist world of what Schopenhauer assumed to be “Platonic Ideas” and replaced it 
by a timeless image of what it truly means to have to live. This image shows amazing 
similarities to Schopenhauer’s view of life as presented mainly in the metaphysical 
parts of The World as Will and Representation and in the relevant passages of Parerga 

200 
the metaphysical vision
and Paralipomena. As has been shown above, Schopenhauer did not know of any 
form of art, produced by human artists, which he judged capable to adequately 
render the contents of his metaphysics of life and world. Beckett’s art comes closer 
to this than anything Schopenhauer ever could have imagined.
Schopenhauer’s thing-in-itself, the metaphysical ground of the world, is, 
according to his theory, not to be perceived directly, but objectifies itself in living 
beings and the world’s nature in general. There are some phenomenal traits, how-
ever, in which the objectivity of the thing-in-itself shows more distinctly than in 
others. These traits are most prominent in the world of Beckett’s postwar literature 
and they belong to the core subjects of his dramatic characters’ communication.
ESTRAGON: (violently). I’m hungry.
 VLADIMIR: Do you want a carrot?
ESTRAGON: Is that all there is?
 VLADIMIR: I might have some turnips.
ESTRAGON:  Give me a carrot. (Vladimir rummages in his pockets, takes out a 
turnip and gives it to Estragon who takes a bite out of it. Angrily.) 
It’s a turnip! (20)
Schopenhauer claimed the timeless essence of life to be willing and striving, 
comparable to an “unquenchable thirst” and therefore, unavoidably, “need, 
lack, and hence pain.” (WWR I, 312) He also claimed “that there is no  ultimate 
aim of striving” which “means that there is no measure or end of suffering.” 
(309) Life in all stages of its development from the most primitive plants through 
the different species of animals up to the phenomenon of human  existence 
shows, according to the philosopher, “how essentially all life is  suffering.” (310) 
Pozzo’s last words concerning human existence have already been quoted: 
“They give birth astride of a grave, the light gleams an instant, then it’s night 
once more.” Vladimir, in his last monologue, picks up this description of life 
and adds  suffering: “Astride of a grave and a difficult birth. Down in the hole, 
lingeringly, the grave-digger puts on the forceps. We have time to grow old. The 
air is full of our cries …” (90 f.) Schopenhauer starts his chapter On the Vanity 
and suffering of Life thus:
Awakened to life out of the night of unconsciousness, the Will ﬁ nds itself as an 
individual in an endless and boundless world, among innumerable individuals, all 
striving, suffering, and erring; and, as if through a troubled dream, it hurries back 
to the old unconsciousness.” (WWR II, 573)

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
201
One need not start an extensive search for suffering and direness in the life of 
Beckett’s characters. These traits are to be found everywhere and may therefore 
be considered indeed essential for Beckett’s world. Almost inexhaustible seems 
the number of those who ask for something and do not get it, or, as if Schopenhauer 
had designed their course of action, do get it indeed but soon afterwards suffer 
from their next want. And this next demand is either not fulfilled or, if granted, 
it is granted in a most frustrating way. In the passage just quoted, Estragon, after 
his first disappointment, indeed gets a carrot. It is the last one. Next time he 
wants a carrot, he is doubly disappointed:
  VLADIMIR: Would you like a radish?
ESTRAGON: Is that all there is?
  VLADIMIR: There are radishes and turnips.
ESTRAGON: Are there no carrots?
  VLADIMIR: No. Anyway you overdo it with your carrots.
ESTRAGON:  Then give me a radish. (Vladimir fumbles in his pockets, finds  nothing 
but a turnip, finally brings out a radish and hands it to Estragon, 
who examines it, sniffs it.) It’s black!
  VLADIMIR: It’s a radish.
ESTRAGON: I only like the pink ones, you know that! (68)
Vladimir almost constantly wants to urinate, but never fully succeeds. The 
closest he comes to success is that, once, he does not need to get up during the 
night. Nagg wants his pap and what he gets is a biscuit which he cannot chew. 
Hamm keeps asking for his painkiller. Clov keeps informing him that it is not 
time yet. It will never be:
HAMM: Is it not time for my pain-killer?
  CLOV: Yes.
HAMM: Ah! At last! Give it to me! Quick!
     Pause.
  CLOV: There’s no more pain-killer. (46)
Hamm wants to have a dog, a man-made imitation, since a real dog might be 
able to reproduce. Clov has tinkered him one, but with only three legs yet and 
no sex. The desired completion of the animal substitute does not take place 
anymore, not in this performance of their Endgame.
Possibly the most memorable image which brings an important trait of 
Schopenhauer’s view of life onto the stage is the process of Waiting for Godot 

202 
the metaphysical vision
itself. Godot, whoever he may be, is equipped by the thin memory of the waiting 
characters and by their even thinner imagination with a number of predicates 
all of which are not suitable to indeed recognize him in case he ever should 
come. If somebody came and wrongly claimed to be Godot, Vladimir and 
Estragon had no definite means to disprove the claim. Somehow they seem to 
hope that, if they were to find the right Godot, they would be given a place to 
sleep, something to eat and, possibly, something to do, possibly even some reli-
able information concerning what their life is all about. It is quite likely that 
this cannot be had in the world in which Estragon and Vladimir have to serve 
their duty of waiting. It seems much more plausible that in this world there are 
only promises which are not fulfilled, such as the promises which Godot sends 
through the boy (the boys). Thus Vladimir’s and Estragon’s situation is such 
that they have to wait for somebody the coming of whom, if it occurs at all, is 
likely to happen only in the mode of swindle. If one also remembers the ridicu-
lous and brief satisfactions they manage to snatch, satisfactions which just serve 
to soon show up their persistent neediness again, and if one thinks of their 
strange position between an illusory future and a most dimly remembered dis-
tant past, it seems highly plausible to take them as an adequate stage image of 
Schopenhauer’s description of the true nature of life:
Life presents itself as a continual deception, in small matters as well as in great. If 
it has promised, it does not keep its word, unless to show how little desirable the 
desired object was; hence we are deluded now by hope, now by what was hoped 
for. If it has given, it did so in order to take. The enchantment of distance shows 
us paradises that vanish like optical illusions, when we have allowed ourselves to 
be fooled by them. (WWR II, 573)
In the same essay of Paralipomena from which Beckett took Schopenhauer’s 
praise of the word “defunctus” (Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Suffer-
ing of the World), the philosopher declares life to be (in his English) “a 
 disappointment, nay, a cheat” (PP II, 299). In an earlier section he has described 
the standard course of a life spent in permanent hope for the better: “And so 
the course of a man’s life is, as a rule, such that, having been duped by hope, he 
dances into the arms of death.” (PP II, 286)
56. This is not boring you I hope
One of Schopenhauer’s most powerful metaphors for man’s existence under the 
rule of the Will is that of the pendulum between pain and boredom. The  philosopher 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
203
took it that the eternal fate of the Will, when objectified in living beings, shows 
most distinctly in the constant alternation of those two unpleasant states. As 
pointed out above, Schopenhauer considers them to be life’s “ultimate 
 constituents”. He evidently thought them to be like elements out of which life’s 
appearances in all their diversity are composed and into which those appear-
ances can be analyzed by philosophical consideration. The idea of life as a 
pendulum between suffering and boredom has explicitly been endorsed by 
Beckett in Proust. He even combined it with Schopenhauer’s thesis that suffering 
enables the sufferer to recognize true reality whereas what Beckett called “the 
boredom of living” keeps the person wrapped in the comfortable but untrue 
world of Habit.
Pain and boredom, in Schopenhauer’s metaphysical view of life, are also 
the main topics of the great tragicomedy in which all human persons have to 
play their part from birth to death without ever being able to, even temporarily, 
gain the dignity of tragic figures. Schopenauer thought that this drama, which 
shows the true metaphysical nature of life, necessarily does not become the 
subject of dramatic art but has to remain on the stage of a, as it were, open-air 
theatre provided by nature itself. The true tragedy of human persons, together 
with the ridicule and mockery they inevitably have to suffer as well, is according 
to Schopenhauer not accessible to any art form, but belongs to the objectivity 
of the Will who, if anything at all, is the only director and spectator of the great 
metaphysical show: “Yet no further complaint of this can be made from any 
direction, for the Will performs the great tragedy and comedy at its own expense, 
and is also its own spectator.” (WWR I, 331) Thus, in Schopenhauer’s  philosophy 
of art, tragedy as a form of art devised and produced by human beings does not 
comprehend and is not expected to comprehend the total picture of human life 
as the philosopher’s metaphysical imagination presents it to himself and to his 
readers.
If not intentionally, then factually, Samuel Beckett follows a more radical 
path. The pendulum between pain and boredom, which Schopenhauer thought 
to be the true form of human life as seen by a metaphysically inspired glance, is 
nowhere more intensely and more believably presented on the stage of a human-
made theatre than in Beckett’s dramas.
All characters have their own way to suffer. Gogo has his hurting feet, Didi 
his nearly bursting bladder, Lucky has whip, rope, kicks. Nagg has his hunger 
and then the biscuit in his toothless mouth, Nell is cold with her stumps on the 
sand in her bin, Clov has bad eyes and legs and cannot sit, Hamm is blind, 
arthritic and needs the catheter.

204 
the metaphysical vision
When Gogo and Didi, or Hamm and Clov, or Nagg and Nell briefly forget 
about their different afflictions and when nothing else does happen which 
attracts their attention, they are bored. It is as if they exist to be examples of 
Schopenhauerian tragicomic figures:
Behind need and want is to be found at once boredom, which attacks even the 
more intelligent animals. This is a consequence of the fact that life has no genuine 
intrinsic worth, but is kept in motion merely by want and illusion. But as soon as 
this comes to a standstill, the utter barrenness and emptiness of existence become 
apparent. (PP II, 287)
The characters of Waiting for Godot and Endgame have a certain repertoire 
of means with which they try to fight their boredom if it becomes too 
 annoying. Most prominent among these means is the attempt to tell jokes or 
anecdotes or recite fragments of a self-made story. Unfortunately, most of 
the characters have lived in each other’s company for an indefinite, quasi 
endless time already. Hence, they know each other’s jokes, etc., far too well 
to find them entertaining. On the contrary, the all-too-often reproduced 
jokes and stories, offered as a remedy against boredom, tend to deepen the 
boredom instead and to demonstrate all the more conspicuously the lingering 
monotony of their situation, virtually the same for ages apart from a few small 
changes, almost always for the worse. Of course, the unexpected arrival of 
Pozzo and Lucky is something new for Vladimir and Estragon, but in no way 
alters their situation. When the two strangers are gone, nothing substantial 
has changed for them.
At least in the beginning, Didi offers something which he hopes will be 
genuinely interesting to Estragon, the question of the two biblical thieves.
 VLADIMIR: Ah, yes, the two thieves. Do you remember the story?
ESTRAGON: No.
 VLADIMIR: Shall I tell it to you?
ESTRAGON: No.
 VLADIMIR:  It’ll pass the time (Pause.) Two thieves, crucified at the same time as
 
our Saviour. One –
ESTRAGON: Our what?
 VLADIMIR:  Our Saviour. Two thieves. One is supposed to have been saved and
 
the other … (he searches for the contrary of saved) … damned.
ESTRAGON: Saved from what?
 VLADIMIR: Hell.

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
205
ESTRAGON: I’m going.
 
He does not move.
  VLADIMIR:  And yet … (pause) … how is it – this is not boring you I hope – how 
is it that of the four Evangelists only one speaks of a thief being 
saved. The four of them were there – or thereabouts – and only one 
speaks of a thief being saved. (Pause.) Come on, Gogo, return the 
ball, can’t you, once in a way? (12)
The story does not do its job. Estragon returns the ball badly. He is neither 
interested, nor does he show any understanding of what is said, nor is he in any 
way amused. His main reaction is one of unmitigated sarcasm:
ESTRAGON:  (with exaggerated enthusiasm). I find this really most extraordinarily
 
interesting. (13)
In contrast to virtually all other characters there seems to be one who, at his 
first appearance, gives the impression of being relatively healthy. Not counting 
that he worries about his obliviousness and his dwindling imagination, Pozzo, 
in the first act, appears like a man who does not have much to complain about. 
What shows in him more noticeably even than in the others, however, is what 
Schopenhauer phrased “life-destroying boredom, a lifeless longing without a 
definite object, a deadening languor.” (WWR I, 164) The mighty man on whose 
ground they all have gathered wants to be entertained. He feels the need for 
human company. Before parting, he blesses the dubious “gentlemen” Vladimir 
and Estragon and tells them that they have been civil to him. Their civility 
obviously consisted in not leaving (they can’t anyway, they are waiting for 
Godot), listening half-heartedly to Pozzo, feigning appreciation for his lyrical 
rant, inviting him with false politeness to stay, simulating curiosity and asking 
him questions which he can take as cues for further swaggering.
“Yes, gentlemen, I cannot go for long without the society of my likes” says 
Pozzo when he comes to rest with the two tramps, “(he puts on his glasses and 
looks at the two likes) even when the likeness is an imperfect one.” (24) Thus 
starts the scantly motivated break which in itself gives the impression of being 
as erratic and aimlessly meandering as the trip which is interrupted by it. During 
that break, Pozzo unwraps his own entertainment provisions. When he is fin-
ished with them, when Gogo and Didi inevitably start feeling bored anew, 
Pozzo, who knows the pain of boredom excessively well, offers Lucky as an 
encore. Whether Lucky is to dance, or sing, or recite, or think, asks the mighty 
man. Just before this question, as if wanting to predict what will come after the 

206 
the metaphysical vision
show, he has already stated without further explanation: “For I shall suffer, no 
doubt about that.” (39)
On his first visit, Pozzo seems to be the only character on stage without 
obvious ailments. He can use all his force to kill time mercilessly. Thus, he is 
like a living vignette for Schopenhauer’s theory of sociability:
Now it is at once well worth noting that, on the one hand, the sufferings and 
afﬂ ictions of life can easily grow to such an extent that even death, in the ﬂ ight 
from which the whole of life consists, becomes desirable, and a man voluntarily 
hastens to it. Again, on the other hand, it is worth noting that, as soon as want 
and suffering give man a relaxation, boredom is at once so near that he neces-
sarily requires diversion and amusement. The striving after existence is what 
occupies all living things, and keeps them in motion. When existence is assured 
to them, they do not know what to do with it. Therefore the second thing that 
sets them in motion is the effort to get rid of the burden of existence, to make it 
no longer felt, ‘to kill time,’ in other words, to escape from boredom. Accordingly 
we see that almost all men, secure from want and cares, are now a burden to 
themselves, after having ﬁ nally cast off all other burdens. They regard as a gain 
every hour that is got through, and hence every deduction from that very life, 
whose maintenance as long as possible has till then been the object of all their 
efforts. Boredom is anything but an evil to be thought of lightly; ultimately it 
depicts on the countenance real despair. It causes beings who love one another 
as little as men do, to seek one another so much, and thus becomes the source 
of sociability. (WWR I, 313)
Of course, it is not just Pozzo who satisfies the criteria of Schopenhauer’s theory. 
In their own way, Gogo and Didi, and Hamm and Clov do the same. Love 
certainly is not what Vladimir and Estragon manage to feel for each other. It is 
with greatest indifference that they discuss their ever-recurring project of part-
ing company. Neither why they stay together nor why they have lingered 
together an indefinitely long time is explained sufficiently by their waiting for 
Godot, let alone their ritualized embracings. The most plausible explanation for 
why they stay together is perhaps provided by the predicament which they 
recognize when they discuss hanging themselves. When considering whether 
the bough will be suitable for that project or not, the main objection against the 
idea is that the bough might stand the hanging of the first chum, but break 
when the second tries. But then the second would have to go on living, alone. 
To put it in terms of decision theory: The preference for being dead is greater 
than that for going on living with one another. But since neither feels up to 
properly estimating the bough’s bearing force, nor their own weight, and since 
surviving alone is seen to be the least preferred outcome, they do nothing at all. 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
207
Hanging is postponed until the arrival of Godot: “Let’s wait and see what he 
says.” They stay together, although they do not really like each other. It would 
be worse to endure the suffering and boredom of life without company. Thus, 
they are in a way like Schopenhauer’s famous porcupines:
One cold winter’s day, a number of porcupines huddled together quite closely in 
order through their mutual warmth to prevent themselves from being frozen. But 
they soon felt the effect of their quills on one another, which made them again 
move apart. Now when the need for warmth once more brought them together, 
the drawback of the quills was repeated so that they were tossed between two 
evils, until they had discovered the proper distance from which they could best 
tolerate one another. Thus the need for society which springs from the emptiness 
and monotony of men’s lives, drives them together; but their many unpleasant 
and repulsive qualities and insufferable drawbacks once more drive them apart. 
(PP II, 651 f.)
When Gogo and Didi think themselves in danger, they cling to each other and 
want to save their lives. When the danger is over, they appreciate every well-
killed hour of this life. “That passed the time,” says Vladimir when Pozzo and 
Lucky are gone. “It would have passed in any case,” replies Estragon. “Yes, but 
not so rapidly,” says Vladimir. (48) If Hamm did not have Clov, who helps him 
kill time through providing a counterpart for his twaddling, driving him around 
in his chair, looking for him out of the window, tinkering him a dog, bringing 
him the gaff, etc., his existence would be even more unbearable. They even 
have had fun together long ago, Hamm recollects “with senile quaver”, but 
“then we got into the way of it.” (42)
Schopenhauer saw at least one means to escape from the pendulum between 
pain and boredom. This is the will-less, visionary contemplation of things, living 
beings, human existence which is the basis of art and which, if circumstances 
are right, can be evoked again by art in the spectator, reader, listener, etc. Soon 
after presenting his brief theory of sociability just quoted, Schopenhauer points 
to that means of escape: “What might otherwise be called the finest part of life, 
its purest joy, just because it lifts us out of real existence, and transforms us into 
disinterested spectators of it, is pure knowledge which remains foreign to all 
willing, pleasure in the beautiful, genuine delight in art.” But those who are able 
to enjoy that means of escape, due to their higher intellectual capacities, are 
again more susceptible to suffering and are lonelier among their fellow human 
beings – “and in this way also matters are made even.” (WWR I, 314)
Some of Beckett’s characters indeed attempt to make use of these means. 
Pozzo and Hamm like to see themselves as literary men. The results of their 

208 
the metaphysical vision
literary swaggering do not satisfy even their authors. Pozzo insinuates that Lucky 
taught him “beautiful things” and was able, in former times, to enjoy beauty, 
grace, and truths of the highest kind. Now he seems to pay for his former joys 
by a greater degree of suffering. The stage of Endgame is a “bare interior”. 
Besides the ashbins, the small curtains, Hamm’s armchair, there is just one 
permanent bit of fixture in the room, a piece of art: a picture near the right door. 
It is hanging “its face to wall”. (11) Just once in the course of action, towards 
the end, somebody takes notice of it: “Clov sees the picture, takes it down, stands 
it on the floor with its face to wall, hangs up the alarm-clock in its place.” (46) No 
“pleasure in the beautiful”, no “genuine delight in art”, indeed.
57. Why will you never let me sleep?
Estragon and Vladimir know that there is a petty substitute for happiness after 
all, under conditions of the pendulum between pain and boredom. This shows 
when one of them tries to withdraw from their unpleasant situation. Estragon, 
contrary to Vladimir, enjoys the gift of a quickly oncoming sleep. Vladimir is 
not willing to let him enjoy this gift for too long a time. He has his reasons.
ESTRAGON: … Let’s stop talking for a minute, do you mind?
 VLADIMIR:  (feebly). All right. (Estragon sits down on the mound. Vladimir
 
paces agitatedly to and fro, halting from time to time to gaze into
 
distance off. Estragon falls asleep. Vladimir halts before Estragon.)
 
Gogo! … Gogo! … GOGO!
 
Estragon wakes with a start.
ESTRAGON:  (restored to the horror of this situation). I was asleep! (Despairingly.)
 
Why will you never let me sleep?
 VLADIMIR: I felt lonely. (15)
In a will-controlled existence, happiness, according to Schopenhauer, can only 
be negative.158 Since the exceptional states of aesthetic contemplation and 
158  “All satisfaction, or what is commonly called happiness, is really and essentially always nega-
tive only, and never positive. It is not a gratiﬁ cation which comes to us originally and of itself, 
but it must always be the satisfaction of a wish. For desire, that is to say, want, is the precedent 
condition of every pleasure; but with the satisfaction, the desire and therefore the pleasure cease; 
and so the satisfaction or gratiﬁ cation can never be more than deliverance from a pain, from a 
want.” WWR I, 319. Cf. above p. 78f.

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
209
 ascetic denial of the will are not to be achieved ad libitum, he considered it 
 wisest for a will-controlled being to strive only for painlessness. This is the most 
important advice of his Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life: “The prudent main 
aims at painlessness, not pleasure.” (PP I, 404) But since the life of human 
persons is usually organized as a pendulum between pain and boredom, both of 
which, though in different ways, come under the heading of suffering, the only 
safe state of painlessness in a ‘normal’ life is sleep. Even those whom we call 
“happy” in comparison to the ones whose entire life is consumed in discharging 
a painful pensum, in Schopenhauer’s eyes are just relatively happy: “Whatever 
we may say, the happiest moment of the happy man is that of his falling asleep, 
just as the unhappiest moment of the unhappy man is that of his awakening.” 
(WWR II, 578) (In one of his thirties jotters, Samuel Beckett carefully copied 
a German newspaper report about a young woman living in Chicago who suf-
fered from compulsive sleeping and could not be cured. Beckett did by no means 
agree with the pitiful tone of that report; instead, he re-titled it and gave it a 
new heading of his own: “Glücklichster Mensch der Welt” [“Happiest human 
being in the world”].)159
If there is happiness for Estragon, it consists in him sleeping, and he seems to 
know this: he laments his waking up. When Estragon is asleep, Vladimir on his 
part feels even more unhappy than usual, since he lacks the palliative of company. 
Therefore, as soon as Estragon has withdrawn into sleep, Vladimir wakes him again. 
The play’s most plagued character, Lucky, cultivated – or had to cultivate – 
sleep as an escape from his tortures more decidedly than the others. “Every time 
he drops he falls asleep,” says Pozzo. Even when standing, Lucky recurs to this 
remedy: “Lucky sags slowly, until bag and basket touch the ground, then straightens up 
with a start and begins to sag again. Rhythm of one sleeping on his feet.” (25)
When Endgame starts, some kind of morning routine is beginning. Hamm, 
after a brief monologue, greets his co-player, Clov, saying “You pollute the air!” 
It is already then that Hamm gives his first order: “Get me ready, I’m going to 
bed.” (13) More than once in the course of the play, Hamm wants to be gotten 
ready and to go to bed. Only, Clov does not fulfil this wish. Moreover, it becomes 
apparent towards the end of the play that an important means for Hamm’s fall-
ing asleep is missing: “There’s no more pain-killer.” (46) Hamm begrudges 
others what he is not granted himself. His father, Nagg, after having been torn 
from his sleep upon Hamm’s order, complains: “I was asleep, as happy as a king, 
and you woke me up to have me listen to you.” (38)
159 Reading University Library MS 5006, 14/1/1937.

210 
the metaphysical vision
In Schopenhauer’s view, more reliable than sleep as a means to halt the 
pendulum between pain and boredom once one has come into existence is 
death. Hamm wishes Clov to finish him. As a reward he offers him access to 
the larder. Clov says he cannot do it. Towards the end, Hamm orders Clov: 
“Put me in my coffin.” Clov replies, “There are no more coffins.” (49) To those 
who have to discharge the pensum of their lives, the time before birth seems 
like a lost paradise. Birth is seen as a mischief, a sin or worse. Hamm shouts 
at his father: “Accursed progenitor!” (15) Or: “Scoundrel! Why did you 
engender me?” (35) Hamm once starts talking about a madman who thought 
the end of the world had come. Clov asks when that had been. Hamm: “Oh 
way back, way back, you weren’t in the land of the living.” Clov: “God be with 
the days!” (32)
When the play nears its end or, rather, this performance nears its end, there 
is the following bit of dialogue:
HAMM: Clov.
  CLOV: (absorbed). Mmm.
HAMM: Do you know what it is?
  CLOV: (as before). Mmm.
HAMM: I was never there. (Pause.) Clov!
  CLOV: (turning towards Hamm, exasperated). What is it?
HAMM: I was never there.
  CLOV: Lucky for you. (47)
Existence itself, extending between an accursed birth and a hoped-for death, is 
experienced as a punishment or penance. The place where life has to be exe-
cuted is some kind of hell. Schopenhauer’s arguments, as presented already, 
correspond closely:
Far from bearing the character of a gift, human existence has entirely the char-
acter of a contracted debt. The calling in of this debt appears in the shape of the 
urgent needs, tormenting desires, and endless misery brought about through that 
existence. As a rule the whole lifetime is used for paying off this debt, yet in this 
way only the interest is cleared off. Repayment of the capital takes place through 
death. And when was this debt contracted? At the begetting. Accordingly, if man 
is regarded as a being whose existence is a punishment and an atonement, then 
he is already seen in a more correct light. … An outcry has been raised about 
the melancholy and cheerless nature of my philosophy; but this is to be found 
merely in the fact that, instead of inventing a future hell as the equivalent of 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
211
sins, I have shown that where guilt is to be found, there is already in the world 
something akin to hell; but he who is inclined to deny this can easily experience 
it. (WWR II, 580 f.)
Clov’s description of his existence, given right at the beginning, conforms to the 
idea of life as a punishment, having the form of a pensum to be worked off:
CLOV:  (fixed gaze, tonelessly). Finished, it’s finished, nearly finished, it must be   
nearly finished. (Pause.) Grain upon grain, one by one, and one day, sud-
denly,  there’s a heap, a little heap, the impossible heap. (Pause.) I can’t 
be punished  any more. (Pause.) (12)
Of course, Clov’s hope that his punishment is ending turns out to be treacher-
ous. It goes on and on. But near the end of this performance of the play about 
ending, Clov is given a chance to present a fragment of his views about what 
indeed is happening. With the same look and the same voice as at the beginning 
(fixed gaze, tonelessly, towards auditorium) he returns to his hope that there might 
be an end to his punishment:
CLOV:  (as before). I say to myself – sometimes, Clov, you must learn to suffer 
better than that if you want them to weary of punishing you – one day. 
I say to myself – sometimes, Clov, you must be there better than that if 
you want them to let you go – one day. (51)
The end of punishment could only be achieved by suffering better. Suffering 
better would help to discharge his pensum earlier and earlier expiate the guilt of 
his existence. Being there better, i.e., fulfilling the lot of his existence and bear-
ing his punishment160 better, might lead to being allowed to go, one infinitely 
distant day in the future.
Among the many things Gogo and Didi, Hamm and Clov have in com-
mon is that they wish to leave their situation, which can be compared to 
hell161, and go. This is what Estragon keeps suggesting, whereupon Vladimir 
160 Schopenhauer (as quoted above): “To have always in hand a sure compass for guiding us in 
life and enabling us always to view this in the right light without ever going astray, nothing is 
more suitable than to accustom ourselves to regard this world as a place of penance and hence 
a penal colony, so to speak, an ε1ργαστη′ριον, as it was called even by the oldest philosophers.” 
(PP II, 302).
161 When Hamm has Clov drive him around in his armchair, he lays his hand against the wall of 
their room and says: “Old wall! (Pause.) Beyond is … the other hell.” (23) For Schopenhauer’s 
words about life being hell see also p. 90 above.

212 
the metaphysical vision
reminds him: “We’re waiting for Godot.” At the end of both acts Vladimir 
indeed agrees to go, but “They do not move.” Clov, from the beginning, wants 
it to end. Ending for him would also mean leaving Hamm. At one point, 
Hamm straightforwardly tells him to be off. Clov does not move but just 
“heaves a great groaning sigh.” Hamm reminds him: “I thought I told you to be 
off.” Clov replies, “I’m trying … Ever since I was whelped.” (18)
Hamm not only wishes himself to die (without being able to), but he also 
wishes any life which still might procreate to die, too. He is anxious to make 
sure that no being is left which might be the starting point of a new evolution 
producing a new mankind. When Clov, at one point, finds a flea on his body, 
Hamm comments: “(very perturbed). But humanity might start from there all 
over again! Catch him, for the love of God!” (27)
Hamm’s valuation of life is reminiscent of Schopenhauer’s: a world without 
life would be decidedly preferable. Nothingness would be preferable to Being. 
As has been pointed out, Schopenhauer thinks “that it would have been much 
better if … the surface of the earth, like that of the moon, had still been in a 
crystalline state. We can also regard our life as a uselessly disturbing episode in 
the blissful repose of nothingness.” (PP II, 299) Hamm could also agree with 
Schopenhauer’s claim that anybody who understands the lesson which life is 
teaching, will thereupon reply: “For this reason, I wish I had been left in the 
peace of the all-sufficient nothing, where I should have had no need either of 
lessons or of anything else.” (WWR II, 580) The peace of the all-sufficient nothing: 
This is what Hamm and Clov are yearning for, just as do Murphy (above p. 151) 
and the Unnamable.
Although Hamm and Clov wish their life to end or, at the least, their pres-
ent situation to end, they stay where they are and go on living similar to 
Vladimir and Estragon who decide to go but do not move. Hamm does not fall 
asleep, is not put in his coffin, does not proceed to kill himself or be killed by 
Clov, but remains in his armchair. Clov at the end of the performance indeed 
enters “dressed for the road.” However: “He halts by the door and stands there, 
impassive and motionless, his eyes fixed on Hamm, till the end.” (51 f.) That was 
Clov’s posture at the very beginning: “Motionless by the door, his eyes fixed on 
Hamm. Clov.” (11)
It is significant that Beckett, in his English translation of the original French 
text, inserted or altered a number of details. Some important alterations enforce 
the view that nothing essential in Hamm’s and Clov’s world has changed and 
that nothing is changing. Among those alterations is the stage direction for 
Hamm’s final posture and the aspect of the whole stage during the last moments 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
213
of the performance. The very last words of the stage direction, inserted in the 
English version, and not yet there in the French one, read: “lowers his arms to 
armrests, remains motionless. Brief tableau.” (53) These last words most forcefully 
emphasize the perfectly static nature of the world which is depicted here.
58. Old endgame lost of old
The subject matter of Waiting for Godot is: Being there and not being able to 
go. The subject matter of Endgame is: Being there and not being able to end. To be 
there and not to be able to escape this very basic predicament is the main theme 
of both plays. The structure of this predicament is developed and explored. Its 
dissolution is wanted and hoped for. It is anticipated that the dissolution will be 
impossible. At the end, this impossibility is confirmed and accepted, explicitly 
or implicitly. Then there is nothing left to say.
In both plays the main characters know, or at least sense in some sort, that 
they have lived through this situation or course of ‘action’ before. They also 
know, or at least sense in some sort, that they will have to live through a similar 
situation or course of ‘action’ again in the near future, possibly under conditions 
which will be even worse than the present ones. When, after their first appear-
ance, Pozzo and Lucky have gone again, Vladimir remarks that the two of them 
have changed. Estragon purports not to know them. Vladimir insists that he 
and Estragon have seen them before, “unless they are not the same.” Vladimir 
also thinks that he has seen the boy before, whereas the boy does not remember 
him. After a brief discussion about what might be called their past ‘relationship’, 
Estragon and Vladimir decide to go, but, typically, remain motionless.
Their non-action is not forced upon them. Their passivity is contrary to 
their own words, but certainly of their own making.162 Nobody and nothing, as 
far as can be seen, keeps them from going. Therefore it seems absurd that, after 
their explicit decision to go, they do not move. It would be inadequate, however, 
just to see an absurdity here and nothing else. Beckett’s essay on Proust already 
contains a view of human persons after which Gogo’s and Didi’s behaviour is 
not absurd (in the sense of inexplicable) at all, but conforms to a basic element 
of human existence: “So that we are rather in the position of Tantalus, with this 
162 Because of this, the play’s substance cannot be just waiting as Hugh Kenner claims in his 
 otherwise elucidating essay Waiting for Godot (in: H. Bloom (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for 
Godot).

214 
the metaphysical vision
difference, that we allow ourselves to be tantalised.” (Proust 13) The provoking 
clause “that we allow ourselves to be tantalised”, in Proust is not, like some other 
of Beckett’s statements in that essay, derived from the analysis of time, but must 
rest on other considerations. The most likely candidate for this is that human 
beings are driven by their “will to live”. (Proust 15) This will, in Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy and in Beckett’s adaptation of it, constantly affirms itself without 
having to do so by special ‘acts’. The will’s self-affirmation in Schopenhauer’s 
theory is construed similar to the principle of self-preservation (conservatio sui) 
in seventeenth-century philosophy, which principle does not need any explicit 
decision either for being in force. Such is the Tantalus-like waiting of Estragon 
and Vladimir: They allow themselves to be tantalised since this conforms to 
their situation as willing beings in a world where there is no true, non-illusory 
satisfaction whatsoever. What is available instead and what is silently accepted 
by the self-affirmation of willing, is described by Schopenhauer’s well-known 
words about human existence: “Nowhere is there a goal, nowhere a final satis-
faction, nowhere a point of rest” (WWR I, 309); “our state is so wretched that 
complete non-existence would be decidedly preferable to it” (WWR I, 324); 
“life is nothing but a series of disappointed hopes, frustrated plans, and errors 
recognized too late … something that were better not to be, a kind of mistake” 
(PP II, 321).
Hamm and Clov do know that they play and that they played many times. 
Their play is always about ending. Their age is, by human standards, like Vladi-
mir’s and Estragon’s, immemorial. The persistently repeated attempt to end is 
undertaken by beings who exist outside the structure of empirical time – just as 
Molloy, Malone, the Unnamable and other characters in Beckett’s work. Some 
of these even have been dead long ago and still somehow keep going on and on.
Hamm and Clov know that their Endgame is merely the play about an end 
which does not and cannot arrive.163 After Clov has told himself that he must 
learn to suffer better than that if he wants them to let him go one day, he real-
izes: “Good, it’ll never end, I’ll never go.” He still imagines some possible chang-
es which might perhaps be seen as if an end might be nearer – something of the 
kind which happens to Malone or the Unnamable: further away from mankind 
163 E. Amiran (Wandering and Home: Beckett’s Metaphysical Narrative, University Park PA, 1993) 
sees Beckett’s narrative works, too, as presenting a life process “that cannot end, that can never 
reach nothing” (p.5). That Endgame may be some kind of ritual which is repeated over and over 
again was observed by, among others, Adorno (Versuch, das Endspiel zu verstehen, p. 228), and 
Acheson (Samuel Beckett’s Artistic Theory and Practice, p. 160).

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
215
and closer to a state in which ending is slightly more plausible. Of this sort is 
Clov’s last idea of the future state of his body: “I am so bowed I only see my feet, 
if I open my eyes, and between my legs a little trail of black dust. … When I fall 
I’ll weep for happiness.” (51) But even this, by the standards of Molloy, Malone, 
the Unnamable and others, would still be far from being a true end.
When the performance on stage is nearing its end, Hamm, just as he did at 
the beginning, announces that he is going to play. Then he “wearily” utters the 
words which ascertain the status and the success, i.e., the failure, of this play: 
“Old endgame lost of old, play and lose and have done with losing.” The French 
and English texts differ at this point. This is another one of Beckett’s alterations. 
The French text has: “Vieille fin de partie perdue, finir de perdre.” There is no 
equivalent yet for “of old”. In the English version, the endgame is not just lost, 
but has been lost long ago. The failure has been predetermined for a very long 
time. This further confirms what has been assumed already: that there have 
been many performances before that have ended in failure, just as the present 
one does. The old endgame, played many times, in which the end is again and 
again aimed at, hoped for, but never attained, is lost of old.
In chess, which most likely is alluded to by the title, there are end-games 
which cannot possibly be won, i.e., they cannot come to that end in which one 
party is checkmated. Anybody who wants to win such an end-game is faced with 
a predictable, predetermined failure. For any player who is determined to arrive 
at a regular end (and not give up or agree on a draw), such a match, although 
never decided, means defeat.164 Of course, in an end-game of chess that cannot 
be won but is continued indefinitely, it is quite normal that the same position of 
the chessmen can recur (in some end-games: must recur) again and again.
Possibly, even likely, Hamm and Clov are up to something even more frustrat-
ing. They look like players in an end-game of a special kind of chess, namely the 
kind Murphy plays against the brilliant Mr. Endon (!). The course of that game 
is such that Mr. Endon, again and again, is invited, as it were, by Murphy to take 
one of his chessmen, especially his queen, and in the end, beat him. But Murphy 
fails in his attempts to rouse any will to win in Mr. Endon. On the contrary, 
Mr. Endon steadfastly refuses to make any move to his own advantage. He thereby 
ingeniously thwarts all of Murphy’s attempts to make him win. Upon recognizing 
Mr. Endon to be the superior player in that kind of chess, Murphy surrenders.
164 For another way to see Endgame as a game of chess, cf.: J. Acheson, Chess with the Audience: 
Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, in: Critical Quarterly 22 (1980), p. 33–45. See also Adorno, Versuch, 
das Endspiel zu verstehen, p. 230.

216 
the metaphysical vision
It is possible to play chess reversely, with the aim of forcing the other party 
to checkmate oneself. This is the kind of fight Murphy puts up and loses against 
Mr. Endon. End-games of that kind of chess are extremely difficult and can 
virtually never be won. Since the stage directions of Endgame are such that 
Hamm’s and Clov’s movements are described in a way highly similar to the 
rigidly defined movements on a chessboard, the characters can plausibly be seen 
as playing some close analogue to Endon’s chess, without any chance to ever 
come to an end. Any two players, who are up to a game of Endon’s chess, are, if 
both ‘fight’ their opponent reasonably well, losers from the very start.
As in a game of chess, the characters of Endgame follow movements and 
take up positions on stage, all meticulously defined. But as it may happen in 
chess when both players are in a situation where winning is impossible, they end 
up after a while in the very same position which they had occupied before. 
Beckett, in his English translation, made it perfectly clear that Hamm’s and 
Clov’s positions are precisely the same at the beginning and at the end. In the 
French version, the stage direction for Clov’s place at the beginning reads: 
“Immobile à côté du fauteuil, Clov le regarde.” This is not quite his position at the 
end: “Près de la porte, impassible, les yeux fixés sur Hamm, Clov reste immobile 
jusqu’a la fin.” In Beckett’s English version, Clov’s position at the end is indeed 
the same as in the French one: “He halts by the door and stands there, impassive 
and motionless, his eyes fixed on Hamm.” However, in that English version, Clov 
does not start the play standing by Hamm’s armchair, but, precisely as at the 
end: “Motionless by the door, his eyes fixed on Hamm, Clov.”
Hamm’s and Clov’s end-game has been played of old again and again; it 
cannot end, and in this sense it is lost from the start. The only thing which is 
left for Hamm to do when this performance ends is to summon himself to play 
and to lose (i.e., not to end), hoping and wishing that he has done with losing. 
If the losing indeed had been done with, this would truly be an end. But Hamm 
can only act as if Clov had gone (he is motionlessly standing by the door), and 
as if he himself had come to a genuine end (he just remains in his armchair and 
covers his face with the handkerchief, as the face was covered with that hand-
kerchief at the beginning). Nobody can believe this to be a definitive end, 
certainly not by the standards of Beckett’s work of the postwar period.
Endgame is presented as a performance, the characters knowing that they 
play and saying so. Hamm is especially articulate about this. Quite a few remarks 
of his throughout the play refer to his role as a player. He knows the technical 
terms for the parts of a drama’s dialogue and uses them. From his “Me … to 
play” at the beginning up to his “last soliloquy” at the end, Hamm almost 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
217
 showcases himself as an actor in a stage production. Clov, who suffers more and 
therefore (quite in line with Schopenhauer’s doctrine of the benefits of extreme 
suffering) is granted more bits of insight into their common situation, comes up 
with a request:
  CLOV: (imploringly). Let’s stop playing.
HAMM: Never! (Pause.) Put me in my coffin. (49)
In the terminology of chess, Clov’s request is the offer to surrender or, at least, 
a plea to quit playing. In the terminology of the theatre, Clov’s request is the 
wish to come to a definite end. Hamm refuses. The play goes on and, after this 
performance, will commence afresh, the players starting from the same positions 
they had occupied last time. None of the characters who are still subject to their 
individual will has yet arrived at the attitude which Schopenhauer takes to be 
that of the true ascetic who indeed can see life as game of chess which has come 
to a genuine end:
Nothing can distress or alarm him any more; nothing can any longer move him; 
for he has cut all the thousand threads of willing which hold us bound to the 
world, and which as craving, fear, envy, and anger drag us here and there in 
constant pain. He now looks back calmly and with a smile on the phantasmago-
ria of this world which was once able to move and agonize even his mind, but 
now stands before him as indifferently as chess-men at the end of the game … 
(WWR I, 390)
59. The form of life is the endless present
When we ask why Endgame does not really end, why Didi and Gogo keep wait-
ing indefinititely, why the Unnamable has to go on jabbering although long 
being dead, why most of Beckett’s later ‘plots’ are without a definitive end but 
remain open to go on and on towards ever worsening situations, we may remem-
ber the timeless, bleak nature of what Schopenhauer considered to be the 
metaphysical truth about human existence: that there is no true end of striving, 
that is, of suffering and pain, and that especially individual death which people 
mistake for a genuine end, does not provide an end at all to the suffering which 
is the eternal fate of life. Schopenhauer takes it that the metaphysical vision of 
the philosopher as well as of the genuine artist brings that truth to mind, where-
as empirical perception tends to consistently overlook it, since this perception 
remains in the service of the Will and therefore remains blind in all matters of 

218 
the metaphysical vision
metaphysical insight. We may also remember the passage from which we started 
the present inquiry into Schopenhauer’s philosophy and Beckett’s metaphysical 
pessimism:
The present alone is that which always exists and stands ﬁ rm and immovable. 
That which, empirically apprehended, is the most ﬂ eeting of all, manifests itself 
to the metaphysical vision that sees beyond the forms of empirical perception as 
that which alone endures, as the nunc stans of the scholastics. The source and 
supporter of its content is the Will-to-live, or the thing-in-itself – which we are. 
(WWR I, 279)165
In Proust, the gist of Samuel Beckett’s view in these matters may be seen in that 
he also distinguishes between an empirical mode of perceiving the world, and 
a metaphysical – in his case an artistic – one. The empirical glance sticks to the 
caricature-like surface of worldly phenomena and is subject to the needs of the 
individual will and of habit. Suffering and boredom, the latter being in the last 
analysis nothing but suffering as well, are not recognized by the empirical glance 
as the main constituents of life: Habit makes us arrange our perception and our 
lives so as not to come into close contact with true reality. The metaphysical 
vision in Beckett’s essay is that of the artist who prefers the suffering of being to 
the boredom of living and thereby acquires knowledge of what is beyond everyday 
phenomena: true reality. This reality is declared to be of a non-empirical nature. 
Beckett claims that it has the ontological status of the Idea, although his notion 
of this metaphysical entity differs in some detail from Schopenhauer’s. In any 
case, for Beckett, too, the term “Idea”, as it did for Schopenhauer (and Plato), 
stands for true reality as opposed to the everyday, distorted contents of sense 
perception.
It would be hard to find a literal equivalent for Beckett’s early notion of 
“the Idea” in his later work. However, what is to be found is an image of life 
outside normal relations of space and, especially, outside the normal structure 
of time. The reality of Beckett’s characters, from the postwar period onwards, 
is in most cases not a reality within empirical time, but, rather, a reality where 
time tends to stand still. In the main, there is but minimal change, usually for 
the worse. For the leading characters and their situation which drags on and 
on, there is no substantial betterment to be expected. It is as if time had ceased 
to “move”, as we say, or, rather, as if the reality depicted here did not move in 
time. In that sense it may also be said that Beckett’s reality tends to stay 
165 As at the beginning, I replaced “glance” by “vision”. For the reasons see note 1 above.

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
219
 immobile, as if it were timeless. Certainly it is not subject to the rules and 
 conventions of time as we experience it in the phenomenal, everyday world.
The similarity between Beckett’s world and the metaphysical world of 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy can hardly be overlooked: Schopenhauer, too, con-
siders true, metaphysical reality to be without genuine development, without 
history, without substantial change, but certainly to be prone to persistent pain, 
as if it were exposed to an everlasting, permanently burning sun which ensures 
an eternal mid-day. There is no end to the everlasting presence of striving and 
suffering under the rule of the Will-to-live. We already know some of the 
words:
But just as on the globe everywhere is above, so the form of all life is the present; 
and to fear death because it robs us of the present is no wiser than to fear that we 
can slip down from the round globe on the top of which we are now fortunately 
standing. The form of the present is essential to the objectiﬁ cation of the Will. As 
an extensionless point, it cuts time which extends inﬁ nitely in both directions, and 
stands ﬁ rm and immovable, like an everlasting midday without a cool evening, 
just as the actual sun burns without intermission, while only apparently does it 
sink into the bosom of the night. … Life is certain to the Will-to-live; the form of 
life is the endless present; it matters not how individuals, the phenomena of the 
Idea, arise and pass away in time, like ﬂ eeting dreams. (WWR I, 280 f.)
Schopenhauer’s metaphysical vision gives an image of human persons outside 
the normal relations of space and time, therefore (since space and time form 
the principium individuationis), also outside the form of empirical individuality. 
Empirical individuals do die, but, metaphysically, this death is irrelevant and 
meaningless. It does not seem inadequate at all to see Beckett’s leading char-
acters, like those of the trilogy, of Waiting for Godot, of Endgame and of many 
later works, as providing an image of what living beings turn out to be if we look 
at them from a Schopenhauerian metaphysical viewpoint: The passing-by of 
time is an illusion, the individual death is illusory, what is left for that kind of 
view is the everlasting presence of living beings in a persistent, Tantalus-like 
situation with no chance of escape.
Just as on any stage there is, empirically, an above, below, before, after, we 
also see, empirically, actors who play certain individuals. But as the true logic 
of the kind of ‘life’ which is depicted here is not that of empirical existence in 
empirical time, the true logic of the characters we see is not that of empirical, 
individual persons. Seen from this point of view, the individuals presented on 
stage are merely part of the theatre convention, just the same as the spatiotem-
poral procedure of the activities on stage. As a form of life which, being a 

220 
the metaphysical vision
metaphysical metaphor, does not develop within the forms and boundaries of 
human individuality, the life of Beckett’s characters shows a striking closeness 
to what Schopenhauer thought to be the metaphysical truth of human  existence: 
The metaphysical essence of life constantly affirms itself without knowing this, 
and constantly suffers the pain which results from its own nature, without hav-
ing a chance to understand why all this is happening. To recapitulate briefly: 
Beckett claimed in Proust that persons, without fully understanding themselves, 
are like a Tantalus who allows himself to be tantalised. Schopenhauer described 
the metaphysical truth of life, too, as “a constant striving without aim and 
without rest”, “an unquenchable thirst”, “need, lack, and hence pain”. (WWR I, 
311 f.) Empirical individuals at least die some day. The metaphysical vision of 
life in Schopenhauer’s sense, and, it seems, in Beckett’s as well, is such that the 
individual death is a mere phenomenon and therefore only provides an illusory 
release: this metaphysical aspect of life is such that there is no end of want and 
suffering, no genuine death, just, in Schopenhauer’s terms, an incessantly burn-
ing mid-day of neediness, a never-ending, painful present. Waiting for Godot and 
Endgame, seen from Schopenhauer’s point of view and from that of Beckett’s 
Proust, present a stage action which metaphorically represents life’s nature as it 
is, not an object of the empirical eye, but of the metaphysical vision: “The earth 
rolls from day into night; the individual dies; but the sun itself burns without 
intermission, an eternal noon.”
60. Since that’s the way we’re playing it, 
let’s play it that way
Hamm and Clov, being characters of a stage play, know that they play and 
experience their playing as constraint. Neither of them manages to step out, 
although both, in their own way, wish the play to end. Even the very last words 
and doings, Hamm declares, are parts of a play, just as were the very first ones. 
Endgame is a performance presented as such on stage – not a play within a play 
as we know it, but a play about having to go on and on performing a play.
Schopenhauer trusted the metaphysical vision to see not only the life of 
human persons as a theatre play, but the whole world, too, together with all its 
events and living beings. He adopted the old idea of the world as theatre, not 
only for the fate of individuals, but also for the fate of the self-objectifying 
Will as thing-in-itself. According to him, the thing-in-itself has its self-
objectification, its form as a phenomenon, in the world as a totality. The world 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
221
as we experience it empirically is there only because the Will as essence of the 
world strives to objectify itself in the form of worldly objects, and also strives to 
gain an indirect awareness of itself through the eyes of living beings. 
 Schopenhauer sums up this metaphysical view of the world as a piece of theatre 
organized for the Will as thing-in-itself, by the Will as thing-in-itself: “Yet no 
further complaint of this can be made from any direction, for the Will performs 
the great tragedy and comedy at its own expense, and is also its own spectator.” 
(WWR I, 331)
Schopenhauer assumes that the thing-in-itself comes to the highest grade 
of its self-awareness in human persons. He also takes it that in the experience 
of suffering, as it fills those person’s lives, the thing-in-itself comes closest to 
having a notion of its own timeless, persistently painful nature. In  Schopenhauer’s 
system, the metaphysical vision as a privilege of the artist and of the artistically 
inclined philosopher is the furthest-reaching and most comprehensive epistemic 
means we possess when it comes to gaining knowledge of the true nature of the 
world and of ourselves. Using Schopenhauer’s expression and drawing upon the 
amazing similarity between this philosopher’s view of the world and that of 
Beckett’s works, we may say that Beckett’s plays constitute a theatre of metaphysi-
cal vision. For this vision, the basic forms of empirical perception are empty and 
void. When, in Waiting for Godot and Engame for instance, the characters try to 
gain some reliable orientation about their place in time, the results prove their 
experience of time to be corrupt from the very start. Basically the same applies 
to their attempts to know for sure where they are and what may be beyond the 
immediate range of their eyes. Hamm and Clov, like Vladimir and some of 
Beckett’s other characters166, have the vague impression that they are part of a 
performance for a possible spectator or onlooker whom they do not know. 
‘Normal’ persons, in Schopenhauer’s view, cannot see that they, in fact, are the 
characters of a great performance who have to lead a life of suffering, fit for any 
tragedy, but who do not possess the dignity of tragic figures, since they “in the 
broad detail of life are inevitably the foolish characters of a comedy.” (WWR I, 
322) At very rare moments, however, some characters of Waiting for Godot and 
Endgame reflect about the possibility that somebody might see them. This 
166 E.g.: Winnie, the Unnamable, the narrator of Comment c’est have some kind of awareness 
about another party seeing them and, in that sense, that they are part of a presentation for some 
unknown looker-on. The hero of Film acts according to the principle esse est percipi and tries to 
escape that kind of existence. He prefers not to be although he is just as Hamm and Clov want 
to end but have to go on living.

222 
the metaphysical vision
 corresponds to their having, again at very rare moments, some poor fragments 
of metaphysical insight.
The heroes of conventional tragedy, Schopenhauer claimed, have to expi-
ate the guilt of their very existence. Beckett endorsed that view in Proust: “The 
tragic figure represents the expiation of original sin, of the original and eternal 
sin of him and all his ‘socii malorum’, the sin of having been born.” (67) At the 
end of the tragic action, however, the heroes of tragedy, according to 
 Schopenhauer, are granted some insight into the common nature of all beings. 
This is the result of their excessive amount of suffering; normal persons do not 
enjoy this privilege. Furthermore, Schopenhauer assumed that the tragic heroes 
at this moment finally manage to cease affirming their will-to-live, not to resist 
further suffering, and gladly accept death. Their attitude is similar to the only 
one which, in very rare cases, allows a living being to become permanently free 
from the otherwise ubiquitous striving and suffering: the denial of the Will-to-live. 
This is Schopenhauer’s new interpretation of the tragic experience: the heroes 
of tragedy, after an excessively painful life, are raised to the metaphysical insight 
into the true nature of their existence and briefly enjoy the freedom from the 
pressure of their will-to-live. The spectators of tragedy may thus come to the 
point of recognizing that there is such an attitude and there might be a different 
way to lead their lives.
As quoted above, Clov, near the close of Endgame, utters a few words which 
show that he, too, has some fragmentary insight into the basic conditions of his 
life and that he, therefore, can at least see in the very distance a marginal 
chance of becoming free – although there is little hope that he will ever get to 
that point: “I say to myself – sometimes, Clov, you must learn to suffer better 
than that if you want them to weary of punishing you – one day. I say to myself – 
sometimes, Clov, you must be there better than that if you want them to let you 
go – one day. But I feel too old, and too far, to form new habits.” (51)
Endgame, seen from Schopenhauer’s point of view, is truer and more 
 merciless than any conventional tragedy. It is truer because from the very begin-
ning the dramatic characters know that they just play. It is more merciless, 
because these characters neither die in the end, nor are straightforwardly grant-
ed the redemptory denial of the Will-to-live. Their wish to end in  Schopenhauer’s 
view would have to be classified as the typical error of individuals who do not 
recognize that personal death is metaphysically meaningless and that longing 
for that death is just another form of affirming the eternal Will-to-live. Clov 
only can see the redemptory attitude in an almost infinite distance. Whether 
he will ever be able to acquire this is most dubious (just as in Schopenhauer’s 

 
gogo and didi, hamm and clov 
223
own philosophy the lasting denial of the Will remains a matter of grace and a 
miracle, above p. 74). Still, Clov’s seeing the mere possibility of the attitude, 
which finally would mean freedom from the Will, may still be considered a small 
fragment of metaphysical insight which Schopenhauer had claimed to be the 
reward of living through the sufferings of a tragic fate.
Perhaps Hamm, too, may be considered to show rudiments of resignation 
in that he willingly complies with the rules of the game and does not, for indi-
vidual purposes, resist the pre-defined course of events: “Since that’s the way 
we’re playing it… (he unfolds handkerchief) …let’s play it that way.” (52) 
 Whether Hamm indeed may be taken to see, in the infinite distance, a 
 Schopenhauerian kind of redemption, must be left open. Nevertheless, his 
acceptance that he is merely acting to end instead of indeed attaining that aim 
may be taken to indicate that he is not perfectly averse to the piece of advice 
which Beckett gave in Proust: “the wisdom that consists not in the satisfaction 
but in the ablation of desire.” (Proust 18)


61. Schopenhauer made use of
The chief doctrine of Schopenhauer’s philosophy is his metaphysics of the Will 
as thing-in-itself. The theoretical justification for this doctrine as put forward 
in the Second Book of The World as Will and Representation is an argument from 
analogy and, even by Schopenhauer’s own standards, remains, in the last 
 analysis, uncertain. Schopenhauer’s lasting popularity among many artists is 
due to the fact that a consistent reading of his philosophy grants art a distinctive 
primacy over philosophy in metaphysical matters. The metaphysical vision of 
the artist, according to Schopenhauer’s own theory of art, provides a more 
certain and richer access to the world’s metaphysical nature than philosophical 
theory. Moreover, the preconditions of the artist’s visionary states of mind, as 
 Schopenhauer puts them, are similar to what important artists of twentieth-
century modernity considered necessary for an artistic access to the world’s 
essential reality: a mental attitude by which space, time, and empirical self dis-
solve, so as to make room for the emergence of a different world view which is 
judged truer than the empirical one. Furthermore, Schopenhauer’s metaphysi-
cally grounded deeply pessimistic image of life never ceased and is unlikely to 
ever cease appealing to persons of a cognate frame of mind. Schopenhauer’s 
impact in that respect is largely enhanced by his mastery of language and 
CONCLUDING REMARKS

226 
the metaphysical vision
 metaphor which makes him present the consequences of his philosophical 
system in a form sometimes closer to superb literature than to philosophical 
theory. Beckett commented on that (as cited): “And it is a pleasure also to find 
a philosopher that can be read like a poet …”167
Beckett’s Proust, it could be shown, rests largely on Schopenhauer’s 
 philosophy in most respects of the theory of art and of a metaphysical 
 interpretation of human life and the world. However, Beckett adapted 
 Schopenhauer’s tools of aesthetic analysis so as to fit an artistic procedure dif-
ferent from what this philosopher, neglecting the power of history, considered 
to be timeless forms of art. He also re-interpreted Schopenhauer’s theory of 
Ideas and thereby freed its subject from the statue-like immobility which has 
often been criticized. Despite these amendments, Beckett’s overall approach to 
art and human life in Proust remains distinctly Schopenhauerian. This is, 
 perhaps, best shown by his silently using Schopenhauerian elements, even 
wordings, at a number of points without telling his reader. Obviously, 
 Schopenhauer’s philosophy was constantly present in the author’s mind when 
he wrote the essay on Proust’s Recherche.
Just a small selection of Beckett’s literary works could be considered. As 
was said, Beckett does not translate Schopenhauerian philosophy into  literature. 
Notwithstanding that, there is a striking closeness between the philosopher’s 
view of art, life, and world and the existential predicament as well as the views 
and actions of important characters in Beckett’s oeuvre. This, quite apart from 
Beckett’s unswerving commitment to Schopenhauer’s philosophy, justifies my 
attempt to read some of Beckett’s works from a Schopenhauerian point of view. 
The works considered only constitute but a fraction (though an important and 
influential one) of Beckett’s oeuvre. It may be assumed that many more details 
about traces of Schopenhauer’s philosophy in Beckett’s work can be 
discovered.
The individual works examined may be seen as representing four different 
ways how parts of Schopenhauer’s philosophy recur in Beckett’s oeuvre.  Murphy 
is not the narrator of his own story. Therefore, his experiences concerning the 
dissolution of the empirical world and of the self do not directly influence and 
restructure the very process of narration. Even when the narration refers to the 
innermost parts of Murphy’s personality (in the chapter on Murphy’s mind and 
the passages just before the fire in which he perishes), this report is not  Murphy’s 
167 Letter to Thomas MacGreevy of 21 Sept. 1937. Quoted from: Knowlson, Damned to Fame, 
p. 268.

 
concluding remarks 
227
own. There exist significant similarities between Murphy’s ecstatic states of 
mind and Schopenhauer’s aesthetic contemplation, even though the main bulk 
of propositions about Murphy’s mind, as presented in chapter six, originates 
from seventeenth-century metaphysical systems like those of Descartes, 
 Geulincx, Spinoza, and Leibniz. The similarities to Schopenhauer’s states of 
contemplation are to be found in the narrator’s reports about Murphy’s vision-
ary experiences and their necessary preconditions, such as the disappearance of 
the spatiotemporal world, the dissolution of self-awareness, the keenly empha-
sized will-lessness, the bliss in beholding a non-empirical, never to be disturbed 
reality. But Murphy is not described as a person who produces works of art or 
kindred artefacts and who lives for doing so. The description of his visionary 
states of mind is not linked with propositions about transforming their contents 
into something else.
Moran, the second hero of Molloy, is presented as an “agent”. But the reality 
of his life and mental attitudes is less than agent-like. If we consult Beckett’s 
description of the artist’s life and mind as given in Proust (which closely resem-
bles that given in Schopenhauer’s philosophy of art), we are bound to conclude 
that Moran is, without fail, rather more of an artist than an agent. His mental 
approach to the subject of his search and his report, too, is often literally 
 congruent with the way Beckett, following Schopenhauer at several points, 
characterized the devoted artist. During his trip, which ends in failure, Moran 
develops a unique kind of autonomy which consists in his being committed to 
an impersonal, inner entity. It is an entity similar to that which, in later parts 
of the trilogy, provides the very matter of narration. The new mental integrity 
which Moran acquires during the process of his body’s decay and his renuncia-
tion of any form of physical and economic well-being, closely resembles the 
unique invulnerability which, in Schopenhauer’s philosophy and in Beckett’s 
Proust, is ascribed to those who voluntarily accept their distress and suffering, 
and thereby turn away from the surface of the world and open “a window on 
the real”, a metaphysical vision of true reality.
In The Unnamable we do not, as we still do in Molloy, find a well-described 
person as the narrator anymore. The novel, in the process of its evolvement, 
realizes the “identity of subject and object” in a way more radical and further 
reaching than was envisaged in Schopenhauer’s aesthetics and Beckett’s Proust. 
That identity had been assumed to be the mark of artistic experience and the 
basis for artistic production. In The Unnamable, the ‘narrator’ in different phases 
of his ‘existence’ and, after a while, even in the process of speaking, jabbering, 
etc., keeps merging into what is spoken about. Despite the unreality, even 

228 
the metaphysical vision
 logical impossibility of his ‘life’, the Unnamable, when describing his situation 
and ‘existence’, still sporadically uses expressions which Beckett in Proust had 
taken straight from Schopenhauer’s philosophy.
The plays, of course, do not have a narrator, not even a self-contradictory 
one. Fragments of Beckett’s early thoughts on art and life and of Schopenhauer’s 
respective views, however, keep recurring more or less distinctly in the dialogue 
and the actions of the characters. I focussed on two plays only. The ‘reality’ 
represented on stage in those plays is such that it comes surprisingly close to what 
Schopenhauer thought to be only the object of a metaphysical vision, not a vision 
centring on some ideal species, but one centring on the all-embracing truth of 
what life, considered metaphysically, really is. Schopenhauer did not know of 
any form of art which might be capable of representing the content of his meta-
physical views on the vanity and suffering of life. Tragedy, as described in his 
theory of art, looks like a one-sided, limited product of art when compared to 
Beckett’s dramas. Seen from the standpoint of Schopenhauer’s metaphysics, 
Waiting for Godot and Endgame are plays which indeed still use the forms of space, 
time, and individuality in matters of stage technique, but have dropped them as 
far as the inner structure of the kind of life and the whole world depicted here 
is concerned. Thus, viewed from a Schopenhauerian perspective, Beckett’s plays 
must be taken as presenting an all-embracing essence of life which this philoso-
pher would have termed “truer” than any kind of traditional tragedy, but for 
which there was no place in his theory of dramatic art.
62. Schopenhauer altered
Early on, I briefly compared Beckett’s Proust to Nietzsches’s Birth of Tragedy in 
several respects: both books represent early stages in their author’s thinking 
about art and life, both draw heavily on Schopenhauer’s philosophy and at the 
same time start moving away from him, and both books were reassessed  critically 
by their authors later in life. Still, in the mature works of both authors we find 
highly visible marks of their early engagement with Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy.
That Beckett adapted and altered Schopenhauer’s theory for his own pur-
poses in Proust was easily recognized. Some of these alterations were due to 
Beckett’s subject, Proust’s Recherche. Some of them were occasioned by Proust’s 
self-interpretation as given in the last book of that work. The most important 
one of Beckett’s alterations was to reorganize Schopenhauer’s aesthetic theory, 

 
concluding remarks 
229
so as to rest now on a different notion of “Idea”. Beckett, indeed just as 
 Schopenhauer, took “Idea” to be a word for the extratemporal, extraspatial 
essence of everyday phenomena and, in that sense, for true reality. However, 
Beckett, did not conceive Ideas to be the archetypes of living species (as 
 Schopenhauer did), but, following Proust, saw them as the extratemporal 
essence of situations experienced formerly in a habit-controlled, impoverished, 
therefore untrue form.
Yet more important than Beckett’s statements in matters of philosophical 
aesthetics, of course, is his literary oeuvre. Some details of the works considered 
may indeed be read as a word-by-word implementation of Schopenhauer’s view 
of human life. But it is an implementation which this philosopher himself would 
have thought impossible, since Beckett, in other important respects, does 
not stick to Schopenhauer’s theory of art at all anymore. Still, Beckett does 
not abandon Schopenhauer’s philosophy by way of dropping it altogether. He 
keeps to important elements of Schopenhauer’s picture of what life truly is, in 
a literary form which largely expands the limits of what formerly would have 
been considered feasible. This expansion by far transcends the alterations which 
Beckett had administered to Schopenhauer’s theory in Proust already.
Murphy, as a person who wants to escape from the quid pro quo of the 
empirical world with its pensums, prizes, objects of desire, and who wants his 
will to turn into dust, can still be relatively easily examined for similarities and 
differences between his attitudes and Schopenhauer’s philosophy. It was not 
difficult in principle to find in him a certain amount of properties, including 
those of his mind and his self-forgetful visions, and to compare them with 
 Schopenhauer’s description of ecstatic, will-less states of perceiving true reality. 
It was not difficult either to compare Murphy’s doings and mental attitudes with 
that philosopher’s statements on the life of persons who try to withdraw from 
their individual will and live for acquiring knowledge of a different, truer world. 
Differences and similarities between Murphy on the one hand and a 
 Schopenhauerian will-less person on the other, who lives for his or her visions, 
can be discussed without special epistemic problems. Also, it is epistemically 
normal that some points in such an undertaking have to remain undecided, 
since Beckett’s book is not a doctoral dissertation in the psychology of mystical 
or near-mystical experiences, but a novel.
Moran, although possessing obvious similarities to the artist of Beckett’s 
Proust and to Schopenhauer’s “genius”, is not just a fictional character but also 
a logically questionable one. This becomes obvious at the very end when 
Moran’s report, that is, the second part of the novel Molloy, proves to be  logically 

230 
the metaphysical vision
contradictory. The last words of that report read: “Then I went back into the 
house and wrote, It is midnight. The rain is beating on the windows. It was not 
midnight. It was not raining.” (Molloy 176) The beginning of Moran’s report 
was: “It is midnight. The rain is beating on the windows.” (92) The end of the 
report, considered together with its context and the opening sentences, reads 
like an instance of the liar paradox. Even as a fictional product, the report 
contradicts any claim to be read as a straightforward story. Thus one may indeed 
draw up a list of Moran’s properties as so-called ‘agent’ and writer of his report, 
and compare them to the properties of the artist in Beckett’s Proust and in 
Schopenhauer’s philosophy. In doing so, one will come to understand some of 
Moran’s most enigmatic statements about himself and, above all, one will come 
to see through his self-description as an ‘agent’ and recognize this as artistic 
camouflage. But the situation when speaking about this part of the novel Molloy 
is epistemically abnormal, since there is no definitive yes or no even with regard 
to the fictional events and the properties of the person reporting them. No 
matter how emphatically Moran may report this or that event, this or that 
personal peculiarity, it is always possible that an objection will make use of the 
self-contradictory logical status of the report and point to the unusual situation 
that, in this report, nothing really certain is communicated even about the 
fictional characters and events which the report deals with. This situation could 
not occur in a work of art the status of which would have to be determined by 
reference to Schopenhauer’s philosophical aesthetics. Such a work, as a piece 
of literature for instance, would have to be understood as depicting, in the forms 
of the empirical world, traits of true reality the status of which would be that of 
the Idea. Moran’s report in Molloy II would, from this point of view, have to be 
considered either as confounding the reader instead of informing him, or it 
would have to be seen as saying that the only way to come near true reality is 
by using contradictory statements. Taking into account other of Beckett’s works, 
too, like The Unnamable and the plays discussed, one may conjecture that 
Beckett may indeed have thought along those latter lines. Schopenhauer cer-
tainly could not have followed him there, despite the striking closeness between 
Moran’s personality and a Schopenhauerian “genius” or a devoted disciple of 
On the Vanity and Suffering of Life.
The Unnamable discards his statements more or less constantly as untrue. 
I take this to be not just a case of unreliable reporting (the Unnamable does not 
give a genuine report), but the author’s alogical exploring of a situation which 
comes about when there is no person-like narrator, no stable matter of  narration, 
no difference between ‘subject and object’ in the process of narration, no secure 

 
concluding remarks 
231
way to identify any individual or event, no dependable relations in space or 
time. From the latter peculiarities Schopenhauer would have concluded that 
there is no ‘veil of Maya’ here. Whereas in Beckett’s Proust the work of the 
 artist, following Proust himself, was described as an excavation, the artist’s work 
in The Unnamable resembles, rather, the reconnoitring of an empirically impos-
sible, but metaphysically significant situation, beyond the basic forms and the 
logic of everyday life. As Beckett stated in one of his very few remarks on art 
and the artist from the time of The Unnamable (above. p. 185), the true artist 
has to devotedly undertake the impossible task of rendering, bare of any artistic 
tool as we know it, a non-existent object with which, a fortiori, the artist has 
no cognitive relation as we know it. Looking at this situation from the viewpoint 
of Schopenhauer’s metaphysics of art and the artist, we may say that the emer-
gence from time, space, and causality, and the dissolution of the individual in 
the pure presence of the artistic matter, recur in The Unnamable as the openly 
accepted, contradictory identification of “I”, “voice”, “Hearing”, “Speaking” 
and anything which, though not existent, might take over the role of ‘narrator’. 
It was only consequential to shape this situation in the form of a logical paradox, 
thereby indicating its impossibility and emphasizing that this work is about 
something else than well-known empirical reality. In Proust, Beckett, like 
 Schopenhauer and unlike most philosophers of today, had considered logic to 
be the basis of causality. And he had thought causality to be, in turn, the 
epitome of a false world order, an order which only holds for a bare disfigured 
surface and caricature of what there truly is.
Waiting for Godot and Endgame can likewise be seen as exploring a situation 
where, for the dramatis personae, there is no secure orientation in space or 
time and no dependable causal connexion between the events of their world. 
There are, of course, in the empirical process on stage, empirical relations of 
time, space, and causality. But they just provide a coordinate system for the 
 movements of the actors for what is above and below, left and right, in front 
and behind on stage. The world represented in those plays (if one, for a moment, 
takes them for straightforward representations) is such that the characters 
have to be  prepared for finding themselves in complete disarray about the 
where and when of their existence and the why of anything that happens, often 
even of  everything they do. It has been pointed out how well Schopenhauer’s 
metaphysical view of human existence as a great comedy and tragedy of never-
ending farcical suffering, presented for a non-empirical, unknown spectator, 
fits the world and existence of Beckett’s dramatic characters. Only, 
 Schopenhauer could never have thought it possible to find, on the stage of any 

232 
the metaphysical vision
human playwright, as adequate a picture of what he thought to be the ‘essence 
of life’.
63. Schopenhauer left behind
There is something akin to the liar paradox (though not the same thing) in 
Waiting for Godot and Endgame: Some characters deny their existence. Yet in 
doing so, they implicitly affirm it. Hamm tells Clov: “I was never there.” Clov 
has him repeat the message and answers: “Lucky for you.” (47) Estragon assures 
Vladimir: “We always find something, eh Didi, to give us the impression we 
exist?” Vladimir: “Yes yes, we’re magicians.” (69) A self-evident reading of 
Hamm’s denial of his existence is to see it as yet another instance of the char-
acters’ rotten memory and of their general insecurity about what is real and 
what not. A less obvious reading suggests itself when we take an explicitly 
Schopenhauerian approach: The characters’ negation of their own existence 
may indicate that, as individuals, they are ontologically void, just as in 
 Schopenhauer’s metaphysical view of human life: Individual existence is a mere 
phenomenon, individual death is meaningless, to hope for individual death as 
the salvation from suffering is illusory. It has been noted that, just as 
 Schopenhauer considered suicide to be a foolish undertaking which by no 
means provides a genuine escape from the underlying Will-to-live and its suf-
fering, Beckett’s dramatic protagonists sometimes indeed discuss suicide and 
hope for death, but they neither in fact commit suicide nor do they die. (Some 
of them even could not, since they are already past death.) Hamm’s and Vladi-
mir’s doubts about their own existence point to the ontologically unique status 
of this kind of theatre: We see individual actors playing individual characters, 
some of whom, however, are not sure about their being there at all.  Schopenhauer 
would have to say that this is metaphysically consequential, but aesthetically 
impossible. Beckett’s plays are far beyond Schopenhauer’s theory of tragedy, 
although this philosopher might watch them as if seeing his own metaphysics 
of life put on stage.
Beckett is not Schopenhauer’s literary wax sculptor. He does not only make 
his own use of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, he does not only give it at new twist 
at several points – he also breaks its system’s architecture apart. His works fit 
Schopenhauer’s metaphysics of human life as if they were calculated to do so. 
But these same works could not be incorporated into Schopenhauer’s philoso-
phy of art without forcing it to undergo a fundamental mutation.

 
concluding remarks 
233
Commensurate to that situation we find that reading one of Beckett’s 
 postwar novels or watching one of his plays is most unlikely to produce the 
effect Schopenhauer thought typical for an adequate reception of a work of art. 
He assumed that immersing oneself into a work of art may bring forth a state 
of mind which is closely similar to the artist’s original will-less, self-forgotten 
state of metaphysical contemplation. To concentrate on the voices of the 
Unnamable, for instance, even if accomplished up to the point of hearing them 
in one’s imagination, does not provide the reader with the experience of a calm, 
quasi-radiant, non-empirical object as Schopenhauer would have to assert. The 
reader of that novel, just as the spectator of a Beckett play, is more likely to be, 
at least for the moment, mentally confounded by that experience, rather than 
somehow elevated. Just as some of Beckett’s most seminal works present a real-
ity which is contradictory in itself, the person who reads or watches such a work 
must be prepared to find that experience highly disturbing at first, although he 
or she may come to agree with the metaphysical image of human life given 
there.
There is still another reason why it is hard to come to terms with a work by 
Beckett in a perfectly logical, emotionally well-balanced way. Although the 
image of life shown there may be taken as a perfect stage adaptation of what 
Schopenhauer thought to be the great farce and tragedy of life as it presents 
itself to an all-embracing metaphysical vision, we, as persons of our time, do not 
possess the all-embracing metaphysical theory anymore which would allow us 
to place that image of life bit by bit into a contemporary philosophical edifice. 
Metaphysics in general had less than a successful philosophical career during 
the past hundred years. A literary oeuvre like Beckett’s which presents a non-
empirical, non-historical, timeless image of life where developments, if any, tend 
towards the worse, is hard to integrate into contemporary philosophical world 
views or even everyday notions of what life is about. That suffering is the 
 general condition may still be grasped, though is hardly assented to. That will-
lessness and voluntary acceptance of ever-increased hardship might lead to a 
precious freedom at a point immeasurably far away, as Clov hopes for, seems 
quite alien to contemporary mindsets, philosophical as well as commonplace.
As has been noted above (p. 125), there is, already in Beckett’s Proust, a 
noticeable reserve towards Schopenhauer’s notion of an ever-transcendent Will 
as the entity which underlies the whole world. Although Beckett talks about 
“capturing” the thing-in-itself and thereby confirms his metaphysical outlook, 
his referring to “will” and “will-lessness” is not to Schopenhauer’s singular Will 
as thing-in-itself but to the experience of willing or abjuring to will in living 

234 
the metaphysical vision
persons. Beckett’s works, seen from a Schopenhauerian viewpoint, may be 
considered as amplifying and largely enriching the metaphysical image of human 
existence under the heading of “vanity and suffering of life.” This image of life 
is basically unchanging, not subject to any overall betterment, not subject to 
the forces of history, not open to genuinely new developments, set in a distinctly 
metaphysical frame outside the empirical world and, above all, outside empirical 
as well as historical time. But quite apart from not intending at all to illustrate 
Schopenhauer’s philosophy in literary form, Beckett also remained aloof as far 
as the philosopher’s theoretical system as a whole is concerned. Just as he virtu-
ally dropped the description of the thing-in-itself as the Will in Proust, just as he 
re-wrote Schopenhauer’s notion of Idea so as to fit his own needs, just as, by 
the time of The Unnamable, he declared the Schopenhauerian subject-object 
relation to be useless for understanding serious artistic work, he also gave to his 
literary image of life and world, which so closely resembles Schopenhauer’s, a 
contradictory ontology which Schopenhauer could never have consented to.
Although Schopenhauer’s philosophy of human existence remains present 
virtually everywhere in Beckett’s work, other parts of Schopenhauer’s system, 
notably his theory of art, were left behind by Beckett step by step, as he found 
his own literary Gestalt. Schopenhauer’s system as a whole might be said to have 
been for Beckett’s work, to a certain extent, like Wittgenstein’s ladder which 
the one who climbed it and has arrived above it, can throw away. Beckett’s 
works, of course, do not need to rely on any other groundwork, be it 
 Schopenhauer’s or anybody else’s. His postwar works, moreover, seem to be 
standing, as intentionally designed paradoxes, in mid-air. They occupy a unique 
place in a logically and ontologically ungrounded nowhere and everywhere.

Acheson, James, Beckett, Proust and Schopenhauer, in: Contemporary Literature 19 (1978), 
165–179.
Acheson, James, Murphy’s Metaphysics, in: Journal of Beckett Studies no. 5 (Autumn 
1979), 9–23.
Acheson, James, Chess with the Audience: Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, in: Critical Quarterly 22 
(1980), 33–45.
Acheson, James, Samuel Beckett’s Artistic Theory and Practice: Criticism, Drama and Early Fiction, 
New York (St. Martin’s Press), 1997.
Adorno, Theodor W., Versuch, das Endspiel zu verstehen, in: Adorno, Noten zur Literatur II, 
Frankfurt/M. (Suhrkamp), 1961, 188–236.
Amiran, Eyal, Wandering and Home: Beckett’s Metaphysical Narrative, University Park, PA 
( Pennsylvania State UP), 1993.
Anquetil-Duperron, Abraham H., Oupnek’hat, Strasbourg, 1801–02.
App, Urs, Schopenhauer’s Initial Encounter with Indian Thought, in: Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch 87 
(2006), 35–76.
Baum, Günther, and Birnbacher, Dieter (eds.), Schopenhauer und die Künste, Göttingen 
( Wallstein), 2006.
Beckett, Samuel, Collected Shorter Plays, London (Faber and Faber), 1984.
Beckett, Samuel, Collected Shorter Prose 1945–1980, London (John Calder), 1988.
Beckett, Samuel, Comment c’est, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1961.
Beckett, Samuel, Disjecta: Miscellaneous Writings and a Dramatic Fragment, ed. Ruby Cohn,  London 
(John Calder), 1983.
Beckett, Samuel, DREAM Notebook, ed. John Pilling, Reading (Beckett International 
Foundation), 1999.
Beckett, Samuel, Eleuthéria, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1995.
WORKS CITED

236 
works cited
Beckett, Samuel, En attendant Godot, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1952.
Beckett, Samuel, Endgame, followed by Act Without Words, London (Faber and Faber), 1958.
Beckett, Samuel, Film, in: Eh Joe and Other Writings, London (Faber and Faber), 1967.
Beckett, Samuel, Fin de partie, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1957.
Beckett, Samuel, How it is, London (John Calder), 1964.
Beckett, Samuel, L’Innommable, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1953.
Beckett, Samuel, Malone meurt, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1951.
Beckett, Samuel, Molloy, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1951.
Beckett, Samuel, Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable, London (Calder and Boyars), 1966.
Beckett, Samuel, Murphy, London (Calder & Boyars), 1963.
Beckett, Samuel, Oh les beaux jours, Paris (Les éditions de minuit), 1963.
Beckett, Samuel, Proust and Three Dialogues with Georges Duthuit, London (John Calder), 1965.
Beckett, Samuel, Proust, translated into German, ed. and annotated by Katharina Raabe, 
Frankfurt/M. (Luchterhand), 1989.
Beckett, Samuel, Waiting for Godot, London (Faber and Faber), 1956.
Beckett, Samuel, Watt, London (Calder & Boyars), 1963.
Bloom, Harold (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot, New York (Chelsea House), 1987.
Bloom, Harold (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, New York (Chelsea House), 1988.
Bloom, Harold (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable, New York (Chelsea 
House), 1988.
Brunschvicg, Léon, Spinoza et ses contemporains, 3. éd. revue et augmentée, Paris (Alcan), 1923.
Bryden, Mary (ed.), Samuel Beckett and Music, Oxford (Clarendon), 1998.
Buning, Marius; Engelberts, Maathijs; Houppermans, Sjef: de Ruyter-Tognotti, Danièle (eds.), 
Three Dialogues Revisited – Les Trois dialogues revisités, Amsterdam (Rodopi), 2003.
Butler, Lance St. John, Samuel Beckett and the Meaning of Being, London (Macmillan), 1984.
Calder, John, The Philosophy of Samuel Beckett, London (Calder), 2001.
Cavell, Stanley, Ending the Waiting Game: A Reading of Beckett’s Endgame, in: H. Bloom (ed.), 
Samuel Beckett’s Endgame, New York, 1988, p. 59–77.
Diels, Hermann, and Kranz, Walther, (eds.) Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 6th ed. 1952, reprint 
Hildesheim 1985.
Fletcher, John, The Novels of Samuel Beckett, London (Chatto and Windus), 1964.
Fletcher, John, Samuel Beckett and the Philosophers, in: Comparative Literature 17 (1965), 
43–56.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, Vorlesungen über die Ästhetik, in: Hegel, Werke in zwanzig Bänden, 
ed. E. Moldenhauer and K.M. Michel, Frankfurt/M. (Suhrkamp), 1971, Bde. 13–15.
Henry, Anne, (ed.), Schopenhauer et la création littéraire en Europe, Paris (Méridiens 
Klincksieck), 1989.
Hesla, David, The Shape of Chaos: An Interpretation of the Art of Samuel Beckett, Minneapolis 
(University of Minnesota Press), 1971.
Hübscher, Arthur, Denker gegen den Strom: Schopenhauer gestern – heute – morgen, Bonn 
(Bouvier), 1973.
Iser, Wolfgang, Subjektivität als Selbstaufhebung ihrer Manifestationen: S. Beckett: Molloy, Malone 
Dies, The Unnamable, in: Iser, Der implizite Leser: Kommunikationsformen des Romans von Bunyan 
bis Beckett, München (Fink), 1972.
Jacquette, Dale (ed.), Schopenhauer, philosophy, and the arts, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 1996.
Jacquette, Dale, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, Chesham, Bucks. (Acumen), 2003.
Janaway, Christopher, Self and World in Schopenhauer’s Philosophy, Oxford (Clarendon), 1989.
Janaway, Christopher, Schopenhauer, Oxford (Oxford UP), 1994.

 
works cited 
237
Janaway, Christopher (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, Cambridge (Cambridge 
UP), 1999.
Janaway, Christopher, Will and Nature, in: C. Janaway (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to 
 Schopenhauer, 138–170.
Janaway, Christopher, Knowledge and tranquillity: Schopenhauer on the value of art, in: Jacquette, 
Date (ed.), Schopenhauer, Philosophy and the Arts, 39–61.
Jean Paul, Kleine Nachschule zur ästhetischen Vorschule, in: Jean Paul, Sämtliche Werke, ed. N. Miller, 
München (Hanser), 1963, Abteilung I, vol. V, p. 457–514.
Jones, K., Schopenhauer and Beckett’s ‘Proust’, in: Etudes Irlandaises 11 (1986), 71–81.
Kaelin, Eugene F., The Unhappy Consciousness: The Poetic Plight of Samuel Beckett, Dordrecht, 
(Analecta Husserliana XIII), 1981.
Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith, new edition, Basingstoke 
(Palgrave Macmillan), 2003.
Kant, Immanuel, The Critique of Judgment, trans. J.H. Bernard, Amherst, N.Y. (Prometheus), 2000.
Katz, Daniel, Saying I No More: Subjectivity and Consciousness in the Prose of Samuel Beckett. 
 Evanston IL. (Northwestern UP), 1999.
Kenner, Hugh, Samuel Beckett: A Critical Study, New York, N.Y. (Grove), 1961.
Kenner, Hugh, A Reader’s Guide to Samuel Beckett, New York, N.Y. (Farrar et al.), 1973.
Knowlson, James, Damned to Fame: The Life of Samuel Beckett, London (Bloomsbury), 1996.
Knowlson, James, and Pilling, John, Frescoes of the Skull: the later prose and Drama of Samuel 
Beckett, London (Calder), 1979.
Knowlson, James, Beckett and Kleist’s essay ‘On the Marionette Theatre’, in: J. Knowlson and 
J. Pilling, Frescoes of the Skull, London 1979, p. 277–285.
Lane, Richard (ed.), Beckett and philosophy, Basingstoke (Palgrave), 2002.
Luft, Eric von der (ed.), Schopenhauer: New Essays in Honor of His 200th Birthday, Lewiston, N.Y., 
(The Edwin Mellen Press), 1988.
Magee, Bryan, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, revised edition Oxford (Clarendon), 1997.
Murphy, Peter J., Beckett and the Philosophers, in: J. Pilling (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to 
Beckett, Cambridge 1994, p. 222–240.
Murphy, Peter J., Reconstructing Beckett: Language for Being in Samuel Beckett’s Fiction, Toronto 
(U of Toronto Press), 1990.
Nicholls, Moira, The Influences of Eastern Thought on Schopenhauer’s Doctrine of the Thing-in-
Itself, in: C. Janaway (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer, Cambridge 1999, 
p. 171–212.
Nietzsche, Friedrich, The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music, trans. Shaun Whiteside, 
London (Penguin), 1993.
Nietzsche, Friedrich, Untimely Meditations, trans. R.J. Hollingdale, Cambridge (Cambridge 
UP), 1983.
Nixon, Mark: “Scraps of German”: Samuel Beckett reading German Literature, in: Samuel Beckett 
Today/Aujourd’hui 16 (2006), 259–282.
Nixon, Mark: “what a tourist I must have been”: The German Diaries of Samuel Beckett. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Reading, 2005.
O’Hara, James D., Beckett’s Schopenhauerian Reading of Proust: The Will as Whirled in Re-Presentation, 
in: E.v.d. Luft, Schopenhauer: New Essays in Honor of His 200th Birthday, 273–292.
O’Hara, James D., Samuel Beckett’s Hidden Drives: Structural Uses of Depth Psychology, Tallahassee, 
FL (UP of Florida), 1997.
Pilling, John, Beckett’s ‘Proust’, in: Journal of Beckett Studies 1 (1976), 8–29.
Pilling, John (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Beckett, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 1994.

238 
works cited
Pilling, John, Beckett before Godot, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 1997.
Pilling, John, Proust and Schopenhauer: Music and Shadows, in: M. Bryden (ed.), Samuel Beckett 
and Music, Oxford 1998, p. 174–178.
Pilling, John, A Companion to Dream of Fair to Middling Women, Journal of Beckett Studies Books, 
Tallahassee FL, 2004.
Pilling, John, A Samuel Beckett Chronology. Basingstoke (Palgrave Macmillan), 2006.
Pothast, Ulrich, Die eigentlich metaphysische Tätigkeit: Über Schopenhauers Ästhetik und ihre 
Anwendung durch Samuel Beckett, Frankfurt/M. (Suhrkamp), 1982.
Proust, Marcel, A la recherche du temps perdu, ed. Jean-Yves Tadie, 5 vol.s, Paris (Gallimard, Les 
Editions de la Pléiade), 1987.
Reid, James H., Proust, Beckett, and Narration, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 2003.
Renner, Charlotte, The Self-Multiplying Narrators of Molloy, Malone Dies, and The Unnamable, in: 
Harold Bloom (ed.), Samuel Beckett’s Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable, New York, 1988, 
p. 95–114.
Rosen, Steven J., Samuel Beckett and the Pessimistic Tradition, New Brunswick, N.J. (Rut-gers 
UP), 1976.
Safranski, Rüdiger, Schopenhauer oder die wilden Jahre der Philosophie, München (Hanser), 1987.
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, System des transcendentalen Idealismus, in: Schelling, 
 Ausgewählte Werke, Schriften von 1799–1801, Darmstadt (Wiss. Buchges.), 1975.
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, Philosophie der Kunst, Darmstadt (Wiss. Buchges.), 1960.
Schiller, Friedrich, Kallias oder über die Schönheit: Briefe an Gottfried Körner, in: Schiller, Sämtliche 
Werke, ed. G. Fricke und H.G. Göpfert, München (Hanser), 1960, 394–433.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, Sämtliche Werke, nach der ersten, von Julius Frauenstädt besorgten 
 Gesamtausgabe neu bearbeitet u. herausgegeben von Arthur Hübscher, 4. Aufl., Mannheim 
(Brockhaus), 1988.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, Der handschriftliche Nachlaß, hg. v. Arthur Hübscher, 5 Bde. in 
6, Frankfurt/M. (Kramer), 1966–75.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, Philosophische Vorlesungen, hg. v. Volker Spierling, 4 Bde., München 
(Piper), 1984–86.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, The World as Will and Idea, English translation of: Die Welt als Wille und 
Vorstellung, trans. R.B. Haldane and J. Kemp, 4th ed. London (Kegan Paul), 1896, reprint 
New York, 1977.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, The World as Will and Representation, English translation of: Die Welt 
als Wille und Vorstellung, trans. E.F.J. Payne, 2 vol.s, New York (Dover), 1966. This edition is 
referred to as WWR I (vol. I) and WWR II (vol. II).
Schopenhauer, Arthur, Parerga and Paralipomena: Short Philosophical Essays, English translation of: 
Parerga und Paralipomena, trans. E.F.J. Payne, 2 vol.s, Oxford (Clarendon), 1974. This edition 
is referred to as PP I (vol. I) and PP II (vol. II).
Schulz, Hans-Joachim, ‘This hell of stories’: A Hegelian Approach to the novels of Samuel Beckett, 
Den Haag (Mouton), 1973.
Spierling, Volker (ed.), Materialien zu Schopenhauers ‚Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung’ Frankfurt/M. 
(Suhrkamp), 1984.
Spierling, Volker, Arthur Schopenhauer: Philosophie als Kunst und Erkenntnis, Frankfurt/M. 
(Frankfurter Verlagsanstalt), 1994.
Spinoza, Benedictus de, Ethica Ordine Geometrico demonstrata, ed. J. Stern, Stuttgart 
(Rec-lam), 1977.
States, Bert O., The Shape of Paradox: An Essay on Waiting for Godot. Berkeley (U of California 
Press), 1978.

 
works cited 
239
Uhlmann, Anthony, Beckett and Poststructuralism, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 1999.
Uhlmann, Anthony, Sjef Houppermans, Bruno Clément, (eds.), After Beckett/D’après Beckett, 
Amsterdam (Rodopi) 2004.
Uhlmann, Anthony, Samuel Beckett and the philosophical image, Cambridge (Cambridge UP), 2006.
Vlastos, Gregory, Ethics and Physics in Democritus, in: Philosophical Review 54 (1945), 578–592, 
and 55 (1946), 33–64.
Wagner, Richard, Beethoven, in: Wagner, R., Gesammelte Schriften und Dichtungen, ed. W. Golther, 
Berlin o.J., vol. IX.
Wellbery, David, Schopenhauers Bedeutung für die moderne Literatur, München (C.F.von Siemens 
Stiftung), 1998.
Weller, Shane, A Taste for the Negative: Beckett and Nihilism, London (Maney Publishing), 2005.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Tractatus logico-philosophicus, ed. B. McGuinnes and J. Schulte, Frankfurt/M. 
(Suhrkamp), 1989.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Tagebücher 1914–1916, in: Wittgenstein, Schriften I, Frankfurt/M. 
(Suhrkamp), 1960, 85–185.
Wolff, Christian, Philosophia prima sive Ontologia, Frankfurt/O. 1729, reprint Hildesheim, 1965.
Wood, Rupert, Beckett as Essayist, in: J. Pilling (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Beckett, 
Cambridge, 1994, p. 1–16.
Wood, Rupert, Murphy, Geulincx, Beckett, God, in: Journal of Beckett Studies vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring 
1993), 27–51.
Wulf, Catharina, The Imperative of Narration: Beckett, Bernhard, Schopenhauer, Lacan, Brighton 
(Sussex Academic Press), 1997.
Young, Julian, Schopenhauer, Heidegger, art, and the will, in: D. Jacquette (ed.), Schopenhauer, 
philosophy, and the arts, Cambridge, 1996, p. 162–180.
Zöller, Günter, Schopenhauer on the Self, in: Ch. Janaway (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to 
Schopenhauer, Cambridge 1999, p. 18–43.
Zurbrugg, Nicholas, Beckett and Proust, Totawa N.J. (Barnes and Noble), 1988.


abstract 2, 3, 27, 28, 36, 40–48, 66, 73, 85, 
86, 97–100, 105, 106, 112, 126
absurd, absurdity 87, 96, 180, 195, 213, 234
Acheson, James 4
Adorno, Theodor W. 17
aesthetics 2–5, 10–19, 25, 31–70, 82, 97, 
118–129, 145, 181, 185, 188, 196, 199, 
227–230
affirmation of the Will-to-live 16, 71, 75–78, 
81, 83, 85, 86, 89, 90, 92, 132, 134, 214, 
220, 222, 232
Amiran, Eyal 214
Anquetil-Duperron, Abraham Hyacinthe 
37, 69
a posteriori 44, 49
a priori 9, 28, 44, 49, 63, 127, 132
Aristotle 70
art 1–21, 28, 32–85, 89, 95–139, 143, 
149–163, 170, 181–189, 198, 200, 
203–208, 225–234
forms of 38, 54, 108, 226
object of 12, 49, 52, 53, 118, 127, 149, 
169, 198
theory of 4, 5, 12, 31–70, 95–128, 
183–189, 198, 225–230, 234
work of 2–5, 17, 37–59, 79, 80, 99, 
107, 113–117, 127, 137, 159, 181–189, 
230, 233
artist, artistic 2–4, 7–13, 16–19, 32–70, 
80–86, 95–139, 143, 149, 153–168, 
172–189, 196, 200, 214–218, 221–234
asceticism 73, 79, 80, 89, 92, 138, 154
Augustine, St. 7
Baudelaire, Charles 98, 99, 106
Baum, Günther 8
Beaufret, Jean 4, 12
beautiful, beauty 44, 49–53, 58–63, 81, 97, 
111, 113, 122, 137, 207, 208
Beckett, Samuel 2–8, 12–19, 26–32, 35–40, 
47–50, 58–81, 89–234
aesthetics, view of art 3–7, 12, 16–19, 26, 
27, 35, 38, 44, 49, 50, 58, 81, 95–139, 
143, 160–164, 172–189, 221, 225–234
view of life and world 5–7, 13–16, 19, 
90, 91, 93, 94, 95–139, 143, 145–152, 
155, 156, 164–168, 177–180, 191–223, 
225–234
“Clare Street” notebook 13
Comment c’est 221
Disjecta 14, 93, 146, 183–187
Eleuthéria 153, 163
Endgame 17, 19, 93, 143, 189, 192, 
194–223, 228, 231, 232
Film 151
Happy Days 221
INDEX

242 
index
Malone Dies 18, 155, 170, 171, 183
Molloy 18, 19, 153–171, 175, 177, 181, 
191, 196, 214, 215, 227, 229, 230
Murphy 18, 19, 93, 143, 145–153, 
170, 175, 183, 196, 212, 215, 216, 226, 
227, 229
Proust 2, 3, 5, 6, 15–19, 37, 38, 44, 58, 91, 
95–139, 143, 147, 148, 150, 154–168, 
177, 181, 182, 185–189, 194–199, 203, 
213, 214, 218–223, 226–234
“Sottisier” notebook 15, 90, 91, 94
The Unnamable 14, 18, 19, 143, 153–157, 
166, 169–189, 197, 212, 214, 215, 217, 
221, 227, 228, 230, 231, 233, 234
Three Dialogues with Georges Duthuit 3, 19, 
184–186
Waiting for Godot 19, 143, 189, 191–223, 
228, 231, 232
Watt 155, 183
“Whoroscope” notebook 13, 94
Bergson, Henri 8, 10
Birnbacher, Dieter 8
bliss, blissful 58, 60, 61, 93, 111, 138, 148, 
149, 151, 154, 212, 227
Bloom, Harold 17, 170, 213
boredom 72, 75, 76, 81–87, 91, 104, 109, 
119, 130, 132, 134, 135, 137, 168, 
202–210, 218
Borges, Jorge Luis 8
Brahma 134
Broch, Hermann 8
Bryden, Mary 121
Buning, Marius 185
Butler, Lance St. J. 6
Calder, John 6
Calderón de la Barca, Pedro 120
causal, causality 9, 13, 24–34, 37, 39, 49, 57, 
60, 69–71, 97, 100, 101, 106–114, 118, 121, 
123, 124, 128, 150, 181, 194–196, 199, 231
Cavell, Stanley 17
concept 3, 19, 25, 27–31, 36, 40–60, 66, 
71, 73, 92, 97–104, 107, 110–112, 118, 
122, 147
contemplation, contemplative 36–38, 41, 44, 
46, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56–58, 60–63, 79–81, 
98, 113, 114, 117, 120, 130, 138, 149, 150, 
154, 162, 181, 182, 199, 207, 208, 227, 233
Dante Alighieri 99, 113
death 67–72, 82, 83, 86, 88–90, 108, 109, 
131, 149, 180, 202, 203, 206, 210, 217, 
219–222, 232
Democritus 93, 152
denial of the Will-to-live 16, 71–75, 77, 
79, 82, 89, 92, 138, 209, 222, 223, 232
Descartes, René 26, 118, 119, 145, 
150, 227
endless, endlessness 86, 88, 90, 91, 200, 204, 
210, 217, 219
Epictetus 7
ergasterion 15, 90
essence 2, 3, 28, 29, 32, 38, 39, 41, 64, 65, 
67, 68, 72–76, 97, 98, 101, 102, 106, 108, 
110–112, 116, 122, 124–126, 128, 130, 
131, 150, 158, 159, 178, 200, 220, 221, 
228, 229, 232
ethics 10, 152
existence 7, 11, 15, 19, 25, 26, 34, 58, 
61, 62, 68, 70–85, 89–91, 97, 102, 
104, 108, 120, 122–125, 130–136, 
138, 139, 143, 147–153, 156, 160, 
167, 168, 171–174, 177, 180–184, 
188, 193, 194, 200–214, 217–222, 227, 
228, 231–234
experience 2, 3, 8, 9, 24, 26–28, 30, 37, 38, 
43, 44, 46, 48, 49, 57–60, 62, 63, 67, 71, 
78–80, 84–86, 98–137, 146, 149–151, 
159–162, 168, 173, 177, 179–181, 186, 
187, 193, 196, 199, 210, 220–222, 227, 
229, 233
artistic, aesthetic 2, 3, 37, 38, 43, 44, 48, 
57, 59, 60, 80, 103, 114, 118, 129, 137, 
138, 159
forms of 1, 9, 24–27, 30, 32–35, 37, 41, 
44, 53, 56–58, 60, 63, 70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 
82, 86, 92, 97, 100, 106–108, 110, 118, 
123, 124, 133, 134, 218, 220, 221, 229, 
230, 231
metaphysical, visionary 37, 38, 43, 44, 48, 
67, 98, 101, 111, 112, 149, 151, 162, 
177, 181, 196, 227
‘mystical’ 109–111, 115, 117, 118, 127, 
129–132, 229
‘normal’, ‘everyday’ 2, 3, 24, 27, 30, 49, 
84, 85, 104, 106, 108, 118, 124, 146, 
147, 149
extratemporal 3, 24, 131, 229
fail, failure 3, 49, 97, 99, 101, 108, 136, 161, 
164, 168, 183, 184, 186–188, 195, 198, 
215, 227
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 27, 46, 55
Fletcher, John 165
Freud, Sigmund 10

 
index 
243
genius 37–39, 48, 53–58, 64, 67, 71, 79–81, 
110, 121, 166, 168, 183, 229, 230
Geulincx, Arnold 7, 93, 145, 150, 227
Gide, André 8
God 27, 46, 55, 69, 74, 85, 135, 145, 150, 
152, 158, 194, 210, 212
habit 36, 102–109, 111, 112, 119, 124–126, 
130–133, 137, 159, 160, 168, 176, 196, 
203, 218, 222, 229
Haldane, R.B. and Kemp, J. (translators) 1, 
36, 37, 49, 121
happiness 4, 71, 78–81, 208, 209, 215
Hayden, Henri 186
Hebbel, Friedrich 8
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 6, 7, 38, 40, 
49, 51, 55, 57, 60
Heidegger, Martin 8
hell 6, 7, 15, 76, 90, 112–114, 155, 204, 
210, 211
Henry, Anne 8
Herwegh, Georg 8
Hesla, David 6
Hobbes, Thomas 77
Horace 111, 121
Hübscher, Arthur 55, 91
Idea 1, 3, 33, 34, 36–70, 80, 81, 88, 96–103, 
107, 108, 110, 112–119, 122–130, 138, 
150, 181–183, 199, 218, 219, 226, 229, 
230, 234
Platonic Idea 33, 34, 41, 45, 46, 127, 199
illusion 2, 6, 14, 69, 70, 76, 82, 87, 135, 154, 
202, 204, 219
individual 2, 6, 26, 28–37, 42, 44, 48, 49, 
52, 56, 68, 70–72, 74, 75, 77–80, 82–91, 
96–100, 104, 105, 107–109, 112, 113, 120, 
122–128, 132–135, 137, 138, 150, 160, 
164, 165, 173–177, 179, 181, 182, 199, 
200, 217–220, 222, 223, 226, 228, 231, 232
Iser, Wolfgang 170
Ixion 80, 147
Janaway, Christopher 23, 29, 60, 69
Jean Paul Friedrich Richter 55, 75
Jones, K. 4
Kafka, Franz 15
Kant, Immanuel 7, 9, 10, 23–29, 38, 40–46, 
49–63, 92, 113, 137, 145, 162
Critique of pure reason 9
Critique of Judgment 51, 54, 55, 59, 61–63, 
137, 162
Kaun, Axel 14
Kennedy, Sigle 93, 94, 183
Kenner, Hugh 6, 213
Kierkegaard, Sören 7, 184
Kleist, Heinrich von 148
Knowlson, James 4, 12, 146, 148, 226
Lane, Richard 6
Lawrence, David Herbert 8
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 25, 66, 94, 145, 
150, 227
Leopardi, Giacomo 4, 134
life 1–3, 5–7, 10–12, 14–19, 21, 28, 30, 
31, 38, 40, 42–44, 50, 57, 67–94, 96, 97, 
99–105, 108, 109, 111, 113, 114, 119, 
122–125, 128, 129, 130–134, 137, 138, 
143, 146–159, 165–179, 178, 180, 182, 
184, 189, 194, 196, 199–207, 209–214, 
217–222, 225–234
loneliness, lonely 81, 134, 136, 167, 
207, 208
MacGreevy, Thomas 4, 12, 146, 226
madness 39, 108, 110, 111, 121, 136, 177
Magee, Bryan 2
Mann, Thomas 8
Marx, Karl 8, 86, 87
Mauthner, Fritz 7
memory 39, 96, 102–111, 114, 117, 
124–127, 130, 138, 148, 155, 192–195, 
199, 202, 232
metaphysical 1–5, 9–13, 17–19, 28–34, 
38–55, 57, 61, 64–69, 72, 74, 79–89, 97, 
103, 110–114, 116–118, 123–128, 132, 
138, 143, 145–147, 149–151, 154, 179, 
181, 182, 195–200, 203, 214, 217–230, 
232–234
metaphysical activity 2, 19, 40, 43
metaphysical drama 81, 85
metaphysical vision 1, 2, 5, 10, 12, 17–19, 
38, 39, 42, 43, 45, 48, 57, 61, 80, 86, 
110–113, 117, 127, 138, 143, 150, 151, 
181, 182, 217–222, 225, 227, 228, 233
theatre of 19, 221
metaphysics 3–5, 10, 11, 16, 17, 23, 28, 
32, 33, 39, 41–44, 66, 74, 83, 116, 
129, 132, 145, 147, 199, 200, 225, 228, 
231–233
morality 134, 136
motivation 24–26
Murphy, Peter J. 145, 183
music 2, 5, 38, 51, 64–68, 81, 85, 121, 122
Musil, Robert 8

244 
index
Nietzsche, Friedrich 2, 5, 7, 10, 11, 26, 32, 
40, 43, 50, 66–68, 74, 104
The Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of 
Music 2, 5, 43, 66
Schopenhauer as educator 11, 74
Nixon, Mark 13, 14, 78
Nothing, Nothingness 14, 16, 25, 92–94, 149, 
151, 152, 175, 178, 183, 185, 188, 212–214
object, objective 9, 12, 17, 19, 23, 24, 26–28, 
30, 32–39, 43–46, 48–58, 60–63, 66, 71, 
75–77, 81, 83, 87, 92, 94, 96–99, 101–116, 
119, 122, 123, 125–135, 138, 139, 149, 
151, 160–162, 166, 170–173, 175–177, 
181–189, 194–199, 202, 205, 206, 220, 
221, 227–233
objectify, objectification 28, 30, 32, 33, 38, 
52, 64, 65, 68, 75, 77, 84, 88, 122, 125, 
200, 203, 219, 220, 221
objectivity 28, 30, 32, 33, 36, 38, 42, 44, 51, 
53, 56, 57, 64–66, 69, 72, 74, 77, 85, 86, 
92, 113, 123, 126, 144, 183, 200, 203
O’Hara, James D. 4, 95, 119, 156
optimistic, optimism 2, 10, 87, 96, 97
pain 6, 46, 68, 72, 74–78, 81–90, 93, 104, 
106, 109, 119, 122, 129, 134, 135, 167, 
169, 177, 200–210, 217, 219–222
Parmenides 6
Payne, E.F.J. 1, 15, 29, 37, 41, 72, 74, 90, 91, 
93, 111, 121, 123, 178
pendulum between pain and boredom 76, 
81, 82, 85, 119, 202, 203, 207–210
pensum 15, 88, 90, 91, 122–123, 148, 151, 
153, 155, 156, 177, 178, 184, 188, 
209–211, 229
perception 1, 3, 24, 26–28, 32–37, 39–48, 
56–58, 60, 63, 68, 71, 86, 96–98, 101–103, 
106–108, 110, 112, 113, 115–118, 121, 
123, 124, 126, 130, 131, 133, 137, 148, 
151, 168, 181, 182, 217, 218, 221
pessimistic, pessimism 4, 10, 67, 93, 104, 
218, 225
phenomenal, phenomenon 1–3, 9, 14, 
24–35, 37–39, 42–55, 58, 61, 63–65, 
68–73, 76, 78, 82–84, 87–89, 92, 95, 97, 
101, 102, 110, 117, 123, 124, 128, 133, 
148, 160, 173, 199, 200, 218–220, 
229, 232
philosophy 2–12, 14–18, 23–25, 28–33, 
38–51, 58–71, 81, 85, 86, 88, 92, 94, 95, 
102, 112–116, 118–123, 125, 126, 128, 
132, 133, 136, 138, 154, 163, 165, 168, 
203, 210, 214, 218, 219, 223, 225–230, 
232, 234
Pilling, John 4, 7, 18, 95, 119, 121, 145, 148
Plato 33, 34, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46, 68, 127, 
199, 218
pleasure 12, 46, 58, 60–63, 71, 75, 78, 80, 
81, 146, 151, 184, 207–209, 226
present 1, 17, 36, 57, 58, 68, 69, 72, 76, 81, 
82, 86–88, 90, 91, 102, 105–107, 110, 
111, 114, 115, 128, 131, 135, 155, 156, 
159, 172, 173, 177, 178, 187, 191, 193, 
196, 199, 202, 203, 207, 211–213, 215, 
217–219, 226, 228, 233, 234
principium individuationis 26, 30, 32, 34, 73, 
82, 133, 173, 174, 181, 219
principle of sufficient reason 9, 13, 16, 25, 26, 
32–37, 53, 56, 58, 63, 82, 86, 97, 101, 110
Proust, Marcel 2, 4, 5, 8, 17, 18, 64, 95–97, 
99, 100–105, 107–112, 114–119, 121–125, 
127–129, 131–139, 154, 157, 159, 163, 
177, 181, 182, 213, 226, 228, 229, 231
A la recherche du temps perdu 4, 5, 64, 95, 
111, 115–117, 123, 129, 131, 135, 136, 
182, 226, 228
pure, purity 25, 35, 36, 49, 51–53, 56, 60, 
63, 80, 81, 97, 99, 111–121, 125, 130–133, 
151, 207, 231
Raabe, Katharina 106
real, reality 1–7, 9, 10, 12, 14, 24–30, 33, 
38–45, 48–51, 57, 58, 61, 63, 67, 69–72, 
78, 80, 82, 86–128, 130–133, 137, 138, 
147, 148, 150–153, 159–163, 168, 172, 
173, 176, 177, 180–182, 187, 196–203, 
206–208, 214, 217–219, 225, 227–233
realism (in art) 48–50, 97, 108, 127
reason (faculty of the mind) 9, 13, 16, 
25–28, 32–35, 37, 40–45, 49, 53, 56, 58, 
59, 63, 82, 85, 86, 97, 101, 110, 113
Reid, James H. 154
Reinhold, Carl Leonhard 23
Rilke, Rainer Maria 8
Rosen, Steven J. 4
Sartre, Jean-Paul 6, 184
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von 7, 
27, 38–40, 46, 49, 55
Schiller, Friedrich 49, 59, 60
Schopenhauer, Arthur 1–19, 23–105, 
107–130, 132–139, 143, 145–155, 
162, 163, 165–168, 173, 174, 177, 178, 

 
index 
245
181–185, 188, 189, 194, 196, 198–214, 
217–223, 225–234
aesthetics, theory of art 2–12, 31–70, 
95–128, 183–189, 198, 225–234
metaphysics 1, 9, 10, 16, 17, 23–43, 64–94, 
118–128, 132, 133, 213–219, 225–234
theory of knowledge 9, 10, 23–31, 44, 45, 
95–100
view of world and life 6, 7, 10, 11, 14, 29, 
32–39, 67–94, 119, 124, 127, 135, 143, 
199–223, 225–234
Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life 16, 79, 209
On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of 
Sufficient Rreason 13, 16, 25
Parerga and Paralipomena 15, 16, 74, 79, 
90–93, 107, 120, 123, 202, 204, 207, 
209, 211, 214
The World as Will and Representation 1, 2, 
9, 10, 23–94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 103, 107, 
108, 111–113, 120–122, 137, 152, 178, 
189, 199–212, 214, 217–221, 225
Schulz, Hans-Joachim 6
science 2, 11, 12, 24, 28, 40, 99
self, self-awareness 1, 12, 23, 24, 26–29, 31, 
32, 34–43, 48, 52, 56, 57, 60, 61, 63, 64, 
71, 73, 74, 77, 79, 80, 100, 109, 111, 117, 
118, 120, 121, 124, 126, 132, 133, 146, 
148–152, 154, 163–167, 170, 175–177, 
178, 181, 182, 199, 214, 220, 221, 
225–227, 229, 233
sensory 40, 41, 44–48, 51
sleep 148, 169, 202, 208–212
space 9, 12, 24–34, 37, 39, 42, 43, 49, 52, 
57, 60, 63, 69–72, 82, 86, 92, 97, 100, 101, 
106, 114, 118, 121, 123–125, 128, 133, 
150, 174, 176, 177, 180–182, 191, 192, 
194–196, 199, 218, 219, 225, 228, 231
Spinoza, Baruch de 13, 77, 94, 145, 150, 227
Strindberg, Johan August 8
subject-object relation 23, 185–189, 234
subject-object terminology 96, 109, 119, 
185, 189
suffering 15, 38, 51, 68–71, 74–91, 96, 104, 
109, 111, 119, 122–124, 132, 135–138, 
147, 153, 167, 168, 200–203, 206–211, 
217–223, 227–234
suicide 16, 88, 89, 232
symbol 46–48, 98, 99
Tanner, M. 2
Tantalus 80, 96, 132, 134, 147, 213, 214, 
219, 220
Telephus 129–131
thing-in-itself 1, 3, 9, 10, 28–33, 42, 51–53, 
64, 65, 68, 69, 72–74, 81, 84, 97, 116, 122, 
124–126, 200, 218, 220, 221, 225, 233, 234
time 9, 12, 23, 34, 36, 37, 39, 42–44, 49, 
51–61, 63–65, 69–73, 75, 79, 81, 82, 
86–88, 92, 96–103, 105, 106, 108–110, 
112, 114–119, 121, 123–126, 128–136, 
138, 150, 151, 154, 156–159, 165, 172, 
174, 176–182, 191–196, 199–201, 204, 
206–210, 214, 215, 217–220, 221, 225, 
228, 231, 233, 234
timeless, timelessness 1, 10, 33, 36, 44, 53, 
55, 56, 65, 82, 86–99, 96, 98, 117, 
124–128, 131, 132, 138, 181, 196, 199, 
200, 217, 219, 221, 226, 233
timeless form, timeless Gestalt 44, 65, 98, 
131, 199, 226
Tolstoy, Leo 8
tragedy 2, 5, 38, 43, 50, 66–73, 75, 81–84, 
89, 104, 119, 120, 138, 155, 203, 221, 222, 
228, 231–233
Uhlmann, Anthony 6
understanding (faculty of the mind) 25–28, 
45, 46, 55, 56, 62, 63, 67, 96–103, 122
vanity (of life) 15, 67, 70, 72, 79, 80, 82, 200, 
228, 230, 234
van Velde, Bram 19, 184–188
van Velde, Geer 19, 184
veil of Maya 14, 69–71, 75, 82, 87, 88, 111, 
138, 173, 231
Vlastos, Gregory 152
vulgar, vulgarity 48, 106–108, 136
Wackenroder, Wilhelm Heinrich 55
Wagner, Richard 8, 43, 64, 65
Wellbery, David 14
Weller, Shane 7, 93
Wieland, Christoph Martin 111, 121
Will, Will-to-live (as thing-in-itself) 1, 2, 
10, 16, 18, 29–34, 38, 41, 42, 44, 51–53, 
56, 64–77, 81, 83–86, 88–93, 122–127, 
133–135, 147, 152, 153, 200, 202, 203, 
217–223, 225, 232–234
will, will-to-live (of an individual) 2, 6, 
28, 30, 34, 35, 42, 45, 46, 48, 49, 52, 53, 
56–61, 63, 69–85, 89, 91, 96–98, 100–108, 
110, 112–115, 117, 118, 120–122, 
124–128, 130–135, 137, 139, 147–151, 
153–154, 156, 160, 162–168, 177, 182, 

246 
index
will, will-to-live – Cont.
 196, 200, 207–209, 214, 217, 218, 222, 
223, 229, 233
will-less, will-lessness 35, 36, 41, 42, 44, 48, 
52, 56–61, 63, 79–81, 98, 100, 110, 113, 
117, 118, 130, 131, 138, 139, 149–154, 
163, 164, 177, 181, 182, 187, 196, 207, 
227, 229, 233
Windelband, Wilhelm 7
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 8
Wolff, Christian 16
Wood, Rupert 18
world (empirical, as phenomenon) 3, 5, 7, 
10–16, 18, 24–64, 68–72, 78, 81–88, 89, 
91–118, 120, 123–125, 127–129, 132–138, 
146–152, 160–164, 177, 181, 182, 193–195, 
198, 203, 211, 217–221, 225–234
world (metaphysical, as Will) 3, 7, 10–14, 15, 
18, 28, 29, 30, 32, 38–41, 50, 51, 64–69, 
72, 73, 77, 78, 81, 85–89, 91–93, 122, 
124–126, 138, 148, 152, 195, 199–202, 
211, 213, 217–219, 221, 225–234
world view 23, 29, 44, 71, 87, 88, 110, 119, 
124, 127, 135, 143, 145, 168, 185, 225, 233
Wulf, Catharina 7
Young, Julian 8
Zöller, Günter 29
Zurbrugg, Nicholas 95

